SERMONS Made by the most reverend Father in God, Edwin, Archbishop of York,
Primate of England and Metropolitan.

DAN. 12. 3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament:
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.



AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Midleton, for Thomas Charde. 1585.

To the Christian Readers, grace and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
OF other things besides these, Eccl. 12, 12. 13
my son, take thou heed: for there is none end of making many books, and
much reading is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the end of all, fear
God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of every man. By
which words of weight, proceeding from the Oracle, not of Apollo, but of God
himself, what effect has been wrought, both in the hearts, and in the
hands of many great learned Clerks, both here and elsewhere; both
heretofore, and at this day, to make them withdraw their minds from writing,
and to withholde their pens from paper: some witnesses worthy credit could
testify, but that daily experience needs no farther proof. Howbeit, when it
is well known, and ought accordingly to be considered, that the place alleged
should rather correct the bookish humor of common writers, and idle discoursers,
then control the writing of necessary and needful works, which to the
singular advancement of kingdoms and co^monweales, to the most excellent
service of almighty God, to the inestimable benefit and blessing of his Church,
many hundred years, since that saying of Solomon, have been printed and
published notwithstanding: (as by large volumes innumerable, of Scriptures and
fathers, of histories and arts in all kinds of knowledge may evidently
appear): Every man of ability, should rather by those examples encourage
himself, the suffer himself by these words to be dissuaded, to imploye the
talent, as well of his hand, as of his tongue, to meet with, and overtake all
practices, and inconveniences, and as it were, to apply a salve to every
sore; to minister a medicine to every malady, that may occur. Again when
we perceive Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem, Noadiah the Prophetess, and their
accomplices, continually to hinder and impeach, as much as in them lies, the
work of Gods Temple; that is Papists, Jesuits, and Malecontentes, with their
adherents, all adversaries and enemies to the everlasting truth of the Gospel,
without intermission to abuse their great leisure, and small learning, to plant
error and heresy in the hearts of our brethren, thereby to supplant all
religious woorshippe of almighty God, all audience of his word and reverence
to his Sacraments, all humble obedience to lawefull Magistrates, all dutiful
regard of wholesome laws, all careful observation of ancient discipline,
all sincere and seemly conversation of Christian life and honest manners: how
can the holy Ghost (who reprooueth the woorlde of sin) but require us to
bestow all the forces and habilimentes we have, not only as good Zacharias
and Aggeus to prophecy, but as godly Zorobabell and Salathiell, to reedifie,
that is, as well by writing, as by preaching; as well by our books, as by our
sermons, and as it were with a trowell in the one hand, and a sword in the
other, to raise and erect the new Jerusalem, supplying the decays, repairing
the ruins, filling up the breaches, building up the walls and towers of Sion in
perfect beauty? The consideration whereof together with some other earnest and
vehement persuasions to the like effect used: did at the last though long
first, induce the most reverend author of this book, eue^ another Esdras or
Nehemias to suffer these his labors to come to light: as well for that he
might leave behind him a witness and warrant of his godly and zealous
affection, that the profession of his faith might become the sweet savor of
life to life in all rather the^ the savor of death, to death in any: as also
for that words spoken are soon come soon gone but written withal, may make a
deeper impression, and so by striking as well the eye of the reader, as the ear
of the hearer, may perse his heart the better: and save his soul the sooner.
Of the book it self I will say but this: that for mine own part, I am
verily persuaded, there is no work, written in this kind, wherein men of
principal estate, or particular callings, may be either more sufficiently
informed to know, or more plainly directed to perform their several duties:
The superior how to govern, the inferior how to obey: the Minister what to
teach, the people what to learn: the Parliament what to establish, the Realm
what to embrace: her Majesty and counsel what to hear, Court, City, and
Country what to amend: why Patrones especially professing godliness should be
vncorrupt: why Pastors undergoing such a charge should keep the flock from
the fox and wolf; why Bishops should be more vigilant and precise not to
admit Ministers hand over head: why the rich should be open handed and poor
Christ in his needy members competenlie relieved: how the Church to be
disciphered by her proper marks of the word to be heard with diligence, and the
sacraments with reverence to be frequented: how the Temple to be purged of
idolatry, superstition and superfluity, the Church men of ignorance,
negligence and simonie, the commonweal of unmercifulness, covetousness, and
usury, the judgment seats both civil and Ecclesiastical of briberie,
extortion and partiality: why the Gospel to be preached with favor, the Law
with terror, yet both with a caveat: how God to be worshipped, our neighbors
entreated, our children and families catechized, our selves conformed to Christ
his image, the simple advised, the subtle prevented, the weak supported, the
obstinate corrected, what patience to be used under the cross, what
thankfulness to be showed for Gods great mercies, what prayers in our
extremest necessities to be powered out: what sorrow must throw down the
sinful man, what faith raise him up, what hope sustain him, what charity
inflame him, what worthy fruits commend him to the world: finally, how the
truth may be confirmed, falsehood refelled, vice reproved, virtue advanced, and
so the child of God made a man wise unto salvation, and perfectly enabled unto
every good work: Besides many other most profitable observations, sooner
taught then learned, yet sooner learned then followed, such and so many, as in
so few sermons you shall hardly find I believe, but in the same. Nor is this my
single opinion only, but many men's censure of greater learning and better
judgment: who know what belonges to matter and method, to times and persons, to
place and occasions, with other due circumstances of well and wise meaning,
speaking and writing. But as those sermons be best praised ever, that be ever
best practiced: so if these shall be received into the good ground of your
hearts, with the same affection and spirit they were preached first, and now
be published, no doubt but the sower, the seed, the soil, the increase and
all, will be found to the glory of his grace, that works all in all.
Wherefore as not only Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, but all are ours, and we are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods: so let us comfort and strengthen one another, in
our holy faith, holding nothing more dear unto us, then the salvation each of
others: and in Gods holy fear commend we one another to that faithful creator,
who is father of all, above us all, and through us all, and in us all. To him
be rendered all thanks, and all honor given for ever and for ever.

The order and matter of the Sermons.
1 The first, Ho every one that thirsts come to the waters, etc. Esa. 55. 1.
2 Be this sin against the Lord far from me, that I should cease to pray,
etc. 1. Sam. 12. 23. 3 Take us the little foxes which destroy the vines: for
our vine has flourished. Cant. 2. 15. 4 I exhort therefore before all things
that requests, supplications, etc. 1. Tim. 2. 1. 5 Be like minded having the
same love, being of one accord, etc. Phil. 2. 2. 6 Teach me thy way O Lord,
and I will walk in thy truth. Psalm. 86. 11. 7 Draw near to God, and he will
draw near to you. Iac. 4. 8. 8 Seek the Lord while he may be found, call
upon him while he is near, etc. Esaias 55. 6. 9 All the days of this my
warfare do I wait, till my changing come. Job. 14. 14. 10 That being delivered
out of the hands of our enemies we may serve him, etc. Luc. 1. 74. 11 Owe
nothing to any man but this to love one another: for he that loves, etc. Romans
13. 8. 12 He has showed thee O man what is good and what the Lord requires
of thee, etc. Mich. 6. 8. 13 And Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out
all them that soulde and bought, etc. Matthew. 21. 12. 14 Then Peter opened his
mouth and said, Of a truth I perceive that God, etc. Act. 10. 34. 15 We
therefore as helpers beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain,
etc. 2. Cor. 6. 2. 16 Marriage is honorable in all. Heb. 13. 1. 17 After these
things Jesus went his way over the sea of Galile, etc. Ioh. 6. 1. 18 Then
there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon, etc. Luc. 21. 25 19 And when
he was entered into the ship, his disciples followed him, etc. Mat. 8. 23. 20
The end of all things is at hand. Be ye therefore sober. etc. 1. Pet. 4. 7. 21
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness. Psalm. 4. 5. 22 For the rest, brethren
fare ye well, be perfect, be of good comfort, etc. 2. Cor. 13. 11.
A Sermon made in Paul's on the day of Christ's Nativity.
ESAIAS 55. 1 Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters; and ye that have
no silver, come, buy, and eat; come, I say; buy wine and milk, without
silver, and without money.

2 Wherefore do ye lay out silver, and not for bread? and your labor without
being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and
let your soul delight in fatness.

3 Incline your ears, and come unto me; hear and your soul shall live; and I
will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.


OUR Euangelical Prophet Esaias, Christ, and thos^ things which he should do
and suffer, foretold by Esayas.
through the spirit of revelation, has in the former part of this his
prophecy, 800. years before the birth of Christ (even as if the thing had
already been performed, such is the certainetie of his prophecy) most lively
described, and set forth the nativity, the preaching, the persecution, the
apprehension, the death, the resurrection, the ascension, yea and the latter
coming of our Savior Christ, to judge the quick and the dead: in such wise,
that, for the substance thereof, no Evangelist has more perfectly or plainly
set forth this great mystery of our salvation. He foretells that Christ
shall be borne of a virgin, that his name shall be Immanuel, that his office
shall be to preach the glad tidings of salvation to the poor in spirit, that he
shall be led as a sheep to the shambles to be slain, that he shall be stricken
for our sakes, and bear the burden of al our sins upon his back.

2 His birth foreshewed so long ago by this heavenly Prophet was in fullness
of time accomplished, His birth according to yt which was spoken before by ye
Prophet*
as this day, in Bethlem, a city of David, according to the testimony of that
Angel sent from heaven, to proclaim the birth of the son of God at the same
time, saying, Luc. 2.
Behold I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be unto all the people,
because this day is borne unto you a Savior which is Christ our Lord in the
City of David. This is that seed of the woman which breaks the serpents
head, that meek Abel murdered by his brethren for our sin, that true Isaac
whom his father has offered up to be a sacrifice of pacification and
atonement between him and us. This is that Melchisedeck, both a king and a
priest, that lives for ever, without father or mother, beginning or ending.
This is Joseph that was sold for thirty pieces of money. This is that Sampson
full of strength and courage, who, to save his people, and destroy his enemies,
has willingly brought death upon his own head. This is that Lord and son
of David, to whom the Lord said, Sit thou on my right hand. Psalm. 110.
This is that bridegroom in the Canticle, whose heart is so inflamed with
heavenly love toward his dear spouse, which is his Church. This is he whom
holy Simeon imbrasing prophesied that he should be a light to the Gentiles and
a glory to his people Israel, he upon whom the holy Ghost descended, and of
whom the father testified from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son. This is
that lamb of God pointed at by John, and sent to take away the sins of the
world; to redeem us from thraldom, not with gold nor silver, but with the
inestimable price of his precious blood, to be made our wisdom,
justification, sanctification and redemption. This is the child that is borne
for us, the son that is given for our cause, the king whose rule is upon his
shoulders, Esaias 9.
whose name is marvelous, the giver of counsel, the mighty GOD, the
everlasting father, the prince of peace; the same Messiah which was shadowed in
the ceremonies and sacrifices of old, which was prefigured in the Law, and is
presented in the Gospel, and has been approved to the world by signs and
wonders, by so clear evidence as cannot be either dissembled or denied. Let
us therefore embrace this babe with joy, let us kiss the son, let us with
the Angels of heaven praise the Lord, let us sing their Psalm to the honor of
his name, Luc. 2.
Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace.

3 The Prophet Esaias having in spirit espied Christ, and seen the day, All
men invited unto Christ.
though far off, wherein the Savior of the world should be borne, calls
all the nations of the earth together, and exhorts them to come, to behold,
to believe, to embrace, to taste of the mercies of Christ Jesus, which are as
water to refreshe their thirsty spirits, and as milk to nourish and comfort
their hearts. All you that thirst come to the waters, etc. In which exhortation
the Prophet observes this order: First he exhorts the people to come;
Secondly he tells whither, and to whom they should come; Thirdly he teaches
after what sort they must come; Fourthly what commodity such as come shall
receive.

4 Come all that are thirsty. Gods mercy is great and general; he Who are
called: generally, all; but specily, the thirsty.
no country, no kindred, no age, no condition, no sex is excluded. He calls
Jew, and Gentile; young, and aged; rich, and needy; bond, and free; man and
woman. He commanded his Gospel to be preached to all, Go your ways preach
the Gospel to every creature. Mark. 16.
In the parable, all are invited to that magnificent marriage and kingly supper.
Christ himself cries in general words, Matthew. 11.
Come to me all that labor. If all be called and exhorted to come, what cause
can any man allege sufficient to excuse his not coming? the buying of fermes,
or the trying of oxen, or the marying of wives? They have base minds that are
withheld by these means. But if any have a fearful and a trembling heart; who
being called, stand still a far off, not because they will not, but because
they dare not approach near: them God pitieth, yea unto them especially, or
rather only unto them he says, Come you. Be thy sins never so great, fear
not to come; for he that calls thee, has stretched out his arms of mercy at
length; they are wide open to embrace thee; mercy is ready to all that will
receive it; and to them that need it most, most ready. A comfortable ^esson
to all sinners.

5 Come all that are thirsty. He calls not them which are full, and need
neither meat nor drink; but such as be hungry and thirsty, them he calls.
The proud Pharisey, that was full of his own righteousness, hungered not after
remission of sins; and they who are ouerfilled with works of supererogation,
and have store to serve themselves and others, never thirst to drink of the
cup of salvation: In general such as are drunk with the vain trust of their
own merits, will neither taste of this bread, nor drink of this water. The
covetous man thirsts after money, even with the sale of his own soul, to
get it; The lewd after fleshly delights and pleasures, to the wasting of his
patrimony upon them; The proud after glory, that his itching ears may be
tickled with his own praise: But what thirst the Prophet does mean, Christ
shows in the Gospel where he also blesses it. Matthew. 5.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness. Such as see their
own nakedness; as feel their own infirmities; as groan under the heavy
burden of their sin; as confess with David, Psalm. 51.
I know mine own iniquities; as make request with the Publicane, God be
merciful to me a sinner; Luc. 18.
as cry with the Leper, Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean; Luc. 5.
such are invited, unto such our Prophet speaks. He calls not the just, but
unto sinners he says, Come. Go not away, but come.

Come to the waters. Not to such waters as either the well, Whither and to whom
they are called. To the waters, wine, and milk.
or the river yields: but to those that issue from the son of God, to those
that shall be in him which tastes them, a well of water springing unto
everlasting life. Unto whom shall we go? thou have the words of everlasting
life. Come to these waters, buy this wine, John 6.
and this milk. Other bread is no bread; Eat that which is good. Under these
names of water, wine, and milk, all things necessary to a spiritual life are
comprehended. For as with these corporal meats and drinks the body is
nourished: so in Christ, thorough the believing of the Gospel, our soul is
refreshed, and perfectly fed unto everlasting life. Christ is the fresh
fountain, whereof who so drinks shall never thirst. Christ is that bread,
which descended from heaven. He that eats that bread, which is his flesh,
shall live forever. Christ is that wine, which makes merry the heart of man,
and quieteth the troubled conscience. Christ is that milk, which nourishes,
and feeds us, that we may grow to a perfect man. Milk is fit for infants;
water is convenient for young men; wine agrees with old age. So in the
Scriptures there is food, both for such as are simple, and weak; and also for
such as are learned and strong.

7 This grace of God which saves has appeared to all men; Water, wine, milk
freely offered by Christ.
this heavenly food Christ Jesus, by preaching the Gospel, is offered to all,
as Manna the heavenly bread, by faith to feed upon; and as a lively fountain
to drink of, to everlasting life. All are of mercy, grace, and favor freely
called; al may come, and freely feed, without penie or penieworth. The grace
of God is free, remission of sins is free: Contra Pelag. de origin peccat. cap.
24.
freely granted, freely given, without money. The price of our redemption is
neither gold nor silver: Through grace ye are freely saved. For it cannot be
grace any way which is not every way free, says S. Augustine.

8 Wherefore do ye lay out your silver for that which is no bread, The
contrary sold by Antichrist for money.
and your labor on that which is not to satisfy? As before he exhorted us to
come and buie freely, without money; because God is no money man, neither can
any man deserve favor at his hands, but whatsoever we have of him, we have it
of mercy: so now he sharply reprooueth all such, as by money or
merchaundise; by desert, or merit seek after salvation. He dehorteth us from
false teachers, crafty seducers, which offer to sell the grace and mercy of
GOD for money. Christ proposes his heavenly treasures, remission of sins,
justification, sanctification, mercy, grace and salvation freely. He that
sits in the Temple of God, and terms himself Christ's Vicar, does in like
sort offer unto the people bread, water, wine, milk, pardon of sins, grace,
mercy and eternal life: but not freely, he is a merchaunt, he gives nothing,
and that is nothing which he sells. For although he make large promises to
the buyer, he sells that which he has not to deliver. Eternal life is the
gift of God. The Pope therefore sells but wind and smoke for fire, shadows
for truths: he deceives the buyers with false ^lights, false measures, false
weightes. Beware of this merchaunt; loose not your labor; cast not away your
money: it is not meat but poison which he offers you. His physic cannot
heal your diseases; His holy water cannot wash away the spots of a sullied
and defiled soul, as he untruly would bear you in hand; His blasphemous
Masses do not appease, but provoke Gods wrath; they cannot benefit the
quick, much less the dead, which either need no help, or are past al help;
His rotten relikes cannot comfort you; His blind, dumb, and wormeaten Idols
can do you no good; It is cast away which is spent upon his shameless
pardons, they will not prevail, God will not admit them; By his Latin service
ye cannot be edified, or made wiser. Yet this trumperie they sell for money, and
upon this trash they cause silly men to wast their substance, and to these to
commit their souls. Thus you see a manifest difference between Christ and
Antichrist, the doctrine of God and the learning of man, true teachers and
false, sound and counterfaited religion. The one offers true bread, freely;
the other that which is no bread for bread, and that not freely neither, but
for money. The diversity of religion professed in these our times is here most
plainly and lively depainted. For the better clearing whereof, I will in three
notes lay before your eyes the whole difference which is between them.

9 First we disagree in the very foundation. Three differences between the
doctrine professed by true Christians, and that which is maintained by their
adversaries, the Pope and his adherents.
They lay one ground, and we an other. We lay no one stone but only upon that
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whereupon whosoever is builded grows
into an holy temple in the Lord; a temple, which no wind, no waves, no
storm, no tempest is able to overthrow. The foundation of our religion is the
written word, the Scriptures of God, the undoubted records of the holy Ghost.
We require no credit to be given to any part or parcel of our doctrine,
further than the same may be clearly and manifestly proved by the plain words
of the law of God, The first difference is in the ground and foundation of
doctrine Reasons why religion should be grounded only upon scripture.
which remains in writing to be seen, read and examined of all men. This we
do, First, because we know that God has caused his whole Law to be written;
Secondly, because we see that it has been the practice of all the defenders
of the truth since the beginning to rely their faith only upon the Scripture
and written word; Thirdly, because it is evident and plain, that we cannot
receive any other foundation of heavenly truth, without the overthrow of
Christian faith.

10 There was never any Lawemaker so simple, The whole Law of God, which is
the rule of religion committed to writing.
as to make statutes for perpetuity, and not to register them in books, or
engraue them in tables. When Memucan was desirous to have a Law made for the
bringing of women in subjection under their husbands, his persuasion was this,
If it may please the King, let a royal decree proceed from him, Hester. 1.
and let it be written. The Laws of the Medes and Persians that might never be
altered, were for ever recorded. When God delivered his first Law unto his
people, the Law which commonly we call moral, he gave it them written in
tables of stone. Again when he delivered them civil ordinances for the
administration of justice between man and man, Moses first proclaimed all
those Laws and ordinances amongst the people, afterward he took and wrote in
a book all the words of the Lord. As for the Laws of rites and ceremonies,
they are likewise written in this book. To these we must add that Law, which
the blessed Apostle does call the Law of faith. Romans 3.
This Law God preached unto Adam by himself, The seed of the woman shall
break the serpents head; Genesis 3.
unto Abraham by his Angel, In thee shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed; Genesis 12.
to the children of Abraham by his Prophets, Esaias 7.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son; finally unto us, by his
son, and by them whom his son has sent into the world to make it known,
Acts. (...)
that through this man is preached remission of sins, and from all things
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by him every one
that believes is justified. And the statutes of this Law are also written.
God being moreover desirous to have his servant not only taught by doctrine,
but provoked also by examples, gave them a fifth sort of Laws and testimonies
called historical, not leaving these neither to men, to deliver unto their
children by word of mouth, but all by writing. If God have committed his Laws
moral, civil, ceremonial, euangelical, and historical also unto writing, where
should we seek for the statutes of the almighty but in his written word?

11 The ancients of the house of God knew no fountain of his truth but this.
The (...) professors (...) then says upon scripture (...)* Joshua. 2^.
They never enquired what had been whispered in men's ears, that which they
believed and taught, they read it out of the book. In the History of Joshua it
is recorded, how he did assemble the Tribes, Elders, Heads, Judges, and
Officers of Israel together, showing them what God had spoken unto them by
Moses, but uttering to them no speech which was not written. Josias with all
the men of Judah, 2* Reg. 23.
and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Priests, Prophets, and all the
people, small and great, made a covenant before the Lord to keep his
commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all their heart,
and with all their soul: But what statutes? what testimonies? The words of the
covenant written in this Book. Christ speaks many things, his Apostles many
things concerning the doctrine of the Prophets, but no one point of doctrine
which is not found in their books and writings. The prophet Esaias cries
Adlegem and testimonium, Esaias. 8.
To the law and to the testimony; If they teach not according to this Law,
it is because there is no light in them. Consider the practice of Christ Jesus.
His proofs are, Scriptum est, It is written; His demands are, Quomodo legis?
How do thou read? His Apologies are, Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the
Scriptures, they bear me record. His Apostles tread in the same path, they go
not the breadth of an hair, not a whit from that which is written. Thus S.
Paul protests, 1. Cor. 15.
I delivered unto you that which I received, how Christ died for our sins,
according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose the third
day, according to the Scriptures. It is not lightly to be marked, which is
twice repeated. He delivered nothing but according to the Scriptures. I would
hear the voice of my pastor says S. Augustine. Read this out of some
Prophet, read it out of some Psalm, recite it out of the Law, recite it out
of the Gospel, recite it out of some Apostle, read it and we will believe it.
These be good presidents for us to follow, til sufficient reason be alleged,
why we should lay an other foundation than that which has been laid by so
many, so wise, so reverend builders.

12 Especially since this foundation is so peculiar to the truth, It is
dangerous to admit unwritten verities.
that we cannot rest upon any other without manifest danger of the utter
overthrow of Christian faith. For first what certainetie or assurance can we
have of any of those things which are believed, if our faith do not lean
only upon the Scriptures? If once a religious credit be given to unwritten
verities, and to men's reports, the undoubted articles of our belief cannot
choose but at the length become doubtful, and uncertain, like a tale that
passes from man to man, and is told as many ways as there are men to tell it.
Again, if once it be granted that there is any part of the Law of GOD
unwritten, if entrance once be given to Laws that pass by the word of mouth,
I would know when we should be able to say, Now we have all the statutes of
God, these we must observe, but more we may not receive. The Marcionites, they
have a doctrine as they say, received from the Apostles by tradition, without
book: Valentinus he likewise urges very stoutely, Christ had many things to
tell his Disciples, which as then they could not bear, and therefore his
doctrine may not be tried by the book, It is a tradition. Let any thing but
the written word of God take place in matters of faith, and who sees not that
the very mainesea of heresies must needs break in upon the Church of Christ?
These are, as we suppose, causes just and allowable and sufficient in the
indifferent judgment of reasonable men, why we should deliver you no doctrine
concerning faith and religion, but only that which is in Scripture; why we
should admonish you to beware of bread sowred with pharisaical leven, and to
feed upon that which ye know came down from heaven, to shun broken cisternes,
and to come to the well of living waters, as here ye are exhorted by the Prophet.

13 At this the adverse part does greatly storm, The Pope will not have his
doctrine tied unto this ground: and why.
they cannot abide to have controversies judged only by the scriptures. They
which make scripture only the ground and foundation of faith, are no fit
builders for the Church of Rome. When Constantinus required that those matters,
about which the Church was then veriehoat in contention, might be decided only
according to those things which are written, the answer of Hilarie was, Hoc
qui repudiat Antichristus est: Hill. ad Constant lib. quem ipse tradidi^.
He which refuses this is Antichrist. Why then do our adversaries fly this
kind of trial? why refuse they to go to the law and testimonies there to be
judged? The reason is rendered by the Prophet, It is because there is no light
in them. They have chosen to them selves another foundation than that of the
Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore as Herod, to cover the baseness of his
stock, and to the end that in time he might be thought to be of the blood
royal, Ambros in Luc lib. 3. cap. 3.
burned the sacred monuments and books of the Jews, wherein the lineal
descents, pedigrees, and genealogies of the kings of Israel were described; so
they, to strengthen the authority of their base and ill-favored grounds, do
endeavor not only in word and writing, by contumelious and reprocheful terms,
to discountenance, but also (if the power of God were not greater than theirs)
by fire and flame to destroy for ever the eternal testament of the son of
God. We charge them with no corner attempts, we have seen the burning of these
heavenly records, we have seen the very handling of the book of life
punished with bitter and cruel death. May we not justly say to that man of sin,
August contra liter. Petilia. lib. 2 cap. 7.
as S. Augustine to Petilian? Judas Christu^ carnalem tradidit, tu spiritualem:
furens Euangeliu^ sanctum flammis sacrilegis tradidisti. Judas betrayed Christ
in the flesh, but tho^ in the spirit. In thy fury thou have delivered the
holy Gospel unto heinous flames.

14 But what are the grounds, The grounds of Poperi^.
for which they have thus furiously bent themselves against the writings of the
holy Ghost? The grounds whereupon they build such doctrines as cannot stand
with the scriptures of God, are fained miracles, the record and witness of
foul spirits, precepts of men, muddie legends, uncertain traditions: which
grounds, so long as the light of the Gospel shines in men's eyes, so long as we
have the scriptures to direct us in our judgment, are easily perceived to be
but bogges and false grounds: but take away the scriptures, put out the light;
and, in darkness, who can descrie what they are? This is the only reason,
why Antichrist does so much strive to hoodwinke the world, by conueying the
scriptures out of sight.

15 By the scriptures we learn, Miracles. 2. Th^ss. 2.
that the coming of that wicked one shall be with power, and signs, and lying
wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness: which when we hear,
it gives us plainly to understand, that miracles are rather to be taken for
causes of reasonable suspicion, than infallible proofs of true doctrine. But
the Pope well perceives, that, if the scriptures may be buried, his miracles
will then stand him in good stead. As soon as Philip preached the things that
concerned the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ to the people of
Samaria, Acts 8.
they forsook the sorceries of Simon Magus, and believed the doctrine of the
scriptures. But till then, they all gave heed to witchcraft, and their
general judgment of Magus was, This man is the power of the great God.

16 In the scriptures we are charged to hear Moses and the Prophets. Foul
spirits.
In the scriptures we find, that Christ refused the testimony of an unclean
spirit. In the scriptures we have learned how to answer them, which send us
either to devils, or dead men's ghosts to be schooled and taught. Esaias 8.
Should not a people enquire at their God? From the living to the dead? But let
it be provided, that such sentences as these may be no more remembered, and then
what is it which the Pope may not confirm by his pale and grisly witnesses?
when men do not hear of these scriptures, they will easily find as good
reason as Saul to open their ears and to listen unto Satan, God answers me
no more neither by Prophets nor by dreams, 1. Sam. 28.
Therefore I have called thee that thou may tell me what to do.

17 How often are we warned in scriptures to take heed that we build not
religion upon doctrines of men? Precepts of men.
How sharply are the Corinthians taken up by the Apostle, for pinning
themselves upon men's sleeves, 1. Cor. 3.
saying, I am of Paul, and I of Appollos? But if this were concealed, who would
controlle the Pope for dividing his train, for appointing some to be of
Benedict, some of Frauncis, some of Dominicke; for exacting more rigorously the
strict observation of their rules, than the keeping of the Laws and statutes
of God?

18 So long as the mist of popery was thick enough to stop the light of the
scriptures of GOD, Legends.
the fabulous legends of Saints lives were thought as true as the Gospel. There
they had with marvelous cunning conueyance, interlaced all points of popish
doctrine; which being barely taught, would, by reason of the grossness of
them, have been loathed in short time: but being mingled with strange and
pleasant fables, and so powered both into young and tender wits, as the first
licour wherewith their minds were seasoned, and into old heads, as the only
thing that might hold them even then when all other entries of delight were
shut up, so long as they had but an ear left, were so effectual to deceive al
sorts of men, that, knowing this, we cannot marvel if popery were spread far
and wide. He did the Pope very profitable service which first found out this
ground to build on. It bare up their building a great while. But after that
the light began a little to appear, when men had gotten once a sight of the
scriptures in a known tongue, they woondered to see the world so deluded; in
so much that even amongst themselves, such as had any small freedom of
judgment, spared not plainly to auouche, that this ground was but mire and
slough, altogether unfit for spiritual building. Why that book should be
called a golden legend, Viu^s.
says Viues (for so it was entitled) I do not know since it was written by a
man of an iron mouth and a leaden heart, and is altogether full of most
shameless lies. Ann^t. in Hieron. de Ecclesiast. scriptorib.
Erasmus likewise, At this day, says he, every bodies dreams, yea the
dotages of silly women are read amongst divine Scriptures.

19 The last ground which they have, Traditions.
and the fairest to the eye is their traditions. Under the name of doctrine
received from Moses by word of mouth, without writing, that is to say
tradition, the Scribes and Pharisees were able smoothly to carry away
anything, til Christ recalled all things to the Law, the Psalms, and the
Prophets, til he opened the scriptures. And as in other grounds, so in this,
the Pope has found by good experience, that they cannot stand longer than the
scriptures lie secret and unknown.

20 He therefore that builds upon these grounds, has cause, Doctrines
builded upon the foresaid grounds against scripture.
I think, to besturre hand and foot, that men may be always kept off from
the scriptures. For whatsoever is builded upon these grounds, by the scripture
it is overthrown. The scriptures have prescribed an holy communion; they upon
their foundation have reared a blasphemous Mass. The scripture makes baptism
the consecrated seal of man's salvation; They upon their foundation have
builded the baptism of belles and ships. The scripture says, Christ was
offered up but once; they upon their foundation have erected an altar,
whereupon he is daily offered up. The scripture will have the scriptures to be
read of all men, prayer to be made with understanding, Christ to be a full
satisfaction for sin, worship to be done unto God alone; They upon their
foundations have builded a doctrine that forbids Gods people to read his
word, that teaches them to power out their prayer in a tongue which they
cannot understand, that has found out a way to satisfy the wrath of almighty
God in this life by penance, and after this life by indurance in Purgatory, a
doctrine that commands them to call upon Saints and souls departed, to
worship the work of their own hands, to say to a piece of bread, Religion
builded upon such grounds, though it were not injurious, is notwithstanding
frivolous and uncertain.
My Lord and my God. If these doctrines of theirs did not contain, as they
do, most manifest impiety, yet all religion builded upon such grounds must
needs be vain and frivolous. For although we offer up never so many
sacrifices; though we keep all the days in the year holy; though we pray,
and give thanks, and do alms; yet except we know that herein we show
obedience to the laws and statutes of our God, we do but tire out our selves
in vain. Will God reward those things wherein he takes no delight? Or takes
he delight in any thing and has not showed it? Or has he showed it, and not
in scripture? Doubtless they worship him but in vain, which either teach or
practice the precepts of men for the Laws of God. That they teach or practice
the precepts of men they will not grant, yet the most that possibly they can
allege to prove any one of these things to be of God is this, Such or such a
father says that this or this being not written, is nevertheless
Apostolical. And they know that the witnesses whom they cite in matters of
tradition, do sometimes check and contrary one another. In the controversy
that was between the East and West Churches concerning the feast of Easter,
the one part alleged tradition to prove their custom, and the other part
tradition to prove the contrary. It might be that neither was Apostolical,
both could not be, when each gainesaide other. Yet both must be, if al be
Apostolical which the Fathers have said is Apostolical. If al be not, where
is the certainty of these grounds? Why do they murder, burn, and persecute
from place to place as many as make any doubt of these things, which are
grounded upon so fickle and weak foundation?

21 But to leave the foundation whereupon they build their doctrine, The
second difference between true Christianity and Popery is in the end.
if in the rest we find them as corrupt, as in this they have been declared
weak; surely then we may boldly affirm, that the Church of Rome is rather a
sink of all abomination, than a fountain from whence those living waters, or
a storehouse wherein that heavenly food, whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks,
may be had. Let us therefore now consider the end, as well of our religion as
of theirs. Let us view the mark whereat each part does shoot. Whatsoever
men do; they do it to some end. And the quality of things which are done to
any end is judged to be good or bad by the end whereunto they are done.
Hereof it is, that in scripture, things otherwise highly commended, as prayer,
fasting, and alms deeds are most bitterly reproved when they tend to bad
ends. As there is but one author from whom all things are, so there is but one
end, unto whom al things should incline and bend themselves. God is Alpha, the
first, from whom all other things have their being and beginning; wherefore in
reason he is Omega, the end and final cause of all things: upon him they must
attend, and seeing they are not of themselves, therefore they may not serve
themselves, but for the glory of him by whom they are. From hence a rule may
be gathered to judge between pure religion in deed, and that which is
untruly so called. For that religion no doubt is best, which most aduaunceth
the glory of God; and that which takes most from him, the worst. Ephe. 3.
Ipsi gloria in Ecclesia: In the Church of God all glory is given not to men,
but to him. This is the song of the true Church of Christ, Dan 9.
Righteousness O Lord belongs unto thee, but unto us open shame.

22 Wherefore touching our selves, Man is humbled by true doctrine touching
original sin.
we teach with the blessed Apostles and Prophets, that by nature we are the
children of wrath; that corruption is bredde and settled within our bones; that
we are both borne and begotten in it; that with it all the powers and faculties
of our nature are infected; Ephe. 2.
that still it cleaves fast unto our souls, and, although the deadly sting be
taken from it, yet there it sticks as long as life does endure, so irksome
and so grievous, that it forces the most upright and perfect to cry, Romans 7.
Miserable man, who shall deliver me?

23 By this inbred corruption our understanding is so darkened, Thraldom of
will.
that naturally we cannot perceive the things which are of God; no we count
them foolishness; our will is in such thraldom and slavery unto sin, that
it cannot like of any thing spiritual and heavenly, but is wholly carried unto
fleshly desires.

24 If therefore we perceive the things that are of God, Grace.
and do like of them; if our hearts be inclined to do his will, because this
cannot come of our selves (our nature bending a clean contrary way) we
acknowledge most willingly, and unfeignedly, The good we do is his, it is not
ours; our beginning to do, and our continuance in doing well proceeds
only, and wholly from him. If any man receive the grace of God offered, it is
because God has framed his heart thereto. If any man come when God calls, it
is because his grace which calls, draws. If being brought unto Christ, we
continue in him, we have no other reason to yield of our doing, but only
this, he has linked us and fastened us unto himself. We neither rise, when we
are fallen; nor stand, when we are risen, by our own strength. When we are in
distress, we are of our selves so far from ability to help our selves, that
we are not able to crave help of him, unless his spirit wrest out Abba
Father from us. We cannot moan our own case, unless he do groan and sigh for
us; we are not able to name Jesus, unless by the special grace of his spirit
our mouths be opened; no, we cannot, of our selves, so much as think of naming
him, if to think of naming him be a good thought.

25 When against our natural inclination to evil, Works.
his spirit, which works all in all, has so prevailed, that we now begin
to hate the works of the flesh, having an earnest desire to abound in love,
Gal. 5.
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperaunce, and all other fruits of the spirit; yet, by reason of the
strength of that body of sin which ever fights against the spirit, our
inward man is so weakened, that we cannot do the things which we would, and the
things which we do, even the best of them, are so far beneath that perfection
which the Law of God requires, that, if he should rigorously examine them in
justice, no flesh could ever be accounted righteous in his sight. The
loathsomest things that can be imagined, the clothes that be most unclean are
not so foul as our very righteousness is unrighteous: Whereupon we conclude,
that whatsoever we receive by way of reward at Gods hand either in this life
or in the life to come, we receive it as a thing freely given by him, without
any merit or desert of ours; we do not say in our hearts, The Lord has given
us these good things to possess for our righteousness. For seeing it is he
which gives both to will and to do, he crowns in deed his own work, when
he rewards ours; and he never rewards any work of his own, wherein there
is not somewhat of ours which he pardons.

26 Thus being naked and utterly destitute in our selves we seek all things in
Christ Jesus. The truth seeks to throw down men, and to advance Christ.
Him only we acknowledge to be our wisdom, our justification, our
sanctification, our redemption, our priest, our sacrifice, our king, our head,
our mediator, our physician, our way, our truth, our life. In our selves we
find nothing but poverty, and weakness; praise, and honor, and glory we
give to him. The only mark we aim at is to set up his throne, to advance
his kingdom, to make it known that in him the Father has laid up all the
treasures of heaven, to the end that unto him the thirsty may repair for
water, the hungry for bread, the naked for clothes, and we all for all
things needeful to the safety of our souls and bodies.

27 This is not the scope which the Church of Rome proposes; The Church of
Rome seeks her own glory and gain.
They direct all things to an other end. How can ye believe, says Christ to
the Jews, which receive honor one of an other, and seek not that honor
which comes of God alone? John. 5.
And how can the faith of the Church of Rome be sound, since they hold such
doctrines, as tend wholly to their own glory, their own gain, and not to
the praise and honor of God?

28 That they seek not his glory, She paireth and diminishes man's original
corruption.
but their own, it may appear unto any man which thoroughly considers of
their doctrine. First they will not acknowledge that poverty and nakedness,
those filthy garments of corruption and sin wherein Adam has wrapped his
posterity; But in the pride of their hearts, they dissemble it, diminish it,
and make light of it. For although they deny not but that man's nature is
corrupted, yet mark how they pair and lessen this corruption. The Prophet
David does term it wickedness, Psalm. 51.
and sin: but they make it only an inclination unto sinning. The Lord
himself does witness that by it all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's
heart are only evil: Genesis 6.
they restrain it to the inferior part of the soul, and make it only a
mother of some grosser desires. The blessed Apostle prayed, groned, and wept
against it, as a thing which made him altogeher weary of his life: But after
Baptism, they make no more account of those inward rebellious motions against
the spirit, than they do of the beating of a man's pulse.

29 And as they hide that weakness which indeed they have, She boasts of
freewill.
so they boast of that strength which is not in them. For being subject unto
miserable bondage under sin, by reason of that corruption which has spread it
self over all flesh, they brag notwithstanding of the freedom of their will:
as if sin had not utterly bereaved us thereof, but still it were in us to
frame and fashion our own hearts unto good things. For proof whereof their
manner is to make long discourses teaching, that Gods foreknowledge does not
take away free will, that men are not violently drawn to good or evil. Which
things we easily and willingly grant; neither do we teach, or ever did, that
the freedom of our will is taken away by the eternal decree of his
unsearchable purpose: but this we say, and all that have the truth do say the
same, that the will of man being free unto natural and civil actions, has of
it self no freedom to desire things heavenly and spiritual; not because the
eternal purpose of God, but because the corruption of our nature has addicted
us only unto evil. We do not teach or ever did, that any man is the servant
either of sin or of righteousnesie by constraint. For whether we obey the one
unto death and condemnation, or unto life and salvation the other, our
obedience is always voluntary, it is not wrested from us against our wills.
But the question being how we are made willing unto that which is good, this is
the difference between our answer and theirs: We say only by the grace of
God; they say partly by grace, but principally by the power and strength of
their own nature. For being ashamed to affirm with Pelagius that a man may
do the works of righteousness by nature without the grace of God, they hold
his grace to be a thing indeed necessary: But how? As a bird that is tied
or a man that is in fetters needs only to have those incumberances removed,
having then a natural ability to fly and walk without any further help; so
man, as they say, has in himself ability to do good, if the grace of God
do but remove lets. Is not this to make nature the principal cause of our
well doing, whereas in truth, without the special motion of Gods spirit,
and that in every particular action, we are no more able to walk in the
ways which GOD has commanded, than a drunken man to go without leading, who
staggereth even in the plainest ground, though all stumbling blocks be
removed, though his way lie never so smooth before him, such is our
weakness. In consideration whereof the blessed Apostle says plainly, Romans 9.
It is not in him that wills, or in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy. We dragge, and are not able of our selves to set one foot before an
other. Cantic 1.
Draw me, says the spouse in the Canticles, and then we will run after
thee. But these men little considering of what frail metal they are made,
perceiving not how sin has weakened the faculties of the soul, vaunt of
freedom, of strength, of inward power, and make their own will the chiefest
cause of their well doing.

30 And when they have done any thing which to their seeming is well done,
Justification by works.
they prise it so high and esteem so much of it, that God, as they think,
should do them injury if in judgment he did not pronounce them just and
righteous for their works sake. If it were possible that God entering into
judgment should find any so upright and perfect that by their works they
might be justified in his sight, doubtless he should find his own servant
to be such; or else none: if any of his servant, surely his Prophets; if any
Prophet, rather David than any other. But David cries out, Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment no not with thy Servant O Lord. For in thy sight
shall none that lives be justified. For whether we consider works forbidden,
or commanded by the Law; what man is there living which can say in the one,
My heart is pure, in the other, I have done all that is enjoined me? For if it
were so that we knew nothing wherein we had transgressed the laws and
statutes of the almighty, yet herein could we in no wise be justified, because
of secret sins hidden even from our own selves. For which if God shall call
us to our reckoning, and mark straitely what is done amiss, Psalm. 130.
O Lord, says the Prophet, who shall stand? Again, if we had done whatsoever
we could; yet, because we cannot do so much as we should, we ought to
acknowledge our selves unprofitable: whereas we, even the best of us, are far
from doing that which, if we would, we might do.

31 Now if God notwithstanding, Of merits and works of supererogation.
for his sons sake, do so allow and accept the work of our hands, that he
bountifully rewards our weak service with an excellent and an eternal
weight of glory, how much are we bound both to praise his mercy, and to hate
the insolency of those men, who, besides all this, swelling in the proud
conceit of their works, will have eternal life which is his gift to be their
merit? nor only that, but the worthiness of their deserts to be so great,
that many of them doing God more service than can be sufficiently rewarded in
their own persons, deserve heaven not only for themselves, but for others
too. These shipwracks of faith they have made by reason of their inward pride.

32 The excessive desire of outward pomp has furthermore caused them to
disdain the baseness of Christ Jesus, She desires excessiuely outward pomp.
and of his Apostles; to be ashamed of the mean and low estate, wherein they
lived; to make of their Deacons and Priests Cardinals exceeding the kings of
the earth in glory; of their Bishop a Monarke, under whose foot the Emperor
himself has been a footestoole, whose stirrup the greatest Sovereigns have
scarce been deemed worthy to hold, at whose bridle kings have attended as
servant, that the words of the Preacher might be justified, Eccles 10.
Folly is set in great excellency, and the rich set in the low place. I
have seen servant on horses and Princes walking as servants on the ground.

33 This pomp cannot be maintained with nothing, She maintains it by vile
merchandise.
it must have strong sinnewes. And therefore whatsoever man's wit might possibly
devise for gain, they have both found it out, and put it in ure: setting
Offices, Masses, Prayers, Pardons, Sacraments, Heaven and Earth, all the
treasures of the house of GOD to sale, if we may term it the house of God,
which they have made a shop of so vile merchaundise. It were infinite to
recite what huge sums of money they have heretofore, by religious pretenses,
every year gathered within the compass of this one Island: What heaps then
have they raked out of other parts of Christendom? Which offals and profits
if once men begin, as here, so in other kingdoms also, to withholde from
them; if men leave off buying their wares any more, if things which are fat,
and excellent depart, doubtless that city, which now is clothed in fine
linen, and purple, and skarlet, which now is gilded with gold, and decked
with precious stones, and pearls, shall in one hour be made desolate. This
they know, and it makes them careful to maintain whatsoever is commodious
and gainefull to them. As for the glory of GOD, it is the least part of their
care; nay, they care not how heinous sacrilege they commit in spoiling and
robbing him of his honor.

34 It is an honor unto God, She robs God of the honor which he should have
by Faith, Invocation, and Obedience.
when all men by faith point their fingers, as it were, at Christ Jesus, naming
him the only Lamb which takes away the sins of the world; when he is
acknowledged the only mediator between God and us; when we confess, that
he is that Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 10.
which, having offered one sacrifice for sins, has therewith, because it was
a perfect sacrifice, consecrated for ever them that are sanctified; when our
faith is so ascertained and grounded upon his promises, that we can be bold
as Lions, Prou. 28.
assuring our selves that the eye of the Lord is on them which trust in his
mercy to deliver their souls from death, Psalm. 33.
as the Prophet witnesses. But how do they give unto him this honor, who
have devised so many ways to take away sin besides the blood of the Lamb of
GOD; who, as though we might not be bold to enter into the holy place by the
new and lively way which he has prepared for us through the veil which is
his flesh, or as though there were some others without whom the father in him
is not pleased, some others more willing to hear our requests than he who
gave himself to death for our sakes, have made their intercessors infinite in
number; and, as though his sacrifice were so imperfect, that by being once
offered it could not perfectly consecrate those which are sanctified, renew
their oblations day by day; finally, as though the Prophet were over
presumptuous which says, Psalm. 46.
God is our hope, and strength, and help, therefore will not we fear, go
about by all means to strike a servile terror into the hearts of the
faithful, to keep them always wavering and doubting, to take away all
assurance of the mercy and favor of God toward them: which when we have
lost, what courage can we have to withstand the fiery assaults of Satan? what
comfort or consolation in the midst of those sharp and bitter conflicts,
which we must endure, if we will live godly in Christ Jesus?

35 It is an honor unto God, when his name only is called upon; when we
worship and fall down before none but him. This honor he gets not at their
hands, which have gotten to them selves legions of Angels, to whom they pray,
and millions of Idols, which they daily adore. Their differences between an
Idol and an Image are but shifts. Call them what ye will; They are
similitudes of things in heaven or things in earth, which is sufficient to
condemn them of Idolatry that worship such things. Their distinctions
between the honor which they give to Images, and the worship which they do
to God alone, may serve to bleare the eyes of mortal men: But the eternal God
does know, that they honor creatures with that honor which is forbidden them
in the Law: that they bow down to them, and that they serve them. Exodus 20.


36 It is an honor unto God when reverence and obedience is showed unto his
Law. But is this performed in that synagogue, where he sits which is an
adversary, and exalts him self against all that is called God, or that is
woorshipped; making himself supreme Judge of all nations, requiring his own
words to be heard of all men as the words of God; bereauing magistrates of
their lawful power; exempting his Clergy from the civil sword, what villainy
soever they commit; changing at pleasure the government of Christ established
in his Church; dispensing with sin be it never so directly against the
express commandment of God; forbidding his Clergy marriage, under color of
seuering them from the world, but in deed to ease them of such cares and
troubles as are necessarily joined with that honorable estate which God
commends, and both secretly with concubines and openly in stews permitting
them fornication which God does hate? Seeing therefore that this their
synagogue is nothing but a sink of all uncleanness, seeing that all their
endeavors tend to no other end but only to the advancement of themselves, the
dishonor of God, and the disgrace of Christ, doubtless they are not, they
cannot be the men which minister the waters of eternal life unto thirsty
souls.

37 Now that we have seen both the ground, The third difference between true
Christianity and Popery is in ye means and manner of proceeding.
and the end, as well of that faith which we profess, as of the doctrine which
is held by them who are deadly enemies to us and our profession, it remains
that a word be spoken of the means which are used on both parts, to set
forward that for which we strive. Touching our selves, as the mark which we
shoot at is to set up the kingdom of Christ Jesus, a kingdom which is not of
the world, so the means which herein we use, are not worldly, but
altogether heavenly and spiritual. What the proceedings of the Gospel have
been, ye are not ignorant; ye know very well, how without force, without
cruelty, without treachery and deceit, without all wisdom of flesh and
blood, in naked simplicity, in truth vncoloured, and, as the Apostle
speaks, in foolishness of preaching we have labored to prepare you for one
husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ, not outwardly arrayed in
purple and skarlet, gilded with gold, precious stones, and pearl, like the
strumpet that sits upon many waters, but, like the spouse of Solomon,
glorious within, full of Christ, rich in faith, and in good works, fulfilled
with knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
strengthened mightily in the inward man, rooted and grounded in sincere love,
enabled to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and length and depth
and height of the love of Christ, strengthened with all patience and long
suffering, blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things.

38 Contrariwise they desiring no such thing, but seeking to build an earthly
kingdom for themselves, use the means which are fittest for that purpose.
They feed men's eyes with all glorious and glittering shows, they invent to
themselves instruments of Music to delight the ear; but of the work of the
Lord, of preaching the Gospel, of instructing the heart, of building the faith,
of exhorting and comforting Gods people, who sees not how little regard they
have? They keep men occupied always in corporal and bodily exercise, 1. Tim.
4.
which profits little: But are they careful to train men up in the knowledge
of Christ, which is eternal life? in true godliness, which is profitable unto
all things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that which is to
come? No, their practice from time to time does show that most profane and
godless men only siding themselves with the Church of Rome, and defending by
all means the Popes honor, may both be counted as Catholics, and even
canonised as Saints among them. If they pass the days of their life lewdely,
after death at a reasonable prise they may purchase rest for their souls. If
their hearts be set upon adultery, incest, theft, murder, consider the holy
father for his parchement and lead, and what more easily granted in the Court
of Rome, than full and free liberty to commit sin? Hence it comes to pass
that as every man is most licentiously bent, so he joins himself most
willingly to the Church of Rome, and warreth most earnestly for that faith,
which faith if the rich men of this world be for the most part ready to
embrace, what marvel is it? For whereas Christ has said, It is hard for a
rich man to enter into heaven, their doctrine and practice makes the way
expedite only for the rich; but by the way which they teach for a poor man
to enter into the kingdom of heaven, it is a hard matter. It were too much to
recite all the means whereby that kingdom of darkness has grown; it were
a thing too full of horror to discourse of all the trecheries, poysonings,
murtherings, massacres which they have used to maintain their power, never any
tyrant in the world more. Did Christ, did Peter, did the blessed Apostles, thus
subdue and conquer nations? Did they thus enlarge the kingdom of God? As
verily as he does live, it is not the goodness of their religion but the
strength of their faction, and the wiliness of flesh by which they stand.

39 Wherefore briefly to conclude this matter, and in few words to knit up
that which remains; I have, as you see, set before you life and death, truth
and error, wholesome food and noisome poison. If ye tender the safety of your
own souls, be not as children ready to take whatsoever is offered you;
learn to judge between good and evil; lay not out money for that which is no
bread; spend not your labor in that which cannot satisfy; come to the waters
whereunto God calls you.

After what sort men must come to the waters of life.
We must not give ear unto lying spirits; Hear not the words of the
Prophets that prophecy unto you, and teach you vanity: they speak the
vision of their own heart; and not out of the mouth of the Lord, Ierem. 23.
turn away your ears from such, and hearken unto me, says the Lord. Hearken
diligently, carefully, attentively. The word of life is of power and strength
to save your souls: But if ye be as vessels that leake, and run out, how
should the doctrine of salvation profit you? This food, refusing all other, we
are exhorted both to take, and to eat. If sinners, heretics, enemies of the
truth say, Come with us; shun them, turn away your feet from their paths,
offer not you their offerings of blood, present not your selves in their
temples, taste not things sacrificed unto their Idols, Eat that which is good.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, much less for that whereby men
perish; but labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, which meat
the son of man shall give you. For him has God the father sealed. He is the
bread of life, his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink in deed,
his word is the power of God unto salvation, his sacraments are seals of
righteousness by faith, in him are all the treasures of peace, joy, rest,
comfort; no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no heart has conceived the
things which are hidden and laid up in him. Whereupon if we feed in such sort
that our souls take joy, pleasure, and delight in fatness, then the fruit
which hereby we shall reap is this.

41 Your soul, says God, shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant
What commodities such as come shall receive.
What? Shall they then which hearken unto him and put their trust in his mercy
deliver their lives for ever from the hand of the grave? Shall they live, and
not see death? There is a first and a second death, the one only seuereth the
soul from the body for a time; the other tormenteth first the soul severed,
and afterward both body and soul for ever. The second death shall not touch
them of whom the Prophet here speaks. Job. 30
But of the first Job has said, Death is the house appointed for all the
living. Wherefore God does not promise to prolong the days of his children
continually here on earth, but his promise is that their souls shall live. For
touching outward things, we cannot certainly judge the hatred or love of God
by them. Eccles. 9.
In these external events, The same condition is to the just and to the
wicked, to the good and pure and to them that are polluted, to him that
sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not. As is the good, so is the sinner,
he that swears, as he that fears an oath. How dies the wise man? Even as
the fool, says the Preacher. Nay one is wicked and lives in ease and
prosperity, another fears God and dies in the bitterness of his soul;
they sleep both in the dust together, the worms cover them both alike. Job.
21.
This only is the difference. The wicked is kept to the day of destruction,
and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath. But the just shall live by
faith: his soul shall live. The foundation from whence this life flows is
that covenant which was made with David, 2. Sam. 7.
I will set up thy seed after thee which shall proceed out of the body, and I
will stablish his kingdom, he shall build an house for my name, and I will
stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever. Now as David, so the children of
David after him fulfilled their days, and fell asleep: the throne of David was
not established in them for ever. But of Christ, the Angel of the Lord has
said, Luke 1.
The Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end.
Wherefore in Christ this covenant with David is fulfilled. The mercies which
were promised unto David are the benefits, Acts 13.
and, as the Apostle terms them, the holy things which we receive by Christ
Jesus. This covenant is everlasting. If, says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Ier.
33.
you can break my covenant of the day and my covenant of the night, that
there should not be day and night in their season, then may my covenant be
broken with David. As the covenant made with David is everlasting, so the
mercies therein contained are sure. Of the sure mercies of David thus he
speaks in the book of Psalms, Mine hand shall be established with him and
mine arm shall strengthen him, the enemy shall not oppress him, neither shall
the wicked do him hurt, but I will destroy his foes before his face, and
plague them that hate him, my mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my
covenant shall stand fast with him. The covenant made with David is made with
us, his mercies are our mercies, if so be we perform that which here is
required at our hands. If we hearken diligently unto him that cries, Come to
the waters, if we cleave fast unto his truth, if we embrace his promises with
joy, eating that which is good, shunning and loathing that which is evil,
surely his hand shall be established with us as with David, his arm shall be
our strength, the enemy shall not oppress us, neither shall the wicked do us
harm: but God shall destroy all our enemies before us, and plague them that
hate us, his mercies he shall keep toward us for ever, his covenant shall
stand fast with us, our souls shall live, he shall make an everlasting covenant
with us, even the sure mercies of David. Which mercies the God of all mercy
grant us, unto whom with the Son by whose blood they are purchased, together
with that glorious Spirit which has sealed in our hearts full assurance that
they cannot fail, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A Sermon made before the Parliament at Westminster.
1. SAMVEL 12. 23 Be this sin against the Lord far from me: that I should
cease to pray for you. But I will show you the good, and the right way.

24 Therefore fear you the Lord, and serve him in the truth.


HIstories, The use of Parliamentes.
as well sacred as profane, at large record, that good Princes have ever
vigilantly looked into the state of the common wealth, which is their charge:
and perceiving disorder, or foreseeing danger, have speedily caused
consultation to be had, as well for the reformation, as for the preservation
thereof. In which consultation, three especial things are commonly offered to
consider of: The state of religion; the state of the Prince; and the state of
the common wealth. Three most necessary things to be regarded, and provided
for. If religion be not sound, men's souls cannot be safe; if the head be not
preserved, the body of necessity must decay; if good government want, the
common wealth falls into confusion. Our Prophet, that good Prince and ruler
of the people, in the great assembly of the Israelites, remembered unto them
these selfsame things, as by the words which I have chosen to treat of it will
appear. Our Samuel, our good and gracious governor, moved with like
affection, has called this honorable and high Court of Parliament for like
end. Wherein, that things well intended may the better proceed and take best
effect, let us in our prayers crave help and assistance from above. Wherein
let us not forget Christ's universal Church, this particular Church of England
and Ireland, the Queens excellent Majesty, our most Sovereign Lady and
chief governor, that God remembering us in his mercy may grant her Majesty
a long happy life, with the increase of all godly honor and felicity, to
the great praise of his name and great good of his Church. Let us also remember
in our prayers the honorable privy Counsel, the Clergy, the Nobility, with
the whole people of this Realm: that God may grant every one grace in his
calling syncerely to serve him. And especially at this time, let us call upon
God for wisdom and grace from above, that in this consultation of Parliament
all private affections and respects to our own commodities laid aside, Gods
glory and the good of his Church and this common wealth, only and syncerely
may be sought. For these, and grace let us pray unto God, as our Savior Christ
has taught us, Our Father, etc.

2 The better to conueigh my self to the matter which I have in hand I shall
crave leave that I may speak somewhat of this princely Prophet Samuel: Things
to be considered in the person of Samuel. He was a Minister.
who descending of noble parentage, was by his mother consecrated to the
ministry. Of which calling though Christ himself thought so highly, and
honorably, John. 6.
that refusing to be a King, he chose the office of a Minister: yet, so
perverse is the judgment of the world, that they think no condition more
base or vile. The minister with his master Christ is contemned: this holy
office is become odious: All men seek their own and serve themselves: Phil. 2.
it is accounted slavery to serve the Lord.

3 Samuel was called of God to be a magistrate: He was a godly magistrate; yet
misliked by them over whom he was placed.
wherein he was so faithful and upright, that his adversaries were forced to
justify his doings, and to bear him record, that he neither was a
bribetaker, nor an extortioner, nor one that had iniuried any man. It were well
with our common wealth, if all officers could carry away the like testimony.
But evil subjects cannot away with good magistrates. The prodigal, which have
consumed their substance in lewdenesse and vanity, long for a change:
supposing that their state will be bettered thereby, and persuading them selves
that it cannot be made worse. All change is perilous, and an old saying is it,
Seldom comes the better. A better this people could hardly have had: yet so
unquiet and discontented they were, that (the good and peaceable government of
Samuel notwithstanding) they misliked their present state, and desired an other
governor to be given them. Exodus 15.
The worthy magistrate Moses was muttered against: 2. Sam. 17.
The noble king David for a time deposed: our faithful Samuel rejected. Behold
the hard state of good Princes, who are for the most part rewarded with great
ingratitude. Psalm. 70.
Moses dear cousins became his deadly enemies: David's familiar friends became
his most fierce and violent foes: Samuel was rejected of such as he most
favored. Crysippus.
Crysippus observing the course of these things, says that, which experience
proves true: Thou shall be sure if thou govern amiss, to purchase Gods; if
well, the peoples anger and displeasure. The danger of this office, by reason
of the great ingratitude of the people, made Moses say to God, Exodus 2.
Send whom thou will send: it caused Demosthenes rather to wish banishment,
Demosthenes Themistocles Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 2.
than place of government; and Themistocles to prefer hell it self to the
judgment seat. When Antigonus should put on a royal diadem, he brake forth
into this speech, O cloth of more honorable, than happy estate: wherewith if
a man were so thoroughly acquainted that he could tell the number of cares and
miseries wherewith thou art fraught, he would not stoop for thee, though he
might have thee for the taking up. Wherefore it grieved not Samuel to be eased
of so heavy a burden: but God was much grieved, to see so great disgrace
offered to his anointed. They have not rejected thee but me, 1. Sam. 7.
says the Lord. To dislike and cast off a good magistrate is to dislike and
cast off God: because all power is of God. Romans 13.
God in his wrath for godly Samuel gave them wicked Saul. I pray God in his
justice serve all such alike, as seek after such change, as cannot submit
themselves with loving and obedient hearts to the good government of worthy
Samuel their natural Prince, their good and faithful Magistrate: whom for
conscience sake, they ought to honor, and obey.

4 Samuel was both a Prophet, He was both a Prophet and a Prince.
and a Prince: a Minister, and a Magistrate: So was Melchisedech, Moses, David,
Christ. He had need to be a rare man that should well answer sundry
offices. Luke. 16.
When Read rationem, give account comes, then one office such as the least
of these, will be thought a burden heavy enough for any one, besides these,
to have borne. But the matching of these two offices does teach, what
agreement, love, and liking should be between these two officers. They are
Gods two hands, to build up withal the decayed walls of Jerusalem. If the one
hand set forward, and the other put backward, Gods work will be ill wrought.
Exodus 4
The wisdom of God matched Moses and Aaron, two brethren; the one the
minister, the other the magistrate: that knit together in brotherly love, they
might labor together with both hands, for the furtherance of Gods building.
When the word and the sword do join, then is the people well ruled, and then
is God well served. So long as king Ioas and the good priest Iehoida lived
together, 2. Reg. 12.
God was served according to his word; the priest rightly counseled, the king
gladly followed.

5 Samuel zealous for the glory of God, Things contained in the words of
Samuel.
and careful for the commonwealth, preaches to the Parliament assembled after
this sort: Be this sin against the Lord far from me, etc. Wherein first, he
puts the ministers in mind of their duty; 1. The duty of the minister.
secondly, he tells the prince and people of their office; lastly, he
shows if they do it not, 2. The duty of the Prince.
what punishment will follow.

6 Samuel rejected and put from the office of a magistrate by this froward and
rebellious people, 3. The duty of the people.
yet was not so froward himself, as to forsake the office of a minister. 4.
The punishment if this duty be not performed.
Neither minded he to revenge this wrong offered him; but, with a mild mind,
he was content not only to pray for them, but to teach them faithfully, and
lovingly to admonish them. Samuel zealous in Gods cause, but mild in his own.
A pattern for all princes, to be mild in their own matters, yet earnest
and zealous in the quarrel of God. He prayed for the people his enemies; the
cause was his own: he took the sword in his hand, 1. Sam. 15.
and cut King Agag in pieces; the cause was Gods. Moses in his own cause was a
man most mild, he quietly suffered wonderful wrongs: but when he perceived
Idolatry committed, Gods glory coming into question, he with his partakers
for worshipping of that calfe put to the sword three thousand men. Exodus 32.
Christ our Savior and Master suffered, John 2.
though undeservedly, yet meekely all reproof, yea reproach, yea death it
self: but when his fathers cause came in hand that the house of God was made
a den of thieves; he bestirred him with his whip, coursed those symoniacall
choppers and chaungers, buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and made havoc
of whatsoever they had.

By his own example he gives ministers to understand that it is their duty
to Pray and to Teach.
first by his own example puts the ministers in mind of their duty: in
whom he requires two things, as principal points concerning them, To pray;
and, To teach. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord and cease
praying for you: I will show you the good and right way.

8 Christ, His prayer was earnest: as appears by his words, Be this sin
far from me that I should cease to pray.
that good pastor, was earnest in prayer for the people, Holy father keep
them: yea for his enemies, Father forgive them. Paul the good Apostle prayed
without intermission. James the good Bishop of Jerusalem, made his knees as
hard as the hoose of a camel, with continual praying. Our good Prophet
Samuel thinks it a great sin not to pray for the people. Absit a me hoc
peccatum, Be this sin far from me. Christ, Peter, Paul, Jeremy, prayed
with many tears. God is delighted with an hearty prayer both in the minister,
in the Prince, and in the people. Christ was so fervent herein, Luke 22.
that he swet water and blood. King David in his earnest prayer, Psalm. 6.
nightly watered his bed with tears. The Israelites, 2. Par^l. 33.
in Babylon, in pouring out their hearty prayers, powered out also tears
abundantly. Moses was so earnest with God in his prayers, Exodus 3^.
that God said unto him, Why do thou hold me? 1. Sam. 1.
Anna was so eager, that she powered out her very heart before God in prayer.
The very Ethnickes would not dally with their false gods in prayer. Plato.
Plato reports, that when they met in the house of their Idols to pray, one
openly pronounced, Hoc agite, Do this. Talk not, trifle not, let not your
minds wander. Do that ye come for. For prayer is the lifting up of the mind
to God. And Christ complains of this lip labor: Matthew. 15.
This people honor me with their lips. God sees thy heart, and he requires
it.

9 The persons for whom Samuel did pray are specified in the latter end of
his speech. He prayed for the prince and the people.
For to whom he says if ye do wickedly ye shall perish both you and your
king; for them, that they might not do wickedly, he prayed. We must pray
first for kings, 1. Tim. 2.
and all that are placed in authority: that God may give them understanding
hearts rightly to rule; faithful counselors, from whom they may receive wise
and grave advise; careful minds, to put good counsels in execution. Evil
counsel given and followed has wrought much woe to many princes, and utter
ruin to sundry common wealths. 2. Sam. 10.
King Hanan hearkened to evil counsel, and executed it: but it turned to the
confusion of him and his people. 2. Sam 20.
Absolon likewise followed Achitophels wicked counsel: 1. Reg. ^1.
and destruction likewise followed them both. Solomon he gave ear to foolish
women, and followed their idolatrous devises: whereby he procured to himself
the wrath of God. Roboam rejected the counsel of the grave and wise, 1. Reg. 12.
and followed the light and lusty devises of young brains: but it spoiled him
of the most part of his kingdom. Zedechias would not hear the good counsel of
Jeremy, Ier. 38.
but gave ear to the evil advise of his bad counselors: which, in the end,
turned to his confusion. Happy is that Prince, that has wise and godly
counselors: and thrice happy that will follow them. Then may the people live
a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Samuel prayed for
the Prince, and the people. This is one principal part of the ministers office.

10 The other is to teach. The next duty of the minister is to teach; not
what they list, but the good and right way.
If I teach not, woe worth me says S. Paul. But what is it that the minister
should teach? The Pope to be head of the universal Church? No, that Christ
claymeth as his own right. To abstain from marriage and meat, as not lawful
to be used? That S. Paul terms the doctrine of devils. Shall we teach
Purgatory, and prayer to the dead, Col. 1.
or for the dead? Ephesians. 4.
But S. John teaches, that we are purged by the blood of Christ. 1. Tim. 4.
And God commands us to call upon him in our prayer. 1. John 1.
Other commandment have we none. To be short, shall we teach the doctrine of
men? Then all our worshipping of God shall be in vain. Matthew. 15.
Samuel therefore tells us what we shall teach, namely, Esaias 30.
the good and right way. Esaias speaking of Gods word says, This is the way,
Ier. 6.
walk in it. The prophet Jeremy has the like, Stand upon the ways and see,
and inquire of the old way, which is the good way, and walk in it. We ought
to walk in the old path of Gods ancient word. For that is the good, and the
right way. Ye shall not do that which seems right unto you: Deuteronomy 12.
but what I command, that only do; neither add nor detract any thing. John
14.
Christ taught not his own ways, but the ways of his Father. The words
which I have spoken, are not mine, but his that sent me, the fathers. S. Paul
durst not teach any other thing, 1. Cor. 11.
than what he had received of the Lord* Yea he curses the very Angels of
heaven, Gal. 1.
if they teach any other way, than that which he had already delivered, as
right and good. It is the office therefore of the minister to teach the
word. 1. Pet. 4.
He that speaks let him speak as the words of God. The good Emperor
Constantinus was so careful of this, that he required of the Synod over
which he was set, to decide matters of religion, that they should order all
things by the book of God, which book he placed for the same purpose in the
midst of them: and what the Bishops in Synod did so conclude to be godly
and behooueful, that he did ratify and confirm.

11 The ministers, Such as do not this work should not be suffered to bear
this office.
you see, should teach the right way. He, which bears that name, and
performs not this office, is but an Idol. Let another take his Bishopric.
Such drones were better smothered than suffered in that hiue, where none should
live, that will not labor. Zach. 11.
Such as sow not, why should they reap? Neither is it any new thing to cast
out unworthy ministers who cast off care of their duty. Acts 1.
Solomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest: 1. Reg 2.
and Justinian deprived Syluerius and Vigilius Bishops of Rome. These are good
presidents for Princes in like case to follow.

12 Again, Punishment due unto such as teach ways contrary to that which is
good and right.
such as teach, but teach not the good, and right way; such as are open and
public maintainers of errors and heresy; such, in the judgment of God, are
thought unworthy to live. Falsus Propheta moriatur. Elias, and Iehu did not
think themselves imbrued, Deuteronomy. 13.
but rather sanctified with such blood. I have no cruel heart; 1. Reg. 18.
blood be far from me: I mind nothing less. Yet needs must it be granted
that the maintainers and teachers of errors and heresy are to be repressed in
every Christian common wealth. 2. Reg. 10.
Such troublers of the quiet of the Church, such deceivers of the people are at
leastwise, according to the ancient commendable custom of the church, to be
removed from the ministry. It is no reason that the church enemies should
be fostered in the bosom of the church. The histories of things done by good
princes and rulers in these cases are so many and manifest, that I need not
trouble you with recital of them. Trip hist. lib. 9. cap. 25.
Amphilochius the Bishop sharply reproved Theodosius the Emperor, that he so
long winked at Arius, and suffered him to spread his pestilent heresy far
and wide, over the body of the church. The Emperor was not angry at the
words of just reproof; but forthwith banished Arius, and gave him some part
of his just deserts. The ministers, what room soever they have in the church
of God, ought to pray, and teach the good and right way, or else to give place
to others that can and will. And thus much for the duty of the ministers.

Fear the Lord and serve him in the truth withal your hearts. The duty of
the Prince toward God and the common wealth.
The Prophet, in these words, puts the prince and people in remembrance of
their duty. Wherein double service is required: The service due unto God; and
the service due unto the common wealth. The service which we owe unto God is
fear; which fear is ever joined with love, and for that cause called a
sonnelike fear: to distinguish it from that servile fear, the end whereof is
desperation, as the fruit of the former is love, which makes not ashamed.
Fear God: for they which fear him shall not feel his power. All things be
naked and open before him. He does see and will judge. Fear him therefore; but
love him too: who has so loved thee, that he has not spared his only son,
but given him to death for thee.

14 God puts the heads in mind of this duty: How princes do serve God as
Princes.
knowing that, as they go before, so the people will follow after. Jeroboam
gave evil example, 2. Reg. 22.
and he made the people sin. Josias feared and zealously served God; and the
people did the like. Quomodo reges Domino seruiunt in timore, Aug. cp. 50.
nisiea quae contra Domini iussa sunt religiosa seueritate prohibendo atque
plectendo? Aliter rex seruit vt homo, aliter vt rex: vt homo, fideliter
timendo; vt rex, leges iusta praecipientes and contraria prohibentes sanciendo.
How do Princes serve the Lord in fear, says S. Augustine, unless with
religious rigor they forbid, and punish things wherein the statutes of the
Lord are broken? The king serves God as a man one way, and an other way as a
king: As a man by leading a faithful life: as a king by making Laws such as
inioyne things that are just and forbid the contrary. Ezechias did God the
service of a king in destroying the groves and temples of Idols, 2. Paral. 3^.
which were builded against the commandment of God. 2. Paral. 34.
Josias did the like, in reforming the church; in dispatching all Idolatry,
and superstition. Darius did God royal service, Dan. 6.
when he gave the Idol into Daniels hands, and cast his enemies into the den
of Lions. Dan. 3.
Nabuchodonazer did the like, when by strait Law he commanded that none
should blaspheme, but that all should serve the God of Sydrach My sach and
Abednago. Herein Princes do rightly serve God as Princes, when, to serve him,
they do such things, as unless they were Princes they could not do.

15 The first point of kingly service unto God is to purge, The first point of
kingly service unto God is to purge his Church.
and cleanse his Church. Christ teaches this, by that which he did at his
entering into that fowlie defiled temple of Jerusalem. It appertains to
Princes, to Magistrates, to them which are now assembled in this honorable
Court of Parliament, by all good means and Laws to see Gods house made
clean: that it may be the house of prayer, and not a den of thieves.

16 First it must be purged from all false doctrine: From false doctrine and
Idolatry.
from all Idolatry, and superstition. The good kings, Ezechias, and Josias
were careful in this behalf. They could not abide Idolatry to be committed,
or God to be blasphemed within their dominons. It had been hard to have
purchased such a thing as a Mass at Moses hands with a mass of money. That
zealous Prince king Asa deposed Maacha his grandemother wholly from all
government, for setting up a foul Idol in a grove. He that dealt so sharply
with his grandmother for this, surely would, in no case or respect, have
tolerated a blasphemous mass in his reformed church and kingdom. The evil
which others do by our sufferance is ours. We do it, when we suffer it to be
done. Princes, to please princes, may not displease the prince of all princes.
Fear the Lord, and serve him in zeal, and in truth; cast out of the church
of England all leuin of blasphemy and Idolatry. So shall you glorify God, 1.
Sam. 2.
and he shall glorify you. Paul's heart was set on fire, his spirit was kindled
within him, Acts 17.
when he saw the city of Athens given to Idolatry. 1. Mac. 2.
Ye know the History of that worthy man Mattathias. We pray daily,
Hallowed be thy name: but with what minds, if wittingly we suffer his name to
be profaned and blasphemed?

17 Fear the Lord, From occasions of offense.
purge his Church, remove all stones of offense out of his vineyard. 1. Cor.
14.
S. Paul's rule is, Let all things in the Church be done seemly: What that
seemelinesse is he himself expounds in these words, 1. Cor. 14.
Let all things be done unto edification. The primative Church, casting away
Judicial, and Heathenish rites was simple in her ceremonies. The pope has
polluted, and burdened the Church with both. We may have no other than such
as are comely, and serve for the furtherance of true religion.

18 The church had need to be purged of an other enormitie, From Simonie
or else it cannot be safe. The sin of Magus must be removed. This disease
spreads far. Patrones gape for gains, and hungry fellows, utterly
destitute of all good learning or godly zeal, yea skantly clothed with
common honesty, having money, find ready entrance into the Church. These are
thieves and robbers, John 10.
they creep into the church of Christ by stealth. They are not called of God,
Heb. 5.
as Aaron was. This sin is universally complained of. Surely, if symoniacall
affection have corrupted the heart of any Bishop: (as some will not let openly
to say) it were not amiss if his heart were given him in his hand. He is
easily dealt withal if he be disbishopped. If the lot fall on the lay man, the
loss of his patronage is but a light punishment for a fault so heinous. But
whosoever is this money man, I will say unto him in the words of S. Peter, Acts
8.
Thy money be with thee unto perdition. Shifts are but shifts in these matters.
It is all one to go plainly to work with Judas, What will ye give me: and to
give thy patronage to thy servant to sell, and so to divide Christ's coat
between you. Ambrosius.
Ambrose, in his book de pastore, seems to touch Bishops of his time with
simonie: saying, Quod dedit, cum Episcopus ordinaretur, aurum fuit; and quod
perdidit, anima fuit: cum alium ordinaret, quod accepit, pecunia fuit; quod
dedit, lepra fuit. That which he gave when he was ordained Bishop was gold: and
that which he lost was his soul. That which he took when he ordained an
other was money: and that which he gave was a leprosy. This is the hole
whereat so many unfit and unworthy persons have crept in. 1. Tim. 5.
Lay not thy hands on any man quickly, is worn out of remembrance. Such as
cannot feed the flock, are now dispensed withal to be owners of the fleese.
God no doubt will find out the fault, and the blood of such as perish will be
required at some bodies hands. God grant speedy reformation herein. Such in
authority, as truly fear God, will purge his church from false doctrine, from
Idolatry, from superstition, and from Simonie.

19 The next point of princely service done to God, The next point of princely
service to God, is to provide that his people may be taught the way of
salvation.
is to nurse the church with wholesome food till we all grow up to a perfect
man in Christ Jesus. That this food may be ministered, that this word may be
preached, every where, to Gods people; good princes, and such as are in
authority must take special care. For this is truly to serve and fear God.
It is not enough that princes and magistrates embrace the Gospel, that they
feed upon the food of salvation themselves; but they, as heads and pastors,
must see this bread broken and delivered to the people. Christ had care of all the people, and sent his disciples abroad with this charge, Go your ways into
the whole world. Matt. 28.
The will of Christ is, that all be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth. 1. Tim. 2.
The preaching of the gospel is called the kingdom of Christ. For by that
means Christ is planted, grows, and reigns in the hearts and souls of the
people. If the flock want their pastor, and, by reason thereof, through famine
perish; doubtless that blood of souls will be required. Laws provide for many
matters of small importance. This weighty matter of man's salvation is not
lightly to be passed over. The harvest no doubt is great, Luke 10.
many willing to hear the word: few there be that labor, but many idle
lookers on, who take the wages, but either will not or cannot work. They have
learned of the evil steward to play the thief: Luke 16.
both to rob their master Christ of his glory, and the church of Christ of
their salvation. But woe be to those sheepeheardes which feed themselves, and
suffer the flock of Christ to want their meat.

20 The want of reward hinders this work. Provision to be made for teachers
to that purpose.
But this will be answered. Some have enough and some have too much. I am
acquainted with these speeches: but let me say again: A great sort have too
little, and some that are worthy to have, have stark nothing. No man has too
much that well does his duty: for he is worthy of double that honor which he
has. 1. Tim. 5.
And he that can justly be charged with want of duty, Apoc. 2.
let his candlestick in Gods name, and for Gods sake be removed. Now if it be
alleged, that if equal division were made, all might be sufficiently provided
for: But who shall make the division? There is cause, why men may think it
skant safe for the Church of Christ to put her patrimony to arbitrament:
least, while division be pretended, some Quintus Fabius adiudge a good part
thereof to the Senate of Rome. Cic. de Off. lib. 1.
Rome has robbed Christ of his honor; and, by impropriations, given his
patrimony to idle fat Monks to feed upon. We have restored Christ to his
honor and dignity: but we still hold from him his lands and living like a
ward. The Ethnicke and Idolatrous priests of Egypt, of Jupiter, of Baal, of Bell
were liberally provided for. The priests of Aaron, the Scribes and Pharisees,
the Monks, Friars, and sacrificing popish priests were in high authority, and
had the wealth of the world. Shall Idol service be preferred to the true
service of God? Shall false prophets be better regarded and rewarded than true
Preachers? Then just is our condemnation. John 3.
For we show, that light being come into the world, we love it not so much
as they loved darkness. The Gospel has evil luck: it is never preached, but
the patrimony thereof is pinched. Such as will pretend the Gospel, and labor
to pull away the patrimony of the Gospel, Tit. 1.
may well profess Christ in words but they deny him in their deeds.

21 As the ministers are to be provided for, The people to be constrained to
hear; what soever they pretend to the contrary.
that the word may be preached: so the people must be brought to conform
themselves to the thankful receiving thereof: that from thence they may
learn truly to serve and fear God. And this care also pertains to godly
princes, and good magistrates, to provide good Laws for the same, and to see
those Laws put in execution. Although conscience cannot be forced; yet unto
external obedience, in lawful things, men may lawfully be compelled. God the
great king who works al things well, sent forth his officers to compel men to
come in, Luke 14.
and eat of his great supper. Hereupon S. Augustine says, Aug. epist. 204.
Qui compellitur, quo non vult, cogitur; sed, cum intrarit, iam volens
pascitur. He that is constrained, is driven whither he would not go
willingly: but when he is entered by constraint, then he feeds with a good
will. Paul never embraced the gospel until he was cast off his horse flat upon
the earth: and then he cried, Acts 9.
Lord what will thou have me to do? It is profitable for men to be constrained
unto those things which are good. And as it is profitable for them to be
constrained, so is it a thing very reasonable to constrain them. For why
should not the Church enforce her lost children to return to salvation: if
lost children enforce others to turn to destruction? Seeing that the whole
service in our Church is no other than Gods written word: as there can be
alleged no just cause, why any man should withdraw himself from this word;
so appertains it unto princes that fear God, within their dominions, to
compel every subject to come and hear this word: least the church by this
evil example should be greatly offended. Gods causes are zealously to be seen
unto: and the winning of men's souls is religiously to be sought. And thus much
briefly touching the service of God: To see the Gospel eueriewhere preached,
the ministers provided for, and the people compelled to come hear the word.
This is the fear of God which Samuel requires.

22 Whereunto must be added a special regard to the common wealth. The duty
of the prince toward the common wealth.
It is commonly said that the common wealth is sore diseased, and that every
member of that body seems to be grieved. Remedy would be sought in time,
least remedy come too late. But I am no Physician for that body, and
therefore is it not fit for me to minister any medicine to it. But I shall pray
for the health thereof, and set it over to such as have skill and can help.
The care of the common wealth chiefly appertains to the head of the common
wealth, who is Parens Patriae, the mother of this sick child. It is required
at our hands to fear and serve the Lord in truth. That prince does serve
God in truth, and in deed, which is careful that the evil may be punished
and repressed; and that the good may be defended, and advanced. When
generally all men are seen unto, that every man do his duty, then God is
in truth and synceritie served.

23 The prince is set as the head over the body; With the prince other
officers must be joined of whose choice how great care should be had.
as the chief shepeheard over the flock. These titles are given to Princes,
and governors, to put them in mind not only of their honor and preeminence,
but of their charge and office also. But the prince cannot do this alone, it
is a burden too heavy for one to weeld. And therefore he must, according to
the counsel which Iethro gave unto Moses, choose out of all the people men wise
and fearing God, lovers of the truth, Exodus 18.
such as hate covetousness, and out of them make rulers over thousands,
hundreds, fifties, and tennes, that they may sit and judge the people at all
seasons. Magistrates should be chosen out of all the people for their
worthiness. It is unmeet that such things as should follow deserts, be
procured by other sinister means. Magistrates should be wise men, furnished
with learning, understanding, good skill, and long experience; men that fear
God, religious lovers of his truth, favorers of the Gospel, and of all such
as live in the fear of God; True and upright dealers, such as will steadfastly
fasten their eyes upon the causes brought before them, and not regard the face
of any man; lastly haters of covetousness, bribes, and rewards. Good officers
should thus be qualified. And to the end that magistrates may be such, it must
be provided that there may be choice of officers without sale of offices. It is
not probable that he which obtains such a room for a price, will leave it
freely, or deal justly in it. A greater corruption than this cannot enter into
a common wealth. For by this mean both the prince and people are deceived. To
punish the evil; to maintain the good; to ouerlooke the whole, and to choose
and appoint forth worthy officers for the government of the common wealth,
this is the duty of a prince that fears God. That prince which does this
serves God in truth.

24 Homer brings in Jupiter sitting in the midst of the assembly of gods,
The power of princes if they list to use it unto good purposes.
whom he menaceth and threateneth on this wise: Let not any god or goddess
attempt the breach of my mandate. If I understand that any do, I will give him
small joy of this place, or provide him another far enough hence, a dwelling
place the gates whereof are iron, and the ground brass. I will plunge him as
deep under hell, as heaven is over earth. He shall well know his might to be
somewhat beneath mine. For if ye think your selves to be stronger than I am,
make trial of your strength, fasten a chain in heaven and join all your
force at the end thereof. But ye shall never be able to pull Jupiter out of
heaven, no though ye sweat much about it: whereas if I list to put but my
finger to the haling of you, I will pluck up sea and land with you: So much am
I superior unto gods and men. Kings and princes in their several dominions
have such power, through the providence of almighty God, by whose appointment
they wear their crowns, that their ordinances be not lightly broken,
unless themselves be careless to have them kept. For by reason of the
Majesty that God has given them, they are feared of all estates and
conditions of men. They can throw down whom they will; and whom they will they
can advance. They have the chain and the reine in their hands: they can draw
others whither they will, but others are not able to draw them unless they
list. This power and strength and glory which GOD has given unto kings, and
whereby they are able to lead the world as it were in a string, leaves them
utterly without excuse if they use it not to the benefit of the common wealth.
They cannot serve God in truth, and give the bridle to their subjects, to
sin without restraint. These times of greatest and grauest consultation are
fit occasions wherein Princes may most effectually show how heartily and
truly they fear the Lord. Making of Laws to remedi^ abuses in the common
wealth.
These are the times to provide chains, that is to say, good statutes and
laws to hold all men within compass, and to bind together the skattered
parts of the common wealth. When the great counsel of Rome entered into the
Senate, to consult for the good government and defense of the Empire; first
they went and sacrificed to Jupiter, and there every man offered up and left
behind him his private affections: promising that their consultation should
only tend to the common benefit. Leave you all private affections likewise;
cast them behind you, seek not your own commodity. Let it appear that you
love your Country. God, the Prince, and the common wealth require a faithful
performance of this service at your hands. Seek by Law the sincere setting
forth, the maintenance and continuance of Gods true religion. Let this be your
first and principal care: and so shall ye serve the Lord in truth.

25 Seek by Law to repress the gainesayers, Liberty of professing diverse
religions is dangerous to the state.
and the enemies of this truth. This liberty, that men may openly profess
diversity of religion, must needs be dangerous to the common wealth. What
stirs diversities of religion has raised in nations and kingdoms, the
histories are so many and so plain, and our times in such sort have told you*
that with further proof I need not trouble your ears. One God, one king, one
faith, one profession is fit for one monarchy, and common wealth. Division
weakneth; Concord stre^gtheneth. The story of Scilurus the Scythian is known,
who upon his death bed taught his lxxx. sons the force of unity by the
strength of sticks (weak by themselves) when they are tied in a bundle. Let
conformity and unity in religion be provided for, and it shall be as a wall of
defense unto this Realm.

26 And as these things are especially to be regarded; Smaller abuses in
attire, diet, etc.
as our principal care must be for the highest matters, synceritie and unity
in religion: so we may not neglect or pass over smaller things, which need
redress. For as diseases and sores in the basest and vilest parts of the body
do grieve, and may endaunger the chiefest, unless they be cured betimes: so
the least abuses, by sufferance, may work the greatest harm. Gorgeous
apparel, and sumptuous diet, with such like matters, may seem small things:
but they are the causes of no small evils. They eat up England, and are
therefore to be repressed by strait Laws. It is a part of true service done
unto God to see even unto these things.

27 We may seem to cast our eyes very low, Corruptions in officers under the
prince
when we look into the dealings of every officer under the Prince. Yet
every one must be seen unto. They wax suddenly rich by the spoil of the
Prince. Reform it by Law, that all may walk in truth. Deceit in the meaner
trades of life.
If merchaunts, with other artificers, and meaner trades do inriche themselves
by impouerishing others, through deceitful shifts; the common wealth suffers
damage by their uneven dealings. If we will have God served in truth, we must
by Law reform them.

28 That biting worm of usury, Usury.
that devouring wolf has consumed many; many it has pulled upon their knees,
and brought to beggerie; many such as might have lived in great wealth, and in
honor not a few. This canker has corrupted all England. It is become the
chief chaffer and merchaundise of England. We shall do God and our country
true service, by taking away this evil. Repress it by Law, else the heavy
hand of God hangs over us, and will strike us.

29 That vile sin of adultery, Adultery.
in Gods common wealth punished with death, so ouerfloweth the banks of all
chastity, that if by sharp Laws it be not speedily cut off, God from heaven
with fire will consume it. Prevent Gods wrath, bridle this outrage: so shall you
serve the Lord in truth.

30 There is nothing more hurtful to the common wealth than these corner
contracts, Corner contracts without consent of parents.
without consent of parents; contrary to the word of God, the Law of nature,
the Law civil, and all right and reason. The inconveniences that follow are
not sufferable. Euaristus a Bishop of Rome says, It is not wedlock, but
whoredom, when the consent of parents is wanting. God cannot be better served
than if by Law ye restrain this unlawful contracting. The children of this
inconvenient marriage may scarsely be termed lawful. The devil, that has
ever hated wedlock and loves whoredom, was the first author of this great
disorder. God grant you understanding hearts and willing minds, faithfully
and in truth to travel to repress and take away these evils.

31 And as evil is to be controlled by Law, The poor.
so that which is good is also by Law to be procured. God has made us many
ways rich. For what we have, freely at his hands we have it. But he himself
is become very poor: in so much that, for want of relief, he is forced to
beg; and, for want of lodging and meat, he lies and dies in our streets.
This great ingratitude God cannot but revenge. Oh what shame is this to a
Christian common wealth, in a reformed country? Obstinate Jews would never
show themselves so unthankful. Deuteronomy. 15.
Their ancient Law forbidding beggars is even to this day most straightly kept
amongst them. Laws in this behalf have been provided: but as they wanted
perfection, so have they in manner in no point or any where had execution.
Serve God in truth, provide that Christ crave not. Such as will not feed him
here: he will never feed in his kingdom. Thus have I, point by point, let you
see disorders and wants in the common wealth. Ye have authority by Law to
reform them. Consider duetifully of it, and serve God truly as ye ought,
always remembering the saying of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 10.
Woe be to them that make wicked Laws.

32 When good Laws are made they must be put in execution. Execution of Laws.
Law is the life of the common wealth: and execution the life of the Law. And
better not to make Laws: than not to execute Laws, when they are once made.
This is the duty of the public ministers of the common wealth. They must
first keep Laws themselves: and then see that others in like sort may observe
them. If the officers and ministers of the common wealth contemn laws;
doubtless the people will never reverence them: if they break them; the people
will never keep them. Solon.
Which Solon wisely considering, wisely answered being demanded what was
chief safety for a common wealth: If the Citizens obey the Magistrate, and
the Magistrate the Laws. You that are appointed to this purpose, and put in
trust therewith, lay aside dread and meede, favor and friendship, gift and
gain, and with simplicity of heart punish the transgressor of the Law
according to the Law. Make not Anacharsis web of the Law, Valor. lib. 7. c.
2.
Let not the hornet escape: and the little fly be caught. Few Laws well made
and well kept, would serve the turn. This is Gods service; the execution
thereof he has set over to your hands. Ier. 48.
Serve him in truth and singleness of heart. Cursed is he that negligently
does the work of the Lord.

The duty of the people toward God.
to the people it is spoken as well as to the prince, Fear and serve ye the
Lord in truth. Fear God, embrace the Gospel, lead your lives in holiness
and righteousness according to the word of truth. The Lord is a strong
defense to them that fear him. Psalm 34.
They that fear him want nothing.

34 Give unto the Lords anointed due reverence and honor. Toward higher
powers.
Let every soul be subject, not by constraint, but for conscience sake. Romans
13.
Imitate those worthy Israelites, who were so willingly obedient to Joshua,
that they cried with one voice, Whosoever shall rebel against thy
commandment, Ios. 1.
and will not obey thy words in all that thou commaundest him, let him die.
Grudge not, repine not at higher powers: say not in your hearts, Psalm. 2.
Let us break their bands, and cast away their chains from us.

35 Seek the peace of the common wealth and the safety thereof: Toward the
common wealth.
for in the peace thereof your peace does stand. In this sort God is to be
feared, Ier. 29.
in this sort of all sorts he is to be served: and by this mean the common
wealth is to be maintained and preserved. If we, linked together in the fear
of God, and in true concord and amity among our selves, put to our helping
hands every one duetifully in his calling, to the supporting of this state,
and defending thereof; doubtless no enemy, no foreign power can hurt us, no
Bull of Basan shall prevail against us: but we and our common wealth in
despite of all both corporal and spiritual enemies, shall be strengthened and
stablished for ever. So true is it, Greg. Nazian.
that kingdom which is grounded upon good will, stands fast and sure for ever.

36 But as the natural body without sinews can not grow, Subsidies.
wax strong, or continue: no more can a civil body without his sinews. The
sinews of the common wealth are the treasures. Tributes therefore and
subsidies are due to the Prince. Give unto Caesar those things that are
Caesar's; Matthew. 22.
tribute unto whom tribute belongs. It is not given to the Prince, Romans 13.
but to the common wealth: it is in truth bestowed upon our selves. The
prince, in respect of private use, neither needs, neither requires our
money. It is the common wealth, whereunto we owe not our goods only, but our
lives also: it requires this at our hands, for our own safety. The prince
will be but a steward hereof, seasonably to lay it out for public use. Good
common wealthsmen have not spared to give their very lives for their country:
Val. lib. 5. cap. 6.
as Themistocles, Curtius, Codrus and others. And who can so little regard the
common wealth, as by pinching at a piece of money, to pinche it? He that sees
his house ruinous, and for sparing will not repair it; if it fall upon his
head, let him fall himself. Moses found his subjects marvelous ready in this
behalf; when a voluntary contribution was required toward the building of
the tabernacle, Exodus 36.
they brought in so much, that he was forced to cry, Sufficit: Now enough.
Cyrus was a gentle and a good prince, and he had thankful subjects: their
voluntary gift at one subsidy surmounted all the long heaped treasure of
rich Craesus. The Princes treasure is wasted in our defense; our duty is to
repair it again for our safety. This duty God and our common wealth
require at our hands. Let us pay frankly this debt: so shall we work our
own safety, strengthen the common wealth, and serve God and our country in
truth.

37 And thus we learn, that if the ministers earnestly pray The punishment,
if by the minister, the prince, and ye people ye foresaid duties be not
performed.
and faithfully teach the prince, and the people; if the prince and the people
syncerely fear, and serve God; fear him as an omnipotent Lord, and just
Judge, and withal love him as a most loving father, serve him in cleansing,
and feeding his Church; cleansing it from false doctrine, Idolatry,
superstition, and symonie; feeding it with the word, by causing it eueriewhere
to be preached, which will be by providing maintenance for the preachers
thereof, and compelling all subjects to hear Gods word, and receive his
sacraments: Further if the Prince carefully consider of the common wealth, to
repress the evil, encourage and strengthen the good, and ouerlooke the whole;
and do choose wise, religious, lovers of the truth, and haters of
covetousness under him to govern it: If in this great and stately counsel of
the kingdom (banishing private affections) it syncerely be sought, by Law to
set forth and prefer true religion, and withal to bridle the desperate
tongues of gainesayers: If by strength of good Laws they repress monstrous
apparel, and excessive diet, deceitful bargaining, usury, adultery,
unlawfully stolen contracts; and so provide for the poor, that Christ in his
members may be relieved: If the officers of the common wealth keep good Laws
themselves; and faithfully, without foolish pity (which is cruelty) see them
executed upon others; If the people like good subjects fear God, honor the
Prince, live peaceably, and seek the safety of their country: Lastly, if we
all linked together in love, liberally relieve the common wealth, and frankly
supply the want thereof, for our own safety: then doubtless the Lord will
bless and preserve our Prince, and us, and stablish this kingdom in peace,
and prosperity, to flourish and to continue. But if we be cold, and negligent
in Gods cause: if we be unthankful and disobedient to our good Samuel, to our
gracious Sovereign: then let us look for that which God threateneth here by
his prophet, Both you and your king shall perish. God grant in his mercy that
assisted with his grace we may syncerely seek and serve him to his great
glory and our great safety in this life, and eternal salvation in the world
to come. To that immortal only wise and most gracious God, etc.

A Sermon preached in York at the celebration of the day of the Queens
entrance into her Reign.
CANTIC. 2. 15 Take us the little foxes which destroy the vines: for our vine
has flourished.
SVch solemn assemblies in so sacred a place, Solemn assemblies ordained in
the Church to the praise of God for special benefits.
to give God thanks for great benefits received, are no rare things among
Gods people, but are confirmed by sundry examples in the scriptures. Nehem. 8.
Nehemias, after that the house of God was reedified, assembled the people,
caused the Law of the Lord to be openly read, gave thanks unto the Lord for
their deliverance from Babylon and for restitution of religion, and with great
reioising and feasting kept that day holy unto the Lord. Hester 9.
When, by the means of Queen Hester, the Jews had gotten rest, and given a
great overthrow to their enemies, she likewise with the advice of her godly
uncle Mardocheus, commanded the people to keep that day the fourteenth of the
month Adar holy unto the Lord yearly, to feast and give thanks for Gods great
mercies and their marvelous deliverance. When God had delivered his people
Israel from the tyranny of Triphon, 1. Mac. 13.
by the means of Simon the high priest, a governor and prince of the Jews:
Simon ordained that the same day of their deliverance should yearly be kept
holy unto the Lord, with gladness, feasting, and thanksgiving. The feasts
of Passover, Pentecost, Deuteronomy. 16.
Tabernacles, and such other were commanded to be kept holy in remembrance
of great benefits received at the Lords hands. The people of Israel with
thankful hearts remembering what a great benefit they had received, when he
chose and anointed David to be their king, gathered together in a solemn
assembly to celebrate that happy day and to give God thanks, sang with
joyful acclamation unto the Lord, Psalm. 118.
This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it.

2 Greater cause to assemble together, As great cause of the like assemblies
presently in England as ever any where.
and to give God thanks for blessings and benefits received, had never nation
or people than we presently have. For as this day now twenty years fully
finished, the Lord in his mercy remembering us, when we little hoped and less
deserved, delivered us from the state of miserable servitude, and gave us our
gracious Sovereign, his own elect, Elizabeth by his grace our prince and
governor, the restorer of our religion and liberty. Lord show us the light
of thy favorable countenance, multiply these good days, grant us many of
these happy years: O Lord I pray thee save now, O Lord I pray thee now give
prosperity, Lord preserve who^ thou have given, give her O Lord good success
and prosperity. Eusebius the Bishop of Cesarea thought himself much honored,
that he was appointed to celebrate with a Sermon the Inauguration of
Constantinus the Emperor. Even so I take it for my great good hap, that it
falls to my lot at this present to put you in remembrance of the great
happiness which has befallen us as on this day, that we may rejoice and be
thankful for it.

3 And for the better performance hereof, as the public minister of the
Church, Three things contained in this parcel of scripture above written.
I bring unto you the voice of the Church, a part of the most excellent song of
Solomon. Which at the first sight although it may seem a strange piece of
scripture, and skantly fit for this time; yet, when it shall be thoroughly
considered of, it will appear very pertinent to our time and purpose. For
herein is contained a doctrine touching the mercies of God toward us: the
malicious frowardness of his and our enemies, and our duty toward him
concerning them. Our vineyard has flourished; behold the mere grace and
favor of God toward his Church: Little foxes devour it; behold the
ingratitude of the people resisting the grace of God and abusing his mercy:
Take us these little foxes; behold the commandment of God and the duty of
his servant. Of these three things in order as they lie my purpose is, by
Gods assistance, to speak.

Our vineyard has flourished The Church of God like a vineyarde, which must
first be cleansed; then planted; and thirdly fensed, to the end it may
flourish,
and that in diverse respects. But because it were more curious than profitable
particularly to follow the comparison, I will only remember unto you the chief
parts. The vineyard that shall fructify must fall into the hands of a skilful
and laboursome husbandman, who first must weed it, stone it and prepare it,
then he must in season, and with cunning, plant a good vine that will bear a
pleasant grape in it, water, underprop and prune it, and lastly compass it
about with a ditche, a strong wall, or a sure hedge for defense. Such a
vineyard must needs bring forth good fruit. God of his goodness has
provided for this vineyard his church of England all these helps abundantly,
he has beautified it and furnished it most plentifully with rare and
wonderful blessings.

5 He has given it a skillful ouerseer, The Church of England blessed with an
ouerseer wise; and learned; religious; just; peaceful; performing the aforesaid
duties therein.
one endued with all gifts and qualities fit for government. An unwise King
destroys his people: but where they that be in authority are men of
understanding, there the City prospers. Be wise therefore O ye Kings, be
learned ye Judges of the earth, says the Prophet. It pleased the Lord greatly
that Solomon asked rather wisdom than riches, knowledge than honor: Give
unto thy servant, O Lord, an understanding heart, Eccles. 10.
to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad. Psalm. 1.
If learning and wisdom be so necessarily required in a governor, 1. Reg. 3.
how great is the goodness of almighty God to us ward, which has so
plentifully bestowed this gift of knowledge and wisdom upon our Sovereign,
not far inferior to Mithridates for diversity of languages, but far
surmounting al former English princes in learning, knowledge and understanding?
which rare and excellent gift dwells not in her royal breast alone, but is
beautified and accompanied with sundry other most singular graces. She is the
very patroness of true religion, rightly termed The defender of the Faith:
one that before all other things seeks the kingdom of God. If the
threatenings of men could have terrified her, or their allurements entised her,
or any crafty persuasions have prevailed, she had revolted long ere this: so
fiercely by great Potentates her constancy has been assaulted. But God has
strengthened his royal handmaide; the fear of God has put to flight the
fear of men; her religious heart is accepted of the Lord, and glorious it is
also in the eyes of the world. A Prince so zealous for Gods house, so firmly
settled in his truth; that she has constantly determined, and oftentimes vowed
rather to suffer all torments, than one jot to relent in matter of religion.
She is not fraudulent and treacherous; but deals justly and truly in word
and deed with all men, promises and performs. Herein her Majesty passes
all princes; and therefore in credit she is far before others. And her great
desire is, that all men placed in authority under her should deal truly,
judge rightly, and give to every man his own, according to justice, matching
always with justice mercy: which two are so linked and coupled together that
they may not be severed. Justice without mercy is too sharp and rigorous: and
mercy without justice, is not mercy, but folly. That no Prince of this
Realm, inclining so much to mercy, did ever less hinder the course of
Justice than her Highness has done, such as are placed in Judicial roumes
must needs confess. So truly it may be said, Psalm. 44.
The scepter of thy kingdom is a righteous scepter, thou love justice and
hate sin. Of nature a prince most merciful, in judgment upright and just.
A prince void of all corruption, an hater of bribes, free in bestowing, in
taking close handed, one that has learned and does practice our Saviors
lesson, Acts 20.
It is a more blessed thing to give than to receive. A right Samuel, that
cannot be charged with indirect dealing. A prince mild as Moses, just as
Samuel, peaceful as Solomon, zealous as David. Neither speak I this in
flattery, which thing be far from me, but in an upright conscience; not of
guess, but of knowledge; not seeking my self, but the glory of God, that
being put in mind of your happiness, ye may praise God for his mercy, and
glorify him in his gracious gifts. Thus has God blessed this vineyard his
Church with a learned, wise, religious, just, vncorrupt, mild, merciful,
peaceful, and zealous Prince to govern it. A great blessing, the Lord
continue it, and make us thankful for it.

6 This skillful manurer of the vineyard must first rid the ground, The
vineyard of England purged of Idolatry and superstition.
purge the Church. The barnefloore must be cleansed, before the harvest be
brought in. Jeremy commands the thorns first to be rooted out, and then
the seed to be cast into the ground. Moses gave charge to cast out all
leaven, before the people might celebrate the passover. Joshua willed the
Cananites to be expelled, ere he would establish his common wealth of Israel.
Jacob would not sacrifice unto God, till he had purged his house of Idols. The
like might be showed in David, Ezechias, Nehemias, Mattathias. But one example
may serve for all, being of our Savior, who is above all, and Lord of all.
Christ at his first entry into the temple, purged it by casting out buyers and
sellers. Our gracious Governor following Christ's example has labored most
earnestly first to cleanse this ground and to purge this church of England,
has caused the stones to be picked out; brambles and breers to be pulled up;
all rubbidge, and whatsoever was hurtful to be removed; the den of thieves
to be dispersed, buyers and sellers of popish trash, Monks, Friars,
Massemongers with like miscreants to be hurled and whipped out; the stumbling
stones of superstition, the baggage of man's traditions, with all monuments of
Idolatry, vanity, and popery to be cast out of the house of God and vineyard
of the Lord: So that the field of God is cleared, the vineyard cleansed, the
church purged, ready for the seed to be sown, and the vine to be planted.
And all this without resistance or tumult. It was the work of God, it is
marvelous to as many as duly consider it.

7 Now it behooves the vinitor to take great heed what vine he planteth in
this vineyard. Christ planted in ye vineyard of England.
Thorns will not bring forth grapes, nor thistles figs. If thou sow the
giddie darnell of humane traditions, look for like fruit: for he that
conceiueth vanity, shall bring forth wind. But our skillful householder, our
wise governor has planted in this our vineyard neither thorns, nor thistles;
but the true vine Christ, growing in the hearts of his elect. This vine has
been diligently watered with the dew of Gods truth syncerely preached; it
has been cherished with his sacraments, reverently administered, according to
his will; it has been underpropped with the continuance of authority, and
defense of zealous Christian magistrates; pruned with the two edged sword of
Gods spirit, working by the ministry of his servant, who with the sweet
promises of the gospel have reared up the drooping branches ouerburthened with
sin, and with the sharp threatenings of the Law have cut off the lascivious
wild boughs of wickedness. No flock better fed, no people more instructed,
no vineyard in the world more beautiful or goodly to behold.

8 This vineyard so prepared, The vineyard fensed with Laws of discipline.
this vine so planted, watered, and underset, has also been strongly hedged,
and fensed with godly Laws of good discipline, to put back all enemies, to
punish all transgresiors, to bridle the unruly, and to keep men in order,
that the church of God may live in all peace and tranquillity, with all piety
and honesty. This is the flourishing vineyard of the Lord; the beautiful arc
of covenant, wherein are reposed the treasures of God, the golden pot with
Manna, the rod of Aaron, and the tables of Moses. No church under heaven more
enriched with treasures and gifts of God; so that we may truly say, 1. Cor. 1.
We are enriched by him in all knowledge and in all speech, in so much that we
are not destitute of any gift. The Lord may justly say to us, as to his people
of old, Esaias 5.
What might I do for my vine which I have not done? and we may well sing the
song which the spirit has indicted, even of purpose as it seems for us,
Vinea nostra floruit, Our vine has flourished.

9 And although the ground where this vine is planted, The fruits of this
vineyard many; one special, which is peace both spiritual and civil.
has been very barren: yet has it brought forth many goodly and pleasant
grapes. The gospel has chased away walking spirits, it has cast out devils,
banished much ignorance and blindness, put horrible blasphemy in manner to
flight, utterly cleansed that sink the stews, made vain and filthy songs
less current than they have been in former times, and caused sin to be
more shunned, although it be, God knows, too much still frequented. But one
pleasant grape, especially the gospel, the word of reconciliation has
brought forth, and that is the sweet fruit of peace; peace toward God, and
peace amongst our selves. The gospel preaches Christ. Christ is our peace,
and peacemaker. He that has Christ, has peace with God: and he that
believes in him has him. By this means we have peace of conscience peace
with God. The other peace is civil peace among men. This is a pleasant fruit
and a great blessing. He that knows the hurt of war can best judge of the
worth of this benefit. The God of peace has done this for us, to our
singular commodity and comfort he has given peace in our days, England never
so long tasted the like. War heretofore has torn this Realm in pieces: all
Nations round about us starve in the field, tumble in war, wallow in blood
expecting no end of their troubles but utter ruin and desolation. In the mean
while we sit safe under our vine, every man in peace may quietly follow his
vocation. God has not dealt thus with all nations as he has dealt with us
the least nation of all. It must be granted, some storms have been stirred
up to disturb this our happy rest. But the prince of peace, and Lord of our
tranquillity has ceased the waves of the sea, stilled the rage of the people,
maruellously prevented their wicked devises, and confounded the deuisers of
them. There is neither power nor counsel against the Lord. God takes away the
hearts of the enemies, and then as fearful Hares they flee at the wagging of
every leaf: yea they fear where there is nothing to be feared. For this
great calm, for this miraculous peace we have to praise our God.

10 This peace has fructified and brought forth his natural fruit which is
plenty. The fruit of civil peace, plenty.
War is a locust devouring all fruits; peace as a sweet and pleasant dew
makes all things fruitful. Peace has made this Land flow like Canaan, with
milk and honey. God has opened his merciful hand, and replenished us with
all his blessings; the Lord has showed us his loving kindness, and our Land
has brought forth her increase. The end why God sends these temporal
blessings.


11 These earthly blessings God has given to try us whether provoked by his
gracious benignity we will walk in his Law or no. I will rain down bread
out of heaven that I may try you whether ye will walk in my Law or no. Exodus 16.
After this sort he proved Adam, giving him all dominion over his creatures,
with all the fruit and plenty of the earth. So proved he the Sodomites with
a Country for pleasure and plenty termed The Lords Garden. Genesis 13.
So proved he Israel when he gave them Canaan; but they were forgetful of the
giver, and abused his gifts both their peace and plenty; they provoked GOD
unto wrath, and they felt his heavy hand; their peace was turned into war;
their plenty into distress; their pleasure into pain; their joy into sorrow.

12 These things are written to warn us; The plagues which follow temporal
blessings when they are abused.
that we should beware of the like sins, least we feel the like plagues. For
if we regard not the favor of God; if we contemn his word, the word of
salvation; if we refuse to hear it, read it, follow it; if the seed of God
do not fructify in our hearts; if the peace we have with God bring not
forth piety; if our civil peace bring forth no better fruit than beastly
security; if plenty work nothing in us but pride; if with Adam in our
presumption we disobey the Lord; if with Sodom, when we are full, our care be
only to satisfy our lust; if we neglect the poor, and deride the just; if,
with Israel, we lust after flesh, and despise Angels food; if we hunger after
popery, and thirst not after the water of life; if we fall away from God, and
fall down to creatures; if we run a whoring, and defile the flesh, and
profane the temple of God; if we tempt God being weary of our profession,
having wavering minds and backesliding hearts; if we despise government, and
speak evil of them that be in authority; if we mutter and murmr against
the principality of Moses and Aaron; if we loath the present state, and seek
after alterations: then shall all these godly blessings of God turn into
cursings; the message of life shall be unto us a favor of death; the words of
the son of God spoken unto us for our salvation shall bear witness against
us, and condemn us; our vineyard shall be laid wast; we shall be made a
byword, and a wonder to the world; and, for a just reward of this our
wickedness, our former benefits shall but add a greater weight unto our woe.
But this be far from us and from our children, for evermore. Wherefore to
return and to conclude this part, when we shall behold the great mercies of
God so plentifully powered upon us; how he has regarded his vineyard, blessed
and enriched this his Church with so great gifts, and so marvelous treasures,
you see how truly we may say, Vinea nostra floruit, Our vine has flourished.
This is the goodness of God toward us.

The vineyard devoured by little foxes. Why the Church enemies are termed foxes,
and why little.
and great also has been the malice of Satan, and the ingratitude of man, in
laboring by all means to lay it wast. These enemies of the vineyard are
termed foxes; under which name be comprised all heretics, all Schismatikes,
all hypocrites, Atheists, Epicures, Conspirators, Persecutors with all the
rabble of the wicked. They are termed little foxes, either for that they are more
rash, more wilful, and more hurtful to the vineyard than the old foxes
because they shun no peril; or else they are so called, in contempt. For
although they seem mighty, strong, and fierce; yet, when God shall arm
himself against them, then they will appear silly weak cubbes, not able to
kick against the prick. There is no wiliness, no force, no power, no
counsel against our God. John 18.
If Christ say It is I, all his enemies do stagger and fall flat to the
ground. The little cubbes perhaps are animated by reason of their wiliness, and
because they know they are many in number. It is true, The children of this
world are wise in their generation, subtle they are as serpents. But God
confounds the counsels of all crafty Achitophels, and takes foxes in the
snares they set for others. The number is great, and as the manner is of evil
weeds, it grows apace; they are ten for one. But one David is worth not
only ten but ten thousand Philistines, because he comes in the name of
the Lord. He that fights under Christ's banner, and is protected under the
shadow of the wings of the almighty, he is safe, be he in never so great
perils. Gedeon with three hundred crying, The sword of the Lord and Gedeon,
Iud. 7.
slew and put to flight an infinite number, the huge army of the Madianites.
It is all one with God to overcome with few, or many. So the enemies then of
God, the enemies of the Church, they are but silly weak cubbes; be they never
so wily, never so many.

14 But the enemies of Gods vineyard are therefore chiefly called foxes, The
Church enemies resemble foxes in four properties. In ravening.
because they are of like condition unto foxes, whom they singularly resemble
in four peculiar properties. The fox is ravenous, greedy on his pray. And
these cubbes, enemies to the cross of Christ, have under pretense of long
prayer devoured widows houses; spared no estate or conditon of men; beguiled
Princes of their possessions; gotten to themselves the riches and wealth of the
whole world, with false merchaundise, selling that for bread which is no
bread, making their gain of masses, merits, pardons, and such like stuff.
Insatiable dogs they are, ever barking and never satisfied. The old gray
fox is become the Lord of the whole earth, the king of kings; his Cardinals,
Abbots and Bishops great Princes, and Lords of whole Countries; the little
foxes, as Monks, Friars, and Massing priests, what with singing, and what with
begging have raked no small heaps together.

15 Foxes do feed on blood, In cruelty.
in desire whereof they kill more than they can devour. Christ calls Herod
Fox, partly for his savage and cruel murdering of Infants. What thousands of
the children and lambs of God these Herodians, these Romanists, these ravening
wolves, and bloody foxes have devoured, look into the histories of all times,
you shall wonder at it and abhor them. Doubtless the righteous blood which
they have shed upon the earth shall come upon them, the blood of the Saints
whom they have cruelly butchered cries unto the Lord against them for revenge,
and the Lord will hear it. Whomsoever thou shall see take delight in the blood
of persecution he is a Fox.

16 As they lively resemble foxes in greediness and cruelty; In wiliness.
so in wiliness also they are like unto them, crafty they are and subtle, as
false as a fox. The fox will not woorry near his bele, but raungeth far
abroad, least he be espied. So these subtle deceivers go far off; they
compass sea and land to make a proselite of their own profession; they shut
themselves up in their beles in the day time; they dare not abide the light,
but seek lurking holes and corners, disguising themselves in strange apparel,
least their woonted attire should bewray them; wily foxes, deep dissemblers,
double hearted, double tongued, double faced; speaking them full fair whom
they hate full deadly; promising, and not performing; shifting off, and seeking
time; now humble as sheep, but when time serves as fierce as Lions. By
subtle slightes, and breach of faith, they brought John Hus to the Council at
Constance, and there cruelly murdered him; they promised him a Safe Conduct to
come and to go, but those holy Fathers agreed upon a new point of religion,
that Promise is not to be kept with heretics, and so cruelly and treacherously
consumed with fire the Saint of God. These faithbreakers be no more to be
trusted than foxes.

17 The last property that I note in the fox is, In casting an evil savor.
that he casts an evil savor. I will not remember unto you, for offending
your chaste ears, the horrible filthiness wherewith those learned Scribes,
those holy fathers, those maiden priests, those foxes were infected: the smell
whereof ascended up into heaven, and cried out for vengeance against them.
Spiritual and corporal whoredom for the most part go together. Who was more
hot in the service of Baal than Iesabel that devout hypocrite? and yet she
was but a painted harlot. When Israel gave themselves to Idolatry, they
forthwith fell unto whoredom. Men's life and religion are for the most part
like; a sound faith, a sweet behavior; men gather not figs of thorns;
neither can their outward conversation be pure, whose inward persuasion is not
good. These are they that destroy the vines. Whereunto even now they have
prepared themselves; For this end and purpose they gather themselves together,
they boldly have their conuenticles, they contriue treachery, and devise how
to destroy the vineyard and church of God. In the late evil times the
professors of the Gospel found no such liberty. But the saying of Christ is
verified, Matthew. 8.
Foxes have holes, but the son of man has not where to hide his head.

18 Two especial means they use in seeking to destroy the vineyard: The
means which they use to destroy the Church, force and fraud; force open, and
secret; open, by fire and sword.
force, and persuasion. Force of two sorts; open and secret. Open force of
persecution that cruel beast has always practiced from time to time. What
prince has he not stirred up? what nation has he not armed to persecute the
professors of true religion with fire and sword? The red bloody dragon does
still vex the woman with her child, Apoc. 12.
Christ with his church. The practice hereof all Nations have felt, and
England cannot forget. The late rebellion in this Realm raised for no other
cause but by force to subvert religion, by no other man than the father of
these foxes, is fresh in memory.

19 When by open force this beast cannot quench his thirst with the blood of
his Saints, Secret force; by trecheries, sorceries, poisonings.
then he practices by secret devises. Sometimes under pretense of marriage and
faithful affinity, he leads Princes blindefold to the house of slaughter;
sometimes, under color of giving aid to possess kingdoms, he dispossesseth
them both of their state and of their life; sometimes he offers league and
confederacy with such as in heart he deadly hates, thereby to stay their
force, till he may fitly practice his purposed mischief. When these practices
will not serve, then they sell themselves to satan as did Pope Syluester; they
enter into an execrable league with the devil, and labor by incantation,
coniuration, magic, sorcerie, and witchcraft to consume kill and destroy the
Lords anointed by picturing, etc. When enchantments will not serve, that no
poisoned devise be left unattempted, they fly to poysonings, which practice of
theirs has taken effect in diverse. Henry the Emperor received poison in
sacramental bread, Victor the Pope in sacramental wine. Wherein it is to be
noted by the way, that if they did offer the body and blood of Christ indeed,
as they pretend to do, they could not mingle that sacred and glorified
substance with poison. Of late noble Dandelot with others, have drunk of the
like cup. So these foxes conceive mischief and bring forth most monstrous
and cruel wickedness; both by open violence and by secret treachery.

20 The other mean, Their fraud, in persuading by arguments drawn from
antiquity.
whereby they labor to hinder the course of the Gospel and to subvert religion
is fraud, the natural property of a fox. This fraud is practiced after
sundry sorts. First they labor to seduce the simple by persuasion. Of
persuasion they have sundry kinds. As first the Antiquity of their religion,
their fathers old faith. But they should remember that their religion is as
new as false; six hundred years after Christ unknown. The substance of our
religion is most ancient, and shall be most permanent, it was from the beginning,
it shall remain to the end, no jot nor title thereof shall perish. In matter of
religion we may not follow our fathers, further than they have followed our
Master Christ. We must think, not what others have said or done before; but
what he which is before all others has said and done. Hear him. The
scripture has given us warning to be wary in this point. God fed Israel with
wormwood, and gave them waters of gall to drink, Ier. 9.
because they walked after Baalims which their fathers taught them.

21 Another ground whereupon they build their persuasion, From the authority
of their Church and Pope.
is the Authority of the Church, and of the Pope, which cannot err. There is
a church of God, and a synagogue of Satan. The Church of God is builded upon
the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. The true church has her marks
whereby she is known: The Gospel truly preached, The sacraments syncerely
ministered, discipline duly executed. The popish church has neither the true
foundation nor yet the right marks of the church of God; Col. 1.
her foundation is Man, her marks are blasphemy, Idolatry, superstition.
Christ is the head of his body the Church. This head cannot err: the head of
the church Antichristian, is the Pope that man of sin, a lier, yea a very
father of lies.

22 From these general persuasions they train the people to particulars, From
the excellency of their sacrifice.
teaching many other shameful things; but this above all other, as most
needful to be held of all, that the mass is a sacrifice available for
quick and dead, strong and effectual to take away sin, forcible in ridding
souls out of Purgatory pains. But S. Paul teaches that Christ was offered
up once to take away all sin; and by that one oblation, because it was
perfect, obtained the full delivery and redemption of his Church. The blood of
Christ does cleanse us from all sin. Therefore we need not their
aftercleansings, which in truth are defilings. With these and other like false
and subtle persuasions they lead the simple people to the pit of destruction.

23 Or if they cannot prevail by such persuasions, From fained Prophecies.
they find out Prophecies and therewith fill the peoples ears: they have the
books of Merlin and other fantastical spirits, full of doubtful sayings,
and deceitful dreams: of these they make such constructions and expositions,
as may serve their purpose, all tending to this end that alteration is near,
that the state will not continue, that religion cannot endure long: such and
such times when this change should be they have presumed more than once to
appoint. But their times-master has deceived them, they have found him a lying
spirit in the mouth of his Prophets. This practice of Satan and of his impes
has brought sundry great persons and noble houses to confusion. Let their
posterity take example and warning by them.

24 They have left no means unattempted whereby the hearts of the people might
any way be seduced. Their fraud in persuading by promises of reconciliation.
Wherefore unto other their deceitful practices they have joined the offer of
reconciliation. The Pope has sent his proctors abroad to pardon whatsoever is
already past; so that men will now forsake the church of Christ, and join
themselves unto that harlot inseparably henceforward; which to do they must
take a solemn oath, and in token thereof wear some mark of the beast, as a
Cross, an Agnus Dei, a medall, or some such badge of recognisance. These
popish proctors have poisoned many, and the observing of this most wicked oath
has made many silly souls, especially women break their faith to Christ,
their loyalty to their Prince, and their promised obedience to their husbands.
A wicked promise is best unmade, but being made is better broken than
performed. It had been a less offense for Herod to break his oath, than to
behead an Innocent. We may neither make, nor keep any promise, 2. Cor. 5.
oath, or vow against the Lord. As for reconciliation, Be reconciled unto
God. He it is which alone remitteth sin: and they only which are reconciled
to him, shall be saved.

25 But these destroiers and subuerters of the Lords vineyard cease not thus.
Their stratageme of raising up slanderous reports.
Some credit they think to win to their own cause if they can work the
discredit of such as are maintainers of the contrary. To this end they raise
up slanderous reports against our magistrates and ministers, that the people
first misliking them may afterward be brought with more ease to mislike of
that religion whereof they are. This is an old practice of the ancient enemy.
Daniel was charged to contemn the decree of Nabuchadnetzar; Micheas to be a
lier; Jeremy to be an enemy to the common wealth; Elias to be a disturber of
the state; Christ to be an enemy unto Caesar; Paul to be factious, and
seditious; the Christians in the days of Traian the Emperor to have their
women common in their night assemblies, to worship an Asses head in stead of
God, with many such like shameless reports. How these foxes have falsely
slaundered both magistrates and ministers of God in these our days, it shall be
needelesse here to recite. Their books are extant as full of lies as lines.
Thus you see how they labor by all means to hinder the passage of the
Gospel, and utterly to subvert true religion. We see also how the Lord of
hosts fights for us; how the almighty is our defense; how he that keeps
us slumbereth not; how strangely and miraculously he preserves his anointed
David, both from the bloody hands of Saul abroad and Absolon at home, in the
midst of so many conspiracies, treacheries, snares and traps which these foxes
have devised and laid. We see how God preserves his vineyard, how he
maintains his church so many ways assaulted, maugre all his and all our
enemies. It is his only work marvelous in our eyes; it is the Lord, let us
praise his name.

The foxes must be taken, To whom; by whom; How.
yet his will, and commandment is, that we should not live in security, but
beware of them; watch them, and catch them, if we can: Take us the little foxes.
This last and most necessary part for order sake may be thus divided. First we
learn, that foxes are to be taken; secondly, to whom; thirdly, by whom; and
lastly, how they are to be taken.

27 These foxes are to be taken. Why foxes must be taken.
For so the spouse of Christ, or rather Christ himself commands. And why?
Because they are hurtful to his vineyard. God commands false prophets not
only to be taken, but also to die the death: Let the false Prophet die. Deuteronomy.
13.
Paul wishes that the disturbers of the peace of the church were cut off. Gal.
5.
He laid an heavy hand upon Elymas the sorcerer, when he stroke him stark
blind. Acts 13.
Moses at the commandment of God made a speedy dispatch of Idolaters. Exodus
32.
The Apostle would that dogs, Phil. 3.
evil workmen, Tit. 3.
sectmakers should be shunned, that all heretics not recalling themselves by
admonition should be avoided. The scabbed sheep must be removed out of the
flock, the leper should be severed, the adulterer cast out, the leaven put
away, foxes taken and tied short. This is the will of God, the request of the
spouse, the commandment of Christ. The Law of nature, God, and man cries,
Take these foxes.

28 But unto whom? They must be taken, if it may be, to the Church; if not,
then from the Church.
Nobis. Catch them unto us, says the spouse of Christ. Christ came into the
world to save sinners; he wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should convert and live. He came to recall the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; his will is that stony hearts be turned into fleshie; that foxes be
changed into sheep; that enemies be reconciled, and made friends; that
strangers be made citizens with his Saints, that all come unto him, that all
may find rest for their souls. He created man for himself, for himself he
redeemed him, his will is that foxes be taken and brought to him, that he
himself may be glorified in them.

29 But who should take them? They must be taken by the friends of the
bridegroom, ministers and magistrates.
The friends of the spouse, the servant and officers of the bridegroom
Christ. There be two especial servant, whom the Lord has appointed to hunt
for these cubbes; the magistrate, and the minister. These are to join their
force together; to be as brethren Moses and Aaron, knit in love and liking, to
give all diligence and mutual endeavor for the apprehension of these foxes. For
why? the vineyard of the Lord is set over to their oversight, and government.
Kings and Queens should be as Nurces, to tender and cherishe the church of
Christ, to keep every noisome and hurtful thing from it. Ministers are they,
whom God has set to sweat and labor in the vineyard; to govern and feed
the flock, which he has purchased with his own blood. These are the Lords
two hands; to both these he speaks when he says, Take the foxes. But all
the craft is in the catching. We must therefore learn how they are to be
taken.

30 The minister has his nets to take withal, The minister takes them by
doctrine.
the magistrate has his traps. The first is the net of Gods word to cast into
the sea for fishes, or to set upon the land for foxes. Preach the word, be
instant in season and out of season. Luke 3.
The Law of the Lord conuerteth souls. With this net John Baptist caught at
one time a great number of foxes, Scribes, Pharisees, Publicanes, soldiers and
sinners: they came confessing their sins, and asking, What shall we do? Acts
2.
Peter cast out this net and in one Sermon brought three thousand unto Christ.
Acts 10.
With this net at Cesarea he took Cornelius the captain with a great
multitude. Paul by spreading this net gate huge numbers in Asia, in Africa, in
Europe, in all parts and quarters of the world. Christ himself with this net
took so many that they said, John 12.
Behold the whole world goes after him. Philip took the Eunuche in this net;
in the same net Lidya, Dionysius, Paulus Sergius was caught. Ambrose set this
net for Augustine and took him in it. Verily if this net were diligently set,
it would catch these cubbes apace. For they err, because they know not the
scriptures; and they cannot know, because they are not taught. Woe therefore
to the idle and Idol pastor, to the dumme dog, to the unpreaching minister.
For the blood of all these that perish for lack of taking through his
negligence shall be required at his hands.

31 The second net is godly conversation, By example of life.
good example of life. This net holds hard. Examples are a great deal
stronger than words, and the voice does not so fully instruct as the life.
Therefore Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.
Be a platform for the flock to follow. He that lives otherwise than he
speaks, teaches God to punish him says S. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. 13.
Paul terms such teachers as are fertile in speech and barren in life
tinckling cimbals. They send forth a sound and inwardly are hollow. Christ
did what he taught. His innocence and patience changed the hearts of the
very soldiers that put him to death. And as the godly example of a good life
draws many to Christ; so an evil life gives great offense. The bad demeanor
of Helies sons caused men to loath the offering of the Lord. And you, says
Jacob to his two sons Simeon and Leui, Genesis 34.
have made me to be abhorred among the inhabitants of the Land. Let us
therefore have our conversation honest among these men, that as now they speak
evil of us as evil doers, so hereafter they may by our good works which they
shall see glorify God in the day of visitation. 1. Pet 3.


32 The third net to take these foxes in is discipline. By Ecclesiastical
discipline.
Where the former nets fail, this will take hold; it held that incestuous
Corinthian whom no other way could have taken. 1. Cor. 5.
Hereby Ambrose brought the Emperor Theodosius himself to unfeigned humility,
and hearty repentance. Does it not appertain unto pastoral diligence, Aug.
de cor. ca. 8.
says S. Augustine, with fear, yea, if they resist, with feeling of stripes
to recall to the fold of the Lord those sheep when we find them, which have
not been violently carried away, but by fair and soft usage being seduced have
gone astray and began to be held in possession of strangers? Those wilful
cubbes which neither by teaching nor by example will be reformed must feel the
smart of the rod. We have, says Paul, 2. Cor. 10.
in a readiness punishment against all disobedience. Such as will not come to
feed with Christ willingly must be compelled against their wills. Constrain
them to come in. Luke 14.
Thus the minister should take these little foxes and win them unto the Lord
with the net of Gods word of good example and of discipline. Now if they cannot
be so recalled that themselves perish not: they are to be cut off or tied up
that they destroy not others.

33 The magistrate therefore must also set traps to catch these foxes withal.
The magistrate takes foxes by civil punishments.
The chief trap the magistrate has is the Law. Artaxerxes writes his letter
unto Esdras whom he sent to Jerusalem to see the people governed, and
requires him hoth to place Magistrates and Judges over the people, and to see
that they might live according to the Laws of God and the king, adding
thereunto a sharp commination against transgressors, 1. Esd. 8.
Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God and the kings Law, let him have
judgment without delay; whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. The kinds of punishment here set
down are four, Death, Exile, Confiscation, Incarceration. These lawful
means are wisely to be used of Christian Magistrates; as traps to take these
little foxes.

34 The first is death. By death.
It is the Lords commandment, Let the false Prophet die, Let the adulterer
and the adulteress be put to death, Let the blasphemer be stoned. Moses
observed this in destroying Idolaters and hanging up them that committed
whoredom. The Magistrate bears not the sword in vain. Asa the good king of
Judah gave commandment, that if any would not seek the Lord God of Israel he
should die, 2. Par. 15.
from the least to the greatest, from the man to the woman. Thus zealous
Magistrates have endeavored to take rebellious foxes.

35 Exile is also a punishment fit for foxes. By exile.
Zerubabel and Ieshua together with the rest of the fathers of Israel agreed,
Ezra 4.
not to suffer the enemies of their religion those wily foxes to join with
them, but banished them out of their company. It is not for us and you to
build a house to our God. The Emperor Theodosius likewise being moved
thereunto by that zealous Bishop Amphilochius, drove all the Arrians out of his
dominion. These foxes must be removed, the further the better. And it were well
with Christ's Church, if they were all, as far as Rome hence from whence many
of them came who now wander and raunge amongst us. God spared not to expel
Angels out of heaven, men out of paradise. 2. Sam. 14.
And when Absolon had put off the duetifull mind of a natural son, then
David laying aside the tender affection of a loving father banished him his
country.

36 The third trappe to take withal is confiscation of goods, By confiscation.
which way is the easiest and not the woorst. For the most men love Mammon
better than God, their riches more than their religion. When the rich man
heard that he and his wealth must part he went away very sorrowful: If he from
Christ, it is to be hoped these will from Antichrist. There can be no sharper
punishment to a worldly minded man, than to be taken in this trap. God
therefore commanded the Egyptians to be spoiled, than which there could be no
plague more grievous unto them, being so greedily set upon their gain. 1. Sam.
13.
When the Philistims would keep the Jews in good order, and disable them to
rebel, they took their weapons and instruments of war from them. It is no
evil or unlawful policy to weaken these enemies which are ready to use the
strength of their wealth to the overthrow of the Church, if occasion did serve.
Touch them by the purse; It is the most easy and ready way, whereby to take
and tame these foxes.

37 The last way set down by wise Artaxerxes is Incarceration. By
incarceration.
When Joseph had cast his brethren in prison, then they remembered their fault
and repented; then they thought, We suffer these things deservedly for the
hardness of our hearts against our brother. Manasses was never reclaimed
until he was enclosed in prison. 2. Par. 33.
He was miserable in his kingdom, and blessed in his captivity. Thus it is
the duty as well of the Magistrate as the Minister to obey the commandment of
the almighty, and by all means to prevent wicked enterprises; to root out
evil, and to seek the safety of Gods vineyard his beloved Church. Which God
grant them once effectually to do for their own discharge, and benefit of
the people so dearly redeemed by the blood of Christ. To whom, etc.

A Sermon preached in the same place, and upon the same occasion with the
former.
1. TIM. 2. 1 I exhort therefore before all things, that requests,
supplications, intercessions, and giuings of thanks be made for all men.

2 For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet,
and a peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty.


MOSES speaking to the people of God, The cause of the assembly and the
matters which this scripture offers to be spoken of.
concerning the institution of the Passover to be kept at the appointed
season, from year to year, says, When thy Son shall ask thee, What is this?
thou shall say unto him, Exodus 13.
With a mighty hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt out of the house of
bondage, and in remembrance hereof we celebrate this feast. In like sort when
your children shall ask you what this our assembly means, you shall
answer, that it is to give God thanks for that great benefit which we
received at his hands as this day, when in his mercy he gave us our gracious
elect Elizabeth, whom he has used as his mighty arm, to work our
deliverance, to bring us out of Egypt the house of Romish servitude. Psalm. 117.
This is the day which the Lord has made, this is that our happy day, the
Lord in his mercy has made it, let us be thankful for it, let us rejoice
and be glad in it. This is the acceptable time, the day of salvation, the
happy time of our deliverance. This day God showed us the light of his
gracious countenance, and had mercy on us in bestowing upon us so great a
treasure, so good a governor, so worthy a Prince. The Lord grant us many of
these days, and long continuance of these happy years. And, as our Apostle
does exhort us, let us both praise the Lord and pray unto him, that under so
good a government we may live a quiet, a godly, and an honest life, as the
Lords goodness toward us and our duty toward him and profession of his
name require. I exhort you therefore before all things, etc. Here are two
things offered to our consideration, first an exhortation Pray for all men,
especially for princes and rulers; secondly a reason of this exhortation, that
by their good government we may live a quiet a godly and an honest life.

An exhortation unto prayer.
We must pray to God to give us good Princes and rulers; under a good prince
we ought to lead a good life; a good prince should procure peace, piety, and
honesty to the people; a good people should live peaceably godlily and
honestly under their prince. The exhortation is, Pray for all men, especially
Princes and rulers. In this part we have to consider what prayer is; To whom we
should pray; What be the parts of prayer; When, where, and how we should pray;
For whom we should pray.

3 Prayer is a lifting up of the mind unto God, What prayer is, and what parts
it has.
or a friendely talking with the Lord, from an high and a kindled affection of
the heart. In the word God speaks unto us, in prayer we speak unto him.
Prayer is the pouring out of a contrite heart, with a sure persuasion that God
will grant our requests and give ear to the suites which we make unto him.
This prayer must be only unto God. It is prayer unto God that only has
promise, that only has example in the scriptures. Psalm. 49.
Call upon me, says God; Ask the father in my name, John 16.
says our Savior. Ask and ye shall have. When ye shall pray; Matthew. 6.
says Christ, pray thus, Our Father which art in heaven. So and none otherwise
prayed all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself and all
true Christians in all ages. In prayer no creature may be joined with God. God
and our Lady help us, is no allowable prayer.

4 This prayer which must be made only to God, Petitions, or requests.
our Apostle divides into his parts, Requests, Supplications, Intercessions,
Thankesgiuings. Requests or petitions are when we pray for the increase of
Gods good gifts in us, and that of his mercy and favor he would give us
whatsoever is necessary for body or soul; and, for as much as we cannot
obtain any thing for our own merits, that he would grant us all things for
his son our Saviors sake.

5 Supplications, when we pray to be delivered from evil; as when we pray
that the wrath of God, Supplications.
which we have deserved, may through his mercy be removed from us as far as
the East is from the West, that our sin may be remitted and blotted out of
Gods books.

6 Intercessions are, Intercessions.
when we pray for such as do afflict and wrong us; for our enemies which
persecute us; that God would forgive them, turn their hearts, and better them.
Or when we pray for others; either for remoouing of evil from them, or for
Gods favor and blessing toward them.

7 Thankesgiuings are when we praise, Thankesgiuings.
and thank God, for the great mercies, graces, and gifts which we have
received at his hands. Jacob. 1.
For we must acknowledge, that every good and perfect gift comes down from
above, from the father of lights, and is by his mercy freely given. Prayer
generally may be divided into two parts; Petition, and Thanksgiving: in the
one we ask of God, in the other we offer unto God; both are accepted as
sweet smelling sacrifices; pure, and through the merit of his son,
pleasant in his sight. I shall not need to put you in remembrance, that we
must pray both for our selves and others; that there is a private, and a
public prayer; that we must pray for things perteining to salvation
absolutely, and for things that pertain to this life conditionally. These are
matters wherewith ye are thoroughly acquainted.

8 The next thing to be considered in prayer is when, When, where, and how to
pray.
where, and how to pray. When? Always, without ceasing. Where? In all places,
1 Thessalonians. 5.
especially that place which being sanctified to this use is therefore called
the house of prayer. 1. Tim. 2.
How? from the heart, lifting up pure and clean hands; that is to say in
faith, and in love. Our prayer fethered with these two wings flies straight
into heaven.

9 Thus we are by the Apostle willed to pray before all things according to the
commandment of our Savior. Prayer before all things.
Seek first the kingdom of God. Let us begin all our works, our enterprises,
our actions, our iourneies, our lying down, our rising up, our eating, our
drinking, and all our studies with prayer. So our bread shall be multiplied, our
oil increased, our meat sanctified, all our endeavors and actions blessed. If
the very Ethnicks in the beginning of their books first prayed unto their
gods, to prosper and give good success to their labors; it were a shame for
us not to pray to our God before all things, knowing that the prayer of the
just is greatly available before him. Prayer is a succor unto us, a sacrifice
to God and a scourge to Satan. Examples are infinite. Exodus 3.
Israel in prayer groned unto God, and was delivered out of Egypt. Exodus 32.
Moses by prayer so held God, that he could not destroy his idolatrous people.
Ios. 6.
The blast of prayer overthrew the walls of Ierico. Ios. 10.
At the prayer of Joshua the Sun stood still. The young men prayed in the
burning furnace, Dan. 3.
and their prayer took away the force of the fire. The scriptures are full of
examples of all sorts: Kings, Prophets, Apostles, faithful Christians have
called upon the Lord in the time of their troubles; he has heard them*
granted their requests, and delivered them from their distresses. Wherefore
before all things the Apostle here exhorts us unto prayer.

10 But for whom? First generally for all men; For whom we must pray, and for
whom not.
then specially for kings, and them that are placed in authority. It seems
some were of opinion that prayers should be made only for the faithful, for
the brethren, for Christians, and not for Infidels. Paul to meet with this
uncharitable error says, Let supplications be made for all men. S John in his
Canonical Epistle seems to make exception against this general doctrine, 1.
John 5.
There is a sin unto death I say not that thou should pray for it. This
is that sin, which Christ calls sin against the holy Ghost, which never
shall be remitted, and therefore is not to be prayed for. But because it is
hard for us to discern who sin unto eternal death, Christian charity will
that we hope well of all, and observe the general rule to pray for all. There
were secrets revealed to the Apostles of Christ, which are hidden from us; they
had the gift of prophesying and discerning of spirits, to foresee and know,
which gifts these times have not. 2. Cor. 12.
Paul rapt into the third heaven learned secrets not to be revealed; 1. Tim. 1.
he knew that Himenaeus and Alexander were reprobates. Romans 14.
We may not so judge of others. Who art thou that iudgest an other man's
servant? In outward show after the judgment of man Paul being a violent
persecuter of Christ sinned unto death, yet was he the elect vessel and
glorious instrument of God. Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, he will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. We must therefore have a charitable meaning toward all and pray
for all as he has died for all. Pray even for your enemies, for them that
persecute and slander you; Bless them that curse you. Wish well to them that
do ill to you. For God suffers his rain to fall, and his light to shine
both upon good and bad. Abraham prayed for Abimeleck, Moses for Idolaters,
Samuel for Saul, Stephen for them that stoned him, and Christ for them that
cruelly put him to shameful death. Let us imitate these holy paternes.

11 As we should pray for all men; Prayer to be made especially for kings and
such as are in authority.
so chiefly for kings, and such as are in authority, because they chiefly
need it. In Paul's time the kings and rulers of the people were Ethnickes,
tyrants, enemies to Christ and cruel persecuters of the Gospel: whereupon some
thought it not convenient for the Church to pray for them who sought to
destroy it. S. Paul abateth this opinion, teaching them that they should
chiefly pray for such as for men in greatest danger and most needing the
help of their prayer. Pray for him that prays not for himself. The prophet
Jeremy requires the Israelites to pray for the cruel persecutor of Gods
people Nabuchadnetzar. Ier. 29.
For God in his mercy gives good princes, Esaias 3.
and in his ire he gives wantons, as Esaias says; and hypocrites, Job. 34.
as Job writes. Both evil and good are the ordinance of God. We must pray
for ill princes, because the kings heart is in Gods hand; that he may turn
their minds, and stay their persecutions, of evil make them good, and of
strangers from the common wealth of his Saints make them pillars and stays
unto the Church. For good princes we ought heartily to praise the Lord, for
them especially to pray as the prophet did for Solomon, Psalm. 72.
Give thy judgments to the King O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings
Son. For it is the singular gift of God not only to set up rightful
government in the world, but also to cherishe and preserve the same. Even they
whom he has furnished with the spirit of righteousness and of judgment, are
unable furtherfoorth to execute their charge than they be specially directed by
the hand of God, and assisted from heaven with all helps necessary for their
calling. If the Christians did pray for the wealth and prosperity of those
princes which bent all their force and power against the kingdom of Christ,
surely for such as are defenders of the faith and zealous patrones of Gods
people, Tertul in apologet.
we ought daily, and hourly to power out supplications, that God would grant
them a long life, a safe gouernementt, a sure dwelling, valiant soldiers,
faithful counselors, a good people, a quiet world, and whatsoever the hearts
of men or kings do desire. And let all such, as will not say Amen to those
prayers, assure themselves that they are neither duetifull Christians, nor
faithful subjects; but disloyal contemners of Gods ordinance, and rebellious
despisers of his commandment, who spoke by the mouth of his Apostle, saying,
Pray for Kings and all such as be in authority.

12 If any Church, No nation more occasioned than the English to praise the
Lord for their prince.
any people, any nation in the world have cause to praise the Lord for their
prince; this Land has more than any, in respect of the wonderful blessings
wherewith God, by the ministry of his handmaide, has enriched us far beyond
all that we are possibly able to conceive. Israel was well apaide with the
good government of Debora, Judith, and Hester. But they thought themselves
twice happy when God gave them Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, Iehosaphat,
Ezechias, Josias, to govern them. England liked well and took it for no small
blessing of God when Henry the first, H. the second, Edward the first, Edward
the third, Edward the fourth; H. the fifth, H. the sixth, H. the seventh, H. the
eight, Edward the sixth bare rule over it. But did God ever bless the throne of
any man as he has done the royal seat of his anointed at this day? Has
the like ever been heard of in any nation to that which in ours is seen? Our
Debora has mightily repressed the rebel Iaben; our Judith has beheaded
Holophernes, the sworn enemy of Christianity; our Hester has hanged up that
Haman, which sought to bring both us and our children into miserable servitude.
And if we may compare with the ancients of Israel Moses was not more mild, nor
Samuel more just, nor David more faithful, nor Solomon more peaceful, nor
Iehosaphat more ready to assist his neighbors, nor Ezechias more careful for
Gods cause, nor Iozias more zealous to restore sincere religion: If, ye make
the comparison between her own predecessors, neither was Henry the first
better learned, nor Henry the second more easy to forgive and put up
injuries, nor Ed. the first more chaste, nor Ed. the third more loath to accept
of foreign dominion being offered, nor Ed. the fourth more just in yielding all
men their own, nor H. the fifth more happy, nor H. the sixth more holy, nor H.
the seventh more prudent, nor H. the eight more valiant in quelling the Pope,
nor Ed. the sixth more syncerely affected toward the Gospel of Christ. Look
upon other princes at this day; some are drunken with the poisoned cup of that
harlot, whose venom her Highness does abhor; some have imbrued themselves
in blood, wherewith her Majesty did never yet stain the tip of her finger;
when they tumble in war, she sits in peace; when they break oaths and
couenaunts, she keeps promise: therefore God has blessed the work of her
hands; she found this Realm in war, she has established it in peace; she
found it in debt, which she has discharged; she has changed dross into
silver and gold; she has, by living within compass, and sparing wastfull
expenses, without pressing the people, or seeking more than ordinary and
usual tribute, furnished this Land with so great a Navy, with such store of
armor and warlike munition both for defense and offense, as England never had
in former times. This I speak not of flattery (it was never my fault) but
rather in synceritie testifying the truth, that seeing your happiness you may
be thankful; and considering the wonderful mercies of God, ye may fall into
that meditation of the Prophet, What shall I render unto the Lord? Psalm. 117.
All his benefits are upon me. I will receive the cup of salvation, and call
upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord even now in the
presence of all his people. God has laden us with all his benefits. Far be
it from us that our unthankfulness should bereave us of this felicity. That
we hear the sound of bells, and not the thundering of gunnes; that our goods
are not spoiled, our houses rased, our lands extended, our bodies imprisoned,
our wives and children murdered before our eyes; that mercy and truth are
met together; that righteousness and peace have kissed each other; that in
liberty of body, and freedom of conscience we may assemble thus together in
the house of God, to make our prayers, to hear his word, to receive these
holy and heavenly mysteries, do we think it a small or a light or a common
benefit? How should we requite the Lord? We have nothing in us worthy the
name of recompense. All that we can render or repaie for that which we have
received is before we crave more to be mindful and thankeful of that we have
obtained already, to take up the cup of salvation, call upon the name of the
Lord in the presence of all the people: let supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for Kings; this one payment does
abundantly satisfy God for all graces, benefits, and blessings, which by the
means of good Kings have been powered upon us.

13 Neither let us pray for our prince only, but also for all such as God has
placed in authority under her. All that are in authority under the prince
must also be prayed for; be they good or bad; be their authority
Ecclesiastical or Civil.
For every power is of God, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Civil power. We
must pray for all those that be in authority be they good or bad; for the
continuance of the one, and the amendment of the other. Our prayer for
Ecclesiastical powers must be, that GOD would place over his people good
guides, loving and wise sheepheards, such as may carefully govern the flock
over which the holy Ghost does make them overseers; such as Peter, that will
feed as much as in them lies; such as Paul, that will preach in season and
out of season, that will soundly instruct, sharply improoue, severely correct,
and diligently guide; such as John, that fear not to reprove kings to their
faces; as Elias, which will not spare to punish transgressors; that the Church
may be delivered from such as Judas, and Magus buyers and sellers; from false
prophets, from sacrificing Balamites, from devouring wolves, wily foxes,
insatiable dogs, dumme curres, deceitful workmen, makers of division, Idol
pastors, unsavory salt, such as make their belly their God, their
preferrement their religion, lewdely and worldly minded men. Our prayer for
them in whose hands Civil government lies must be, that, for as much as one
is unable to bear the burden of a commonwealth alone; such, according to the
counsel of Iethro, may be chosen, as be Salomons not Nabals; men of wisdom,
and not dotterels; men of experience that can, and of courage that will both
wisely, and boldly discharge their duty; men like to Gedeon, and not to
Pilate; such as will not fear the face of Caesar, when they should do right;
men able mightily to put down sin, men that fear God syncerely, being
lovers of the truth, not secret fosterers of superstition; men that hate
covetousness, and are not takers of bribes to pervert judgment; men like to
Samuel, not the sons of Samuel. Woe be to that people which is led with
blind guides, and woe be to that common wealth, which is ruled with base, bad,
and evil governors.

14 Let us therefore bless God, if we have good rulers, and The reason why we
pray for all men and for princes, puts both princes and al other men in mind
of their duties. Princes that they should study to make the people live in
peace.
that is to say, that we may lead a peaceable, and quiet life under them, with
all godliness and honesty. Herein we have two things to be considered; the
duty of rulers, and the duty of them which live under rulers. Kings, and
such as are in authority must seek the peace, piety, and honesty of the
people: the people thus governed must lead a peaceable, a godly, and honest
life under them. It was said to the Jews, which lived in captivity, but may
serve as a profitable lesson for all that have sovereignty over others, Seek
the prosperity of the City: In the peace thereof you shall have peace.
Solomon has this commendation especially given him in scripture, Ier. 29.
as a notable effect of his wonderful wisdom, He had peace on all sides, 1.
Reg 4.
Judah and Israel dwelt without fear, every man sat quiet under his vine and
under his figgetree all the days of Solomon. Our Savior Christ is called the
Prince of Peace; Esaias 9.
he brought peace into the world; Luke 2.
at his Nativity the Angels sung Peace on earth; at what time he was borne,
there was peace amongst all people. Ezechias likewise sought the peace of his
Country by earnest and hearty prayer, Esaias 39.
Let there be peace and truth in my days.

15 The long and honorable peace which we have enioied and do enioie is in
the eyes of all that do behold it woonderful, In piety.
the more because the procurer of our peace has been careful therewithal to
have piety and true religion planted and continued amongst us. Doubtless
they that so watch over the people committed unto their charge, show that
they are neither coldly affected toward God, nor uncharitably toward their
people. David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, Asa, Ezechias, Josias are commended of God
for good rulers: because they were religious and feared God. These loving the
Law of the Lord themselves, labored by all means to make the people
partakers also of the like love. These were in deed the Nurces of the Church,
having the same affection and kindehearted inclination, which the blessed
Apostle had toward them of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
unto whom he was not only content to give the milk of the gospel of Christ,
but willing that they might suck even blood out of his breast, so it were for
their benefit. So dear and precious they were unto him. Such a nurce was
Moses, which fed the people with the Law of God, the food of life, meat
sweeter than honey or the honey comb. Such a one Iehosaphat, in sending
abroad preachers to feed the people. Such a one Ezechias, in washing and
cleansing the Church from Idolatry, Josias in reforming the house of God,
Solomon in deposing evil priests and placing better, in laboring by all means
to enlarge the glorious kingdom of God. These did the parts of good and
faithful nurces, and God did highly requite their service.

16 After piety, In honesty.
honesty and order must be sought. This is attained unto by seeing good Laws
both made and put in execution. For the execution of the Law is the life of
the Law, and a Law not executed is but a dead Law. And here let rulers first
learn to observe Laws themselves, and so with greater courage and better
countenance they may punish by Law the transgressors of the Law. For this
cause S. Paul would have a Bishop, whose office it is to reprove others,
himself to be unreprovable. Judah gave sentence against Thamar for her
incontinencie, Genesis 38.
Bring her forth and let her be burnt. But when he once understood it was his
own offense, the case was altered. The Prophet David was driven to the like.
Those magistrates do both wickedly and shamefully which prescribe a Law of
honest life unto others, and keep it not themselves. It is foul thing when he
that punishes is more worthy punishment than the party punished. Paul
himself being blameless executed discipline with great authority upon that
lewd incestuous person. Samuel a faultlesse magistrate was not afraid to cut
off the head of Agag the king with his own hands. 1. Sam. 15.
Moses could not with that courage have hanged up those Gentlemen-fornicators,
had not his own life that way been without stain or blemish. When
magistrates themselves be clear, they may boldly punish others, and see
diligently to the strait execution of Laws. For want whereof it comes to
pass, that for the most part Laws are accounted like to cobwebs, which take
small flies and hold them fast, but suffer hornets to break through. In
execution of laws we may not respect the person of the rich or of the poor;
neither fear nor pity must remove us; that which is just must take place in
both. For if Laws be not executed without respect of person, if sin be not
severely repressed, if the people be not kept in order; it will shake the
state, all will be in an uproar, no man shall be master of his own or in any
safety of his life, al iniquity will abound, all honesty will be exiled, and
the magistrate shall bear the sword in vain. To neglect it, is to neglect
that thing for which this ordinance of God was first appointed. For if men
without these means might be kept in order, surely God would never have
established government to keep them in order by these means. Barbarous
therefore, and wicked is the opinion of the Anabaptists, which condemn all
superiority, authority, and government in the Church. For what is this else,
but utterly to expel both out of Church and common wealth all godliness, all
peace, all honesty?

17 Now as magistrates and rulers should by good government procure peace, The
duty of the people under their Princes is to lead a peaceable, a godly, and
an honest life.
promote religion, and preserve honesty amongst men: so our Apostle requires
at the peoples hands, that they under government lead a peaceable, quiet,
and honest life. There is a double peace, the one outward; the other inward:
peace with men, and peace with God. With God there is no peace, but in Christ.
Through faith in him we have peace with God, and not otherwise. He has peace
with God, whose sins are remitted; Romans 5.
for, Blessed are they whose iniquities are pardoned. But our sins are
remitted only in the blood of Christ Jesus, his blood does purge us from all
sin. 1. John 1.
Christ therefore is our only peacemaker with God. This is that peace which
passes all understanding: He that will enioie it must be careful to keep a
good conscience. 1. Pet. 3.
Have a good conscience; that when men speak evil of you, as of ill doers,
they may be ashamed. For if our own heart condemn us, God is greater and will
more syncerely judge us. A good conscience makes a strong faith. Many by
loosing their hold of the one have made shipwreck of the other.

18 The peaceable and quiet life, What it is to live peaceably
which S. Paul in this place does chiefly require, is to have outward peace
with men. If it be possible and as much as in you lies have peace with all men.
Rom 12.
Yet not peace with all men so, but that we may be always ready for Gods
cause to sustain the hatred of all men in the world. We may not for peace sake
flatter men in their sin; for that is to be partakers of evil. We must have
peace with all, if it may be, and so far as in us lies, ever preferring a
good conscience and a Christian mind. For it may not be which may not be
honestly. Follow those things that belong unto peace, but unto godly peace.
For our God is the God of true and of good peace. He detesteth them that sow
discord, yea the soul of the Lord abhors them. Doeg was hated of God for
setting dissension between Saul and David; Achitophel likewise for stirring up
Absolon to strive against his father. For as peacemakers are blessed; so cursed
are all disturbers of peace, all breeders and maintainers of sedition. Unto
peace we must join holiness, true and religious worshipping of God. Heb. 12.
So says the Apostle, Follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord. Matthew. 4.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. He is a
spirit, and will be woorshipped in spirit and truth, in inward holiness, not
in outward show of holiness only; in synceritie, and not in ceremony alone;
according to his own will and commandment, not according to the fancy or
invention of man. Aug. de consen. Euang. lib. 1. cap 18.
Every God, says Socrates, is so to be worshipped as himself has appointed.

19 This our serving of God in the Church of God in true holiness consists
chiefly in true and earnest prayer unto God; The principal public duties of
godliness are prayer, hearing of the word, and receiving of the sacraments.
in diligent and duetifull hearing of his word; in faithful and reverent
receiving of his Sacraments. In prayer we beg of God those things which we wish
and hope to receive, and we praise him for things already received. This is a
sweet and an acceptable sacrifice. The hearing of his word is also a service
wherewith he is pleased.

20 And as praying and hearing; Two sacraments, Baptism and the supper of the
Lord.
so the worthy receiving of his sacraments, is not only a sealing of his
grace unto us, but also a testifying of our godliness toward him. His
sacrameuts are two in number, instituted by Christ to be received of
Christians: By the one, which is Baptism, we are received and incorporated
into the Church of Christ; by the other, which is the Eucharist or Lords
supper, we are nourished and fed unto life everlasting. These are pledges, and
assurances of remission of sins and salvation purchased by the death of
Christ. These are Gods seals, added unto his most certain promises, for the
confirmation of our weak faith, weak by reason of the infirmity of our
flesh. For if we were spiritual, Hom. 80. sup^^ Matthew.
says Chrysostom, we should not need these corporal signs. We being now
prepared, and purposed to be partakers of this holy mystery, the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ; it stands us upon to have that due
consideration which the weight of a matter so nearly concerning our salvation
does require, to the end that we may to our comfort and profit receive the
same. Deeply to enter into this matter the shortness of this time will not
permit: yet somewhat I will say, and give you a taste of things needful.

21 In this sacrament there are two things, Of the outward signs in y^
Eucharist; and how the inward grace thereof is reaped, not by carnal and gross
devouring; but by spiritual and heavenly feeding upon the body and blood of
Christ Jesus.
a visible sign, and an invisible grace: there is a visible sacramental sign
of bread and wine; and there is the thing and matter signified, namely the
body and blood of Christ: there is an earthly matter, and an heavenly matter.
The outward sacramental sign is common to all; as well the bad, as the good.
Judas received the Lords bread; but not that bread, which is the Lord to the
faithful receiver. The spiritual part, that which feeds the soul only the
faithful do receive. For he cannot be partaker of the body of Christ, which
is no member of Christ's body. This food offered us at the Lords table is to
feed our souls withal; it is meat for the mind, and not for the belly.
Our souls being spiritual can neither receive, nor digest that which is
corporal, they feed only upon spiritual food. John 6.
It is the spiritual eating that gives life. The flesh says Christ, does
nothing profit. We must lift up our selves from these external and earthly
signs, and like Eagles fly up and sore aloft; there to feed on Christ, which
sits on the right hand of his father, whom the heavens shall keep until
the latter day. From thence and from no other Altar shall he come, in his
natural body to judge both quick and dead. His natural body is local, for
else it were not a natural body; his body is there, therefore not here: for
a natural body does not occupy sundry places at once. Here we have a
sacrament, a sign, a memorial, a commemoration, a representation, a figure
effectual of the body and blood of Christ. These terms the ancient Fathers,
Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Augustine, S. Jerome, S. Chrysostom do use. Seeing
then that Christ in his natural body is absent from hence; seeing he is
risen, and is not here; seeing he has left the world and is gone to his
father; how shall I, says S. Augustine, lay hold on him which is absent?
how shall I put my hand into heaven? Send up thy faith and thou have taken
hold. Why preparest thou thy teeth? Believe and thou have eaten. Thy teeth
shall not do him violence, neither thy stomach contain his glorious body.
Thy faith must reach up into heaven. By faith he is seen, by faith he is
touched, by faith he is digested. Spiritually by faith we feed upon Christ,
when we steadfastly believe that his body was broken, and his blood shed for
us upon the cross; by which sacrifice, offered once for all, as sufficient for
all, our sins were freely remitted, blotted out, and washed away. This is our
heavenly bread, our spiritual food. This does strengthen our souls, and
cheer our hearts. Sweeter it is unto us than honey, when we are certified by
this outward sacrament of the inward grace given unto us thorough his death;
when in him we are assured of remission of sins, and eternal life. Better
food than this thy soul can never feed upon. This is the bread of
everlasting life. They which truly eat it shall live by it.

32 Thus I have briefly, The visible elements of bread and wine are neither
changed in substance by virtue of consecration; and they should in
administration be given both unto all; not one without the other unto priest or
people.
simply, and plainly unfolded unto you the meaning of this most holy mystery.
Time will not suffer me to let you see the absurdities of the popish unsavory
opinions in this matter; neither to confute their vain allegations, and false
collections, abusing the scriptures, dreaming evermore with the gross
Capernaites of a carnal and a fleshly eating. Behold the one part of this
sacrament consecrated is termed bread; the other a cup by the Apostle himself,
Because what they were according to the substance of their natures before
consecration the same they remain after, says Bertram. The like has
Theodoret, Those mystical tokens after they be sanctified do not leave their
proper nature: for they abide in their former substance, Bert. l. 4. de corp.
and sang. chr.
figure, and shape. This sacrament was delivered to the Corinthians in both
kinds. As Christ says, so says Paul, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of
this. That the whole sacrament should be received of the people, and no
mutilation permitted, the ancient writers are most clear, as Ambrose, Ierom,
Chrysostom, Gelasius, Cyprian, etc. This sacrament is to be received in
remembrance of Christ crucified. As often as ye shall eat this bread, and
drink of this cup, ye show the Lords death until his coming. Of preparation
required to the worthy receiving of this blessed Sacrament.


23 In what manner we ought to prepare our selves thereunto Paul teaches
saying, Let a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread and drink of that
cup. This condemns Anabaptists, which thinking themselves to be without sin
communicate with none but such as they think like to themselves. 1. Cor. 11.
Every man shall bear his own burden; It behooves therefore every man to
try him self and not other men. 2. Cor. 13.
Try whether ye be in the faith or no. Faith has his fruits: It works
repentance, it causes sorrow for sins committed, fear of sinning again
and hope of pardon. It breeds love toward God, and love toward our
brethren. If incredulity, if impenitencie, if hatred and malice have possessed
thine heart, then abstain from the Lords table; least with Judas thou receive
the Lords bread against the Lord, the food of salvation to thy condemnation.
But if thou believe, repent thee of thy sin, purpose to live a charitable and
godly life, if thou be clothed with the sweet garment of the son of God;
then sit thee down at the table of the Lord, and at the feast of the lamb.
For this is his feast, this is done only in remembrance of him this is the
blessed Eucharist, a sacrament of praise and thanksgiving; as for all other
godly benefits, so particularly and principally for the death and passion of
Jesus Christ Gods only son and our only Savior.

24 These duties being thus performed unto God, Honest life and conversation
amongst men.
we must also endeavor to live and lead an honest life. Peace is a great
mean to procure piety, and piety should breed honesty in us. The one
cannot be where the other is not. Walk honestly because the days are evil;
deny impiety, and worldely lusts; live soberly, justly, godlily in this
present world; looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of
the mighty God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. If we will be Christ's Disciples,
let us tread in his footsteps. If we follow him here in peace, piety, and
honesty, we shall receive in his kingdom that crown of eternal glory, which
God the father for his sons sake grant us, to whom with the holy Ghost three
persons and one God be all honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

The fifth Sermoni. A Sermon preached before the Queen.
PHILIPPIANS 2. 2 Be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and
of one judgment;

3 That nothing be done through contention or vain glory, but that in
meekness of mind every man esteem other better than himself.

4 Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of other men.

5 Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus.


THE Apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, The Apostles vehemency in
exhorting to brotherly concord.
with a most vehement spirit, and most earnest obtestation, does here exhort
the Philippians if there were any consolation in Christ, any comfort of
charity, any communion of the spirit, any bowels of tender affections, or any
compassion in them, they would to the fulfilling of his joy follow peace,
unity, love and brotherly concord; remoouing withal the lets thereof; and
showing the means how unity, love and concord may be continued, and
preserved. And that his exhortation might be of greater authority, and so take
better effect; he sets down our Savior Christ as an example: who is the
God of unity and peace, the Lord of love, and the liueliest pattern of all
piety, and sweetness of manners; requiring of us; as we profess Christ in
name and word, so in mind and in deed to be so affected as Jesus Christ
himself was.

2 Be like minded having the same etc. Three things performed in the words of
S. Paul: he moves unto unity; takes away lets which hinder unity; shows
y^ means whereby unity is maintained.
We have here an exhortation; and an example, so linked and tied together, the
one depending upon the other, that they cannot well be sundred. My purpose
therefore is jointly to lay them both before you: and in explicating the one
to propose the other. The exhortation is this, Be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, and of one judgment. That nothing be done through
contention or vain glory, but in meekness of mind every man esteem other
better than him self. Look not every man on his own things, but every man
also on the things of other men. Upon this exhortation follows the example,
Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus. The exhortation stands
upon three parts. First he moves unto unity saying, Be ye like minded having
the same love, and this unity by way of interpretation he divides into two
members, Be of one accord and of one judgment. Of one judgment, in matters of
religion; and of one accord in brotherly love. In the second part he remooueth
the lets of this unity and concord saying, Let nothing be done through
contention and vain glory. These are great hindrances to unity and concord.
Lastly he tells the means whereby agreement and love may be vpholden and
maintained, saying, In meekness of mind let every man esteem other better
than himself: Look not every man to his own things, but every man also to
the things of other men. Here he sets down two preservatives and defenses
of unity and love: the one, in humbleness of mind to think better of others
than of our selves; the other, not to look upon our own things only, but
every man also on the things of other men.

3 The Apostle requires of us a double unity in Religion and brotherly
concord. Both are so necessary, The Apostle requires unity both in religion
and affection.
that the one cannot stand long if the other fall. Unity in religion is a
thing most to be desired. What is the woorst thing of all others? Dissension.
What the best? Greg. Nazian. Act^ 4.
Unity, peace, and agreement: Thus thought Gregory. And we read that the
Gospel had his beginning in unity, The multitude of them which believed had
one heart and one soul. Schism had his beginning of dissension: I am of Paul,
I of Apollos, I of Cephas; this was that which rent the church of God in
pieces. 1. Cor. 1.
The Church is called the kingdom of God; the Arc of Noah, the body of
Christ: to teach us that it should be at unity in it self. For a house, a
ship, a body divided cannot continue. By themselves they are brought to ruin.
Wherefore together with the blessed Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.
I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak
one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you: but be ye knit
together in one mind and in one judgment.

4 But we must consider which is true unity: Every agreement is not that
unity whereunto we are exhorted.
For every agreement is not that concord whereunto we are in this place
exhorted. Lucifer with other Angels consented together; Eve and Adam and the
serpent were all of one mind; so were the builders of the tower of Babel; so
were they of Sodom a puero vsque ad senem, Gen 3.
from the child to the man of graie hairs; so were Dathan and Abiram with
their accomplices; Genesis 11.
so were the woorshippers of the golden calfe; Genesis 19.
so were the sacrificers in Dan and Bethel; Number. 16.
so were Pilate and Herod; Exodus 32.
so were the Jews that cried with one voice, Let him be crucified; and so are
they which have joined themselves in holy league with no other intent than
those wicked confederates had of whom the Prophet says, They assembled
themselves together against the Lord and against his Christ. Psalm. 2.
But it is unity of the spirit, unity in the truth, unity in Christ and in
his gospel, whereunto our Apostle here exhorts us. The name of peace is
goodly, Hilar contra Auxent.
and the opinion of consent, says Hilarie, is a fair and a beautiful thing;
but who doubts that the linked peace of the Church and of the Gospel is that
peace only which is of Christ, which he spoke of to his Apostles after his
glorious passion, which he commended at his departure as the pawn of his
everlasting commandment? All other peace is no peace indeed. Nor is he
joined to the Church, says Cyprian, who is severed and sundered from the
Gospel. Romans 15.
S. Paul moving men to unity in religion says, This is all one thing; but he
adds further, according to Jesus Christ. The city whereof the Prophet
speaks, which is at unity within it self, must be builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles, and of the Prophets. For what a concord is that
which is at strife with Christ? John 17.
Unity must be in verity, Thy word is verity, Augustine.
in this we must agree. Let us not hear, This I say, This thou say, but
This says the Lord. For unity in religion not grounded upon Christ and his
Gospel is not concord but conspiracy.

5 And here we have to praise our God, The unity which is in ye Church of
England at this day touching religion; the disagreement about some smaller
things outwardly apperteining to religion.
that in public doctrine touching the substance of religion we all agree in
one truth; we all build upon one foundation, Christ Jesus slain and offered
up for our full redemption according to the doctrine of the scriptures. So much
the greater pity it is that there should be such dissent in matters of small
importance, in rites and circumstances, that by contention in such things the
course of the Gospel should be hindered, Christ's adversaries strengthened, and
his church offended. The ministry cannot be well executed without her rites,
which rites are left indifferent to every policy, so that they be not
disagreeing from the word, so that they tend unto edification, so that they be
seemly and according to decent order. Be it granted that some rites upon
some consideration might be bettered or omitted: yet can I not say neither any
man, I suppose, can prove that any thing is set down to be observed in the
Church, wicked or contrary to the word. And it were scarce wisdom when as
in many years a beautiful and a costly house is builded, if a window be set
a little awrie, or some small like eye sore do appear, in respect thereof to
disturb the whole house, to put it down, and lay it flat with the ground.
For every change being so full of peril, surely these great alterations upon
so light advise, these new common wealths, howsoever they be shadowed with
the plausible name of reformation, yet in seeking (for undoubtedly this is
sought and that by many) to have the patrimony of the Church divided, mangled,
and impaired, they threaten the utter overthrow of learning and religion. For
take away living at which root this axe especially strikes, and ye take away
learning; take away learning, and ye overthrow teaching; take away teaching,
and what shall become of the church of Christ? Prou. 29.
Where there is no vision there the people cannot choose but come to decaie.
There is no state (no not the state of a prince excepted to whom fear, honor,
obedience, and tribute is due) that may more rightly challenge a competent and
sufficient living than the minister of the word of God. They seem to have put
out the very light of nature in themselves, which repine at the reasonable
maintenance of them that minister before the Lord in these sanctified labors.
For who does plant a vineyard and does not eat of the fruit thereof? or who
feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? Mark how the
scriptures both in the Law and in the Gospel do beat upon this point. In
the Law it is said, Thou shall not mussle the mouth of the Ox. 1. Cor. 9.
Does God take care for Oxen? No his care is for us. For our cause it is that
he has said, The labourer is worthy of his hire. 1. Tim. 5.
For our cause he has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. He had a care of his church, Gal. 6.
and therefore gave charge, Let him that is taught in the word make him that
taught him partaker of al his goods. This is large yet but reasonable. For if
we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your
carnal things? is it much to make us partakers of all your goods? 1. Tim. 5.
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, specially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
They which labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you, have them, says the Apostle, we beseech you in singular love, for their
works sake. It was foreseen no doubt by the spirit, how Gods portion should
be pinched; how the ministers of the word should be contemned; how
injuriously men in these last uncharitable days would seek for the havoc
and spoil of the Church: this moved him in so large and ample sort to speak
of maintenance, and honor due to his ministers. If any man be slow and
rechelesse in doing his office, if there be any Idol-sheepeheard that feeds
himself only and not his flock; let him be reformed or removed: But for the
fault of a few, that the whole state should be subverted, and the patrimony
of the church of Christ spoiled and devoured, it were very hard. No prince,
nor people, Christian or Heathen, could ever consent to such a thing without
sacrilege. Well, as we are at unity in substance of religion; so God grant
that at length in these things also we may agree and be as one; even as
becomes the congregation of Christ, which is a society linked and knit
together, not sundered by division, and rent in pieces by variety of opinions
and judgments. To this unity Paul exhorts, Be of one meaning. This unity
Christ commends to his Disciples saying, Be one.

6 Of this unity and conjunction of men agreeing in the truth, Of unity in
religion comes that unity which linketh men's minds in mutual affection each
toward other.
arises that brotherly concord, whereof. S. Paul in the words that follow
says, Be like minded, having the same charity. Where dissent in religion is,
there can hardly be consent in love. Diversity of religion sundered the Jew
and Gentile, caused the one to be an abomination to the other. Wherefore he
that came to bring religion into the world, came not to bring with it peace,
but a sword; a sword to divide asunder not only kingdoms and cities, but
even the man and the wife; the father and the child; a sword to cut off one
brother from another. For there can be no agreement between Christ and
Beliall, the light of the one and the others darkness: such as are not of one
true religion with us, their profession may be friendship, but their practice
is deceit; they may with speech and countenance flatter and fawn, but they
carry for the most part a malicious heart set upon mischief. Caine spoke Abel
fair enough: Genesis 4.
but for the diversity of his sacrifice he hated him, and spying opportunity
shed his blood. Matthew. 2.
Herod pretended to worship Christ, whose death he fully purposed in his
malicious mind. There was never therefore wise Israelite that would trust an
Amorite. It is and will be true for ever that Constantine said, Sozom. l. 1.
ca. 6.
Qui perfidi sunt in Deum, in Principem fideles esse non possunt. They cannot
be sure to their Prince, who to Godward are not sincere. They count truth
heresy; and, No PROMISE TO BE KEPT WITH HERETICS is their posie. Children
they are like to their father which is a murderer and lier from the beginning.
But when we speak of love and charity, we speak of the badge of
Christianity, of the virtues of true Christians: who consenting in faith,
bring forth the fruit of faith which is love; without which, how near
soever we approach unto Christ in word and in outward profession, we are in
deed none of his. He cannot agree with Christ that is at discord with a
Christian. God is so delighted with this affection, that he professes himself
to hate them that are enemies of it, yea the soul of the Lord abhors him
that raises up co^tentions amongst brethren. Prou. 6.
Love is the Liuerie-coate of Christ; whosoever will be numbered with his
servant must put it on. By this men shall know you to be my Disciples, John
13.
If ye love one another. In those very creatures which God has left empty
and void of understanding there is a kind of love: a consent we see there is
in the stars, in the elements, in times and seasons, amongst the beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea, and fruits of the earth;
every beast does love his like; to our shame and reproach, if having so many
schoolemasters to teach us one thing we learn it not, especially being so
necessary as it is. For in love and concord our prayers are accepted in the
sight of God, and without them abhorred; Matthew. 8.
Verily I say unto you that if two of you shall agree in earth upon any
thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of my father which
is in heaven.

7 S. Paul therefore to persuade men to this concord, The love and unity which
should be in the mystical body of Christ which is the company of men
professing the Christian faith, showed by comparison of that unity which is
seen in the parts and members of a natural body.
uses a similitude drawn from the members of a natural body: wherein he
notes that the body by nature is a thing whole and perfect, consisting of all
his members; if any part be wanting or cut off, it is maimed: Even so in this
mystical body of Christ, in this spiritual society of the faithful, if any
part be cut off the whole is defaced and deformed. All the members and every
one of them labor not for themselves only, but for the use and preservation
of the whole body. So are we borne not for our selves alone, but for others
also, for whom we should travel as for our selves. The members strive not, but
are content with their placing, be it honorable, be it base: Even so should
not we strive for equality or superiority, 1. Cor. 14.
but every man content himself with his own calling. The members rejoice and
suffer together: Even so should we be kindly affected each to other,
mourning with them that mourn, and being glad with them that do rejoice. That
member which has not this sympathy, this mutual suffering, this feeling of
other men's hurts is dead and rotten. Remember them says the Apostle, Heb. 13.
that are in bonds, as though ye your selves were bound with them, and them
that are in affliction as if ye your selves were afflicted in their bodies.
The members are sundry and have sundry offices. For if all were an eye where
were the hearing? If all did command which should obeie? Even so in this
resembled body, and civil society there must be diversity as of members so
of functions. The prince is as the head, without whose discreet and wise
government the Laws would cease, and the people being not ruled by order of
Laws, ruin and confusion would soon follow, each contending and striving
against other the end would be the utter subversion of all. The ministers of
the word are as the eyes to watch, and not to wink or sleep, and as the
mouth to speak, and not be dumme. For then they perform not their allotted
function. They are placed as watchemen over the Church for the good and godly
direction thereof to take heed both to themselves, and to all the flock
whereof the holy Ghost has made them overseers, to feed the Church of God
which he has purchased with his own blood, to warn the people of the enemy
ever at hand always ready to assault, to teach and instruct the people of
God in the way of their salvation, to tell them of their sins, to cry unto
them and not to cease. The Judges are as ears who should sit in open places to
hear the causes and complaints of the people, opening the one ear to the
plaintiff, and reserving the other to the defendants answer. The nobility are
as the shoulders and arms to bear the burden of the common wealth, to hold
up the head and defend the body with might and force, with wise counsel and
good advise. Men of lower degrees are set as inferior parts in the body,
painefully to travel for the necessary sustentation both of themselves and
others. All these members are so necessary that none can want without the
ruin of the whole. For every one has need of other and by the help of the
other is maintained. This necessary conjunction should cause the Prince to love
the people, as Moses, which wished rather to be blotted out of the book of
life than that they should perish; and as David, which besought the Lord to
turn his wrathful hand against him, and to spare the people. It should cause
such love in the people toward the Prince, as was both in the people of Israel
toward their Prince and governor Joshua, Joshua 1.
when they said, All that thou have commanded us we will do, and whithersoeuer
thou sendest us we will go; and in David's subjects toward him, when they
stood fast by him at such time as he fled from his rebellious and unnatural
son; not suffering that he should adventure himself in the field, but they
rather for him to bear the brunt and burden of the battle, Thou shall not
go, 2. Sam. 18.
thou art worth ten thousand of us. This should cause the pastor to love his
flock as Paul did love his brethren, I would wish my self separated from
Christ for my brethren; Romans 9.
and again, Our good will was to have dealt unto you not the Gospel of GOD
only but even our own souls too because ye were dear unto us. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
This should cause the people to love their pastor dearly, as the Galathians
loved Paul, to whom he gives this testimony, Gal. 4.
I bear you record that if it had been possible; you would have plucked out
your own eyes and have given them to me. Finally this should cause all men to
walk in love even as Christ our example has loved us.

8 It follows, Let nothing be done through contention or vainglorie. The
first hinderance of unity is contention.
peace; to this they provoke and exhort eueriewhere, I beseech you let there be
no contentions amongst you, Heb. 12.
Follow peace, Let no root of bitterness spring up and trouble you. Where
the man and the wife, the parents and the children strive one against another,
that house needs no foreign enemy to bring it to naught, it will be
devoured of it self. A kingdom, a city divided by contention, how should it
stand? All times and examples are our witnesses. Contention between Roboam and
Jeroboam brought the kingdom of Israel first to a division, and then to
confusion. The contention between Simon, John, and Eleazar, chief men in the
city of Jerusalem, was the last and utter destruction of that city. If
counselors emulate and contend amongst themselves, ^t must needs tear the
state of the common wealth in pieces. It was great wisdom therefore in M.
Aemilius and Fuluius Flaccus, that being at enmity, yet when they were chosen
Censors of Rome together, they joined hands and buried all injuries; least
through their contention, the state should come to ruin. Abraham knowing the
hurt of contention gave place to his nephewe Lot, Genesis 13.
Let there be no strife I pray thee between thee and me, neither between
mine heardmen and thine, for we are brethren. The scripture terms us sheep,
meek and patient. Let us not therefore be currish like unto dogs,
contending, barking and biting at our brethren. Gal. 5.
If ye bite one another beware least ye be consumed one of an other.

9 And as the bane of unity is contention, Another hinderance is vaineglorie
the mother and breeder of contention.
so the breeder of contention is vaineglorie. What else caused John Bishop of
Constantinople to contend to be called The universal Bishop? Superbum nomen
hoc est: This is a proud name says Gregory. What else made the Angel to
contend to advance himself above measure? Adam to seek to be wise as God?
Absolon to strive for his fathers kingdom? Caesar to brook no man to be his
better? Pompey no man to be his peer? Wherefore let us not be desirous of
vaineglorie, provoking one another, envying one another. The proud and vain
glorious are compared to the Cedar trees of Libanus, which are higher than
others, not of themselves, but by reason of the high mountain whereupon they
grow. There is nothing in us whereof we may boast.


10 It is madness for men to glory in that which is not their own. What have
thou that thon have not received? And if thou have received, why do thou
glory? 1. Cor. 4.
Do thou glory in thy good works and righteousness? Esaias 64.
They are as the clothes of a woman in her blood. Do thou glory in thy
nobility, and great authority? Prou. 8.
By me Kings do reign, neither is there any power but from God. Rule is given
you of the Lord, and power by him that is most high. Glory not but fear,
knowing that he which has received much has much to reckon for. Sap. 6.
And, A hard judgment shall they have that bear rule. Do thou glory in
thy riches? Fool, this night thy life is taken from thee, and then whose are
they? They are as grass unto all, but unto most men as thorns; many have
been pierced to the heart by them, they spare neither prophet, Number. 22.
nor Apostle, as we see by the examples of Balaam and Judas, Matthew. 26.
they are euerywhere unquiet gests. Sigismundus the Emperor could not sleep so
long as a chest full of gold remained in his bedchamber. Do thou glory in
form and fashion? in favor? Esaias 40.
in beauty? All flesh is grass, and the glory of it is as the flower of the
field. To day it flourishes, to morrow it vanishes. Do thou glory in thy
worldly wisdom and policy? The wisdom of the world is but foolishness
before the Lord. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom: Ier. 9.
Let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord which show mercy, judgment, Hest. 5.
and righteousness in the earth. Do thou glory with insolent Haman that
thou art in exceeding grace and favor with Assuerus the king, and can have
whatsoever thy heart does wish at his hands? Do thou in this thy loftiness
envy unto death godly Mardocheus, because he honors not thee which art in
thy self altogether unworthy of honor? His pride had a fall, his insolency
ended in ignominy and shame. Let such as are lifted up into such favor fear,
let them learn to be so much lowlier as they are higher than others,
remembering that the wrath of a prince is death, and what is more easily kindled
than wrath?

11 It is hard to bridle the hawtie affections of vaineglorious men. Vainglorie
hardly bridled.
This vanity staineth our best and purest actions; Our prayer, when we pray
that we may be seen and thought holy; our alms, when we give that we may
have a praise; our fasting, when we use it, either to merit unto our selves,
or thereby to seem devout unto others; our preaching, when we seek our own
commendation, when we study not so much to please God as men, when much
learning puffs us up, when we take a pride in our picked words and pleasant
utterance, when we rejoice with Herod to hear the people showte and cry The
voice of a God. Acts 12.
Thus as the goodliest trees in a garden are soonest blasted with red winds;
so men endued with the rarest qualities and best gifts are soonest infected
with this poison. That great and blessed Apostle himself was in some danger of
this disease. Wherefore thus he speaks, Least I should be exalted above
measure through abundance of revelations, 2. Cor. 12.
there was given unto me a sting in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me, that I might not be exalted above measure. He only was quite and clean
void of this sin, who is our example, who says in the Gospel, I do not
seek mine own glory.

The first mean to preserve unity is humblenes of mind.
being removed, S. Paul teaches in the last place by what means unity and
concord may be preserved. Wherein he sets down two strong preservatives.
The first is, In humbleness of mind every man to esteem others better than
himself. To esteem others better than our selves, is a lesson hard to be
learned, a lesson which never can enter into the brain of a proud hearted
man. And therefore S. Paul requires humbleness of mind in him that shall
thus frame and fashion his judgment: according to that whereunto he exhorts
in an other place, Walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called;
Ephesians. 4.
with all humbleness of mind and meekness, with long suffering, supporting
one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace. For upon whom shall the spirit of the Lord rest, but only upon
them that are humble and lowly? To whom should he give grace, but unto men of
a meek and gentle spirit? But there are sundry sorts of humility.

13 There is an humility which is constrained, Diverse kinds of humility.
an humility perforce, such as that whereof the Prophet says, The Lord
releeueth the meek and humbles the wicked to the ground. Psalm. 147.
Such are then humble only when God has humbled them by afflicting them.
There is a counterfeite humility, such as was in Absolon, when he stole away
the peoples hearts from the king. For it is the usual manner of some to bow
down themselves, Eccle. 19.
and to look most demurely, when their inward parts are full of deceit, and
their heads most occupied about wicked purposes. Again there is a
superstitious humility, Col 2.
such as that was, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, touch not the chalice, taste
not an egg in Lent, handle not the bread that by consecration is made holy;
which things had a show of religious holiness, but were in deed mere
daliances devised by Satan to no other end but only to noozle the deceived in
their blindness. But true humility is the lowliness of a pensive and
contrite heart. Luke 18.
This humility was in the Publicane, which thought so basely of himself that
he durst not lift up his eyes toward heaven: this humility was in Paul when
he confessed himself the least amongst the Apostles, 1. Tim. 1.
and the chiefest amongst sinners. A man of this disposition which thinks so
basely of himself will easily esteem others better than himself. But what?
Should a king then in dignity, place and authority prefer a mean artificer
or a daylabourer before himself? or should a wise man esteem a natural fool
wiser than himself? No. Saint Paul is no author of confusion, neither will he
in any wise have Gods good gifts debased. He descends not to these
extremities, but only persuades us not to think so arrogantly of our selves,
as in respect of our selves to condemn others. Every man has the mind of a
king in himself. Goliath thought bigly of himself, but of David how basely?
This selfeliking has infected and possessed all^flesh.

14 The way to redress it is to look upon our selves and upon others, The way
to redress that ouerweening which we have of our selves.
but not upon both with the same eyes; upon our selves with the eyes of strait
judgment, upon our neighbors with a favorable and a charitable eye.
Whosoever therefore thou art that despisest another, consider in thy self
these two things. First whatsoever thou have that good is, it is of God the
author of al goodness: and as all that thou have is from him, so to him thou do
stand accountable for it. Thou art but a steward of his goods, which will call
thee to a strict and a hard reckoning for every mite. If thou consider this
thou shall find small cause to boast and glory of thy self, but shall give
all glory to the king of glory. But open thine other eye and look down to
thy sins, there shall thou see an ouglie sight; thou shall be forced to leave
off glorying and to cry with the Prophet David, Psalm. 38.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too
heavy for me. Yea if thou rightly look upon thy sins, thou shall see in
that glass Gods face turned away from thee and his ears shut up against thy
prayers. Esaias 59.
Your iniquities, says God, have made a division between you and me. If thou
truly enter into thy self and consider of thy sin, thou shall say with the
prodigal child, Luc. 15.
Lord I am not worthy to be called thy son; Luc. 5.
and with Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinner; and with David, 2. Sam. 24.
It is I that have sinned, as for these sheep what have they done? Thou will
think of others as Saul did say of David, 1. Sam. 24.
Thou art more righteous than I. But the prince of darkness has dimmed, or
rather put out both these eyes; we can neither see our gifts that be good to be
of God, nor our sin as we should to be of ourselves, and therefore we esteem
most highly of our selves and most vilely of others. Which we would not do if
we did lovingly and charitably behold with reverence the graces and gifts of
God which are in them. For who is there in whom some commendable thing does
not appear? Lazarus seemed a contemptible thing in the eyes of that rich
glutton; yet was his patience to be preferred before the others riches. The
Publicane seemed ougly and odious to the Pharisee; yet his humbleness was much
more worthy praise than the others supposed purity and holiness of life.
There is no man so base but a charitable eye may find out in him some good and
precious thing. And no man may be despised in whom there is any appearance at
all of that which is good. At the least this we may see in all men, that they
show the workmanship of him which made them, they carry the image of him by
whom they were created; and in them which are our brethren, how high soever we
bear our heads, yet thus much we may consider more, that they are as dearly
bought as we, the precious blood of the son of God was shed for them as well
as for us, we have not a foot more than they in that eternal inheritance which
God has provided for his humble-minded children. If these considerations do
not make us to esteem others better than our selves, yet somewhat they will
abate and take down that proud humor which causes us to lift up our selves
so much above others. And as in looking upon our brethren we must have one eye
open to behold the graces of God which are in them, so the other must be shut
and closed up that those things wherein they are weak may be hidden. 1. Pet.
4.
For Charity does cover sins. There can be no charity in that man's heart
whose eyes are fed with beholding the infirmities of his brethren. Sem and
Iaphet turned away their faces when they went to cover their fathers
nakedness, for which charitable deed they received a blessing: but Cham for
looking upon his fathers fall brought a curse upon himself and his posterity.
To teach us that he which looks upon other men's faults with pleasure and
delight, does well deserve that other men should look upon his plagues
without compassion. S. Paul therefore would have us to be favorable censurers
of our brethren, ready to pardon scapes, Considering says he, Gal 6.
thy self least thou also be tempted. And it is a good meditation which
Augustine prescribes in these cases, Augustine.
Such we were or may be. Wherefore as Christ does not only cover our manifold
sins, but also forgive as it were and quite forget them: So let us, like good
and pitiful Surgions, hide the sores of our wounded brethren from the wind.
This the Law of charity and love requires, and this neither takes away the
sword from the magistrate nor yet the rod from the minister, but that each of
them severally according to the order of his vocation may punish sin as he
must pity sinners.

15 The other preservative of unity is, The second mean to maintain concord
is care not only for our selves but for others also.
Not to look upon our own things only, but every man upon the things of
others. These words do suffer a double exposition. They may be referred to
the words before by way of preoccupation, as if he should say, You think it
hard to prefer others before your selves, but you may make it easy. Look
not upon your own things, such as minister occasion of ouerweening, but look
upon the virtues, qualities and graces, that be in others. Another exposition
is to make this a proper mean to keep and conserve unity, rather than a way
only to diminish loftiness and pride: so that the words are to this effect,
Without unity there can be no Christianity, and a chief mean to live in
unity is that men be not every one for himself, but each careful to do
good to other, that we seek not greedily our own commodity and neglect the
commodity of our brethren. Love seeks not her own. But in these evil days
charity is grown so cold that every man's song is, I am nearest to my self.
Men scrape and scratch, they heap together and lay up for them and theirs,
but the bowels of tender mercy toward others are withered and dried up. Of
these selfeseekers we have too many examples. Genesis 34.
Of this crew were the Sichemites: for to obtain substance, wealth and cattle,
and friends, they sticked not to alter their religion. But whilst they thus
sought themselves they lost themselves. 1. Sam. 25.
Nabal was one of the same note, and the rich man whose heart was set only
upon the enlarging of his barnes was another.

16 There be that seem to be far from this fault and are not, Many seem
to have a care of others whose care in deed is for themselves.
that seem to look upon others but do it not with a single eye. And of this
kind I note four sorts. There be that give to others for a Ne noceat, which
although it be not simple, yet is it more sufferable than the rest. 2. Chron.
28.
Achaz spoiled the temple of God to give rewards to the king of Assyria, and so
bought his own quietness with a stolen price. Genesis 3^.
Yea Jacob is feign and glad to send his brother Esau great gifts, that he may
pass quietly by him without hurt. The needier sort are forced to consider of
the richer for their better safety. The poor servant in the Comedy
complains of it, It is a hard case, says he, that the poor must still offer
to the rich man's box. There be others that sometime look upon others with
some part of liberality. But either they do it to avoid an evil name, and
least they should be noted for niggards, or else they do it when it is wrung
out from them by clamor and importunity. The poor widow by weerying the
wicked Judge brought him at length to show her Justice. The Disciples may
seem to have had a spice of this fault by that speech of theirs concerning
the Cananite, Matthew. 15.
Send her away, she cries after us. Another sort give, not because they are
but because they would seem to be bountiful and liberal, as the Pharisees
which made a trumpet to be blown that men might know when they gave alms.
The last and woorst sort give, but they give to gain. Jason gave Antiochus the
king a graund sum of money. But he knew the office of the high Priest to be
well worth it.

17 Our Apostles meaning is not that we should in this wise consider one
another, Our care for others must be hearty and sincere, as Christ's is for us.
but he exhorts us syncerely, heartily, and in deed, to seek the commodity
and safety of others, even as Christ has sought ours. He sought not himself,
but being equal with God became man for us; and being Lord of all, for us
became a servant, to exalt us, he humbled himself; he made himself a
curse, to take away the curse which was due unto us. Let that affection
therefore be in us which was in him. He is our example. Him we must follow in
the path of his virtues if we will follow him in at the gate of his kingdom.
Every Christian ought so to be affected toward others that he may say with
S. Paul in synceritie and truth, I seek you, not yours.

18 Princes are not exempted from this rule of Christian duty. This care of
caring for others does principally concern Princes.
Love thy neighbor as thy self is spoken unto them. All Christians are our
neighbors which do need our help. To suffer such to perish for want of
help is to be guilty of their blood. Moses in consideration hereof, when he
saw an Israelite in danger to be murdered of an Egyptian, Exodus 2.
in defense of his brother slew the enemy of God. Genesis 14.
Abraham sat not still when Lot was in danger. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 15.
When the Christians were persecuted by the Persian, Constantinus wrote letters
in their behalf that they might peaceably enioie the freedom of their
conscience and the liberty of the Gospel. The same Emperor waged war against
Licinius his own sisters husband in the quarrel of the poor afflicted
Christians. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. vlt.
Constans likewise wrote a menacing letter to Constantius his brother, Theod.
l. 2. ca 9.
wherein he proclaimed open war against him, Socr. l. 2. c. 22.
unless he did presently surcease his enterprises against the Christians.
These zealous and worthy Princes being nearly touched with those afflictions
which others suffered for Gods cause, studied for their safety as for their
own. This they did for strangers: what would they have done if their subjects
had claimed succor at their hands? would they have put their own sheep in
the mouths of bloody and ravening woolues, which were so careful to deliver a
strange flock from the butchers knife? As it is treason for the subjects to
forsake their Prince, so for the Prince to forsake his subjects it is a fault
not sufferable. If Christ made himself poor to inriche us, if he humbled
himself to the death of the cross for our deliverance, when we were his
enemies held in captivity under sin and death, shall we spare our pains,
our purses, or our lives for the releeuing of our brethren the afflicted
members of Christ Jesus? It was a plain lesson which Mardocheus gave Queen
Hester, If she neglected the people of God, God would find a way to deliver
his people, but she and her fathers house should perish. Kings and Princes
should consider that they are Gods ministers, furnished with power and might
from above to stand with him against his enemies, to serve him both with
scepter and with sword, to be patrones and defenders of all his servant. It
is a glorious thing for a prince to fight as David did the Lords wars against
the Philistims, to be in the field under Christ's banner. But to draw in one
yoke with Infidels, to be in league with Antichrist, it is both an impious and
a base thing. 2. Reg. 8.
By ioining with Achaz Iehosaphat gained nothing, and Ochozias as little by
joining with Ioram. 2. Reg. 9.
Ioas and Iehu worthy princes regarded Gods cause, and had singular care of
the safety of their people: 2. Reg. 11.
the one took away that cruel murderer of the kings blood, 2. Reg. 9.
the conspiring and traitorous Queen Athalia, the other brake the neck of
that idolatrous, proud, and lascivious Queen Iesabel. Moses and David most
worthy princes looked not only on themselves, but provided for their
posterity, when the one appointed Joshua and the other Solomon to reign after
them. The prince that has not a special and singular care over his people,
has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

19 Neither does this concern the duty of Princes only, It concerns also
counselors, ministers, and generally all men.
but of Counselors also. Their care should be greater for the Prince and
common wealth than for their own commodity. I will not remember unto you
Codrus and Decius, Curtius, Brutus, with such like who loved their country
more than themselves. I will not put you in mind of those two precepts set down
by Tullie out of Plato, the one of not seeking for private commodity, the
other of not leaning to one part and neglecting another of the common wealth. I
like not so well to deal with profane things in this place; the word of God
being so plentiful and of great power to move the hearts of such as believe.
In the scriptures of God Counselors have examples laid before them of both
sorts; as well such as have referred all their counsels to their own private
gain, as also such as have faithfully employed their travels to the benefit
of others. 2. Sam. 17.
Achitophel being a man of a traitorous heart gave treacherous advise tending
to the kings confusion. But Chusa the Archite directed faithfully his counsel
to the safety of his Lord and Master the King. Let him be followed who is most
to be commended and was best rewarded. This lesson must be delivered unto them
also, which have charge to deliver it unto others. For woe be to those pastors
that feed themselves and not their flock. Paul had care of all Churches.
Christ preferred the safety of his flock before his own soul, he gave his
precious life for his beloved sheep. To be short this must teach every
member to travel for the benefit of the whole body, that the glory of God
may be sought of all; Which that all may seek syncerely and heartily, God the
Father grant for his Son our Saviors sake, to whom, etc.

The sixth Sermon. A Sermon preached before the Queen.
PSALM 86. 11 Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth.
I Will not meddle with the argument of this Psalm, A petition to be taught
the way of God, and a promise to walk in his truth.
nor make any general discourse of the whole: this one verse shall suffice,
being plentiful and rich in matter, most fit for these our times, and not
unfit for this most honorable audience: they are the words of a most worthy
prince, pertinent to all princes, and convenient for all Christians. This short
sentence consists partly of a petition, and partly of a promise. For first he
prays to be taught of God, secondly he promises to walk in his truth. In
the former part are these things chiefly to be considered, first a request to
be taught, Teach me; secondly to be taught of God, Teach me O Lord; thirdly
what he would be taught, Teach me thy ways.

2 The king in praying to be taught confesses his ignorance; In praying to be
taught he confesses his ignorance.
who is he that dare boast of knowledge? If S. Paul after so long study, and
after so many heavenly revelations did confess, We know in part; then the
best learned of all may learn. 1. Cor. 13.
Yea when a man has done his best, he must then begin again, as if all which
has been done already were in comparison of perfection nothing. It is too
much arrogancy in that proud man who thinks himself to have all knowledge
hid in the chest of his bosom, and all truth cheined to his tongue, so that
he can neither deceive nor be deceived. No man has attained to the knowledge
of any thing which will not confess with Socrates, This one thing I know that
I know nothing. 1. Cor. 10.
Brethren, says the Apostle, I would not have you ignorant. Ignorance is the
mother not of devotion, but of superstition; not of truth, but of error and
sin. If we desire therefore rather to walk in light than to dwell in
blindness, we must learn of this princely prophet to become scholars in Gods
school; 1. Reg. 3.
we must with Solomon prefer knowledge and wisdom before riches, honor and
long life.

3 God has appointed good means to lead men to knowledge: The means whereby
God does lead men to knowledge.
he has caused the scriptures to be written for our learning. Without the
knowledge whereof, neither can kings bear rule, Ios. 1.
neither subjects obey and live in order as they should. Wherefore Joshua was
commanded not to lay aside the volume of the Law at any time, Psalm. 119.
night nor day. The prophet David made it his continual study. The wisest
governors of Israel would not enterprise any matter of weight til they had
turned the leaves of this book, thence to take advice for their better
direction. This most precious jewel is to be preferred before all treasure. If
thou be hungry, it is meat to satisfy thee; if thou be thirsty, it is
drink to refresh thee; if thou be sick, it is a present remedy; if thou be
weak, it is a staff to lean unto; if thine enemy assault thee, it is a
sword to fight withal; if thou be in darkness, it is a lantern to guide
thy feet; if thou be doubtful of the way, it is a bright shining star to
direct thee; if thou be in displeasure with God, it is the message of
reconciliation; if thou study to save thy soul, receive the word ingrafted,
for that is able to do it: It is the word of life. Whosoever loves salvation will
love this word, love to read it, love to hear it; and such as will neither
read nor hear it; Christ says plainly they are not of God. For the spouse
gladly hears the voice of the bridegroom, John 10.
and my sheep hear my voice, says the prince of pastors.

4 But the world seems to be glutted with the word, The contempt of the
means whereby knowledge is attained.
there be many stomachs that cannot digest it, and many that loath it. I stand
in fear that God in his justice will give us instead of plenty of this bread a
famine; Luke 11.
and for wholesome food, meat that shall rot between our teeth. There is not
that desire in us to know the wisdom of Christ, which was in the Queen of
Saba to hear the wisdom of Solomon. There were of the Jews no small numbers
that heard Christ three days together in the wilderness, and that fasting:
but he has fed us so full that we care not for him. The servant of Solomon
were thought happy that they might stand daily to hear his wisdom. Happy it
were both for the servants of Solomon and for Solomon too: if but every
Sabbath they would hear him which is far both greater and wiser than
Solomon. There is no want except it be of willingness only: for both we have
leisure enough to hear, and there are store of them whom God has very well
enabled to speak. No time can be better spent, nothing more necessary for a
Christian Court. What more princelike than to honor the prince of all princes
with that service, wherein he is so highly delighted? The belly is daily and
daintily fed: O suffer not the soul to want that food which abides for ever.
They are not blessed that feed and pamper the flesh, Luke 11.
they are that hear the word and keep it. This word attentively and carefully
heard would convert our souls, correct our lives, soften our hearts, inflame
our minds with the love of God; it would root out vice and ingraft virtue;
banish vain and cherish good desires in us; it would lay our sins before our
faces, humble our proud and hawtie looks, bring us unto true and hearty
repentance, throw us down with godly sorrow, and raise us up again with
heavenly comfort in the merits and mercies of Christ Jesus; 2. Tim. 3.
it would perfectly perfect us unto every good work.

5 The Prophet, Unto knowledge prayer is as needful as meditation.
being inflamed with a desire of knowledge and understanding, saw no other
way to attain thereunto, but by joining with continual meditation earnest
prayer, Teach me thy ways O Lord, Give me understanding, Show me thy Law. He
knew that praying was as needful altogether as reading; that if there be any
difference at all, it is this, By praying we profit more than by reading.

6 As he desires to be taught, so it is especially to be noted that his
desire is to be taught of God. Teach thou me, O Lord. There is none that can
open the sealed book of God but only the Lion of the tribe of Judah, No man
learneth wisdom except God be his teacher.
the root of David, the Lamb of God. For Thou art worthy to take the book
and to open the seven seals thereof, Apoc. 5.
because thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy blood. It is he
that has the keie of David, which opens and no man shuts, shuts and no
man opens. For the outward reading of the word without the inward working of
his spirit is nothing. The precise Pharisees, the learned Scribes red the
Scriptures over and over again; they not only red them in books, but woore
them on their garments; they were not only taught, but were able themselves to
teach others. But because this heavenly teacher had not instructed them, their
understanding was darkened, their knowledge was but vanity, they were
ignorant altogether in that saving truth which the Prophet David is so
desirous to learn. The mysteries of salvation were so hard to be conceived of
the very Apostles of Christ Jesus, that he is forced many times sharply to
rebuke them for their dullness: which unless he himself had removed by
opening the eyes of their minds, Luc. 24.
they could never have attained to the knowledge of salvation in Christ Jesus.
Acts 16.
The ears of that woman Lydia would have been as close shut against the
preaching of Paul as any others, if the finger of God had not touched and
opened her heart. As many as learn they are taught of God, John 6.
and no man knows the father but he to whom it, pleases the son to reveal
him. There is but one teacher in the school of Christ: John 16.
he it is that leads unto all truth.

7 Now although Christ only opens the book of knowledge, Dangerous to
look for instruction by revelations.
gives understanding, and reuealeth unto us the will of his father; although
the spirit only be the schoolmaster that inwardly guides the heart in the
way of truth: yet may we not gape for revelations as the Anabaptists do, or
think that God has revealed unto us whatsoever we do vainly imagine and
conceive in our brains. For as there is a spirit of truth: so there is also a
lying spirit. S. John therefore gives us a caveat not to credit every spirit,
1. John 4.
but to try spirits whether they be of God or no. We are to be taught of God,
yet by such means as God has appointed. The rich man being in torments
craved revelations for his brethren, Luc. 16.
to whom it was answered, They have Moses and the Prophets. God does teach
inwardly, but by outward means. He spoke in old time by Angels, by dreams, by
visions, by revelations. But now in these latter days he has spoken by his
son, Acts 8.
and he by his ministers. Acts 10.
He taught the Eunuch, but it was by Philip; he taught Cornelius, Acts 9.
but it was by Peter; he taught Paul, but it was by Ananias.

8 But howsoever, The thing which the prophet desires to learn is the way of
the Lord.
or by whomsoever we taught, the thing which we must learn is the word of
God, not the decrees and decretals of Popes, not the quiddities of too curious
schoolmen, not lying legends, not amorous arts, not the dangerous discourses
of Politikes void of the fear of God, denying and defacing Christian
religion. This is not our school, these are not our studies. What we should
desire to learn the Prophet shows by the words following, Thy ways.

9 This word WAY by a translation or metaphor in the scripture has sundry
significations. The word WAY taken diversely in scripture.
Sometime it is taken for doctrine, as thou teach the WAY of God truly;
sometimes for religion, as when S. Paul says, Matthew. 22.
I persecuted this WAY; and again, According to this WAY which they call
heresy, Acts 24.
I woorship the God of my Fathers; sometimes it is taken for the course and
order of a man's life, Esaias 8.
as in the words of the Prophet Esaias, The Lord taught me that I should not
walk in the WAY of this people; sometimes for the counsels and purposes of
men, Job. 34.
so Elihu meant it, saying, His eyes are upon the WAYS of man, and he sees
all his goings. The way which the Prophet here would learn of God is true
religion, the doctrine of his holy will in his word revealed, but chiefly the
doctrine of the true Messiah promised, the way of truth it self, he only
being the way, the truth, and the life, having given us an example that we
should follow his steps who did no sin. Now as God has his way, Esaias 55.
so man has his. My ways are not your ways. The ways of Christ, and
Antichrist; of the Church of God, and the Synagogue of Satan; of religion, and
superstition; these are contrary each to other. Christ says of himself, I am
the way. In the knowledge of this way S. Paul glories, 1. Cor. 2.
I esteemed to know nothing but Christ Jesus and him crucified; and in the
knowledge of this way the Prophet desires to be taught of God, Teach me thy
way O Lord.

10 To this petition he adds a promise, first to walk, and secondly to walk
in truth. The promise of the prophet to walk.
We may not be idle; We are created unto good works which God has prepared
that we might walk in them. We are redeemed and bought with a price, Eph^s. 2.
not to do nothing or to live as we list, 1. Cor. 6.
but to serve him which has redeemed us. Our Savior could in no wise abide
idleness, Matthew. 20.
Why stand ye still? Saint Paul would have all men to be stirring, 1. Cor. 7.
Let every man walk. Not one is excepted, not one can be dispensed withal,
Whosoever he be that will not labor let him not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
For it is good that every man should eat his bread in the sweat of his
brows. And work in the wise man's judgment is even as needful for men as
meat. There is no such bane to a common wealth or kingdom, no such poison to
the manners of every particular man as idleness is. Examples we have too many
in all ages. Idleness in David was a cause of lewdenesse: so that it is not
good no not for Princes to be idle. Idleness was the root of all that filth
in Sodoma. Israel in the absence of Moses being idle, fell to feasting,
dancing, and idolatry. And therefore seeing that such as be idle are subject
to so many noisome temptations: S. Ieroms counsel is this, See thou be always
doing somewhat that the devil may find thee occupied: he that is out of good
exercise is easily snared of the devil. And idleness, says S. Bernard, is
the mother of toys (he might have said of vices) and the stepdame of virtues.
Amasis king of Egypt made provision by Law against idleness, once a year
calling every man to a reckoning what he had gotten, and what he had spent. In
this reckoning was neither the gain of carding, dicing, usury, briberie,
cousinage nor extortion allowed. Let every man walk in that vocation
wherewith God has called him. ^. Cor. 7.
God has called no man with these vocations. Yet dare I not say, neither will
I, that for any man, at any time, in any sort, to recreate himself with
cards or dise is sin. I am not of that opinion. Yet it falls out too often
that these exercises are occasions of much sin. And when they are so, it were
no doubt much better to be altogether idle than so ill occupied. We must not
play, but walk.

11 And least in walking we should wander out of the way, Our walking must be
in truth.
the Prophet now teaches us wherein we should walk. In truth. We must beware
of crooked bywalkes, the way of the Lord is the strait path of truth.
Therefore the Prophet makes this promise, I will walk in thy truth. Truth
comprehends both soundness of doctrine, and integrity of life. Solomon
declares that David walked after this sort, 1 Reg. 3.
My father walked in truth and justice before thee. In truth of doctrine, and
in justice of life. He faithfully performed his promise unto the Lord.

12 S. Paul complains grievously of some walkers. Walking in heresy.
Many there are, says he, that walk, of whom I have told you often, and now
tell you weeping. Phil. 3.
They are enemies of the cross of Christ. The cross of Christ is taken here
for the passion of Christ, which suffered on the cross. Whosoever offers up
Christ again once offered and sacrificed for our sins, he is an enemy to
the cross of Christ. To seek remission of sins, redemption, justification,
satisfaction or salvation elsewhere than in Christ crucified, is to be an
enemy to the cross of Christ, and to walk not in the high way of truth, but
in the bypathes of wicked men.

13 S. Paul notes other bywalkers, Walking after the flesh.
which walk according to the flesh. In this byway walked the Sodomites, the
Beniamites, yea and David sometimes himself. Gal. 5.
This was the bypath of the rich glutton, which fed daintily day by day, whose
God was his belly, he served no other Lord. In this byway walk all wantons,
flatterers, liars, envious persons, stirrers of strife, makers of division,
sectaries and such like. The end also of this way is perdition.

14 Ezechiel complains of walkers, Walking after covetousness.
which walk after covetousness. This path is haunted of all sorts of men,
priests, prophets themselves, Ezech. 33.
and prophets children, yea kings have been subject to this fault. They are
most miserable which take this way. They enioie no quietness, they tire out
themselves with foolish cares, they entangle their hearts with noisome lusts,
they grieve the spirit, their toil and vexation has neither end nor measure.
The prophet therefore beggeth at the hands of God, Psalm. 119.
Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

15 Jeremy complains of walkers in the hardness of their hearts. Walking in
obstinacy.
They have hearts trampled on with the feet of men, and made as hard as a
beaten way. Ierem. 13.
They are become as obstinate against the word and message of God as ever was
Pharao. There is planted a prejudice in them from which they cannot go back.
No enchauntment be it never so wise can have any force upon them, their ears
are so cunningly and so closely stopped.

16 David complains of such walkers as are led by the counsel of the wicked,
Walking in the counsel of the wicked.
as Eve by the serpent, Absolon by Achitophel, Saul by Doeg, Psalm. 1.
Roboam by a train of lewd companions rash heads. The way of all these
ungodly ones shall perish.

17 There is also another kind of inordinate walkers complained of by the
Apostle, Walking with the tongue.
which work not at all, but under pretense of zeal and religion, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
forsake all labor, and occupy their heads wholly with searching and sifting
other men's doings, their tongues only with barking against such as God has
placed in authority, their ears, with nothing but listening after strange
and new reports. These are spreaders of brutes, brochers of news, informers
of men how the world shall wagge. They are still beating and forging out new
plots of common wealths, and undermining the old. They are one of the woorst
kinds of men that live. The unbridled malapertnesse of such men the prophet
David seems to touch when he says, Psalm 73.
The tongue of them walks throughout the earth. They make no difference of
any person high or low, they stay no where. David though a king, Paul though
an Apostle, Christ though the son of the living God, escaped not the reach of
these venomous creatures. Such walking tongues would be tied short. If men
cannot bridle them, yet of this we are sure, that Slaundering and lying lips
the Lord will destroy.

18 Jeremy complains also of certain walkers, Walking in treachery.
whom he terms rebellious traitors walking craftily: flattering them whom
they purpose to undermine. Ier. 6.
These be cunning courtlike men, whose countenance will never bewraie that
which lies secretly hid within their hearts. 2. Sam. 16.
Of this crew was Siba, who pretended great good to his master Mephiboseth, but
spying a time begged his whole inheritance of the king; And Herod that fox,
which made a show of religious worshipping him whom his meaning was cruelly to
destroy; 2. Sam. 3.
And Ioab which fraudule^tly bare Abner in hand that he came to talk with him
as a friend, but getting opportunity stabd him to the heart; Genesis 34.
And the sons of Jacob who under pretense of friendship, marriage, and ioining
in religion with the Sichemites, caused them to be circumcised, and when they
were sore fell upon them and murdered them without compassion or pity. Let no
man defraude or circumuent: for the Lord is the auenger of all such things. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
But, as S. Paul faith, What should I say more? Time would be too short if I
should remember unto you all the bywaies wherein the wicked do walk.

19 The prophet David seems to be much grieved at the great swarms of bad
walkers in his days. The preferment of evil men ye cause why evil walkers
do abound in the Clergy.
The wicked, says he, do walk on every side. And he yields the reason,
Because they are exalted. When bad men are placed in great roumes, when the
base are exalted and lifted up into places of authority, then the bounds of
wickedness are enlarged, Psalm. 12.
and sin going on without controlement gathers strength. Christ therefore
requires careful choice of ministers in his church, his desire is to have
them faithful and wise. Paul would place none but such as were well testified
to be blameless in life, and apt to teach with wholesome doctrine. The
admitters of ministers are too lavish in our days, they have little regard or
care whom they take; S. Paul's lesson, Lay not hands on any man rashly, 1. Tim.
5.
is forgotten. The preferrers unto livings are no less faulty, they choose of
the woorst, they respect no ability but of the purse. What numbers are there
placed this day in the church, 2. Mac. 4.
as Jason and Menelaus were placed by Antiochus in the priests office, not for
learning, but for money; not for desert, but for reward? It goes full hardly
with the church of God when Balam is the Bishop, Judas the Patron, and Magus
the Minister. This merchaundise will make the house of God a den of thieves.
No one thing this day more necessary to be reformed in the church of God.

20 It were happy if the temporal policy were faultlesse in this behalf, In
the temporaltie the reason why wicked men abound is because wicked men bear
rule.
and in choice respected only the worthiness of such men as are chosen to
bear office in the common wealth, The Prince, as Iethro said truly, cannot
bear the burden of the common wealth alone. The prince must needs have
inferior officers as eyes to see withal, ears to hear withal, tongues to
speak withal, hands to work withal, shoulders to bear up the burden
withal, and legs also to walk withal. If the eyes be blinded or look
asquint, if the ears be deaf or hard of hearing, if the tongue cannot speak
or else do stammer, if the hands be nummed, the shoulders weakened, and the
legs lamed, it must needs make a lamentable body and a monstrous common
wealth. For such guides, such people. If officers be ill chosen, men of small
wit and less wisdom, weak hearted and feeble handed, men not religious but
popish, not favorers but haters of the Gospel, lovers not of truth but of
themselves, partially affected, corruptly minded, such as be mates with
thieves, partakers of spoils with extortioners, maintainers of evil men and of
evil matters, having their share with malefactors, pretending justice and
doing manifest wrong, not haters of covetousness but takers of bribes,
lingering out causes that are brought before them in hope of commodity,
dispatching no matter but for money, such as are not ashamed to suck profit
with Vespasian from the homeliest things, such as would sell their very souls
for money, such as will not stick if nothing else may be had to cut off even
the coats of men by the skirtes, if such be exalted is it marvel if the
wicked do walk on every side? King David was so careful of this that he
would not suffer a wicked person, a backebiter, an hawtie hearted man, a
subtle deceiuer, a flatterer or a liar to remain in his Court. Constantius
would not suffer a dissembler in religion, a seruer of times, a nullifidian, an
Atheist, an Idolater to be about him. For so it has been always and so it
will be, when the vile are in credit wicked men will hold up their heads,
they will band themselves in companies, all corners will be pestered with them.

21 Wherefore it greatly behooves them that are in highest authority to bear
a watchefull eye over those which deal in causes of importance under them,
Church-robbers under the name of Church-visiters.
that such bywalkers be not countenanced with authority as they are that trot
from one Diocese to another prying into Churches. The pretense is reformation,
but the practice is deformation. They reform not offenses, but for money
grant licenses still to offend. These Surueyers are spoilers of the patrimony
of Christ. Exodus 36.
When Moses took upon him to build the ark of God, the princes and the
people so plentifully of their own accord gave gifts thereunto, gold, silver,
precious stones, skarlet, silk and Cedar, that Moses was forced to make
proclamation and cry, Sufficit. It is enough. I shall most humbly beseech our
most mild Moses the Queens Majesty, and that in the blood and bowels of
Jesus Christ, as her Highness tendereth the glory of God and the continuance
of learning and religion, and her own salvation, to make proclamation not to
the arke-builders, but unto these church-robbers to stay their hands. Truly
Sufficit. It is enough. For there is no more to be had, except, as the prophet
speaks, they will put their very skins off their-backes. Woe be to that
common wealth where they are made overseers and examiners of other men's ways,
whose own footsteps are uneven. May not the wicked be bold to walk on every
side when so vile persons do bear such sway?

22 But the way wherein the prophet promises to walk is truth. It is not
sufficient to talk of truth; we must walk in it.
I will walk in thy truth: I will embrace it with my heart, I will frame my
life after it, I will profess it syncerely and be zealous for it. I will not
be a knower but a doer of thy Law. They which know it and do it not, deserve
not praise but stripes. For Christianity does not consist in loud and shrill
crying, Lord Lord, but in doing the will of our heavenly father. This touches
us very near, which content our selves with the bare profession of the name of
Christ, as if it were sufficient to make a flourishing show as trees do which
are fair to the eye but fruitelesse. The Gospel of Christ has been long
taught amongst us, we have long heard it, the sound has filled our ears, but
whose heart has it pierced? whose life has it bettered? Sin is sharply
reproved; yet iniquity does still abound. We have often promised with the
prophet saying, We will walk in truth, but we never set forward. Toward God
we are hypocrites, toward men deceitful, double faced, double tongued, double
hearted. Where should one find a faithful man? It is to us that the prophet
Esaias speaks, Esaias 48.
Hear this O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are
come out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord and make
mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, not in righteousness. We are
very counterfeites, we use religion but for a policy and for a cloak; we
talk, we hear, we pray, we fast; but what truth, what synceritie is there
in our doings? We would seem to seek reformation in religion; the pretense
is good, many things may be bettered, and we ought to strive unto better
things; but God grant that we have not a meaning rather to part the garments
of Christ amongst us. We will seem to be careful of civil reformation, and
to desire that all abuses in the common wealth may be redrest. But our intent
is in deed to make our gain by corrupt and partial execution of penal
statutes, our purpose is only to benefit our selves by pinching others, and
by impouerishing many to inriche a few. Thus the world is full of bywayes; and
they are many that walk corruptly. Yea we have all declined, every one has
stepped aside; from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is no
soundnes. Prince and people, and priest and prophet, all have straied from the
way of truth, though not all alike.

23 Let us therefore return from the paths of iniquity, This duty belongs
unto all, but principally to such as are in authority, because what way they
take in the same others will tread after them.
let us inquire after the good way that we may walk in it. Let us not make
courtesy who shall begin, but strive rather every man to be first; the
pastor, because he has the greatest skill; the prince, because he has the
highest room, the people, because they are most in number. If the pastor go
before, the sheep will be the readier to follow after; if the fountains be
sweet, the rivers that flow from them will not be sour; if there be
darkness in the hills, there will be more in the valleies, if those that
should give light unto others be turned into darkness, how great shall the
darkness of others be? Examples have a marvelous force to lead men. The
whole world is led as they have others especially their superiors for examples.
And therefore you that be chiefest in authority should by reason be foremost
in the way of truth. Walk in what way you will, you are sure to have
followers. Josias walked in the strait way to heaven, and the people
followed; Jeroboam in the broad way, and the people were carried after in
heaps. If you live in security careless for Gods matters, careless for the
causes of the common wealth, careful to feed upon pleasures and fancies,
careful to pass over your own times in ease and quietness, the people will
easily take after your, your towns and cities will soon be made like to that
secure and careless city of Lais. If ye will have the people of the Land
watchful, you your selves must not slumber. If you make light of the word of
God, the people will learn by your example to despise it; if you embrace the
truth, they also will love it. You my Lords, you whom God has placed before,
you must go before: for Gods love strive no longer, take your places and go
on that the people of God being guided by you as by lights may follow after in
the way of truth. It is a monstrous thing to see the basest lives in the
highest roumes. Your conversation must be a glass for others to look into.
Others shall answer for their own faults, but you for your own faults, and
for others, who through your example are faulty. To conclude, let us all so
walk as becomes the children of the light; let it suffice that in times past
we have walked according to the vanity of the Gentiles; let us now return
unto the Lord; let us cast away impiety and worldly concupiscence, and live a
sober, a righteous, and a godly life; let us with true repentance crave pardon
and mercy at the hands of God, and hereafter walk humbly before him, not for
a day, or for a month, or a Lent season, but continually all the days of our
pilgrimage upon earth. He only shall be saved that continues walking in
truth to the end. God for his mercy sake let fall plentifully the drops and
dew of his heavenly grace upon the hill of Hermon, and the mountains of Sion,
to the fruitful watering of the whole Land of Israel. Teach us, O Lord, even
our princes, our prophets, and our people thy ways, direct all our goings,
that we may walk for ever in thy truth. This that we may do all and every
of us in our several callings, God the father grant for his Son Christ's
sake, to whom, etc.

The seventh Sermon. A Sermon preached before the Queen.
IAC. 4. 8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your
hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye double minded.

9 Suffer affliction, and be sorry, Weep. Let your laughter be turned into
mourning: and your jot into heaviness.

10 Cast down your selves before the Lord: and he will lift you up.


GOD requires in his household steward the minister of his blessed word
fidelity and discretion: The wisdom that should be in teachers to apply
rightly the words of doctrine and exhortation. In th^s exhortation of (...).
fidelity, to deliver to Gods family such meat without mingling as he has
received at his Lords hands; discretion, to give it fitly in due season, by
respecting the time, place, auditorie, and like circumstances. Al men are not
of one kind of constitution. Some are able to receive and digest strong meat,
James three things contained.
high mysteries, deep secrets of God: Others must be fed with milk, simple
and plain lessons, Heb. 5.
yet available to their salvation. These differences are in the food it
self. The manner of dividing it stands in doctrine, and exhortation. Doctrine
is for the ignorant to instruct them: exhortation for the learned, to monishe
and strengthen them: both may most profitably be joined together. Paul having
to do with the ignorant Gentiles (learned in profane arts; but barbarous in
true religion) is full of doctrine. James dealing with the learned Jews
traueileth more in exhortation. Our times are learned times; 1. Cor. 1.
God has blessed our days with understanding; We are enriched by him in all
speech and in all knowledge. But we know, and do not, and that deserves
stripes. Miserable is it to be ignorant of Christ, not to know the path which
leads to heaven. Yet better it were not to know the way of truth than not to
walk in it being known. I will therefore follow the wisdom of S. James,
and with his own words exhort you, Draw near to God and he will draw
near to you, etc. In which words first he exhorts us to draw near unto
God; secondly he shows us the means how we may so do; lastly he tells
what commodity we shall reap thereby.

Sinners are exhorted to draw near to God.
Sinners are such as be notable and open offenders: who make all the world
witnesses of their wickedness. Marie Magdalene is called a sinner because she
was known to be a great offender, Behold a woman that was in the City a
sinner. Luc. 7.
The Sodomites, and the Amalechites, Genesis 18.
are likewise termed sinners for the excessiveness of their sin, 1. Sam. 15.
because their sins were notorious and manifest. Double hearted men are
hypocrites resembling painted sepulchers, beautiful without, and within full
of rottenness; such as say, and do not; pretending holiness for advantage,
and working mischief in their hearts.

3 This exhortation is general, All are sinners, though not all notorious.
it reaches to all: for we are al offenders even against the majesty of
almighty God; although not all in the same degree. Romans 3.
All have sinned and do need the glory of God. Every man's ways are corrupt.
Genesis 8.
The imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth. What man living
can say My heart is pure? Between an open sinner and an hypocrite there is a
difference in their sight which take them as they seem; there is no difference
before God, who beholds them as they are. As God will not hear the prayer of
the open obstinate sinner: so does he power his grievous curse upon all
hypocrites and counterfeite Christians, Matthew. 23.
Woe be to you ye hypocrites.

4 David when he committed that great folly was an open sinner and gave great
offense. David an open sinner in committing adultery.
It was told him by Nathan, Thou have made the Lords enemies to blaspheme.
Marriage is honorable in the sight of all men, 2. Sam. 12.
but fornication and adultery the Lord does abhor, and the offenders therein
the Lord shall judge. This one sin drowned the whole world, Genesis 6.
it called fire out of heaven to burn up cities, Gen 19.
it destroyed the Tribe of Benjamin. Ephe. 5.
Let it not be once named amongst you. They that are such shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. These foul offenders are here termed Sinners.

5 The Jews were grievous sinners which slew their Prophets, The Jews, in
cruel dealing with the Prophets of God.
and stoned such as were sent unto them. But they escaped not his heavy hand
whose servant they did so cruelly entreat. God plagued this their sin with
strange desolation. He made their house like Shilo, and their city a curse to
all the nations of the earth. The Lord has also sent wise men Scribes and
Ambassadors unto us: of them in these our days we have killed and crucified
none; we have scourged none of them in our Synagogues; we have persecuted none
from city to city; we have not beaten one, and stoned another; we have not
dealt thus cruelly with any one of them; but we have dealt hardly and
unkindly with more than one. No man's life has been touched: many men's livings
are. They have not been murdered and slain; they are defaced, reviled, and
made contemptible to the whole world. These messengers ought to be better
esteemed for their masters, and for their message sake. But the son of God
whose servants they are, will in his good time revenge it: he will not bear
this injurious ignominy done to himself. He that despises you despises me.
Such contemners of Christ and of his ministers may most justly be called
Sinners.

6 Achab gave great and open offense in robbing Naboth of his vineyard: Achab,
in robbing Naboth. 1. Reg. 22.
And God did revenge this open sin with an open plague; punishing the
deuourer, with deuourers; blood, with blood. The vineyard of the Lord is set
over to the spoil, it is the only pray that is left for greedy cormorants to
raven upon: The hedge is broken, wild boares are entered in for to destroy it.
If God had not set his elect over it, no doubt ere this day it had been
utterly laid wast. You could have looked for no grapes of piety, of learning
or of religion of it: but being rooted up by these violent boares it would
have brought out nothing but sowthistles, ignorance, Esaias 33.
superstition, and gross Idolatry. But, Woe be to thee that spoilest: shall
not thou be spoiled? How both the Church and common wealth are spoiled, all men
see it, but few will tell it, and no man goes about to redress it. These
greedy gleaners are also in the number of them whom our Apostle here names
Sinners.

7 The sin of king Saul was heinous, Soul, in consulting with a witch.
in consulting with a witch that had a familiar spirit, inquiring of her what
chance should befall him. 1. Sam. 28.
This grievous sin God grievously, and without delay plagued. On the next
morrow he and his sons were slain; all Israel discomfited, murdered, and
put to flight. If every good gift come from God: shall we seek help at
devils hands? If only God knows the heart of man and things to come; shall
we inquire of secrets at the mouth of Satan? The devil is a liar: John 8.
and shall we believe him? He is our adversary: and shall we seek aid of
him? 1. Cor. 26.
He is a deceiuer: and shall we trust in him? There is no fellowship between
Christ and Beliall: neither ought the servant of Christ to communicate with
such servant of Satan. Leuit. 20.
Let witches, sorcerers, and sowthsaiers die the death says the Lord. Such as
communicate with them communicate with devils, and such also are Sinners.

8 Doeg sinned greatly in accusing faithful David, Doeg, in accusing David and
Abimelech unjustly.
and the good high Priest A^imelech to king Saul, who being light of belief
persecuted the one, and murdered the other. Haman dealing so with godly
Mardocheus brought him almost to the gallows, 1 Samuel 22.
and his people to great confusion. Hest. 3.
The Arrians accused the right Christian Bishop Athanasius of incontinencie
before the Emperor Constantinus: but his innocence, through the providence of
God cleared him. Mat^h. 11.
Christ was charged to be a drunkard, a companion of sinners, a destroier of
the Law and of the Temple, an enemy to Caesar. Such false accusations are
more current in these our evil times and latter days than ever. If the
Heathen accounted it a discredit to be termed an accuser, may we not justly
call false accusers sinners? By whose means, if false accusations may get
credit, innocence shall be condemned, Christ shall be crucified as a
malefactor, and Barrabas as an innocent shall be let loose. Wherefore the
Civil Law has well provided that the false accuser receive as much damage as
he seeks to bring upon an other. And this Law has been sometimes executed.
Eus. lib. 5. ca. 21.
He that falsely accused Appollonius was so served. For failing in his proof,
sentence was given that both his thighs should be broken. This is another
kind of Sinners.

9 Now as our Apostle remembers unto us open sinners: Double minded men.
so does he also covert sinners, whom he calls double minded. The Sichemites
were double minded in matters of religion, Gen 34.
who in respect of gain and profit were content outwardly to yield to Jacob
and his sons, to receive the Jews religion, and to be circumcised. Men for
commodity can transform themselves into all colors and conditions, and in
open show profess any religion, inwardly keeping their false hearts to
themselves.

10 Which practice the Family of love has lately drawn to a precept, Such
are they of the family of love.
and has newly broached it as saleable doctrine, that men need not openly be
of any religion whereby they may endanger themselves: that it is good
Christiandome to lie, swear and forswear, to say and unsay to any saving such
as be of the same Family, with whom they must only use al plainnes and keep
their mysteries secret from all others to themselves. These men may do any
thing to avoid affliction, and they have scripture for that purpose: 1. Cor. 6.
Your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost: you may not suffer Gods
temples to be touched. As fitly alleged as Scriptum est by the devil.

11 In a paper which of late came from the Pope as a token to his dear
children, Such they which term themselves the only Catholics.
there were printed the five wounds of Christ with this poesy, Fili da mihi
cor tuum and sufficit; Son, give me thy heart and it suffices. Whether his
Holiness did mean thereby to allow dissimulation or no, I will not define.
His practices are mystical, and his brood is so thoroughly framed in this way,
that they seem to take the Popes emblem in no other meaning. They halt on
both sides, they serve all times, and turn with all winds. By professing all
religions, they show themselves plainly to be of none. They have double hearts,
one heart for the Prince, another for the Pope; one for Christ, and an other
for Baal; one for a Communion, and an other for a Mass. These dissembling
wolves put upon themselves sheep skins, to deceive withal. Now are they
mild and gentle, flattering and promising all loyalty to the prince,
conformity to government, and consent to religion. But if the times should
turn, they would turn off the sheep coat and play the wolf in his right
kind. They would show their ravenous nature by their cruel deeds; then
would they fill their bellies with that, after which they now thirst; they would
find swift feet to shed the blood of innocents. From the mouth of the Lion O
Lord deliver us. This sort of people our Apostle calls double hearted.

12 Herod was a double hearted man, Such a one Herod, Caine, Ioab, Absolon,
Matthew. 2.
who calling the wise men to him, bad them go and search out Christ, return
and bring him word, that he also might go and worship him. He intended to kill
whom he pretended to worship. Judas was like affected, Matthew. 26.
he kissed and betrayed. Genesis 4.
Cains mind was as double, when he spoke fair unto his brother, entised him
into the field, and there villanously murdered him. Ioab dealt even so with
Amasa and Abner, 2. Sam. 2.
whom under pretense of friendship traitorously he slew. Absolon invited his
brother Ammon to a feast, and in the midst thereof suddenly bereaved him of
his life. 2. Sam. 13.


13 These double hearts died not with these men; Such are all they toward God
who profess the truth in word and in life deny the power of it; toward men,
they which fawn upon them whom in heart they abhor.
they live still in their posterity. With Herod all men pretend to woorship
Christ, but most part also with Herod in truth, in heart, in life kill him,
and trample under their feet the precious blood of his Testament. Whom we
profess in word we deny in deed, who^ in doctrine we follow him in life we
forsake. Thus in doubleness with Judas we flatter, we dissemble, we courtesy,
we kiss: but the inward heart is full of malice and treason. Faithful
friendship has taken his flight away, There is no truth in the earth. We
speak them full fair whom we hate full deadly. Whom we kiss we can sell to
death for a piece of money. Judges can talk of justice, and for money pervert
judgment. For money the vineyard of the Lord is laid wast by them who
profess themselves the keeepers of it. By them for money the flock of Christ
is scattered and left to the wolf to be devoured. For money an Idol is made
a pastor: Judas sells, Magus buyeth, and a thief by a thief is placed.
Beware of these double hearted men. Cain is a murderer speak he never so
fair. If Absolon feast thee, yet fear least thou find sour sauce to thy
sweet meat. The bond of brotherhoode is not of strength sufficient to retain
these double hearts. Take heed of Ioab howsoever he fawn: for he carries
inwardly a big and hawtie mind. It is death to him that any should be in
credit or direct David besides himself. He must do all alone. His outward
speech is fair, but his inward thought is full of hatred, envy and wrath.

14 Such as the fountain is such is the river that runs from it. Double
minded men are also commonly double tongued.
A double heart makes a double tongue. They which think deceitfully speak
deceitfully, and flatter with their lips. The Disciples of the Pharisees and
the Herodians as they had double hearts, Psalm. 12.
so had they double tongues. Before Christ's face they could say, Matthew 22.
Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest for any man, nor respectest the person of men. Luc. 7.
But behind his back they termed him a seducer, a companion of Publicanes and
sinners, a wine bibber, and most spitefully railed against the righteous Lord
of glory. All flatterers are double tongued. Whom they praise excessiuely
being present, of him their manner is being out of sight to speak most
slanderously and vilely. So unlike they are to our Savior Christ, who would
not praise John to John's Disciples, but after their departure commended him to
the people. It is Saint Augustines judgment, that the hand of no persecuter is
more grievous than is the tongue of a flatterer.

15 These sinners and double hearts our Apostle does here reprove: All these
are exhorted to draw near unto God.
using withal and earnest exhortation unto them to draw near unto God, from
whom they have so far straied. All sinners are straiers: for sin makes a
division between God and man. Esaias 59.
Your iniquities have made a separation between me and you. To sin is to
depart and fall away from God: The more we sin, the faster and farther we
fly from him. Judas sinned deeply and deadly: having sinned he could not
abide the presence of that innocent whom he had betrayed: but went out and
unrecoverably fell away. The prodigal child being loosely given, waxed weary
of his fathers virtuous house, raunged abroad, fell to folly, fed on
filthiness, and bathed himself in all loathsome sin: yet being touched with
Gods hand, he repented and drew near. What should I name this or that man
which has gone astray? It is most true that the Prophet says, We have all
erred and gone astray like sheep. Not one has remained within the sheepefold.
Every one has either skipt over the hurdles, or crept through the hedge. All
have sinned, Romans 3.
there is not one innocent. He that says he is no sinner is a sinner because
he is a liar. Our sin therefore has separated us from God, who hates and
abhors sin. Our doubtful double hearts have carried us into many crooked
and dangerous ways. Our Apostle does call us home again, as sheep that have
strayed, saying, Draw near unto God.

16 But what, To draw near unto God is not in our power without his grace.
is it in our own will and power to return? or does God command that which
is impossible for us to perform? Truth it is, All our sufficiency is of God.
Of our selves we are not able to think a good thought. It is God that gives
both to will and to perform. 2. Cor. 3.
Without me, says Christ, you are able to do nothing. No doubt we have power
and free will to run from God, Phil. 2.
but to draw near unto him is his grace and gift. Ang. de can. no. cap. 8.
Ad malum sufficit sibi liberum arbitrium; ad bonum, non. Freewill has in it
self ability enough to evil but not to good. He commands us therefore to
do that, which of our selves we are not able to do; that seeing our want, we
may crave his grace and help, which will enable us to draw near unto him.
This grace is not in vain: by it we are, that we are; when we be, as we should
be, near unto him. If he that commands us do not reach us his hand, when we
are bidden to draw near we go farther off. But let God give that which he
commands, and then command whatsoever he will. Convert us O Lord, Psalm. 19.
and we shall be converted. If he convert us not, we shall remain as we are,
John 6.
or rather proceed to worse. No man comes unto me, says Christ, except the
father draw him. The spirit and grace of God of untoward and unwilling makes
forward and ready; and so by the efficacy of the spirit being changed, we
which were far off are drawn near.

The way to draw near unto God our Apostle sets down at large, The way
how to draw near unto God.
Cleanse your hands, purge your hearts, be afflicted, mourn, weep, let your
laughter be turned into sorrow, and your tote into grief. Humble your selves
in the sight of the Lord: Esaias the Prophet teaches the selfsame in few
words, Esaias 55.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord: S. Paul means the same thing, Tit. 2.
when he speaks of denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living
soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world. Mark 1.
But our Savior Christ shuts up the whole in one word Repent.

18 The order of our repentance set down by the blessed Apostle is this. Our
hands must be cleansed.
First of all we must remove evil from us. Cleanse your hands, purge your
hearts; wash and scowre both body and soul; make you selves clean, both from
outward and inward sins. For it is not sufficient to abstain from evil in
our external actions, but we must also chase from our hearts evil cogitations.
Luc. 18.
The proud Pharisee seemed to have a pure life, but he had a polluted heart.
If the fountain and spring be not pure and sweet: the rivers that issue from
it must needs be unsavory. Matthew. 15.
From the heart there proceed evil cogitations, murders, adulteries,
fornications, false witnessings, reuilings. These are the fruits of an impure
heart: and these are the works of unclean fingers. The hand is but the
servant to execute that which the heart has devised. It was folly in Pilate
to wash his hands in token of his purity, when his heart had consented to shed
the blood of that Innocent.

19 The hand has sundry significations in the scriptures. Hand taken for
counsel.
Sometime it is taken for counsel, 2. Sam. 14.
as, Is not the hand of Ioab with thee in all these things? Acts 4.
And again, They met together to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel had
before decreed to be done. Evil hands are the breeders of al mischievous
practices: but such counsel is commonly woorst to the giver. David prayed to
God, to confound the traitorous counsel of Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17.
who conspired against his master and king. And it came to pass that his
fingers did knit a roape about his own traitorous throat to strangle himself
withal. It is written of David, that he fed his people in the singlenes of his
heart, and led them forth in the discretion of his hands. The sword of
government is an edged tool: it requires the hand of wise counsel
discreetely to weeld it. 1. Reg. 12.
Roboam being guided by the unwise hands of those lusty young Counselors, who
advised him to oppress his people with heavy burdens, to bring them into
bondage, and to give them short and sharp answers, wrought in the people
discontented minds, alienated their hearts from their Prince, which in the end
was the tearing of his kingdom into pieces. Of twelve parts he lost ten and
better.

20 The word Hand is also taken for cruelty and oppression, Handesfull of
blood.
because the hand is the instrument to work these things. Your hands, Esaias 1.
says the Prophet, are full of blood. Such hands had Herod. And such have they
not only which kill, but which hate, malice, and slander their brethren. For
he which hates his brother is a manslaier.

21 Finally because the hand works most of all the members of the body in the
necessary actions of man's life: All pollutions under the name of unclean
hands.
therefore all pollutions in our outward deeds are contained in the name of
unclean hands.

22 The slanderer and libeller has bloody hands, Slander.
his tongue cutteth like a sharp rasor: his pen writes in blood. For he
kills whom he defameth.

23 The oppresser with his bloody fingers pulls the skin off the peoples
backs. Oppression.
Aemilius being placed by Tyberius Caesar over Egypt, oppressed the Egyptians
with great and unwonted exactions. The Emperor hearing of it was wroth, and
wrote unto him, That he would have his sheep to be shorn, but not flaied.
Such oppressers of the people greatly wrong the Prince, who being faultlesse
yet is forced to bear the burden of that blame. Such gleaners of other men's
goods and pillars and purloiners, although they join house to house, yet the
foundation of them being laid in blood, that building shall not continue. That
which comes ill shall go worse away: They loose as much in their consciences
as they gain in their cofers.

24 Rewards likewise do not only blind the eyes, Bribes.
and pervert the words, but they also defile the hands of the wise and
righteous.

25 All such as enter into the Church of GOD by corrupt means, S^monie.
defile their hands and destroy their souls. That says S. Ambrose, which the
man gave when he was ordained Bishop, was but gold, and that which he lost, was
his soul.

26 The usurer does so mire his fingers in money, Usury.
that with his foul filthy fists he can never take hold upon the tabernacle
of God.

27 It were infinite to go through all particulars. Our hands foul eue^
We defile our hands, when they are cleanest.
whenever our actions are corrupted, infected, and polluted with sin; seem
they unto us never so perfect, holy, and good. Things highly esteemed before
men are found to be as vanity before God. Esaias 64.
Our very righteousness in his sight is polluted. Yea many times, even when
we do good, then we do ill: In our prayer, by coldness; in our alms deeds,
by vaineglorie; we defile the hands which we lift up unto God, and put forth
unto men. These foul hands our Apostle bids us wash, Mundate manus vestras
O peccatores.

28 And as we must wash our foul hands, The heart must be purged.
so must we purge our infected hearts. The heart of man is not searched by man.
Who knows it? Ier. 17.
Only God is the searcher of hearts. The hypocrite seems holy in the face
of the world: but his inward man is poisoned with sin. Of men he is
commended and reverenced: but his false impure heart the Lord does abhor. Thy
heart must be purged before thy hands can be washed to any purpose. For as all
impuritie rises from the heart, and so pulluteth the hands: so must first thy
heart be purified and that will make all clean. If thine eye be right all thy
body will be clear, Luc. 11.
says our Savior. The stomach well confirmed, all the body will be in good
estate. But our hearts are impure, Prou. 10.
neither can any man say, My heart is clean. The Pharisee said that he was
righteous; but he looked only upon his hands, and did not see into his proud
and malicious heart. The penitent Publicane wisely knocked upon his heart; for
there lay the disease. Every sin breeds in the heart, from thence it has
his original, and every heart is possessed with sundry sins, and has
need carefully to be purged.

29 Pride polluteth man's heart. It must be purged of pride.
This venom poisoned the heart of the great Angel of God; of Adam the most
perfect man of God; of Nabuchodonozar the great and mighty Emperor; of Ozias
the king. Their hearts were lifted up, and therefore GOD threw them down.
Pride is the first and greatest sin: and therefore with chiefest care to be
shunned. This hidden poison cannot be smothered, it will burst forth into the
outward parts. It will appear in thy countenance, in thy pace, and in thy
apparel. Monstrous attire does show a monstrous mind. A minsing tripping
pace, Esaias 3.
as the prophet does note, argues a proud and an unstable heart. A lofty
countenance, a stretched out neck, and a wandering eye are the pictures of an
hawtie and a wanton mind. Unchaste looks are tokens of unchaste thoughts.

30 S. Paul has made mention of three great and pestilent infections of the
heart. It must be kept from being ouercharged with surfets.
The first is banqueting and drunkenness. Beware your hearts be not
ouercharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Meat and drink are ordained for
man, and not man for them: we should eat to live, and not live to eat. Luc.
21.
Nature is content with little, and by much the health is empaired. A full
belly dulleth the senses: and the more wine the less wit. The judgment of
Plato is, that he which fills his belly twice a day shall never prove but a
sot. Too much drink laid Noa naked, and made him ridiculous to his own
son. Genesis 9.
Drunkenness is a fawning devil, a sweet poison, a pleasant sin: which
whosoever has, wants himself; and whosoever commits, does not commit
sin; but is altogether very sin it self. Let not your hearts therefore be
oppressed and defiled with surfeiting nor with drunkenness.

31 Another poison of the heart is chambering and wantonness. From chambering
and wantonness.
The former breeds the latter. And, Where fullness is there filth reigns.
Hieron. sup. ep. ad Tim.
These are commonly linked together; and where the one is near, the other is
not far off. Ezechiel the prophet adds an other cause of this vice, and
that is idleness. A full belly and an idle body make an unchaste heart. David
taking an afternoones vacation, and walking idle in his gallerie, fell
shamefully away from his former purity and dangerously from GOD. Idleness and
riotousnesse are the fuel of uncleanness, which S. Jerome considering
breaks out into these words, O infernal fury; the matter whereof, is
gluttony; pride, the flame; the sparks, lewd words; the smoke, infamy; the
ashes, impuritie; the last end, hell misery. Our bodies are made unto
sanctification and not to fornication: let us use them to that end to which
they were created, that we may bring them to that ioiefull end of eternal
blessedness.

32 The third bane of the heart is emulation and contention. From emulation and
contention.
Let nothing be done through contention and vaineglorie. Pride causes
emulation, and of emulation comes strife: so that the cursed generation of
vice is fruitful. Pride made the devilish Angel envy that his Lord and God
should be above him: it made Adam desire to be as full of knowledge as his
creator: Absolon to emulate his father and to thirst after his kingdom. Caesar
was so proud that he could not abide a superior: Pompey could not bear an
equal. Number. 16.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram in the pride of their hearts sought to displace Moses
and Aaron, the chief magistrate and the chief minister. They set down a
handsome platform of equality, and many of the multitude allowed of it as
well pleased with a popular estate; where the worst of them might be as good as
the best. But GOD brought their devise and themselves to naught. This emulation
is ever contentious, and contention brings dissipation. 1. Cor. 14.
A kingdom divided will not endure. Our God is the God of peace and not of
contention. In peace then we shall have safety, and be followers of our God.
We ought therefore to be mild and quiet like sheep: and not contentious and
biting like dogs. Gal. 5.
Whilst one of you does bite another, take heed ye be not devoured one of
another. Therefore let every man be content with his own estate. For God
has ordained distinct estates, and by his providence men are placed in them.
Pride, surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, emulation and
contention are infections of the heart and dangerously defile the same: we must
purge our hearts of them.

33 Thus if we with a simple eye behold our hands, Our hearts and hands are not
purged but by Christ.
and take a view of our souls, we shall easily epsy foul fingers and
polluted hearts. We are bid by our Apostle to wash the one and purge the other:
but this is not in the ability of sinful man, it is the work of our
gracious God. Christ is the only Physician to heal this our disease. Only
God remitteth and eases us of our sin. Therefore our defiled hands and
depraved hearts can not otherwise be washed and made clean but only with the
blood of that immaculate Lamb. 1. John 1.
For so the scripture witnesses, The blood of Jesus Christ does make us clean
from all sin. Psalm. 51.
If he wash us we shall be whiter than snow. Otherwise our filthy sin
will stick to us for ever. And thus we see that evil must be taken away from
al parts, both inward and outward; our hands must be cleansed, and our hearts
purged. This is the first part of our repentance.

34 But this will never be done, Christ does not ease us of the burden of
sin unless he see us mourn under it.
unless we conceive unfeigned and hearty sorrow for sin. Wherefore it
follows in the words of the Apostle, Be afflicted, be sorry and weep, let
your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. It is
heard, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5.
and that for certainty, that there is fornication among you and such
fornication as is not once named among the Gentiles. And ye are puffed up and
have not rather sorowed. They showed as he thought little token of antent to
cleanse themselves who saw such filth and laughed at it. If we have purpose
indeed to draw near unto the Lord, our hearts must be resolved into
tears, and our hands washed in the water of our eyes. Have we sinned with
David? Let us cry Peccaui with as grieved an heart as David did. 2. Sam. 12.
Have we denied Christ with Peter, not with our lips, but in our lives? Matthew.
26.
Let us then weep for it with Peter bitterly. Have we in transgressing
followed the wanton steps of Marie Magdalene? Luc. 7.
Let us follow her steps also in pouring out tears plentifully for our
offenses. Have we wandered, and gone astray with the prodigal child? Let us
with him likewise turn into our selves, and behold our defiled souls; let us
with him return home at the length with a contrite heart, bursting out into
that confession full of sorrow, Luc. 15.
Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee. Psalm 51.
A bruised and humbled heart, O God, thou will not despise. Repent you
therefore of your sins, Acts 3.
says Peter, that your sins may be done away. Let your tears show that
ye do repent, and let your lives declare that ye are converted. When evils
past are bewailed, and things bewailed are not committed again, this, says
Ambrose, is to repent. It is a vain repentance which is by and by sullied
again by transgressing. Tears avail nothing if we fall afresh into our
sins. It is bootelesse to ask pardon for evil deeds, and when we have
done to do them again. This is plain, The dog to his vomit, and the
swine to his mire. Let us therefore wholly cast away all impiety and worldly
concupiscence: let us change this idle, vain, wanton, and profane life, with
sober, righteous, and godly behavior. Let your laughter be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness. For our God sees all our thoughts, he
hears all our words, he beholds all our works. There is no wantonness nor
wickedness but our God, who does hate it, sees it (the Lord be merciful
unto us) yea our just God, who will judge us according unto our deeds sees
it. O Lord be merciful unto us. O Lord who shall stand in that most dreadful
day? Lord grant us true repentance, that forsaking our selves and detesting
our sins, we may fly so unto thy mercy that we may taste of thy tender
compassions, and not receive according to thy justice and our most sinful
deserts. Enter not Lord into judgment with thy servants. O let us at the
length wash our hands and purge our hearts. Let us mourn and bewail our sins:
that so being clean we may approach and come near unto our God.

35 The only thing which hinders and keeps us back from this, We must be
humbled and thrown down.
is that ouerweening which we have of our selves. Whereby it comes to pass,
that when we should be sorrowful we are puffed up. The Apostle therefore to meet
with this fault, and remove this let adds, Cast down your selves: Humble
your selves in the sight of God. The country which we seek for is on high,
but the way is below that leads unto it. He that seeks the one must not
refuse the other. The Publicane humbling himself before GOD, drew near unto
him and was received. To whom has God regard? on whom does he look? Esaias 66.
to whom is he near? Even unto him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, add
that trembles at my words, says the Lord. Manasses notwithstanding his
idolatrous sinnefulnesse, yet by humility drew near unto God and found his
saving mercy. And all that are, or shall be his, must learn of him to be
mild, as he is mild: to humble themselves unto Christ's mercy, who humbled
himself unto man's cruelty.

36 What has man wherein of right he can boast himself, There is nothing in
us why we should not carry humble and lowly minds.
or whereof he may be proud? It is God who has given us those good gifts
which we have, we have them not of our selves, and he has given them us not
to pride our selves in them, and so to make them ill; but humbly to be
thankful for them, and to dispose of them well to his glory, knowing and
remembering that we must straitely reckon for them. Render an account will one
day be a fearful speech. For why? does thy nobility, power and authority
lift up thy mind? These are given thee from above. By me kings reign, Prou 8.
by me Princes bear rule. There is no power but of God. He that sets up can
likewise cast down. Nay, He has cast down the mighty from their seat,
Luc. 1.
and has exalted the humble and meek. And what he has done once, he can do
again. The highest place is not the sweetest nor the safest place: much
authority is co^bred with many cares. Such as have entered into a great charge
must enter into a great account. And greater cause have they to fear their
reckoning; than to be proud of their ruling. The more that God has lift thee
up the more thou ought to humble thy self before him least he eternally
cast thee down.

37 A Christian heart must be an humble heart: The cause of our loftiness is
the want of looking into our selves.
and the way to humble our selves is to know our selves. For if we did look
upon our black feet, our fair Peacocke feathers no doubt would soon fall
down. If we did cast our eyes upon our foul hands and polluted hearts; if we
did sift our selves, and search our souls, and see how ouglie we had made our
selves in the sight of God; having blotted out his gracious image in us, and
clothed our selves with the maculate coat of sin, the reward whereof is
that eternal death of hell: this sight would terrify us; this consideration
would pull down our haughtiness, and cause us to mislike and utterly deny our
selves, and fly only unto Gods mercy. Our cheerful countenance would be
changed into an heavy; our mirth, into sighing; our pastime into prayer. It
would make our sorrowful hearts to water our wanton eyes with bitter tears.
It would cast down our big and high looks flat upon the earth; and turn
our curled frisled writhen hair into a baser use, even into a towell to wipe
the feet of Christ withal. In the stead of monstrous apparel we would put
on sackecloth and ashes: and cry with S. Paul, Romans 7.
Miserable man that I am who shall deliver me? This sight of our selves would
humble us in the sight of God. This humility would cause us to draw near
unto him; If we drew near unto him, he would draw near unto us; If we did
cast our selves down, he would mercifully lift us up.

What comes unto us by drawing near unto God.
He will draw near unto you, he will lift you up. If we sinners and double
hearted men wash and purge our hands and hearts; if by faith and unfeigned
repentance we draw near unto him: he will meet us in the way, embrace us
with his arms of mercy, kiss us with the kiss of peace and reconciliation,
put on our spowsall ring upon our finger, as fully restored unto our gracious
and blessed spowse in that perfect spiritual marriage. He is as ready to
forgive our sins, as we are to ask forgiveness. If we turn unto him by
repentance, he doubtless will turn unto us in mercy. He will refresh us,
Matthew. 11.
and we shall find eternal rest for our wearied souls. Be our sins as
bloody as skarlet is red, he will make them as white as snow. Though they
now press sore upon us, yet he will remove them as far from us as the East
is from the West, Mich. 7.
yea he will drown them in the very bottom of the sea, Ezech. 18.
he will wholly blot them out of his book, forgive them and forget them for
ever. This our gracious God has promised: this our true God who cannot deceive
will perform. 1. Cor. 11.
Lastly if with penitent and humbled hearts for our sins, we cast our selves
down before God, our God will lift us up. If we condemn our selves with trust
in his mercy, our God will justify us. If we die unto sin, we shall be
raised up unto happy righteousness. The more we humble our selves, the more
he will exalt us, not for our own deserts but for his promise sake, of free
mercy, and his sons complete merits. To conclude, if here we be humbled with
Christ, hereafter we shall be exalted with Christ, even into the high
heavens, and there be placed in the joyful presence of God our father, to
whom with his Son Christ Jesus our Savior, and the holy Ghost our
Sanctifier and Comforter be all honor and praise now and for ever. Amen.

The eighth Sermon. A Sermon preached before the Queen.
ESAIAS 55. 6 Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near.

7 Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive.


HERE we learn by the Prophet, Why, how, and with what fruit God is sought.
that salvation is not sold, but freely given of God to as many as hunger and
thirst after it; that they which seek the Lord shall find him, so that they
seek him in due and seasonable time; and that the time of seeking the Lord is
now. Seek the Lord, etc. In this exhortation of the Prophet, let us first
consider why, secondly how God is to be sought, and thirdly what gain does
grow to the seeker. If I should particularly prosecute this distribution, and
follow it at large as every part shall minister occasion of speech, I should
be too long for this place. But I mind brevity, because I know before whom
I speak. Few words will be sufficient for the wise, and to a mind well
instructed already, a short putting in mind will serve. If I chance to say
what other men have said before me (for what can be said which has not
been said before?) I must beseech you to remember the words of the blessed
Apostle S. Paul which was not ashamed to tell even his own tale twice. To
write unto you the same things to me it is not tedious, Phil. 3.
and to you it is necessary.

God commands us to seek him.
because that only is naught which God misliketh, and that which he misliketh
he has forbidden: So I may be bold to say with S. Augustine, that There is no
virtue but obedience only. Luc. 7.
If therefore the Centurions soldiers obediently went, came, and did what he
commanded; if the Israelites were so duetiful unto Joshua that they said, All
things which thou have commanded us we will do, Ios. 1.
he that shall not obey let him die the death; if mortal men for conscience
sake must be obeyed, shall we despise the voice of him that says from heaven,
Seek ye the Lord? When God does bid us go we may not stand still. And that
which his Prophets in his name command us, he commands himself.

3 But least that the majesty of him which commands should rather astonish
men than set them forward to seek the Lord, God allureth us by benefits to
seek him. Us as Israel by three especial blessings.
with rough commandments he ioineth oftentimes sweet allurements, Come unto
me; Come, and ye shall find rest for your souls; Not entising men with fair
and sweet words only, but pouring his benefits also plentifully upon them. So
he dealt with his old and ancient people whom by his Prophet Micheas he
puts in remembrance of three especial blessings whereby they were provoked
to serve the Lord, Surely I have brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt and
redeemed thee out of the house of bondage, Mich. 6.
and I have sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Myriam. O my people remember
now what Balak king of Moab had devised, and what Balam the son of Peor
answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness
of the Lord.

4 The chiefest benefit which the Lord powered upon his people, Deliverance
out of thraldom.
and the first whereby he allured them to seek him was this, With an
outstretched arm he brought them forth from the Land of Egypt, the house of
bondage, where their dwelling place was a prison, and a long life long misery.
No doubt a mighty and a merciful work of God to deliver his people out of
such thraldom, and to set them at such liberty as they afterward enjoyed.
Bondage is an heavy yoke, an exceeding plague; freedom and liberty a great
benefit, a sweet blessing. The like benefit in as great a measure of love,
favor and power, we have received at the hands of our merciful God. He has
done that for us a rejected nation which he did for his own inheritance.
He has delivered us from the tyranny and thraldom of that great Pharao;
from Satan, sin, hell, death and condemnation by the mighty hand of our
Moses, our graund captain, Christ Jesus: who on the cross gate the victory,
spoiled our enemy, cancelled the writing of our bondage and servitude, brought
us through the red sea, and by his bloodshed wrought our perfect and full
deliverance. Again, when we groaned under the heavy burdens of a second, the
child of the former Pharao, when the tyranny of Antichrist lay grievous upon
our souls, constraining us by force unto those things, in comparison whereof
the gathering of stubble, or making of brick, the sustaining of burdens far
heavier than the Egyptian laid any upon Israel would have seemed tolerable,
light and easy; in the midst of these insufferable griefs, even then when
these Egyptians were most fiercely and eagerly bent, when they thought their
kingdom most strongly established, and us past looking for any deliverance
(and what else could the reason of man suppose?) even then our mighty and
merciful God (to whose works man's thoughts aspire not) by the hand of his
mild and faithful servant delivered his people out of that thraldom, of
bond made us free, discharged us from the intolerable tyranny of Antichrist,
delivered us from the usurped power of popery, from the Romish yoke of servile
superstition, that we might serve no longer that man of sin, but our God, not
with a slavish mind, but in perfect freedom of conscience; according to his
most holy word, and not man's blasphemous doctrine. If we did not pass over
this blessing of God with blind or closed eyes, surely the consideration
thereof would move us, it would force us to break into words of wonderment,
Psalm. ^1.
and to cry out with the Prophet, How great is thy goodness? It would stir
up in us an earnest desire to seek our gracious Lord, and when he is found,
for ever to cleave fast unto him.

5 God further provoking his people Israel to seek him, The benefit of giving
Moses, Aaron, and Marie.
puts them in mind of a second benefit, of sending Moses, Aaron, and Marie
before them. Moses to be their Magistrate, and Aaron to be their Priest, the
one to judge, and the other to teach; the one to punish sinners, the other to
pray and to offer for them. These two were brethren that the bond of nature
might unite their minds in government: and that their unity might more
advance Gods glory, and procure the tranquillity and safety of their
country. 2. Reg. 12.
So Ioas the king, and Iehoiada the Bishop ioining hands, and drawing in one
line, man's policy giving place to the word of God, the only fountain of true
honorable policy, Israel had a prosperous and happy state.

6 Moses was a worthy magistrate. And his greatest commendation is that he
was no less sharp and severe in Gods cause, Moses severe in punishing public
offenders, easy in pardoning injuries done to himself.
than mild and gentle in his own. His mildness caused him many times to put
up other private injuries; it never caused him to spare such as attempted the
overthrow of true religion, or made the people to bow themselves unto strange
gods. In such cases the very heads and princes of the people escaped not his
just hands. Number. 25.
He did wisely consider that as it is a point of mercy to pardon private
wrongs, so not to punish public transgressors against God and the state were
great injustice, it being in doubt whether their deeds were more pestilent,
or their example if it were strengthened by impunitie would be more pernicious.
The scepter of thy kingdom, Psalm. 45.
says the Prophet, is a scepter of righteousness. And he proves it thus,
For thou love righteousness and hate iniquity. Will thou know what is
good, and what the Lord requires of thee? Mich. 6.
Surely, says the Prophet, to do justice and to love mercy. Psalm. 101.
The song of David had these two parts, Mercy and Judgment. Princes are Gods
lieuetenants, his person they bear and his image they must resemble. In him
both these are joined together, I am the Lord which show mercy, Ier. 9.
judgment, and righteousness on earth. Mercy without justice is not mercy
but folly, says S. Chrysostom. And again, Mercy is then rightly termed
mercy if it be showed so, that justice be not thereby brought into contempt.
Aug. ep. 54.
And S. Augustine says, that As it is mercy sometimes to punish, so sometimes
to spare is cruelty. Concerning our selves, thus much I can say that if care
be not had thereof in time to keep back the rage of sin by repressing
sinners, it will be too late when the Land does flow with blood to think upon
it. Moses so loved the safety of his people that he cried, Exodus 32.
Lord spare them or wipe me out of the book of life. To have a governor like
to Moses, mild and merciful; yet not careless to be zealous in Gods cause,
nor unmindful in justice to punish great transgressors, is a great and a rare
blessing. Which if our God have bestowed upon us (for unto him we must
acknowledge it, although in this place I pass it over, because my desire is
not to please but to teach, neither did I ever use flattering words as ye
know) but if God have been merciful to us herein, the Lord make us
thankful for it.

7 Together with Moses God gave his people Aaron the Priest: Aaron, and Marie.
which gift he accounts also as a great blessing. Yet Aaron was a man though
of great virtue not altogether without blemish. We see how for fear of the
people more than of God, in the absence of Moses he played the milkesop,
erected an Idol, and with his body wheresoever his heart was become, either
committed Idolatry or at least permitted it, persuaded hereunto as some
suppose, by Marie the sister of Moses. We have too many followers of the steps
of Aaron in this weakness. Howbeit unto some God has given a greater measure
of strength and courage, some there are more bold and constant in Gods cause
and their duty, some that will not bow their knees to Baal, that will not
displease God for the pleasuring of man, some whose liberty and lives are not
so dear unto them, but that they can be contented not only to be bound but
also to die for the testimony of Christ. Of this better sort although in
comparison of the worse the number be not so great as good, yet I suppose that
few Nations under heaven have more faithful and able ministers than this Land
has. Beg we at the hands of the Lord of the harvest to send more pastors and
fewer hyrelings, more laborers and fewer loyterers. For in respect of the
greatness of the harvest these workmen though they be many yet are but few.
When God does give his people good governors and wise teachers; when he makes
their men to excel in wisdom, their princes to be as Moses, and their
Priests as Aaron; and besides all this raises up women like to Marie amongst
them pouring out his spirit not only upon their sons but upon their
daughters also, choosing out of them, notwithstanding their weakness, mighty
instruments of his power, surely a benefit so rare and precious should win
men's hearts unto God for ever.

8 But the Prophet goes forward and makes mention of a third thing, The
enemies curse turned into blessing.
which is that God did turn the cursings of Balaam into blessings. Remember
what Balak King of Moab had devised, and what Balaam the son of Peor
answered him, Number. 23.
from Shittim to Gilgall, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord. It
fretted the heart of that profane king Balak to behold the flourishing
prosperity of Gods people, to see Og the king of Bashan and Sihon king of the
Amorites conquered and slain by them. This multitude, says he, will lick up
all that are about us as an ox licketh up the grass of the field. Wherefore
mistrusting his own strength, and having feene trial of theirs, he devised to
hire Balaam the wisard to curse them, and thought by that mean without all
peradventure to prevail over them. But ye know Balaams answers, the first,
How shall I curse where God has not cursed? the second, God has blessed, and
I cannot alter it; the third, How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thine
habitations O Israel? As the valleies are they stretched forth, as gardens by
the rivers side, as the Aloe trees which the Lord has planted, and as the
cedars beside the waters. When he saw that God would not suffer his tongue to
curse Israel though it were hired, he gave Balak this advise, Apoc. 3.
to cause the daughters of Moab to steal away their hearts by carnal
pleasure, and so to allure them unto the sacrifice of their gods, that they
forsaking the true God he might also forsake them. This practice was a
stumbling block in their way, whilst they abode in Shittim they committed
fornication, Number. 25. and 31.
they coupled themselves unto Baal Peor, and ate of things sacrificed unto
Idols and devils. Wherefore God plagued them, and laid his heavy hand upon
them. Howbeit he withdrewe not his mercy and kindness wholly from them,
Joshua. 5.
but in Gilgal took away this their shame, and sealed again the covenant of
reconciled love. So that as there was no curse which could take away his
blessing, so there was no counsel that could hinder his good purpose toward
his people. Ye are not ignorant how the Balamite of Rome has cursed us, our
prince, our prophets, and our people, even as the Philistim cursed David by his
gods. 1. Sam. 17.
But we have found the promise of Christ most true, Matthew. 5.
Blessed are ye when they shall revile you. Our God has turned all his curses
into blessings, his name be blessed for it. The Pope that Balaam has bitterly
cursed the ground whereon we go, and the whole Land wherein we live. But has
there grown a brier or a thorn the more upon it for all that man's curse? He
that shall surueie it and view it well, and mark the plentifulnesse of these
latter years, must needs confess that God has bestowed upon it more than
ordinary or usual blessings. As the blessings of that man are by God
accursed, so where he curses there the Lord blesses; and to the eternal
reproof of that our enemies unjust and uncharitable execration, he has in
these our days opened his bountiful hand far wider than in former times,
when those Antichristian blessings came posting yearly from Rome, and embraced
our Land so kindly that they sucked the sap of wealth both from branch
and root. The Land of Canaan was a pleasant and a fruitful Land, flowing
with milk, and abounding with honey: truly it was barren and almost beggarly
in respect of our abundance and store. God may justly say to us, Esaias 5.
What could I have done more unto my vineyard which I have not done unto it?
He has miraculously given and continued with us that grand blessing of his
glorious Gospel, he has wonderfully preserved our Sovereign his servant, he
has kept her safe as Moses and David from Pharao, from Dathan and from Amalek;
from Goliath, from Saul, from Absolon, from the hands of her open enemies and
treasons of her deceitful friends: he has not only given her a circumspect
heart to foresee and to prevent, and, I trust, to cut off all intended
destruction, but also has more than miraculously abated the pride and
confounded the manifold counsels of her and our enemies, and contrary to all
expectation kept us in peace and safety. GOD make us thankful and give us
hearts syncerely bent to seek him which so mercifully by his benefits and
graces has sought us. How great is thy goodness, Psalm. 31.
O Lord, which thou have laid up in store for them that fear thee? For this
shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou
may be found, Psalm. 32.
and call upon thee while thou art near.

9 If this way will not serve to bring us unto God, Them whom benefits will not
win, plagues must constrain to seek y^ Lord.
another must be assayed; if we will not be led by fair means, we shall be
drawn by foul: God has blessings for them which are of a pliable mind; but
for the froward, rods. Them he first threateneth, as having no delight or
pleasure to punish; he punishes as one unwilling to destroy. Gods
corrections is for our reformation, but if it will not reform us, for our
confusion. This self love of ours, this senseless security, this contempt of
Gods word, this want of godly zeal, these contriuings of treason and
conspiracy are tokens that God has bent his dreadful bow, and is preparing
to make his arrows drunk with our blood. If he spared neither Israelites nor
Angels, doubtless neither will he spare us, except unfeignedly we seek him,
and seek him now.

10 For now is the acceptable time, Now is the time to seek the Lord.
now is grace offered, the Lord now stretches out his hands of mercy, this
is the day, wherein the Lord may be found of them that seek him. But some
stop their ears at this and will not hear, they are too wise to be enchaunted
with these times. If ye tell them of seeking the Lord, their answer is, Who is
the Lord? They say plainly in their foolish hearts, Luc. 14.
There is no God. But the just God will one day show himself to their
confusion. Others have their excuses of worldly hinderaunces and lets, Fermes
or Oxen or Wives have tied them by the leg when they should go and seek the
Lord. Others have a mind not utterly unwilling to seek after him; but they
would feign stay a while and seek him hereafter. Youth they say must have his
swinge, let old age wax holy. Such nouices there were of whom Chrysostom
writes, that they would not be baptized until they were in their death
beds, least baptism should be as a bridle to hold them in. They were
desirous to have their forth in their carnal desires, and at the end of their
days by baptism to wash away all at once. But God shall mock such craft, and
they who will not come when he calls, when they call shall not be heard. Beware
of these delays. Let us not differ and put off till to morrow, but while it
is called to day, even whilst this acceptable day is, let us seek the Lord
that we may find him. Now he is ready to meet us by the way, and lovingly
to embrace us with the arms of his eternal mercy.

11 The second thing to be considered is how we may seek the The Lord is
sought and found by faith
and in seking him be sure to find him. I will omit to show how vainly the
Gentiles in their Idols, the Jews in their ceremonies and traditions, the
Papists in their superstitions do seek the Lord. They seek him and find him
not, because they seek him where he is not, not where he is; as themselves
have imagined, and not as he has prescribed. Ambr in Luc.
The first entrance into the way where God will be found is faith, Lib. 6.
cap. 8.
Fide tangitur Christus, fide videtur, says S. Ambrose. By faith Christ is
handled, by faith he is seen. By faith he is found. All our travel in seeking
without faith is but a fruitless wearying of our deceived souls. For he that
comes unto God must believe.

12 And the way to believe is hearing; Faith comes by hearing the word of God.
for by hearing comes faith: The word is that star which guides and
directs us unto Christ. Search the Scriptures: For to this end they are
written, John 5.
That ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that
believing ye might have eternal life. John 17.
They were written to be red: and therefore S. Paul charge Timothy
straightly, 1. Tim. 4.
Give attendance to reading. They were written to be red not of him only, but
of us also, in what condition or estate soever God has placed us. Princes are
not exempted more than others, no they above others are especially charged to
travel herein. What charge can be devised more effectual than that which is
given unto Joshua, Joshua 1.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate thou
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein, for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success? Good reason it is, that as Kings do reign and hold
their power by him; so his will revealed in his word should be the rule and
direction of their government. If they think to establish their thrones
better by their own wise and politic devises, they are greatly deceived.
There is no policy, no wisdom like the wisdom of GOD. The common wealths
which Aristotle and Plato have framed in their Books, otherwise full of
wisdom, yet compared with divine policies, with that city for whose sake and
benefit the Lord does watch, what are they but fancies of foolish men? As for
Machiauels inventions they are but the dreams of a brainesicke person, founded
upon the craft of man and not upon godly wisdom which only has good
effect. Godly Princes have no need to seek for counsel at these men's hands,
the mouth of the Lord is sufficient for them. Psalm. 119.
Thy testimonies, says David, are my counselors. Their counsel was to him
sufficient. He red not the scriptures at idle times or at leisure; they were
his meditation continually; Reading was not irksome and tedious unto him, his
eyes did prevent the night watches to meditate in the word. The time was not
lost which was so bestowed. For by thy commandments, says he, thou have made
me wiser than mine enemies. Acts 8.
The diligence of that noble Eunuch chief officer to the Queen of Ethiopia is
greatly commended, as a worthy president for Christian Courtiers to behold
and follow. Many cannot read, yet al ought to hear; I will hearken, Psalm. 95.
says David, what the Lord God will say. Who does not rejoice to hear a
prince speak gracious and favorable words? But I will hear the lord speak,
says the prophet, For he will speak peace unto his people. A bad servant, an
evil wife, a cursed child, a damnable creature that will not gladly hear the
voice of the Lord, the husband, the father, the creator. Christ taught daily
in the temple, and doubtless he was daily heard. But hearing of the word may
not daily be attended, least it hinder more weighty affairs. Is there any
thing more weighty than the matter of salvation? Is the earth of more account
than heaven? a short miserable life than a blessed and immortal? Philip of
Macedonia casting off the suite of a poor woman with a short answer that he
had no leisure to hear her cause, she answered boldly, Why then have thou
leisure to be a king? I may as boldly ask of them which say they have no
leisure to hear Gods word, Iac. 1.
how they will find the leisure to be saved. This word only saves, Receive ye
therefore the word ingrafted which is able to save your souls.

13 If there be no salvation but by faith, The want of teachers at whose
mouths the word should be heard.
no faith but by hearing the word of God, how should the people be saved
without teachers? The mother City of the Realm is reasonably furnished with
faithful preachers, certain other Cities not many in number are blessed too,
though not in like sort. But the silly people of the Land otherwhere
especially in the North parts pine away way and perish for want of this saving
food, they are much decayed for want of prophecy. Many there are that hear
not a sermon in seven years, I might say safely in seventeen. Their blood will
be required at some bodies hands. The Lord deliver us from that hard account,
and grant redress with speed.

14 But why does the country want preachers? The cause why there are so few
s^fficient men to teach the people.
The people pay tithes of that they have, therefore there must needs be
sufficient to maintain them. If things were well ordered, this sequel were
good. But the chiefest benefices were by the Pope long since impropriated unto
a Monks which devoured the fruits and gave a silly stipend unto a poor Sir
John to say Mass. And as they left it so we find it still. Where livings were
not impropriated by the Pope, there they are for the most part so handled, that
patrons maintain themselves with those tithes which the people give: and
ministers have that which the patrons leave. The world deals with Gods
Clergy as Dionysius the tyrant with Jupiters Idol. They make themselves as
merry with spoiling Christ's patrimony as he with robbing Jupiter of his golden
cloak: which, being too heavy for Summer, and too cold for Winter, he took
away, and left in stead of it a cotton coat light for the one time, and warm
for the other. To take from them which live idly and superstitiously in the
Church they plead it to be lawful, because those unprofitable members were
unworthy to enioie the fat of the earth. Abbeies being eaten up and other
profits gone, now as greedy cormorants they sease also upon the Church of
Christ. It is not fit forsooth that men sanctified unto heavenly things should
be overmuch encombred with these earthly commodities; and therefore even of
great devotion and zeal they will ease the Church of these her burdens. Thus
by men that cannot stand without the fall of the Church of God all means are
invented to beggar the ministry. A devise no doubt of Satan and a practice of
his impes to cause a famine of the bread of life, by staruing the Ox that
should tread out the come; and to withdraw Gods people from seeking the Lord,
by weakening and discouraging such as should guide them in the way of life.
Thus you see how God must be sought in his word, which word because all men
must hear and learn, therefore many must be sent to teach it.

15 But because the seed which is cast into the earth grows not up unless
it be watered with the dew of heaven, The Lord must besought by prayer also
and not by hearing only.
neither does the sound of the word bring any man unto Christ except the grace
of the spirit be with it, which grace God offers so freely unto men that
there needs no more but Ask and Have, for this cause it follows in the
Prophet, Call upon him while he is near. We may read and hear of God as of
one far off. But when we pray unto God, we acknowledge that he is as it were
within sight; when we call upon him we speak to him as unto one which is
present. He is never so clearly and plainly found, his presence is never so
familiarly enioied as by hearty prayer. Prayer consisterh of two parts:
Thanksgiving for that which we have received, and requesting of that whereof
our souls or bodies have need.

16 The good king David falling into consideration of the infinite mercies of
God, Thanksgiving for benefits already received.
bursteth out into these careful words, What shall I render to the Lord?
Finding no way to requite he resolves thus, Psalm. 116.
I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. Perhaps
the Prophet had the more care to show himself thankful toward God, by
reason of the grief which himself sustained through men's ingratitude toward
him. He makes pitiful complaint that his familiar friends who ate bread at
his table, who took sweet counsel with him, whom he had many ways
benefited were unthankful and requited him with treacherous dealing. An honest
hearted man is never so grieved as when his friendlinesse is requited with
ingratitude. If it be, says S. Ambrose, a fault to be matched even with
murder not to requite man with thankfulness, what a crime is it to deal
unthankfully with God? Dixeris maledicta cuncta cum ingratum hominem dixeris.
We have named all the naughtiness that can be objected when we have termed
a man unthankful, says another. Lycurgus being asked why in his Laws he
had set down no punishment for ingratitude answered, I have left it to the
gods to punish. All the punishment which man could devise he though too easy
for a fault so heinous. The ingratitude of Jerusalem did more wound the heart
of the son of God Christ Jesus than the spear that pierced him through the
heart upon the cross. He has dealt as mercifully with us as with them; if we
deal as unkindly as they with him, we which know what befell them for it,
cannot be ignorant what is likely to befall us, except we take the cup of
salvation betimes, and call upon the name of the Lord while he is near.

17 And as his benefits do require thanks, Craving of help in present
necessity.
so our own estate does need succor. Our necessities therefore should make us
earnest suitors unto God that he would be our relieuer. Our ship is in peril of
tempest, the ragings of the sea do threaten it: yet who cries, Matthew 8.
Help Lord? What man is there that weepeth bitterly with Peter, Matthew. 26.
or nightly waters his cowch with tears as David? Yet al have sinned and
offended the Lord of glory. It is high time therefore to call upon God and
that earnestly. The superstitious prayed without understanding. Wherein are we
better, if our prayers be without feeling? The fountain of prayer is the
feeling of the heart Power out that before the Lord, call upon him from thence,
cry from the depth, Esaias 58.
and he shall answer, Here I am thy ready helper in time of need.

18 But withal take this, Prayer is fruitless where repentance is not.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, that is to say Repent, Paul to Titus uses the like
description of repentance, saying, Tit. 2.
The grace of God teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live soberly, and righteously, and godlily in this present world.
Peter out of the Psalm in fewer words says the same, Decline from evil and
do good. 1. Pet. 3.
The Papists set repentance upon three feet, Confession, Contrition, and
Satisfaction. But two of them are of wood, without life. Their confession is to
a priest, whereas the scripture makes God and not the priest our Confessor.
Confitemini Domino, says the Psalmist, Make confession to the Lord. 1. Pet. 1.
Their satisfaction is but money matter, and God is satisfied not by gold but
by blood: and with us he is pleased when our lives are amended. Deus morum
emendatione placatur, and qui peccare desinit iram Dei mortalem facit. God is
pacified by the mending of our manners, and he that cease from sin brings
the wrath of God to an end says Lactantius. We must forsake therefore our own
ways, our own cogitations; they are wicked and ungodly. There is nothing ours
but imbecillitie and naughtiness, which with our selves we must utterly
renounce and forsake, and fly to Gods mercy, that in mercy he may accept us.
No doubt we have all wandered out of the way, all have started aside, every
man has wandered his own fond and sinful way, we have provoked Gods
wrath, our ingratitude has grieved him, we have wickedly profaned his sacred
Gospel, his word we have contemned and abused, using it as a cloak to cover
our deep hypocrisy, Christ was never more professed and never less obeyed.
It is truly verified in our times which the Prophet Oseas complained of in his,
There is no truth, there is no mercifulness, Osce 4.
there is no knowledge of God in the Land; cursing and lying and murder and
theft and whoredom have ouerflowed, blood has touched blood. Ezech. 16.
Ezechiel teaches that the sins of Sodom that sink of sin were
Idleness, of fullness of bread, pride and unmercifulness toward the poor.
Are not these the sins of this Land, of this City, of this Court at this
day? Are not these bad ways our ways? Half England lives idly or worse
occupied, we are fed to the full, and who is not puffed up with pride? or who
relieueth his neighbors want? No man is contented with his own estate, but
every one strives to clime higher to sit aloft. There is want of the true
fear of God in all sorts, estates, and ages. Yet we please our selves and
walk on, as if God either saw not our sin, or else in his justice could not
punish it. Are the eyes of the Lord shut up? or has God forgotten to be just?
Surely our sins will not suffer his plagues to stay long from us. What
plagues I dare not presume to prophecy. For God has kept that secret to
himself. But I stand in fear that we are the men to whom Christ says, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from You; that we are they whose sins will
bring the scepter of this kingdom into the hands of an hypocrite. If God in
his justice do this, woe worth us most wretched men. The loss of the Gospel
is the loss of our souls, and the loss of our Sovereign the loss of our
lives. Truly when I fall into consideration of the wickedness of this world,
that all sorts of men fall to sinning with greediness, that there is skant one
left as Elias complains, that truly seeks after God, that in all conditions
iniquity does abound and charity wax cold, that the zeal of God is
utterly dried up in the hearts of men, that God is served for fashions sake and
not in truth, what should I think but that God has gathered his lap full of
plagues and is ready to power them down upon us? There is but one way to
stay him for which he himself does stay and wait. Do ye not know that the
lenity of God inuiteth you to repentance? If we will save our Nineuie, we must
repent and turn to our God; we must seek him both prince and people.

19 The benefit which comes unto those that seek him He will have mercy on
them. The fruit that comes by seeking the Lord.
Although the house of Israel rebelled against the Lord as a froward woman
rebelleth against her husband, yet he ceased not to call upon them still by the
voice of his Prophets, Ier 3.
O ye disobedient children return, return and I will heal your rebellions.
Job. 34.
Surely it pertains unto God to say I have pardoned I will not destroy. Job.
33.
He looks upon men and if one say I have sinned and perverted righteousness
and it did not profit me, he will deliver his soul from going into the pit
and his life shall see light. Lo all these things will GOD work twice or
thrice with a man. He desires not our destruction but our conversion be we
never so great sinners. For he is very ready to forgive. Ask pardon and
thou shall have it. Return to the Lord unfeignedly and he will mercifully
accept thee.

20 And if he be ready to forgive us, Our thankfulness toward God whom we
seek must be showed by our mercifulness to the poor.
let not us be loath to give unto him. We need not ask where he is, or what
he wants, that we may give unto him. He is near at hand straying and
staruing in the streets; naked, hungry, cold, harborlesse, sick and
diseased, ruthfully moning and crying for relief. Let the pitiful cry of our
Christ move our hearts to mercy. Prou. 21.
He that shuts his ears at the cry of the poor shall cry himself and
not be heard. Let that merciless Moguntine terrify men of hard and stony
hearts, who was devoured of rats the vilest vermin for his cruel heart void
of all compassion upon the poor. Let us seek up Christ and provide for him.
He sought us and found us, when we were robbed, spoiled and deadly wounded: let
not us turn away our faces from him seeking and craving so small help at our
hands. He became poor to make us rich, let us out of the abundance of our
riches spare somewhat now to the relief of his poverty. He will well requite
it. It is not lost which is bestowed upon him in his poor afflicted members;
that which we put in the hands of the poor we lay it up in the Lords bosom,
where neither dice nor cards, hawks nor hounds, horses nor harlots can consume
it, rust and canker can not eat it, thieves can not rob and bereave us of
it. Unworthy we are to be called Christians, if we suffer our head Christ
Jesus to be naked and cloth him not, if we see him hungry and give him no
bread. Worse we are than Jews if we suffer this ignominy to be done unto
Christ, this ingratitude to be showed to so gracious a God. O let us be
merciful, that as children we may resemble our heavenly father, for he is
merciful. Unto this merciful God the Father the Son and the holy Ghost be
honor, glory and praise now and ever. Amen.

The ninth Sermon. A Sermon made in Paul's at the solemnization of CHARLES the
9. the French Kings funeral.
JOB 14. 14 All the days of this my warrefare do I wait, till my changing
come.
THE custom of funerals as it is ancient, The custom of funerals ancient and
commendable.
so is it commendable. Abraham the father of our faith purchased a piece of
ground to bury his dead in. Genesis 23. and 25. and 50.
And in that place he himself, Sara, Isaak, Jacob and Joseph were buried with
great solemnity, and much mourning. Tob. 2.
Tobias is commended for burying the dead. John 12.
So is Marie Magdalene for preparing of ointment for the burying of our
Savior. John 19.
So is Joseph, and also Nicodemus for the care that they had about Christ's
funeral.

2 Causes of funerals S. Augustine gives three. Three causes of solemnizing
funerals.
First it is the office of humanity, the duty of charity decently to commit
the dead corpse to the earth, out of which they came. This charitable duty is
commended in Toby and others, whose names I mentioned before, and was of the
very Heathen religiously observed. Secondly it is a thing very seemly and
convenient, with reverence to lay the corpse in grave, because our bodies are
the temples of the holy Ghost, wherein and by which as by lively instruments
both God has been glorified, and his people have received good. 1. Cor. 6.
Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you? That which has been so notable an instrument would not be irreverently
entreated though dead. Thirdly our faith is hereby confirmed touching the
article of our resurrection. For we lay down the body in the earth, under
hope that This mortal must put on immortality: 1. Cor. 15.
as confessing with Job, I believe that my redeemer lives, Job. 19.
and that I shall see God in my flesh, mine eyes shall behold him and none
other. But the Christian Church does not, neither ought to use funerals
thereby to relieve or benefit the dead. Aug. de Ciuit. De. lib. 1. cap. 12.
All these things, says S. Augustine, furniture of funerals, order of burying,
and the pomp of exequies are rather comforts to the living than helps to the
dead. Luc. 16.
The glutton of whom S. Luke speaks in the Gospel, was buried no doubt with
pomp enough; yet his wicked soul was plunged into hell. There comes
therefore no part of blessedness to the dead by funerals: but Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord. Apoc. 14.
Lazarus wanted (as it is to be thought) his funeral, but the want thereof
bereaved him not of his happy estate: he died in the Lord and so was blessed.

3 Since therefore death brings with it our particular judgment; Our state is
not changed after death; but as we fall so we lie.
since he that believes on the son has everlasting life; but he that
believes not on the son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on
him: Let us live as we will die, and die as they that hope to rise again and
live with Christ hereafter. John 3.
As every man departs hence, so shall he be judged at the last day. Aug. ad
Hes^^.
And, Every man shall sleep with his own cause and with his own cause rise
again. At our particular death is our particular judgment: at the glorious
coming of Christ shall be the general revelation of the judgment of the
whole world. After this life there is no help remaining to the dead: to the
living there is mercy offered, to the dead there remains only judgment.
He that is not purged here, shall be judged as filthy there.

4 Vain therefore and dangerous is the opinion of Purgatory. The opinion of
Purgatory vain and dangerous.
Vain, because it has no foundation at all in Gods word. Moses prescribing
all kinds of sacrifices in the old Law makes no mention either of
sacrificing or praying for the dead. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Paul instructing the Thessalonians what they ought to do in funerals, neither
does remember unto them sacrifice nor prayer. Just Simeon never dreamed of
Purgatory when as he said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word. Luc. 2.
Small peace is there in Purgatory, as Papists report. It never came into
Saint Paul's mind when he said, Phil. 1.
I desire to depart hence and to be with Christ. It was not revealed to the
Angel when he said, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, Apoc. 14.
they rest from their labors. There is no rest but intolerable pain imagined
in Purgatory, even to them which die in the Lord. Luc. 16.
Neither Lazarus not the rich man were acquainted with it, the one was
immediately carried into heaven, the other cast into hell. Luc. 23.
He which said to thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, knew
only two ways, the strait way to heaven, Matthew. 7.
the broad way to hell: he who knew all things was ignorant of this third
way: For there is no such way to know. This opinion is perilous. The hope of
help in Purgatory has sent many deceived souls into hell. This opinion is
injurious to the blood of Christ. For if any sin remain to be purged by
these after pains, 1. John 1.
then The blood of Christ does not cleanse us from all sin, and then ^e make
God a liar. It destroieth repentance, without which there is no remission of
sins here, and with which satisfaction for sins afterward cannot stand. For
faith and repentance cease with this life. He that has not his pardon here,
deceives himself if he hope to have it hereafter elsewhere. Every man after
life shall bear his own burden, as every man has wrought in his body.
There comes nothing to the spirits of them that be dead, but that which they
wrought while they were alive. Work thou righteousness before thy death:
Eccles. 14.
for in the grave it is too late. And thus it does appear that although the
use of funerals be ancient, and that for good causes they are to be
celebrated; yet neither purgatory nor prayer, neither any other after helps
can be available for the party departed; and therefore we must now sow, as
hereafter we will reap. Cast away impiety and worldly concupiscence, Tit. 2.
and live a sober, a just, and a godly life; looking for the blessed hope, and
the appearance of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Here we are as Christ's soldiers appointed to fight a good fight, ^. Tim. 4.
to fulfill our course, to keep the faith: and so to look for the promised
crown of glory, which God will give to such as look for and love his coming.

5 Whereof Job is a good remembrance unto us. Three things contained in the
words of Job.
All the days of this my warfare do I wait till my changing shall come. In
which words we have three things chiefly to be considered. First, that our
whole life is a warfare, Secondly, that this war will have an end; Thirdly,
that this end is daily to be looked for.

6 He which says here, I wait all the days of this my warrefare: Man's life a
warfare.
Man's life is a warrefare upon earth. In this Christian war some be generals,
some captains, some trumpetors, the rest be common and ordinary soldiers.
Every one must keep his standing, answer his calling, fight and manfully
strive for the victory.

7 Kings and princes are generals, Kings and Princes Gods generals.
Gods lieuetenaunts upon earth; to defend Gods people, to set them in order, to
see them well governed, to fight in Gods quarrel, to prefer and promote Gods
cause. They should serve the Lord the king of kings in fear, Psalm. 2.
Embrace the son, advance true religion, Seek the kingdom of heaven,
Matthew. 6.
wherein does consist their victory and glory. This they will do, if they be
zealous in Gods cause, if they be in deed the Nurces of his Church, Esaias 49.
they will hate his enemies with perfect hatred, they will punish
transgressors, Psalm. 138.
protect the innocent, execute justice and judgment without respect of
persons. So shall they militare Christo do the office of a good general in Gods
war. Such generals were David, Iehosaphat, Ezechias and Josias. These
generals are placed of God, and therefore of duty to be obeyed. Let every
soul be subject to the higher power: Romans 13.
for there is no power but of God. God gives good princes as a blessing; and
the same God gives evil princes as a curse. He gave Samuel in his favor, and
in his wrath the gave Saul. He makes an hypocrite to reign for the sins of
the people. These generals have authority from the Lord of Hosts to draw the
sword against transgressors, Job. 34.
and to execute martial law according to such limitatio^ as God has prescribed.

8 The captains are the Nobility, The Nobles Captains.
put in their several authorities our several bands. They must valiantly go
before, strive and stand for Gods cause, give good example to their soldiers
in honest behavior, in painful travel, according to their callings: So
upright in all their doings, that the people may be enforced to justify them
as the Israelites did their Samuel. 1. Sam. 12.
Good captains make good soldiers.

9 The trumpetors are the ministers of Gods word, The ministers trumpetors.
by the blast of the trumpe both to give warning of the enemy, and also to
order the going forward of the army. To these men God says, Cry out alowde,
Esaias 58.
leave not off, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
offenses. If these men be dumme dogs and sound not the trumpet as well to
forewarne as to guide Gods army, Ezech. 33.
The perishing blood shall be required at their hands by whom it has been
betrayed. Paul was faithful and skillful to sound this trumpe and to sound it
in season, to strive for the truth and to power out his blood in Gods quarrel.
He ended his days like a man full of valor, 2. Tim. 4.
I have fought a good fight, I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith.
His faithful heart was careful for the whole army of God; 2. Cor. 11.
I have care of all the Churches.

10 The common soldiers must keep their stand and station in all obedience
and readiness; The rest common soldiers.
stowtly they must fight under Christ's victorious banner. They are not trifles
for which they strive. Therefore let them not shrink nor cowardly run away,
but with an invincible courage in an assured hope of the victory abide all
warrelike miseries sustained with the comfort of that reward which no man shall
receive, 2. Tim 2.
except he strive lawfully. No man that lays his hand to the plough and
looks backward is worthy of the kingdom of heaven. Matt. 10.
But he that endures to the end shall be saved.

11 Now we must strive for Christ and not for Antichrist: They which war
under Christ must strive for the truth and not against it.
for the truth and not against it, I can do nothing against the truth but for
the truth says S. Paul; For the gospel, and not for the doctrine of man; for
true religion, and not for superstition must we strive. But our striving for
the most part is all awrie and wicked. 2. Cor. 1. 3.
We strive who may be the prowdest, pretending equality we strive in deed
for superiority. Neither equal nor superior can we abide; we strive how to
supplant and overthrow one another. Envy has made men impudent striving to
undermine and cast down the walls of innocence, striving how to place and how
to displace, how to disgrace and how to bring into favor, how to set up and
how to throw down. And in so doing we strive against our selves, and for
the advantage of our deadly foes. This war is not Christian: this is not to
strive lawfully. 2. Tim. 4.
This is not to fight a good fight. This victory shall not be crowned.

12 Our principal and common enemies against whom we must all jointly fight,
The enemies against whom we must strive; the devil, ye world, and the flesh*
are the devil, the world, and the flesh. The devil is strong and subtle, a
roaring Lion, and an old Serpent, of long and great experience. So soon as we
profess to be Christ's soldiers, 1. Pet. 5.
as a malicious and fierce enemy he inuadeth us. My son if thou will come
into the service of God, Apoc. 1^.
stand fast in righteousness, and fear: Eccles. 2.
and arm thy soul to temptation. Christ himself was tempted immediately after
that he was baptized. Matthew 4.
His ways of assault are these. He persuades to evil, he either hinders or
infecteth that which is good, that no action which we do may be pleasant in
the sight of God. He tempts and overcomes even the perfectest, Genesis 3.
as he did Adam; Iud. 16.
the strongest, as he did Sampson; the wisest, 2 R^g. 1^.
as he did Solomon. He therefore that stands, let him take heed that he do
not fall. 1. Cor. 10.
No perfection, no strength, no wisdom ought to free us of this care. But we
need to pray continually, Lead us not into temptation. And yet we being in
the midst of the battle with such an enemy, still sleep in security. But the
devil sleeps not. And this malicious adversary has spials in our army, he
labors by corruption to make a mutiny amongst us, that whilst we strive
amongst our selves, he may more easily eat us up. He sets the generals
together by the ears. The captains they envy one another. The soldiers take
parties and are divided. The generals, captains, soldiers and all contemn
the watcheman and will not give ear or regard the sound of the trumpe. Mar. 3.
The kingdom, the city, the house thus divided can it think you stand long?
The devil plaieth his part, and plieth it busily; but we like cowards yield,
and do not resist; are at variance amongst our selves and thereby at agreement
with that adversary; whom, who so hates his brother, serves. Our second
enemy is the world: the world which is altogether set on al wickedness. The
third our flesh: Gal. 5.
our flesh which rebelleth, and lusts contrary to the spirit. 1. Pet. 2.
Fleshly lusts fight against the soul. And thus we have enemies on every
side, yea and that which is most dangerous of all within us, which daily give
us fore assaults. For love of the victory and shame of this cowardlinesse,
Ephesians. ^.
and fear of that dreadful and eternal captivity, let us put on our armor,
the girdle of truth, the breast plate of righteousness, the helmet of
salvation, and the buckler of faith, a sure defense against all the fiery
darts of Satan: and let us take in our hand the sword of the spirit the word
of God, the dint whereof he dare not abide. Resist the devil, Iac 4.
and he will flee from you, Resist him in faith, in prayer, and in the word.
Gal. 6.
Be crucified unto the world, even as strangers which are not of the world.
Heb. 13.
For we have here no abiding City. Chastise the body with watchings, with
labor, with fastings. It is a great victory to overcome the devil; a greater
to overcome the world; and the greatest of al to overcome thy self, even
thine own flesh. To him that overcomes shall be given a crown. But he that is
overcome shall be the continual bondsman of Satan our vile and cruel enemy.
Let us so strive that we may overcome. He only that strives lawfully shall be
crowned. 2. Tim. 2.


Our warfare shall have a change.
subject to change, and desirous of change. No man is long contented with his
own estate be it never so excellent. The Angel would change, to be like unto
God. Adam would change, to be as wise as he that made him. Change desired of
al men.
Absolon would change, and sit in his Fathers seat. 2. Sam. 15.
Solomon would have change of wives. 1. Reg. 11.
The Israelites would change Moses and Aaron both magistrate and minister.
Number. 16.
They would needs change their Judge for a King, 1. Sam. 8.
their Samuel for Saul. The Sichemites would change their religion. Genesis 34.
The Israelites would change Manna the food of Angels for the flesh pots of
Egypt. Exodus 16.
The wavering Jews changed Christ for Barrabas, their Savior for a murderer.
We are like affected to them, in liking and loving change: change of meat,
change of apparel, change of manners. We change simple dealing into crafty
undermining faithfulness into treachery, truth into falsehood; liberality into
covetousness; humility into pride, chastity into lewdenesse; mercy into
malice; light into darkness; day into night; all virtue into all vice. And
that which is more monstrous, sheep are changed into goats; sheepeheardes
into wolves; and as Bernard says, Prelates into Pilates; Nurces of the Church
into robbers of the Church. The hearts and tongues of men are changed, and of
single both made double. Our times breed men of the nature of the fish
Polypus, which can change it self into all colors to deceive. And as he
says in the Comedy, There is a change of all things.

14 But while we are thus occupied about these choppings and changings, The
change which Job looked for,
we seem never to remember that great change whereof Job here speaks: which
he daily looked and longed for. And that is the change of this mortal life,
looking for that great and glorious resurrection. Death is here termed a
change. This change is certain: all flesh must die. The time till this change
does come not long: the days of man are short and miserable. The time when
this change will come uncertain.

15 We all must die. Unto this change all are subject.
God gave a Law to our father Adam forbidding him to eat of the fruit,
adding the penalty of death if he did. Adam transgressed, the penalty was
inflicted. The sentence of death was this, Dust thou art, and into dust thou
shall. In our fathers fall we fell, and of his punishment his children are
partakers. Hebr. 9.
This is a statute made by the three states. It is appointed to all men once to
die. Thou have appointed man his bonds which he cannot pass. Job. 13.
This is the way of all flesh: what man is he that lives and shall not see
death? 1. Reg. 2.
Neither king nor kesar could ever be dispensed withal from this statute.
Psalm. 89.
The good king Ezechias sought and sued unto God for a dispensation, 2. Reg. 20.
but it would not be granted; only he obtained the prolonging of his days for
a few years. This Law stands fast, this debt is due unto all flesh. And the
time that we have before the day of payment is not long.

16 The days of man are short: No man far from y^ time of his change.
the number of his months is known only to the Lord. All creatures now wax
old with the aged world. This is even the last hour: the world cannot
continue long. Genesis 5.
Mathusela lived 969. years. If in our age we reach to 80. Psalm. 89.
it is with sorrow and labor. Thou have made my days as it were a spanne
long, Psalm. 39.
says David. All flesh is grass, says the Prophet, Esaias 40.
and all the glory thereof as the flower of the field: both the grass and
the flower quickly fade and fall away, and the flower sooner than the grass.

17 The people are the grass and will abide the withering. The mightiest
soonest changed.
The flower is the Nobility set aloft in great beauty: yet every frost
causes the flower to fade, and every blast of wind ruffleth the leaves and
even shakes them off. This all times do teach: and the action we have in
hand does presently put us in mind thereof. This mighty king, this great Prince
CHARLES THE FRENCH KING whose funeral we now celebrate, in his young years,
in his flourishing age, in the perfect strength of his body, when he minded
weighty matters and great attempts, even then was he stopped in the midst of
his race, and the line of his life cut off. This glorious flower is faded and
fallen away. How soon? how suddenly? It falls out in experience true which
is written by Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 10.
The life of Potentates endures not long. Some though few are consumed with
the cares of the common wealth. The good king David complains that his bones
were even dried up with the cares he took for his country. Psalm. 101.
Some are wasted away by wantonness, as Commodus, Claudius, Nero, Alexander
the great. Some are shortened by ambition; they will never leave climing till
they catch a fall. 2. Sim. 18.
That cut off the days of Absolon, that brought Haman to the tree. Hest. 7.
Some God takes away because the world is not worthy of them: and some
because they are not worthy of it. 2. Reg 23.
He cut off Iofias; for his sou^e pleased God, therefore he made have to take
him away from the midst of iniquities. He cut off Achab, 2. Reg. 22.
Agag, and Herod: because they were bloody and wily men, Psalm. 54.
therefore they did not live out half their days.

18 So true it is, We are daily and hourly put in mind of our change by the
usual accidents of common life.
Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live: and it is even as
true that follows in the same sentence, that his few days are full of
misery. He comes up and is cut down like a flower, he flees as it were a
shadow, and continues not. Man's life is as vnlasting as a flower. He comes
up and is cut down as a flower. He vanishes away like a shadow of a flower.
And while he lives he is full of misery. He comes into the world with
sorrow and weeping: whilst he lives in the world he is hated of the
world, or else (which is worse) of God; assaulted of Satan in continual
war: subject to the manifold diseases both of the body and of the soul, the
one truly miserable but the other most intolerable. He never continues in one
state. To day in his princely throne, to morrow in his dustie grave; to day
placed in great authority, to morrow cast out of countenance; to day in high
favor, to morrow in high displeasure; now rich, now poor; now in wealth, now
in woe; now sound, now sick; now ioiefull, now full of sorrow; to day a man, to
morrow nothing. O how short, how changeable, and how miserable is the state of
mortal man? which we neglect, but Jacob well considered, when he answered
Pharao of his age, The days of my peregrination are pauci and mali: Genesis 47.
few and evil, Walk therefore circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.
says S. Paul, for the days are evil. We are fallen into those evil days
and perilous times, of the which both Paul and Peter forewarned us. These may
be rightly called dismal days. The God of this world has blinded the eyes
of men. Let him therefore that stands (I say it again) take heed that he
fall not. Let us expect our change, and pray the Lord to increase our faith,
that we may be able to stand before him in that day, that dreadful day of
his just judgment.

19 As our days here are short and evil: Our change certain, the time
uncertain.
so is the time of our change either to better or worse uncertain. What is
most certain? Death. What most uncertain? the time of death says Bernard.
We are all tenants at will, uncertain how long to remain in this our earthly
tabernacle. Of this we are put in mind in the Lords prayer. Give us this day
our daily bread. We say this day as uncertain of to morrow. It is written of
one that being invited to a dinner on the morrow by his friend, he answered,
These many days I never had to morrow. Therefore says S. James, let us not
appoint for to morrow but with conditions, Iac. ^.
If the Lord will, and if we live. The Egyptians considering the uncertainty
of man's days were accustomed at their great feasts in the midst of their
iollitie to have one suddenly come forth with an image of death, and showing
it to the gests to pronounce this speech: Eat, drink, be merry, within a
while thou shall be such as this. And the Israelites dwelt in tents, uncertain
of their abode ever ready to shift: whereby they represent unto us our
peregrination in this mortality; wherein because we are uncertain to stay
long, we ought at all times to be ready to depart so, that we may enter into
that celestial Canaan. This time of man's life and death God has made
uncertain for two causes: the one that his mind might not be troubled; the
other this present text gives, and it is the last member of our division.

20 This end or change is daily to be looked for. Seeing The change of this
life continually to be looked for: the first change by death.
our days short, and the time of our dissolution unknown: wisdom would have
us to put our selves in readiness looking for our change the end of this bad
life, that it may be to us the beginning of a better. It is good counsel which
S. Augustine gives, Death looks for thee eueriewhere; if thou be wise look
thou eueriewhere for him. The remembrance of this our end would bridle sin
well in us. Eccles. 7.
Remember thy end and thou shall never do amiss. Mar. 13.
Christ says, Watch, for you know not at what hour he will come. Luc. 12.
He comes suddenly as a thief in the night. The Lord will come when thou
look not for him, and in an hour that thou know not. Matthew. 25.
Let us watch therefore with the wise virgins, having our lamps continually
burning, waiting for the coming of the bridegroom, that we may enter with
him into his joy.

21 And as man's life is short, The second by the second coming of Christ.
so is the coming of Christ at hand. Wait, for it will surely come, and will
not stay. The time is short. This we know, though it be not in us to know the
definite point of time: Abac. 2.
which to the Angels of heaven is unrevealed. But Christ has set down
certain tokens of the end which all are fulfilled, 1. Cor 7.
and amongst others he says, Iniquitte shall abound; charity shall wax
cold; ^. John 2.
the Gospel shall be preached in all the world, and then shall come the end.
Matthew. 24.
Never more iniquity, never less charity; the Gospel never so liberally
taught: behold the end. Peter says, The end of all things is at hand. 1. Pet
4.
If then at hand, how much nearer now? If those were the latter times, surely
these are the last times, the very end of the end. Hear the counsel of a
wise man. Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, Eccles. 5.
and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord
break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall
perish in the time of vengeance.

22 By procrastination, The first danger of not expecting continually our
change.
driving off, and forslowing our turning to the Lord and looking for our
change, three great dangers do ensue. First if we slumber and sleep in
security, if we accustom our selves with sinning, not looking for our change
neither remembering the fearful coming of our Lord; our custom will wax to
be our nature, and hard will it be for us to rise from sin in which we have
been so long and so deeply buried. After that Lazarus had lain four days
in the grave, John 12.
Christ used many circumstances for the raising of him again, who raised
others with a word.

23 Secondly it is dangerous in respect of the sudden taking away which
happens to many, The second (...).
in so much that they have not time sufficiently to think upon God, or once to
cry Lord help. The first age in all their iollitie not thinking on death were
suddenly drowned; (...) 7.
The Sodomites suddenly by fire consumed; Pharao with his army swallowed up
in the sea; Genesis 19.
The Israelites gnawne of deadly serpents; Exodus 14.
Dathan with his accomplices eaten up of the earth; Herod suddenly devoured
with lice; Number. 21.
The rich man after all his provision suddenly smitten with death; Number. 16.
Lying Ananias suddenly fell down dead, Acts 12*
Eglon the Moabite, Luc. 12.
Abner the captain suddenly murdered by the sword of Aod and Ioab. Acts 5.
All histories, all ages are full of like examples. Iud. 3.


24 The third danger is, The third.
that in driving off to the lest day we shall find hard time then to turn
unto our God. Sickness will sore disquiet us; Satan will extremely tempt us;
Our friends with talking and craving will molest us; the terror of our ouglie
conscience will astonish us; so that hard it will be for us then to be rightly
mindful of our end, and so in this extremity to turn to God that he in our
extreme case may turn his mercy toward us. And as S. Augustine says, The
remedies come too late when peril of death is near. Remember that which he
also says elsewhere, He that has lived well cannot die ill: Aug de doct.
Christ.
and he can hardly die well that has lived ill. He says hardly; not
vnpossibly, but questionlesseverie hardly.

25 Put thine household in an order, Motives to wishing and looking for our
change.
for thou shall die and not live, says Esaias to Ezechias. Give thy goods
whilst they be thine, for after death thou have no interest in them. Stand
with your loins girded, and your shoes on your feet, 2 Reg. 20.
and your staff in your hand, that you may be ready. Exodus 12.
We have slept too long in sin to our great danger. Let us now awake to our
speedy deliverance. It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time that
is past of our life after the will of the Gentiles. 1. Pet 4.
Let us now imitate that worthy soldier who after long warring under Adrian
the Emperor, returned home and lived as Christ's soldier a most godly life,
and after 7^ years died, and caused to be written on his tomb, Here lies
Similis a man, that was many years, and lived but seven. Let us these few
years that we have live them to God. For that only is worthy to be called a
life which brings us from a transitory life to an eternal, from a miserable
to a most blessed and glorious. Let the trumpe ever sound in our ears, Rise
you dead come unto judgment. Let us daily remember that we must die; and so
shall we contemn these things present, and make have to things to come. Truly
if we shall rightly consider the vanity of the world, the miserable estate of
man, Heb. 13.
that we are here but pilgrims and have no permanent city, that whilst we
live in this rotten tabernacle we are mere strangers and men from home, 2.
Cor. 5.
that we daily slide yea and fall into sin, that our righteous God hates
it, and that the stipend thereof is eternal death; and withal propose before
our eyes the celestial kingdom, the crown of glory, the eternal felicites
which the Lord has prepared in heaven for such as love his coming, 2. Tim. 4.
we will not only watchefully look for but most greedily desire the same; In
our heart we will daily cry with S. John, Come quickly Lord Jesus; Apoc. 22.
we will be like affected to S. Paul desiring to depart hence and to be with
Christ; we will sigh and mourn as he did, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? We will with Job even be
weary of our lives, and cry with Elias, It is enough O Lord, 1. Reg. 19.
take my soul; it will be with us as it was with all the blessed Patriarchs,
and Prophets, and Apostles, and holy men, now glorious Saints in heaven, who
continually being here, thirsted after God, and now most blessedly have
enioied him; we will utterly contemn this earthly trash, worldely vanities,
and transitory things, and desire and seek those things which are above where
Christ sits on the right hand of God; Col. 3.
we will whilst we have our being here which is but a while humble our
selves to walk with our God; and although we tread this earth, yet our
conversation will be in heaven, Ph^l. 3.
from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who will
change our vile body that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.

26 Thus we see that funerals are Christian, A repetition of that which h^^h
been spoken.
ancient, and commendable; that the causes are sundry good and godly, yet
neither our preaching nor prayer neither any other ceremony nor circumstance
can profit the dead, but are helping comforts to such as live, that only in
this life mercy remains for man and after this life only judgment. As we
now sow so we shall then reap. Here we are Christ's soldiers to fight a good
fight, so we may hope for the crown of glory. Which thing Job does well
declare unto us, First telling us that we are in continual war; wherein
both the generals, the captains, the trumpetors and common soldiers, that is
the prince, the nobility, the ministers and the people must take to them a
good courage, be faithful, dutiful and manfull in fighting the battle of the
Lord, every man keep his standing and answer his office. But we must all
strive for Gods truth and not struggle against it, not ambitiously contending
for superiority, or maliciously how to undermine and wrong one another. This
is no lawful combat, no Christian war; this is not to fight a good fight.
But we must wage war against our common and our deadly enemies, the devil,
the world and the flesh. The devil is a roaring lion, a subtle serpent, who
has overcome the perfectest, the strongest, the wisest. The world is all
wrapped in wickedness. The flesh wrestleth against the spirit. We must put on
the armor of God, resist the devil and he will fly from us, crucify the
world, chasten our flesh and bring it into subjection unto the more noble part,
our spirit. At length this our warrefare will come to an end, we may look
for a change. All the world is mutable, and of all things in the world man
most mutable. We would change our condition, our magistrates, our ministers,
our religion, all things. But the change that Job speaks of we least
remember, we little think upon the change of this mortal life. We may assure
our selves that we all shall die. It is an act of Parliament that shall never
be repealed, it is the way of all flesh. The days of man are short and
wretched: short, a spanne long: wretched, full of miseries. All flesh is as
grass and as a flower; both do fade, but the flower sooner. Cares,
wantonness, ambition, yea God in sundry respects cutteth off both the good
and the bad, good flowers and bad flowers but all as flowers. The time of our
change is uncertain, and often sudden; that our mind be not troubled, that
we always be in readiness. Jobs example admonishes us of this, I look still
when my changing shall come. Let us after his example daily look for our
change. Let us expect the coming of Christ. He comes in post, the
forewarnings are fulfilled; Iniquity abounds, Christian charity is frosen,
the Gospel is preached: Then is the end. Let us not slumber in security or
drive off to return unto our God. For it is hard for the buried in sin to
rise. Man often is suddenly smitten, that he has no time to repent. In his
last day he is disquieted by sickness, by Satan, yea by his friends, yea by
his own conscience. Let us live in reverent expectation of the Lord with our
loins girt, and with our lamps light, and let the trumpet of judgment ever
sound in our ears: it will well stir up our hearts. Let us live these few
days that remain unto the Lord, whom we ought to have served all our days.
And lastly recounting the vanity of the world, the miserable state of this
life, and the inestimable blessedness of the life to come, let us with John,
Paul, Elias, the blessed servants and Saints of God look for the appearance of
the coming of Christ Jesus: who will place us upon the right hand of his
father, and give us possession of our inheritance, that we may have the perfect
fruition of all the treasures prepared for us by our God in heaven. To him even
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God of
eternal majesty be all honor, etc.

The tenth Sermon. A Sermon preached at his first coming to York.
Lvc. 1. 74 That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies we may serve
him without fear,

75 In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.


THE greater and better part of holy Scripture either sets forth Gods
goodness toward us, As we have redemption at the hands of God, so he at ours
should have the duty of continual holiness and righteousness of life.
or our duty toward him. In these few but most pithie words of Zachary
both are comprehended. The great benefit we receive from God is our redemption
in Christ. The duty which we owe to him again, is in holiness and
righteousness of life continually to serve him. He touches our redemption in
one word, but in many words explicateth the duty which we owe for it unto our
redeemer: giving us hereby secretly to understand, that men are easily taught
to know; but hardly brought to do their masters will. We are rich in all speech
and understanding, 1. Cor. 1.
but in deeds full poor and barren. We know much but little do we, although
amongst other things known this be one; Luc. 11.
that, He which knows his masters will and does it not shall be beaten with
many stripes: Matthew. 23.
and this another; that, Not every one that says Lord Lord, but he which does
the will of the father shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. We are for all
this such as those Pharisees were whom Christ reprooueth because they said and
did not. Matthew. 7.
Even such we are become, as Jude does describe: Wels without water, Clouds
without rain, Ep. Iud.
Trees without fruit, dead; though not as yet pulled up by the roots. We are
hearers of the word, and yet skantly that: but workers of the word we are
not. God grant that the word wherein we now glory be not one day to our
shame: that the Gospel of salvation bear not witness against us and condemn
us: that the words which Christ has spoken unto us heap not judgment upon
our heads: that this be not our condemnation also, John 3.
that light being come into the world we love darkness more than light.
Surely if we continue to profess in words, Heb. 6.
and deny in deeds; to crucify to our selves our Savior Christ afresh; to
feed upon our vomit, and to welter in the loathsome mire of our filthy sin:
2. Pet. 2.
we shall make our selves unworthy of the kingdom of God, Acts 13.
we cannot claim the benefit of Christ's merits, neither be partakers of
that glorious redemption which Zachary here remembers unto us: but the blood
of Christ shall be upon our heads, and we shall perish in our sin as being
guilty of our own damnation. Osee. 13.
Thy destruction O Israel is of thy self.

2 Wherefore to avoid Gods perpetual indignation and our perpetual confusion,
Our redemption; the end thereof, to serve him; the manner of service, in
holiness, etc.
let us follow the counsel of Zachary; who instructed by the spirit of
wisdom teaches us: First, that we are redeemed; secondly, that the end of
our redemption is that we may serve him that has redeemed us; thirdly, after
what sort we should serve him. Where he says that we are delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, it argues that we once were in their hands. We are
freed; therefore we were bond. And in this point we have to consider: First our
bondage: then the mean of our deliverance: and lastly the cause, by which we
were delivered.

3 Adam through his rebellion lost his freedom and became All men by nature
bondmen.
conceived and borne in sin; Psalm. 51.
the children of wrath; bond unto Satan, and servant unto wickedness, Romans 6.
the deserved reward whereof is death, even double death, this our present
mortality, and everlasting damnation. Romans 5.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death: so death went
over all men, in as much as all men sinned. With Adam we lost Gods first favor
and protection; with him the gracious image of God was blotted out in us also;
with him we were expelled out of paradise, cast upon the face of the cursed
earth, thrown into the hands of our cruel enemy whose liuerie we did put
on, and under whose miserable thraldom we lived. In this fall from God we
lost our immortality, we lost our freewill, we lost our wisdom, our virtue,
our light, our glory, our joy, our heaven, our God. Our perverse heart became
prone to all evil and full of all sinnefulnesse, we became unwise in our
judgment, disobedient to our God, deceived and deceiving, serving lusts and
deadly pleasures, living in malitiousnesse and envy, hateful and hating one
another. Ephesians 2.
We were without hope, and without God in this present world; all blinded in
ignorance, and wrapped in all sin. For as we changed our master, so changed
we our minds and manners also, and for Christ we served Antichrist; we threw
away the love of Gods eternal truth, and according to the ignorance of our
blinded hearts hungerly fed upon all poisoned error, and plunged our selves
into all wickedness. This was our most miserable estate, thus we were and thus
we are by nature. This was the pitiful condition of all humane flesh.

4 Let us now see the mean of this our deliverance from this deadly
captivity. By Christ we are redeemed out of bondage.
We are ransomed out of the hands of our enemies, pulled out of the jaws of
Satan, freed from the servitude of Antichrist, of ignorance, and of sin only
by the mediation of our redeemer Jesus Christ. He is the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, which alone has trodden the winepresse, alone has fought the battle,
in fighting achieved the victory, and by vanquishing brought our enemy Satan
under our feet for ever. On the cross with his blood he blotted out the
handewriting that was against us; Col. 2.
he spoiled our foes of their prai^; Ephesians. 4.
he took even captivity it self captive, in a word he wrought our full and
complete deliverance. The price of our redemption was not gold but blood; the
precious blood of our blessed Savior. The blood of Jesus Christ does deliver
us from all sin. And as he died to redeem us so rose he again to justify
us. In rising again he triumphed over death now conquered; he burst the gates
and cheines of hell, and set our feet in a place of great liberty, he
clothed us with his righteousness, reconciled us to his father, of enemies
made us friends, of no people the people of God, of strangers citizens with
Angels and inhabitants of heaven, free denisons with the children of God, and
heirs of his everlasting kingdom. This deliverance out of bondage, this
redemption, this kingdom of God and everlasting inheritance our Christ has
purchased, and God has granted to all such as thankfully will receive him. As
many as received him, John 1.
to them he gave power to be made the sons of God: and to receive him is to
believe in him: for so it follows, To them which believe in his name. Faith
therefore is the mean to make us partakers of that great redemption in Christ
Jesus. Heereunto all the Prophets bear witness, Acts 10.
that whosoever shall believe in him, by his name he shall receive remission of
sins, and withal eternal life.

5 And as Christ has delivered all his out of the captivity of Satan and
sin, Us he has delivered after a more peculiar and special manner
so has he also us after a more special and peculiar manner out of that den
of thieves, out of that prison of Romish servitude, out of the bloody claws
of that cruel and proud Antichrist. Our God has used our Moses to deliver us
from Egyptiacal servitude, that we may serve him henceforward in freedom of
conscience, he has led us out of a marvelous darkness into a marvelous
light, he has given us (for his gift it is) an understanding heart to know
God the father and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ, unto whom by this star
his shining Gospel he has conducted us. This truth of God has discovered
yea and discomfited also gross error. For the want of this light was the cause
of all our blindness, which is the mother of all superstition which is the
enemy to all religion. That now we have eyes to see and hearts to understand
there is no other cause besides the mercy of our redeemer.

6 For of the cause of our gracious deliverance thus Zachary records. The
cause of our deliverance is the mercy of hi^ who has delivered us.
It was, says he, that he might show mercy toward our fathers. God made a
covenant with our father Abraham* confirmed it with an oath, not that it might
be surer, but that we might be more assured of it: the covenant was that he
would show mercy and in mercy work our deliverance. To perform this
covenant of grace and mercy made unto our fathers, and comprehending also us,
he gave up his only begotten son in the fullness of time to death. There was
no other motive why he should work our deliverance but only this; his mercy.
God therefore which is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved
us even when we were dead by sin revived us with Christ. The cause of our
redemption was his good will only. Ephesians. 2.
For, By grace we are delivered. He did it according to the good pleasure of
his own will, according to the riches of his grace. So that all the steps to
this our redemption are built upon mercy only. God in mercy made covenant of
our deliverance, in mercy confirmed it with an oath, in mercy through the
merits of Christ performed his promise to us, so that our whole redemption is
free, not due; of mercy, and not of merits; Not by works which we have
wrought, Tit. 3.
but according to his great mercy he has saved us. Man never brought one
stone to this building; man never laid one finger to this work; it is the
only building and work of GOD who in tender compassion has both begun and
finished it. We may well wonder that God with so merciful eyes looked upon so
miserable and so sinful creatures, that the son of God would die for the
redemption of his enemies. This does in deed commend his love, seeing that all
which he has done is of mere mercy in himself, without any shadow of
merit in us.

We were redeemed to the end we might serve him.
least he utterly devour us. He is cast out of our house; let him enter in no
more, least he bring seven with him worse than himself, and then our evil
end be far worse than our bad beginning. Now that Christ has cleansed us
from our sin, let us not swinelike return to wallowe in that slime again.
Thou art made whole, says Christ, I have washed away thy sin with my blood:
John 4.
Go and sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Now that Christ
in a mighty arm has freed us from Pharao, from the house of bondage; let us
return no more to the flesh pots of Egypt, let us not lust after quails: for
if we feed upon them, we shall surfeit of them to our destruction. Let us
serve no more him that serves Satan; that undoubted man of sin. And lastly
now that Christ has opened our blinded eyes, and has powered understanding
into our hearts: now that he has given us a lantern to guide our feet, let
us tumble no more in darkness, but as the children of light walk in the
light honestly as becomes men in so clear noone day. For the end of our
redemption is that we may serve him without fear, that has so dearly
redeemed us.

8 First we must serve. Man borne unto labor and service.
Secondly we must serve no other but him. Thirdly him we must serve without
fear. We were created, man is borne unto service and labor, as birds unto
flight. We were not redeemed and bought with a price to be idle and do
nothing, but to glorify him in body and spirit that has bought us. Matthew. 8.
We are not called to stand or sit still, but to walk every one in that
vocation wherewith he is called. John 12.
The scriptures are full of such speeches as these, 2. Tim. 2.
Go, walk, work, sweat, why stand ye idle? Genesis 3.
To teach us that service is required at our hands. Matthew. 20.


9 God delivered us to the end that being delivered we might now serve him as
heretofore we served Satan. We must serve him and no other.
We are not now our own men to serve who^ or how we lift, Matthew. 6.
but we are his to serve him as he prescribes. No man can serve two masters:
we have yielded and promised our service to him, therefore besides him we may
serve no other.

10 We may not serve Mammon; Not Mammo^, as covetous men and usurers do.
for that is made to serve us. The covetous man which serves his money is
justly called of Paul an Idolater. For he is our God not whom we profess, but
in whom we repose our trust, Ephesians. 5.
and whom we serve and obey. When the Lord commands one thing and his money
persuades an other: will not his obedience declare whom he makes his God? God
says, Luc. 6.
Lend freely and look for no gain. But will the usurer whose money is his God,
remit his interest because of this, because the Lord has so charged him? No he
will not so let go his ten or twenty or thirty in the hundred. To him the
glory of God yea and his own soul is vile, nothing is precious but only
money. What the Prophet speaks of putting forth money to usury he full
little regards, but feeds still upon his mast, and blesses himself when
he waxes fat, not perceiving that God has already plagued him with a plague
of all plagues the obduration of his heart. And although that God has given
him over into a dull and senseless mind, his ears being so dammed up that
nothing can have entrance to move or touch his hard heart: yet he still
blesses himself and his accursed soul. Thou usurer thou idolater that do
glory in thy shame, in thy evil gotten gold: do thou not know that thy
wealth shall melt like snow before the sun? think thou still to hold it?
O fool this night shall they t^ke away thy soul, Luc. 12.
perhaps this instant, Luc. 8.
and then whose is all this? After that Zacheus fell to the service of Christ,
and that Christ entered into his house, he presently forsook the service of
Mammon, made a large restitution of that which he had gained by such unlawful
means, and then began to be liberal, not only to lend freely but to give
for nothing: he gave the one half of all his goods to the poor. If God would
at this day work thus in the heart of one Zacheus, a rich usurer: how many
poor might be relieved by such a restitution? He might maintain many a needy
man and save his own soul. Well this one thing we know. This word that
proceeds out of Gods mouth against usury shall not return in vain: Esaias 55.
if it cannot work reformation; it will work confusion.

11 As these serve their money so there are some Domino non seruientes sed suo
ventri, Not the belly as time seruers.
servant to the belly and not to the Lord. He serves the belly who frames
himself to be of any religion so that in this world he may live by it: when
popery has the upper hand, then a papist; when the Gospel is in due
estimation, a protestant; all things to all men that somewhat may be gained or
saved to himself. He makes no difference between the Mass and the
Communion, Christ and Beliall; but for his belly sake will halt on both sides,
serve all times and turns. Such a one was Leontius Bishop of Antioch, Theod.
lib. 2. cap. 24.
who being in heart an Arrian, covered his religion and joined with the
counsel of Nice in outward profession of the truth. So his soul was led by
the devil, and his body by the world.

12 Some and those many are servants of men, Not men as the popish faction,
etc.
as those which in matters of religion wholly hang their souls upon humane
authorities and judgments. So did the Corinthians; I hold of Paul, 1. Cor. 1.
I of Cephas, and I of Apollos. So do all the Popes favorites. And so do those
that choose to themselves new masters, new teachers, 2. Tim 4.
according to their itching and wandering ^ares, esteeming such and despising
others. So do they which praise and flatter men in their folly, thereby to
win themselves estimation with them which have men's persons in admiration for
gains sake. Finally so do they which repose their trust in the merits of men,
that seek justification or remission of sins either by their own works or
by the deserts of others. For to know that he is our redemption,
sanctification, and justice, is no small part of Gods service: to give this to
any other is to take it from him: which who so does is not worthy to be
named his servant. He that serves him must serve him alone.

13 Not him and the world: Not ye world, sin and Satan.
For the world is wholly set on vanity and mischief, it hate^h him and
therefore we must hate it. Romans 6.
If ye be his servant let not sin bear rule in your bodies or have
dominion over you. We must die unto sin, that we may live unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. He that does sin is the servant of the devil: the
devil is but a bad master to serve: he is a lier, a thief and a murderer. And
he entertaineth no servants but such as be like himself, whose wages are
fire, cheines, brimstone, darkness, wailing, howling and gnashing of teeth,
in a word everlasting death and damnation. We are nor ransomed out of the
hands of our enemies to serve these masters, mammon, the belly, men, sin,
the world, or the devil. But we are redeemed to serve him only, to serve our
Christ, our redeemer that has full dearly bought us. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.
and him only shall thou serve.

14 Him we must serve without fear. In the Psalm it is said, We must serve
with fear, chi^like not slavish.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. And here we
are taught to serve him without fear. As there is but one God, so the
scripture is always one. There is a fear which children have toward their
parents, P^al. 2.
and a fear of servants toward their masters. God will be feared of us as
children, but not as servant, or if as servant, not as slaves. The
believing Christian, the regenerate child of God, who through faith in Christ
is certain of his deliverance from the devil and from hell, assured of
remission of sins and of life everlasting in the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ our Savior, he serves in the reverent fear of love, and not in
that dreadful fear of death and everlasting damnation wherewith the reprobate
mind is daunted. He fears not death, for he is sure of life; he fears
not damnation, for he is assured of salvation; he believes that which Christ
has promised, and doubts nothing of the obteining of that which Christ has
procured for him. He is surely persuaded with S. Paul, Romans 8.
that neither death, nor life, nor tribulation, nor affliction, nor any thing
present or to come shall separate him from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus. 1. Cor. 15.
He fears therefore neither the sting of death, nor the power of Satan. But
this certainty of Gods love toward him in Christ and the testimony of his
love toward God again casts out all fear of eternal punishment. Romans 8.
For ye have not says the Apostle, received again the spirit of bondage unto
fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption by which we cry Abba
father. This spirit testifies with our spirit that God is our gracious father,
and if he our father, we his children; and if his children, heirs of his
glorious kingdom. The preaching of the Law lets us see our sin, but no
remedy against the sting thereof, so that it makes us fear and with trembling
look for the reward of sin which is everlasting death. But the spirit of
adoption by the preaching of the Gospel tells us that in Christ we have
remission of sins, we are reconciled unto God and adopted by him, we are his
chosen children and may boldly and joyfully call him father. And this
certainetie of our salvation the spirit of God testifies to our spirit,
whereby we put away all servile fear of punishment being assured of Gods
constant favor and eternal love toward us: who never leaves unfinished
that which he has begun, nor forsakes him whom he has chosen.

15 Therefore dangerous and desperate is that doctrine of the Papists which
does teach us ever to be doubtful and in suspense of our salvation. Popery
teaches in stead of fear, distrust.
A lamentable, discomfortable, and miserable estate. Here it is in one word
confounded. For Zachary says we are redeemed to serve him without fear or
doubtfulnesse. For where doubt is there is fear, and what greater fear than
of a thing so fearful? He that will serve God must serve him in a quiet and
ioiefull conscience with a sure and undoubted confidence of mercy and
salvation in Christ the Lord of mercy. With thee is mercy, Psalm* 131.
says the Prophet, that thou may be feared. As if he should say, Thou art
full of clemency and compassion, and therefore we serve thee with a reverent
and without a servile fear, being persuaded of thy great mercy.

16 Fear is ever of the inferior to the superior. Inferiors must fear
superiors.
It is not required in the prince to fear the subject; the master the
servant, the father the child, or the husband the wife, but contrary in all.
God fears not man his creature, man ought to fear God who has created him:
to fear him as a loving father and not as men do fear a fierce tyrant.

17 The true fear which is required of us is ever joined with love. Our fear
must be joined with love.
The good child fears to offend his father for that love and reverence he
bears to him, and not in respect or for fear of punishment. The honest and
well natured wife that truly loves her husband, for the same cause fears
and takes great heed least in any thing she should offend him. Even with such
fear ought we to serve our God, who is our father; our Christ, who is our
spouse. Psalm. 2.
Of this godly fear the Prophet David says, Serve the Lord in fear. And
again, Fear the Lord all ye his Saints. Psalm. 34.
Of this Christ speaks, Matthew. 10.
Fear him which can destroy both body and soul. This fear great goodness
and happiness do accompany. It is the beginning of true wisdom. For all
wisdom without the fear of God is but earthly, fleshly and devilish. They
that have it shall be satisfied with all good things: Psalm. 34.
There is no want to them that fear him. It causes men to decline from evil;
it banisheth sin, woorketh repentance in man's heart; and happy are all they
that fear the Lord, as they cursed which fear him not. If the Angel had
feared the Lord, he had still kept his place and glorious estate, and not been
made of an Angel a devil, cast out of heaven into hell. Genesis 3.
If Adam had loved and feared God, he had not been banished out of paradise,
and thrown upon the face of this cursed earth. Gen 7.
If the fear of God had not of old wanted, Genesis 19.
the whole world had not been drowned. If the city of Sodoma had feared God,
they might have remained in prosperity until this day. Genesis 4.
If Cain had feared God, he had not so trecherously murdered his brother. Genesis
9.
If Cham, he had not so shamefully discovered his father. If Laban, Genesis 29.
he had not so deceitfully dealt with Jacob. Number. 11.
If Pharao, he would have let Israel depart when GOD commanded. If Israel had
loved and truly feared God, they would not have loathed Manna, despised
magistrates, followed fleshly lusts, murdered the Prophets, crucified Christ
and persecuted his Apostles. If the Corinthians had feared God, they would not
have been so contentious, 1. Cor. 11.
so proud, so adulterous, neither would they so uncharitably have judged their
brethren in things indifferent: they would not have condemned marriage the
institution of God, neither in such sort profaned the holy Sacraments of
Christ. The fear of God would have brought forth better fruit in all these, and
the want thereof brought forth this bad fruit.

18 If the fear of God dwelt in our hearts, The preaching of the Gospel with
so little fruit is a token that the true fear of God is wanting.
the Gospel so truly and plentifully preached among us would no doubt bring
forth far more fruit, after so many monitions, persuasions, and entreaties we
would lead a better life. When there are amongst us many that breed
contention and make division, that lend out their money upon usury, that
pollute their neighbors bed with adultery, that shut up the bowels of mercy
and compassion, and suffer Christ to beg, cry and starve in the streets,
that neither regard the heavenly message of their salvation nor esteem the
messenger by whom it is brought, that show no reverence to the word of God,
but manifestly hate, loath and despise it, is it not too clear and manifest
that we fear not the Lord?

19 If the fear of God were in us would we deal with the servant of God as
we now do? The cruel entr^ating of Gods messengers.
The dealing of Hanun the son of Nahash toward David's servant was not more
villainous than the dealings of the world are with the honorable Ambassadors of
the most high God at this day. 2. Sam. 10.
David sent his servants to the king of the children of Ammon to comfort him
straight upon the death of his father. The malicious Ammonites misconstruing
their intent, whispered in the ear of their Lord: Think thou that David
does honor thy father* or that he has sent comforters unto thee? Are they not
rather sent as spies to search the city and so to overthrow it? He had no
sooner heard the name of a spy, but hands were laid upon David's servants,
they were sent away with their beards half shaven and their coats cut off in
the vnseemeliest place, to his own everlasting ignominy and shame which so
despitefully used men sent unto him of mere love and hearty meaning. For the
good king had no other drift or purpose in his heart but this: I will show
kindness to Hanun as his father showed kindness unto me. The true David, the
most mighty Prince, the king of all kings has in favor, mercy and
reconciled love sent his ambassadors his ministers unto you; to comfort you in
your griefs, and to bring you ioiefull tidings of a kingdom which it has
pleased his father to bestow upon you. These messengers ought of right to be
honorably received. Entreat such with honor says the Apostle. Phil. 2.
Nay, such messengers are worthy of double honor. 1. Tim. 1.
But behold they are taken as if they were spies, they are accounted as the
offscourings refuse and baggage of the world; 1. Cor. 4.
not as the ambassadors of the great king, but as contemptible pesants and base
outcasts of men. Away they are sent laden with spiteful words, with
slanderous reproaches, injurious dealings, all kinds of contumely and
disgrace. But note of whom: of the Ammonites which fear not God, of the
profanely minded Atheist, of the carnal gospeller, of the zealous hypocrite,
of such in whom the fear of God or the care of their souls remains not; of
such as also spoil the patrimony of Christ, such as would not stick I think
to sell Christ himself if they might for money as Judas did, and to cast lots
for his coat with Pilates soldiers. This robbery and spoil, this
despitefulnesse and ignominy done unto David's messengers he took in such sort
as done unto him self. For the wrong or ignominy done to the messenger is
done to the master who sent him, and on whose business he goes. David would
not put it up so but revenged it. He comforted his faithful messengers, sent
them new apparel, and caused them to remain at an appointed place Jericho
until their beardes were grown again, for it was ignominious to the Jews to
be beardlesse. Afterward he addresseth forth an army of strong soldiers, who
set upon the Ammonites, put them to flight and made great mortality. And does
not Christ our king esteem the ignominy done to his messengers as if it were
done to himself? Has he not said, He that despises you despises me? No
doubt he shall comfort his afflicted and despised messengers. As they suffer
for him, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
so shall they reign and shine in glory: It is a righteous thing with him to
render unto them that are despised rest, but unto despisers tribulation and
vengeance in the day when he shall show himself from heaven with armies of
Angels in flaming fire to the confusion of his enemies. And if in this world
also he take from such unthankful Ammonites the Gospel, religion, all
knowledge and learning, if for the light he give them darkness, for truth
lies, for knowledge blindenes, for learning barbarism, for Christ Beliall;
they have the just reward which is due unto them that truly fear not the
Lord. We must serve, we must serve him, we must serve him without servile
fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. It
belongs to God to prescribe how he will be served.
Here we are to note first that God himself prescribes how men shall serve
him, then what service it is which he prescribes. God accepts of no service
but such as he commands. Deuteronomy. 12.
Ye shall not do every one that which seems right unto you, but ye shall
do what soever I inioine you, says the Lord. Our service is limited to that
which God likes. Their worshipping and serving of God is in vain which teach
doctrines the precepts of men. Marc. 7.
That which men think highly of, that does God abhor. Saul thought that
sacrifice had been service: 1. Sam 15.
God had liked better of his obedience. 2. Sam. 6.
Oza supposed he had done God very good service in holding up the arc which
was like to fall. But God taught him that it was far otherwise. The Scribes
and Pharisees thought themselves the only men that served God because of their
long and often praying, their much fastings, their washings, their tithings,
their giving of alms: but who required these things at their hands? Where
has God prescribed these kinds of outward service and worship to be done as
being acceptable to him without inward holiness and true righteousness? In
the same rank with these Pharisaicall devises we may place those papal
inventions of Masses, Pilgrimages, Vows, auricular confessions, and whatsoever
man has invented without the warrant of Gods word, seem it never so godly
and holy unto them. For the word of God is the only rule of our religion, our
only direction in the service of God.

21 The service which God has here prescribed us is this, He will be served
in holiness and righteousness syncerely and continually.
To serve him, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our
life. Herein is contained whatsoever God commands in his Law. This is the
brief of both the Tables. Holiness has relation to the former table, and
righteousness to the latter: In holiness is set forth our duty toward
God, in righteousness toward man. We must serve God in holiness in respect
of himself, we must serve man in righteousness in respect of God. For that
which we do to men, if he command it, we do it unto him. In as much as ye
have done this, Matthew. 25.
says Christ, to one of these little ones ye have done it to me.

22 Holiness is the end of our election: Our election; his will, commandment,
example, calling requires holiness at our h^nds.
He chose us before the foundations of the world that we might be holy. Our
holiness is a thing which God does greatly desire: This is the will of God
even your holiness. Unto holiness we are not only constrained by his
commandment, but allured also by his example: Be holy because I am holy.
Ephesians. 1.
Unto this we are called: For God did not call us unto uncleanness but unto
holiness. 1. These. 4.
So that unless we esteem vilely of our own election, unless we refuse to
satisfy the will, to obey the commandment, to follow the example, and to
answer the vocation in which God has called us, we must be holy.

23 And this our holiness in serving of him must not be smothered in our
mind, Our holiness^ must appear.
or concealed in our chamber, but be showed in open place. As his benefits
toward us are more clear than the noone day: so our confession of him and
praise of his name must be openly in the face and eyes of the world,
especially in the congregation of his Saints. For whosoever says Christ is
ashamed of me before men, I will be ashamed of him before my father. 1. Tim. 6.
Christ has given us example, he made a good and an open confession unto
Pontius Pilate. Daniel being forbid by the king prayed openly thrice a day to
the God of Israel. God commanded Solomon to build him a temple wherein
publicly he would be served and worshipped of al his people. All the people
ascended up to Sion to the house of the Lord of hosts there publicly to serve
and praise their God. Such as will be members of Christ must be knit together
in one body: and in one place with one mind and one mouth glorify the Lord.

24 It is true that when the Church is infected and polluted with idolatry and
superstition, When Christian assemblies to the serving of God may be secret,
and when not.
when the house of prayer is made a den of thieves, the temple of God a
synagogue of Satan, when the truth of God is persecuted with the professors
thereof; then we are to serve him as we conveniently may. When public service
is public idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.
then we are to listen unto those admonitions, 2. Cor. 6.
Avoid the worshipping of Idols: Bear no yoke with Infidels, Esaias 52.
Depart, Go out, Touch not that which is polluted. Rather celebrate the
Passover in the wilderness with Christ than in a temple profaned and defiled
with Idolatry. When the gospel is persecuted, Acts 2.
secret congregations are allowed. When Christ was crucified the Disciples kept
themselves secretly together in a parlour at Jerusalem for fear of the Jews,
and there served God. Such private congregations the Ecclesiastical histories
plentifully set forth and commend. Heb. 11.
In such tempests to serve our God in deserts, in hills, in dens and holes of
the earth we must be content. But conuenticles or private meetings, when the
gospel of God being strengthened with the civil hand, has his free and safe
passage, is publicly and syncerely preached, when al persecution and fear
thereof is wholly vanished, have been ever suspicious, and they are the nurces
of all errors. It is the property of froward sectaries whose inventions cannot
abide the light, to make obscure conuenticles when the doctrine of truth is set
at liberty. The Donatists, the Arrians, the Anabaptists, the Family of love
with all others of the like sort, fostered up their errors in secret and dark
corners. But such as be of the flock of the great sheepeheard Christ ought to
assemble themselves in one sheepefold. Peruersitie never wants excuses, neither
is satisfied with any reason: but no man can in right refuse to communicate
with us in our Church. It is the sanctuary of the Lord, the house of God, the
ark of God; wherein the treasures of heaven are laid open for our use, no
other than such as God has commanded. The golden pot with Manna, the
flourishing rod of Aaron and the tables of Moses: these are no bugges to fray
away Gods children. They have nothing offered them but the heavenly food
whereupon the elect of GOD should feed, even that bread which Christ has
sanctified and broken unto us for our comfort.

25 Such stray sheep therefore as will not of their own accord assemble
themselves to serve the Lord in the midst of this holy congregation may
lawfully and in reason ought to be constrained thereunto. Christian magistrates
may constrain their subjects unto open assemblies where God is served.
For though religion cannot be driven into men by force, yet men by force may
be driven to those ordinary means whereby they are wont to be brought to the
knowledge of the truth. Parents cannot constrain their children to be learned:
But parents may constrain them to repair thither where they may be taught.
Thus you see that God must be served of us in holiness: holiness openly
declared and professed, not secretly kept and laid up only in our hearts and
bosoms.

26 It follows in the words of Zachary, With holiness righteousness must be
joined.
And in righteousness. This righteousness has chiefly respect to the second
table, and puts us in mind how we ought to use our neighbor. In doing
right unto him we serve the Lord Jesus (whose commandment this is) in
righteousness. One lesson well observed were sufficient for this matter. If we
could love our neighbors with that kindness which we do our selves, which
is the precept of the Law, we would not want in any part of righteous duty
toward men. Romans 13.
Render unto every one that which is due, this is righteousness.

27 They which are in authority are called Justices, Righteous magistrates.
to the end that their name might put them in mind of that duty which they
owe to the common wealth: If they do not see that Laws be put in practice and
execution; if in judgment they do not justly punish transgressors and deal
in deciding matters of controversy between man and man with an even hand; if
for fear they cruelly cast away the innocent (for cowards been ever cruel)
or for favor spare the rich; if they be men of corrupt minds, patrones of
evil men and of evil causes for their own commodity; if they be not wise,
with Solomon; if they fear not GOD, with Moses; if they love not the truth, as
David; if they hate not covetousness, as did Samuel: surely they do not serve
God in righteousness and justice, because they are injurious toward their
neighbors.

28 The minister of Gods word is also a servant. Righteous ministers.
We are your servant brethren for Christ's sake whose embassage we bring.
If we be fraudulent or negligent in performing the parts of this duty, we
are most unrighteous.

29 To serve in justice is the duty of every man: Righteous ^ich men.
The rich man is a servant to the poor to relieve and comfort him as he is
able. For that is right and to that end God has made him rich, that he as a
faithful steward might bestow those rich blessings upon the family and
household of God. John the Bishop of Constantinople who for his liberal
releeuing of the needy was surnamed the Almner was wont to provide daily
meat for the poor and when it was made ready, to come forth and himself
see it served. This service is of us very slenderly and slackely done: Christ's
impotent and miserable members are sent away not relieved. To suffer him in his
members so to beg who has given thee all that thou have is horrible
ingratitude, it is not the part of a Christianly afdicted heart of one that
serves his Lord in righteousness.

30 The counselor at the Law is a servant to his client whom he ought to serve
in righteousness. Righteous Lawyers.
Take not excessiuely of the poor, for that is not right and equal. Of right
you should even without money plead his cause: so God commands who will no
doubt in that respect pay you your fees with a bountiful hand. Take not of both
parties, for that is treachery and not justice. Thou take not those fees but
stealest them. Neglect not thy clients cause, if thou promise perform, neither
take upon thee more than thou can well answer. If with words and subtle
handling thou winnest an evil cause to another man's wrong, thou art guilty of
that wrong: if thou do by negligence loose a good cause, thou art guilty of
that loss and seruest not thy client nor thy God in righteousness.

31 To conclude and knit up all in a word: Righteous men of what estate soever.
of what trade or vocation soever we be, this we must know, that he only
serves God in holiness and righteousness, Tit. 2.
who denying impiety and worldly concupiscence lives soberly, justly and
holily in this present world; soberly as touching himself, justly toward his
neighbor, and holily as concerning God; he that casts off the old Adam and
puts on Jesus Christ; he that truly repents, that leads a new life;
who hears the word and works it, who knows the will of God and does it.

32 And this we must do coramipso, Our holiness and righteousness must be in
zeal.
before him. The service which we do before him must be zealous, hearty and
sincere. We may not serve God with lukewarm service as the Laodiceans did.
Apoc. 2.
For then God no doubt will vomit out us as he threatened to do them. Vehement
therefore and zealous must we be for the house of God, for the glory of God,
and in Gods service.

33 But every zeal God does not accept or like of. With what kind of zeal we
must serve
For as there is a zeal according to knowledge, so there is a blind headie
zeal void of true knowledge, and therefore of true faith. S. Paul in his
blind zeal persecuted the Church of God. 1. Tim. 1.
The Jews in their blind zeal crucified their Lord Christ. Romans 10.
They have a zeal, says the Apostle, but not according to knowledge. If they
had known the Lord of glory, they would never have crucified him. This blind
zeal causes poor deceived souls to think themselves zealously affected
toward Christ, when they are stubbornely set for Antichrist. Zeal without
knowledge is not zeal but stomach. It is not true zeal but rather a
brainsick giddiness which causes many to forsake their natural home and to
wander to Jerusalem there to woorship God; as if they thought with Benadab king
of Syria that God were the God of the hills and not of the valleies. 1. Reg. 10.
It is another thing to be eager, and another thing to be zealous. They deceive
themselves which think they do the duty of servants zealously bent in their
masters cause, when they are sharp without all sober and stayed consideration,
reproouing them openly whom they ought privately to admonish, rashly condemning
them whom they ought charitably to judge as brethren.

34 We must be zealous in Gods cause. Examples of ^^ue zeal in Gods service.
For Angels themselves without zeal are nothing. But our zeal must be as I
said with judgment. Exodus 33.
Ye are not ignorant what heroical zeal there was in Moses, 1. Reg. 18.
in Elias, in Iehu, in Phinees, in Matt^^thias, in Christ. 2. Reg. 10.
This zeal, Number. 25.
this love, this true holiness and hearty fear of God is abated in the best
and utterly banished out of most men. 1. Mac. 2.
Where now in what corner of this earth shall we find a man in zeal
comparable unto David, John 2.
whom when the word of God was contemned and his ministers despised the grief
the of had like to have wasted away? Luc. 19.
My zeal Psalm. 119.
says he, has even melted me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.
What a cross, what atorment was the sin of Sodom to the heart of just Lot?
The small remorse which we have for sin shows our zeal is not very great.
Let us pray therefore to God as to increase our faith, so to kindle true zeal
in us: that we may as Phinees with the sword of the holy ghost the wo^d of
God run through, cut asunder and destroy all the filth and uncleanness which
lies lurking in our hearts; that we cut off all our lewd affections, our
carnal lusts, our lascivious thoughts; that we may so mortify the members of
the body and rectify the affections of the mind, that with a chaste life in
body and soul we may glorify our God. Let us pray for the zeal that was in
Christ Jesus, that we may with the sharp whippe of unfeigned repentance drive
out of our bodies which are the temples of Gods holy spirit all buying and
selling, all covetousness, usury, envy, lying, deceit; that we give not
our bodies and souls to any such profane use, but to be kept vncorrupt and
pure as beseems the temples of his holy spirit; that we may offer up unto
God in the midst of these temples the sacrifice of an humble and of a contrite
heart, Psalm. 51.
the sacrifice of righteousness, the sacrifice of praise. Let us beseech him I
say to inflame our hearts with true zeal, that earnestly seeking our own
salvation and the safety of others, we may be zealous as the blessed Apostle
was with the zeal of God: 2. Cor. 11.
even holy and zealous before the Lord.

35 For as our zeal must be coupled with judgment and knowledge, Our zeal
must be as in knowledge, so in synceritie.
so with truth and synceritie. God will not be served with fained holiness
and with counterfaite religion, with outward shows and with the lips, but
with the heart. In our prayers we must power out our hearts before him: in
repentance our hearts must be rent asunder: in our alms we must keep a single
heart: when the word is preached we must open our hearts to receive it:
whatsoever we do in his service we must do it heartily as to the Lord. For
all our serving of him is in vain, nay it is damnable if we seek only which
way we may appear holy and righteous unto men. Such as we would seem to be
we must be in deed, such we must appear in truth before that Lord who sees
our very hearts and examineth our in most reins. Let us ever remember that
God looks upon us with open eyes, he beholds in greatest darkness, he
sees the unsearchable heart and thought of man: no secret can be kept secret
from him. This would bridle in us all inward wicked cogitations, all outward
wicked works, if we could well and as we should consider it. For if we be
ashamed and afraid to offend in the sight of man who has only power over our
mortal body; how much more should we be overcome with shame and fear to
sin in the sight of that eternal God, who has power over body and soul to
cast them both into eternal fire?

36 Thus we are to serve our redeemer, Our serving of God must continue all the
days of our life.
we are ransomed and bought to serve not for a day, but for all our days, we
are redeemed for ever to serve him for ever. He that runs is not crowned til
he have ended his race, and then begins his glory. Judas and Demas began to
serve the Lord: but they were soon weary: their service was unrewarded
because it was vncontinued. Only he that continues to the end shall be saved,
which salvation of our souls and bodies the Lord of his infinite mercies
grant, that we may aspire unto him in this life, and attain unto him in the
life to come through the merits of Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and
the holy ghost, etc.

The eleventh Sermon. A Sermon made at York.
ROMANS 13. 8 Owe nothing to any man but this to love one another: for he that
loves another has fulfilled the Law.

9 For this, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall
not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet, and if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
even in this, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

10 Love does not evil to his neighbor: therefore is love the fulfilling of
the Law.

11 And that considering the season, that it is now time that we should arise
from sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed it.

12 The night is past, and the day is at hand: let us therefore cast away the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

13 So that we walk honestly as in the day.


OUR Apostle in the former part of this Chapter has diligently set down as
well the office and authority of a magistrate, Magistrates ought to be obeyed
whether they be Heathen or Christian.
as also what duty and obedience the subjects do owe unto him. He was
occasioned hereunto for that the Jews the elect nation of God (who therefore
claimed to be a free people) could not abide so to subject themselves as to
live obediently under foreign Princes. The Gentiles which now were become
Christians thought it not agreeable to their holy profession to yield
obedience unto wicked magistrates persecuters of true religion, who by evil
means had attained unto that authority and behaved themselves as ill in it.
Paul in this treaty of a magistrate meets with both these errors. He lays
down this foundation for an absolute and a general rule: Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. This obedience he requires both of Jew and
Gentile; of Prophet and Priest, in sum of every Christian: and this position
he proves by sundry forcible reasons.

2 First there is no power but of God. Why obedience should be yielded unto
Magistrates.
The powers that are be ordained of him. Be the magistrate Jew or Gentile,
Christian or Heathen, good or bad, he has his authority from God the
magistrate of all magistrates. God has placed him and ordained him to be thy
governor, in respect whereof thou art bound for thy conscience sake toward
God for to obey him. Another reason why every soul should live in subjection
to the higher power is, because whosoever resists the ordinance of God
provoke the judgment of God against himself. If God for thy sin set a
wanton, an hypocrite, yea or an Infidel over thee, thou must obey that wanton,
that hypocrite, and that Infidel, and not rebel against him. GOD has
ordained him; to resist that power is to resist the ordinance of GOD, to
conspire against him is to conspire against GOD, to reject him is to reject
God. Christ submitted himself to the authority of Caesar, and to Pilates
judgment. Resisters and rebels receive to themselves condemnation; they never
have neither ever shall escape the heavy hand of Gods wrath; they feel it
often in this life, but in the life to come, if they escape it here, they are
sure to feel it. A third reason why we should live obediently is, because
there is no reason why we should do otherwise. For why should any man desire
not to be subject? Because he is afraid of the power of kings and rulers?
Princes are a terror not to them that do well, but to evil doers. Will thou
then be without fear of the power? Withdraw not thy self from obedience, but
do well; so shall thou have praise and be without fear. For this end
magistrates are appointed of God to maintain the good and repress the evil.
And the magistrate is so necessary in respect hereof, that no common wealth
can be safe or long stand without him. For if the bad were not bridled more by
the authority of the magistrate than by any moderation in themselves, they
would eat up the good, and a woonderful confusion would soon follow. A
fourth reason may be this. God has put a sword in the magistrates hands, to
show that he has appointed him as his vicegerent to take vengeance on them
which do evil. So that the very sight of the sword ought to put us in mind
of his power and our obedience. For God has not delivered him a sword for
nothing: he is the minister of Gods wrath, he has not received the sword in
vain, it is given him to smite the wicked withal.

3 Wherefore ye must be subject not because of wrath only, Magistrates to be
obeyed in the Lord for conscience sake and not for fear only.
but also for conscience sake. The Apostle concludes upon the former reasons
that we must submit our selves obediently unto the magistrate, and attempt
nothing against him: not only for fear of punishment, he being the minister
of Gods displeasure; but also for conscience sake, in that God requires this
obedience at our hands. All this notwithstanding if magistrates should
command that which is impious and which God forbids, in such cases we have
our answer well warranted, Acts 5.
Melius est obedire Deo quam hominibus. It is better to obey God than men.

4 In token of this obedience we pay them tribute: Tribute due to Princes.
as acknowledging them to be Gods ministers. It is not a strange or a new
custom to pay custom to princes: All nations, all people have ever used it
and yielded it, and magistrates well deserve it. For their office is both
painful and chargeable; they ever caring for the benefit of the common
wealth, to repress the evil, to strengthen the good, to set up virtue, to
cast down vice, to defend their people and country, and in well governing as
the good ministers of God to spend both their goods and lives. These
magistrates must be supported and may lawfully receive the reward of their
labors: nay they must receive it. Wherefore unless ye will be injurious and
withhold back from them that which is theirs even by debt and not by courtesy,
give to all men their duty: tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom,
fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor is due. We must have
magistrates in great estimation and reverence; we must fear them as the
ministers of Gods wrath; we must honor them, for that they occupy Gods place
for our benefit; we must readily and willingly pay unto them tribute and
custom, for God has so appointed and they have so deserved. And therefore the
Apostle says, Reddite, Pay it. Whereupon S. Chrysostom fitly notes, We do
not give it unto magistrates, but we pay it unto them. It is as due as debt.

5 Upon this particular touching our duty toward magistrates our Apostle
infers a general exhortation. What we owe to men, and what to God.
Owe nothing to any man but this to love one another, etc. This exhortation
compriseth two things, our duty to our neighbor, our duty to God. Our
duty to our neighbor consists in paying him what we owe him and in loving
him as we love our selves.

Examples of them which have well or ill discharged y^ debt they owe to
magistrates Joshua 1.
fear, honor, tribute, custom: all this is due unto him, all this is thy
debt. The people of Israel bound themselves with solemn promise to pay this
debt to their magistrate Joshua, whom the Lord had given to be their
governor. All things which thou have commanded us we will do, and whither so
ever thou will send us we will go, as we obeyed Moses, so will we also obey
thee. Only let thy Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. Whosoever
shall rebel against thy commandment and will not obey thy words in all that
thou commaundest him, let him be put to death. This is the debt we owe to
magistrates. Myriam would not pay this debt to her brother Moses; and God
plagued her with a foul leprosy, so that she which had separated her self
from common obedience was separated from all company. Dathan and Abiram with
their accomplices rebelliously murmured against their magistrate; and God made
the earth open and swallowe them up, and a number of that conspiracy he
consumed with fire. Absolon rebelled and would not pay this debt of obedience
to his father. But God quickly paid him that which was due to his rebellious
and disloyal attempts. God is still the same God* he hates iniquity and will
not suffer conspiracy, rebellion or treason against lawful magistrates either
unrevealed or unrevenged. And therefore let all subjects, as well to avoid the
wrath of God, as also for conscience sake, pay this debt of true obedience in
all lawful causes to their lawful magistrate.

7 Let the magistrate pay unto the people the debt which he owes them. The
magistrate is a debtor to the people as they are debtors unto him: he of
justice as they of obedience.
The debt of the magistrate is the just execution of lawful punishment against
transgressors. The sword is delivered unto him for that purpose; neither is any
open transgression of any kind, whether it concern the first or second table
of the law of God, or any man of any calling be he Prophet or Priest
exempted from this judgment. Solomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest. Iehu
slew the false Prophets. Elias the Baalites. This sword is given of God to
magistrates, to execute just judgment against all sins and all sinners: and
this part of debt is to be paid. It is also a part of the magistrates debt to
give upright sentence in matters of controversy between parties. For which
cause the Poets feign Justice to carry a sword in the one hand and a balance in
the other: to kill sin with the one, and with the other to weie litigious and
controuersed causes.

8 Such as are magistrates to whom the deciding of causes and punishing
offenses is committed, Qualities required in a gistrate.
should be chosen out of all the people the best and fittest men for their
wisdom and courage; Exodus 18.
their religion and hearty affection to the truth, and for the hatred which
they bear to covetousness. For this is no office for a fool: and he that
fears not God will show partiality; he that loves not the truth will
justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent; he that hates not
covetousness will take rewards, and be corrupted with bribes as the sons of
Ely which received gifts with the one hand, and with the other perverted
judgment. The eyes even of the wise are blinded herewithall. Fear also,
affection and commiseration, with desire to please men, are great hurts unto
justice. Pilate for fear of Caesar gave sentence against Christ: For fear of
displeasing a man on earth he murdered the king and God of heaven. Whom money
cannot corrupt affection will carry away, it is the cutthroate of al justice,
the people daily both feel it and rue it. Pity or commiseration made Joshua
spare the miserable Gabionites, contrary to the express commandment of God.
Luc. 23.
Desire to please caused Pilate to send Jesus over unto Herod, who together
with his band despised and mocked him. It caused Herod to imbrue his hands in
the Baptists blood. It causes many even against the light of their own
consciences to justify the wicked and condemn the man whom they find
innocent. Such do very ill discharge the debt which they owe unto their
brethren.

9 The minister is also a debtor to the people committed to his charge. The
debt of the minister to his flock.
I am a debtor says the Apostle both to Greeks and Barbarians, 1. Pet. 5.
to learned and unlearned. The pastor is a debtor unto his flock to feed it so
much as in him lies, to feed it both spiritually and corporally: spiritually
by life and doctrine, corporally with hospitality according to his ability.
Woe be to that pastor yt paieth not this debt. For if the flock perish for
want of food, al yt perishing blood shall be required at his hands. A hard
reckoning for him to answer, and a sharp punishment to sustain for not
answering.

10 The flock is indebted to their pastor, Theires to him.
to honor and to reverence him as their father; to hear him as their
schoolmaster; to obey and submit themselves unto him, as to one whom God has
set over them for to rule them; to observe his wholesome precepts, to follow
him in life as he follows Christ; to love him and to minister necessaries
unto him for his convenient sustentation. All this debt is set down in the
scriptures and God requires payment of it.

11 The husband does owe unto his wife due benevolence, The debt of husbands,
wives; masters, servants
tender and faithful love, provision for things needful and honest, wise
government, good instruction, protection, custody and honor: The wife is
indebted unto her husband to honor him, to love him, to obey him, to learn of
him, to be governed by him, to live under him in silence with all subjection,
to ease him in the orderly nurturing of his children and the wise governing of
his house; to be not only an help, but a credit unto him by her keeping home,
by her industry and painfulness, by her sober, holy and discreet
behavior. The master owes to his servant meat, wages, correction,
instruction. The servant to his master honor, obedience, faithful service and
whatsoever he is able by labor to perform.

12 Every man is to his neighbor a debtor not only of that which himself
boroweth, Usurers bad paymasters of that which they owe.
but of whatsoever his neighbor needs, a debtor not only to pay that he
owes, but also to lend that he has and may conveniently spare; Luc. 6.
to lend I say according to the rule of Christ, Lend, looking for nothing
thereby. And your reward shall be much, you shall be the sons of the most
high. So that these ouerpaiments, the usury which has spoiled and eaten up
many, the canker of the common wealth is utterly both forbidden to man and
abhorred of God. To bargain for lead, grain or leases with such as have
neither lead, grain nor lease to pay, neither any such matter meant but only
unlawful gain of money, the party to forfeit his obligation because he
neither can nor means such payment, and the lender not content to receive
less advantage than thirty at the hundred: this is but a patched cloak to
cover this vile sin withal. Whatsoever thou receiuest upon condition, or by
what means soever thou receiuest more than was lent, thou art an usurer
toward thy brother, and God will be a revenger against thee. He whom thou
should obey if thou will be saved does in express words command thee not to
lend thy money for usury. Exodus 22.
If thou lend money to my people, to the poor with thee, Leuit. 25.
thou shall not be as an usurer unto him. If thy brother be impouerished and
fallen into decaie, Deuteronomy. 23.
thou shall relieve him; and as a stranger or soiournour, so shall he live with
thee. And again, Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, usury of
money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury. This word
of God man cannot dispense withal, and it shall not return in vain. If it
cannot be a converting commandment it shall be a confounding judgment. The
reasons of men for usury must give place to the precept of God against it.
What man art thou that wilt be wiser than thy maker? Has God condemned it,
and dare thou defend it? Is it in his judgment injurious, and does thy
censure think it equal? Has he seen reason to prohibit it, and do thou
see reason why thou may use it? Such reasons with the makers and users of
them the Lords justice shall destroy. And yet in truth all reason and the very
Law of nature is against it, all Nations at all times have condemned it as the
very bane and pestilence of a common wealth: whereof the old Roman both
history and practice is an often witness. These secret shifts are seen of
God and abhorred and will be revenged. Well may thou escape the hands of man
by thy colored delusions, yet can thou not escape the sharp and swift
judgment of God: who, accordingly as he has threatened, will exclude thee
out of his kingdom, interdict thee his tabernacle, and hurl thee into hell
where thy evil gotten money can neither redeem nor help thee. A just reward
for thy unjust usury. Our Apostle requires that we pay unto every man the
thing that we owe. And we are as much debtors to lend freely as others
faithfully to pay the thing which is lent.

13 The merchaunt is indebted to his neighbor, Falshoode in merchants paiments.
the feller to the buyer to deal truly with him; not to defraude him by false
weights, false measures, false lights, false words; by swearing and
forswearing, or by any such usual but unlawful mean. One lesson observed
serves this matter: lend, as thou would borrowe; sell, as thou would buie;
do, as thou would be done unto. This is duty; this is debt. Pay it and
owe nothing unto any man but this that ye love one another.

14 The debt of love is natural and continual. The debt of love is general
and continual. Al men owe it, and no man paieth it so, but that still he owes
it.
We all owe it and we owe it unto all. And unto whom we owe it we never pay it
except we acknowledge that we owe it still. In this debt of love we must
consider why we must love, whom we must love, and lastly how we must love.

15 To omit the reasons drawn from nature this one taken from the God of
nature shall suffice. Reasons why-loue is due debt.
We must love because God has so commanded, and because it is the fulfilling
of all his commandments. I give you a new commandment, says Christ, that
ye love one another. In our new birth or regeneration, we are made brethren
and fellow heirs with Christ of Gods kingdom. As God therefore for ever
loves us in Christ; so we ought to love our brethren for God and in Christ
for ever. If ye will be known to be his servant, by this men shall know you.
If ye will be counted not hearers only but also doers of the Law, the Law
is love. He that loves another fulfilleth the Law. Which the Apostle proves
thus. The Law says, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not
bear false witness, thou shall not covet: that is to say, thou shall no way
harm thy brother. Love does no evil or hurt to any, he that loves his
neighbor will not take away his life, will not defile his bed, will not steal
or rob him of his goods, will not witness untruly against him, will not in his
heart covet any thing that is his: And he that does any of these things against
him bears not in deed hearty and true love toward him. Therefore is love the
fulfilling of the Law. So that you see great cause why we should enter into
this holy and Christian band of love.

16 But whom must we love? Love is due to our neighbors; and who they be.
Thou shall love thy neighbor. And who is our neighbor? Not he only to whom
we are joined by familiar acquaintance, by alliance or neerenesse of dwelling,
but whosoever does need our help he is our neighbor, be he Jew or Gentile,
Christian or Infidel, yea friend or enemy, he is our neighbor. To him we
ought to be near to do him good. It is frivolous for thee to object, he is
mine enemy, he has many ways wronged me, he has raised slanderous reports
of me, he has practiced against me, spoiled and robbed me: how can I love him?
If Christ had loved his friends only, he had never loved thee whosoever thou
art. Look upon him whose hands were stretched out upon the cross for his
enemies, and for thee when thou wast his foe. No man proposes him as a pattern
to be followed whom in his heart he does mislike. Thou mislikest thine enemy
because he hates thee; if thou hate him then do thou imitate the very thing
which thou hate. Love thy neighbor therefore without exception; and love him
as thy self.

17 For after this manner we ought to love. How we ought to love others;
namely as our selves.
No man hates his own flesh, no man is envious of his own commodity or
preferment. Nature breeds a selfeloue in every man. And as this Law of
nature does work in us a very fervent and careful desire both to procure
unto our selves whatsoever we are persuaded is good, and to avoid whatsoever
seems hurtful or noisome: So the Law of charity requires at our hands
like readiness and cheerfulness to benefit others. Of love toward our
selves we hide and very warily cover all such faults as might any way work our
discredit or disgrace. If we love our brethren as our selves, we will no more
blase their offenses than our own. Charity does hide the multitude of sins.
But when we enlarge the sins of other men, that they may seem great; or reckon
them up by one and one, to make them appear as if they were many; how fulfill
we the Law of charity? would we do this in our own transgressions? we are
never weary in doing good to our selves, but to do good to others we have
no sooner begun but we are even tired. Our selves we love not in word and show
but in truth and in deed. If we speak deceitfully every one to his
neighbor, if we flatter with our lips, if we carry in our heads a double
tongue, and in our bodies a double heart, and say we love: we lie. Which of us
being in his right mind does lift up his fist to strike himself? If any part
of our bodies be out of frame, any bone out of joint, we seek by and by all
the help we can to set it in. The name of strife and contention would never he
heard of, if we were thus affected toward others. The only breach of peace
is the want of love, he that loves al men will have peace with all men.

18 Yet this does suffer a kind of exception. Have peace with all men, A
caution to be observed in loving one another.
says the Apostle, but he adds: if it may be, and as much as in you lies.
It may not be which may not be lawfully. We may not so yield unto love, that
we yield unto sin withal; not so have peace with our neighbors, Romans 12.
that to continue love with them we depart from the faith and love of God; or
that for peace sake we flatter and follow our neighbor in his evil. That
were to fall out with Christ, that we may keep in with men. If thy hand or eye
offend thee, cut the one off, pluck the other out: Love Gods creation, but
hate all sinnefulnesse: the Lord also does abhor it. And therefore we must be
well content to loose the love and bear the enmity of the whole world, for
the love we bear to God and his truth. With that strife to keep this peace
the Lord is pleased.

19 But we are fallen into these evil times wherein iniquity abounds and
charity waxes cold. The great want of love in these our times.
Hearty love is turned into hearty hatred, our hands are bloody, and our
hearts malicious. He lives not that loves his neighbor as himself. If we
did love our neighbors as our selves, we would not oppress them with
extortion and usury; we would not undermine them, and wring them in
bargaining; we would not so proudely contemn them, so spitefully envy them,
so impudently slander them, or so greedily practice for their infamy and
discredit; we would not speak them fair, and mind them evil; fawn on them,
and betraie them; seek our credit by their reproach, our gain by their loss;
when we see their necessities, we would relieve and succor them, bind up
their wounds with the good Samaritan, and charitably provide for them. When we
suffer them for want to perish in our streets, this is an evident token and
manifest argument that we neither love God neither them that are of God:
neither him, nor his. If the virtues which are in love be not found in us, but
if contrariwise we abound in those vices from which love is free; if we be
void of patience and courtesy, full of envy and froward dealing; if we swell
in pride, and care not what we do to advance our selves above others; if every
man's care be only for himself; if our wrath be kindled with every light
occasion, and any thing suffice to make us always think the worst that can be
surmised, and do the woorst that can be invented; if we rather be glad at the
fall of our brethren, than rejoice when they constantly abide in the truth; if
we be come to that pass, that we can in a manner suffer nothing, believe
nothing, hope nothing, bear and endure nothing: what should we say but
acknowledge the arrearages in which we are cast, and confess that we have
left that debt of love which we owe to our brethren vndischarged. God grant
us grace to amend this bad payment, least he pay us our due punishment. Thus
much of our duty toward our neighbor set down in these words Owe nothing,
etc.

20 Now follows the duty which we owe unto God. And Our duty to God,
repentance and newness of life.
that it is now time we should arise from sleep. For now is our salvation
nearer than when we believed. The night is past, and the day is at hand. Let us
therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light, so that we walk honestly as in the day. Two things are here required
at our hands: to cast off the works of darkness, to put on the armor of
light, to put off the old man Adam, and to put on the new man Christ; to shake
off the ragged coat of sin, and to cloth our selves with the comely vesture
of innocence; to abstain from evil, and to do good; in a word, to repent
and amend. Why we should thus do our Apostle gives reasons: The time does
require that now we should arise from sleep, our salvation is near, the
night is past, and the day has dawned.

21 This time requires a new life. The time requires the paiments of this
debt.
For this is the last hour; the acceptable time; the day of salvation; the day
when as God does visit us in his mercy, calling us to the knowledge of him
and of his son Christ, by the preaching of the gospel to the saving of our
souls. O that we could know the day of our visitation, and would take hold of
this gracious time of mercy. Arise at length, arise from sin, and redeem
the time past and lost. We have long yea too too long slumbered: it is now more
than high time to arise, to arise from sleep of error, of sin and of security.

22 Many are fallen asleep in the blind errors of man's doctrine; The blindness
in which the world sleeps, although the night be past.
many are yet drowned in the dregs of popery, preferring dreams, fancies,
lies and fables before the heavenly doctrine of Gods everlasting truth. The
cause of this their blindness is ignorance of the scriptures; the cause of
their ignorance is the hardness of their hearts. They neither know, they are
so ignorant; nor will know, they are so stubborn. When they are exhorted to
read, they close their eyes; when to hear, they shut their ears; when to
come, they draw back their feet. If the sun shine never so bright, they
see it not; if the trumpe sound never so loud, it will not waken them. Christ
compares them very aptly to the hard stony way, whereon what good seed
soever is cast, is lost; it can take no root: for either it is eaten up by
birds, or trodden down by men. The stubborne-hearted and stiff-necked Jews
were cast into this dead sleep, establishing their own righteousness, and
rejecting the righteousness that is in Christ Jesus, reposing salvation in
their external sacrifices and ceremonies, not seeking it there where it was
only to be found, in Christ which was the sacrificed Lamb from the beginning
of the world, that only takes away the sins of the world. As those were
then; so now these are: who with the proud Pharisees justify themselves by
their own defiled works, not regarding the true justification which we have
in Christ thorough faith, preferring the sacrifice of the blasphemous mass the
mere invention of man or of Satan before the sweet and acceptable sacrifice
which Christ made for us upon the cross once, not to be renewed; and sufficient
not needing help. Men they are of dull ears and of hard hearts, a rebellious
and froward generation, to whom whatsoever we speak, this account we may make
before hand, Ezech. 2.
Surely they will not hear, neither will they arise from the error wherein
Satan has rockt them asleep, cry the Prophets never so loud and so often,
Esaias 60.
Rise O Jerusalem, be enlightened, for thy light is come, John 3.
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. The light is come into the
world. Therefore considering the season it is time we should awake, least we
be unseasonably taken asleep and so judged as we are taken.

23 Arise thou that sleep, As many sleep in error, so the most in sin.
whether it be in error or in sin. This sleep is so pleasant that all the
world lies in it, and hardly can shake it off. King David fell into it, and
continued in it, sleeping very soundly, never lifting up his head for two years
space, till at the length Nathan the Prophet at the commandment of God
awakened him. Zacheus slept a long time pleasauntly in his usury with heaps
of evil gotten goods under his head, till the son of God himself called
upon him and lifted him up, by whose voice he was effectually and thoroughly
wakened: insomuch that his eyes being now opened to see the ouglinesse of his
sin wherein he had so long time before slumbered, he not only made
restitution but also gave the one half of al his goods to the poor. This man
awaked in an happy time. It is most dangerous to slumber long in sin.
Custom of sin makes sin familiar, so that at the length we learn not to
fear it at all, but rather to take delight and pleasure in it, to commit it as
the Apostle says with a kind of greediness, to count sin no sin, to
swallowe it down without any remorse or contradiction. Their case is lamentable
which are thus fallen asleep, and for the most part their end miserable. Luc.
12.
Such was the sleep of that rich man, who having filled his barnes and
provided store for many years encouraged himself to sensuality, Soul take
thy rest. You that love the rest of your souls in deed, keep your souls
waking, and do not suffer them to take rest. Ephesians. 5.
Awake thou that sleep, and take thy rest; stand up from the dead and
Christ shall give thee light. It is time to awake, we have slept too long. God
would not have us to sleep unto death, but to awake unto life: for he will not
the death of a sinner, his desire is rather that we should repent. Now is the
time, now Christ calls thee, now he stretches out his arms, now he
offers mercy: come unto him and thou shall find true rest for thy wearied
soul. Long has been thy sleep, great has been thy sin: but God is full
of compassion, pressed and ready not only to grant but to offer pardon. If
now we refuse it offering it self to us, it will refuse us hereafter when
we offer our selves to it.

24 Of this we are not afraid, Sleeping in security.
because we sleep as well in security as in sin. We must therefore be
raised out of this sleep also. Man's life is a warfare, and men are soldiers:
we must keep our standing and watch, least we be unawares both assaulted and
surprised. We have both many and mighty and fierce adversaries: The devil,
who is violently and greedily set as an hungry Lion, that roareth for his
pray; The world, which has infinite slights to deceive us; The flesh, which
mightily strives and wrastleth against the spirit. There is no place of
security left for a Christian soldiers there being so many great dangers.
There is no where any place wherein it is safe to be secure. Not in heaven,
says Bernard, Bernard.
nor in Paradise: much less in the world. In heaven the Angels fell from the
very presence of the Godhead; Adam fell in Paradise from the place of pleasure,
and Judas in the world from the school of our Savior. In the time of Noe they
lived in great security and the flood suddenly overwhelmed them. In the time
of Lot the Sodomites lived in as great security and were as soudainely
consumed with fire. Thus with fire and water security has been plagued. God
has armed the very elements against that thing, wherein notwithstanding we
continue, as if we would try whether he which wakened them by sending water
upon the one and fire upon the other, would waken us by causing the earth to
swallowe us up. What we should look for, GOD does best know; our security
being the same with theirs can denounce no less to us than it brought to them.
We cry peace peace: what more evident token can there be that our sudden
destruction is at hand? Men are commonly nearest unto peril both corporal and
spiritual, when their minds are furthest from thinking of preventing it. It
is written of the people which were in Laish that because they had no business
with any body nor any body with them, no man raised any tumult or usurped any
dominion in their Land, and the place which they inhabited was good and lacked
nothing, therefore they dwelt careless, quiet and sure. Which when the spials
sent forth from the children of Dan had once perceived, they made no doubt of
conquering the Land, but encouraged their brethren and set them forward: Be not
slothful to go and enter, to possess the Land. If ye will go ye shall
come unto a careless people, the country is large: surely GOD has given it
into your hands. They went up being only six hundred men, came to Laish,
found the people without all mistrust of danger, put them to the sword, and
burnt up their city. Their peace bred plenty; their plenty, security; their
security, their destruction. And as in dangers of the body, so likewise or
rather much more in perils which beset the soul we shall find those temptations
most grievous which assault us at unawares. For this cause we are in scriptures
so often called upon to be watchefull. Matthew. 26.
Watch and pray, says our Savior, that ye fall not into temptation. He
that falls into temptation asleep hardly rises out of temptation alive. For
if they that watch continually be not conquerors but with much ado: what shall
become of them, upon whom Satan then lays hands, when being lusty and
strong having whatsoever their hearts can wish, they are at peace, take their
rest, and because they have no change, therefore fear not GOD? Surely their
destruction is as the swelling of an high wall, it comes suddenly down and
they are fearfully consumed. Watch therefore and sleep not in security.
Blessed is he that watches.

25 Our salvation is nearer than when we believed. Because our salvation is
nearer, therefore we ought not to sl^epe still in darkness.
This is the second reason why we should cast away the works of darkness and
put on the armor of light. We have entered our names into the profession of
Christianity in our Baptism, we have received the truth by it, we seek
salvation, we have been long scholars, we ought now to grow to some good
perfection: we draw now near unto the end, therefore we should amend our pace in
this our course. The nearer we come to the end of our race, the faster we
should run, if we desired to get the reward we run for. Let us do so. And
seeing the race that we have to run is even in a manner finished, and the crown
we run for is immortal, let us be earnest in the cause, let us cast off all
hinderaunces and strive industriously unto that salvation which is set before
us. Now that we are almost as it were within the reach of the crown of
glory, let us take strength unto us, let us double our courage* increase our
zeal, add more and more unto every good and perfect gift which we have
receined from the father of light. This the neerenesse of our salvation does
now especially require.

26 Let them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death sleep on. The
night is past.
But unto us the night is past. Night in the scriptures is taken for ignorance,
the times whereof are now past. The day star is risen and has appeared unto
us. Christ the true light is come into the world; he that now will walk in
darkness is not blind but wilful, and runs with open eyes to his own
damnation. If the light had not come into the world, if I had not spoken unto
them, says Christ, they might have pleaded ignorance; but I have told them
the truth, therefore they are left without excuse. Christ that light of the
world has appeared, his cross is painted out before our eyes. If our Gospel
be hid it is from them that perish, whom the God or rather the devil of this
world has blinded. We are in the light, the way of truth lies plain and open
before our faces. Let not us walk now as the children of darkness. For
darkness and the night are past.

27 The day draws near. The last day draws nere.
The day of every man's particular dissolution, and the day of that general
judgment of all men. Although the day of our death be uncertain; yet because
all our days are few, our first day is no sooner come but we are sure and
certain that the last draws near. Wherefore it behooves us continually to
watch, to look for our end, and to put our selves in a readiness for it. For
as we are found in that day, so shall we find in the day after that; the day
of the glorious appearing of Christ, when all secrets shall be unsealed, al
faults made manifest, and every man receive a blessing or a curse as he has
wrought in his body good or bad. Many days are past since Christ and his
Apostles did count it near: therefore now it must needs draw much nearer and
be even at the door. We may now say justly, It is time to rise from sleep.
Our salvation is nearer than when we believed. The night is past, the day
draws on.

28 Let us walk honestly therefore as in the day. We must therefore walk
honestly as in the day.
We are created and redeemed to walk and serve God, in whose service if we go
not forward we go backward; we may neither lie down nor stand still, but take
pains and walk. And that honestly, having our conversation according to our
good profession. We are set as it were upon a stage: the world, Angels and
men fix their eyes upon us. And if the eyes of all these were closed, yet he
to whom the night and the light are all one in clearenesse, our eternal God
he sees our cogitations, and searches our heart: he understands all our
ways. All things lie open and uncovered unto him, he beholds all practices,
all devises, all trecheries, all treasons, all sin. Let us walk uprightly
and live honestly as in his sight.

29 This we shall do if we follow the counsel and exhortation of S. Paul; We
must cast off the work^s of darkness.
that is, if we first cast away the works of darkness. Sinful actions are
called works of darkness. First because much sin springs out of
ignorance which is blindness and darkness; wherefore S. Paul alleges
ignorance to be the cause why he persecuted the Church of Christ: Secondly for
that sinners, because their works are evil, hate the light which discovers
them, and love darkness wherein they may conceal them. Thirdly because the
works of sin are to be cast into that perpetual and utter darkness of
hell, and bound in everlasting cheines of darkness unto the judgment of that
great day.

30 Howbeit for that it suffices not to abstain from evil but it is required
that we should do good, We must put on the armor of light.
therefore the Apostle exhorts us not only to cast away the works of
darkness, but to put upon us the armor of light. Wherein look what was
said why sin should be called by the name of darkness the like may on the
contrary side be said why righteousness should be termed by the name of
light. Phil. 1.
First for that good works are the fruits of the light of knowledge, wherein
if we increase more and more in love and in all spiritual understanding we
shall not only put a difference between those things that are more excellent,
but be pure also and without offense unto the day of Christ filled with the
fruits of righteousness which comes by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God; Secondly because they that walk honestly as in the day time,
John 1. 1. John 1.
delight in the light: For he that does the truth comes to the light that
his deeds may be made manifest, that they are done in God who is light and in
him is no darkness at all: And therefore insomuch as they well understand
that the night will come, wherein no body shall be able to work, while they
have the light they give themselves to walk in the light, that they may be the
sons of the light; And thirdly because as Bernard says, Bona opera non sunt
causae regni sed via regnandi: Good works are not the causes of but the way
unto the kingdom, so they lead us the way to the inheritance of Saints in
light, and to the fruition of that God who as he is the father of lights in
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of change, so he dwells in a light
that cannot as yet be commen unto, we shall come to it hereafter when we shall
drink of the well of life, when in his light we shall see light. To the which
everlasting life and light he bring us, who is not only the way, the truth
and the life, but God of God, light of light, even Jesus our Savior, to whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost three persons and one God, etc.

The twelfth Sermon. A Sermon preached at an Assizes.
MICH. 6. 8 He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires
of thee: Surely to do judgment and to love mercy, to humble thy self and to
walk carefully with thy God.
FOR the better understanding of the Prophet in these few words recited, The
occasion of the above written words of the Prophet.
it shall be requisite to open unto you a few circumstances concerning them
wherein I will be short. We learn in the text that goes before in this
chapter that God was displeased with his people the Israelites. And that it
might appear how just cause he had of offense given him, he challenges
them, that his gratiousnesse toward them, and their unthankfulness toward
him might be examined and tried in just judgment. And God appoints the
mountains to be Judges herein, that is, as Jerome expounds it, the Angels
of heaven, whom God often uses as ministers for his glory, and for the
benefit of man. God declares therefore here by his Prophet first that he
never wronged them, and therefore they had no cause to complain; secondly that
he has bestowed his manifold benefits upon them, that he delivered them out
of the house of bondage, from the tyrannical hands of cruel Pharao, whose
slaves their fathers were; that he had given them worthy magistrates, and
good Priests to rule, direct and instruct them, Moses, Aaron, Myriam, and
lastly that he had turned Balaams cursings against them into blessings toward
them. Now after that God had thus set forth his great goodness toward them,
he charge them with their great unkindness toward him: how they fell
from the serving of him to the woorshipping of false gods by running a whoring
after Idols, and sacrificing on their hill altars, committing most gross
Idolatry and foolish superstition: how altogether they contemned the word of
the almighty, the preaching of the Prophets were drowned in sinful
security, and fed themselves with their own fantasies the inventions and
vain conceits of man. These and such like were their faults, as may appear in
the life of king Achas in whose time and reign the prophecy was written. The
people unable to gainesay so manifest a truth, were forced to plead guilty,
and to acknowledge their offenses, and therefore went about to seek out
means, how to pacify Gods wrath and to satisfy for their sins, and being
doubtful by what means, or with what sacrifice, to please God, and appease his
anger, enquireth, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? The Prophet Micheas
directs the doubtful minds of the people in this behalf, and says, He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee. Thus in
few ye see the occasion of these words, which I have taken in hand to expound
unto you.

2 And it shall not be unprofitable with like brevity to apply the
circumstances to us and to our times. The likeness between the occasion
offered to the prophet of those words then, and of the like now.
If God should in like case contend in judgment with us, the Law would accuse
us, heaven and earth would bear witness against us, and our own consciences
would condemn us. For great and manifold are Gods mercies toward us, and
we render nothing again but mere and extreme ingratitude. What have I done
to thee, or wherein have I grieved thee, says the Lord?

3 God has not envied us, The mercies of God toward the Church of England.
he owes us nothing, but he gives us much, he has not been grievous unto
us, but mercifully considered of us. He has kept promise with us and performed
his word, though we have neglected our faith toward him. We have often
tasted of his bountiful goodness of us altogether undeserved. Eusebius. li. 4.
c. 15.
Policarpus being required by an Infidel Judge to blaspheme Christ, made this
answer: Fourscore and six years have I served him, neither did he once harm
me in any thing, how then can I blaspheme my king, that has saved me? We
cannot charge our just God, with any wrong; our gracious Lord, with any
unkindness toward us; but must with Policarpus ever acknowledge his
unspeakable mercy and exceeding goodness. For as he bestowed upon his people
the Israelites sundry great benefits, so has he blessed us with the like or
greater. God with a mighty arm has delivered us out of Egypt from the
tyranny of Pharao, not only out of the cheines and deadly thraldom of Satan
and sin by the death and blood of Jesus Christ our redeemer, but also out of
the servile bondage of the great Pharao, though lesser than the former, the
Romish Antichrist, who villanously bereaved us of our spiritual liberty,
robbed us of that inestimable treasure the word of God, and oppressed us with
the intolerable burden of unprofitable labors, trained us up in ignorance,
forced us in Idolatry and superstition the ways to hell to seek our safety
and everlasting life: But God in his mercy has remembered us to do us good
and to work our deliverance, of bondslaues to make us freemen, of the children
of darkness to make us the sons of light in him, and to restore us to the
comfortable freedom of conscience by the gracious liberty of the Gospel. God
has also blessed us with good magistrates, he has not only given us his
son Christ the Prince of his people who by offering up himself a sacrifice
for our sins procured unto us free remission of them, but has also blessed
us with worthy rulers under him, which govern in equity and syncerely seek
the glory of God. He has given us Moses our Sovereign, a prudent and a
gentle magistrate, who seeks not revenge, but bears with the muttering of
the people: yea with the rebellious Dathan and Abiron choosing rather to put up
any tolerable wrong, than to see the ruin and subversion of men though they
seek it themselves. He has also given us Aaron and Miriam, Priests and
Prophets to minister unto us the heavenly bread the food of our souls, the
word of God, the Sacraments of Christ, and that most faithfully and syncerely
without changing or mingling. And as I said of late in this place, so I say
again, England has at no time heretofore been blessed with so many and so
faithful preachers of Gods word. Surely God minds your salvation in that he
so plentifully offers unto you the word of salvation: Nor that only, but
therewithal peace, plenty, and rest such as our fathers never tasted of in
their ages.

4 Which mercies and blessings powered upon us in so great measure should in
reason enforce us to praise him our God and to serve him in true holiness all
the days of our life, Our evil requiting of the Lord for his goodness.
from the fountain of whose unspeakable goodness we have received them. The
Israelites (their strange deliverance out of Egypt, their good Magistrates,
their manifold blessings, benefits and graces notwithstanding) were found
unthankful. And if God shall enter into judgment with us, and thoroughly
examine us (as one day he will) may we not be accused and shall we not be
found guilty of the like ungrateful crime? Have we not a longing as they had
unto that from which the Lord has delivered us in great mercy? God has
blessed us with both magistrates and ministers of great valewe, but so
thankful are we to him and to them his servants that we can easily abuse
both, mutter against the one, and despise the other; neither is obeyed, neither
reverenced according to the word and will of GOD. But such as cannot away
with Samuel, God in his wrath shall give them a Saul; and such as mislike of
the true preacher, shall be rewarded with a false Prophet. The word is loathed;
men are full of the Gospel; and of many it is professed without all fruit,
we shall therefore hunger for this bread, seek it and not find it; in the
stead hereof we shall surfeit upon the fruit of our own desires, yea God in
his justice shall take his word from us, and give it to a people that will
bring forth better fruits and more worthy of so precious a blessing. Thus
truly considering our case, and entering into judgment with God, we must with
the Israelites plead guilty and as profess his mercies so confess our
faults.

5 The guilty Israelites sought means how to satisfy for their sins. The
way which men have devised for remedy of this.
Their means were to sacrifice to God and to offer up calves, rams and
goats: yea some have not shrunk to power the blood of their own children
upon the altar, as Moab who offered up his eldest son to pacify the wrath of
God, when in battle he was beseeged and brought into straights. Even by like
means, when our conscience has accused us of sin many have sought to make
satisfaction to God for it: some have sought remission of sins in a great
number of prayers uttered in a strange tongue without either sense or zeal,
neither made in faith nor charity, procuring hatred in Gods sight, while they
looked to be heard by their much babbling: Some have sought to pacify God by
hearing and buying of many Masses, wherein God was blasphemed and foul
Idolatry committed: Some by killing of Christ the first begotten son again,
sacrificing him afresh as they thought upon their hill altars for the dead and
the quick: But they were deceived. Some by the mediation of Saints departed,
robbing Christ of his office, who is the only mediator and intercessor
between God and man: Some have thought to make amends for their sins by
buying popish pardons, by taking their walks in long pilgrimages to dumme and
senseless idols, and in such like not only vain but impious devises of man's
foolish brain. Thus sundry have sought out sundry ways some blasphemous and
some of them ridiculous to appease the wrath of God provoked by their sin.
The Israelites doubted by what mean to satisfy for their sin, what God
would accept they could not tell, they were altogether uncertain which way to
please him. And truly it is lamentable that there be so many even now in the
clear light of the saving Gospel, which doubt by what means they may be
saved, and in this doubtfulnesse many still follow their own fantasies, and
through ignorance are led into the high way of damnation. Wherefore such as are
doubtful our Prophet Micheas clearly resolves, such as are out of the way he
calls into the right path, such as are ignorant he instructs, and such as
will learn he offers to teach what the good will and pleasure of the Lord
is.

6 He has showed thee, The way which God has prescribed by his Prophet.
O man, what is good and acceptable to him: surely not to take upon thee to
satisfy for sin thy self, for that passes thy power, all thy righteousness
being but filthiness in the pure sight of God; not to offer up any sacrifice,
as being in it self propitiatory for sin, for that Christ only has done
on the cross and that but once and that for all: he is the only sacrifice,
the only priest, the only mediator, the only redeemer. The price of our
salvation is neither gold nor silver, but the precious blood of the innocent
lamb of God Christ Jesus, Acts 4.
shed for the sins of the world: there is no other name under heaven,
whereby we can be saved. God requires therefore no satisfaction for sins at
thy hands, but at his he has required it to the uttermost: Rom 8.
Christ is thine; God has freely given thee both him and with him all things
that are his. If thou receive him through a true faith, thy salvation is
sealed, and thou art safe. For as many as have received him to them he has
given power to be the sons of God even to them that believe in his name.
John 1.
If thou confess with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart, that thou art
delivered from thy sin, by that one oblation of Christ offered upon the
cross, that his merit has made thee the child of his father, and the
inheritor of that kingdom which he has prepared for as many as are his, then
apply thy self to live after the will and commandment of him that has
done so great things for thee: show thy faith by thy life: let it appear and
be seen in thy works that thou art in deed, the loving and the justified
child of God, ready and desirous to obeie and do his will. And least in thy
working thou should follow thine own fantasy, and do that which is not
acceptable in the sight of God, he has laid out thy way before thee.

7 He has showed thee, No service pleases God but such as God prescribes.
O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: Surely to do
judgment and to love mercy, to humble thy self, to walk carefully with thy
God. Wherein we first learn this lesson: that no service we do to God can
please him, but such as himself in his word has prescribed; he will be
served as he has commanded in his law, and not as thou have devised with thy
self. That service which God in his word does not require at thy hands, if
thou offer it him, it is in vain thou offerest. The Lord has not asked it,
and he will not accept it of thee. In vain they worship me teaching doctrines
the precepts of men. It is not for nothing that God was so curious in platting
forth the Tabernacle, and so precise in commanding that all things without
exception should be done according to that pattern. Was God so careful over
an earthly and a corruptible house think you? No; His meaning was to teach us
that in the spiritual Tabernacle in matters of religion, perteining to the
service and worship of God all things should be done according to the rule of
his own will which is set down in his written word. For has he not said in
the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.
What I commmaund thee, that only shall thou do, Apoc. 22.
thou shall neither add nor diminish? He that adds God shall add unto him
all the plagues, he that takes away God shall take from him all the blessings
contained in that book. The doctrine of Christ, says Clemens Alexandrinus,
Clem. Alexand.
is most absolute, neither wants it any thing. God is well pleased when men
are so religiously affected, that they dare not swerve a hairs breadth from his
word. S. Cyprian says, Cyprian.
The foundation of all religion and faith is laid in the word of God. Hieron.
And S. Jerome, That which has not authority out of the word of God, is
altogether as easily refused as proved. Which rule of religion if the Latin
Church had as well observed as it is both in the scriptures often given, and
often commended by the godly fathers: the Church of Christ had never been
burdened with so many unprofitable traditions, and new inventions of men: so
many superstitions, so great idolatry, so ouglie pollutions had never found
entrance into the house of God. In the scriptures wherein is contained all that
is good and all that which God requires or accepts of, we find no mention
either of the name or of the thing of the Mass, the Pope, Purgatory, praying
on beads, hallowing of bells, either any such like popish trashe: In sum few
parts of their religion have any one stone from thence to be founded or built
upon. For where does God require any one of these or the like at our or their
hands? That which is required in his name is this, To do judgment and to love
mercy, etc. Wherein is fully comprised our whole duty both to God and man.

8 To do judgment. God prescribes doing of judgment, and what it is to do
judgment.
This sentence receives sundry expositions, and each of them yields us
sundry good lessons. Jerome understands by doing of judgment doing all
things with reason and ripe consideration. God himself gives an example
hereof and applies himself to our senses that he may instruct our minds
herein. For minding to power his plagues upon Sodoma and Gomorra those sinful
cities he says first with himself, Genesis 18.
I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether according unto
that cry which is come unto me or not, that I may know. It was rashness in
Iephthe to promise without exception whatsoever should meet him first, and he
paid full dearly for it. Herod without all reason and judgment promised to
his daunsing daughter whatsoever she should demand, and his keeping of
promise was even as unadvised. They want judgment that forsake the fresh
living springes, and drink of a puddell, that contemn the saving word of
God, and be altogether addicted to man's vain and deceitful doctrine, that
forsake Christ's merits by sticking to their own. They want judgment that call
upon dead Saints, when they may and should call only upon the living God; who
has promised when we cry both to hear and to help us. They are destitute
both of reason and judgment who vow that which lies not in their power to
perform. The world is not ignorant how these holy ones performed their vows
of chastity and of single life. Matthew. Paris^n Henr. prim.
How unable to bear this yoke the Popes own legate was which forced this
thing here in England upon others, they well knew which took him in the midst
of his filth, to his own everlasting infamy and the great dishonor of
Honorius the second from whom he was sent. Res notissima, negari non potuit:
the thing was famously known, and could not be denied. Do thou teach
another and do not teach thy self? Do thou forbid marriage and thy self
commit adultery? Do thou force that yoke upon others which thy self so
shamefully shakest off? What is emptiness of reason and judgment if this be
not? The murder which Theodosius rashly committed without advise or judgment
put him to great penance and wrought him much sorrow: whereupon he gave his
royal assent unto a Law, that afterward he should do nothing without
deliberation before hand taken. The man that is hasty and rash as he does
others much woe, so wants no woe himself. S. Paul would have our serving of
God for to be reasonable, that is to be such as that a good and a just reason
may be rendered of it: not such reasons as Durandus gives of popish rites and
ceremonies in a book written purposely of this matter, but written in such
sort that a man unacquainted with the strange blindness of their darkened
minds would certainly think that such a work was rather published to move
laughter amongst companions than to breed knowledge in the minds of religious
Christians. So void they are in all their doings even of common sense and
reason, not only of true piety and obedience to Gods word.

9 Another interpretation of doing judgment may be given, Judgment must be
done by such as have the administration of justice committed unto them.
and that is if we take judgment for the administration of justice, and so it
has a special respect to such as are set in place of deciding causes and
repressing sins, who are required by our Prophet to give righteous and just
judgment. Give thy judgments to the King O God, says the Prophet, and thy
righteousness to the kings son. Psalm. 72.
Then shall he judge the people in righteousness and the poor in justice.
Justice and judgment are commonly in the scriptures joined together because if
there be a divorce at any time between these two, Gods family and the common
wealth go to wrack and ruin. The Psalmist seems to note a separation to
have been between these two in his time, when he says, Judgment shall
return to justice. Psalm. 94.
But these may also be so distinguished that judgment have his especial
respect to the execution of the sword, to the punishing of transgressors;
justice to the righeous deciding of matters which are in controversy. I need
not travel much herein, I speak to wise and learned men which well know
their duty, and I trust that the fear of God will direct them Christianly to
discharge the same: Ye do not forget that ye are called in the scripture God:
not only because ye are set in Gods seat, but because ye are the mouth and
the hand of God; the mouth to speak in awarding true sentence, the hand to
strike in executing judgment without respect-of men's persons. Wherein it
behooves you to take good heed, and to beware what ye do. For ye exercise
the judgment not of man, but of God. If the seat be his, if ye be his mouth
and hand, if sentence be his, if his be the judgment: then see to it that ye
judge uprightly as the ministers of that upright judge. For there sits a
judge also upon you: what measure you give you shall receive, when the great
judge shall proceed to his last and everlasting sentence. He that truly
fears God and considers these things will not swerve from justice for fear
or favor of any man or thing.

10 I will briefly touch certain properties which should be in such as are
placed in Gods judicial seat and leave the rest to your wise considerations.
Judges free from taking of bri^es.
The first thing that judges are especially to take heed of is that they be
not receivers of bribes. Beware of rewards; they are the very bane of upright
judgment.

11 In God whose seat ye sit in there is no iniquity. They that judge others,
must themselves be faultlesse.
Such therefore as correct faults ought themselves to be faultlesse. In
condemning others we condemn our selves, if we our selves do that for which
we condemn others. A certain pirate being charged with his fault by
Alexander the great conqueror made him this answer, I rob in deed with one
little ship, but thou robbest with a whole Navy. It is not for him to
reprove that is reprooueable.

12 God is no accepter of persons: Acceptance of persons.
neither must you in judgment either favor the rich, because of his wealth;
or spare the poor, for his miseries sake: but weie their causes in the balance
of equity with an even and steddie hand.

13 The judge may not give place to commiseration: Foolish pity.
his place is a place of equity and not of foolish pity. Ios. 19.
The pitiful and deceitful cry of the Gabionites, the appearance of their
miserable estate and condition made the wise and worthy judge Joshua to swerve
from justice and to break the commandment of the almighty. The exclaming of
the people has many times as much cause as had the harlots complaint made unto
Solomon that her child was taken from her which her self had smothered.

14 In proceeding in judgment beware of swiftness and much speed. Judgment
neither too hasty nor too slow.
It is good for a judge commonly to have leaden feet. Yet as a judge may be
too swift so he may be too slow. Delatories and shiftings off wear out many
a just cause, and beggar many a poor man. The cause standing clear further
pleading should cease, sentence should not be delaied. Solomon set not over the
harlots to the next term, 1, Reg. 3.
but seeing by his wisdom the truth of the cause proceeded forthwith to
judgment. Paul was set over from place to place, Acts 24.
from term to term, and could not receive justice; the cause is declared,
Felix hoped for a fee. But this fault of delaying justice is laid upon the
Attorneies and Proctors, the Counselors and Advocates in the Law, who seek
their greater gain and wealth through the greater trouble and loss of the
people. If they would learn two short lessons of S. Paul and learn withal to
follow them, the matter easily might be amended. The one is to love men and
not their money. Non quaero quae vestra sunt, 2* Cor. 12.
says S. Paul, I seek not yours but you. This lesson is hard, 2. Cor. 13.
but good: and the other is like it. I can do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth, says the Apostle. Nothing in a bad cause, but in a good cause
all things. These lessons well learned would quickly cut off many evil pleas,
and drive back causeless controversies.

15 You to whom the sword of justice and judgment is committed take heed unto
it. Partiality.
Let it not spare mighty men: for their sins are mighty sins. If such
offend, their fall draws down others with them. God therefore commanded
Moses to hang up the princes of the people upon gibbets that they might be
examples of punishment who had been examples in sinning. The good Consul
Iunius Brutus spared not his own sons but cut off their conspiring heads.
And Aulus Fuluius in the like case did the like thing. Pilate abused his
office, when upon suit he spared Captain Barrabas the murderer, and killed
Christ our savior. Spare not traitors, murderers or thieves, least you be
partakers of their sins. Your lenity toward them is cruelty toward the
common weal, the enemies of whose peace they are. Serve God in fear, love his
truth, promote his Gospel. The seat, the judgment, the sword is the Lords,
defend therefore his cause, see to the keeping of his statutes, enlarge his
kingdom, advance his glory: for he has promised to glorify them that
honor him, but they that despise him shall be full base: he shall make them
vile and contemptible.

16 Doing of judgment may also generally be taken for just dealing. Judgment
and justice must be in all the dealings generally of all men.
Justice is a virtue which gives every man his own. Render unto every man y^
which is his. Let every man perform his office and fulfill his duty, let
every man do right one to another: do as you would be done unto. If this Law
were observed the people should be eased of great expenses, judges and justices
of great travel. Christ says, if a man take thy coat from thee rather than
strive give him also thy cloak. 1. Cor. ^.
There is verily a fault amongst you, because ye go to Law one with another:
why do you not rather suffer wrong? Why do ye not rather sustain any kind
of tolerable harm? Abraham gave place to Lot and would not contend: his only
reason was, we are brethren. Genesis 13.
But brotherhoode is now adays no argument of agreement, our times are so
unlike their times, and we so unlike them. There were no better mean in my
opinion to bridle these quarelling and contentious minds of wranglers than to
burden such as fail in their cause with great expenses and amerciaments. It
would make them beware of quarrels and unjust contending if they were sure to
pay well for it. Do judgment, deal justly one with another, pay unto al
men that which is due, that which is not due seek not to have at any man's
hands.

17 The second duty to our neighbor is mercy: As we must do judgment, so
we must also love mercy: which he that loves does not rashly judge others.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee: surely to do judgment, and to love mercy. Be merciful says our
Savior as your father is also merciful. This mercy as Christ there teaches
will show forth it self in three properties. First it will bridle that
uncharitable rashness of judging and condemning others. Nolite iudicare, Judge
not. Mercy will not be hasty to judge. Luc. 6.
There be judgments civil, and judgments Ecclesiastical; judgments
public, and private judgments. Christ neither forbids the magistrate
neither the public minister to judge according to the Law, neither the parent
or master to judge and correct their offending children or servant. It is
uncharitable private judgment which God forbids when men unadvisedly take
upon them to give sentence of others, as if God had resigned his own right
into their hands: they condemn whom they list, and say what they list, even
as they fancy so they judge. This man is a Saint and that man a sinner; he the
servant of God, and he the child of death. Who art thou that so iudgest
another servant? Is it not to his own master only to whom he stands or falls?
Who art thou that take such severity upon thee? that dealest so unmercifully
with thy brother? He is a sinner: so thou either art, or have been, or may
be: judge therefore thy self, try and examine thine own works. Judge I say
thy self and judge not him least thou be condemned of the Lord, for both not
judging and judging. Gal. 6.
If a brother be overtaken with a fault, ye that are spiritual show mercy,
restore him with the spirit of meekness: considering thy self, least thou
also be tempted. Verily this merciless judging of others is the cause why we
fall into many perils and secret temptations. Love mercy therefore and judge
not. He that judges with the Pharisee, with the Pharisee shall be judged.

18 Another fruit of mercy is forgiveness. They who are hasty to judge are
for the most part in forgiving slow. Lovers of mercy are ready to pardon and
put up injuries.
But forgive and ye shall be forgiven. Howbeit such as sit in judgment ought
to correct and not to remit, because they deal not with injuries done to
themselves but to the laws and common wealth or church: But in private
injuries we must all remember the words and follow the example of our
Savior. Be merciful and forgive. Christ forgave them that put him to death,
Stephen them that stoned him, Joseph them that sold him, the king his
unthrifty servant 1000. talents. If we forgive not others, it is in vain to
pray that which we daily pray, Forgive us. For so does Ecclesiasticus well
teach us. Ecclesiast. 28.
He that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord: and he will
surely keep his sins. Forgive they neighbor, the hurt that he has done to
thee: so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also, when thou praiest. Should a
man bear hatred against man: and desire forgiveness of the Lord? He will
show no mercy to a man, that is like himself: and will he ask forgiveness
of his own sins? If he that is but flesh, nourish hatred, and ask pardon
of God: who will entreat for his sins? Matthew. 5.
And our Saviors commandment is, If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee; leave there thine
offering before the altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy
brother; and then come, and offer thy gift. Whereunto S. Chrysostom alluding,
says, That God had rather want thy sacrifice due to him: than reconciliation
should not be made, between thee, and thy brother.

19 The next and third fruit of mercy mentioned by our savior is, Merciful
men are bountiful.
Give and it shall be given unto you, He that loves mercy gives alms, but
the covetous man is cruel. God is so careful to have the poor relieved that
he has bound himself by promise to make alms most gainefull to the giver: so
that it is not in this as in other common expenses, but whatsoever we lay out
that we lay up. He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, a sure
discharger of his debts to the uttermost. For he leaves not a cup of cold
water given in his name unrewarded. The occasions which we have to show forth
this fruit of mercy are very many and great: we have the poor with us, and
we have them with us in great numbers. Are we not worse than Jews, if we
suffer our Christ, at whose hands we have received all our riches, in his naked
and hungry members to beg his bread at our doors, and pitifully to die even in
the midst of our streets for distress, for cold and hunger? If our gospel
bring forth in stead of mercy this cruelty, in stead of kindness this
hardness of heart, doubtless God will take his precious gospel from us, and
give it to a people that will bring forth better and sweeter fruit. Now if
the love of God and mercy toward our brother can not pierce our flintie
hearts, yet let shame of the world compel us, and our own commodity induce
us well to consider of this lamentable case. If that which is given were given
in good order it would ease this common grief. By good order and wise
provision the impotent might be so relieved, that they should not need to beg,
and such as are able might be forced in the sweat of their brows to eat
their own bread. And if the matter were taken in hand by them by whom it
should, I do not doubt but GOD would touch the hearts of many a man with
tender mercy that they would both cheerfully and liberally contribute to this
work of mercy, which God does more esteem than any other sacrifice, nay he
refuses sacrifice and craves this. The Lord loves a cheerful and a
bountiful giver and will plentifully reward him. Let every good man set
forward this work: it is the work of the Lord, the fruit of mercy, good and
gainful not only to others but also to our selves. For behold how the works
of mercy do return back again unto them from whom they proceed. Judge not
and you your selves shall not be judged, Forgive and ye shall be forgiven
your selves, give and it shall be given unto you.

20 All which notwithstanding, Usurers ar^ altogether mercilesse^ men.
the bowels of compassion are in some men so maruellously dried and closed up,
that they turn away their faces from all men that desire any thing at their
hands, though they ask it not of gift but of loan; unless they ask to buie
the loan with usury. The Jews even till this day will not lend upon usury
among themselves, but lend freely to their brethren and without gain. Judas
himself that sold his master for money was not more cruel hearted I suppose
than these men are who for money devour their brethren. Their hearts are iron
hearts. They have no spark of pity or compassion left in them. Let them not
think but that one day their gain shall be their exceeding loss. If
Chrysostom thought that one evil gotten groate laid up amongst a chestful
of money would be as a canker to fret out and eat up the rest, what shall
become then of so much gotten by so unmerciful and ungodly means? Where is
love, where is mercy, when lending of money is become merchandise? Enough has
been said in this place of this matter: which if it be not amended be ye
assured that the Lord God in his just wrath will plague you both in your
selves and in your posterity for it.

21 Now that we have seen what duty we owe to men, The duty toward God
which the prophet requires at our hands.
let us see what God requires to be performed unto himself. He has showed
thee, O man, what is good. Our duty toward him is to humble our selves and to
walk carefully with our God. He that will walk with God must be of an humble
heart. It is the milde-hearted, and not the proude-minded; the Publican, and
not the Pharisee that walks with him.

22 To walk with him is to be syncerely and heartily careful to set forward
his cause, What it is to walk with God.
to promote his gospel, to defend his truth, to amplify his kingdom to the
uttermost of our powers. Princes and they that judge the earth whom God has
blessed with so high an honor especially should in fear and reverence serve
their God, love his word and gospel, earnestly and cheerfully advance,
maintain and defend true religion. They are able to do most good, and
therefore most is required of them. Bishops and ministers the dispensers of
Gods blessed mysteries should carefully travel in their Lords cause and
glory, in season and out of season to preach the gospel, even so much as in
us lies: or else the Vae of God which hangs over our heads shall be powered
down upon us. But the saying of S. Paul is verified in these our days upon al
sorts of people, All men seek their own. The preferring of true religion, the
seeking of Gods glory is the least part of men's care or thought. It was
otherwise with Moses who both loved Gods service with perfect love, and hated
superstition with perfect hatred. Theodosius for want of this warmenesse and
zeal in Gods quarrel suffered by his too much lenity the Arrians who denied
Christ to be God quietly to spread abroad their heresies in his dominions
without check or controlling. The good Bishop Amphilochius upon this occasion
repaired to the Emperor who had at that time with him his son and heir
Arcadius. The Bishop did his obeisance and duty to the Emperor, but saluted
not his son; wherewith the Emperor finding fault said, Why salute ye not our
son who shall sit on our seat? No Emperor; for so much as thou do not care
for the son of God, but suffer him to loose his honor and place, neither
shall thy son be regarded or sit on thy seat. Here at his own cause called
into question he waxed warm, and forthwith expelled the Arrians out of his
dominions. Many of them who are hot in their own matters are cold in Gods
cause. Yet our Prophet bids us carefully to walk with our God and to be
earnest in seeking of his kingdom and glory.

23 Be careful over your conversation, He which walks with God must walk
carefully, especially if God have made him as it were a God amongst men.
give no cause of slander, to them which are without; or of offense, to the
little ones: Let not the gospel be discredited by your behauiours. Be careful
that the light of your life so shine before the world, that therein your
heavenly father may be glorified. Ye ought to shine as lights: Take heed that
your light be not turned into darkness. Be bright stars, and not mistie
clouds. If an Eclipse fall amongst you, the rest of England will be darkened
with it. Ye are seen and marked of men and Angels. The world has many eyes,
ears, and tongues. London, Westminster, the Innes of Court and Chancerie, from
whence the best and most of you do flow, are as a fountain from whence should
spring all true religion, all piety, virtue and godly conversation. If this
spring be corrupted, the rivers that flow from it must needs be polluted.
If blasphemous popery full of idolatry and superstition, if vain and puffed
up pride, if wicked avarice and intolerable usury the great canker of the
common wealth, if belly cheer and filthy whoredom, if subtle and false
dealing, if counterfaite and fained friendship, if flattery and dissimulation
be the water of this your well: doubt you not but that all England will drink
thereof, and they being poisoned by your ill example: their blood shall be
required at your hands.

24 Walk therefore, They which walk with God must still walk on.
and walk on; go forward. For if ye be in the way of life, not to go
forward is to go backward. If ye be entr^d into this happy path, step not
aside, give not back. A dog returning to his vomit is a foul and an ougly
thing to behold. Take heed I say of backesliding. It is a dreadful thing to
forsake Christ, and to be ashamed of the gospel. He that tastes of this
sweet gift of God the gospel of Christ and falls back from it, he is a
tormenter as much as in him lies and a crucifier of the Lord of glory. Walk
therefore, go on from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue. Ye have
been heretofore often moved: but what effect has it taken? God grant that
there be not a retyring from strength to weakness, from virtue to
sinnefulnesse. It is to be feared that many men's woonted zeal is transformed
into cold security, their liberality into greediness and biting usury,
charity into envy, sobriety into wantonness, humility into pride and
haughtiness. This is the common walking of men, for whom it were far better if
they stood still. The Apostle could not mention them but with tears. There
are many which walk, says he, of whom I have told you often and now tell you
weeping, they are enemies of the cross of Christ, their belly is their God,
their glory is in their shame, their end is damnation.

25 Walk not as these do in darkness but in light. We all walk before God,
but not all with God.
God is light, walk therefore with God. And then ye do that which he
requires at your hands. Walk with him: for howsoever we walk we are sure to
walk before him. We cannot shun his eye: if we fly up into heaven, he is
there, if we go down into hell, there he is also. He sees things done in
light and beholds that which is covered with darkness: he is privy unto
men's thoughts: he knew the spiteful and malicious purposes of the Scribes and
Pharisees: he espied Adam biting the forbidden fruit: he looked upon Cain
shedding his brothers blood: he perceived the secret sins of Sodom: he
understood the corruption of Giezi and made it manifest: he saw the double
heart of Judas who kissed his master and betrayed him: he beheld Siba when he
falsely and traitorously accused Mephiboseth unto David. The cloaked adultery
and murder which David had covered with clouds of policy could not be hidden
from his eye: The lie of Ananias was written in capital letters before him
plain to be red: The sleights and conueiances of the usurer cannot be covered
with figgetree leaves from the sight of the almighty: there is neither bribe
given nor taken but God looks upon it: there is no treachery nor treason that
can be hid from him. Dominus videt is a short but a good lesson. I beseech you
learn it and remember it, that it may teach you to walk always as in the
sight of the Lord, who will be a swift witness and a fierce judge against
evil doers who walk with Satan. Which thing rightly and duly considered and
weied would bridle these untamed affections of ours, and terrify men from
these heinous and wilful sins. Our Lord grant this good effect for his
great mercies sake. Thus have you heard the occasion, explication and
application of these the prophets words: what way we may please God and
pacify his wrath, what we owe to our neighbors, namely to deal justly and
mercifully with them, not rashly to judge of them, easily to forgive them, and
liberally to give unto them: what we owe likewise to our gracious GOD, to wit
to humble our selves lowly before his majesty; and carefully, zealously, and
continually to walk in his presence. To this God, even our good and merciful
father, with his son our savior and the holy ghost our sanctifier, three
persons and one God be all honor and glory world without end. Amen.

The thirteenth Sermon. A Sermon made in York at a visitation.
MATTHEW. 21. 12 And Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all them that
sold and bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money changers,
and the seats of them that sold Doves,

13 And said to them, It is written, Mine house shall be called the house of
prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves.


THE Church and spouse of God has been ever most dear to the children of
God. The care which the godly have always had o^ the Church.
Godly Princes have always carefully traveled for the good preservation and
government thereof. David that princely prophet; Solomon that wise and mighty
king, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Zorobabel, with others most religious and
worthy men which bare excellent rule in their dominions have painfully
traveled not only to build, to amplify and to enlarge the kingdom of God
by setting forward true religion, but also to purge and reform his temple by
taking away such defilementes and corruptions as grew by means of careless
government. The Apostles of Christ both among the Jews and Gentiles did first
plant Churches by the diligent preaching of the gospel, and afterward with like
care and diligence visit them to see in what state they stood, that if any
thing were gone to decaie it might in time be repaired. Acts 15.
This is recorded unto us in the history of their acts and deeds, and namely
in the fifteenth chapter. Christ the anointed king and priest, the great
sheepeheard of the sheep, the perfect example given us to follow did not
only go about through all Galilee and the costs of Jury preaching the glad
tidings of the gospel and confirming his heavenly doctrine with wonderful
miracles, but as it is in this present history declared perceiving that
through the subtlety of Satan and covetousness of the priests the temple of
God was profaned, in his pastoral care he visited it and in the zeal of God
voided them out which did defile it. How the fathers of the Church and chief
pastors have with great care and diligence every where at all times in all ages
done the like I need not declare unto you, the histories are plain and
plentiful. And thus considering my calling and the charge committed unto me, I
thought my self by these former examples in duty forced and in conscience
bound, not only as much as in me lies to feed the flock of Christ, but also
to view and see in what state the Church of God committed to my oversight and
government stands. And as Christ began with the most magnificent temple of
Jerusalem which he found profaned and polluted through the practice of the
priests: so thought I it convenient and meet first to visit this most
ancient and famous church, the head and example to all the rest, well hoping to
find it in better order.

2 That we may learn by the doctrine and example of Christ how we ought to
use our selves in the house of God, The Church purged, and the use thereof
showed by Christ.
as well for the establishing of true religion and of the sincere serving of
God, as also for the expelling of that which is vain, corrupt and counterfeit,
there are in this action of Christ two things especially to be considered of:
first he comes to Jerusalem, enters into the temple, finds it full of
corruption and does purge it, secondly he teaches the true use of it, and
shows them their fault who did abuse it.

3 Christ coming toward Jerusalem was at the first highly magnified and
received with applause of the people crying, The entertainment of Christ and
his ministers in the world when they go about to do the work of the Lord.
Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes king in the name of the Lord, peace in
heaven and glory on high. But this fair wether did not long continue. So
soon as he entered into the city and taught, the chief priests, the Scribes
and the Princes of the people sought to destroy him: Luc. 19.
yea the people which before gave so great applause crying, Hosanna, soon
after cried with a loud voice, Crucifige. The gospel in prosperity has many
pretensed friends and favorers: but when it is persecuted by the wise and
mighty men of the world, then these counterfeits show themselves in their
own colors, the hollownesse of their hearts is then descried. Let the
minister therefore which minds indeed the glory of God beware that he never
depend upon men whose minds are changeable and always wavering; but let him
rest upon GOD and rely himself wholly upon his providence. Let us all
faithfully and painefully travel in our function, making our selves ready for
the cross patiently to suffer with Christ Jesus.

4 Being come to the city he straight way entered into the temple, Christ's
entering into the temple.
either as Gregory notes, to declare quod ex culpa Sacerdotum ruina populi,
that the fault of the priests is the ruin of the people, and therefore his
principal care was to correct and reform them; or else to give all men an
example of diligence in repairing to the house of God.

5 Having entered the temple he finds there in stead of pastors teaching the
word of God, The state wherein he found the temple of Jerusalem.
drouers and brokers making sale; in stead of pues for prayer tables for
exchange; in stead of righteous men brute beasts; thieves in stead of a
sanctified congregation. Thus he found the Church of Jerusalem disfigured and
forlorn: this was the state of that Synagogue at what time he came to visit
it.

6 How to proceed in reforming a Church so greatly disordered our Savior
has taught us by his own practice amongst the Jews. He (...)
He entered into the temple, threw out the men that bought and sold, whipped
out the beasts, powered out the changers money, turned their tables vpside
down, ouerthrewe the seats of them that sold doves, and withal told them,
Scriptum est, It is written.

7 In that we read how Christ did all these things, By whom the Church should
be reformed when things are found to be amiss.
we are thereby given to understand at whose hands we must expect reformation
of things amiss in the Church of God. Christ had authority to cast out of the
temple whatsoever displeased him because he was supreme Lord over it. The
persons therefore to whom this work of reformation belongs are not al men
indifferently but they only to whom he has granted the seat of special
authority in his Church. If they whom he has set over his house as principal
servant, guides and stewardes either ciuilly or spiritually, as Moses or as
Aaron to rule and govern it until his coming shall in such manner as agrees
with their several places and callings perform his duty in the church of
Christ, whosoever in such proceedings withstandeth them the same undoubtedly
rebelleth against God. Yea I say further when GOD has given his people kings
which are as nurcing fathers, Esaias 49.
and Queens which are as nurcing mothers to his church, when princes are not
enemies but professors of the faith and protectors of the faithful, their
hands ought to be chief in this work: neither is it lawful for subjects of
what degree and order soever by themselves to attempt alteration and change in
the church of God though it be from worse to better. In the days of Josias
Helchiah although he were the Lords high priest and knew things to be very much
out of order, 2 Reg. 22.
did not thereupon according to the custom of the turbulent and seditious, by
word or writing alienate and estrange the minds of the people from the
present kind of government either of the Church or public weal, but peaceably
and orderly he sent Shaphan the Chauncelor to the king: who perceiving the
things which were amiss, went immediately up to the house of the Lord with all
the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests and
prophets and all the people, where the faults and abuses being clearly set down
that every one might see them, he gave commandment to Helchiah the high
priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door to
bring out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal.
Thus the prince did his duty, and the priests theirs, he by iniunction, and
they by execution; they instructing him, and he strengthening them in the work
of the Lord. Seeing therefore we have on the one side (the name of the Lord be
blessed for it) the highest power zealous for the glory of God as theirs was,
let not us whom this care ought especially to touch, show our selves less
ready than they were to bring out of the temple of the Lord all such filthy
corruptions as are crept into it by the wicked dealings of those ungodly men
which care not how shamefully they pollute and defile it, let not us whom the
Lord has made the overseers of his house be slothful in proceeding to sweep,
cleanse and purge it according as Laws and statutes have wisely provided in
this behalf; let us consider that we are the Lords laborers, Ier. 1.
that the work we have in hand is his husbandry, that our duty is as well
to destroy as to build, to root out as to plant.

8 But what is that which we must labor to destroy? What was reformed by
Christ in the temple.
what weeds be those which we must endeavor to root out? We read here that
our Savior did cast buyers and sellers out of the temple terming them Thieves.
For although to buy and sell be actions in themselves lawful and honest: yet
the time and place with other circumstances may so change their quality, that
he which buieth shall be as one that robs, and he that sells as one that
steals. They bought and sold in the temple, this Christ condemns. Yet
behold what a beautiful color they had set upon their wicked practices to
make them seem allowable before me^. For of the judgment of God they made no
account. It is written in the Law, Thou shall eat before the Lord thy God in
the place which he shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, Deuteronomy. 14.
the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine and of thine oil, and the first borne of
thy kine, and of thy sheep, that thou may learn to fear the Lord thy God
always. And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry
it because the place is far from thee where the Lord thy God shall choose to
set his name, when the Lord thy God shall bless thee, then shall thou make it
in money, and take the money in thine hand and go unto the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall bestow the money for whatsoever
thine heart desires, and shall eat it there before the Lord thy God, and
rejoice both thou and thine household. Under pretense of providing that
according to this law men which dwelt far off might always at their coming
to the temple have sacrifices there and offerings in a readiness to present
before the Lord, their covetous humor fed it self upon the people without all
fear of God, without any reverence at all of his sanctuary. May they not
justly be termed Thieves, who pretending thus to serve the Lord in his
sacrifices, robbed and spoiled him in his Saints? No doubt Jerusalem had she
known the things which belonged to her peace would have blessed the hour
wherein the Lord of the house came to ease that holy place of so intolerable
burdens, to rid his temple of so noisome filth.

9 Now because the root from whence these abuses and corruptions grew, What
we should reform in the Church according to Christ's example.
was the settled wickedness wherewith the hearts both of the priests and people
were possessed, therefore we may without swaruing from the true intent of this
history, take occasion here to note some special pollutions of the mystical
Temple of GOD which is his Church, and to show the great necessity of
remoouing them. Wherein (as the present occasion of our assembly at this time
requires) I will especially touch such as properly belong to that part of the
Church which has the spiritual regiment of the other. This therefore is the
principal matter which now we have to observe in the fact of our Lord and
master Christ, that if in visiting our temples we find them possessed with
wicked pastors, they are not there to be suffered, the rod of severity must
whippe them out. Who be good sheepeheardes and who be thieves it is soon
discerned, ye shall know them by their fruits.

10 Unto good pastors our Savior opposes hirelings, The unkind affection of
evil pastors.
thieves and robbers, showing also the difference between the one and the
other. John 10.
The good sheepeheard loves his flock entirely, it grieueth him not to power
out his very soul for their sakes, he gathers them as Lambs into his
arms, carries them in his bosom, and kindly entreats them. Contrariwise
the hireling cares not for the sheep, he bears a stern and a stony heart
toward them. And as their inward affections are far different, so their
outward actions are much unlike, whether we look upon their entering into their
function or their dealing after they are entered.

11 The true sheepeheard goes in by the door, Their unorderly entering upon the
flock^ by Simonie.
to him the porter opens: He takes not this honor unto himself, but
expects a calling from God as Aaron did; he breaks not in by violence but
waits till the porter open unto him, till they give him entrance to whom
Christ has given power and authority to ordeine. 2. Mat. 4.
But thieves and robbers clime up another way, they wind in themselves by
unlawful means, with money they purchase the rooms which they occupy in the
Church of Christ. Thus did Menelaus get the priesthood from Jason at the
hands of the king by giving three hundred talents of silver more than the
other, albeit he had nothing in himself worthy of the high priesthood, but
bare the stomach of a cruel tyrant and the wrath of a wild beast. Thus Leo
the tenth, Innocentius the eighth, Siluester the third, two Gregory's, the sixth
and the twelfth, yea the most part of the Bishops of Rome for many years have
obtained their popedomes. Thus do their Cardinals, Bishops and Prelates; thus
do their clergy even to this day. And I would to God this were only their
fault. A thing both condemned by the commendable Laws, decrees, and
constitutions of sundry Councels, and also by the blessed Apostle S. Peter so
grievously accursed in him whose heart was first therewith infected, that in
the whole body of the sacred Scripture a note of the like indignation
conceived against any other sin (as I am persuaded) can scarcely be found.
For why? If they which bought and sold but the beasts of the field and birds
of the air, doves, sheep and oxen in the place which God had sanctified to
himself, were therefore termed by a name that declares their dealings to have
been as much abhorred in his sight as if they had spent all the days of their
life in theft and robbery, how can we think any bitterness of speech or
sharpness of punishment too great for so extreme lice^tiousnes as theirs that
make sale of the cure of souls, that bargain for the gifts of the holy Ghost?
For so they are. The making of Bishops, the bestowing of benefices, the
prese^ting, instituting and inducting of pastors, the placing of teachers,
guides and overseers in the Church, is and should be accounted the very work of
the holy Ghost. Attend, says S. Paul, take heed to your selves and to the
whole flock, Acts. 20.
wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God
which he has purchased with his own blood. Whosoever therefore be the man
that presumes to stain a thing so holy with the execrable filth of indirect
dealing, of buying, selling, couenanting, bargaining either for money or money
worth, may it not as justly be said to him as to Magus, Acts 8.
Thy money perish with thee because thou think that the gift of God may be
obtained with money: Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this buisinesse:
for thine heart is not right in the sight of GOD? I counsel them with S. Peter
that are in the gall of this bitterness, and in the bonds of this iniquity,
betime to repent them of their wickedness, and to pray unto God that if it
be possible the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them.

12 It is a true saying, Their evil dealing after they are entered.
Vix bono peraguntur exitu quae malo sunt inchoata principio, Things ill begun
are not commonly well ended, neither are their proceedings likely to be good
whose beginnings are so greatly out of order. They which enter not into the
temple as did Aaron will hardly behave themselves in the house of the Lord as
Aaron did. 2. Mac. 4.
Jason obtained a superiority in the Church by money: But how behaved he
himself in this his purchased function? Began he not immediately to draw his
brethren to the customs of the Gentiles? Did he not by and by change their
Laws and policies, and bring up new statutes contrary to their Law? As the
good sheepeheard entering in at the door when he is entered, guides his sheep
as David in the discretion of his hands, feeds them carefully with wholesome
doctrine, and walks in all uprightness of holy and undefiled conversation
before them: so he that climeth up an other way after he has gotten himself
in, seeks nothing but to steal, kill and destroy. The thief comes not but
to steal, John 10.
to kill, and to destroy: He has no other end or purpose.

13 The only thing that should be desired by the pastor is the weal and
benefit of his flock. They steal.
For if the mark whereat we shoot be but to make our commodity by the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: wherein do we differ from thieves and robbers? Is not
our intent and purpose the very selfsame with theirs? Wherefore S. Peter's
exhortation is, 1. Pet. 5.
Feed the flock of God caring for it not for filthy lucre but of a ready
mind. If a man have al knowledge, in so much that he be able to speak with
tongues, yea and to prophecy, yet if the thing for which he labors be his
own gain, if he use this vocation than which nothing is more precious and
holy only as a way or trade to live by, whatsoever he receives with such a
mind he steals rather than receives it. This is that whereof the Lord
complains so grievously by his Prophets, Mich. 3.
The priests teach for hire, the prophets prophecy for money: yet will they
lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord among us? Eay 56.
And again, These sheepeheards cannot understand, they all look to their own
way, every one for his advantage and for his own purpose. Moses blessing
Levy before his death says first, They shall teach Jacob thy judgments and
Israel thy Law, they shall put incense before thy face, Deuteronomy. 33.
and then adds, Bless O Lord his substance, accept the work of his hands.
As if he should have said, So long as Levy and his sons do not seek their
own commodity but thy glory, thou art righteous and can not forget to
provide in large manner both for them and theirs. As indeed till the men of
that sacred order took fleshhookes in their hands and sought to better their
estate by force, 1. Sam. 2.
til they became like to greedy mastiues, ravening curres, who ever saw the
Leuite of the Lord forsaken, or the son of the Leuite begging his bread? So
likewise the Church of GOD was never spoiled till her pastors were ouercarefull
to be enriched. In the prime and first appearing of Christian religion as long
as that heroical contempt of earthly things continued in the guides and
leaders of the people, what heaps of worldly treasure were brought and laid
down even at their feet? Men thought themselves to perform nothing worthy
of that profession into which they were entered, unless they sold away their
lands, goods and possessions, and gave al to make the^ rich by whose means
themselves were become righteous. The contrary to which affection as in other
parts of the Christian world, so in this also has taken such root and is
grown now so strong, that God may justly charge us as sometime he did his
own people saying, Malach. ^.
Ye have spoiled me, even this whole Nation. If therefore we be grieved (as who
is not grieved?) to see the havoc that is made of the Church of GOD, let us
change our earthly and worldly affection that he may change the condition of
his Church. God is no puruey or for thieves and robbers. Let us in synceritie
and in truth, heartily and in deed despise our own gain for his glory, and
prove him if he will not rebuke these deuourers for our sakes.

14 The next thing which Christ observes in thieves is this, They kill when
they teach not the truth which saves: This some do because they cannot teach,
some because they will not.
they destroy the flock and make as little conscience to kill as to steal.
They kill not the bodies but the souls of men. The life of the soul is the
word of truth, wherein whosoever has taken upon him to instruct the flock of
Christ, and either cannot or will not do it, what does he else but kill and
destroy? Moses speaking of the obedience of Israel to the Laws and statutes
of their God, This is, says he, your wisdom. But how came Israel by that
wisdom? Did they naturally know the Lord as beasts do naturally know their
dammes? No, The Lord said unto me, says Moses, Gather the people together and
I will cause them to hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the
days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children. So they came near and stood under the mountain, and were taught of
God which spoke unto them out of the midst of the fire. Thus God taught Israel
then. Afterward he raised up prophets among them of their own brethren, and
they were taught by men like unto themselves. Neither has God at any time
ceased and left off, but from the beginning of the world to this very hour he
has given men knowledge by instruction and saved his elect by teaching. Can
not God then give wisdom from above without a teacher? Yes God is able to
maintain the life of man without bread. But why do we talk of his absolute
power when his will is that Cornelius be taught by Peter, Lydia by Paul, Paul by
Ananias, the Eunuch by Philip, every soul that is wise in the doctrine of
salvation by Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, teachers appointed for the
gathering together of the Saints for the work of the ministry and for the
edification of the body of Christ. As therefore he that will live must eat, so
he that will be saved must have a teacher. Wherefore when the Lord meant a
blessing to his people he made them this promise, I will give you pastors
according to my heart which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
When their pastors were void of knowledge and understanding this was ever a
token that their ruin and destruction was at hand. Come now, Esaias 56.
says the prophet, all ye beasts of the field, come to devour even all the
beasts of the forest, this people cannot continue now, they must needs
perish: for their watchemen are all blind, they have no knowledge, they are
all dumme dogs and cannot bark, they lie asleep and delight in sleeping. We
are unworthy of our lives if we do not acknowledge the wonderful blessing
of God in our ministry at this day. For howsoever it be debased by some, yet
is it so far off God be thanked from the state of the Jewish Clergy in those
days, that I am persuaded there neither is nor ever was a more learned
ministry in any nation under heaven. Nevertheless I acknowledge, It is much
to be lamented that the glorious Gospel of Christ now shining with so perfect
beauty as it does, in the midst of so great light so many should still remain
in darkness, living as men without God in this present world, and perishing
through the ignorance of his saving truth. In the mean while they which are
the chief and principal causes hereof think they have very well discharged
themselves by accusing others, as if when they against all both religion and
reason have drawn unto themselves those possessions which ought to maintain
such as labor in the Gospel, a Bishop by striking the earth with one foot
might raise up learned pastors sufficient to furnish a whole province. But
whosoever be the principal cause of this disorder, they undoubtedly cannot
wash their hands of it that presume to take upon them the charge of souls for
which they know themselves unfit and altogether insufficient. In these which
destroy because they cannot save there is only a defect, which although it
woorthily deserve punishment does nevertheless move some pity and
compassion if there be a willingness to do that which there wants ability
to perform. But against such as wittingly and wilfully suffer the sheep for
which Christ died to die for want of instruction, the souls of them that
perish do cry as the blood of Abel against Cain for vengeance and wrath.
Give attendaunce therefore to reading, 1. Tim. 4.
to exhortation, to doctrine, exercise these things and give your selves unto
them that al may see how you profit and how the Church does profit by you.
Ye are fed by the sweat of other men's brows, ye receive things temporal
without any corporal labor of your own. But with what conscience do ye
this, if they which minister unto your necessities reap not that at your hands
for which they minister? You can perhaps allege many colorable excuses for
your selves. But will you allege the same in that day when a strict account of
your stewardship shall be required by him, that comes to judge both quick and
dead? Consider these things and be ye steadfast, immovable, 1. Cor. 15.
abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor in the
Lord is not in vain. Is it not better for you to save both your selves and
others than by not saving others not to save your selves?

15 They which are saved must be sanctified in truth: They kill by teaching
which teach pernicious doctrine of heresy or schism.
they which are of the truth must be consummate and made perfect in one. They
are no better therefore than soule-murtherers be they never so paineful in
their teaching that teach such doctrines as do either poison the Church with
heresy or dismember and rent it asunder with schism. John 17.
Of heretics S. Paul forewarning the Church of Ephesus says, Act. 20.
I know that after my departure there will ravening woolues enter in among you
not sparing the flock. Of Schismatikes he writes in most earnest manner as
well to the Church of Corinth as of Rome. To the one, I beseech you brethren by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all say one thing, 1. Cor. 1.
and that there be no schisms amongst you. To the other, Mark them diligently
which cause division. Romans 16.
These serve not the savior, they serve the destroier of the world. They have
over them a king, to wit the Angel of the bottomless pit whose name in Hebrew
is called Abaddon, that is to say a destroier. Apoc. 9.
Their pestilent properties S. John shows by comparing the harm which they
do in the Church to the torments which they suffer that are stung with
scorpions.

16 Now as these destroy by ill teaching, They kill by example who teaching
soundly live disorderly.
so likewise there are others who teaching well but living ill, do more harm
by their life in one hour than good by their doctrine in many years. Sozomene
writes that when barbarous nations saw how the Christian priests which were
captives, Sozom li. 2. ca. 5.
did by their sober and reverend behavior damme up the mouths of evil
speakers, they thought them to be men full of wisdom and understanding, and
hoped to find favor at the hands of God if they should woorship him after the
manner of those worthy and grave sages. Could the ancient Prophets, the
blessed Apostles, the holy Fathers in former times have enlarged the bounds of
the Church in so strange wise as they did had they not converted more by the
rare integrity of their manners than by the force and power of their words? Not
without cause therefore does the Prophet make request in the Psalm that the
priests of the Lord may put on righteousness as a garment. For if their shame
be seen who shall hide the nakedness of the people? Thus we see what should
especially be reformed in the principal part of the house of God.

17 It remains now that somewhat be spoken of the manner of reformation. The
manner of reforming* Christ reformed the temple orderly.
Christ in reforming the Church proceeded orderly, knowing that disorderly
remedies of evils are as dangerous as the evils for which they are sought. His
orderly proceeding appears in this, that he first visited and then reformed.
Visitations if they be used according to the true intent and prupose whereunto
they were ordained are needful and profitable in the Church. For howsoever
they b^ now abused by men of corrupt minds, the cause for which they were
first established was the maintenance of truth, the rooting out of heresy, the
confirming of good orders, the redressing of things amiss, the continuing of
religion, peace and innocence amongst men. If we reap not this fruit and
commodity by them the fault is in our selves: in the parties visited, when
they hide and conceal that which should be reformed; in the visitors when
they are careless in admonishing, and if that do not serve in punishing
offenders detected and lawfully convicted before them. Let the one sort
therefore remember the sin of Achan, how close it was kept, and how God
plagued Israel till it was revealed: and let the other consider the example of
Christ which proceeded no less severely in punishing than orderly in searching
out the faults and abuses of the Temple.

18 The rod in the hand of the pastor is as necessary as the staff, Severely.
yea perhaps more, because they are more whom fear does constrain than whom
love does allure to become virtuous. It is noted that in the days of Jason a
dissolute and careless high priest, the inferior sort of priests being let
alone were no more diligent about the service of the altar, but despised the
temple and regarded not the sacrifices, they became frequenters of games and
heathenish exercises, not without great disgrace to their calling. When
Nehemias returning from captivity found that Eliashab the high priest had
chambered his kinsman Tobia in the court of the house of God, Nehem. 13.
where aforetime the offerings, the incense, the tithes of corn, of wine and
of oil appointed for the Levites had been laid, by which means it came to
pass that they receiving not their portions were fled, and so the temple was
left destitute, this, says Nehemias, grieved me sore. But whence grew this
fault? Where did Nehemias lay the blame but in the governors? I reproved,
says he, the rulers, and said unto them, Why is the house of God forsaken? If
iniquity do abound for want of punishment, they which have authority be it
Civil or Ecclesiastical to repress sin must answer it.

19 It is not sufficient for them to mislike sin, but they must proceed
against it, Thoroughly.
and that so far till they have thoroughly redressed things amiss. Christ did
not cease pursuing thieves till their catell were gone, their tables
overthrown, their money scattered, themselves expelled and driven out. Which
example Constantine well following has made himself a president worthy by
other Christian governors to be followed. He did not content himself with
misliking or reproouing or lightly punishing heretics, but quite and clean
disburthened the Church of them. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 62.
Shall we suffer, says he, the contagious infection of so great evils to
creep further; knowing that long delaie may cause even the sound and the
strong to be infected with it, as with a plague? Why do we not speedily with
rigor of public punishment cut up the very roots of such iniquity? The
Angel of the Church of Thyatira did not perform his duty in this behalf so
long as Iesabel was permitted to teach; nor of Pergamus, so long as any one
Nicolaitane was there suffered; nor of Corinth, so long as there was any jot of
their corrupt leven kept. I would to God, says the Apostle, they were cut off
which trouble you: not rased on the skin, or launced in the flesh, but cut
off.

20 This can never be done where there lacks zeal, That which moved Christ
to reform the Church was his zeal.
for want whereof in the Church of Jerusalem their corruptions grew so fast
that there was no place left free and clear, the leprosy of their sin
cleaued even to the walls of the house of God, till he came whom the zeal of
that house did as it were consume and devour. If there were any spark of the
like zeal remaining in any Pope or Prelate of the Church of Rome, could they
choose but bewail the unhallowing of their temple? could they patiently abide
to see it possessed by heathenish despisers of Gods Law, to see it made a den
of thieves, a kenel for dogs and unclean beasts? Petrus de Aliaco, H^rue^ue,
Anton. Paganus, etc.
There have not wanted even of their own which have put them in mind of
things to be reformed in the body of their Church, in their Pope and Court of
Rome, in their Bishops and Prelates, in their several orders of religious men,
in their Clergy and in their Laity; there have not wanted from time to time
such as have clearly convicted them of spoiling, murdering and destroying.
But the answer of the Church of Rome has been always, Apoc. 3.
I cannot err, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing.
Thus she refuses, yea she hates to be reformed, not knowing or at least wise
not acknowledging that she is wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. To let them go and to come to our selves. If God have vouchsafed to
choose himself an holy dwelling place amongst us, ought not we to do the
best we can to cast out all that steineth and marreth the perfect beauty of
his Church?

21 What to amend both in our selves particularly and generally in the body of
the whole Church, The rule of reformation which Christ followed was the written
word.
together with the right and orderly means of woorking this amendment, it is
not humane policy that can teach us. But Scriptum est, It is written what God
requires. This is the only rule as of building so likewise of repairing the
Church. 2. Reg. 23.
Josias heard the words of the book of the Law and then reformed his Realm,
binding himself and all the people by covenant to walk after the Lord, to
keep his commandments and his testimonies, and his statutes with all their
heart and with all their soul. So in the days of Nehemias when it was found
written in the book that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not enter into
the congregation of God, Nehem. 13.
when they had heard the law, they separated from Israel all those that were
mingled with them. The same book was opened and red unto us. It was found that
our fathers had not obeyed the words of that book, to do according unto all
which is written therein for us. Hereupon our gracious Sovereign well following
the blessed example of Christ Jesus did that in her dominions for which she
has as woorthily as ever any Prince deserved that praise whereof the Prophet
speaks, Esaias 58.
saying, Thou shall be called the repairer of the breach, and the restorer of
the paths to dwell in. She has caused the vessels that were made for Baal and
for the host of heaven to be defaced, she has broken down the losts that were
builded for idolatry, she has turned out the priests that burnt incense
unto false gods, she has overthrown all polluted and defiled altars, she has
abolished darkness and caused the light of Gods eternal truth gloriously to
shine as we see it does in the Church of England at this day. Remember her O
Lord for this and wipe not out the kindness that she has showed on the
house of her God and on the offices thereof. Nehem. 13.


22 Our Savior alleging the words of Scripture before mentioned does not
only hereby warrant his own deed and lay open the grosnesse of their fault,
The use whereunto Christ requires the temple to be restored.
but also instruct them in the right use of that which hitherto they had so
greatly abused. My house shall be called the house of prayer for all nations.
In which words we learn first that the Church is consecrated to the service
of God, in respect whereof it is called his house; secondly what service it is
which he requires, My house shall be called the house of prayer; thirdly of
whom this service is required, namely of all Nations.

23 It adds much to the wickedness of the sons of Hely and proves the
sin of the young men to have been very great in the sight of the Lord, The
temple sanctified to the service of God.
that they showed their ravening nature upon the purest and holiest things,
that they made no difference between the offerings of the Lord and common
flesh, that they shamefully abused themselves with women even in the door of
the tabernacle of God. Dan 5.
The Prophet Daniel has set it down as a note of extreme impiety in
Balthazar that he with his Princes wives and concubines drunk wine in the
golden and silver vessels which were taken out of the temple at Jerusalem. When
the men of Tyrus brought fish and other wares and sold them on the Sabbath to
the children of Judah, Nehem. 13.
Nehemias reproved the rulers of Judah and said unto them, What evil thing is
this that ye do, breaking the Sabbath day? Did not your fathers thus, and our
God brought all this plague upon us and upon this City? Yet ye increase wrath
upon Israel breaking the Sabbath. Such traficke is as bad in the house as on
the day which God has sanctified. Wherefore in the Law these two are jointly
coupled together, Ye shall keep my Sabaoths and reverence my Sanctuary.
Leuit. 19.
The profaning therefore of the temple, the house of God, the place of prayer,
is an evident token that amongst the Jews all religion was now trodden under
feet, all reverence of God abolished. This shows that there was now no
difference at all, holy and common, pure and profane, clean and unclean,
all was one. When they which ought not to die but without the city were
suffered to live within the temple, yea of and at the altar, when Gods own
house was made a den of thieves, we cannot easily imagine a degree of
profaneness beyond this. At this the Lord himself does seem to wonder. Ier.
7.
Is this house become a den of thieves whereupon my name is called before
your eyes? What reverence or service is it likely that they would show
other-where unto the Lord, who lived as thieves in that glorious sanctuary
where all the earth should tremble before him?

24 In the house of God they had the Law both red and expounded, The public
serving of God in the Church consists in hearing the word
they offered sacrifice, and they prayed. But because the service for which the
temple was ordained, though not only, yet principally is prayer, therefore he
has said, My house shall be called the house of prayer. In Deuteronomie it is
called the place which God chose to cause his name to dwell there. Deuteronomy. 12.
It is true indeed, 1. Reg. 8.
says Solomon, that God will dwell on the earth? No doubt where his truth is
syncerely professed, where his sacraments are rightly and duly ministered,
where his name is called upon by hearty prayer, where two or three are
gathered together in his name, that is to say to serve him in these things,
there the woorking of his spirit is so forcible and effectual, his mercy is
so object even unto sense, his grace is in such sort felt, seen and tasted,
that he seems as it were to stand before men's eyes, to walk, to inhabit,
and to dwell amongst them when they are thus occupied. The door of the Church is
the gate of the Lord, and the righteous will surely enter into it: They rejoice
when they hear men say, Psalm. 12^.
We will go into the house of the Lord, the house of prayer, where as many as
call upon the name of the Lord shall undoubtedly be saved. But because no man
can call on him in whom he does not believe, nor believe without hearing the
word of God, requisite therefore it is that the house of public prayer should
also be the house of public preaching. For this cause the Jews heard the Law
every Sabbath day in their Synagogues.

25 And as they did not only hear the word but also offer sacrifice in the
house of God: In receiving the Sacraments.
so we in our Churches have both the Gospel preached, and the Sacraments
which are seals of the Gospel administered, knowing that Christ has commanded
both alike. He which sent his Disciples to teach sent them also to baptize;
he which inioined them to preach gave them also an other charge, Hoc facite;
Do this in remembrance of me. Therefore as often as we speak unto you out of
these places, as often as here we minister the Sacrament of baptism to your
children in token of their new spiritual birth, as often as we do here
present our selves at the Lords table to eat of his bread and to drink of the
wine which he has prepared for the comfortable nourishment of our souls, we
keep the Lords institution and not our own, we do as he has commanded,
not as we have devised, we use the house of God not as thieves but as Saints.

26 For these things the Sanctuary was erected; In prayer.
for these the house of God was sanctified and for prayer. Therefore the twelve
told the rest of the Disciples (as it is in the history of their Acts) We will
give our selves continually unto prayer and ministration of the word. Acts 6.
Aaron was appointed under the law as to offer so also to pray for himself and
for the people. Be this sin against the Lord, says Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.
far from me, that I should cease to pray for you. The request which Solomon
made unto GOD in the first dedication of the temple, 1. Reg 8.
was, that if his people Israel should at any time for their sins be
overthrown before the enemy, or heaven be so shut up that they should be in
distress for want of rain, or if there should be famine in the land or
pestilence, or blasting, or mildew, or grassehopper, or caterpiller, if the
enemy should beseege the^, if they should fall into any adversity whether it
were of body or of mind, his ears might always be open to the prayers
which they should make before the Lord in the house of prayer. Hear the
supplications of thy people Israel which pray in this place.

27 Nor only their supplications, Thus God will be served of all nations.
but moreover Solomon adds, As touching the stranger that is not of thy
people Israel, who shall come out of a far country for thy names sake, and
shall come and pray in this house, hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place,
and do according to all that the stranger calls for unto thee, that all the
people of the earth may know thy name and fear thee as thy people Israel do.
Agreeable whereunto are the words of the prophet Esaias, Esaias 2.
It shall be in the last days that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all nations shall flow unto it. Esaias 56.
And again, The strangers that cleave unto the Lord to serve him, and to love
the name of the Lord, and to be his servant, every one that keeps the
Sabbath and polluteth it not, and embraces my covenant, them will I bring
also to mine holy mountain, and make them joyful in mine house of prayer:
their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine alter.
For mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all nations. This
proves that article of our Christian faith to be most certain wherein we
acknowledge the Church of Christ to be Catholic and universal. For we must
understand that there was a time when the Lord gave express charge and
commandment, Ezech. 44.
No uncircumcised in the flesh shall enter into my Sanctuary. The adoption and
the glory of the sons of God, Romans 9.
ye covenants, the law, the service of God, the promises and all the riches
wherewith the church of Christ is adorned did belong unto Israel, and unto none
else; they were the only people that obtained mercy, al ye world besides was
Loammi; amongst them God was known, but as for the nations they heard not of
him; Judea was the only garden of the Lord, the rest of the earth was a mere
wilderness; they were the vineyard, and we the forest; they within the walls
of the city of God, and we without; they citizens and we strangers. But now
the bounds of the Church are enlarged, her elders as it is in the book of
revelation do now sing a new song, Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood
out of every kindred, Revel 5.
and tongue, and people, and nation. Wherefore remember, says the Apostle, that
ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians, 2.
called uncircumcision of them which are called circumcision in the flesh made
with hands, were at that time without Christ, and were aliants from the common
wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the couenaunts of promise, and had no
hope, and were without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus ye which
once were far off are made near by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace
which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of the partition wall.
This we are willed to remember. For is it not a thing very memorable, that in
us GOD should now accomplish the promise which he made to his son so long
before, Psalm. 2.
Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the
uttermost coasts of the earth for thy possessions? Is it not memorable that the
furious rage of the whole world mightily opposing it self against the kingdom
of Jesus Christ, it should notwithstanding grow so soon to this so exceeding
greatness, and that by so weak means, from so small beginnings? Now since
God has brought this so strangely to pass for our sakes, since the Lord has
done it for no other cause but only to open the door of salvation unto us,
with how great joy of heart ought we to hear his voice when he says of the
Gentiles, Let them ascend to mount Sion, when he says of his house, It shall
be called the house of prayer for all Nations? He that will not shrowde
himself under this vine, he that enters not into this arc, he that will
not be partaker of these celestial treasures, these heavenly mysteries, this
true bread of life so largely offered unto all nations, if his soul die the
death who will have pity or compassion of him? Wherefore to conclude let us be
followers of Christ as becomes his dear children, let us learn by his
example to be careful and zealous for the house of God, to purge and cleanse
it as much as in us lies from al defilements, that as often as we do reverently
and religiously frequent it to hear the word of salvation, to receive the
blessed Sacraments of the Lord, to power out our prayers and supplications
before him, his spirit groaning with our spirits, and our requests ascending
thorough the forcible intercession of that only mediator which is to be heard
for his reverence sake, we may rejoice in our salvation and he be glorified by
our rejoicing. Which GOD the Father grant for his Sons sake. To whom, etc.

The fourteenth Sermon. A Sermon made at the Spittle in London.
ACTS 10. 34 Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive
that God is no accepter of persons, etc.
THE doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles does wholly tend to this end, The
fullness of the Gospel most clearly opened in the Sermon of Peter by occasion
of Cornelius.
to declare unto us, that Jesus Christ crucified is the promised Messiah, the
redeemer and Savior of all that do believe in him. Neither is this matter
cleared more perfectly by any Prophet or Apostle, than by the Apostle S. Peter
in this Sermon which now we have in hand. For therein is comprised briefly but
most effectually the fullness of the gospel, the perfect doctrine of
salvation. Now because the occasion of having it preached was Cornelius the
captain, and the preacher of it was Peter the Apostle; I will note somewhat in
either of them severally for the better understanding of that which the Sermon
it self shall lay before us. In Cornelius therefore first, what manner of man
he was, on what occasion he sent for Peter, and in what sort he received him at
his coming.

2 The curious description which S. Luke makes of Cornelius here, The person
of Cornelius.
declares him to have been a notable and rare man, both by other
circumstances of his person, and by his manners. The other circumstances which
I mean are his country, his calling, and the place of his abode. His country*
Touching his country he was an Italian, an Ethnike, bred of Ethnike parents,
trained up amongst a people drowned in idolatry and superstition, worshipping
false gods, His calling.
being ignorant of the true God. By calling he was a soldier, a captain of
the Italian band, a captain over one hundred soldiers. The Romans had
soldiers out of al provinces: but their chief force was of the Italians, whom
they trusted best as natural subjects. His dwelling place.
This Italian captain made his abode in Cesarea a famous city inhabited by
the Jews. The whole land of Jury was brought in subjection to the Roman
Empire: and least the inhabitants thereof should revolt, certain garrisons of
soldiers were placed in sundry of the greater cities, to see them kept in
obedience, and to repress tumults, Cornelius the captain with the soldiers
of his retinue were bestowed in Cesarea. If we look on this man's country, if
we consider his calling and vocation, if we call to remembrance in what place
he lived, and with whom he was conversant: we shall find nothing but idolatry
and superstition, we shall behold nothing but rape, robbery, murder,
mischief, spoil, bloud-spilling, we shall see nothing but lewdenesse,
profaneness, wicked manners, and cursed company.

3 All the which occasions of corruption notwithstanding, His godliness, so many
occasions of the contrary notwithstanding.
he was devout, he feared God with his whole family, he gave much alms to
the people, and prayed God continually. The mighty and merciful God did gather
pearls out of this dunghill. God can raise up children unto Abraham out of
stones. Matthew. 3.
Faith, piety, Ephesians. 2.
holiness, and religion come not by nature, but of grace; of Gods free gift, 1
Cor. 12.
not of our deserving; of mercy, not of merit; Faith is the gift of God.
Phil. 2.
He works all in all. He gives to will and to do. Tit. 3.
Not by the works of righteousness, which we had wrought, but according to
his mercy has he saved us: that we may acknowledge our wretchedness and
unworthiness, and give all glory unto him.

4 Here we learn that neither parentage, What we have to learn by the former
circumstances.
nor vocation, nor corruption of place does shut us out of the kingdom of
God. Ethnikes, even wild olives by nature, are graffed by grace in the true
olive. Romans 11.
Soldiers that live in order are allowed of by John Baptist. Luc. 3.
Neither filthy Sodom, nor superstitious Egypt, nor idolatrous Babylon, Genesis
19.
nor corrupt Cesarea was able to infect Lot, or Joseph, Genesis 45.
or Daniel, or Cornelius whom the Lord had chosen according to his good
pleasure, Dan. 1.
and of his mercy had preserved. The foundation of God remains sure, and
has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. It is not in him that wills,
Rom 9.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.

5 Cornelius the Ethnike-captaine, The estate of the Jews over whom Cornelius
was placed.
being placed in Cesarea over the Jews, puts us in mind how the kingdom
of Israel was taken from the Israelites, and given to others. Israel was the
elect and well-beloved people of God, Rom 9.
the happy seed of Abraham, to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory,
and the covenant, and the Law that was given, and the services of God, and the
promises. A most free people as themselves boasted. We are Abraham's seed, John
8.
and were never bound to any man. A plentiful land flowing with milk and
honey, a most flourishing kingdom, a mighty and victorious people; for the
Lord of hosts did fight for them. Yet this elect, beloved, free and mighty
people was overthrown, wasted, translated, brought into most miserable bondage
and slavery, first by the Caldeis, then by the Meedes, afterward by the
Grecians, and last of al by the Romans. And this was the Lords doing. Ier. 27.
I have made the earth (says he) the men, and beasts that are upon the ground,
by my great power, and by my outstretched arm; and have given it unto whom it
pleased me. The name of God be praised for ever, and ever: Dan. 2.
for wisdom and strength are his, and he changes the times and seasons; he
takes away kings, Dan. 4.
and sets up kings. The most high bears rule over the kingdom of men, and
gives it to them whomsoever he will.

6 Jesus the son of Syrach showing the causes why GOD translateth kingdoms,
What brought the Jews in subjection under others.
A kingdom is translated (says he) from one people unto another, because of
unrighteous dealings, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit, Eccles. 10.
and covetousness and pride. The things that destroyed Sodom were pride,
fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and that she strengthened not the
hand of the poor and needy. The sins that consumed Gods people in the
wilderness, and of six hundred thousand left but two alive, was loathing of
the heavenly Manna, 1. Cor. 10.
and lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt, worshipping of idols, fleshly
fornication, tempting of God, and muttering against magistrates. The cause why
Jury was laid wast and Israel carried away captive was the contempt of Gods
word preached by Jeremy three and twenty years: Ier. 25.
and that there was no truth, Osee 4.
no mercy, no knowledge of GOD amongst them. Swearing, lying, murder, theft,
and adultery had gotten the upper hand: and one blood guiltiness followed an
other. Therefore did the Land mourn, and every one that dwelt therein was
rooted out. God is always a just God, one that hates all iniquity, having no
respect to country or calling. If our faults be like we may look for like
punishment. Let us recount with our selves, and compare our selves with others.
Are we not as guilty of unrighteous dealing, of oppression, of extortion, are
we not as covetous, are we not as proud, as ever any people was? Is there not
as much pride, belly-cheere, idleness, unmercifulness in the city of London
as was in the city of Sodom? Do we not as much loath the true bread of
heaven? Cleave we not as fast unto idolatry and superstition? Commit we not
adultery, and filthy fornication? Tempt we not God? Do we not mutter
against the magistrates, as the Israelites did in the wilderness? Is there
more truth, mercy and knowledge of God, less swearing, lying, murder,
theft, adultery and bloodshed in England, than was in the Land of Jury? If
kingdoms then be translated for wrongful dealing, for covetousness and
pride: how can unrighteous, covetous and proud England stand long? If God
spared not the flourishing city of Sodom, can he in his justice spare the
sinful city of London? If God ouerthrewe the mighty people of Israel in
the wilderness for their sins: can he wink at our foul and manifold
offenses? If the Land of Jury was laid wast, and the elect Israel carried away
captive for their ingratitude: will not God punish and plague our shameful
contempt, our wilful disobedience? For these examples are written for us, 1.
Cor. 10.
that we should not offend as they did, least the like fall upon us as fell
upon them: Romans 9.
knowing that if God spared not the branches of the true olive, he will not
spare the twigges of the wild olive. If he spared not the transgressing
Angels, the offending Jews, neither will he spare us most vile and sinful
Gentiles: Our sin no doubt has justly provoked our God to anger. Let our
sighing, and groaning, our earnest prayer and true repentance remove his wrath
least our Niniuie sink, and perish in her sin. Yet remain there a few
days of repentance for the safety of our city.

7 Now to the former circumstances of Cornelius S. Luke adds also the
description of his manners: The manners of Cornelius.
testifying therein that he was devout, that he feared God with all his
family, that he gave much alms, that he prayed God continually. Here is he
set forth as a perfect pattern of true Christianity, an obseruer and keeper of
the Law of the almighty. And because the Law is contained in two tables, his
piety toward God is commended first: secondly his love and duty toward
men. So that it is showed how he lived toward God, how he ordered his
family, and how he behaved himself toward his neighbors.

8 Toward God he was devout; His deuou^ and religious affection toward God.
he feared God, he prayed continually. The foundation of devotion is faith;
the fruits are the fear of God, and prayer. Faith comes by hearing of the
word; His faith.
he heard (by reason that he remained amongst the Jews) that there was one
true God, who was only to be honored. He had heard of the promised seed in
whom all people should be blessed, of the Messiah which should be the Savior
of the people. He believed in this promised Messiah, and thereupon he is
called devout, for without this faith there is no devotion, no piety, no
religion. That fear, that prayer, that comes not of faith is but vain, it
is rejected as sinful in Gods sight. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans
14.
The tree must be good before it bring forth good fruit. John 15.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the vine,
no more can ye except ye abide in me, says Christ. Cornelius brought forth
good fruit, and therefore by faith he abode in Christ, that is he believed.
The fruits of his faith were the fear of God, and prayer unto God: for
neither can we fear God as we ought, nor call upon him rightly except we
believe in him. Romans 10.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? His ^earing of God.
And they believe not in God that do not fear him, that do not call upon
him. For true faith will exercise the faithful herein. This fear of God has
ever respect to religion. Come ye children, and hearken unto me: I will teach
you the fear of the Lord, says the Prophet. That is, I will instruct you in
true religion, I will teach you the true worshipping of God. This is the first
lesson that a Christian should learn. And as all Christians: so especially
such as have dominion and rule over others. Whereupon the princely Prophet does
exhort them: Psalm. 2.
Ye kings, ye judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear: as judging them
happy whose commonwealth is ruled by such as are professors and favorers of
true religion, such as fear the Lord. Which is most true. For happy was
Israel while David, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias ruled: because they were
religious men and feared God. But unhappy when as Jeroboam, Achab, Amon, and
Manasses ruled, because the fear of God was far from their hearts: they went
a whooring after idols, and made Israel to sin. How much the greater care
should Christian Princes have to place none in authority but such as
Cornelius, men that are truly religious and fear God: such as Constantius the
worthy christian Emperor retained in his Court, Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 6.
when he cast out them who forsook Christ, saying that they could not be
faithful to their Prince, who were unfaithful to God. Neither only princes
but the people also, to whom the election of magistrates appertains should
have the like care: remembering the exhortation that Iethro made to Moses,
Provide thou men fearing God.

9 And Cornelius prayed God continually. His continuing in prayer both public
and private.
Faith and fear of GOD do break out into his praises, and calling upon him
by prayer. Prayer is an acceptable service of GOD, prescribed by himself, and
practiced by his servant, to the glory of his name. Psalm. 50.
Call (says he) upon me in the day of trouble: and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Of prayer there are two sorts, private and public:
both which Cornelius used. Public with his family, which he brought up in the
fear of God; private in secret place having his appointed hours to pray.
When the Angel appeared he was in private prayer, at the ninth hour, that is
at three of the clock in the afternoon. Now as Cornelius used them both: so
by his example should every christian do. For touching public prayer the
Disciples of Christ continued altogether with one accord in it. Acts 1.
When Peter was cast into prison: Acts 12.
the church made earnest prayer unto God for him. We read of the Pharisee,
Luc. 18.
and Publicane both, that they went up into the temple to pray. Whereby we may
learn, that they who refuse to join themselves in public place the church of
God to pray with other men, they are worse than either Pharisees, or
Publicanes. Cornelius made his house such a public place for his whole family
therein to serve God. For as he feared God with his whole family: so is it to
be thought that he served God with his whole family too. Insomuch that there
was a church in his house, as in the house of Philemon. A lesson for all them
who have families: that they be religious and fear God indeed, they should
use private prayer in their houses, and cause their families to frequent it. So
shall they make their houses to be churches. And Christ will be in those
assemblies: according to his promise, I will be in the midst of them. As for
private prayer it is also fruitful and effectuous. For therein without
suspicion of Pharisaicall hypocrisy we power out heart before God. Anna in the
temple so behaved her self in her private prayer, 1. Sam. 1.
that Ely the high Priest esteemed her as drunk and sharply reproved her for
it. To whom she answered mildely, I am not drunk, but in my prayer I do
power out my heart before God. Christ appointed himself certain times of
private prayer as in the garden, where he prayed in such earnest and vehement
sort that there dropped from him both water and blood. Matthew. 26.
David had his private night prayers, Psalm. 6.
wherein such was the earnestness of his affection that with his tears night
by night he watered his couch. It appears that Cornelius prayed earnestly and
heartily: for his prayer pierced into the heavens, and was acceptable unto the
Lord. But God abhors prayer that falls out of the lips, and proceeds
not from the heart. Matthew. 15.
He detesteth the Pharisees, who woorship him with their lips, but their
heart is far from him. The Israelites powered out many tears when they prayed
in Babylon. 2. Chron. 33.
The very Ethnikes would not dally in their prayer with their false gods. It
is written even of the Heathenish Romans that when they honored their idols
with solemn prayers and procession, In vita Numae. Plut.
the cryers said to every one whom they met, Hoc age, Set thy mind on this
thing wholly. Be attentive to this and to nothing else. Prayer is the lifting
up of the mind to God. He requires the heart. But alas our prayers are for
the most part only for a fashion that men may behold us. Matthew. 6.
Furthermore the prayer of Cornelius was continual. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Pray ye continually without intermission. We must pray still, and not wax
faint. Luc. 18.
Which yet is not meant, as though we should cease from all other travel and
give our selves only to prayer. That is the error of the Euchites: whose
Disciples were the superstitious Monks that made the house of God a den of
thieves by their hypocrisy. But we are taught hereby to pray often: for we
have always occasion of prayer given us. Dan. 6.
Daniel prayed thrice daily in his house with his windows open toward
Jerusalem, yea though the king forbad it. For he would not be restrained from
praying to his God. Psalm. 118.
David testifies that he prayed unto the Lord seven times every day. Satan
cease not to assault our faith: Luke 17.
Let not us therefore cease to cry unto God, O Lord increase our faith. Our
tottering boat is tossed in the stormy seas: Matthew. 8.
let us lift up our voice to Christ and say, Save us we perish. We are in
danger of greedy roaring lions; the world, the devil, and the flesh: Psalm. 18.
Let us pray, O deliver us from the mouth of the lion. Let us cry, and the
Lord will hear us. Prayer is an help unto him that prays; August.
a sacrifice to GOD; a scourge to the devils, says Austin. And thus much of
Cornelius his devotion, fear of God, and continual prayer: the points whereby
is showed, how he lived toward God.

10 It follows to be noted, The ordering of his family.
how he ordered his family: he feared God with all his household. He played
not Nicodemus that came to Christ by night: he openly professed his religion
and faith, yea and instructed his whole family therein. Neither did he fear
to send for Peter to teach him the religion and faith of Christ. First the
open profession of his religion is commendable. The Romans had forbid by Law
that any subject should profess or receive peregrinam religionem a strange
religion. They considered that it was dangerous to their state to suffer
diversity of religion. They severely punished the transgressors of this law.
Yet Cornelius had learned that it is better to obeie God than man, that we must
obeie princes vsque ad Aras as the proverb is: so far as we may without
disobeying God. Although the Jewish religion was hateful to the Gentiles: yet
he followed the example of Daniel, of the three young men, of the blessed
Apostles, who did boldly preach and profess Christ when they were charged not
to do it. We may not be ashamed of our religion, we may not halt on both
sides. Romans 10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness: Luc. 19.
and with the mouth man confesses unto salvation. Whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and my words: of him shall the son of man be ashamed when he shall come in
his glory, and in the glory of the father, and of the Angels. Moreover
Cornelius instructed his family and brought them up in the fear of God. A
rare example in an Ethnike captain, nay a rare example in such as be
christians, and profess most piety, and by calling should be most religious,
yea and are placed as examples not only to families, but to cities, to
countries, to nations. He remembered well that he that has a charge must
answer for his charge. Luc. 16.
He could not forget Read rationem give an account of thy stewardship. He was
afraid of the saying of the wise man: Wisd. 6.
An hard judgment shall they have that bear rule. The sins of the subjects,
of the people, of the family, will be punished in the magistrates, in the
masters, in the householders. For to every one of these says the Lord, Ezech.
33.
I will require the blood of them that perish, if through thy negligence, evil
example, or want of correction any of them shall fall from God. Not only they,
Romans 1.
says Paul, who commit such things, are worthy of death, but also they who
consent to such as do them. And he consents doubtless which by office
should correct sin, and by negligence or corrupt affection suffers sin.
The scripture charge Elie the priest with the sins of his unruly sons, 1.
Sam. 2.
at the which he winked, and he was punished for it. The sin that the people
of Israel committed in woorshipping idols is laid to the charge of the kings
of Israel, which either instituted them, defended them, or did not pull them
down. The Queen of Saba commends Solomon greatly for the good ordering of
his house. 1. Kings 10.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servant, which stand ever before
thee, Psalm. ^10.
and hear thy wisdom. King David was so careful, that he would not suffer as
much as a liar to remain within his court. Genesis 18.
Abraham is commended of God for the good nurturing, and godly bringing up of
his sons and his household. That magistrate that fears God will not suffer
sin in the city unpunished, the sword is given him to cut it off, and beat
it down. That pastor that fears GOD will use all means to bring his sheep
to the sheepefold if they go astray. Ezech. 33.
That householder that fears God will by good order, and due correction keep
it in the fear of God. And so shall both the magistrate, the pastor and the
householder deliver their own souls.

11 Again as Cornelius declared the fruits of his faith toward his family,
His liberality in giving alms, and that to strangers.
so was he loving and friendly toward his neighbors. He gave much alms to
the people. This is that sacrifice which God does require chiefly of a
christian: I will have mercy mercy and not sacrifice. This is a sacrifice of
a sweet smelling savor, Philip. 4.
a sacrifice acceptable to God, and well pleasing him. He that releeueth not
his needy brother being of ability to relieve him does neither fear nor
love God. Give alms of thy substance and turn not away thy face from any
poor man, least the Lord turn away his face from thee. Luc. 6.
Give, and it shall be given unto you, says the son of God. He that shows
mercy shall find mercy, and judgment without mercy to the merciless. No
treasure so well bestowed as that which is given to the poor, That is laid up
in heaven. God does bind himself to recompense that which is given to the
poor: for it is given to himself. Matthew. 25.
The merciful shall receive everlasting life, the merciless everlasting
death. Deuteronomy. 15.
God gave a Law to Israel: Let there be no beggar among you. This Law the
Jews keep inuiolate to this day. A great reproach and slander it is to us
christians, that the Lord of Jews and Gentiles, the son of God our savior
Christ, who became poor to make us rich, at whose merciful hands of his free
gift we have received whatsoever we have, to us a great shame and confusion it
is that we should fall so far from all hu^manitie, so utterly forget our
christianity to show our selves so hard and stony hearted, so unthankful
and without all natural affection, to suffer our God, our Savior, our Christ
whom we profess, not only to go on begging, but to lie hungry, cold,
naked, sick, diseased, pining and perishing in the streets, and at our
doors. This merciless mind, this great ingratitude will no doubt be requited
with Ite, Go your ways ye cursed into everlasting fire. If it be not
reformed in time: God no doubt will come down and revenge it. Cornelius gave
liberal alms unto them which were strangers to him. God is careful for
strangers. Exodus 22.
He puts the Israelites in mind not to afflict but to comfort the strangers
that dwell among them. Zach. 7.
Foryee your selves were strangers too. By the prophet Zacharias he bids us
beware least we grieve them. Oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless; the
stranger, nor the poor. God ioineth the widows, the fatherless, and
strangers most commonly ever together as persons most destitute, and such as
have most need of help. Egypt was blessed for the strangers that dwelt
there, but when the king of Egypt Pharao oppressed them, they groned and called
upon God, he delivered them and powered his manifold plagues upon Egypt. The
sinful city of Sodom was of long time spared for Lot and his family
strangers there. Such as are strangers for the gospels sake, for the cause
which we profess and maintain are joyfully to be received, cheerfully and
liberally to be relieved. For in receiving them we do not only receive
Angels as Abraham and Lot did, but we receive and relieve Christ Jesus whom
they profess and whose members they are. Mark 9.
And whatsoever we give to them we give it him and he will reward it. But
whosoever shall vex, wrong, or offend any of them, better it were that a
millstone were tied about his neck, and he hurled into the bottom of the sea.
I speak of godly strangers that are strangers for the truths sake; not of
such as are of no religion, of no church, godless and faithless people, some
Papists, some Anabaptists, some Arrians, some Libertines: these are to be
expelled and cast out of the country, least for their wickedness God plague the
whole Realm. God is wont ever to bless the country, for reteining and
releeuing godly religious strangers: so is he wont to power his plagues on
them that nourish Cananites among them. And thus much touching Cornelius the
Italian by parentage, by vocation a soldier: placed in Cesarea, who was
devout, feared God and prayed to God, who brought up his family in the fear
of God, who was pitiful to the poor, and liberally gave alms even unto
strangers.

12 The next point we have to consider of is upon what occasion he did send
for Peter. His sending for Peter according to the direction of the Angel sent
from God to him.
In his prayer at the ninth hour, (which is our three of the clock at
afternoon) an Angel of God appeared unto him, and told him that his prayers
and alms were come up in remembrance before God, and bad him send men to
Ioppe and call for Simon Peter who lodged at a tanners house near the sea, and
he should tell him what he ought to do. After the Angel was departed he sent
two of his servant and a soldier that feared God to Ioppe for Peter. Here
is the cause expressed why he sent for Peter. God by his Angel commanded and
he obeyed. In the Angels Oration I note two things, in Cornelius other two. The
Angel comfort Cornelius, and tells him what he shall do. Cornelius is
afraid at the message: and does that which the Angel wills him.

13 Angels are ministering spirits, The office of Angels good and bad.
sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation.
God sends his good Angels to comfort, Heb. 1.
nourish, govern, guide and defend his elect. The evil Angels are sent
either to try the godly, or to punish, plague and destroy the wicked. This
Angel was a good Angel of God sent to comfort and instruct Cornelius the devout
and righteous man. He does comfort him declaring unto him that his prayers and
alms are ascended up in remembrance before God: which is as much to say, as
that God does accept and allow of them.

14 The papists abuse much these words of the Angel, Popish errors concerning
preparation to grace and justification by works rising by false collection out
of the Angels words.
striving thereby to set forth their own righteousness, to the overthrow of
the merit and righteousness which we have by Christ. For they infer thereof
that our own works before we have faith are preparations to grace. Secondly
they attribute our justification to our works. Things more absurd than that
they need confutation. For what preparation can there be in us of our selves
to grace, 2 Cor. 3.
when S. Paul says plainly, that we are not able of our selves, 1. Cor. 2.
as of our selves, to think any good? The natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of God. And how can our prayers or alms which are not
done in faith please God, Heb. 11.
when without faith it is impossible to please him? Ephesians. 2.
And if Cornelius had faith as it must needs be granted he had that also was
the gift of God as S. Paul teaches us. Now to attribute justification to our
merits or works, Romans 4.
is to make of none effect the merit of Christ, Rom 3.
to make grace, no grace. For remission of sins is justification: as the
scripture shows, saying, Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven. But we
obtain remission of sins not by our works, but through faith in Christ: we
are justified freely, by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of the sins
passed. And our works are such, Luc. 17.
even the works of the best men, that when we have done all, Psalm. 143.
we are unprofitable servants. Enter not into judgment with thy servant O
Lord: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. The Angel therefore
meant not that Cornelius was either prepared to grace, or justified, by his
works: but that God considered his piety, prayers and alms, and would
increase his good gifts in him. For God both accepts good works and will
reward them. Genesis 4.
He accepts them for the man's sake, in that the man is faithful and
therefore accepted. Number. 1^.
In which sort the sacrifice of Abel was accepted through the faith of Abel.
He rewards our works, not for their worthiness, but for his own sake,
for his love and promise. And he promises reward, to provoke us to work: for
to that end are we created, and redeemed even to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Luc. 1.
So does the Angel comfort Cornelius, in mentioning his works, and Gods
remembrance of them.

15 As for that he wills him to send for Simon Peter, Cornelius willed by
the Angel to send for Peter, and to learn of him.
and learn of him what he should do: this speech does import that Cornelius
in his prayer had desired to know how, and by what means he should be saved.
Whereupon the Angel Gods messenger tells him that he must send for Peter by
whom he shall be taught the way of salvation. God ever provides teachers to
such as are desirous to learn: and sends the word of truth to such as love
the truth. Act 8.
He sent Philip to instruct the Eunuch the Queen of the Ethiopians chief
governor, Act. 9.
as he was reading the prophet Esaias touching Christ. He provided Ananias
for Paul, and Peter for Cornelius. The Angel sets over Cornelius to Peter to
instruct him. To commend the ministry God will have his Gospel preached by
men and not by Angels. He will not have us look for revelations from heaven
but to give ear and credit to the voice of his messengers to whom he has
committed the word of reconciliation, whom he would have esteemed for their
office sake; to contemn such is to contemn him that has sent them. Matt. 10.
He that despises you, despises me, says Christ.

16 At his message Cornelius was afraid. He fears.
The presence of the Angel and the strangeness of the message abashed him. Now
if he heard the voice of the Angel with trembling and fear: with what awe and
reverence should we give ear to the voice of the son of God Christ Jesus?
Whenever the gospel is preached, Christ is present, Christ speaks to us.
The godly tremble at his word as we read in Esaias, Esaias 66.
To whom will I look? To him says the Lord, to him that is poor, and of
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. They who despise or disobey the
word of God, do not fear him. For he that fears God does reverence his
word.

17 And he that does reverence the word of God truly, He obeieth.
will no doubt obey it. Example whereof we have in Cornelius. He obeyed the
Angel and straight way sent two of his servants, and a godly soldier that
waited upon him to Ioppe for Peter. Even so likewise must we give ear when God
speaks, as it is written, I will hearken what the Lord God will say. Psalm. 85.
Neither may we consult with flesh and blood when God commands, Gal. 2.
but we must obey, we must not deliberate in his causes. Reason and experience
would have told Cornelius how dangerons it was publicly to profess a strange
and hated religion, it might not only tend to the loss of his office, but of
his life too. He might have disputed also with himself, What is Peter? Some
odd sectarie fled from Jerusalem, who for fear least he with his errors
should be condemned, hides himself in a tanners house. What learning, what
piety can I look for to come out of such a school, and from such a
schoolmaster? This would worldly wisdom and flesh and blood have said unto
him: but faith puts no such peril but readily obeys whatsoever God
commands. It doubts not, it stackereth not: but if God says go it goes;
if GOD say come, it comes; 1. Sam. 15.
if God say do this it does it. Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and
to hearken is better than the fat of rams.

18 He sends two of his servant and a godly soldier that attende^^ upon
him. He sends his servants, and finds them willing to be sent to Peter.
Here was the reward of his labor in bringing up his household in the fear of
God. He had taught his servant truly and syncerely to fear God, and God had
taught his servant faithfully and willingly to serve him. For he, (says the
Scripture) that does serve his master faithfully and heartily, Col. 3.
serves Christ Jesus; Genesis 24.
who rewards all faithful service. Abraham brought up his family in the
fear of God, and he reaped the fruit of it. He had a most faithful servant
whom he sent to procure a wife to his son Isaak: whosoever therefore will be
trustily served, let him train up his household in the fear of God, and expel
out thence all that be not godly, Psalm. 101.
as godly David did. It is dangerous for any man to nourish serpents in his
bosom: they will at one time or other sting him. Faithless servant have
been the confusion of many good masters. And godless children the destruction
of many good fathers. 1. Sam. 3.
Oph^ni, and Phinees were the death of their father Ely the high priest. Matt.
26.
And Judas conspired against his master Christ the innocent son of God.

19 But to come to that which I set down for the last. He receives Peter with
all reverence, and assembleth many to hear him preach.
Note in Cornelius with what humanity and reverence he received Peter the
preacher of Gods word: he called to him his kinsemen and friends and expected
him; he fell down prostrate to do him honor, he thanked him for his coming,
declaring how ready he was to hear him. And because faith does labor for
Gods glory and break forth into love toward our neighbor: he called his
friends and kinsemen to be partakers of that great treasure of God with him.
Genesis 4.
He was not Caine-like who had no care for his brother. Cornelius teaches us
how desirous we ought to be of Gods word, how glad and ready to hear it,
and how that in duetifull love we should provoke others to the hearing and
embracing of it. For it is the word of truth and salvation. Which S. James
considering exhorts his brethren to receive the word that is able to save
their souls. James 1.
And let us consider one another, Heb. 10.
(says S. Paul) to provoke unto love, and to good works, not forsaking the
fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another. The arrogant Jews puffed up with selfeloue would not
join themselves in the congregation with Gentiles. Which thing the Apostle
reprooueth exhorting them not to contemn their brethren, but rather one
provoke another charitably to join together in piety, in hearing of the
word, and receiving of the Sacraments. Esaias 2.
As Esaias did foreshewe that the faithful in Christ's time should say one to
another, Come and let us go up to the mountains of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. But alas this zeal of the glory of God, this love toward our
brethren is worn away in us, I fear me we will neither go our selves to
hear the word, neither suffer others, but dehort them so much as we may:
pretending I know not what to cover our arrogant malicious heart withal. Such
a man is an usurper, I cannot hear him with safe conscience, he wears a
surplisse; I will neither hear him, nor trust him. Another is a shrinker,
another half a papist: leave them, hear them not. This is the common cry, I
will not use their own speech, it is too proud and too bitter. I trust we
all preach Christ crucified. Howsoever it be, says S. Paul, Phil. 1.
so that Christ be taught I rejoice in it. If we mislike the minister, shall we
mislike the message also? If we cannot brook the messenger, shall we be at
defiance with him that sent him? God grant us such hearts as Cornelius had,
that in liking and love we may provoke one another to piety and godliness:
that we may hunger after Gods truth, hear the word without respect of the
messenger, and so hear it that we may live by it. Cornelius fell down
prostrate before Peter. He considered of him as of the ambassador of God; he
reverenced him as his spiritual father; he gave unto him that double honor
which S. Paul says is due unto him. 1. Tim. 5.
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor: 1 Thessalonians. 1.
specially they who labor in the word and doctrine. He looked not on the man
but regarded his office. We beseech you brethren that you know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: that you
have them in singular love for their works sake. Gal. 4.
S. Paul does greatly commend the Galathians in this behalf that they loved
him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus, yea if it had been possible,
they would have plucked out their own eyes, and given them him. But our times
are altered: men are otherwise affected. They envy and mutter against Moses,
and Aaron. They are become such of whom God complains by his prophet Hosea:
Thy people are as they that rebuke the Priest. Hosec 4.
I would to God they would remember Christ saying, He that despises you,
despises me.

20 But the honor which Cornelius gave unto Peter was more than was fit to be
given to a man. Luc. 10.
For Peter refused it with th^^ reason, Cornelius in honoring Peter
ouerreacheth, and is controlled.
I my self am a man too. The zeal and reverence that he had to the word made
him ouerreach in honoring the minister of it. Act. 14.
So did the men of Lystra honor Paul and Barnabas, R^u. 22.
but they said in like sort; O men why do ye these things? We are men subject
to the like passions that ye be. John would have woorshipped the Angel
likewise, but the Angel refused, See thou do it not; I am thy fellow
servant: Worship God. Here we learn how dangerously religious honor is
given to any creature. It cannot be thought that either Cornelius or John would
rob God of his glory, and give it to Angel or man. But yet they were
forbidden to do that which they did, least they should attribute more to the
messenger of God than they ought through preposterous zeal. It is not so great
a danger to honor a prince with all humility, therein men cannot so easily
exceed because the honor is civil. But the danger is in a spiritual person,
least in respect of his holy office they honor him too much. And here is the
insolent pride of the pope reproved who vaunteth himself for Peter's successor.
Peter took up Cornelius and would not suffer him to worship him. His successor
compels princes to cast themselves down before him and to kiss his filthy
feet. This beastly pride declares him neither to be Christ's vicar nor Peter's
successor, but rather his child who said to Christ in the mount, All these
will I give thee, Matt 4.
if thou will fall down and worship me. If man who is the lively image of God
may not have this worship, how much less stocks and stones, the dead images
of men? For is it not more reasonable that the image-maker should be
woorshipped than the works of his hands?

21 Finally Cornelius thanked Peter for his coming, His thankfulness and good
acc^ptation of S. Peter's labor in coming.
and declared withal how ready he was to hear him. For in that he said
thou have done well to come: he showed a thankful mind for his pains
taken. So all should be thankful to such as bring them glad tidings, the
word of salvation. He sends his word and heals them, Psalm. 107.
says the prophet. Let them confess therefore before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men. The
philosophers write even by the Law, and rules of nature that the children can
never yield worthy thanks unto their parents for their birth and breeding.
Such as beget and breed us spiritually deserve more thanks: even so much more
as the soul is better than the body* spiritual regeneration better than
natural procreation. Such as will not be thankful for the ministers of the
truth shall be requited with deceitful teachers. For God will send them strong
delusion that they should believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that all they may be damned that believe not the truth.

22 Now how ready himself and his company were to hear Peter preach it
appears by the words following: His readiness to hear and learn
whatsoever God commanded Peter to preach.
We are all present here before God, to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God. Wherein both the duties of the hearer and the preacher are
plainly set down. The duty of the hearer first to be present before God. To
remember that he stands in the sight of God, the seer and searcher of hearts,
from whom nothing is hid. To stand before the preacher is to stand before God.
The presence of God requires fear and reverence. Fear and reverence should
occupy the hearts of them who stand so. Secondly to hear and learn. There is
none so well learned but he may learn more. For while we live we know in
part, says S. Paul, and therefore we must give diligent care, and apply our
minds to that which is spoken. We must not be as a beaten way, where the seed
can take no root. We must not suffer prejudice to tread down and destroy
the seed, nor the birds of the air, Satan to pull it out at the one ear, so
fast as it enters in at the other* We may not let our minds wander but
coming of purpose to hear to our profit, we must beseech God to give us
memory, and understanding, to print into our hearts that which we hear with
our ears. Thirdly to hear all things, even all the doctrine of God: not
things that do please, but things that displease our flesh; not other men's
faults but our own; not only profession but also conversation; not only
faith, but also works; not only to hear, Matt. 6.
but also to do. Herod heard John gladly while he carped others, but he
could not abide to be rubbed on the gall himself. He heard John in many
things: but not in all. The Jews at Rome heard Paul until he applied the
words of Esaias unto them: Esaias 6.
The heart of this people is waxed fat, and their ears are dull of hearing,
Act. 28.
and with their eyes have they winked: least they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and return that
I might heal them. Then they shrunk from him and would no more hear him. The
preacher is gladly heard of the people that can carpe the magistrates, cut up
the ministers, cry out against all order, and set all at liberty. But if he
shall reprove their insolency, pride and vanity, their monstrous apparel,
their excessive feasting, their greedy covetousness, their biting usury,
their halting hearts, their muttering minds, their friendly words, and
malicious deeds, they will fall from him then. He is a railer, he doteth, he
wants discretion. Not so Cornelius and his company: but they were ready to
hear all and so fashioned and framed according to all that which God by his
word should require at their hands.

23 The duty of the preacher is expressed in these words, The duty of
teachers to teach that which God co^maunde^^.
That are commanded thee of God. The preacher may teach no other than he has
commission to speak, than is commanded him of God. He may not add to the
written word neither take from it. Gods Law is perfect, it does perfectly
instruct and teach all things necessary to salvation. The Disciples must only
break those loaves unto the people which they have received at Christ's hands.
They may not teach their own dreams, inventions, or doctrines. For God will
not have them woorship him so, Ezech. 3.
but thou shall hear the word (says he) at my mouth, and give them warning
from me. And thus much of Cornelius what he was, on what occasion he sent for
Peter, and how he received him at his coming to him.

24 Likewise in Peter three things we have noted. The messengers sent from
Cornelius find Peter praying.
How he was occupied when the messengers came to him, how readily he went
with them, and what the sermon was that he preached to them. The messengers
found him at the sixth hour (which is twelve as we count) fasting and praying
on the house top, where he saw a vision in his trance, a sheet let out of
heaven knit at four corners, wherein were all four footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of heaven. And a voice
said, arise Peter, kill and eat. First we see that Peter had his appointed
hours of prayer. Prayer is an acceptable sacrifice to God, and a Christian
exercise: for the use whereof the godly will prescribe themselves certain
times. For man's corrupt nature is easily carried away to worldely affairs. He
matcheth fasting with prayer, as needful to stir up our slothful drowsy
spirits to pray the more fervently. For a full belly makes a faint prayer.
And he sought also a private place to pray in: because in private places we may
power out our hearts more freely unto God. But of this I have spoken before.

25 The vision that appeared was to teach him that Christ was borne a Savior
to the whole world: The vision of Peter.
that the Gospel was to be preached to all, that he would all should be saved
and come to the knowledge of the truth. And so was declared the calling of the
Gentiles. For Peter was commanded to make no difference between Jew and
Gentile, although the Gentiles were esteemed as unclean in the eyes of the
Jews. Peter being commanded to kill and eat, abstained in respect of the
Law. God told him that he should not take as polluted that which he had made
clean. All meats are sanctified by the word and prayer. So are the Gentiles as
clean as the Jews, whose hearts God has purified. Act. 15.
To forbid meats or marriage as unclean seeing that the Lord has purified
them by his word is the doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4.
For all things are clean to them that be clean, and the believing Gentile is
accepted of God as well as the believing Jew. T^t. 1.
While Peter mused at this vision: Cornelius his messengers asked for him at
the door; and God spoke unto him and said, Go with them, and doubt nothing
for I have sent them.

26 Peter having the word of God for his calling, His cheerful obed^ence
being sent to preach.
went cherefully forward on his journey ready to preach to them to whom God
did send him. He alleged not how dangerous it was to preach the Gospel in
Cesarea; how long and tedious a way thither; how odious to be conversant with
the Gentiles; he indented not what reward he should have; he asked not who
should bear his costs; he alleged not his worn body; his old age; he was
void of all such put-offs, he knew that, Woe be unto him if he preached not
he remembered his lesson given to others, Feed the flock of God: 1. Pet. 5.
he forgot not Christ's lesson given unto him, If thou love me, John 21.
feed my sheep: he knew that the minister of the word ought to preach in
season, and out of season. And he took the thing in hand the more gladly,
having hope that he should win unto Christ by the word a Captain, a man of
might, and authority, in getting of whom he should also get a great sort, he
should get an hundred soldiers who easily would be drawn to be like affected
with their Captain: he should win a great family with the rest of Cornelius
friends and kinsemen, and even so it came to pass. It is a great gain unto the
Church of Christ when as a man in authority is won by the word. Therefore S.
Paul used all persuasion to draw king Agrippa to be a Christian, Act. 26.
knowing what great advantage would come thereby to Christ's Church. To win a
prince is to win a multitude; yea a nation. The Church of Christ increases
and thriueth apace when Kings and Queens become nurces to it.

27 Peter being come now to Cornelius, His entrance into his sermon.
and perceiving how God had touched his heart with the rest of his company,
and made them most ready and greedy of the word of God, opened his mouth and
said; Of a truth I perceive, that God is no accepter of persons, and so
forth. Now Peter enters into his sermon seeing so wide a door opened unto
him, so great an occasion offered, so large and apt a field to sow Gods seed
in. In which Sermon there is enough for a Christian to learn; all matter
needful to salvation is comprised in it. He that has taken out this lesson
needs not to learn another. And a great occasion of it as of other excellent
sermons was in the people. For the holy Ghost sows seed plentifully where
he finds a good ground to cast it in, and gives great utterance lightly to
the minister, when he gives good will to the auditorie to hear. If the field
be barren the seed is spared least it should be spilt. He will not have his
seed cast in an unfruitful ground. Surely when the people are worthy of
the word: God will send preachers with abundance of it.

28 Of a truth I perceive that God is no accepter of persons. Being taught of
God he teaches others that whereof himself before was ignorant.
This is S. Peter's entrance to his matter: wherein he declares that he has
now learned that the Gospel of Christ, the doctrine of salvation does as well
pertain to the Gentiles as to the Jews. For although there was a
partition wall which divided them, now it is taken away. Ephesians. 2.
The Gentiles were aliants from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the
covenant of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world: but
now in Christ Jesus they which were far off, are made near. For he is our
peace, which made of both one, and has broken down the partition wall to make
of twain one new man in himself so making peace. Through him both Jew and
Gentile has an entrance unto the father by one spirit. And Peter having had
this revealed to him before in his vision does now affirm to the Gentiles in
the beginning of his speech: partly to win favorable hearing in that he
envied not their salvation as other Jews did, but carefully sought it: partly
to make them attentive to hear those things which pertained to their
salvation. Of a truth I perceive. Peter confesses his former ignorance
touching the calling of the Gentiles and that he has learned that which he
knew not before. A token of his great humility. His successor the pope is led
by an other spirit, he cannot abide to grant ignorance, or that he can err:
all knowledge is shut up in scrinio pectoris, (as they term it) in the hutch
of his breast. Paul would not arrogate all knowledge, 1. Cor. 13.
though he were taken up into the third heaven, and saw mysteries not to be
revealed unto men, for he says, We know in part. These Romish Rabbis will be
no Disciples but masters. They will answer him that shall take in hand to
teach them: John 9.
Thou art borne wholly in sins, and do thou teach us?

29 But what has Peter learned? God is no accepter of persons.
That God is no accepter of persons. I regard not that which man does regard,
says God to Samuel. 1. Sam. 16.
For man regards that which is before his eyes; but God regards the heart.
The person here is taken for the outward appearance, and qualities as you would
say, or circumstances of persons: as circumcision, uncircumcision; man, woman;
magistrate, subject; Jew, Gentile; Englishman, Frenchman; master, servant;
rich, poor; fair, evil favored; a tall man, a dwarf; a citizen, a
country man; a wise man, a fool; a learned, an unlearned. These and such
other things are here meant by the persons of men. GOD is no accepter of these
outward shows, he judges not as man judges. There is neither Jew, nor
Gretian, Gal. 3.
there is neither bond, nor free; there is neither male, nor female; for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. There is no respect of persons with God, neither ought
we to be carried away with external shows of magnifical pomp, of glorious
titles, of great authority, much learning: nor in matter of religion to respect
the messenger but the message. Paul reprooueth the Corinthians for respecting
of persons in matter of religion; some would hear none but Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
some liked none but Apollos, others followed after Peter, and would only be
his disciples. Is Christ divided says S. Paul? The preacher is to be heard for
the words sake and not for his own sake. If Scribes and Pharisees teach out
of the chair of Moses, if Judas teach the Gospel of Christ, they are to be
heard. To hear or not to hear in respect of the person, is to justify or
condemn the word for the person. Respect not persons, but reverence the
matter; when thou hear the minister preaching the truth thou hear not him
but the son of God the teacher of al truth Christ Jesus. Plato was as honest
a man, and as good a philosopher as was Diogenes for all his pretense of
simplicity and contemning of the world. Have no respect to outward pretenses.
Judge not according to the sight: least in opinion you condemn the good and
justify the evil. In matter of salvation neither ought the child to respect
his parent, nor the servant his master, nor the subject his prince, nor
posterity the predecessors: for we may not hang upon man but upon God. Ier. 17.
Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm. We must herein only give ear and
respect what the son of God shall say unto us who is the wisdom of his
father: whom our heavenly father has commanded us to hear, Matthew. 3.
saying, Hear you him.

30 In every nation he that fears him, God accepts them which fear him in
every nation.
and woorketh righteousness is accepted of him. God respects not the outward
person but the inward man. He regards not the shape but his own image that
is in man. He is not partial to the Jew more than to the Gentile: Rich and
poor, learned and unlearned are all one in his sight. He accepts of such as
fear him and work righteousness. Herein is comprised perfect religion: our
duty toward God, and our duty toward man, the former, and the latter
table, to beleene in God, and to do right to our neighbor, to love God above
all, and to love our neighbor as our self. To fear God is in true holiness
to serve GOD: to work righteousness is not to hurt but to help our neighbor,
to do to others, as we would be done unto our selves. He that will be a wise
man in deed must learn to fear God. The beginning of wisdom, Eccles. 1.
is the fear of the Lord. All other wisdom wherein the fear of God wants
is but earthly, Iam. 3.
sensual, and devilish. Such as fear God shall be strengthened to stand
against all assaults of Satan; yea they shall continue and stand steadfast unto
the end, even to the last gasp. Can thou not away with want? Would thou
have plenty? Psalm. 34.
There is nothing wanting to them that fear him. Can thou not away with
infamy? Would thou be praised? The greatest praise that can come to any man
is that he fears God. Eccles. 10.
It is the glory of the rich, the noble and the poor. Would thou have all
virtues, and the rewards of them? Would thou be free from sins, and the
punishments ensuing them? Follow the example of Cornelius, and fear God.
Eccles. 3.
For they who fear God, will honor and obey their parents; Psalm. 27.
they who fear God will diligently exercise themselves in prayer; they who
fear God will search their own hearts, see their offenses, and with the
prodigal child be sorry for them, confess them and forsake them. Eccles. 21.
They who fear God will abstain from sin: Eccles. 1.
remembering that the Lord does hate it, and will punish it; and knowing that
their doings cannot be hid from him. If the fear of God were planted in our
hearts: we would learn after so many admonitions to lead a better life; we
would practice such lessons as we have been so long in learning; we would not
live in such careless security as we do, the Gospel would take better effect
in us and bring forth more plentiful fruit, we would at the length cast
away impiety, and worldely concupiscence, and live a sober, just and godly
life, we would repent and forsake sin least sin procure Gods speedy wrath;
the ministers would be more diligent in feeding of the flock; the people more
ready to hear the voice of the sheepeheard; the magistrates more careful
over the commonwealth; the subjects more obedient to frame themselves to live
under Law: the rich would not suffer the giver of their riches to go on
begging: the poor would endeavor to get spiritual treasures, and to be rich
in Christ: finally we would not feed our bellies so daintily; nor so vainly
and superfluously cloth our bodies: but use temperance in diet, and sobriety
in apparel, having what to eat and wherewith to be clothed we would be
content. Verily to conclude, such as fear God abstain from evil and do
good: Eccles 15.
and as our Apostle S. Peter says, they do work righteousness.

31 Righteousness compriseth in it all such duty as we do owe unto our
neighbor. And them which work righteousness.
Whatsoever is contained in the second table is comprehended in this word
Righteousness. But how can we work righteousness, who are as unclean
things, and al our righteousness as a filthy clowte? Esaias 64.
Of whom the prophet says, There is not one that does good, Psalm 14.
no not one? In deed we are not able to work perfect righteousness. For if
we could then Christ had died in vain, with whose perfect righteousness we
must be clothed by imputation, that we may be accepted as righteous in Gods
sight. 2. Cor. 5.
For God has made him which knew no sin to be sin for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. But when we are justified so by the
perfect righteousness of Christ: we must endeavor to serve God in
righteousness, and bring forth good fruits though they be imperfect, such as
in this frailty of the flesh we may. And these are accepted of God for
Christ's sake, their weakness and imperfection being pardoned in him.
Wherefore in this sort we must work righteousness, and follow sanctification.
Hitherto how all estates must apply themselves to work righteousness.

32 Omitting therefore others whom generally this touches, Children put in
mind of a work of righteousness toward their parents without whose consent
to bestow themselves in marriage is a thing unrighteous.
I will at this present remember children only of a point of righteousness
which they must work in giving due honor to their parents. For there is a
great fault in many at this day, that whereas they are specially bound to their
parents both by the linkes of nature and by the bonds of Gods word: they burst
those bonds asunder, and dispose of themselves in marriage as they list without
consent of their parents. A fault as most heinous in the sight of God, and
condemned by his law: so condemned too by the law of nature, the Law Civil,
the Law Canon, and the opinion of the best writers. For the Law of God does
not only charge children generally to obey their parents in all things, Col.
3.
but also particularly does show by sundry examples, that children ought to
be given by their parents in marriage, and not to be left to their own
fantasies. And among the Ethnikes even by the Law of nature as their Poets
show, marriages for children were not made by themselves but by their parents.
It is written in the Law Civil; In^ss, de statu hominis l. Paul.
If a son marie a wife against his fathers will: the child that shall be
borne of that marriage shall not be counted lawful. In the Canon Law it is
said, 30. q. 5. c. Aliter.
Marriages are then lawful when maidens are asked to wives of their parents,
and are given by them openly to their husbands: otherwise they are not
marriages but whoredoms. The best writers both old and new subscribe
hereunto: Tertullian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, with all the learned
of latter times: whose particular sentences I omit to recite for breuities
sake. But if youthful children have so little reverence both of God and men
that such admonition will not make them leave such disordered marriages, it
behooves magistrates who are the common parents of the weal public, to
bridle their lusts with severe Laws, for the redress of this evil, and the
mischiefs ensuing of it. And thus much of S. Peter's entrance into his sermon:
the sermon does follow.

33 Ye know the word which God has sent to the children of Israel, The sum
and substance of S. Peter's Sermon is peace by Christ Jesus.
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, and so forth. The sum of the sermon is
this. Jesus Christ which is Lord of all, the preacher and author of peace, did
faithfully perform the office for the which he was sent, preaching to the
people the glad tidings of the Gospel, and healing all their diseases, for God
was with him, and he was slain and hanged on tree; the third day he arose
again from death, he ascended into heaven, from thence shall he come to judge
the quick and the dead: to whom all the prophets bear witness that through
his name all that believe in him shall have remission of their sins. Such as
this is, were the sermons of the Apostles. Here is all things necessary to
salvation expressed. This is that which God commanded his great Apostle S.
Peter to preach. In this doctrine would he have his people trained up. The
people received it as a sufficient doctrine. 1. Cor. 2.
Peter and Paul were directed by one spirit: they neither esteemed to know
any thing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, neither could they testify or
preach ought but him. This sermon is divided into three parts: The parts of
his sermon.
the first that Jesus Christ the Lord of all was sent unto the people of Israel
to preach peace; the next, that he died and rose again from death to procure
us this peace; the last, that we are made partakers of this peace by faith in
his name. Jesus Christ the Lord of all was sent unto the people of Israel to
preach peace. Let us weie the words severally: they are most effectuous, fully
setting forth the mystery of our salvation.

Thou shall call his name Jesus; Jesus Christ Lord of all sent from God to
preach peace
for he shall save his people from their sins. The Angel appearing to the
sheepeheards said: Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to
all the people; that is, that unto you is born this day a Savior. Matthew. 1.
The Ethnikes do seek their safety in their idols; Luc. 2.
the Jews in the obseruances of the Law, and traditions; the Papists in
their pardons, purgatory, masses, merits; the true Christians seek it in
Jesus Christ the Savior, and in none but him. Act. 4.
He will not be matched therein with any other: but he is a full, John 1.
perfect and only Savior. He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of
the world. There is neither water, nor fire, bulls, nor bells, masses, nor
merits, pope, nor pardon that can save us. Rom 8.
There is neither devil, or flesh, nor world, if he save us, that can condemn
us. For who can condemn whom he does justify? And whom he justifies not,
Psalm. 45.
who can save? Christ is anointed. And Jesus is called so, because he was
anointed of God above his fellows. Whereupon Esaias the prophet writes of him:
Esaias 61.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me; for he has anointed me. Anointed he was
to be a king and priest: for they among the Jews were wont to be anointed.
Romans 17.
He is the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. Matthew. 2.
The wise men of the East did acknowledge him a king: Where is he that is borne
king of the Jews? Zachary shows further what manner of king: Zach. 9.
Behold, thy king comes to thee, meek, and riding upon an ass, and upon a
colt the foale of an ass. This our king does govern us with a right scepter.
Psalm. 45.
The scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. He does defend us
with a mighty and stretched out arm, against whose power no power can stand.
He is that triumphant prince which has most victoriously vanquished and
thrown under foot our enemies. They labor in vain that kick against the
pricks, that strive against his Gospel. For he is a prince of might that does
defend it: Act. 19.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew 16.
The sun will run his course: the passage of the Gospel cannot be stopped.
2. Tim. 2.
The Gospel is not bound. Tertul.
While it is persecuted it is enlarged. The blood that is spilt for it is the
very seed of it. Now as he is our king, so our priest and prophet too: Deuteronomy.
18.
at whose mouth we should require the Law of God. That prophet like unto
Moses, the searcher of truth. That very son of God of whom the father has
said, Ipsum audite. Matthew. 3.
Hear ye him. He is the priest, which once for all, has sufficiently
sacrificed for our sins; Heb. 9.
by himself, and by none other; once, and not often; upon the cross, and not
upon the altar; sufficient for all such as shall be saved. He is the priest,
the high bishop that makes intercession for us: the only mediator between
God, and man; to teach man the will of God, to reconcile God to man; to make
intercession between God and man. These are the peculiar duties of Christ, as
we are taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

35 Which is Lord of all. Christ the Lord of all.
Least the Gentiles should conceive that Jesus Christ was promised, and sent to
be a Savior only to the Jews, he answers that objection by a prevention
(so to term it) calling him Lord of all: 1. Tim. 2.
the Lord of the Gentile as well as of the Jew. Matt. 28.
Christ will that all men shall be saved, that is, men of all sorts. 1. Cor. 6.
He was sent to preach peace to all, both Jews and Gentiles. Luc. 1.
He is the Lord over all, even the Lord of glory to who^ all power is given
both in heaven and in earth. He has bought us al with a great price, that we
should serve him in holiness and righteousness. Let us remember therefore
that of the prophet: If I be a Lord, Mal. 1.
where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts? Fear not them which kill the
body, Matt. 10.
but be not able to kill the soul: but rather fear ye him, which is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell.

36 Which God has sent. Christ sent from God to preach peace.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of a woman,
and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the Law.
He was made man for us, Gal 4.
that in our nature he might suffer for us. He was sent of his father being
equal with his father, Phil. 2.
and being in the form of God he made himself of no reputation. All to lift
us up, that were cast down to hell, and to rid us from the bondage of Satan and
his Angels to whom we were enthralled. For that is imported by the peace
mentioned in the words that follow. Esaias 61.
God preached by him, He sent me to preach the Gospel to the poor, says
Christ himself in Esaias. To preach the Gospel, even the Gospel of peace; not
to preach war between GOD and man but to preach peace. For the word of the
Gospel is the word of reconciliation.

37 And here by Christ example all messengers of God and ministers of his word
are taught by the way, Such as preach must be sent to preach.
that before they meddle with doing this office they must be lawfully sent
thereto. 2. Cor. 5.
Such as deny their lawful sending, do also deny their lawful preaching.
Romans 10.
For how shall they preach, unless they be sent, says S. Paul? Ier. 23.
The prophet complains of such runners as be not sent: I have not sent these
prophets, says the Lord, yet they run. Such are sent as are framed thereunto
by the holy Ghost: whom the holy Ghost has furnished with gifts fit for that
office, which do not usurp it, Heb 5.
but stay till they be lawfully called as was Aaron.

38 Christ was not only sent to preach peace, The doctrine (...) Christ is
(...) doctrine of ^^^ce.
but also to be our peacemaker: for through him we have peace with God; and in
him we should seek peace with men too, as far as lies in us. Romans 5.
For the Gospel is the word of peace, not of contention, tumult and rebellion,
Romans 12.
as our adversaries term it: of it own nature it is the word of peace: it
comes otherwhence that contention does follow it; for as soon as the Gospel
begins to be preached Satan makes a stir and labors to suppress it.
Matt. 2.
As soon as the wise men asked after Christ; Matt. 21.
Herod was troubled. As soon as Christ entered into Jerusalem to preach; all
the city was moved. The truth has many enemies. The light is hated of evil
doers, the Gospel will ever be persecuted. And in this sense is that of Christ
verified, I came not to send peace but the sword. Christ was sent to preach
peace. Ephe. 2.
He preached peace, and made peace between Jews and Gentiles; or rather
between them both and the Lord. For he is peace, which has made of both one,
and has broken the stop of the partition wall. Other sheep I have, (says
Christ to the Jews) which are not of this fold. Them must I bring also, John
10.
and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one sheepefold and one
sheepeheard. He preached peace amongst men, and brought peace into the world.
At the time of his nativity (as appears in histories) there was peace
amongst all nations and people throughout all the whole world: Oros. lib. 7.
ca. ^
to show unto the world that the Lord of peace was come into the world. Peace
is the badge that God gives to discern his from others. Love is Christ's
Liuery-coate. John 14,
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye love one another.
He cannot be at peace with God that is at war with his neighbor. August.
He cannot have concord with Christ that nourishes discord with a Christian.
God has made us one: Let not the devil sunder us into many. Pride is a
peacebreaker; humble and mild hearts are not contentious but labor to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.
God has given us Christ the prince of peace; he has given us the gospel the
word of peace; he has given us a peaceful Queen, (the Lord bless her) and
common peace in our country, let us be thankful to the Lord for it, and woe
to him that shall break it. Be of one mind, 2. Cor. 13.
live in peace: and the Lord of love and peace shall be with you. He preached
peace, peace between God and man. Sin made division between God and us as
it is written in Esaias; Esaias 59.
Your iniquities have separated between you, and your God. So that Gods favor
descended not to us, neither could our prayers ascend unto him. But Christ has
removed this wall of division, he has taken away this stoppage; he has
cancelled on the cross this writing that was against us; he has made us a
free access unto God. 2. Cor. 5.
By him we are reconciled unto God the father. He has laid our sins upon
his own shoulders, he has borne the pese of his fathers heavy wrath and
indignation, he has satisfied Gods justice, and pacified his anger, and made a
perfect peace between God and us. Man's conscience can never rest nor be at
peace until it be settled in the full persuasion of remission of sins in the
death and resurrection of Christ Jesus, whereby God receives us into his
favor; and is at one with us through him. This is that ioiefull tidings of
peace with God which Christ was sent to preach unto the world. This is that
peace which passes all understanding. Phil. 4.
He that with patience rests in this peace does suffer all things: he
reioiceth in the midst of troubles and afflictions: he is not overcome with the
fear of man's malice but will cheerfully and boldly say with S. Paul, Romans 8.
If God be with us, who can be against us? And with the prophet, I will lay me
down, and sleep in peace; for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.
Psalm. 4.
This is that peace which Christ preached, and promised to leave with his
elect: peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; John 14.
not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, Esaias
57.
nor fear. This peace is far from the ungodly: there is no peace, says my
God to the wicked. They are ever restless: the biting worm never cease to
gnawe and grate in their combred consciences.

39 Christ preached peace, The diligence of Christ in preaching peace.
when the Lord sent him. He was not negligent in his office, he answered his
calling carefully. He went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the devil. He was not rechelesse in Gods matters. He was no dumb
dog, no idle idol. He crept not into a corner, he hid not himself. But he
walked, he went abroad, he said to his Disciples, Matt. 28.
Go ye, Preacheye, he gave the example himself, he lay not out of his
Diocese, he was resident upon his charge, and looked to every part of it, he
made not his continual abode at Jerusalem, nor at Jericho, nor at Capernaum,
nor in any one city, town or village, but he went through all Jury and
Galilie. Not to poll, and pill; to extort and wring out of the people what he
could: but it was to do good, and to heal such as were oppressed of the
devil, to preach the word and to work miracles. He preached throughout his
whole charge: For I came out (says he) for that purpose. Mark 1.
Nor only did he gladly teach such as came unto him: but he invited also and
provoked all that were weary and laden to come, Matt. 11.
promising them that he would refresh their souls. And herein he did the
office of a priest. And again he healed all that Satan had afflicted, and
herein he did the office of a king. Psalm. 72.
He shall judge the poor of the people, says the prophet: he shall save the
children of the needy, and shall subdue the oppressor. He threw out his
enemy, the oppressor Satan: and delivered his people out of that enemies
hands. An example for the magistrate to defend the innocent, to deliver the
oppressed, to punish the transgressor. Romans 13.
For the sword is given him to this end. An example for the minister to teach
the word of God and confirm it with doing what good soever he may according to
the talents that the Lord has given him. Finally an example for every
faithful Christian, to show forth his belief by his conversation, Iam 2.
his faith by works, to make his vocation and calling sure thereby. 2 Pet. 1.
For God was with him. Christ wrought his wonderful works by the power of
God, and not (as the Scribes falsely charged him) by the power of Beelzebub:
for God was with him. Luc. 11.
He taught the word that he received of his father, he cast out devils by the
finger of God. He was no chopper or changer of the word: he used neither
witchcraft, sorcerie, nor coniuring. He wrought not by the devil but by the
power of God.

40 The next part was, that he died and rose again to procure Christ died to
procure the peace which he preached.
They slew him, hanging him on a tree. God raised him up the third day. The
death and resurrection of Christ is the only mean of our reconciliation and
peace with God. For he died for our sins; Romans 4.
and rose for our justification. By his death and passion he has cancelled and
fastened upon the cross the handwriting that was against us. Ephe. 3.
He has pacified Gods wrath, he has procured Gods favor, of enemies made
us friends, of strangers citizens, of the children of wrath the children of
God, and fellow-heires of his eternal kingdom.

41 Before this crucified Christ that died and rose again we shall appear to
give an account of our whole life, God has ordained him a judge of quick and
dead.
of our thoghts, our works and words. For as S* Peter says, He is ordained of
God a judge of the quick and the dead. At the latter day he is appointed to
be judge of all flesh: The father has delivered all judgment unto him. John 5.
And we shall all stand before his judgment seat that every one may receive
the things done in his body, 2. Cor. 5.
according to that he has done whether it be good or evil. This judge is
both judge and witness. Mal 3.
I will come near unto you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the southsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hyrelings wages, and
vex the widow and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not
me says the Lord of Hosts. Nothing is hid from his eyes, he sees the secrets
of all hearts: he will not be corrupted but give unto every one according to
his works. Christ is judge. Wherefore we are taught to leave revenge unto
him. Rom 12.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. For private men to revenge
wrongs, is to vsurp Christ's office, to take judgment out of his hands whom
God the father has appointed judge of the quick and the dead. You that be
afflicted and oppressed with misery and wrong lift up your heads: for your
redemption draws near. Matt. 24.
You that oppress and wrong your brethren, repent: and desire pardon least the
sentence of Gods justice overtake you. His justice no man can abide: For in his
sight shall none that lives be justified. Psalm. 143.
Christ therefore is given as S. Peter teaches to be our Jesus, that is our
Savior, our Christ that is anointed, a king, a priest, and prophet; the Lord
of all whom we ought to serve in holiness and righteousness; sent of God, and
made man; he preached peace between God and man, and between men among
themselves; he died to be a sacrifice for us, he rose again to justify us;
he is made our judge, and does judge justly.

42 Now we with PETER, The honor which S. Peter in this sermon gives unto
Christ is by us also given him; but not so by
or rather with the holy Ghost, with the Prophets and Apostles, give herein
to Christ that which is his own. And here is the controversy between the
adversaries of the Gospel the papists and us. We give unto Christ that which is
his right: they rob, and take from him that which is his due. We spoil our
selves of all righteousness, and seek to be clothed with his righteousness.
They cloth themselves with their own righteousness, not caring for that
righteousness which is in him. We hope to be saved by him our only priest,
our sacrifice, our mediator. They have shaven priests, and unbloody
sacrifices, and infinite mediators both of Saints and Angels. To be short we
acknowledge Christ our whole Savior, and all the glory thereof we give unto
God. They will be saved by themselves, their merits, their pardons, they impart
the glory of God unto dead men, to images, to relikes, and to dumme creatures.

43 The third and last part of S. Petets sermon, was that we Of the peace
which Christ has procured we are made partakers by faith.
To him all the prophets give witness that through his name all that believe in
him shall receive remission of sins. Wherein three things are remembered unto
us: that remission of sins is free, that we receive it by faith; and that
this doctrine is witnessed by all the prophets.

44 All flesh has sinned, Remission of sins free.
and does need forgiveness. God is the only forgiuer of our sins. Mark 2.
Neither does he forgive them in respect of man's merits: Tit. 3.
but of his mercy, good will and free mercy. The only means that moved God
to be merciful freely to sinful man was that most acceptable sweet
bloody sacrifice which the innocent son of God offered upon the cross for
our sins. Rom 3.
All have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God: and are justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. He took
our unrighteousness upon himself and clothed us with his justice, 2. Cor 5.
and He who knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. In Christ and for Christ we receive free
remission of sins. There is no other name given us under heaven whereby we may
be saved. Acts 3.
I am the way, the truth, and the life: John 8.
No man comes to the father but by me, John 14.
says Christ. No sin forgiven but thorough him: and through him all sins
are forgiven freely.

45 The mean whereby we are made partakers of this free remission of sins,
Of remission of sins we are made partakers by faith.
in the death and resurrection of Christ, is faith in Christ. For all (says
Peter) that believe in him shall receive remission of sins through his name.
God does freely offer unto us remission of sin, and peace in Christ. The
mean and instrument to receive it withal is faith. He that believes is made
partaker of it: and not of it only but of eternal life also. For he that
believes in me has life eternal, John 3.
says our Savior Christ. Romans 3.
But this faith, this justifying faith does work through love, Gal. 5.
and shows it self by works. James 2.
The good tree will be fruitful. The believing justified child of God will
fear God and work righteousness.

46 This doctrine of justification by faith in the death and resurrection of
Christ Jesus is witnessed by all the Prophets. Unto this doctrine all the
Prophets bear witness.
It is no new doctrine, but old: not only proceeding from the Apostles, but
also from the Prophets. For Moses and all the Prophets bear witness of him.
Luke 24.
And as they: so the Apostles after them. Whose steps we must follow, and
acknowledge that no doctrine is to be established but that which is testified
by the Apostles and Prophets. Ephe. 2.
The true Church of Christ does build her faith on their foundation. God will
be worshipped and served according to his prescript word, and not according to
the brain of man. The Prophets and Apostles with all such as be ministers of
the word are here and elsewhere called witnesses: Yea Christ himself terms
himself a witness of the truth. For this cause am I borne, and for this cause
came into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. John 18.
And Christ says to his Apostles, Acts 1.
Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in Samaria; even to the
uttermost ends of the earth.

47 The truth is to be testified by public preaching. Bearing witness to the
truth both by teaching and by suffering for it.
Paul commends the Thessalonians for believing his testimony. His testimony
was the Gospel which he did preach and testify unto them. According to the
voice that did speak unto him when he was cast off his horse: 2 Thessalonians 1.
I have appeared to thee for this purpose: to appoint thee a minister and
witness both of things which thou have seen; Act. 26.
and of the things in which I will appear unto thee. The truth is also
testified by writing. By the writings of the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists
the truth of God Jesus Christ was most plainly testified. As John (to name one
of them among many,) This is that Disciple which testifies of these things.
John 21.
The truth is also witnessed when as it is testified in blood, for a martyr is
a witness. Christ told Peter that when he was young he girded himself and
walked whither he lusted, but when he waxed old other should gird him and carry
him whither he would not. Now this (says John) he spoke signifying by what
death he should glorify God. Many Martyrs have thus testified the truth with
suffering for it. But they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, Reave. 12.
not loving their life, no not to the death. That minister which will neither
testify it by public preaching, nor by writing, will hardly testify it by
suffering, but will rather say with Peter, I know not the man. But I must here
make an end for the time has overtaken me: Matthew. 26.
and without repetition, as you know the manner is. 2. Pet. 2.
To God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons and one
almighty and almerciful God, be rendered all thanks and all glory given for
ever and for ever. Amen

The fifteenth Sermon. A Sermon preached at Strausborough in the time of Q.
Mary's reign.
2. COR. 6. 2 We therefore as helpers, beseech you that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain.

3 For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold now the accepted time; behold now the
day of salvation.


THE Prophet to abate the hawtie conceit, God has created men to serve and
honor him.
which naturally we have of our selves; in such sort as every man were his
own God, and had no other whom to praise for the graces and gifts wherewith he
is beautified, and set forth as a mirror for all other creatures to behold and
wonder at; indeuoureth to turn away our eyes from too much gazing upon our
own excellency, by pointing as it were his finger at him, who is author of
every good and perfect gift, saying, He made us, Psalm. 100.
and not we our selves. For what end and purpose Zachary teaches; Luke 1.
namely that we might serve him in holiness and righteonsnesse before him all
the days of our life. Ephe. 2.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has ordained that we should walk in them. 1. Cor. 6.
Ye are not, says S. Paul to the Corinthians your own. Why so? For you are
bought with a price. Glorify therefore God in your body, and in your spirit;
for they are Gods. For So Much then as we are all of the household of God; all one
in Christ; all members of one, and the same spiritual body; woorshipping one
Lord; receiving one baptism; professing one faith; and expecting one glory to
be revealed upon us in that great day: it is our duty in token of our near
conjunction in the spirit, with one heart, one mind, and as it were with one
mouth to present our selves before his mercy seat; to praise him; to hear
his word; to receive the seals of his merciful covenant in the Gospel; and to
offer him our needeful supplications together; that in all things it may
appear that we are one, as he and the father are one, even one God to be
blessed for ever.

2 With what zeal and desire, With what zeal, joy and gladness the godly do
perform their service to the Lord.
Gods people of old were wont to do this, we may guess by that which we read
of y^ Prophet David: who, being persecuted of his wicked and unnatural son, and
driven from ye presence of that glorious tabernacle, which with great triumph
and joy himself had placed in the City of David, where he was wont with the
rest of the people to call upon the name of the Lord; to hear the Law; and to
offer sacrifice upon those beautiful altars: conceived such a deep impression
of grief, by the sorrowful meditation of those sweet and heavenly comforts,
whereof his soul had tasted in former times; that, forgetting quite the loss
of all other royalties whatsoever, he makes moan for nothing, but only this,
that he might not now be partaker of those inestimable benefits, and the
comforts of mind and conscience, which he was wont to receive at the hand of
God, at such time as with the rest of the Israelites he resorted to the
tabernacle, where God promised to be present, and favorably to hear the
petitions there made unto him. Of this his great miferie, he complains him
lamentably in diverse of his Psalms: but especially in the 84, where he
breaks out into these words of great zeal: Psalm. 84.
O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles? My soul longs, yea and
faints for the courts of the Lord: mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the
living God. He goes on, and magnifieth the blessed estates of those silly
birds, which might have their nests, and lay their young even close by the
altars, from the presence of which he was exiled. In the end, to show the
happy case wherein they are, to whom continual and daily access to the house
of the Lord is granted; he prefers one day spent there, before a thousand
any other-where; the meanest room about the house of God, before the highest
throne in the palaces of the wicked. In another Psalm he so speaks, as if
every days absence from that holy place were a thousand years. Psalm. 42.
When shall I come to appear before the presence of God? As if he should have
said, Shall I never? Psalm. 137.
Never shall I be so happy? So the Israelites at such time as they were exiles
in Babylon, declared their earnest desires this way, by their bitter tears:
Nehemias, by his heaviness in the presence of the king: Christ, by leaving his
mother, to present himself at holy exercises in the temple, being but as yet
of green and tender age. And with what zeal, joy and gladness, the
Disciples of Christ, after the death of their master joined themselves together
in private houses, when by reason of the cruel persecution by the Priests,
they durst not show themselves abroad; it appears both in the Evangelists,
and in the Acts of the Apostles. Yea, when afterward the spirit of God
miraculously descending upon them, had increased both their zeal and courage,
they openly professed him, whom before they worshipped in secret places. No
fear, no prohihition, no threatening of higher powers was able to withholde
them: they spoke, they entered into the temple; they taught daily; and being
persecuted, were glad that God thought them worthy to suffer for his sake,
Acts 5.
who had died for theirs. God, according to his promise, is ever present in his
congregation. Matt. 18.
Wheresoever two or three are assembled in his name, he is with them: yea what
thing soever his Saints so assembled shall lawfully ask; his promise is, it
shall be given them.

3 With what earnest desire, The like alacrity in serving God required now
especially.
dear brethren, ought we then, to stand in this place before the Lord, being
driven from the tabernacle of God, as David; persecuted, as the blessed
Apostles of Christ; exiled, as Israel; cast out of the Churches wherein we were
nurced and trained up? How thankful ought we to be to our heavenly father,
who has in so ample manner, in the midst of our manifold distresses and
griefs, caused the light of his countenance to shine in the faces of us his
poor afflicted servant? For although because we, our princes, our prophets
and our people have grievously sinned in not esteeming so preciously, nor
following so religiously his blessed Gospel as we ought to do; therefore he
has bereaved us of our worldly prosperity, and brought these miseries upon
us, wherein we now are: yet knowing that we are the sheep of his pasture,
howsoever we have wandered and gone astray; it has pleased him in great
abundance of mercy, so to temper the sharpness of his correction, that we
find him still our present helper at hand, and ready most to succor us in
our extreemest need. Could we wish for more at the hands of God, than being
banished, and constreined to forsake all the profits and comforts which we
inioied at home in our native country; here amongst aliens and strangers, to
find a city, so safe to dwell in; maintenance, so competent for our needeful
and reasonable sustentation; such grace in the eyes of the godly magistrates,
under whom we live; such favor and respect to our hard estate; such free
liberty to come together, to call upon God in our common prayers, to hear his
word syncerely and truly preached in our own natural tongue, to the great and
unsearchable comfort of our souls; finally all things so strangely and almost
miraculously ministered, and brought unto our hands, as doubtless we could
never have found here, if the Lord himself had not gone before, as it were
to make ready, and to provide for us? O what tokens of mercy and special
favor, has our kind and gracious father showed us in this our exile and
distress for his Gospel; in these our sorrowful and afflicted times; We have
lost the saving truth at home, and found it abroad; Our countrie-men are
become our enemies, and strangers are made our friends; Being persecuted by our
native rulers, foraine magistrates have showed us favor; In banishment, we
have a place to dwell in; In anguish, we abound with comfort: And, as the
Apostle speaks, having nothing, we are as possessing all things. Therefore,
dear brethren, having received these so great and rare graces, at the
merciful hands of our good God; I may justly as one of your poor helpers in
these holy labors, use the words of S. Paul, which in the beginning I
recited; exhorting and beseeching you, that ye receive not this grace of God
in vain. Be not an unthankful people: neglect not the great benefit now
offered unto you: approach with all reverence, and present your selves as humble
petipetitioners before the Lord, and careful servants before our God. For I say
unto you, as Jacob said in his journey toward Mesopotamia; Genesis 28.
Vere Dominus est in loco isto. Truly God is here, even present amongst us. We
do clearly and plainly perceive, that our fathers and mothers, our friends
and familiars having forsaken us; he has received us as his dearest.

4 Let us now take a view of S. Paul's words which I have propounded to
entreat of. Each man should be another h^lper.
In the entrance of which, he professes himself to be our helper; furthering
us, and setting us forward in the course of our salvation, not only by
teaching the word of reconcilement, remission of sins, free mercy in the
death and through the merits of Christ crucified: but also by most earnest and
vehement exhortation, beseeching us woorthily to receive this so freely offered
grace and blessing. Now as Paul was an helper, and a moouer unto godliness;
so no doubt we ought all to be helpers every one to another, according to our
calling, in distributing and communicating such gifts as we have received at
the bountiful hands of God. 1. Pet. ^
Every one, according to that of S. Peter; as he has received grace
himself, so ministering it to another, as good dispensers of the manifold
graces of GOD. For he has not delivered us our talents to be wrapped up,
hidden, and buried in the earth: We are stewards, so to use the riches of his
grace, as may be most to the advantage of his glory amongst men.

5 Unto this, Three things contained in S. Paul's exhortation.
our blessed Apostle exhorting, sets three especial things before our eyes
to be considered. First he puts us in remembrance of the great mercy of
God toward us, whereof we are moved, not to show our selves unworthy
receivers: Secondly he shows, that this is the acceptable and only
accounted time wherein it must appear, whether we receive that grace in vain
or no: Thirdly he teaches wherein, and how we must declare our selves so to
have received it, as behooves.

6 Receive not the grace of God in vain. I will not travel to tell Of
receiving the grace of God in vain^. What that grace i^.
but rather note unto you in what sense the holy Ghost does chiefly use it in
this place. Grace is the favor and mercy of God toward sinful men. It is
called grace, because it is given gratis, freely and undeservedly on our parts,
Aug. in Psalm 30.
to whom it is given. For us it is purchased, by the only mean and mere
merit of our Savior Christ: and to us it is both offered and exhibited, by
the voluntary and unprovoked operation of the spirit. This grace in it self
being large, and more than sufficient for all men; the holy Ghost divides and
bestows upon each, breathing where and as he lists, according to the
secret pleasure of his will. Thorough it we have salvation; whereas through
sin we deserve death. For out iniquity was heinous in the sight of God,
first committed by Adam, and since continued in us: but far more exceeding
was the mercy of our Lord, who when we were his enemies, sent forth his
son, made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them
which were under the Law, Gal. 4.
and that we might receive the adoption of sons. No tongue can express,
neither any mind conceive this gratiousnesse. Yet let us ponder it with such
consideration as we are able. Great therefore I say was the mercy of our
creator, who gave his son; and great the love of our Savior, who gave even
himself for us. Our thraldom was great, that required a ransom of such
value: our guiltiness much, that could no otherwise be washed away, but with
the very heart blood of the innocent lamb of God, Christ Jesus our Lord: Yea
inestimable and vneffable was the love of our gracious Lord, who to spare us,
spared not himself. He was content to become ignominious before men; that we
might be glorious with his father; to be condemned, that we might be absolved;
to be crowned with thorns, to purchase us a crown of immortality: to loose
his life, that we might gain life; to suffer death, that we might escape it;
and to become as hated and accursed of God, that we might find favor and
eternal grace with him. In his death our sin is pardoned: by his blood, our
filthiness is washed away: by his resurrection, we are reconciled to his
father, and made at one with God. Let us not break this so happy truce
betwixt the Lord and us: let us not through sin condemn our selves again;
now that we are justified: let us not walk toward hell, he having made
plain and easy the path to heaven. The image of God in us, defaced through
Adam, is repaired by Christ: Let us appear therefore in this pure image before
God, that we may be acceptable in his pure sight. Through Christ we are called
to be citizens with the Saints, and Gods houshold-seruaunts: let us then put on
the garments of truth and innocence, that so it may appear whose servant
we are by our Lords liuerie. We are made the happy heirs of his glorious
kingdom, and fellow heirs with Jesus Christ: wherefore let us not seek so
possessions here, that we loose a better inheritance above in heaven. If we
do, it is in vain that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ has been so
largely offered unto us, and plentifully powered on us. Yea his grace will
increase the woefulness of our destruction.

7 Grace is offered and received by two especial outward means: Grace
offered by the word and Sacraments.
the preaching of the Gospel; and the holy administration of the blessed
Sacraments. These two are the instruments, or rather the hands, by the which
the holy Ghost does offer, exhibit, seal and deliver the grace of God unto
us.

8 And there be two sorts of men to whom grace is offered by the word in
vain. Grace offered in vain by the word to such as will not hear it.
The one are they which will not give it so much as the hearing; but do utterly
contemn, and unkindly refuse that which the Lord does so kindly and so
graciously offer to them. The other, they that hear it indeed, read it, but
consider it not, receive it but altogether without fruit, and for fashions
sake. Of the former sort are all such as Pharao was, who enioined Moses to come
no more in his sight, for he would not hear him. Acts 7.
Such also were the Jews, to whom when Stephen preached, they stopped their
ears. Such they of whom the Lord complains by the Prophet; Esaias 66.
saying, I spoke; and they would not hear.

9 Of the latter sort there be three kinds shadowed in the parable of the
sower, To such as hear it but retain it not.
which went forth to sow his seed: whereof some fell in the high way side;
Matthew. 13.
some in stony and grauelly ground; some also amongst thorns. That which fell
by the high way side, either the birds of the air picked up, or men trod upon
with their feet. Which our savior applies unto him that hears the word of
the kingdom, and understands it not; and by and by the devil takes it
away, least he should believe, and so be saved. For it fares with the word
preached, as with the seed sown. Some are so dissolute and rechelesse, that
they let it in at the one ear, and out at the other. The hearts of some be so
be so hardened, and parched, because they want the watering of Gods spirit;
(which does only mollify) that his word can take no root in them. The devil
and his deceitful Angels do so bewitch them, and fill their hearts with vain
cogitations, so abalienate their minds and trouble their memory; that they
cannot tell what is said; it is forgotten by that it is spoken. Yea the devil
does so thoroughly occupy the hearts of many other, with superstitious opinions
and fond persuasions, or with such worldly desires, such fleshly lusts, such
froward affections; that the hearing of the blessed word is a wearisome work
unto them; every hour spent that way, is as tedious as a year, and thought to
be wholly lost. Many likewise both hear the word preached, and read the
Scriptures as the Pharisees did hear them: that they may seem to favor the
Gospel, and so under pretense of holiness blind the eyes of others, and
purloine commodity to themselves. Such come in amongst the children of God, as
did Satan of old: yet God knows them to be children of darkness, not of
light; yea and oftentimes he so shakes them out of their painted rags; that
the whole world may epsy their ouglie and deformed nakedness. Whilst by
their hypocrisy they labor to deceive others; they deceive, yea and damn
themselves. To this sort of men therefore the word is offered: but all in
vain. Either they receive it not: or they receive it to their own destruction.

10 The second sort are resembled to the stony soil, To such as retain it
but not still.
which receives the seed, and it takes root for a time: but when the heat
of the sun comes, it withers away. Many such there be, which have gladly
heard the Gospel: have frequented sermons with appearance of great devotion;
and could freshly talk of the holy scriptures of God. But when the heat of
the sun burst out, when persecution and fire followed the professors of it: O
Lord how many have shrunk, yea and utterly fallen from it? How many
persecuters now which then were professors? Not one amongst forty has
tarried the beam and blase of his burning and trying sun. O Lord God
wonderful is thy mercy, yet their estate is pitiful. These our times (dear
brethren) have maruelously tried what ground we be: what root Gods word has
taken in us. Much grauelly ground does now appear; which before was thought to
be sound, and battle. So it is; the timeliest fruit often comes to least
proof. The freshest Gospeller in appearance, in experience is found not to be
the soundest: and the greatest talkers, oftentimes the idlest workers: and such
as have bragged most; when it came to be tried i^ the field, have first fled.
Such are Gods judgments; who sees far otherwise than man can see, and
through a fawning face espieth a traitors heart. How vainly therefore a great
sort have received and gloried in this Gospel, we now perceive, and with
mornefull hearts do rue it. The Lord forgive them, and strengthen us with his
grace unto the end. Here we learn, that persecution follows this seed of
God. Christ testifies, that he came to send the sword amongst us, Matthew. 10.
and not peace: signifying that the Gospel would procure many enemies and much
persecution. Wherefore my son, says the wise man in the book of
Ecclesiasticus, Eccle. 2.
when thou come to the service of GOD, stand in justice and fear, and make
ready thy soul to trial. Happy is that ground, which being tried is found
good and fruitful.

11 The third sort are compared to ground ouergrowne with thorns. To such as
receive it and retain it, but unprofitably.
For as thorns choke the seed which is sown amongst them; so that it cannot
bring forth that fruit which it ought to do: so the cares of the world, and
the pleasures of this life, which be as thorns to wound; as brambles and
briers to entangle the minds and consciences of men; destroy that spiritual
seed, which in a heart well prepared and purged from these weeds, would grow
up unto everlasting life. In this number we may reckon those base-minded
worldlings mentioned in the parable: who being invited, came not; because their
fermes, their oxen, and their wives withheld them. The inordinate care that
some have for their children and family, how to find them food and raiment,
more than sufficient; the desire that others have to keep their worldly
substance, their possessions and riches, and also to increase the same, and get
to live in wealth themselves, and to leave their children rich; the pleasure
that some other have to live in honor, and to be in office, finely to feed,
and to go gorgeously, to follow their lusts and the transitory pleasures of
this vain world; has ouergrowne, yea utterly choked in a great sort of men, a
great deal of good seed. Many there be whom the cares, the riches and the
pleasures of this sinful world have so bewitched and drawn into so corrupt a
sense; that even like the Gadarenes, Matthew. 8.
or Gergesites, rather than loose one of their pigges, Luke 8.
tbey will bid adieu to the Gospel of Christ, and beseech the Lord of
salvation to depart out of their costs. Most true therefore it is which S. Paul
notes in them, whose hearts are possessed with carfulness of this worlds good.
They that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares, 1. Tim. 6.
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. Riches are the nurces of all vain delights and fleshely
pleasures. This caused our Savior so heavily to threaten; Woe be to the
wealthy. Luke 6.
Let us therefore learn, by this warning of our savior, when the Gospel of
Chiist is preached, to take heed that neither it be devoured by birds, nor
trodden down with feet, nor withered with heat, nor choked with thorns, and
so made unprofitable: but rather being received, kept, and cherished in the
ground of our hearts, it may grow and increase so abundantly; that when the
Lord shall see it ready for the sickle, and send his Angels to cut it down,
it may fill the reapers hands, and make rich the barnes of him that looks
for fruit of it.

12 Now as the graces of God purchased for us by Christ, Grace offered by the
Sacraments.
are offered unto us by the word: so are they also most lively and effectually
by the Sacraments. Christ has instituted and left in his Church for our
comfort and the confirmation of our faith two sacraments or seals: Baptism;
and the Lords supper. In Baptism, the outward washing of the flesh declares
the inward purging and cleansing of the spirit. In the Eucharist or supper of
the Lord, our corporal tasting of the visible elements, bread and wine,
shows the heavenly nourishing of our souls unto life, by the mystical
participation of the glorious body and blood of Christ. For in as much as he
says of one of these sacred elements, This is my body which is given for you;
and of the other, This my blood: he gives us plainly to understand, that all
the graces which may flow from the body and blood of Christ Jesus, are in a
mystery here not represented only, but presented unto us. So then, although
we see nothing, feel and taste nothing but bread and wine: nevertheless let us
not doubt at al, but that he spiritually performs that which he does declare
and promise, by his visible and outward signs: that is to say, that in this
sacrament there is offered unto the Church that very true and heavenly bread,
which feeds and nourishes us unto life eternal; that sacred blood, which
will cleanse us from sin, and make us pure in the day of trial. Again, in
that he says, Take, eat, drink ye all of this; he evidently declares that
his body and blood are by this sacrament assured to be no less ours, than
his; he being incorporate into us, and as it were made one with us. That he
became man, it was for our sake; for our behoof and benefit he suffered; for
us he rose again; for us he ascended into heaven; and finally for us he will
come again in judgment. And thus has he made himself all ours: ours his
passions, ours his merits, ours his victory, ours his glory, and therefore
he gives himself and all his in this sacrament wholly unto us. The reason
and course whereof is this. In his word he has promised and certified us of
remission of sins, in his death; of righteousness, in his merits; of life, in
his resurrection; and in his ascension, of heavenly and everlasting glory.
This promise we take hold on by faith, which is the instrument of our
salvation: But because our faith is weak and staggering through the frailty
of our mortal flesh: he has given us this visible sacrament, as a seal and
sure pledge of his irreuocable promise, for the more assurance and confirmation
of our feeble faith. If a prince give out his letters patent of a gift, so long
as the seal is not put to; the gift is not fully ratified, and the party to
whom it is given, thinks not him self sufficiently assured of it. Gods gift
without sealing, is sure; as he himself is al one, without changing: yet to
bear with our infirmity, and to make us more secure of his promise; to his
writing and word he added these outward signs and seals, to establish our
faith, and to certify us that his promise is most certain. He gives us
therefore these holy and visible signs of bread and wine and says, Take and
eat this is my body and blood: giving unto the signs the names which are
proper to the things signified by them; as we use to do even in common speech,
when the sign is a lively representation and image of the thing.

13 Let us therefore be thankful unto our redeemer Christ, for these his
great benefits, and so unspeakable and undeserved mercies: How grace is
received by the sacraments and not in vain.
and let us receive this holy sacrament as a sure pledge, that the virtue of
his death and passion is imputed unto us for justice, even as though we had
suffered the same which he did in our own natural bodies. Let us not be so
perverse, as to draw back when Jesus Christ calls us so lovingly to this
royal feast: but with good consideration of the worthiness of this gift
present we our selves with a fervent zeal, that we may come woorthily to this
holy table. 1. Cor. 11.
Let each man try himself, and so eat, says the Apostle. Let us enter into
our selves therefore, and examine the estate of our hearts and souls: and
consider in what case we stand. If we be not of the sanctified household of God,
not Christ's servant and faithful Disciples; shall we dare presume to press
in, being aliens and strangers, to the Lords, as most comfortable, so also most
dreadful table? No: let no impenitent blasphemer of God, no whoremonger, or
vile and unrepented sinner, presume to touch or taste this food: for such shall
not feed upon Christ and his merits: but they receive their own damnation.
But such as will woorthily feed at this blessed feast, must earnestly and truly
mourn for their sins past; in a settled purpose and resolution, never
willingly to defile themselves again. And such as will be partakers of this
bread that came from heaven, Jesus Christ, our one and only Savior; must also
be as one bread or loaf, and as one body joined together in brotherly love,
and all other offices of godly and Christian charity. For if thou come to
this banquet without this vesture of love, it shall be said unto thee; Matt. 22.
Friend how came thou hither not having on thy wedding garment? A woeful
speech and an end most miserable. Let this suffice for the first point, which
is the blessed Apostles exhortation, not to receive the grace of God in vain.

The time to receive grace offered, is when God calls by the preaching of the
Gospel.
he applies to his purpose the words of the Prophet Esaias, who speaking unto
Christ, as in the person of his father, says, In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee. The acceptable time
is that, whereof S. Paul speaks. When the fullness of time came, Esaias 49.
God sent his son made of a woman. It was indeed an acceptable time and full
of grace, Gal. 4.
wherein the sacrifice of Christ was so graciously accepted, and his prayers
heard of God. And it may well be called a day of salvation, wherein his father
gave him a triumphant victory over those so bitter torments of death. An
acceptable time was it, a day of salvation; not so much in respect of him who
at all times was accepted; as of us, who without him and his death had been
refused. For in that day was your redemption wrought by our redeemer: and
sinners saved by his passion who had no sin. And as he died, and rose; John
17.
so he prayed and was heard for us. I pray for them, I pray not for the world,
I pray for them whom thou have given me, says our Savior. Now the acceptable
time and day of salvation which Esaias spoke of, S. Paul does very aptly and
effectually apply to his present occasion; Behold, now is the acceptable
time: behold, now is the day of salvation. For the Fathers lived in hope of
this acceptable day of grace and favor to come: but the very time begins
from the suffering of Christ Jesus, and continues even to the worlds end. And
unto every one of us, so much of this acceptable time is granted, as we have
time granted here to live. Which being not long (because our life is but as it
were a span) it may fitly be called a day, or rather an hour of salvation.
This day therefore grace is offered us of God: Romans 3.
Against whose majesty, forasmuch as all have sinned, and by sin are
deprived of his glory; we must needs acknowledge, that for the recovering of
our loss, we stand all in present need of his grace. Now is the time
wherein our souls do groan to be relieved with grace and mercy. For who can
say; My heart is sound: I need no Physician? What one man is there amongst us
all, who has loved God as he ought to do? or tendered his neighbors case as
he would his own? We may dally with our selves, and think that we suffer not
for our own transgressions; that we are not cause of that great plague and
calamity, which presently is come upon our country. Beloved; do not deceive
your selves. Our God is a righteous judge; who blesses the innocent, and
heapeth punishment upon the offending soul. For truly if we search our selves
as we ought to do with a single eye; if we examine out thoughts, take a
reckoning of our words, and peise our deeds and ways in an equal balance;
ask our hearts, and they will tell us; enquire of our conscience, and it will
declare unto us, that every one of us has well deserved more than has
happened unto any of us: Yea we shall find that all have not suffered half
so much, as every one has deserved. Our first parents for tasting the fruit
that was forbidden them, Genesis 3.
were themselves cast out of their pleasant habitation, and punished in all
their posterity to come for ever. Have we being terrefied by the horror of
their example, withheld our hands and bridled our affections from every
unlawful and forbidden thing? Numb. 16.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram with their favorites and confederates, were
swallowed up of the earth for whispering against Moses and against Aaron. Did
we never once mutter against our good and lawful magistrates, against our
judges, and against the Lords ministers? 2. Kings 14.
David, for numbering of his people, procured such a plague, that 70. thousand
were consumed with it: and are we so unspotted, that we have not in as heinous
a matter as this offended God? would to God we were: but the Lord and our own
consciences do know how far otherwise the case does stand. I will not enter
into particulars, nor open the sores of any man: but send you home into the
closet of your own hearts to see it. And if we prosecute the comparison in
such wise as has been touched; I nothing doubt but every one of us may
justly lay the cause of this heavy displeasure of God, and grievous plague
upon himself: every one may say and cry out with the prophet David; It is I
that have sinned, I that have committed iniquity and deserved this great
vengeance. The smart whereof, as we do outwardly feel; so if it inwardly
pierce us to the quick of our hearts and souls, if we be truly wounded and
humbled in deed with the grievous remembrance of our former sins: this is,
of all other, the most acceptable time for us to receive the saving health of
God: who as he takes his time to offer us grace: so we must also take ours, to
receive it being offered. To day, says the Apostle, if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. It is to day, so long as he speaks by his
Prophet, saying, Return every one from his evil way, Ierem. 18.
make your ways and your works good. If this nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I
thought to bring upon them. It is to day, so long as that voice of John the
Baptist is heard, Matthew. 3.
Repent; So long as wisdom utters her voice in the streets, Proverbs 1.
and cries, Turn; so long as our Lord and Savior says, Matthew 11.
Come, it is to day. These so often callings and so sweet admonitions, ought
to be of force sufficient to set us forward to repent, to turn and come to our
merciful Savior in this day of salvation; and to follow the worthy examples
of our wise forefathers, who being stirred up in like sort, 2. Kings 12.
have awaked and have been saved. That very day that Nathan the Prophet told
David of his fault, he repented and was received to mercy. Jonas 3.
The Ninevites likewise were a wise and a circumspect people: they took their
time, even the acceptable time of their repentance; which else had come too
late. So they which repented at the preaching of John, Matt. 3.
made speed to retire from their own bypath, and to turn into the ways of
God. As many as received fruitfully and effectually the grace which the Lord
did offer by the hands of Peter, Acts 3.
preaching the remission of sins; they also took the opportunity of that
selfsame hour, and so were saved. Romans 15.
All these things (as S. Paul witnesses) are written for our instruction: that
we might learn wisely to redeem the time, and to know the day of Gods most
gracious visitation.

15 Especially now; The most especial time to receive grace is when God
afflicts.
since we do not only hear the sound of his voice, but also feel the smart
of his correction. There is no hope that ever we will receive the grace of God:
if in the midst of our afflictions we refuse it. His case is desperate whom
adversity cannot cure: whom eternal death has so possessed and benumbed, that
the very sharpest medicines are unable to work upon him. Prou. 1.
Turn you therefore, says wisdom, at my correction. When men are heavy
laden with grief and sorrow, then are they fittest to call for, and to receive
refreshing. Examples hereof are almost infinite. After Joseph's brethren were
brought into comber and into fear of their lives, Genesis 42.
they remembered their fact committed against their brother; and it grieved them
much, which before had much contented them. Whilst men are at ease and have
rest in the flesh, grace is no grace, the promises of God cannot have their
effectual and powrefull operations, 2. Par. 33.
no not in the very elect of God. Look upon Manasses in his throne, and in
prison: upon the people of Israel, at home in peace, and abroad in banishment:
Psalm. 136.
upon Noah, David, Ezechias, all the Saints and servant of God in their
flourishing estate, and in their grievous troubles: and ye shall find, that
the gracious offers of God were never received woorthily in deed but in great
extremities. When a man is stricken with sorrow upon his bed, and the grief of
his bones is sore, Job. 33.
says Elihu in the book of Job; so that his life causes him to abhor
bread, and his soul dainty meat. If in such a case there be a messenger with
him, or an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his
righteousness, how that God will have mercy upon him, and will say; Deliver him
that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation: such
a message of grace no doubt will then be heartily accepted, or else be in vain
for ever. It is affliction that makes the kingdom of heaven to suffer
violence. When we are in misery, in trouble, in distress of body and mind,
then especially is the acceptable time, the^ is the high day of our salvation.
Ier. 31.
Thou did chastise me, says the Prophet Jeremy, and then I came to
understanding. So that the most especial time to show our selves worthy
receivers of the grace of God, is when his chastisements are upon us, and his
anger does afflict our souls. Wherefore most properly (beloved in the Lord) to
you it may be spoken; Receive not the grace of God in vain. This is the
acceptable time, this is the day of your salvation. Although the grace of God
have heretofore been offered, and unkindly refused; yet, now that the hand
of his heavy displeasure, now that the rod of his correction is laid upon
you: O receive it not now in so acceptable a time in vain!

The right way of worthy receiving grace is by hearty repentance.
is by hearty and unfeigned repentance to acknowledge that we have sinned in
perverting righteousness, and to amend that which we know and acknowledge to
be amiss. If we think to be received into his favor without this;
brethren, we deceive our selves. He is gracious; but to the penitent: and will
have mercy upon sinners; but upon sinners which forsake their sinnefulnesse.
It is true that he will heal whom he has spoiled; and whom he has wounded he
will build up; he will quicken the dead and raise up them that are thrown
down: yet so, if they say, Hos. 6.
Come, and let us return unto the Lord. The first effect therefore of grace in
the heart of man is unfeigned repentance. With the doctrine whereof we are
thoroughly enough acquainted, We have no need to be taught what the name does
signify: the nature, properties, and parts thereof are known. Only the
practice wants: whereunto we are so slow, and so hardly are drawn; that in
this one point we weary out all our teachers, about this one thing they wast,
they spend themselves. And in the end; we are most commonly as we were at the
first; like the Leopard, that changes not his skin. To bring men to
repentance, is such a work of weight, that God himself seems as it were
tired with laboring so long about it. As appears by those passionate and
grievous complaints recorded in holy scripture. I have spoken; they do not
hear: I have stricken, they are not grieved. How often would I have gathered
them as a hen her chickens under her wings; and they would not be gathered. O
Ephraim, Hos. 6.
what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? Yet neither
were they ignorant, and we do very well know, that there is no other medicine
save repentance only to heal the wounds of our souls: no other way to
restore our selves again to our fathers home, Luke 15.
but only, Father; I have sinned: no other mean to quench the wrathful
indignation which our sins have caused to burn and flame as an oven; but
only our tears. Though our sins be red as skarlet, or as fire; yet being
bathed with the water of our eyes, they are scowred and made as white as snow?
It is written of Marie (not of that virtuous Marie, but of the dissolute) that
she was Mulier peccatrix; Luke 7.
notorious for her light and lewd behavior. Yet by repenrance, as she died
unto sin; so the memory of sin being dead unto her, she lives still in the
glorious remembrance of that righteousness which penitent sinners obtain by
faith. She is honorably mentioned wheresoever the Gospel of Christ is heard:
all men speak of her tears; of her sins no one is mentioned or known. The
precious oil wherewith she was wont to anoint her self, that she might be
more pleasant to the senses of her lovers; she now powers out, and for love
sake bestows it upon her Savior. The eyes which were wont to cast wanton
looks upon the dissolute; did now gush out with water, and served as
conduites at the feet of Christ. The hair which before had been wrapped in
gold, had been colored, pleated, and bordered, laid out, and beset with
pearls; was now employed to a far other use; that the honor received from the
feet of Jesus, might put out the shame which before it had taken from the eyes
of lewd and amarous beholders. Having washed and dried, she could not satisfy
her self til she had also kissed her Saviors feet; whose mercy had now eased
her heart of that deadly sting, which the lips of wantons had imprinted and
left behind them. O blessed pattern of true contrition, how woorthily art thou
left for all posterity to talk of; to behold and to follow? Such conuerts show
plainly that they are worthy receivers, and that the grace of God has not
appeared unto them in vain. For they who in this fort deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts; will surely according to the blessed Apostles exhortation which
follows, give offense to none.

17 For although there must of necessity offenses rise: By walking without
offense.
yet, Woe be to him hy whom they rise. Why? Were not the Pharisees offended at
the scholars and disciples of Christ, for not fasting; for eating with unwashed
hands; for plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath day; and for such like
things of their own invention, toys of no importance? Nay did not the most
charitable deeds of Christ himself offend these peevish hypocrites? It is
true; they were offended with him and his: as at this day the Romish Pharisees
are offended with us and ours. But we must mark and observe, that we are
warned only not to give offense to any man. If men be offended with us, which
by us are not offended; such offenses being not given of us, but taken of them;
are not our faults, but their follies. Unto us therefore at this time S. Paul's
exhortation imports thus much: that since God has granted us favor in the
eyes of this people with whom we presently converse, it were a thing most
intolerable for us, with Jacobs children to commit such crimes, or give such
offenses as might make us odious and loathsome in their sight. The Gospel has
now gotten honor and renown by these our sufferings for it: let it not
hereafter be ill spoken of and slandered through our disordered conversation.
Of all others we had need to walk most warily. We are set as it were a city
upon a mountain, to be gazed at. Our conversation is marked of all men: and
diligent search made of it on every hand. Friends, enemies and strangers
observe our steps: and a little fault in us will be taken as a great offense.
Let the word of Christ dwell richely amongst you, with all wisdom; that ye
may be blameless and pure, as the sons of God, without rebuke; that we may
be as shining lights in the world, holding forth the word of life, that in
the day of Christ we may rejoice and be glad, as they who have not received the
grace of God in vain. Let us for so much as our heavenly father for the merits
of his son, and by the ministration of his spirit, does graciously offer and
exhibit unto us his manifold mercies and benefits, especially in his holy
word and sacraments; thankefully and woorthily receive the same: and namely in
this acceptable time, the only time appointed of God for us to receive, and
for him to offer grace: Finally let us show that his grace has taken root
and place in our fleshie, not fleshly hearts: in bringing forth the works of
the spirit, the fruit of true repentance, of sanctification and good life;
giving offense to no man, no not to those which are without, but walking
quietly, honestly and orderly in all things, that men seeing our blameless and
inoffensiue conversation may glorify God the giver of all goodness, and the
eternal father. To whom, with the Son, and the holy Ghost, one God of most
glorious majesty, be all honor and praise rendered in the Church for ever.
Amen.

The sixteenth Sermon. A Sermon preached at a marriage in Strausborough.
HEB. 13. 1 Marriage is honorable in all.
AS God made the world and all the creatures therein contained, Why God
blessed plants, beasts and men with power to increase them selves by
propagation.
to serve for the setting forth of his glory and great majesty: so likewise
by the forcible and mighty operation of his strength and power, he preserves
still the works of his hands; least if he should have only builded the goodly
frame of this world, and afterward suffered the same to decay; the praise of his
name should have lasted but a while, and reached but to a few; which now
passes through many generations, and continues to all eternity. For this he
provided, when having finished the creation of trees and herbs, and made them
both beautiful and good in their appointed seasons: he blessed them with
secret virtue, to multiply by bringing forth fruit and seed, each
according to his kind; that there might be a continuance and increase of things
so behooueful for lively creatures. Also that the lively and sensible creatures
themselves, the birds of the air, the beasts of the field, and fishes in the
sea, might yield in all ages the benefit which the children of men do reap by
them: he powered into them also the selfsame blessing of increase and
fruitfulness. And as unto these, so likewise unto man, the greatest in honor,
though in order the last of all his creatures; he gave the same power, to
spread out himself by propagation, and to replenish the face of the earth.

2 For the seemelier and better ordering whereof, M^ns offspring by marriage.
to the end that as God himself is most pure, and therefore hates all
uncleanness; so the actions of men, who in nature resemble him, might be
framed according to the pattern of his image: he prescribed a way, how man, as
beseems the excellency of his creation and nature; might, not after a
brutish and beastly manner, but in all honesty and cleanlines bring forth the
honorable fruit of his body, that so Gods creation and work might be continued
his kingdom enlarged, and his name by reason of the multitude much more
praised. And this mean or way appointed by God was matrimony: a state whereof
the chosen vessel of God writes this, as the judgment of the holy Ghost;
Marriage is honorable. Wherein for your better instruction and learning, my
purpose is to show you the reasons of the honor which it should have, and also
of the great disgrace which it has amongst men.

Marriage is honorable in respect of the author.
Secondly in regard of the causes thereof; Thirdly for the duties which are
required of the parties married* Touching the first, it appears in the
beginning of the book of Genesis, how after that God had perfectly
accomplished his creation, and had given the Lordeship over all living
creatures unto Adam; Genesis 2.
he said, It is not good that man be alone: let us make him an helper that may
be before him: let us make woman. Whereupon our Savior in the Gospel
infers; Matthew. 19.
That therefore which God has joined together, let no man separate: approouing
marriage to be the institution of God and a natural order, (proceeding I mean
from the God of nature) to be observed and used for ever. Neither did he
only confirm this law and ordinance of God in plain words and in his
teaching, but he also did honest and honor the same with his presence. John 2.
For being called to a marriage, he, his mother and kinsfolk gladly went, there
to feast with others, where it pleased him miraculously to increase their
cheer and withal their honor. For it is not nothing which this does add to
the holy and reverend estimation thereof, that the first miracle which Christ
wrought, was wrought at a marriage, and is so by the holy Ghost recorded. Now
besides this that almighty God himself ordained marriage, and that in Paradise
a most heavenly habitation, and that before the innocence was stained with
sin; besides this that Christ did allow and many ways approve the same, yea
and moreover vouchsafed to resemble his spiritual conjunction with his Church
unto this estate, we find that the Patriarchs, the Priests and Prophets, the
holiest men of God, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, and the rest of that blessed
company have chosen to live rather in marriage than otherwise; acknowledging
thereby the state of marriage to be undoubtedly no less allowable if not more
honorable than single life.

4 Concerning the second point, that is to say the honor Marriage is h^nourable
in respect of the causes for which it was ordained: as comfort, help, and
mutual society.
for which GOD did institute the state of wedlock, the scripture notes
especially three. The first is mutual society, help and comfort. And this
were a cause sufficient to esteem of marriage highly, if there were no other.
For God has said, It is not good that man be alone: Let us make him an
helper: and helper, and not an hinderer.

5 The second cause why matrimony was ordained, Gen 2.
and must be honored; is increase and propagation. Propagation.
For although that this may be; as we see it it is in lewd and shameless
persons too often, without this estate of marriage: yet this is so much against
the dignity of humane nature, that such broodes have been always basely
accounted of, by men which have had but the bare light of natural
understanding. Wherefore the blessed Apostle has said, 1 Timothy 5.
I will that the younger sort marie, and bring forth children: giving us
thereby to understand, that there can be no seemly propagation of mankind,
save only in marriage. Children begotten in the state of matrimony, are the
blessing of God; Psalm. 127.
and the fruit of the undefiled womb is a reward: as Solomon wisely
acknowledged in the Psalm. For a man to be honored with the name of a father,
to be renewed and continued in his posterity; if it be not a special blessing
of God, and a very exceeding great reward; why are men and women so desirous to
see the fruit of their bodies? 1. Sam. 1.
Why was Anna so exceeding in craving children at the hands of God? Why was
barrenness so grievous unto Sara? Luke 1.
Why did it seem reprocheful unto Elizabeth? Is it a small benefit that God
has raised out of the body of Abraham, so many Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets,
Judges and Kings; such a multitude not only of men of reputation on earth, but
also of blessed saints and citizens in heaven? If it were an honor unto
Abraham to be a father of many nations: surely marriage, which made him a
lawful and an honorable father, ought very honorably to be esteemed.

6 Another cause of honor given unto marriage, Remedy against concupiscence.
is for that it is a remedy against uncleanness, Let every man have his
wife, and every woman her husband, for the avoiding of fornication. Upon which
words of S. Paul Ambrose writes very aptly, 1 Cor. 7. Ambrose.
Qui abstine^t a licitis in illicita prolabuntur: They which forbear things
lawful to use, fall many times to use things which they should forbear. And
he brings in the Manichees for example, as we may bring in the Papists; and
namely that ponde of Rome adjoining to a Nunrie, wherein were found the heads
of seven thousand bastards. It is true that all have not need of this remedy,
because all are not subject to the danger and peril of this disease. But if
any man be subject to this disease, let him beware how he despise this
remedy. There be no doubt that have the gift of chastity by birth; and there
be that have made themselves chaste by endeavor: Matthew. 19.
but of all this men are not capable. As it is the gift of God; so it seems
to be a rare and not a common gift. Such as have it and so live sole, they are
more fit to labor in Gods Church; it must needs be granted: for they are
combred with fewer cares. But be these cares never so many and great: better it
is to marie than to burn; and to be burdened with ordinary and nest cares,
than with vnordinarie and dishonest carelessness to be destroyed. There are
many that deceive themselves, thinking a single and a chaste life to be all one.
To be pure in body and in spirit; this is chastity. He that sees a woman,
and in his heart has a lewd desire toward her, has defiled his heart, and
is in soul unchaste. If every man try himself according to this rule
exactly; peradventure he shall see a disease in himself that needs remedy.
Which if he neglect and so perish; whom may he blame? The medicine is commended
with a title of honor, that thereby we might be allured to use it. The danger
of not using of it if need require, is death, For harlots and adulterers the
Lord shall judge.

7 Thus much being spoken of the causes for which honor Marriage honorable in
respect of mutual duties between parties married. The duties of honor required
in the husband toward his wife Ephesians 5.
I will briefly speak of the duties of honor required between parties married.
How honorably a man should use his wife, S. Paul teaches plainly in many
places; but especially in his epistle to the Ephesians. Men: love your wives,
as Christ has loved his Church. In which place he instructs not only by
precept, but also by setting a pattern before our eyes to follow; and that is
Christ, the true spouse to his Church, the congregation of the faithful. The
husband ought to love his wife, even as Christ did his Church. But Christ
suffered death to redeem his Church. Even so the truly the husband if
necessity so required, to save his wife, should ieopard his own life. His
life is well spent in saving of her: and by loosing of her ill spared. Christ
purged and made his Church beautiful, void of spot or wrincle, that it might
resemble himself, as near as might be in purity. Even so the husband should
labor to reform his wife; to instruct and frame her to discretion, sobriety,
al matron-like virtues, and all godliness: A wise wife makes a happy husband
and in her goodness he shall find gladness. The husband is called ye head of his
wife, as Christ is of the congregation. When as the head espieth faults in the
members of the body; it does not study how to cut them off, and make
separation; but does muse upon a remedy, and labor to procure a medicine to
apply unto the hurt parts, to recover the body, and to cover the fault if he
cannot cure it. A good husband is a good head: his endeavor will be to cure his
diseased wife, and not to cut her off from him: especially to win her unto
Christ, if she wander out of the right way. Her faults will make him
sorrowful, not furious: and to pity her infirmities, without hating of her
person. Wisdom is required in the head, to rule and govern well the body
which is placed under it. He that braggeth and boasts that he is the head;
and yet wants the prudencie which the head should have; is unworthy to be
named that which indeed he is not. A wise husband must wink at many faults,
and bear with many of his wives infirmities. He that foolishly champeth upon
those griefs, which wisdom would have be swallowed; if he live in
continual misery, may say, that he only lives happily, which lives
wisely: no greater wisdom than to devour follies. Yet the husbands lenity
ought not to be such, as to nourish foolishness. Virtue is always discreet:
and in all things the mediocritie. S. Paul gives the reason why men should
give this honor to their wives: Ephesians. 5.
for he that loves his wife, loves himself, they two being one flesh. No
man ever hated his own flesh. Our own bodies we love, as Christ has loved
his Church. If a man's natural body were never so mangled, so sick, so
corrupted, so crooked and evil favored; he would yet love and feed it, and
cherishe it so much the more, by how much more it needed comfort. Even so
ought a man to nourish, comfort and help his wife: be she never so deformed
or out of fashion, whether it be by nature or by casualtie, in body or in
mind. We have Christ for our example. When the Church ran a whoring, and
committed loathsome idolatry, he did not forsake it; neither yet does our
gracious Lord forsake his beloved spouse, wonderfully spotted with sin; but
covers and forgets faults; and uses all means possible to reform and
make us fit for him. The like should appear in the husband to his wife; seeing
Paul sets forth Christ to be a pattern to follow. This is that which S.
Peter means, when he exhorts men to dwell with their wives according to
knowledge. 1. Pet. 3.
He would have husbands to rule according to wisdom, and not to play the
tyrants: not to be sour, cruel, rash and rageful: but to govern them
according to ye order of Gods word, in all sobriety gravity, gentleness, love
and discretion; providing for them by honest means, as for themselves. For if
he that provides not for his family, be worse than an infidel: there is
none so bad as he that is careless for his wife. No infidel neglects his
own body. And as S. Paul in the place above mentioned, so S. Peter in this
which was last alleged, shows reasons why the husband should give this
honor to the wife.

8 Give honor unto her, Reason why the wife should be honored of her husband.
velut infirmiori, as to the weaker. This may seem rather to be a cause to
contemn, than to honor. For such is the use. The rich despise the poor; the
learned, the ignorant; the strong, the weak. But this use is wicked. Has not
God chosen the weak of this world to overcome the strong, the foolish to
confound the wise? Are not the ignorant as well as the learned Gods? Have the
rich one foot more of possessions in heaven than have the poor? Despise not
therefore the weaker creatures, least thou dishonor the creator of them. But
seeing that man and wife are members of one body, they especially ought to
bear one with another infirmities; to cover, to dissemble and to forgive each
of them others weakness. Yea the viler the members of our bodies seem to
be, the more careful we are to cover and to honor them, for so S. Paul
speaks. In like manner, the more weak the woman is; the more diligent should
her husband be to give her this honor, to cover her infirmity, and not to
broache it abroad. For in dishonouring her, he dishonesteth his own body.
We easily forgive children when they offend by reason of their age. The want
of discretion is for them excuse sufficient. So a man ought to consider the
infirmity of his wife, and to bear with her for it. The second cause of
honoring her, is for that God does give her honor. God makes her partaker
with thee of his spiritual graces, and fellow heir of everlasting life.
Dishonor thou not therefore her on earth, whom God has honored with a place
in heaven. The third cause why the wife should be well esteemed of, is for
unities sake. For contempt does breed contention, and contention is an
hinderance to devotion. Honor your wives therefore, Ne preces vestrae
interrumpantur, that your prayers through strife be not interrupted and broken
off. Thus much for the duty of the husband.

9 Touching the duties of honor which the wife does owe to the husband;
Duties of honor required in the wife.
we find in the beginning of the book of Genesis, that because of her
transgression (for Eve seduced Adam; not Adam Eve:) God gave her a law of
subjection to her husband: that she might ever after be better directed by him,
than he had been at that time by her. Genesis 3.
Sub viri potestate eris, and ipse dominabitur tui. S. Paul also in his Epistle
to the Ephesians and Colossians, puts wives in remembrance of this
subjection. Wives be subject to your own husbands, Ephesians. 5.
as to the Lord: because the man is the head of the wife; as Christ is the
head of the Church. And therefore as the Church is in subjection to Christ: so
ought wives to be in subjection to their husbands, What should we seek more
reasons? this one is sufficient. God has set the husband over the wife in
authority: and therefore she ought willingly and dutifully to obey him, else
she disobeyeth that God, who created woman for man's sake, and has appointed
man to be woman's governor. Peter also sets forth this obedience, and
brings Sara for an example. 1. Pet. 3.
Wives be obedient to your husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him
Sir* whose daughters ye are made in well doing. Yea we are taught that wives
should be of so good behavior, and of such modest conversation; that by their
chaste and mild life, and the sweetness of their godly manners, they might
win their evil husbands unto God; and of Atheists make Christians. S. Paul in
his Epistle to Titus also teaches a wife her duty: Tit. 2.
that is, that she go apparelled as becomes holiness; that she be no
quareller, or false accuser; but study to be sober, to love her husband, to
love her children, to be discreet chaste, abiding at home, good and obedient to
her husband. Obey in all things, says S. Paul; even as it becomes you in the
Lord. Col. 2.
So that except it be against Gods word, the wife ought in all things to obey
her husband. It is the wives duty, as Theophilact well teaches to regard
those things that be within the house, not lauishingly to wast or spoil their
goods; but to spare with discretion, by such frugalitie as is convenient; to
see things safe and set in good order. God has appointed her to be an helper,
not an hinderer. If she cannot get, yet let her save. As he is to follow his
affairs abroad: so she is to ease him to care and cost at home. Let her be
milde-worded and milde-manered. For, Melius est habitare in angulo domus, Prou.
21.
quam cum muliere litigiosa. It is better to dwell in the corner of an house,
than with a contentious woman. An honest and a modest woman is an honor to her
husband, but the dissolute wife and indiscreet is a death. She may not be a
gadder abroad, a tatler, or a busy body; but sober, quiet and demure; not an
open teacher, but ready to learn of her husband at home; obedient in all
lawful things, taking example of Sara and giving example to the younger women
of well demeaning themselves. Thus the man and wife joining themselves together
in true love, indeuouring to live in the fear of God, and dutifully behauing
themselves the one toward the other, either of them bearing wisely the others
infirmities, doubtless they shall reap joy and comfort by their marriage,
they shall find this their estate which is honorable in all, happy and
profitable unto them.

10 Now that we see the honor which is due unto marriage in respect of the
author, causes and duties thereunto belonging, Marriage dishonored by heretics
that hold it not to be of God.
It is, says one, a Law of matrimony not to iterate matrimony. A Law. But
whose Law? Sure we are that in the book of the Law of God there is no such
law. Again, there were that approved wedlock, yea though it were iterated,
but if priests did marie they held them no better than unclean persons.
Finally there are that say marriage is if not honorable, yet tolerable and that
in priests, but so, if they enter into priesthood being once married, not into
marriage being once priested. Against these howesoeuer in their sole and single
life they pretend great purity and perfection as it were of Angels (although
their glory most commonly has been their shame, and the virginity of most
of them has been whoredom and adultery) it suffices us that S. Paul does
term their lessons the doctrine of devils; and that the godly Patriarchs and
Prophets whom I named before, living in the state of marriage were familiar with
God, and most dear in his undefiled sight. In so much that by S. Augustine
speaking of this matter, Abraham is compared with John Baptist for his
holiness, and by Chrysostom Moses with Elias.

11 This state therefore, Marriage dishonored by them that seek it: and not in
him whom they acknowledge to be author of it.
whatsoever heretics have taught to the contrary, being in consideration of
the first ordeiner thereof honorable, we ought in no wise unadvisedly, lightly
or wantonly to take in hand a matter of such weight and of so grave importance,
least we dishonor it by our disordered affections as heretics by false
persuasions have done. In entering therefore into marriage the first caution is
that which S. Paul has to the Corinthians, whom he teaches how their widows
should bestow themselves. For although the rule be in particularitie applied
to them, yet it serves not for them alone, but for all, the condition of all
being herein like to theirs. Whether it be a widow therefore that bestows
her self, or a virgin which is bestowed in marriage, 1 Cor. 7.
the thing she does is lawful, Only in the Lord.

12 They do not this in the Lord that marie either whom they should not,
Marriage between parties too nearly linked by nature.
or as they should not. Who^ they should not as persons either naturally or
spiritually unfit to join in marriage. Of persons unfit to be yoked in wedlock
by reason of ye natural bonds wherewith they are already coupled, Leuit. 18.
ye law has plainly said, None shall come near to any of the kindred of his
flesh. The unruly desires of men which presume to go further in these cases
than the shamefastnes of natural honesty does permit, must be restrained and
repressed. Mark 6.
For this cause John the Baptist told Herod, It is not lawful that thou
should have thy brothers wife. For this cause S. Paul dealt so sharply and
severely in the cause of that lewd Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5.
with whose foul and unnatural fault the whole Church of Corinth was much
disgraced.

13 In marriage therefore there ought to be a reverend regard of nature,
Marriage without care of religion.
that this state be not dishonored by unseemly copulation, as in like sort it
is by the ungodly joining of the faithful with unbelievers. Of this thing
holy Abraham in providing a wife for his son, had as we see an especial care.
For the eldest and therefore by likelyhoode the discreetest servant of his
house, yea and the trustiest as it seems, (for he had rule over al which
Abraham did possess) was not permitted to deal in this matter without taking
a corporal oath before hand. I will make thee swear, says Abraham, Genesis 24.
by the Lord God of heaven and God of the earth, that thou shall not take a
wife unto my son of the daughters of the Cananites amongst whom I dwell.
Abraham would not link his son with the wicked. He remembered what had come
of such marriages in the age before him, Genesis 6.
when the sons of God took them wives of the daughters of men only for
their beauty, without regard of religion or honesty. Their destruction was a
lesson unto him, he avoided their sin by fearing their punishment. GOD gave
his people express charge concerning this, that they should beware in joining
marriage with Amorites and Cananites, the indwellers of that profane Country,
not only forbidding this kind of marriage, but also showing the reason why his
people should forbear it, least idolatrous wives should make their husbands
also to become idolators, least they make thy sons go a whoring after their
gods. Exodus 34.
Whereof we have a notable example in Solomon, 1. Reg 11.
whose pitiful fall being so wise a prince to so horrible impiety, ought to
be admonition sufficient unto us, to submit our wisdom to the wisdom of the
almighty, and our desires to his commandment. But had Solomon never been,
or had his fall been vnrecorded, our own times may teach us what fruits
have come of such ungodly conjunctions. Man's nature is corrupt and frail, he
runs headlong into wickedness, but to righteousness must be drawn by God,
and sooner can the evil pervert the good than the good persuade the evil.
This kind of marriage therefore seemed so wicked unto Esdras, 1. Esd. 14.
that he caused the Israelites after their return out of captivity, to put
away their strange not women only, but wives which they had taken to themselves
in Babylon. And shall Christians do well in receiving such into marriage, as
Jews being married unto, did well to put from them?

14 But the common sort of men in making their matches this way have chiefly
two outward untoward respects, The cause of irreligious marriage is the
ouergreat respecting of beauty or wealth.
regarding nothing in their choice except it be either beauty or money. The
sons of God of old bewitched with the beauty of the daughters of men,
procured the general flood to ouerflowe them all, and to wash the defiled
world. Samson took one of the daughters of the Philistims to wife, Iud. 14.
because she pleased his eye: but what came of it? It cost him a polling,
wherein stood his strength, and it lost him both his eyes which before were
ravished in the beauty of that deceitful woman. Others there are yet of a
baser note whose only care is to match themselves wealthily. Their question is
with what money, not with what honesty the parties whom they seek are
endowed; whether they be rich, not whether they be godly; what lands they
have on earth, not what possessions are laid up in heaven for them. Such as
marie for money, as the money wastes, so their love wears, neither is there
any love or friendship constant, save only that which is grounded on constant
causes, as virtue and godliness, whereof only neither time nor man can spoil
us. There was a rich man in Athens which had a daughter to marie, and he asked
counsel of Themistocles how to bestow her, showing him that there was a
very honest man that would gladly have her, but he was poor; and there was a
rich man which had also desired her, but he was not honest. Themistocles
answered, that if he were to choose, he would prefer monilesse men before
masterlesse money. It is true that S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.
Godliness is great gain. Whether it be man or woman that is godly, they be
rich, and as Solomon says, He that finds a good wife, Prou. 18.
finds a good and a precious thing, the value of gold is not to be matched
with her. In marriage therefore it behooves us to be careful, that they whom
we choose be of the household of God, professing one true religion with us, the
disparagement wherein is the cause of all dissension, true friendeship being a
loving consent, as in all things so chiefly in Gods true service.

15 But this is not enough. For although the parties married be such as the law
of the Lord allows to come together, yet can it not be said that they marie
in the Lord, Marriage without consent of pare^^es or such as are in stead of
Parents.
except they also marie in such sort as the law prescribes. For marriage may
be as much dishonored by the one as by the other. For orderly entering into the
state of matrimony, it is required that they which be under the tuition and
government of others have the full consent of their parents, tutors, or such as
have rule over them to direct and guide them. Genesis 24.
Abraham provided a wife for his son Isaak; Isaak sent Jacob into Mesopotamia
to his uncle Laban, and there commanded him to take a wife, and he did so. In
the law of Moses children are commanded to honor their parents. Exodus 20.
And what honor is given unto parents, if in this chief case being the
weightiest one of them that can happen in all their life, their advise,
wisdom, authority and commandment be contemned? Exodus 22.
The law says, If a man find a maid that is not betrothed, and take her and
know her, then the man that knew her shall give unto the father of the virgin
fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife. What? Although the parents
be against it? No. For, If her father refuse to give her to him, Number. 30.
he shall pay the money and not marie her. Again the law says, Whosoever
voweth a vow unto the Lord, or swears an oath to bind himself by a bond,
he shall not break his promise, but shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth. Nevertheless if a woman vow a vow unto the
Lord, and bind her self by a bond being in her fathers house, in the time of
her youth, and her father disallowe her, the same day that he hears all her
vows and bonds wherewith she has bound her self, they shall not be of
value, and the Lord will forgive her, because her father disallowed her. If
promises made to GOD without consent of parents are of no effect, can promises
made to men be effectual where the parents consent is not had? Children, says
the Apostle, Col. 3.
obey your parents in all things. In all things? and not in this the greatest
of all? When S. Augustine was required to help to make a marriage in the
behalf of a young man, and the other party was named, Aug. ep. 133.
he answered, I like that match well, Sed matter adolescentulae non adest,
cuius voluntatem, vt nosti, requirere debemus, but the mother of the young
damsel is not present, whose good will (as you know well enough) we must
ask. And as the parents or tutors consent is to be had in all good and
lawful marriages, so it is against the duty of good parents either to keep
their children longer unmarried than in convenient, or thorough an ouergreat
desire of enriching them (which is the common disease) to marie them against
their liking. Such marriages seldom or never prove well, but are for the most
part the cause of great sin and much misery. There can be no lawful and
commendable match where there wants full consent and agreement of the parties
whom it most concerns. Rebecca was asked whether she would go with Abraham's
servant and be married unto Isaak or no. Genesis 24.
Her parents did neither keep her back from marriage when she was fit for it,
nor conclude it til her own mind were known. Such then as marie not in the
fear of God, making a religious and a godly choice; having the full consent
of their parents or tutors, doubtless God is no author of their marriage, it is
not he that coupleth and joins them together, their estate is base and not
honorable in his sight.

16 Touching the causes for which God appointed marriage, Dishonor done to
marriage in respect of the first of those causes for which God appointed it.
we have heard that the first is mutual help and comfort. For the man is a
cover of defense unto his wife, and the woman a pillar of rest unto her
husband. As a body without a head, so is a woman that has no husband. And,
As where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled, so he that has no
wife, wandereth to and fro mourning. This is the judgment of the wise. But the
mouths of fools are always open to aggrauate the incombraunces, Eccle. 36.
troubles and sorrows which the married are wont to sustain in the flesh,
never remembering the helps and comfortes which notwithstanding men religiously
yoked in the Lord, must needs acknowledge far to exceed all those grieuaunces
both in number and measure. If any find it otherwise, ^ith the fault is not in
marriage which was instituted for our help, but in the married who make it a
hinderance to themselves by their own folly, let the men be blamed, let the
thing be honored. The second


17 But as in this case it fares, so does it also in the next. A virtuous
son is his mothers glory, they that see him count the womb that bare him
blessed. Luc. 11.
Yea, though his father die yet is he as if he were not dead, Eccle. 30.
because he leaves one behind him like him. In his life he saw him and had
joy in him, and was not sorry in his death, neither was he ashamed before his
enemies. Thus when our children do well and prosper, Genesis 34*
marriage is honored. But are they dissolute and disobedient? Do they trouble
us as Simeon and Levy did their father? Do they make us abhorred amongst the
inhabitants of the land? By and by we grudge, and think irreverently in our
hearts, Behold this is the fruit of marriage. So that which gives honor to
the birth of man receives dishonor by his lewd behavior. The third.


18 To come to the last, The Physician must be honored because God created him
for necessity. In like sort marriage which God has given as a remedy and not
only as a mean unto propagation. If therefore we need it and do not use it,
how do we honor it? S. Paul was so careful in this respect that even where
he gives the highest commendation to single life, 1. Cor. 7.
there he adds, This I speak for your commodity, not to tangle you in a
snare, but that ye follow the thing which is honest. And again, He that has
decreed in his heart to keep his virgin does well, yet so, if he stand firm
in his heart that he has no need, but has power over his own will.
Otherwise were it not better to use an honorable remedy, than to nourish and
increase an incurable sore? Let us take heed how we feed the flesh in her
unlawful desires. For it cannot be in vain that God should speak so directly
and as it were so particularly unto every one that lewdely defiles and
prophaneth the temple of the holy spirit, Perdet te Deus, Thee God shall
destroy. This the enemy knows, and therefore he laboreth so diligently by
all means to keep his sore ever festering within it self. For which cause it
is strange to consider how he has dulled the hearts of many by settling a strong
persuasion in them, that although they fry in the heat of their vile
affections, yet their outward continency of body is of it self meritorious
before God, their single life of it self acceptable and holy. What a puddle
of uncleanness, what a sink of filth, what ouglie abominations have grown
in the world under this pretense to the great displeasure of almighty God*
The dishonor of marriage, the slander and shame of Christian profession,
Marriage in respect of the duties thereunto belonging dishonored for want of
discretion in married folks.
the enlarging of the kingdom of sin and darkness, the sending of souls
innumerable down to hell, time will not suffer me to discourse.

19 I will therefore add somewhat concerning the disgrace which comes unto
marriage, in regard of the duties thereunto belonging, and so end. The company
and fellowship of married folks, if discreetely, lovingly and religiously they
perform those needful duties each unto other which God requires at the
hands of both, then no doubt their estate is blessed of the Lord and deserves
to be honored amongst men. But if there want discretion in them, we see what
contentions, strifes and heart-burnings are wont to grow betweehe couples, to
the great disquieting of their own minds inwardly, and, if things do
chance to break out as such flames commonly do, to the discrediting also of
their persons openly in the world. How unsweet and unpleasant such a life
is, the wise man shows, by comparing a troublesome and contentious wife to a
continual dropping: as contrariwise, If there be in her tongue gentleness,
meekness and wholesome talk, Pro. 19.
then is not her husband like other men.

20 Let hearty love and affection be lacking between them: and what enemy
can devise so great a torment against them as they exercise continually upon
themselves? Want of hearty affection.
Do they not find that daily whereof Job complains as of a thing which
touched him nearer to the quick than any other cross, though he suffered both
many and heavy crosses besides. My breath, says he, was strange unto my wife,
though I prayed her for the childrens sake of mine own body.

21 Take away religion: let their hearts be void of the fear of God: Want of
religion and the fear of God.
and what sin is there so heinous, what iniquity so huge whereunto they are
not always in danger one to be persuaded by the other? When Satan
despaireth, of al other means he uses this as the surest to speed in
accomplishing wicked purposes. He found no such instrument as Iesabel to make
Achabwallowe in blood, as idolatrous women to bewitche Solomon, as the
daughters of Moab to steal away the hearts of the children of Israel. It is
godliness and religion, conscience and fear of sin that keeps them within
the limits of their duty. Without this they are not only careless of that
comely shamefastness and sober temperaunce which beseems the honesty of
their estate, but exceeding the bounds of all modesty, they ouerflowe and
break out even into extreme lasciviousness with others. Hereby the
honorable ordinance of God is loathed and condemned of loose wantons as a
thing which brings infinite miseries with it, a thing wherein there is nothing
but grief, no quietness of heart, no repose of mind. Thus I have showed you
the author of marriage God himself, the causes of marriage, mutual comfort and
help, procreation, and avoiding of uncleanness; the duties that each party
linked in marriage does owe unto other; the honor which marriage has by every
of these; and in these the ground from whence discredit and dishonor grows
unto marriage. God grant that whether we be called to this honorable estate
of marriage, or have received the gift to live otherwise, we may keep both our
souls and bodies unstained, and in all things walk as becomes Saints that
have betrothed themselves unto Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, etc.

The seventeenth Sermon. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross at his first coming
to the Bishopric of London.
JOHN 6. 1 After these things, Jesus went his way over the sea of Galile of
Tiberias.

2 And a great multitude followed him because they saw his miracles which he
did on them that were diseased, etc.


OUR Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the Archpastor and great shepherd of our
souls, The weightinesse of a Bishoply charge especi^lly over a great and a
wise people,
casting his eyes toward the City of Jerusalem bewailed the lamentable estate
thereof, and that with tears. The like effect, although proceeding from a
cause unlike, I find in my self, beholding this Jerusalem of ours, this
famous City: the greatness whereof does add not a little to that exceeding
grief of mind which the deep consideration of so weighty a thing musts
needs work. This office requires a perfect man to teach, govern and guide
this learned and wise people, this great and large Diocese does wish for one
furnished as Samuel, or rather as Solomon with all graces and gifts of
learning, policy, wisdom and knowledge of things belonging both to God and
men. This comberous charge has made many a good and godly man to withdraw
himself to shrink back, utterly to refuse the like place and calling. For
although it be a faithful saying, If a man desire a Bishops office, 2. Tim. 3.
he desires a good work: yet such are the difficulties, so many are the
perils whereunto they are subject which labor in it, that the richest in all
spiritual graces, the most plentifully endued with rare and excellent gifts of
God might have good cause to ^eare least (the frailty of flesh and blood being
so great) a burden so heavy should make them faint.

2. It is no easy matter to til the Lords ground, The (...) of (...) the
office of a Bishop, in respect of the pains in teaching.
to weed his field to bring in his harvest, to trim his vineyard, to feed
his flock, to build his house, to watch over his city, to preach his
word, to distribute his sacraments, to execute his discipline, to govern his
Church, to perform so many parts as are required in him by whom this great
and high charge is undertaken. Where should one find a servant of that
fidelity and wisdom which the cure of souls does ask? a servant that
knows how to minister seasonably unto every soul; to feed infantes,
nouices, little ones with rudiments of Christianity as with milk, them of
better growth with stronger meat; to confirm me^ established in the truth,
and reclaim them that slide from it; to wound and bruise the hearts of the
obstinate who bend themselves wilfully against God, and to comfort such as
have heau^e hearts, troubled consciences by reason of sin?

3 Neither is the pastor pressed only with these burdens which are peculiar
and proper to himself, Living.
but even those which are common to others with him are also, heavier unto him
than others. To lead a godly and a righteous life belongs not to the pastor
alone but unto all. Yet in this which is common unto all, there is more laid
upon him than any. Others must be sober, he a mirror of sobriety; they
virtuous and honest, he such a pattern of virtue and honesty, that he may say
with S. Paul, Be ye followers of us, walk as ye have us for an example. S.
Chrysostom compares the pastor unto one that wrastleth naked. If there be
any deformity at all in the body of a naked man, it is soon espied and
faulted. We are naked to the eyes of the whole world; no one in the world which
has not more eyes than one; no eye which is not quick and sharp sighted to
epsy a blemish; no blemish be it never so great in others half so soon found
or half so much pointed at as the least and lightest thing awry in us, at
whose hands notwithstanding it is required to walk unreprovable.

4. Now if unto these so many and so weighty considerations, Studying*
to this endless care and thought which a good sheepeheard takes day and
night in attending both to himself that he may walk without blame, and to
his flock that it may conveniently be governed, we adioyne those continual
labors of studying, meditating, reading and writing, whereunto the depth of
the mysteries of God do necessarily enforce him that must lay them open before
others (which if he do not a woe inevitable hangs over him; if he do, the
travel of doing it is such that the Apostle himself cries out, Who is
sufficient for these things?) All this being duly and thoroughly weyed, we may
well conclude that he which desires the room of a Bishop in the Church,
desires as a good, so also a hard, and undoubtedly a very troublesome office.

5. Secondly it is an office full of peril and danger. The peril both o^
^^schargi^g an^ not (...).
For if we preach things pleasant unto men, we discharge not the duty of
the servant of God; if we preach his truth, we are hated as their deadly
enemies to whom we preach: For not speaking against sin the Lord
threateneth death, If thou do not speak to admonish the wicked of his
wicked way, Ez^ch. ^.
his blood will I require at thine hand; and for speaking against sin Elias
was persecuted, Zacharias stoned, Esaias cut in pieces, Ieremias cast into a
dungeon, John Baptist, Stephen, Paul, James, Peter, Iustine, Athanasius,
Cyprian, Polycarp, of our own Bishops and teachers not a few, in other
nations huge multitudes both heretofore and of late in most cruel and savage
manner tormented, with all extremity that might be devised to increase the
bitterness of their death.

6 Many ancient Prophets and worthy Fathers of the primitive Church casting
these accounts in their minds, In these c^nsid^^ations good me^ have rather
wished to avoid than labored to get the office of a Bishop.
have shunned and labored by what means they could to avoid this office.
Doubtless man's flesh is frail, we are all weak and full of infirmity. If
this office require a strong man to bear the burden of so great a travel,
certainly it is altogether unfitly cast upon me. I would have wished rather
rest for this my wearysh body full of diseases, and as the Prophet speaks,
almost worn away like a clowte. If this office in respect of the hardness
thereof, of the great dangers incident into it, and in consideration of man's
unableness to perform it, have made so many so loath to enter upon a charge
of such difficulty and danger before God and the world, what may I then
think of my self? From the bottom of my heart I confess with S. Paul,
Minimus sum, I am the least of the Apostles, not worthy to be called an
Apostle. Wherefore as Moses was contented to take upon him the charge and
keeping of a few sheep in Madian, but being called to guide the great and
mighty people of Israel; answered, Mitte quem missurus es, Send whom thou will send: So although considering the great want of laborers in the Church of
Christ, I were contented to undertake the care and charge of a small flock: yet
being called to this great, this wise and rich people, remembering my
unfitness thereunto, I saw no answer more convenient for me than that of
Moses before mentioned. But God has his secret and unsearchable working, and
I am as clay in the potters hand. Si passeres non cadunt in terram absque
prouidentia diuina, Cyprian.
fortuito fient Episcopi? If sparrowes fall not on the ground without the
providence of the almighty, are Bishops made at all adventure, says S.
Cyprian? Here I see God has placed me by the hand of his chief minister,
with the advice of her wise and honorable counselors, and the choice of them
to whom it apperteineth, not without your great contentation and liking, as I
am given to understand. I have therefore submitted my self and taken upon me
this heavy yoke (as the searcher of all secrets will bear me record)
unwillingly and willingly. In respect of my many imperfections, my unfitness
to execute this great and weighty office in such sort as it ought to be
performed, I receive it unwillingly: but in regard of the calling which I am
persuaded proceeds from the determination of almighty God, I willingly
submit my self hereunto. It is you, it is you dearly beloved that have drawn
me hither. Her Majesty could spy nothing in me worthy of this room, but
your too much and on my part altogether undeserved liking. The Lord be
merciful unto me and grant me his grace, that in some measure I may
answer your expectation.

7 And now to the matter which I have chosen to speak of at this present. The
occasions whereupon Christ forsook Jerusalem, and went beyond the sea of
Galilee,
Wherein it shall not be a thing unnecessary for your better understanding
somewhat to consider of the circumstances and occasions wherepon the words
which I have red do depend. John 5.
Christ having cured a poor sick man which had been eight and thirty years
diseased, whom he found lying by the pond of Bethsaida, desirous of remedy,
but lacking one to help him into the water where it was to be had, the blind
Jews because this was done upon the Sabbath day, found themselves much
grieved, and thereupon persecuted Jesus: who after an Apology made in defense
of that holy action, perceiving their malice to be increased thereby rather
than abated, left them and went beyond the sea of Galilee. Howbeit the
multitude left not him, but because they had seen the signs and woonders
which he wrought, miraculously recovering the sick and restoring them to
perfect health, therefore they flocked after him in great troops. When Jesus
therefore had lifted up his eyes, and saw that a very great multitude came
unto him, he says to Philip, Whence shall we buie bread that these may eat?

8 The first reason therefore why Christ forsook Jerusalem and went beyond the
sea of Galilee, To avoid the hands of the wicked.
was to the end he might convey himself from the tyranny and persecution of
the wicked. Matthew. 14.
So we read in the Gospel according to S. Matthew, that hearing how his
forerunner was beheaded, he went aside, took boat, and retired into a
solitary place apart. Whereby we are given to understand, that if our lives
be particularly sought, we may lawfully flee from the cruel and bloody hands
of our persecutors. Christ foretelling his Disciples of the grievous and heavy
entertainment which they should find at the hands of the world, gives them
this lesson, Beware of men, and withal this license, When they shall persecute
you in this City, Matthew. ^0.
fly into an other. Herein I need not much to persuade, frail and fearful
flesh is ever ready to fly peril. But what scripture those wen can allege
for themselves that fly not for the Gospel but from the Gospel, that fly
before they be persecuted or their blood sought as yet I cannot learn. Belike
they fear least they should be repayed with their own measure. No, our
Gospel is a doctrine of mercy and not of malice; they which syncerely profess
it are full of clemency, and altogether ruled by piety; our Church consists
of mild sheep and not of cruel woolues; the popish Church is the wooluish and
bloody Church; we seek reformation and not destruction, knowing that
Christian hearts are to be persuaded by the Scriptures and not by fire and
faggot to be enforced. Yet do I not mean by this speech but that the
obstinate, the resisters and disturbers of religion, the false prophets and
deceivers of the people may be lawfully cut off: the sword may lawfully be
drawn against such as are manifest traitors unto the truth and to the state.
But this is not the matter whereof they stand in fear. It is not outward
danger but inward terror for which they fly. Prou. 28.
Fugit impius nemine persequente, the wicked man flies when no man pursues
him, he trembles where nothing is to be feared, the wagging of a leaf does
make him shake because his heart is evil.

9 Another cause why Christ went aside into the wilderness, To take some rest.
may seem to have been a desire of taking some rest after the great and
manifold travels that he and his Disciples had sustained, as appears by the
words which he spoke to his disciples, Come apart into the wilderness and
rest a while. Mark 6.
This lesson is gladly learned and too much practiced. Requiescite pleases
every man. The truth is that the body and mind of man must after labor be
refreshed with rest. But he which labors not is altogether as unworthy to
rest as to eat. Again such as will take rest and ease after labors, must
learn of Christ as well to measure their ease as their pains. He permits
his Disciples to take their rest: but he limiteth and restrains his
permission saying, Rest a while. For by too much rest men are not made the more
fit but the less willing to take pain. There is no one fault from which the
wise man does so much endeavor to withdraw men as from sloth. For this cause
he puts us so often in mind of the great blessings which God does heap
upon the painful man. Prou. 28.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule. He that tilleth his land shall he
satisfied with bread, etc. Again indeuouring to set out the lively pattern of
a perfect woman, such a one as can hardly be found amongst a thousand, he
notes this as a chief and principal virtue in her, Prou 31.
She labors cheerfully, her candle goes not out, she ouerseeth the ways
of her household and eats not the bread of idleness. As for the slothful he
did not only hate them himself, but labored by all means to make them
odious: sometime by setting their forlorn estate before men's eyes, Prou. 26.
I passed by the field of the slothful and by the vineyard of the man
destitute of understanding, and lo it was all grown over with thorns, and
nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken
down; sometimes by showing their excuses and shifts to avoid labor, The
slothful man says, A L^on is without, I shall be slain in the streets;
sometimes by describing their lasie gestures, As the door turns upon his
hinges, so does the slothful man upon his bed, he hides his hand in his
bosom and it grieueth him to put it to his own mouth; sometimes by deriding
their unwillingness to take their leave of their rest, Prou. 24.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands. And what is
the end? Poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the way, and necessity
like an armed man. Wherefore though weariness, though labor and travel do
cause thee to desire necessary rest, yet beware that the sweetness of rest do
not cause thee to think that labor is unnecessary. Rest, but rest a little.

10 The last cause that I gather of Christ's going into the wilderness, To
avoid the feast of Easter.
was as it may be coniectured to avoid the feast of Easter at Jerusalem. For
so the Evangelist speaks, Easter a festival day of the Jews was now at
hand. It seems strange that Christ the example of all good order and
behavior should fly from this solemn feast of Easter which he himself by
his Prophet Moses had straightly commanded to be observed and kept. You must
therefore consider that the Jews neglected the commandment of God, and in
stead thereof set up their own traditions, as S. Paul records, so that the
temple was now become a den of thieves. Christ therefore avoided too much
fellowship with this wicked generation. 2. Cor. 6.
For what society has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion
has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? what part
has the believer with the infidel? what agreement has the temple of God with
idols. In this we ought all to follow Christ, all to fly as he did from the
place where the service of God is openly profaned, and his name intolerably
blasphemed. Depart, depart, go out from thence. Esaias 52.
Choose rather to suffer want in the wilderness with Christ than to enjoy the
pleasures of the world with an evil conscience, to be partakers of the word of
life in a desert, than to reign where the adversary of Christ and
Christianity bears sway. God be praised for ever, in our Churches of England
to our great comfort, God is served even in such sort as him self by his holy
word has prescribed. So that no miscontented person can allege any reason
sufficient why to withdraw him self from our assemblies. Our Church-praiers
are the Psalms, our lessons the scriptures, our sacraments according to
Christ's institution. Which thing not many years sithence I alleging unto one
of no small account now in Louain, his answer was, I must confess that is
good which you have in your Churches, but the truth is you have not enough.
Indeed we have less in their eye than enough. But if we weie things
according unto that rule, What soever I command you take heed you do it;
Deuteronomy 12.
thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought there from: then can it not be
denied but that our little is sufficient, and their more is too much.

11 As these considerations drove Christ into the wilderness, Occasions which
moved the multitude to follow Christ.
so the Evangelist sets forth some motives which caused so great a
multitude to follow him. Some were drawn with the strangeness of those
things which he wrought and taught amongst them. Novelties.
To whom in these our days we may compare them which haunt sermons for no
other end, but either vainly to hearken for news, or curiously to note what
order and eloquence they may find in the preacher, or maliciously to take
hold of things spoken, when they may by froward construction be drawn to an
offensive meaning. These labor to their own loss, they are unprofitable
followers.

12 Others followed Christ for bread. Hunger.
Such followers our times have brought out to many. So long as the Gospel can
feed, cherish and maintain them, they are willing and glad to be professors
of it: but when persecution comes they shrink. A great sort of halting and
dissembling ministers do now occupy rooms in the Church, which in heart hate
the Gospel, yet for bread sake they are contented to go in the same rank
with the followers of Christ Jesus. But he knows their secret cogitations and
will one day make them known unto others what they are.

13 Sundry there were which followed for a desire which they had of bodily
health. Health.
For Christ went about healing every malady, and every infirmity in the
people. Matthew. 4.
We see by daily experience that the body is more cared for than the soul,
the flesh than the spirit, the carcass than the mind. If the body be
diseased, we seek physic and are willing to pay well for it; to preserve
the body from grief and sickness who is not careful? but where is he that
studieth how to avoid the diseases of the soul, that mortifieth the noisome
desires of the flesh, that keeps his heart in awe and subjection, that
dieteth himself according to the rules which that blessed Physician has
prescribed? Chrysostom finds great fault with parents in this behalf, who
if their children fall sick in body, weep and lament, but if they be never
so grievously vexed and tormented with sin, they make light or no account of
it. These men love the bodies of their children as it seems better than their
souls. So this frail carcass this body of claie is much made of. To procure
things good and comfortable for it, we can be content to travel sea and land,
to be at any cost, to endure any pains. If health may be had, though it be in
a wilderness it will be sought.

14 The last and best sort of followers were such as followed Christ to hear
his word. The word of life.
This is that travel that chiefly is required of a Christian. Ioh. 8.
Seek first the kingdom of God. This declares us to be his children, Ioh. 10.
to be his flock. He that is of God hears Gods word. My sheep hear my
voice. Thus you see the causes why Christ was followed of the multitude.

15 Christ was quietly set with his Disciples in the mount when this people
approached. Christ with his Disciples quiet in the mount when the multitude came
unto him.
The hill as S. Chrysostom notes may represent the kingdom of God: the
inheritors whereof are always delighted to clime upward, to seek those
things that be above, to take pleasure in nothing but that which is from
heaven. Christ and his Disciples being on the top of the mount were quiet. And
the Church of Christ even in the wilderness in the midst of affliction does in
him find rest. In the world, says our Savior, Ioh. 16.
You shall have distress: but have confidence, I have overcome the world:
these things have I spoken unto you, that in me you may have peace. Upon this
assurance Peter being in prison and in cheines slept quietly; the Prophet David
in the midst of persecution took sweet and pleasant rest. I lay me down,
says he, and sleep in peace: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

16 Now follows the miracle which our Savior wrought by occasion of the
multitude which was there assembled together with him and his Disciples. The
miracle which Christ wrought, and the circumstances which are to be considered
in the people, in his disciples, and in himself. The people were the vulgar
sort.
In this there are many things contained very worthy of your good and godly
considerations: which for orders sake we may reduce to the persons of the
people, of the Disciples, and of Christ. Concerning the people the words of the
Evangelist S. John are these, Sequebatur eum turba multa, A great troop
followed him. But S. Mark more lively expressing the great zeal and desire
they had to the Gospel of Christ, Mark 6.
says, They ran flocking thither on foot out of all Cities. In whom we have
first to observe that they were not of the Princes nor of the priests which
came unto him, Ioh. 7.
but turba the common and vulgar sort. 1. Cor. 1.
Number quis ex principihus? Does any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believe in
him? Not many noble, not many wise, says the Apostle. The noble and mighty
loved liberty of life and feared mutations. The wise were circumspect, and
saw that the Gospel would mar their works. Only the people, they which
were basely accounted of in the world, they which knew not the Law came unto
Christ.

17 The second thing to be observed in them is their cheerfulness, They came
cheerfully.
their alacrity, their zeal and courage. They came not dragging their legs
after them, they ran unto Christ. Neither care of things at home, nor fear of
danger abroad; neither the length of the way thither, nor the lack of
lodging and food there; neither the fear of the Priests, the Scribes and
Pharisees, the known and professed enemies of Christ, nor any other by respect
in the world was able to stay them. Shall not this people rise up in
judgment, think you, against us, whom God has by so many blessings allured
and as it were entised to come unto him, and notwithstanding finds us so
far from this cheerful and gladsome following of him, that when he does
follow and seek after us we turn our backs and fly from him? Could we do
thus, John. 6.
if indeed we did believe that he has the words of eternal life, Matthew. 10.
and that as many as continue with him to the end, they shall be saved?

18 The third thing especially to be noted in this people is, They did
obediently as they were commanded.
that their willingness to come was not greater then their readynesse to obey
him unto whom they came. For when they were willed to sit down upon the
grass, although they were so many and had so little in sight before them (for
what were five loaves and two fishes to relieve almost five thousand men?)
nevertheless they made no answer, they gainsaide not, but without
contradiction did that which they were commanded. Elisha prophesied in the
name of the Lord and promised plenty to the people of Samaria being
grieuouslie afflicted with extreme famine. But a Prince in great favor and
authority with the king replied against the man of God, 2. Reg. 5.
Though the Lord would make windows in the heaven could this thing come to
pass. The same Prophet sent one to Naman the Syrian with this message, Go and
wash thee in Jordan seven times and thy flesh shall come unto thee again and
thou shall be cleansed. But Naman replied, Are not Abanah and Pharphar rivers
of Damascus better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash me in them
and be cleansed? This is the manner of the wise ones in the world: when they
should obey God they reason and dispute the matter with him, as if he knew not
what he did. But the faith of this people did subdue their wit and reason to
the sacred word and will of God.

19 This may suffice concerning the people. The disciples cause the people to
sit down
Of the Disciples of our Savior it is said that They made the people to sit
down. Hence Ministers Pastors and Teachers may learn, that since God has
ordained them as the means whereby the elect must be brought to the obedience
of Christ Jesus, they cannot approve their fidelity unto him except they be
careful to fulfill the work for which he has appointed them. Matthew. 8.
I say unto you that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit
down with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. In this sense
that we might also sit down Christ has established those high and holy
functions before mentioned. Wherefore S. Paul professes that for this cause
he received grace and Apostleship, that obedience might be yielded to the faith
amongst all nations. For this he labored as in other places so in Corinth
also, both delivering them the doctrine which he had received, and executing
amongst them the discipline which their grievous abuses did deserve.

20 The second thing to be noted in the Disciples is that they neither
purloyned nor changed the peoples food. They divided the bread which Christ
appointed to the people.
They received bread, and they delivered bread. But there are deceiptfull
workmen which have entered by a postern gate into the Church, which preach and
deliver not what they have received at the hands of Christ, but what
Antichrist has delivered them. For sweet bread they give sour leaven, for
wheat darnell, for wholesome meat venomous poison, for the word of God the
doctrines of man, for truth fables and vain fancies, for the holy communion
popish private blasphemous Masses, for the serving of God the worshipping of
Images, for fish and loaves stones and serpents.

21 The next thing to be noted in the Disciples is that when the people had
eaten sufficient they gathered up the broaken meat which remained. They
gathered that which was left.
By which frugalitie of theirs we are admonished to use the creatures of God in
such sort as they may be most beneficial unto many, after we have taken for
our own contentment then to reserve for the use of others, that nothing be
wasted which may profitablie be saved. God loves a bountiful but not a
wastfull hand. For although it be true which the Prophet says that God has
given the earth to the sons of men: although it be granted that we may rule
over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of heaven, and over every beast
that moves upon the earth, using them not only for our necessity, but also
for our honest delight and convenient pleasure: yet we must remember that this
power is rather a stewardship than a Lordship, over the creatures of God in
earth. We stand accountable for them, we may not lavish them out as we list.

22 That which hitherto we have observed in these Disciples is both allowed of
God and written that it might be followed of us. They douted how the people
could be fed when they saw not wherwithall.
Another thing there is which we may not let pass although it be a blemish and
a stain in them. For when Christ spoke unto them of feeding the multitude, one
answered, two hundred peniworth of bread is not sufficient for them that
every man may take a morsel. Another said, here is a boy that has five
loaves and two fishes but what are they among so many? The like we read of the
servant of Elisha in the second of Kings. There came a man from Baalshalisha
which brought the Prophet twenty barely loaves, and certain corn. The
Prophet willed it to be given to the people that they might eat. But his
servant answered, 2. Reg. 4.
how should I set this before a hundred men? Well, give it, says the Prophet,
that they may eat. For thus says the Lord, They shall eat and there shall
remain. Then he set it before them and they did eat and left over. This
mistrust of the power and wonderful providence of Almighty God is the very
root of all evil. It cause^ the rich man spoken of in the Gospel to hoorde
up corn for many years; Luc. 12.
it caused Ananias to withdraw a portion of the price of his fearme, it caused
Vespasian to lay an unsavory imposition upon the people to pay money (be it
spoken with good manner) for their very urine; it caused Judas to betraie his
Master, it caused the Israelites when their city was besieged to make there
bellies their cofers, to eat their goulde.

23. But let us now come from the people and disciples to the person of Christ
himself: Christ diligent in his office.
In whom the first thing which we have to observe is his diligence in his
office. He preached in the cities, in the temple, in the villages, in the
ships, on the shoares, in the wilderness: he neither spared any labor nor
omitted any occasion to do good.

24 The next thing is his pitiful affection toward the people upon whom when
he looked his heart was touched with compassion: Pitiful toward them which
had no Pastor to feed their souls.
First because they were as sheep without a Pastor. The high priests, the
learned Scribes, the holy Pharisees were their appointed Pastors, to govern
them, to teach them, and to lead them by example of honest life. Nevertheless
Christ says, they were sine pastore, without a sheepehard. The glorious,
covetous, deceiptfull, ceremonial, and superstitious rabble of popish guides
God does not account amongst the guides of his people, neither are they to be
called Pastors but deuourers of the flock. Pastors which cannot or will not
teach are no pastors. Because thou have refused knowledge, says God by his
Prophet Ose, Ose. 4.
I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest to me. Undoubtedly their
hearts are not touched with any pity or compassion at all over Gods people
who for their own private gain and commodity thrust such pastors upon the
Church that when the Church has them it may justly be said, it has no
pastors. This is the plague, the poison, the bane of al religion, it
threatens ruin to christianity.

25 The other cause that moved Christ to compassion was, Toward them which
wanted food to refreshe their bodies.
that the people which had tarried long with him were hungry and in the
wilderness could get no meat. By this we learn of our master Christ to bear
pytifull hearts toward our needy naked and hungry breathren. 1. Ioh. 3.
For whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion toward him, how dwells the love of God in such a
man? In former times here has been provision for the poor, and some as yet
remains: but it is for the most part much abused. I shall therefore exhort
you the citizens of London and in Christ Jesus require it at your hands that
such order may be taken that the poor may be provided for and not suffered to
cry in your streets. If you that be magistrates will take the thing in hand,
you shall find, I doubt not, a great sort of liberal hearts and helping
hands hereunto. The suffering of the people to beg breadeth great
inconvenience both in the Church and common wealth. I do therefore in Christ
again require you to take due consideration hereof that this thing may be
reformed. So shall you well please God, ease and profit your selves, and give a
good example to the rest of the realm. God cannot be unmindful of so good a
work. It will be an hundred times requited both in this life and in the world to
come.

26 The last thing which I purpose to note in the person of our Savior is that
he did not only conceive an inward pity and therewith content him self: He
gave thanks, divided bread, and it increased in dividing.
but his compassion brake out and declared it self in works of mercy. He
sent them not away, as the manner is, laden with words and empty of alms;
he fed them largely, and gave them till every man had enough. But first he
gave thanks to his heavenly father, leaving us an example thankfully to
acknowledge that whatsoever we receive it comes from him as from the
principal author, and whatsoever we bestow he is the Lord and owner of it. In
dividing the bread he use the ministry of his disciples, as the stewardes
and disposers of his riches. Be it therefore corporal or spiritual
sustenaunce which we receive; although it be at the hands of men, yet is it
unto us as if Christ him self in his own person did reach out his hand from
heaven to feed us. They are therefore too nice which refuse their meat,
because they like not the man by whom it is brought and set before them. They
by whose means we are made partakers of good things are unto us the Angels
of God, and ought accordingly to be honored of what quality soever they be
in them selves. The food which they gave to the people did miraculouslie grow
by diminishing, and by consuming increase. So it was with the meal and oil of
that poor widow of Sarephta. 3. Reg. 17.
It was in sight too little to suffice one; in use it proved more than
sufficient for many. So it is with all the graces and gifts of God: they grow
in the hands of him that spends, and in the cofers of him that saves they
wast. Thus I have briefly gone over such things as I thought most convenient
for this time. The Lord bless the seed of his word sown amongst us, and
give it a plentiful and a large in crease, to his own glory and our comfort,
through the merit of Jesus Christ by the gracious operation of the holy
Ghost, to whom etc.

The eighteenth Sermon. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross.
LVKE. 21. 25 Then there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon and in
the Stars, etc.
GOD bethinking him self, The excellency of the Jewish nation
and as it were musing upon the benefits and blessings, which he had in
great abu^daunce of mercy bestowed from time to time upon the people of
Israel, breaks out by his prophet into these words: Esa. 5.
What might I do for my vine, which I have not done? The graces, wherewith he
enriched them were infinite, their prerogatives above all other people of the
world were manifold, and for the preciousnesse and rareness of them most
wonderful: Romans 9.
to them the adoption, the glory, the couenaunte, the Law, the service of
God, the promises were impropriated: of them were the fathers, and of them, as
concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever: They
had the Arc, the Temple, and the Oracles, with a promise that God would be
their God, and they should be his even Gods own elected and beloved people
(if they walked in his ways, and wrought his will) for ever. But this
ungracious and unthankful nation was unworthy of such worthynesse: they
worshipped God with lips, and not with heart; outwardly in show, but not
inwardly in hearty and sincere truth; according to the letter, but not according
to the spirit, after their own conceits, but not agreeablie to his blessed
will revealed in his holy word. Their cry was still, Ierem. 7.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, but through their
profanation, they made the temple of the Lord, a den of thieves. They cried
Lord Lord, but they did not his will on whom they cried, for sweet grapes, they
yielded sour, for hearty and sincere service, hypocritical and painted shows
of religion: their glory was in the external beauty of their material
temple: they wondered at the stones, and goodly buildinges, at the gorgeous
furniture and precious guiftes, wherewith it was both outwardly and inwardly
adorned, and enriched.

2 Whereupon our Savior to take away the cause of this vain hope and foolish
joy took occasion thus to prophecy of that glorious temple: A prophecy
concerning the overthrow of their temple, and the performance thereof.
Are these the things that you look upon? The days will come, wherein there
shall not be left a stone upon a stone, which shall not be destroyed. This
prophecy was as evidently accomplished as it was made. For thirty eight
years after that they had crucified Christ, their promised Messiah the Lord
of glory, God raised up the servants of his wrath Vespasian and Titus
Emperors of Rome, who beseeged conquered and rased their Jerusalem, made
havoc of the people as of dogs, murdered eleven hundred thousand, man
woman and child of that cursed nation. Then was fulfilled the cry of those
crucifiers, His blood be upon our heads and upon our children. It has been,
and shall be for ever. Yea the violence of the Romans proceeded farther and
pulled down the Temple, and laid flat with the ground their only glory,
insomuch that according to the express words of our Saviors prophecy they
left not one stone upon another. The Jews sundry times, having license
thereunto, attempted to build it up again, but it would not be; for what
their hand builded in the day, the hand of the Lord most miraculouslie hurled
down by night. Most true it is, that Christ says, there is not one word,
that comes out of Gods mouth, not one title, or jot written in his word,
which shall not in his due and appointed time be accomplished.

3 Hence we may take this instruction that God is not delighted in outward
shows, God delights not in the outward beauty of any thing.
in gorgeous pompes, in beautiful buildinges, in painted sepulchers: It is the
inward beauty of the kings daughter, and not the outward bravery of the
harlot of Babylon, wherewith God is pleased: It is the contrite heart of the
postrate Publican, and not the proud ostentation of the Pharasie, wherein he
does take delight. God aloweth as well of Peter in his mantell, as of Aaron in
his miter. All these external shows; are but as the beauty of a painted wall,
not only not acceptable but even loathsome unto God, when the soul, the mind,
the inward part is polluted.

4 The causes, The cause of their ruin, they knew not the time of their
visitation. Visitato^ in mercy moves them not.
why this house, this costly building, and temple of God, was so miserably
destroyed, Christ himself declares, saying, Because thou have not known the
time of thy visitation. There is a double visitation, the one in mercy, the
other in justice. Our merciful God first visited this people in great and
often mercy: He delivered them out of the hands of Pharao: He gave them good
guides: He delivered unto them his law written in tables of stone: He caused
heaven to give them bread and the hard rock to yield the^ drink: Luc. 19.
He made them triumph over their enemies and possess strange cities: He
brought them to a land, that flowed with milk and honey, and caused them to
reap that which their fooes had sown: He gave them Priests and Prophets, and
builded them both an Arc by Moses and a temple by the hands of Solomon
wherein he would be worshipped. All which notwithstanding this stif-necked
people was obdurate and unthankful: no benefittes could ever win them.
They provoked their gracious Lord unto most fierce and most just wrath. After
their deliverance they lusted to return to the place from whence they were
delivered they muttered against Moses, and despised holy Aaron; They loathed
and misliked the very food of heaven, even the meat of Angels; the written
law of God, they mightily transgressed, his messages they contemned, the
Prophets and Messengers they derided, evil entreated, murdered, lastly to
add a crown to all their former wickedness, their promised Messiah their
king, Christ Jesus the Son of the living God, they most spitefully cruelly
and villanouslie crucified.

5 This great unthankfulness of theirs, Visitation in justice.
did greatly provoke the just Lord to displeasure and as it were enforce him to
visit them in justice sharply, and with the rod of more then usual correction.
Wherefore he plagued them with mortality in the wilderness, only two entered
the land of promise of all the number that came out of Egypt: he gave them
over into the hands of their enemies and they that hated them were Lords over
them, he cast them into exile and miserable bondage, he burnt up their holy
city, he destroyed their glorious temple, he left them to be devoured with
pestilence, with hunger, and with the sword the accustomed instruments of his
wrath. Insomuch that even to this day the remnant of that elect and chosen
people is scattered far and wide, and does live in all contempt hatred and
slavery, marked like Cain to be known as a murdering vagabond upon the earth,
to be a byword, and an example of Gods Justice to all the world, throughout
all succeeding ages.

6 Now all these things came unto them not only for their punishment but also
for examples unto others, These things recorded for our benefit.
and were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
They are patterns for us to look upon, that seeing their sin and the
punishment thereof we may eschew the one if we desire to escape the other. And
they cry daily in our ears. Let not your faults be like their faults, least
your destruction also be like to their destruction, for God is the same,
yesterday and to day and for ever, he hates sin no less now then before, no
less in us, than in them.

7 He has visited us in mercy as he visited them, yea we have tasted perhaps
more abundantly of his goodness than ever they did. Our blessings as great as
theirs our unthankfulness greater.
And as the benefittes, we have received, do at the least equal theirs, so
their unthankfulness is much behind ours, if it be rightly and duly
considered. God having so straungly, so far beyond all hope, so much beside
our expectation, and more besides our desert so many times and so many ways
delivered us, not out of one Egypt, from under one Pharao, through the midst
of one sea, but out of sundry places, of most grievous, irksome, and tedious
captivity, from under the heavy yooke of sundry cruel tyrants, through the
midst of sundry maine seas of troubles and afflictions: Yet have we for all
this buried the memory of our deliverance in forgetfulness, yet do we for
all this, sin daily and that with greediness, yea and spiritually as far
as in us lies crucify Christ a fresh, and sheede his most precious blood
again. We are weary of the Gospel, the food of life is rejected as a thing
unsavory, we have no liking to feed as the Lords table, our desire is rather
to frank up our selves with that which we should abhor and loath: Every
house and corner is full of idolatry and superstition, of sin and
filthiness, full of murmuring against God, full of grudging and repyning
against the Lords anointed. For of his Prophets what should I say? was there
ever any time, any age, any nation, country, or kingdom, when and where the
Lords messengers were worsse entreated, more abused, despised, and slaundered,
than they are here at home, in the time of the Gospel, in these our days? we
are become in your sight and used as if we were the refuse and paringes of the
world. Every mouth is spitefully opened, every tooth is sharpened and
whetted against us. Hard it is to find one forth, that will love and
reverence us as fathers, obey us as governors, honor us as Gods ambassadors,
learn of us as of schoolemaisters, here and follow us as sheepeheardes, give
us worthy wages as workmen that take pains for your salvation. But our
exspectation is not deceived, Christ our Savior has told us long ago that the
world should hate us, and our case is no worse herein the^ the blessed Apostles
was, our reward is great in heaven. And it were well if this unkind affection
did reach no further than unto us only. But it spreads wider, and regards
as little the throne of David, as the chair of Moses, the sword as the book,
the Prince as the Prophet, the civil as the ecclesiastical state. Some desire
a change. Others not only desire it but conspire for it too and contriue
treachery, greedelie expecting their looked for time, the day of their
felicity and of their great joy. But if God in his wrath grant such a time,
which for his mercy sake I trust he will never do, it will be, even to them, who
now so earnestly desire it, a day of death and not of life, of lamentation and
not of joy. What gained they who desired the change of Samuel for Saull, of
Christ for Barrabas? they procured Gods wrath, their own confusion, and
perpetual slavery. So it fares with miscontented minds. Their own desires
plague them.

8 Thus we cannot but see Gods godnesse, Therefore without repentance our
punishment cannot be less then theirs.
and our unthankfulness, his gifts, and our abusing of them, his patience
and our continual frowardness. Our sins are come to the fullness with the
Ammorites, iniquity has gotten the upper hand, and crusheth down all piety.
Can our God think you wink at so manifest or hold his hand at so grievous
sin? If he spared not the branches of the true olive, not his first borne
Israel, not his elect people, but often punished and at length gave them quite
over, for that they neglected his word, and despised the Preachers of it; if
he spared not his own only city, not the holy temple, wherein he would be
worshipped, but for that they were both polluted and profaned, destroyed both
for ever; whar can we, which are but as wild twigges, whose father was an
Ammorite and whose mother an Hittite, who have not harkned to his word sent
from heaven, who have defiled his sacred temple, and even crucified his Christ,
look for any other, but Gods great plagues, and dreadful vengeance to be
powered upon us to our eternal misery? doubtless we have deeply provoked him
unto anger. The only way to pacify and appease his wrath, to mitigate his
indignation, and to remove his plagues from us, which even now hang over us,
is our earnest repentance, to turn unto our God, with our whole heart, that he
may turn to us; The disciples question concerning both the particular
destruction of the Jews and the general consummatio^ of the whole world.
to lament and forsake our wickedness, to trust in mercy, and to crave
pardon, to promise and perform amendment of this sinful life. Thus we must
do, and that speedily, or else without doubt and without delay we perish.

9 The threatened destruction of the temple has occasioned me thus much to say.
Now when Christ had uttered the sentence of ruin and desolation against that
holy place, the Disciples, as Matthew reports, Mat. 24.
came secretly unto him, and asked not only of the time when the Temple should
be destroyed, but also of the second coming of Christ and of the end of the
world. They enquired as men desirous to learn that whereof they were
ignorant. And they asked of Christ the wisdom of God, the appointed
schoolemaister of whom we should seek for knowledge. They asked as I said
three several things, of the destruction of Jerusalem, of the second coming
of Christ, of the end of the world, which two later are indeed but one. To
whom Christ makes answer, not assigning any certainetie of the times when
these things should be accomplished, but showing signs that should go before
as well the destruction of Jerusalem, as also his second, coming. It is not
for you to know the times and seasons, (says he) which the father has put in
his own power. No not the son of man as man knew them.

10 This knowledge is kept from men, The time when the end of the world shall
be is for two causes concealed from men to who^ notwithstanding the signs that
go before it are revealed.
for two causes as Saint Augustine well notes. The one, least it should hinder
and withdraw us from perfourming our necessary duties, least it should
terrify and amase us, and make us careless to provide for our selves and
others. An other reason why the time both of our own particular end, and of
the general consummation of all things is left uncertain, is that we might
at all times make ready and prepare for it, seeing it might happen at any time
even at any instant. Watch and pray, because ye know not what hour. God has
therefore kept the time it self secret, but has revealed certain tokens,
and signs going before it: that when we see the messengers and forerunners of
him, which comes swyftly to judge quick and dead we may lift up our heads,
knowing that our redeemer and redemption is near at hand. Christ foresheweth
(as I said) the signs that should happen as well before the ruin of
Jerusalem, as also before his second coming in the end of the world. The
Evangelists have mixed and folded them one within another, so that which do
serve for the one, and which for the other, it cannot precisely be discerned.
S. Chrysostom thinks, that all the signs, simply and literally understood
have relation to the destruction of Jerusalem; but mystically or spiritually
considered of, they may be applied to the end of the world. Others whom in
this I do rather follow, refer the former signs, as false prophets, war,
sedition, earthquakes, famine, pestilence, persecution, hatred of the Disciples
of Christ, and beseeging, to the destruction of Jerusalem: And these latter
signs in the sun, moon, and stars, etc. to the latter coming of Christ
to judgment.

11 In this coming of Christ to judge the quick and the dead, Five things to
be noted in the coming of Christ to judgment.
we may for our better instruction consider these things: First that there
shall be a Judgment, and who shall be that judge; Secondly the time when this
judgment shall be; Thirdly the signs which shall go before it; Fourthly the
manner of it; Lastly how we ought to be in perpetual preparation and readiness
thereunto.

12 A day the Lord has set, There shall be a judgment.
in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he
has appointed, whereof he has given an assurance to all men, Act. 17.
in that he has raised him from the dead. Here we see plainly that there is
a day appointed for righteous judgment of the whole world: that there is a
man appointed to give sentence in that day: that there is an assurance
already given to all men of all things that are written concerning both the
day the judgment and the judge. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
With God (says the Apostle speaking to the faithful which suffered
tribulation for the name of Christ) with God it is a righteous thing to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to the^ which are troubled
rest. This righteous thing with God is not performed here as yet. For this
world is as an hell unto the godly, and an heaven unto them which despise
righteousness. Therefore it cannot be but that God has appointed a day
hereafter to judge the world with that justice which shall give unto every
man according to that he has done, be it good or evil, and which shall render
vengaunce unto them that know not God, but rest unto such as now are trobled
for his sake. Our Lord knows to deliver the godly from temptation but to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be tormented. 2. Pet. 3.
Wherefore S. Peter threatening false prophets and lying masters which bring
in sects of perdition and deny him that bought them even the Lord, 2. Pet. 2.
says that their judgment long ago was not far off, and their perdition
sleeps not. The day of their eternal condemnation is appointed, 2. Cor. 5.
the man that shall condemn them is already assigned and well known. Ioh. 5.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. Act. 10.
The father has given all judgment to the son. He is constituted judge of
quick and dead.

13 This judge has three properties. The properties of him that shall judge.
His knowlegde.
First he is more privy to our thoughts, words and deeds, then we our
selves are, he sees in darkness as well as in light, at midnight as at noone
day; no secret is hid from him, neither can any man convey himself out of
his eyesight. He saw Adam when he ate of the fruit which was forbidden him,
he looked upon Cain when he slew his only brother, he beheld Cham when he
discovered his fathers nakedness, he took a view of Sara when she laughed
behind the door, of the sons of Jacob when they sold their brother Joseph
into Egypt. His eye was open upon David's filthy and bloody acts, upon
Absolons treason, upon Achitophels wicked counsel. The oppression of Achab,
the cruelty of Iesabell, the pride of Haman, the covetous heart of Balaam and
of Geze, the pride and hypocrisy of the Pharisee could not be kept from him.
He sees all sleightes in merchaundise, all shifts in usury, all malicious
minds, all flattering tongues, all lying lips. He looks down from heaven
and beholds all the children of men from the habitation of his dwelling
place, Psalm. 33.
he beholds all them that dwell on the earth: he fashioneth their hearts
every one and understands all their works. He shall be both a judge,
Epist. Iud.
and a witness in that day of all the wicked deeds which the ungodly have
committed and of all the cruel speakinges which wicked sinners have uttered
against him and his, who, as now they cannot avoid his sight, so neither
shall they then be able any way to escape his hand. O consider this you that
forgette God. He that made the eye shall not he see? Can your deeds be
concealed from him that sees all the children of men, and can call them every
one by his name?

14 Another property of this heavenly judge is the infinite greatness of his
power. His power.
He does what pleases him, Phil. 2.
all things are subject unto his will, unto him every knee boweth of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. He has power to
save and to kill, to lift into heaven and to cast into hell; heaven is his
seat, earth is his footestoole. What he wills is as sure as it were already
done. We should fear therefore this mighty judge who has such power to do
his will, and who will do that only which is just.

15 For his third property is his justice. His justice.
He takes no rewards, his scepter is straight, his judgment righteous, his
eye simple, he will not be entreated of the wicked, neither show them any
mercy. In that day, every one of them shall receive justice and just
punishment. These are his properties and he changes them not. He sees all,
he has all power, he is a righteous judge of all and over all for ever. By
this which has been spoken we see that we have to look for a day wherein the
world shall be judged and we see who it is that in that day shall judge the
world.

16 Of this the Lord has sufficiently assured us. The certainty and assurance
of these things
For when diverse things are spoken of before they come to pass, the
perfourmaunce of the first is the assurance of the rest. He which promised to
raise up Jesus from the dead has also promised to judge quick and dead by the
same Jesus so raised. Since the one is performed, how can we stand in doubt of
the other? We may assure our selves that there is a day of judgment to come,
because the resurrection of the judge is already accomplished past and gone.
Romans 14.
So then every one of us shall give accounts of himself to God. There is no
prince, no potentate, no prophet, no Apostle, no man, no woman, neither rich
nor poor, high nor low, that can escape this judgment. We must answer for
our facts even as every man has wrought. We must answer for every idle
word, for every corrupt and wicked thought. What can the unclean fornicator,
the covetous usurer, the mighty oppressor, the proud contemner, the ambitious
climer, the envious hypocrite, the bloody murderer, the false deceauer, the
cruel prince, the vnfeeding pastor, the unjust judge, the deceitful
merchaunt, what may they answer in that day but plead guilty; and what can
they look for but, Ite maledicti, Go ye cursed? Once again I say, O consider
this ye that forget God.

17 But when shall this judgment be? The time of judgment.
As this question is moved by two sorts of men, so there are in scripture two
kinds of answers made unto it. There are mockers which walk after their own
lusts, 2. Pet. 3.
and these ask, Where is the promise of his coming? Since the fathers died
which were overwhelmed by the floude of Noah all things continue as they were
from their first creation. To whom Saint Peter makes answer, that they err
of set purpose. Otherwise they that are so witty in reasoning against the
truth of Gods promises might know this, that the power of the word which
created the world, and kept it till the day appointed for the punishment of
the wicked by water, does also now keep the heavens and the earth in store
and reserve them to fire against the day of judgment, and of the destruction
of ungodly men. Having stopped their mouths with this answer he leaves them
without any further instruction, because they were but swine and the doctrine
of the judgment to come is precious. But the Disciples of Christ with an other
mind making this demand, Tell us when these things shall be, and what sign
of thy coming and of the end of the world, are abundantly instructed by
their Lord and master which knows all things, and withholdeth nothing from
his which is any way needful to be known. Touching the time they are
forbidden to enquire about it. For as in the days before the floude, they did
eat and drink, marry and give in marriage and knew nothing till the floude
came and took them all away: Matthew. 24.
so shall also the coming of the son of man be. In the hour that ye think
not will the son of man come, in a day and in an hour which no man knows,
no not the Angels of heaven, but the father only. It is therefore both vain
and dangerous which some have attempted in setting this and that year beyond
which the world cannot endure. But such is the crookednes of our nature. In
watching, which is commanded, how careless are we? And how curious in
seeking out the time and season, Act. 1.
which to do we are so often and so expressly forbidden?

18 Touching the signs and tokens going before the coming of Christ to
judgment, Signs going before the coming of Christ: to judgment.
they are set down for our benefit and instruction: And therefore let us make
some stay in the due consideration of them. There shall be, (says the
Evangelist) signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars. etc.
These signs shall appear before the coming of Christ, partly that the world
may be admonished of the fearful judgment that is at hand, and thereby
provoked to repentance; partly that the wicked may in this life be punished by
the creatures of GOD, whom they have abused; partly that it may appear that
the creatures which have served sinful man against their will, will now no
longer serve the enemies of their creator; and partly to declare that the
world is come to his just old age and shall have an end. There shall be
signs in the sun. What signs these shall be it is elsewhere in the
scriptures declared. The heavens shall shake, the sun and moon shall be
dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. Again, Joel. 2.
the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come. The like we read in the book of
Revelation. Apocal. 6.
I beheld, and lo, the sun was black as sackecloth of hear, and the moon
was like blood, and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, as a fig tree
casts her green figs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind. Matthew. 24.
Whereunto the words of S. Matthew also do agree, The sun shall be obscured,
and the moon shall not yield her light, the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of heaven shall be shaken. The simple and literal understanding is
that there shall be wonderful and terrible Eclipses in the sun and in the
moon: which things in this last age, in this last hour of the world since
the ascension of Christ have sundry times and in most strange sort been
seen. Or else, even as when Christ was crucified, the sun lost his light,
and darkness for a time was upon the face of the whole earth: so shall it be at
his second coming to judge the children of darkness with eternal death.
Beda.
Others expound it that when Christ shall come in his glory the beams of his
brightness shall so far surmount the shining of the sun, moon, or
stars, that in comparison thereof they shall seem dark and give no light.
Of this his brightness he gave a glimse when he was transfigured in the mount
Tabor. To seek out many expositions of these words, it shall not need. This
we may observe in the writings of the prophets that with them it is usual,
when they foreshewe great plagues, to use these and the like spheeches. So does
Esayas in his prophecy concerning the plagues of Babylon. Esaias. 13.
The stars of heaven and the planets thereof shall not give their light, the
sun shall be darkened in his going forth, Esaias. 24.
and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. Again, The earth is utterly
broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly,
the moon shall be abashed, and the sun ashamed when the Lord of hosts shall
reign in mount Sion. The like we read in Ezechiel threatening destruction and
desolation to Egypt. Ezech. 32.
I will cover the heaven and make the stars thereof dark: I will cover the
sun with a cloud and the moon shall not give her light, all the lights of
heaven will I make dark for thee, and bring darkness upon thy land, says the
Lord. I might allege the like out of Joel, Jeremy, Amos and Micheas* but the
matter is clear enough, and needs rather to be considered tha^ proved.

19 The words being literally thus understood, An Allegorical application of
the foresaid signs.
may be morally applied not without great fruit unto the understanding and
wise hearer, which can discern between interpretation of scripture and
application thereof. In the one we give you the bare sense of the scripture, in
the other we teach you the profitable use of it. For the use of scripture may
be very well showed not only by such collectio^s as do probably gather or
necessarily conclude one thing out of another, but also by those allegorical
comparisons which show how in one thing another is shadowed and a spiritual
thing resembled in a corporal. As for example if here we refer the sun to
Christ, that sun of righteousness; the moon to the Church, and the stars to
the pastors and doctors of the Church.

20 The sun in this sense is most evidently in this our age darkened, The
darkning of the sun by false doctrine.
Christ is obscured, by that great enemy Antichrist the man of sin who has
set himself in Christ's peculiar place and will be exalted above all that is
called God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
To make any other mediator between God and man saving only Christ Jesus which
is not only man but also God; To seek else where remission of sins,
justification, redemption, sanctification or salvation than only in this Jesus
and in him crucified does darken and make dim both him and his merits. And
of this treason the Romish Antichristian Church which they term Catholic is
found guilty. For the children of this harlot labor by all means to obscure
the son of God, to rob him of the glory of his deserts in our salvation.
I would never have believed that any professing learning or having had but a
glimse of the course of the word of God, could have been so gross in such
sort to have eclipsed the brightness of Christ Jesus by giving his glory unto
earthly creatures, if of late I had not to my great grief and their great
shame heard their own blasphemous con^essions thereof. Surely the Romish
strumpet has rubbed her forehead, her children are become altogether
shameless, whatsoever she determines they make it equivalent with the
written word of God. There is no absurdity in popery (in which there are full
many and full gross) which they do not defend to be right good and
Catholic. The Popes pardons, purgatory, masses, merits, prayers both for and
to ye dead, pilgrimages, images, relics, yea holy water and holy bread: All
these they will have some one way and some another to be forcible remedies
against sin and death. This is their religion and serving of God, thus they
honor the Lamb that was slain for the sins of all the world. If this do
not derogate from him and stop the brightness of his glory, who is the only
once offered propitiation for all our sins, by whose blood we are only
purged, whose death only has made us free from death, if this do not obscure
the glorious beauty of Christ Jesus, if this do not deface the worthiness
of his merits, what does? or what can do? Has the glorious son of God
sacrificed his precious life for our sakes upon the cross, that Thomas of
Caunterburies blood powered out in an earthly quarrel should make passage to
heaven for us? Is there any man in whose heart the light of the glory of God
has shined, which sees not how this fogge does darken this blessed sun?

21 Again this son is obscured when as we profess that in our words, The
darkning of the sun by corrupt life and conversation.
which in our lives and deeds we do deny. After that king David had
committed adultery, Nathan the phophet charged him therewith in these words.
Thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. 2. Sam. 12.
When men profess well and live ill, their life is not tolerated for their
profession; Romans 2.
but their profession is slandered by their conversation. When the Jews which
professed the Law did not practice it, the Law which they professed heard evil
thereby. For a bad professor of a good thing, is a stain to that thing which
he does profess. This is the special fault of our wicked days, these our
times are clowdie and full of this darkness, our light does not shine to
glorify God, but our darkness, does abound to the obscuring of his Christ.
The merciless rich men which wring and oppress by deceitful and injurious
dealing, which neglect and despise their afflicted brethren, Iac. 2.
the needy members of Christ, do not they blaspheme the worthy name
wherewith both they and we are named? It were a great deal better never to
have professed then not to practice, never to have received then not to
observe, never to have known then not to obey the word of truth. Unto them
which hear the word and keep it being heard a blessing is promised; but unto
the^ of whom it is written, Dicunt and non faciunt, They say and do not, woes
again and again are denounced. This know, (says the Apostle) that in the
last days shall come perilous times. 2. Tim. 3.
For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of
them which are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasure more
than lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but having denied the power
thereof. Let all the world judge whether these be not the clouds which have
darkened the sun of our days.

22 Now as the sun rese^bleth Christ, The moon ^urned into blood by cruelty
of persecution.
so the moon his Church. For as the moon has her light from the sun, so the
Church hirs from Christ. And as the sun being unchangeable, is at all times
exceeding bright and glorious; but the moon does change, and some times is at
the full, sometimes at the wane, her light to the eye of the world, now
increasing, and now diminishing, now filling the whole globe, and now in no
part thereof appearing: so Christ, and his Church. Christ's glory is always
great, and always one. His Church upon earth does vary; now she flowrisheth,
and now is black; sometimes she over spreads the face of the whole earth,
at other times she is brought to so narrow streightes that mortal eye is
unable to epsy her. When the Church of Christ is persecuted as it was in the
days of those cruel Emperors which were of old, and as it is at this day
under Antichrist and Antichristian Princes, this is as it were the changing
and resolving of the moon into blood. Hereby it comes to pass that she
which looks as the morning and is fair like the moon, changes her
outward shape and figure and appears in the eyes of them that behold her
like a garment dyed in blood. By this we see what the spouse of Christ is to
look for in this world. Will thou be of the number of them that live godly?
prepare thy self to suffer. All that will live godly in Christ must do it,
it is their portion. If he were persecuted, why should we be spared; if he
despised, why we well reputed of? Let us not therefore be dismayed though we
see the Church of God in heavy case. Let her fooes debace and oppress her for
a while, her king shall at length deliver her, and crown her with eternal
glory. She was never I think in greater distress, the enemy never more
cruelly bent, Christ in his members never more bloudilie crucified then even
in these our days, as well by enemies as by false and bastard brethren, who
pretending the aid and succor of the Church practice nothing but theft and
robbery. She is both wounded by her adversaries and spoiled even by her own
children: the one have made her bloody, and the other beggarly. Howebeit as
the Ark of Noah was tossed upon the waters, but could not be drowned, the
Lord susteyning it with his mighty hand: so the Church in the end shall
have a glorious triumph over all the enemies of GOD, hell gates may strive they
can not prevail; in suffering she shall conquer, and when by persecution she
is made most black then is she in truth most beautiful. Cant. 1.
I am black O daughters of Jerusalem, (says the spouse) black, but comely.
Through ignominy she comes unto glory, by tribulation to a kingdom, by
the cross to joy, and by death to immortal and everlasting life. The death
of the saints of God is precious, their sufferinge^ ^re honorable in his sight
for whom they suffer, nay they are profitable even unto them, it behooves the
moon to be turned into blood. Her restoration shall be much more glorious.

23 It follows that the stars also shall fall from heaven. The falling of
stars from heaven.
Unto stars we may very well compare teachers, pastors, and guides, the
brightness of whose doctrine and conversation should give light to such as
live in this worlds mistie darkness. John Baptist was called Lucerna lucens
and ardens, Dan. 12.
a candle which does both shine and burn. They which are as stars unto
others here shall hereafter shine as the brightness of the firmament and as
the stars of heaven for evermore. But these dangerous days have made many
of these stars to fall from the firmament of heavenly doctrine to the
dregs and dreams of man's learning. And one star falls not commonly
alone, Lucifer drew a train of others after him. The star which falls to
the earth becomes earthly, loses the light which it had and like a brande
which is smoothered spends and wastes it self to nothing. He that has
been once illuminated like a star and received the heavenly gift and been
partaker of Gods holy spirit and has tasted of the good word of GOD and of
the powers of the world to come, if he fall at any time away, hardely or
never does he rise again. Dreadful examples hereof there are both ancient
and late, as Judas, Julian, Arius, Franciscus Spira, Staphilus, Baldwin, and
such like. Whose fearful ends it were to be wished that they which follow
their declining steps did well consider. For touching our own countrymen
and brethren according to the flesh, the greatest withstanders of the truth
at this day are such as have been either preachers or earnest professors of
that which now they hate so deadly, and by impugning so fiercely persecute.
They are fallen from heaven to earth; Christ they have forsaken and betaken
them selves to the man of sin Christ's adversary; they embrace darkness in
steed of light; error in place of sound doctrine; damnable heresy for the
pure and saving truth. Had it not been better that these Apostataes had never
known, this blessed way, than knowing it so traiterouslie and so damnablie to
shrink from it? But to leave them to their desperate resolution others there
are that stand in doctrine but fall in life and manners whose conversation is
not in heaven, but altogether upon the earth, being worldly minded, not like
stars of light but like clouds of darkness, teaching others and not
themselves; that say and do not; They are wholly bewitched with love of this
present base world; themselves they seek (and would to God they sought
themselves aright:) but they seek not Christ, without whom themselves are
lost. This is the great scandal of the world at this day: woe unto them by
whom it comes. Romans 2.
Well by that which hitherto has been spoken we see how Christ the son of
righteousness the brightness of his father is obscured as well by false
doctrine as by wicked conversation: how the moon the Church is made black
and bloody by cruel persecution: how the stars the teachers and doctors of
the Church are fallen both by heresy from heavenly doctrine, and by dissolute
behavior from the shining brightness of a sanctified and celestial life.

24 The same words might give me occasion to touch sondrie other kinds both
of persons and things: Other applications of the foresaid signs.
I might show how the spiritual dignity of the pastor, who should be as the
sun in the eyes of men, is darkened and obscured by contempt; how the civil
authority of the magistrate, which ought to show it self in exercising just
and lawful power upon the works of darkness, and so to bear rule as it were
in the night, (being in this age in many places used as a sword, to slay the
innocent and well meaning man, and as a shield to defend and strenthen sin,)
has so clean lost that glorious light of justice, that it seems even
changed into blood; thirdly how the people, which are in number as the
stars, be in nature and disposition so far removed from heaven, that the
very naming of things above as of things which do not concern them is
become even tedious and odious unto them. Again I mightshewe you how faith
(which as the sun gives light to other virtues) is it self dimmed; how the
ancient virtues which have been in high and honorable callinges have left
their place and are not found, they are fallen like stars from heaven.
Charity being unto other virtues as the moon in comparison of the rest of
the stars is also changed; her sweet and amiable nature is converted into
more than savage barbaritie; tender hearted men are become bloody minded;
every man hunteth after his brother as after a pray; each degree is maliced
and hated of other, the Clergy of the laytie, the sheaphearde of the sheep,
the rich of the poor, yea the man of the wife, the parents of the children,
the master of the servants, all men of some, and some almost of all. The
bond of peace, the lincke of love that malicious enemy has burst a sunder.
What shall I say? Surely all things do show, that the end of all things
is at hand.

25 Now what effects these signs before mentioned shall have in men's hearts
those words do plainly declare which follow. What these signs shall work
in the hearts of men.
There shall be upon earth trouble among the nations, Aug. ad Hes.
with perplexity. By the nations, (says Saint Augustine) he means those
that shall stand on the left hand, and not those that are of the seed of
Abraham and shall be blessed. Those dogs, goats, hypocrites and
counterfaite Christians, which are without the fold of Christ, having their
own conscience to accuse and bear witness against them that they have
despised the son of GOD, even him who should have been their savior Christ
Jesus: that they have rejected his Gospel, resisted the truth, weltered in
all uncleanness and sin like beasts, shall at that day fall headlong into
deep desperation knowing that at the hands of that just and severe judge they
shall receive the due reward of their frowardness and iniquity. These
terrible signs shall smite such fear into their hearts, and so woonderfully
amase them, that whatsoever they behold, they shall tremble at it; whatsoever
they hear it shall be in their ears as it were the roaring of the seas. Men's
minds shall be troubled, their faith shall wither and wast away as an untimely
plant, they shall utterly fall from GOD, and all hope of salvation. Yea the
very elect shall quake and tremble, they shall be for the time void of
counsel, and as it were men at their wits end. For if now their minds be
troubled to see the present confusion of things in the world, to see
kingdoms and nations in armor one against another, to see so much monstrous
cruelty showed, so much innocent blood powered upon the ground; to see the
wicked so prosper, and the godly so trodden under foot like duste; to see the
matter of salvation, even the word of God called into question, so earnestly
and doubtfullie to be disputed of even among the learned sort with most
hateful and despitefull contention, whereof there is like to the eye of man to
be no end; if this do so much astonish men's minds now, that it makes them
doubtful what to think, or what to do, in what great perplexity shall they
be in that day when false Christ's and false prophets, not one nor two, but
many shall arise, so forcible in persuasion, that they might deceive, if it
were possible, even the elect of God, and when the powers of heaven shall be
moved? When these things are, doubtless men's hearts must needs fail them
for extreme fear, and for looking after those things which shall come upon
the world. Our merciful Lord comfort us that we do not faint, and strenghen
us that we may stand in that day. After all those signs in the sun and the
moon and the stars, in the powers of heaven, and in the hearts of men,
betokening Christ's approach, Then (says the Evangelist) they shall see the
son of man come.

26 The manner of his coming is thus described. The manner of Chrstes coming
to judgment.
He shall come in a cloud with power and great glory. It was told the
Disciples before whose faces Christ was received up into glory, This Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven shall so come as ye have seen him
go. He went in a cloud, and shall come in a cloud. His first coming into
the world was contemptible but his second coming shall be glorious, Matthew.
25.
his first, to be judged of the world; his second, to judge the world. He
shall be accompanied with the Angels of heaven, partly to set forth his
princely honor and royal Majesty; for so it is written, Psalm. 97.
Let all his Angels worship him: and partly to be his ministers in things
apperteyning to this judgment; Matthew. 24.
for so we read, He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds and from the one
end of the heaven unto the other. S. Paul ioineth with these Angels flaming
fire. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
He shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2.
Pet. 3.
rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power, when
he shall come to be glorified in his saints and to be made marvelous in all
them that believe. This fire shall (whereof the Apostle speaks) dissolve and
melt away the heavens and the earth. Which burning shall be as it were the
fining of goulde in the furnace, not consuming but purging the substance of
these creatures from the dross of those alterable qualities whereunto they are
now subject. So Bid speaks of them, Beda.
Per imaginem transeunt, per essentiam subsistunt: praeterit figura huius
mundi, non substantia. Their shape vadeth, their substance remains: the
figure of this world does pass away, but not the nature. We look for new
heavens, and a new earth, (says Saint Peter) These heavens shall pass away
with a noise, these elements shall melt with heat, this earth with the works
that are there in shall be burnt up. Then shall God be glorified and appear
merueilous. Let the mighty remember this which build their nestes aloft: the
rich which join house to house, whose garners, sellars, and pastures are full
of grain, wine, and cattle; whose chestes are stuffed with money; who wholly
apply the world as they should live ever upon the earth. All this gear will
be consumed, it is but matter for the flame. Flee therefore flee from this
world which will sodenlie melt away: look not back toward this pleasant
Sodoma, Genesis 19.
which the Lord will shortly set on fire. For what does it profit a man to
gain the world, which though it be enioied for a while, yet at length must
needs melt as wax, and to loose his soul, which if it were not lost, might
live in bliss for ever? Love not, seek not the things of this world; look
unto that by which we may stand in the day when the Lord shall show
himself from heaven, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to
be made merueilous in them that believe. Psalm. 1.
The wicked shall not be able to stand in that judgment, neither sinners in
righteous men's company. At the coming of this power, at the presence of this
great GOD, at the sight of this Tribunal seat so full of glory, and of
terror, the deriders of Christ, the contemners of his word, the workers of
iniquity, shall tremble and quake and desire through despair that the
mountains may fall on them, and cover them from his fearful presence. But
the faithful, the elect shall lift up their heads with joy and be made
partakers of exceeding glory: they shall sit upon the twelve seats and judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel. Where the faith of the Apostles shall condemn
the unbelieving Jews: the piety of the Centurion all ungodly magistrates,
preaching Paul all unpreaching prelates, Zacheus al vsurars, and Lazarus al
repining impatient and wicked beggars. Apoc. 20.
The books shall be laid wide open in the sight of all flesh: The book of
God, and the book of man's conscience; the book of his law, and the book of
our life. It shall be examined in the one what GOD has commanded, in the
other it shall be testified how man has obeyed: in the one, what works of
mercy he has required at our hands, in the other what fruits of merciless
affection the ground of our stony hearts has yielded. And according to the
evidence both of the one, and of the other the eternal and irreuocable
sentence shall pass from the mouth of God. Matthew. 25.
The perjured, the usurer, the adulterer, the liar, the idolater shall be cast
into the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21.
into that utter darkness where shall be wayling, weeping, gnashing of teeth,
endless horror and everlasting woe. But the elect which have lived a sober, a
just and a godly life, which have loved the coming of Christ Jesus more than
this world or their present lives, they shall enter into the kingdom of their
Lord, they shall be glorified with Christ and possess with him that
everlasting enheritaunce, having heard that most joyful sentence, Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
first foundations of the world.

27 Heereuppon Saint Peter infers this conclusion, Our preparation unto this
judgment by heed taking.
seeing all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons ought ye to
be in holy conversation and godliness looking for and hasting unto the
coming of the day of God? 2. Pet. 3.
And Saint Luke this threefolde exhortation, Take heed to your selves, watch,
pray continually. Take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness, least your hearts
be oppressed; least that day come upon you at unawares, and unlooked for; least
it happen to you as it happened to the fathers in the days of Noa; they ate
and drank, and suddenly the water overwhelmed them; or as to the Sodomites;
they burned in lust, and suddenly fire consumed them from heaven; or as to the
Israelites, they fed themselves greedily, surfeted and died with the meat
in their mouths. Let their dreadful ends make us eschew their sins,
Beware also of the cares of this life. They be perilous thorns and prick thy
heart to death. Judas was careful by any means to gather money, and to what
it brought him ye all know. Ananias and Saphira caring how to live, made no
conscience to lie to the holy Ghost; their destruction was most sudden. When
the rich man was in the midst of his care how to enlarge his barnes, that
very night his soul was taken from him. Beware therefore and take heed
specially of these two things, Let not your hearts be overwhelmed with excess
of meats and drinks, nor choked with the cares of this present life.

28 Besides this wariness and heedetaking it is further required that we be
also watchful. By watching
For since we know not what time the Lord will come, expedient it is that we
should be in continual expectation of him that wensoeuer he come we may
be ready with joy to meet him. Happy is he that watchfully looks for the
coming of Christ Jesus, and he miserable whom the Lord shall overtake
unlooked for. S. Jerome Jerome.
did so live in continual watching and waiting for this day of redemption,
that the sound of that voice was still in his ears, Arise ye dead, and come
to judgment. I do wait, says Job, Job. 14.
all the days of my warfare till my change come. The like we read of the
Prophet David whose watchfulness was such that the watchman standing upon his
ward being weary of the discomfortablenesse of the night does not so eye the
rising of the morning as he did the glorious appearing of the Lord. I have
waited says he upon the Lord, my soul has waited and I have trusted in his
word. My soul waits on the Lord more than the morning watch watches for
the morning. How happy is their estate whom the Lord in that day shall find
thus ready for him?

29 But because we can of our selves neither rightly beware, By praying.
nor diligently watch without the special assistance of his spirit; therefore
as we are exhorted to watch, so are we likewise admonished to pray. The Lord
of his infinite mercy grant that being thus prepared to meet the Lord in
the day when he comes to judge the quick and the dead, we may be found
worthy to enter with him into that rest which he by the shedding of his most
precious blood has purchased for all the blessed of his father, to whom, etc.

A Sermon preached at Paul's cross.
MATTHEW. 8. 23 And when he was entered into the ship his disciples followed him.

24 And behold there arose a great tempest in the sea so that the ship was
covered with waves: but he was asleep.


THIS short history does by way of a type or figure set forth the state of the
Church, The state of the Church militant figured by a ship tossed upon the
waters.
putting us in mind that the way to the kingdom of God is rough, that we
must enter into joy through much sorrow, that here we must be always on the
suffering side, that the whole life of a Christian man upon earth is a warfare,
that such as will be disciples of Christ must bear the cross, that as many as
will be in the same ship with him must prepare them selves unto dangerous
storms. The sea of this wicked world is troublesome, the Church of God is
beaten and tossed like a boat, it is disfigured with sharp and stormy
weather. Feeble is all flesh; manifoulde are our infirmities; faint is our
faith; and seeing our sin with the remembrance of the stipende due for the
same, we are ready to sink into the bottomless gulf of desperation. In
this dangerous estate we find no help in our selves. But behold the
disciples of Christ have taught us by their example where help is to be sought
in the midst of these manifold and great distresses: And that is only in
Christ who is always a present helper of them which seek him in time of
need, who has overcome and victoriously triumphed on the cross against
Satan, sin, the world, hell, death and condemnation. To him all power gives
place, against him no force is able to stand, unto him all things are made
subject. He is that Samson which by his own death has slain his foes, that
David which has dashed out the brains of Goliath the grand enemy of Gods
people, that seed which has bruised the serpents head, that almighty which
rebukes winds, cease storms, eases the burdens of them that mourn,
washes away iniquity, freely forgiueth sin, hears and delivers out of
trouble. If we cry with the disciples in our distress Help Lord, he will in
mercy awake and hear us, through his mighty power he will both cause the
raging of the sea to cease, and stay the madness of the people.

2 But to the end we may more particularly gather such lessons out of this
parcel of Scripture as may most tend to Gods glory and our edifying, Christ
must be followed into this ship.
I mean to stand while this time will permit upon these points, showing
first that we must follow Christ into the ship, secondly that as many as will
sail with him shall be in danger, thirdly that in their danger they shall
not be destitute of help if they seek it at his hands. It is not my peculiar
conceit: but Tertullian and Chrysostom do note that this ship represents the
church of Christ tossed with the surges of temptation, with the stormy waves of
calamity and trouble in this present world.

3 Christ has always had a Church here on earth, it was begun in Paradise,
This ship must be known from the ship of Antichrist.
since it has remained and continewed even unto this day. And as Christ
has his boat, so has Antichrist also his. Wherefore it behooves us to know
and discern the one from the other. The arc of the tabernacle of the Lord
has her true ornaments whereby to be known. Therein are laid up the
treasures of God, most precious jewels. S. Paul tells us what they are. Heb.
9.
In the arc of the testament was a goulden pot having manna, and the rod of
Aaron that had blossomed, and the tables of the testament. In the tables was
the written word of God; Manna was a figure of that mystical food wherewith
we are nourished to eternal life; the rod of Aaron resembled the scepter of
discipline. So that where nothing is taught but according to the written word,
where the sacraments are sincerely ministered, where the rod and scepter of
government is used, there is Christ, there is the Church. And we may thank our
God for ever that in his marvelous great mercy he has made us pertakers of
these so rich and precious blessings, whereby we know assuredly that God is
amongst us, that he sits in the midst of our assemblies, that this church is
unto us as the arc of Noah, as the glorius sanctuary of the Lord, When we
know the ship where Christ is thither we must follow him.
as the ship into which Christ Jesus is entered.

4 When the Romans minded to leave the city, Scipio took an ensign in his
hand and set forwards toward the capitol saying, Quicunque vult remp. salua^
me sequatur, whosoever wishes well to the common state let him follow me. But
most truly it may be said Whosoever wishes well to his own soul let him
follow Christ. He is no servant that refuses to follow his maisterr: he that
follows him not is not worthy of him. The sheep when they hear the voice
of their sheepehearde they go after him. He is no member of Christ that
sundreth him self from the head of that body whereof he professes himself
a member. That branch that is cut off from the vine withers and is fit for
nothing but for the fire. After that Judas left Christ and gave himself to be
a sectarie of the high priests, his case was lamentable. No man comes to the
haven but he which follows Christ to the ship. If we leave him, whither
should we go? There is no other that has the words of eternal life. Let us
therefore do as his Disciples did, forsake all and follow. Follow him not
only to the ship, but in the ship.

5 The follow Christ to the ship which by faith in the gospel are gathered and
united to his Church: The way to follow him to the ship is by denying our
selves.
the door and entrance whereunto is narrow. For so Christ describes it, If
any man will come after me, let him deny him self. This lesson is general.
For S. Luke says dixit omnibus, Mat. 16.
he spoke unto all: and S. Mark Et turbae and discipulis dixit, Luc. 9.
he spoke it both to the multitude and to his disciples. Mark. 8.
No man therefore can look to come unto Christ by any other way. We must
begin with the plain denying of our selves, that is to say the forsaking of
our impiety and fleshly lusts.

6 To deny impiety is to forsake false doctrine, Our impiety.
false worshipping of God, and whatsoever is against the first part or table
of the law. Tob. 14.
The house of God, says Tobias shall be built for ever with a glorious
building, as the Prophets have spoken of it: And all nations shall turn and
fear the Lord God truly, Act. 19.
and shall bury their idols: that is to say, they shall forsake their
impiety and so be numbered with the Saints of God. When the Ephesians which
had used curious Arts were converted to the faith of Christ, they brought
their books and burned them as many as were worth by estimation fifty
thousand pieces of silver. By the writings of Athenagoras, Clemens, Iustine
martyr, Arnobius, Minutius, Lactantius, and many other of the Auncientes it
appears that the very first thing which those men of famous memory did in
their conversion from Gentilitie to the truth was openly to proclaim defiance
to that impiety wherein they had been nuzled and trained up. Constantine
considering with him self the lives and doings of former Emperors, and
finding that their estate had been always worse which had worshipped the gods
of the nations, that they which gave greatest credit to Idolatrous spirits of
diuinatio^ were but deluded, that none had fairer promises of prosperous
euentes then they whose ends were most unfortunate, that his father only
amongst the rest putting his trust in the God which created heaven and earth
had by experience all the time of his life found him a mighty protector and
a bountiful rewarder of them that fear him: when it pleased God by this mean
to bring him to a love and liking of the truth, he began forthwith to show
great tokens of favor unto Christians, to have conference with their Bishops
and chief professors, to restore them whom cruelty had cast out of their
lawful possessions for beeleuing in the name of Christ, to erect houses of
great charge for prayer and holy exercises of the Church, to do whatsoever
might any way be devised not only for the succor and needeful relief but
also for the honor and dignity of Christians. Now by this that Tobias
foresheweth how the Gentiles being converted to the truth shall bury their
Idols; that S. Luke records how the Ephesians burned all their impious
books; that the fathers in their first conversion wrote so vehemently against
paganism; that Constantine gave so many and so great tokens of a mind
detesting all impiety and burning with the love of Christ Jesus; by this I say
we may perceive how impossible it is to steal a true denial of impiety, how
impossible for a man which in deed has denied it not to show his denial in
his deeds.

7 To deny impiety it is not enough except we also deny our fleshly
lusts. All our worldly and fleshly desires.
If we look into our evil and corrupt nature we shall find nothing but that
which leads us clean from Christ, nothing but rebellion against the spirit,
distrust in the providence of almighty God, joy and delight in earthly
things, blindness of mind, hardness of heart. All this we must mortify,
this we must shake of, we must quite relinquish our own wills and submit our
selves wholly to the will of God. Shall we refuse to do this, when Christ him
self has said I seek not to have mine own will but the will of him that
sent me? Ioh. 5.
And again, it is meat unto me to do his will. Ioh. 4.
And in his greatest agony, Not as I will O father but as thou will. Matthew. 26.
This is a doctrine hard to practice and put in ure. It is the fault of our
corrupt flesh, we think too highly of our selves, we are too much wedded to
our own wills, the blessed Apostle (as we think) speaks like a man besides
himself when he says. 1. Cor. 3.
If any man seem to be wise amongst you in this world let him be made a
fool that he may become wise. This is but the entrance unto christianity: yet
how few are there which be come thus far? The rich young man in the Gospel
seemed to be very forward in the way: Luc. 14.
but Christ discovers his affection and shows that he had not denied him
self, and therefore was no fit disciple for him. It made him heavy and
pensive to think of leaving so great possessions and of weining his heart so
soon from the world. He could have been contented to deny impiety, but
Christ would have worldly concupiscence also to be denied. For the grace of God
our Savior, says the Apostle, has appeared to all men teaching us that
denying impiety and wordly desires we live soberlie and justly and godly in
this present world. Tit. 2.


8 This is the way wherein Christ must be followed by as many as desire to be
shipped with him, The way to follow him in the ship is imitation.
to be of the number of his people. This is the door of entrance into the
Church. When we are once entered and received into the ship, as we followed
him thither by believing the Gospel, by denying impiety and worldly lusts:
so there we must follow him by walking as we have him for our example, 1.
Ioh. 3.
purging our selves even as he is pure, and showing forth the virtues of him
that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2.
Be ye holy for I am holy, Leuit. 11.
says the Lord. As according to his similitude and likeness we were at the
first created, so now according to the same similitude we must also be framed
and fashioned anew. Since we were first light and became darkness afterward,
and are made now again of darkness light in the Lord, it is no reason that we
should any more frame our selves unto the lusts of our ignorance, 1. Pet. 1.
but as he which has called us is holy, so likewise ought we to be holy in
all manner of conversation. When the Jews boasted that they had Abraham to
their father, Ioh. 8.
their vanity was reproved, If ye were the sons of Abraham, says Christ, ye
would do the works of Abraham: but now ye go about to kill me a man that have
told you the truth, which I have heard of God: Hoc Abraham non fecit, Abraham
did not this. It is in vain for us to boast of the name of christians except
the image of Christ be seen in our life and co^uersatio^. If we follow him not
we are not his.

9 We are exhorted to be followers both of God and of men. How God is to be
followed and how men.
Be ye followers of God as most dear children. Again, Be ye followers of the^
which through faith and patience inherit the promises. God is the rule as of
faith so of life: Ephesians. 5.
wherefore absolutely, Be ye followers of God; but of men always with this
caution. Heb. 6.
Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ. The Thessalonians S. Paul commends
for as much as they were followers of him and of the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
1. These. 1.
If our fathers, elders, guides, and teachers be a rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their heart aright, Psalm. 78,
and whose spirit is not faithful unto God, then are they no presidentes for
us to follow: but be followers of us, so long as we are followers of Christ, 1.
Tim. 4,
and are examples unto you, in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit,
Phil. 4,
in faith, in pureness. Whatsoever things are true whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things which ye have both
learned and received and heard and seen in me, these things do, and the God
of peace shall be with you.

10 Their estate in the world which follow Christ in such wise as has been
showed is here resembled by a ship tossed and grieuouslie shaken with a
tempest. They which are wi^h Christ must suffer trouble and affliction.
It is and ever has been, yea and will be their lot whether they be upon sea or
land, to be in peril, to stand in fear, to have wind and weather against
them. As many as follow him must deny them selves, and having denied them
selves they must take up the cross. The cross signifies al afflictions which
may be divided into two kinds, afflictions of punishment, and afflictions of
trial: the former are common unto all, the later are proper to the elect of
God.

11 The sin of Adam brought misery unto man, Afflictions common unto all men.
and a curse unto all the creatures of God. Hence it comes to pass that with
sorrow and tears we enter into the world, and when we are in it we have a
short continuance: yet in that shortness good Lord unto how mane cha^ces and
cha^ges are we subject? In the end we die and who does know what becomes of
us? our graves keep us secret. As the waters pass from the sea, and as the
floude decaieth and dries up, so man sleeps and rises not, Job. 14.
he lies in the dust and shall not be raised from his sleep till the heaven
be no more. O how bitter is this to such as put their trust in, uncertain
riches? how dreadful is the remembrance of death unto the wicked? But they
only are not subject unto death: the sorrows of the grave take hold on all
in as much as all have sinned. Howbeit in these afflictions which come as
punishments unto all there is a difference. They come not unto all with like
intent of him that sends them: they fall upon the godly for their correction,
but they bring confusion unto the wicked.

12 There are other afflictions proper to believers, Afflictions peculiar unto
Gods elect.
tribulatio^s which God does send as special tokens of favor to his dearest
Saints, trials which are unto the^ that bear them patiently, seals and
assura^ces that they are counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which they
suffer. For the world which hates both the truth and the light cannot but hate
all such as love the truth and as walk in the light. Out of this fountain
spring all those molestations which the godly do suffer for righteousness sake
at the hands of wicked and ungodly men. Psalm. 35.
David saw this when he said. Many are the troubles of the just. S. Paul did
consider it and therefore said, They that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. Christ did often put his disciples and scholars in
remembrance of it, If they have persecuted me they will persecute you. In the
world we are sure to find heavy intertainement, but this is our comfort:
with whom we suffer, with him we shall reign; we shall live with him in glory
with whom now we are in misery, if so be we take up our cross and follow him.
Patience perfoce is no patience. Not every one which bears any manner of
cross, but he which takes it up, that is to say which is willing to bear it
he shall receive an immortal crown of glory. The wild, restie, and unbroken
horse if he kick and fling never so much yet is he forced to carry his rider,
but being managed and tamed, he passes on quietly with his burden. The
wicked mutter, they murmr and blaspheme when they are once touched: but the
servants of God do not only take that patiently which is laid upon them,
but they rejoice that they are thought worthy to suffer. Be they never so much
afflicted in body the end of their affliction is always joy in the spirit. The
wicked kick against the prick, the godly submit them selves to the yoke,
knowing that they are stricken with a tender hand, that he which humbles them
loves them and shall turn all things to their good. Yea they take up not only
their own crosses but also the griefs and sufferings of others upon their
backs, they are content to feel the smart even of other men's stripes, to put
their shoulders under the burthe^s of their brethren, to weep for the sorrows
of other men as much as for their own, when others are bound, to be as if they
were in chains with them. These are the suffringes of the church of Christ,
these are the crosses of his children. As for heretics they have no portion in
this cup. Though they offer themselves unto all kinds of torture, yet
because they suffer not for the truth but against the truth, they cannot look
for that rest which is promised to Gods afflicted when the Lord shall show him
self from heaven accompanied, with his mighty angels. 2. These. 1.
For it is not the cross but the cause that makes a martyr. Blessed are they
that suffer for righteousness sake. There is no cause why that irreligious crew
should glory in their sufferings which fight for Antichrist, for heresy, for
popery, for superstition, sedition, (...)
self will and singularity: Non ex passione certa est iustitia, sed ex
iustitia passio gloriosa est, says S. Augustine: Our suffringes are no argument
of our righteousness, but our righteousness an ornament unto our suffringes.

13 To these afflictions whereof we have hitherto spoken the church has
always been subject, (...)
from the beginning it has been tossed and much troubled. Abel the image of the
church was unnaturally murdered by the bloody hand of his own brother. Abraham
the father of our faith with his family a figure of the church lived as a
pilgrim and they as strangers upon earth. The Israelites were in Egypt
tyrannized by Pharao, in the wilderness many ways chastised of the Lord,
afterward in continual storms war, and battle, before they could be placed
in the land of Canaan: when they were come thither and had dwelt long there, in
the end their temple was spoiled, their people murdered, their cities razed,
and they led captives into strange countries. This was the lot of Gods church,
the portion of his elect and chosen people in former times. In the last days
Christ himself was no sooner in the world but he was by and by forced to save
his life by flight. There was no day no hour that passed over him without
grief from the time of his birth to that very moment wherein he yielded up
the ghost. How it fared with his disciples after him, and after them with the
churches which they had planted it may appear by the history partly of their
acts and partly of those times wherein Nero, Traia^, Domitian, Diocletian and
others of the like disposition lived. But no time so bloody and cruel, as
since that Roman strumpet has usurped authority over Christ and his church.
The church could hide it self in no corner of any kingdom in the whole world
but his tyranny found it out to vex it to persecute it and to spoil it. What
blood he has shed, what murders he has committed in these latter days,
England, Scotland, Flanders, and France can sufficiently record. By this it
is evident to al men's eyes how the church in the midst of this wicked world is
tossed like a ship upon the sea.

14 As the whole church of Christ, Upon every particular member.
so every member that truly professes him, is subject unto great tentation.
If the ship be in danger, how can they be without peril that are in it? As
soon as we profess the name of Christ, the Devil stirs up his storms and
tempests of temptation to make us deny and forsake our profession: wherein his
assaults be most fierce, in which respect the blessed Apostle does call the^
fiery. So it pleased God to chastise and keep under every son whom he
receives. And if we would be without affliction then were we bastardes and not
children.

15 If both the whole body and every member thereof be thus devoted unto
suffering, the chiefest members must look to be in greatest dangers. Upon the
principal members specially.
That which Christ told his disciples must be verified in all their successors,
The world shall hate them. For why? they which hate to be reformed cannot brook
to be reproved: And we must needs rebuke the world of sin. What misery soever
comes to the church the minister is always the first that feels the smarte
of it. This we find to have been true in the Prophets, in the Apostles and in
others, that from time to time have borne the rooms of overseers in the
Church. Quem prophetarum non persecuti sunt. says Christ. What Prophet can be
named which has not been persecuted? The time would not suffer me to make but
only a bare rehersall either of the ancient worthy guides of the church, which
have been most cruelly entreated and murdered in former times, or of your own
pastors whom our late evil days have seen taken from us in most cruel sort.

16 By this it is plain that the whole church of Christ and every member of
the same is subject to tribulations afflictions, The causes from whence such
storms do rise as troble yt church.
and troubles, and the chiefest members most subject. Let us now consider how
and why this comes to pass. The most near and immediate cause of their
troble which are tossed upon the sea is the rising of winds and the raging of
the waters. This is manifest unto sense. They that go down to the sea in ships
and use traffic in great waters do see that when the stormy wind arises
and lifts up the waves, they which are in the ship mount up to heaven and
desce^d to the deep, so that their soul melts for trouble: they are tossed
to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and al their understanding is
swallowed up. Wherefore the blustering winds and the stormy seas were the
sensible cause why the ship wherein Christ with his disciples sailed was sore
tossed and greatly dangered. Now if we look into the sea of the world we shall
find that all our grief and vexation comes from those unquiet motions which
are raised by our spiritual and ghostly enemy who never rests but tumbleth
to and fro raising one tempestuous storm in the neck of an other. What
marvel then if the church be troubled, or rather how can it be otherwise then
troubled and sore assalted seeing Satan has so many ways to molest it and
uses as many as he has? Sometimes he stirs up cruel and bloody
persecution. If that will not serve he uses such winds as are somewhat more
calm, but no whit less dangerous, the winds of division and contention then
which nothing does sooner hazard the church of Christ. A kingdom being at unity
in it self, though it be small, yet may be strong: but divided and distracted
into factio^s though it be mighty how should it stand? This is a thing which I
wish greatly that we did thoroughly consider. Hitherto (such is is the mercy of
almighty God) our enemies have not prevailed against us although they be many,
and we but few; they strong, and we weak. But if a few silly weak ones be
miserably divided, what may we look for but inevitable ruin? It is
lamentable that the Gospel of peace should bring forth schism. This is both
slanderous and undoubtedly perilous to our profession. Unto them whom Satan
has abused as his instruments to work this evil, I may speak in a manner as
the clearke of Ephesus did to the people when they were in an uproar without
cause. There is no idolatry no impiety maintained by the laws and orders of
this church. If Demetrius and the crafts men which are with him have any thing
concerning other matters, there is authority, we have courts, there are lawful
assemblies to hear to discuss and to determine the^. When they refuse the
peaceable means whereby strife may be ended, and will follow no course but
that which breeds confusion and raises tumultes, may they not justly be
accused as clamorous troblers of the church of God, for as much as there ca^ be
no just and alowable reason aleaged of these their troublesome and unquiet
dealings? Shall we be followers of me^ in contention and that about frivolous
and vain things, and leave the walking after Christ in peace and love. Romans 15.
Now the God of patience and co^solatio^ grant that at ye length we may be like
minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus, that with one mind and
one mouth we may praise God eue^ ye father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

17 Thus the church as a ship is by outward persecution and inward co^tentio^
as it were by storms and te^pests troubled. How the storms which trouble men
in part^cular do a rise.
The storms which trouble the particular members of the church are our own
rebellious and disordred desires which never suffer us to enjoy any long rest
of mind. Some are troubled with one unquietness and some with another. Some
cannot rest for the cares of the world some swel with pride and vain glory,
some boil in ra^cor envy and malice, some fry in lust, some with anger. The
best are secretly disturbed with that from which the holy Apostle cries out.
Miserable man who shall deliver me? When these things have so shaken us that
our souls are thereby bruised, the^ does Satan raise the greatest storm of all
other. He layth our sins before our eyes, and persuades with us as he did with
Cain and Judas that our iniquity is greater the^ can be pardoned, our sores
past cure, our breaches such as are without hope of remedy. With this blast and
puff he overthrows many, and the dearest children of God are most subject
hereunto. It is therefore good to resist sin betimes, least when the conscience
is therewith ouerburdened if the Devil cast our sin before us together with the
iudegment of God against sin, Our troubles do grow when the causes that
should appease them are asleep.
we make shipwreck of our faith.

18 Now when these troubles are not quieted by such causes as have power to
appease the^, the^ are the causes (although not properly but figuratively) said
to be aslepe. So the Lord when he sees children to be afflicted, or suffers
the wicked for a time to go unpunished, till he deliver the one and plague the
other, is to our seeming as if he slept. And the grace of God in us whereby we
withstand and resist that which fights against the spirit may be said to
wake as long as it works, and to sleep then when it cease working. When we
sleep naturally, our bodies are subject to many dangers. Holofernes being a
sleep the weak hand of Judith was able to make him shorter by the head. Aug.
in Psalm. 32
In cord christiano and tranquillitas erit and pax, sed quamdiu vigilat fides
nostra: Si autem dormit fides nostra, periclitamur. In a christian heart there
shall be both tranquillity and peace, but no longer then our faith is kept
waking: if that fall asleep we are in danger says S. Augustine. For this
cause S. Paul cries out so loud in the ears of men. Ephesians. 5.
Awake thou that sleep. And to Timothy, Stir up the gift of God which is
in thee, but let it not sleep. (...)


19 If the master and governor of the ship who sits at the helm fall
asleep the ship cannot keep her right course unguided but will fall upon
every sand, rush upon every rock and so hazard whatsoever is in it. The
boat of Christ is set over unto two governors the magistrate and the
minister. It is dangerous if either of them be not watchful. When such kings
ruled Israel as lived securely, took their case and cared not for the public
benefit, such as Manasses and Jeroboam, then was there great confusion in the
Church and common wealth, God was not served: idolatry every where was
committed. It is a great fault in rulers and judges of the earth when their
eyes are not open to behold the disorderly dealinges of the wicked, nor their
ears to receive the complaints of the poor, the fatherless, the widow and
them which suffer wrong. There was sometime a Sergeant that now rests (I hope
in peace) who when a poor man craved his advise in a matter and offered him no
money, answered I hear thee but I feel thee not. This man's heart was awake
unto covetousness, but unto judgment and justice asleep.

20 Ministers are termed by a special name of watchmen, By ministers.
to show that they above all others should beware of too much sleep. Ezech.
3.
Son of man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, says the
Lord to his Prophet. Now if the people take a man from amongst them and make
him their watchman, if when he sees the sword come upon the land he blow the
trumpet and warn the people, then he that hears the sound of the trumpet
and will not be warned if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be
upon his own head. For he heard the sound of the trumpet and would not be
admonished: therefore his blood shall be upon him, as contrariwise he that
receives warning shall save his life. But if the watchman see the sword come
and blow not the trumpet and the people be not warned, if the sword come and
take any man from amongst them, he is taken away for his iniquity, but his
blood will I require at the watchmans hand. Wherefore there could not a
greater plague happen to the people of God then that whereof the Prophet Esaie
makes mention, Their watchmen are all blind, Esai. 56.
they lie asleep and delight in sleeping. Whilst the husbandmen slept the
evil man sowed his darnell and went his way and was not seen. Sleepie folk
are the cause why the field of the Lord is ouergrowen with weeds, his church
infected, with sin and error. When the Pastor sleeps, the wolf
deuoureth, sin enters and makes hauock.

21 But since he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep, It is
good that Christ should sleep and we be troubled.
it may be marueiled how that thing which he keeps can be subject to so many
storms and tempests which might be prevented if he did not suffer him self
or us, or them whom he has set as watchmen over us to fall asleep. Whereunto
I answer by the same distinction which the spouse her self does make in the
song of Solomon, Cant. 5.
I sleep but my heart waketh. God suffers us that is to say our outward man
to be molested, troubled, vexed: upon our flesh he seems many times to shut
his eyes, although in truth the eyes of his fatherly providence be always
open even upon that, not permitting us therein to be tried and tempted above
our strength. But over our hearts we know by manifest experience and are
sure to find that he still keeps a continual watch. Psalm. 127.
The Lord will keep thee (says the Prophet) from all evil, he will keep
thy soul. And although it be grievous, yet is it meet and expedient yea good
and profitable for us that our hearts, our souls, our spirits being so surely
and safely kept, God should sometimes wink at the troubles of our flesh as if
he saw them not. He se^deth his disciples help in their troubles.


22 The disciples in their great fear and danger went unto Christ, and
wakened him with their cries, Help we perish. Do thou see us cast away and
not consider it? Of the like complaints of the people of God in the midst of
their distresses we read in sundry places especially of the Psalms: Psalm. 44.
Up why sleep thou O Lord? Awake, be not far of for ever. Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and our affliction? Our soul is
beaten down unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground, rise up for
our succor and redeem us for thy mercies sake. These groans and cries be not
powered out in vain. Christ rebukes the winds and seas: his servants have
their wish, their requests are no sooner uttered then granted. If we as good
disciples of these disciples do in our troubles fly unto Christ for aid, in
his mercy he shall hear us, and deliver us by the strength of his mighty
power. He cannot suffer us to be tried above that which we are able to bear.
Be our suit never so desperate he can help it. For nothing is impossible with
God. Would you see some fit examples? The Israelites groned unto him in Egypt,
he heard them and delivered them from the tyranny of Pharao. The young men in
the furnace called upon him and were preserved. The cry of Daniell stopped the
mouths of Lions, Paul and Sylas being in bonds prayed and their chains fell
loose from them, the doors opened and gave them passage. Although we be
plunged never so low, although the floudes run clean over us, in so much that
we seem to our selves as it were past help and recovery, yet we are not
past help so long as we are not past desire to be helped. The greatness of our
peril can be no stop to our deliverance, because the power of our deliverer
is infinite. In deed we see that men are altogether amazed and in a manner
bereft of wit and understanding when they feel them selves dangerously
tossed to and fro. But do we not also see that when they cry unto the Lord in
their trouble, he brings them out of distress, he turns the storm to
calm, so that the waves thereof are still? do we not see how they pass
throught tribulations to the kingdom of heaven, and through stormy tempests
are brought to the haven where they would be? This the Lord does that we might
confess his loving kindness before him, and his wonderful works before the
sons of men. To him therefore even God the father God the son, and God the
holy Ghost be all honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross.
1. PETER 4. 7 The end of al things is at hand. Be ye therefore sober and
watching in prayer.

8 But above all things have fervent love among you: for love covers the
multitude of sins.

9 Be ye harborous one toward another, without grudging.

10 Let every man as he has received the gift minister the same one to an
other, as good disposers of the manifold graces of God.


THE Apostle S. Peter like a perfitte workman, We must live as they that in the
end shall give account how they have lived.
and a skillful builder, first lays a sure foundation, and then frames and
erecteth a good building thereupon. The foundation is Christ. Another
foundation no man can lay. 1. Cor. 3.
He is the rock, 1. Pet, 2
the foundation; and we as lively stones must be framed thereupon, hewed and
squared with the hammer and squyre of Gods word, that we may grow to be a
spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up unto God through Jesus
Christ spiritual and acceptable sacrifices, of piety prayer and thanks
giving. Through Christ we are brought from darkness unto light, that from
henceforth we should walk as the children of that light wherein he has
placed us; of a perverse generation we are through him made an holy people,
that we should be holy as he is that has called us; we are redeemed not by
goulde and silver, but by the innocent blood of the immaculate lamb, Deuteronomy. 10.
to serve him that has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life; 1. Pet. 1.
we are called to be the children of God, Luc. 1.
citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and to be fellow heirs with Christ of
that his eternal kingdom, that we should be obedience and loving Children,
trusty and duetiefull citizens, that we may be not only called, but chosen,
accepted, and admitted to inherit with Christ the first begotten of God. What
building we be whether goulde or stubble, what life we lead it will one day
appear. Our conversion will be called unto an hard account. In that day we
must stand before the tribunal seat of God and render a reckoning, yea and
receive as we have wrought in our bodies good or badde. The judge is even at
hand, Veniens veniet. A^ac. 2.
He will come surely without fail, and without stay, He stands before the
door. This is the last hour, Apocal. 3.
the trumpe is in a readiness to be blown to judgment.

2 For (says Peter) the end of all things hangs over us. The
consideration of the last end does make them that are heavy joyful, and them
that are godly watchful.
In which words the Apostle does both comfort us, and exhort us. Such as are
afflicted, oppressed with wrong, burdened with poverty, vexed with sickness,
slaundered, persecuted or hated of the world, here they may receive comfort.
Your misery shall be but momentanie and short, your joy shall be great and
endless. Luke, 21.
Lift up your heads for your redemption draws near. The end of your
affliction together with the end of all things is at hand. Again upon these
words a most necessary exhortation is inferred. Christ is coming in the
clouds, all flesh shall rise and reckon: he only that has his lamp burning
shall enter in with the bridegroom: as we are found so shall we be taken and
judged. The end is at hand, be sober therefore and watch unto prayer.

3 Whereas the holy scriptures do make often mention of a double end, The
last end of all things is certain.
the one wherein we are to yield up our mortal lives; the other wherein
Christ at his second coming shall finish the course of all this sinful
world: the Apostle treating in this place of the later, I shall at this
present follow his foote-steppes, and speak of Christ his second coming to
put an end to all things. 2. Pet. 3.
For they which say, Where is the promise of his coming? Act. 27.
deceive themselves. He has set a day wherein he will judge the world in
justice: he is appointed judge of quick and dead. The Angel of God bears
witness of his coming. Act. 10.
This Jesus which is taken up into heaven shall so come, Act. 1.
as ye have seen him go. And S. John as if he beheld and saw him coming,
Apoc. 1.
says: Behold he com^eth with clouds, and every eye shall see him.

4 But as his coming is most certain, The time thereof uncertain.
so the hour, day, month, year or time is most uncertain. It is not for you
to know the seasons and precise points of times which the father has
appointed in his own power. Act. 1.
Of that day and hour no man knows, Matthew. 24,
No not the very Angels of heaven, but my father only. The day of the Lord
will come stealing upon us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
as a thief in the night.

5 Now as we know not the day and time so let us be assured that this coming
of the Lord is near. The time near at hand as appears by signs, but how
near we kno^e not.
He is not slack as we do count slackenesse. That it is at hand it may be
probably gathered out of the Scriptures in diverse places. The signs mentioned
by Christ in the Gospel which should be the foreshewers of this terrible day
are almost already all fulfilled. Matthew. 24.
The prophecies of Daniell of the four Monarchies, Dan. 7.
of the little horn, and of the times, weeks, and days are manifestly come
to pass. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The defections or fallinges away which are spoken of in holy scriptures are
also in great part accomplished. The provinces the ten kingdoms are fallen
from the Roman Empire, and that wicked one has wrought the mystery of
iniquity. Again there has been in a manner a general falling from the
Catholic faith: as the Apostle long before foretold us: some unto Mahomet,
some unto Antichrist his brother. Even about one time Mahomet appeared, and the
Pope swarued from the true faith of Christ, the one renouncing him in name the
other in deed, the one quite blotting out the mention of Christ and denying at
all to profess him in word. The other keeping his name but robbing him of
his office and shutting him out of his right place; both falling from the
faith. That defection also is come upon us which Saint Paul did prophecy of.
1. Tim. 4.
In the latter times men shall fall from the faith, giving ear to deceiving
spirits and doctrines of diuelles. And Saint Peter There shall come in the
last days mockers, 2. Pet. 3.
that walk after their own lusts and say, where is the promise of his
coming? Thus heretics and Atheistes have fallen from Christ and Christian
faith. We that profess Christ and his Gospel are also charged with a
defection, a schism and a falling away. But in every Apostasy two things
must be considered from whom and to whom this sliding is. We gladly grant
that we are fallen away from the Bishop of Rome, who long ago fell from
Christ, we do utterly abandon, his usurped and proud authority, we have
happily forsaken that Synagogue of Satan, that den of thieves, that polluted
Church, that simoniacall temple, and we joyfully confess, that we have no
society or fellowship with his darkness. In our sermons we preach Christ and
none else but him; we know nothing, we teach nothing, we believe nothing, but
Christ and him crucified. In our Sacraments we show forth the Lords death in
no other sort then he himself has done and commanded us to do. In our lives
we woorship the Lord alone and in yielding up our souls, we fly for mercy
only to the merits of Christ Jesus our merciful savior. This is our
Apostasy. We have forsaken him that has forsaken God and whom God has
forsaken; we have left that man of sin, that rosecolored harlot with whom the
kings of the earth have committed fornication, that triple crowned beast, that
doublesworded Tyrant, that thief and murderer, who has robbed so many souls
of salvation and sucked so much innocent blood of Christian martyrs, that
adversary unto Christ, that pretensed vicar, who has displaced the person not
only taking upon him Christ's room and office, but also boasting himself as
if he were a God, and being content of his parasites so to be called. This
wicked man of sin is at length revealed by the sincere preaching of the
Gospel. Daniell in his prophesies, Paul in his Epistles, and John in his
Revelations have most lively described and pointed him forth even as it were
with the finger. Yea through his pride and ambition, his usurping authority
and worldly rule, his tyranny and persecuting of Christ in his members, he
has sufficiently revealed and detected him self, if none had done it for him.

6 This wicked man the Lord shall destroy with the breath of his mouth and
then shall be the end. The destruction of Antichrist,
The blast of Gods trumpe has made him already stagger: he has caught such a
crampe that he begins now to halt: his long and far reaching arm is
marueilously shortened: his cofers are waxen leaner: his falshoode is espied;
many princes refuse to taste any more of his poisoned cup: he is fallen from
being the head and come almost to be the tail: he was too cruel and too
violent to continue. There is no counsel nor power against the Lord. And that
as all men so especially he has felt. It is too hard for him to kick against
the spur, to fight against the Lord of hosts. Seeing therefore that this man
of sin is not only revealed but in a manner overthrown too, doubtless the Lord
is coming and the end of all things draws near. Iniquity (says our
savior) shall abound, and charity shall wax cold, the Gospel shall be
preached in the whole world and then an end. Iniquity does abound: Ose. 4.
for as the prophet says, There is no truth, there is no pity, there is no
knowledge of God in the earth. Slaundering, lying, murdering, stealing, and
whoring have ouerflowed the world. Charity is frosen up and become cold as
ise. These latter days have bredde and brought out swarms of such as love
them selves: but neither God nor their neighbors. Gods word never sounded
more shrill, never was preached more sincerely than at this day. It is not
bound or shut up in straightes it has free and large passage. Iniquity thus
flowing, charity thus ebbing, and Gods Gospel thus sounding throughout the
world, I may conclude with S. Peter, The end is near at hand.

7 This coming of Christ will be a joyful day for Gods children they shall
lift up their heads, The duties toward God which S. Peter infereth upon this
doctrine.
but to Antichrist to the enemies of Gods Gospel to the workers of iniquity
it will be a day of wrath indignation and all affliction. But they put far
from them the remembrance thereof, they set it aloof and go still forward:
heaping up riches though they know not how soon they shall depart from them:
building though they know not for what inhabitant: purchasing though they
know not who shall inherit: decking, feeding, pampering themselves, though
they know not whether the next or this night, the next or this moment their
soul shall be taken from them. The world is toward an end. 1 Ioh. 3.
Love not the world therefore neither the things that are in the world, but
be ye sober and watching in prayer and above all things have fervent love
amongst you. This is S. Peter's exhortation in this place: wherein we learn
our duty toward God, and our duty toward our neighbor. Toward God: be
sober, watch, and pray; toward our neighbor, have fervent charity.

8 There is an inward and an outward sobriety: Inward sobriety, Inward
sobriety.
as Origin defines, is that whereby we keep our affections and desires within
listes, that no man take more upon him then is meet, but every one according
to the measure of his degree. Which definition that father seems to have
drawn out of the words of S. Paul. Romans 12.
Let no man be more wise then behooves him, but let every man be soberly
minded. Angels having too lofty a conceit of themselves were not able to
keep their first estate. Our first parents for passing the limits of
sobriety lost the godly possession which God had given into their hands.
Through an vnsober desire of knowing all things they knew too soon their
own misery. This haughtiness of heart set Absolon so far besides himself
that neither force of nature, fear of God, nor shame of men and the world,
could withholde him from traiterous attempting to tear the crown from his
fathers head. It is strange to see how Herod was swollen with the arrogant
ouerweening and proud conceit of his own eloquence. His strange blasphemous
pride had a strange and fearful punishment. Nabuchodonozor through his
affection being not content to be the highest amongst men, was made the vilest
among beasts. Those are ougly paternes of monstrous minds void of that
sobriety which was in Paul, who, although God had exalted him to the third
heaven and there showed him more than a man might conceive: thought
nevertheless modestly and meekely of himself. 1. Cor. 13.
I am the least of the Apostles not worthy to be called an Apostle. The like
affection was in Saint Peter, it caused him to loath himself at the sight of
the Majesty of the son of God: Luke. 5.
Depart from me (says he) I am a sinful man. It was in that Centurion
which thought himself unworthy to open a door unto Christ Jesus. It was in
the Publican that durst not cast so much as an eye up to heaven. Such again
pass the bounds of this sobriety as seek after needelesse things
neglecting necessary. The Philosopher that gazed upon the skies heeding not
the pit that was under his feet was deservedly laughed to scorn by a girl.
We are all tainted with this fault, whereby it comes to pass, that we wast
(says Seneca) a great part of our life in doing nothing, a greater in doing
evil the greatest of all in meddling with those things which are not for us.
They that in matters of religion will know more than God has revealed, think
not soberlie, but arrogantly of themselves. Woe be to them which are wise in
their own eyes, they are foolish in the sight of God. The root of this vice
is a false persuasion which we have taken that we can stand of our selves.
Wherefore the Apostle puts us in mind of our danger unless we be
supported by other manner strength than by our own feeble faith. Romans 1^.
I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this secret, least you
should be arrogant in your selves. We bear not up our selves: God does bear
up all, and each man is or should be a stay to bear up others. We are all
members of one body: and we know we have need one of another. The hand
cannot want the help of the toe, though the least and lowest member. Man alone
were a miserable creature, he could neither cloth nor feed nor defend
himself from violence. The wisest man oftentimes needs counsel. Who was more
wise than Moses? yet Moses knew he needed the advice of others and therefore
occasion serving disdained it not. Rebecca saw more tha^ Isaak in things
nearly concerning their children, Esau and Jacob; Sara more than Abraham in
the mother of Ismaell. Naaman followed the counsel even of his servant, and
it did not repent him so to have done.

9 Now as this inward sobriety of mind and judgment is required: Outward
sobriety in diet.
so are we exhorted likewise to an outward sobriety, which consists in
diet, in apparel, in gesture, and in speech. Be sober in diet. Nature is
contented with a little: but where sobriety wants, nothing is enough. The
body must have sufficient least it faint in the midst of necessary duties:
but beware of gluttony and drunkenness. And Christ says, take ye heed
ouerloade not your hearts with these burdens of excess. Be not drunken with
wine. These lessons are fit for England where ancient sobriety has given
place to superfluity: where many such rich men are, as fare daintely day by
day. God grant their end be not like his, who riotouslie wasting beer the
creatures of God wanted afterward a drop of water when he would gladly have
had it. John Baptist was content with a simple diet, Christ with very slender
fare. But there are of us I fear me, whose God is their belly, and whose
felicity is meat and drink. Our excess this way is intolerable and
abominable, we strive to equal almost Vitellius, who had served unto him at
one feast 2000. fishes and 7000. birds: and Heliogabalus that monster of the
world, who at one supper was served with 600. ostriches. There is no bird
that flies, no fish that swimmeth, no beast that moves which is not buried in
our bellies. This excess is an enemy both to wealth and health: it has cut
off much housekeeping and brought many men to extreme beggerie: and as many
great diseases are cured by abstinence, so fullness has been the cause of
sundry, strange and unwonted sicknesses. Aurelian the Emperor did never
send for physician in time of his sickness, but cured himself only by thin
diet. And as immoderate feeding does much hurt to the body, so it is more
noisome to the mind. For as the ground if it receive too much rain is not
watered but drowned and turns into mire which is neither fit for tillage nor
for yielding of fruit: so our flesh ouerwatered with wine is not fit to admit
the spiritual plough or to bring forth the celestial fruits of
righteousness. The herbs that grow about it will be loathsome and stinking
weeds, as brawling, chiding, blasphemy, slander, perjury, hatred,
manslaughter and such like bad works of drunkenness and darkness. Are not
these unsavory fruits enough to make us abhor the tree? A drunken body is
not a man but a swine, fit for Devils to enter into. For these sins are against
nature, which being moderately refreshed is satisfied, being stuffed is hurt,
violated, and deformed: God has given us his creatures soberly to use, and not
so shamefully to abuse: we should if we did well, feed the body to serve and
not to rule, to obey and not to lead the spirit. 1 Cor 9.
I chastise my body, (says S. Paul) and bring it into servitude. Is it not
perilous trow you, to pamper and make strong our adversary, or have we a
greater or stronger enemy than our rebellious flesh? Full bellied drunkards are
no better then traitors in this spiritual war. Iud. 7.
Ge^deon a figure of Christ, would no other soldiers to fight against the
Madianites, but such as stood and took up water in their hand and lickt it
out, of such there were but 300. in number, the rest yt were afraid or lay
down to drink their fill, he sent away they were not for his purpose. Such
filled bellies were not fit to serve God, nor able to fight against the
Madianites, Satan, and sin; Gods and Gods peoples enemies. The Israelites
lusted after quails but to their own confusion. Esau for his belly sake sold
his birth right and inheritance. Beware their examples. Lucullus a Roman had
a servant always at his elbow to pull him by the sleeue at such times as he
porred in too fast. But we have the blessed Apostle of Christ the servant of
God to put us in mind of sobriety in diet. Nor in diet only, but also in
attire.

10 A man's apparel, Sobriety in attire.
laughter, and gate, does show his nature. In apparel this is to be observed,
Ecclesiast. 19.
that avoiding vanity and pride therein every man wear according to his
calling. John Baptist ware a rough cote of camels hair. But Salomo^ used rich
and glorious apparel, and yet both used yt which did become the^. There is no
more holiness in a Friars coule than in a sheepheardes cloak. Yet that is
comely in one, which is not seemly in an another. Saint Paul is very earnest
with women, and requires them to go in sober apparel decking themselves with
shamfastnes and modesty, not with brodered hair, 1 Timothy 2.
or with gold, or pearls, or sumptuous attire, but as becomes women that
profess the fear of God. And S. Peter tells the^ that their godly mother
Sara went soberly apparelled. Sara was a good woman, a rich woman, and a noble
woman, such as follow her footesteppes need not be ashamed. Yet do I not
condemn all other apparel: yea even such apparel as is costly and gorgious
may be fit for some states and personages. I do not doubt but that Hester and
Judith did wear gold and were gorgiously decked. But if Paul and Peter did
live in our days, they would not spare the vanity of our women, much less of
our men. The vain and monstrous apparel of all other countries and nations
England has scraped together and in a bravery put it on, the estimation
whereof is this. A light wavering mind matched with a vain proud heart,
desires a light, vain, strange, proud, and monstrous apparel, to cover and
cladde it withal. But sobriety is content with that which is seemly. Be
sober in your apparel.

11 Be ye sober also in your speech and gesture. Sobriety in speech and
gesture.
Be slow to speak, and when you speak let your words be so seasoned that
they may be wholesome and not offensive to the hearer. Let no lewd speech
proceed from your mouths. A man's speech and gesture will bewray his
thoughts. The talk of a fool is unsavory altogether and his gesture
uncomely: but a wise man's understanding is seen even in his looks. A fool
exalts his voice in laughter: but the man that is soberly minded will
scarcely smile to himself. He that is guiltless hides not his face; but the
murderers head is in his bosom. Our outward actions are lively tokens of
our inward disposition from which they proceed. Wherefore it greatly
behooves al estates and conditions of men both inwardly in mind, and
outwardly in diet, attire, speech, and gesture to be sober.

12 With sobriety S. Peter joins watchfulness. Awaking out of error,
superstition, and sin.
Be sober and watching. I will not here recite unto you the manifold kinds
of watching, whereof the Scriptures make mention, but rather note a few unto
you most necessary and such as the Apostle chiefly means. Before we can
watch we must be wakened. Wherefore he says, Ephe. 5.
Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead and Christ shall give
thee light. He speaks not of natural sleeping, but of a sleep which is in
death. He that lives in pleasures is dead being alive, and they that wake unto
sin, are asleep unto righteousness. All such as live in error and lie in
sin are but dead men in the sight of God. Aristotle says, that seven hours
of sleep suffice naturally the body. Let it suffice the souls of men to have
slept in the lap of Antichrist 700. years and to have been rocked so long
in the cradell of that deadly error. It is now high time to awake and arise
from the dreams of popery for they are not sickly but deadly. At the length
let Christ shine unto thee: the light of his Gospel if thou embrace it, will
drive away the dark clouds of error and ignorance. Awake I say at the
sound of Gods word from thy former superstition and at length embrace the
truth, which will be as a lantern, nay as a bright shining star to guide
thee unto Christ. S. Paul speaks to the elect of God, who doubtless will at
length awake. As for the reprobate they still shall sleep on in their errors
and sins unto their eternal death and confusion. Esaias. 60.
But arise Jerusalem and be thou enlightened: arise Jerusalem from death to
life, from error to truth, from darkness to light, from Antichrist to
Christ, who by his holy spirit will illuminate thee that thou may know God
the father, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ, and that is the only way to
everlasting life. Pliny reproouing our drowsinesse, says: that sleep does
steal away the half of our life. But this sleep whereof we speak steals
away the whole life of the greatest part of men. David himself lay slumbering
in the filthy sleep of whoredom a whole year at the least, and could not
awake until Nathan blewe in his ear and stirred him. But David's sleep was
but a nappe in comparison of such as are so hard and fast a sleep, that they
will never stir, until fire out of heaven flee about their ears to waken
them. So were the Sodomites wakened and consumed. Awake therefore and when ye
are wakened then watch.

13 Watch that ye be not deceived by false prophets, Watching that we
ourselves be not deceived by false teache^s.
who watch to deceive you and teach otherwise tha^ Christ has taught. The
devil is a subtle perswader of men, he is a lying spirit in the mouth of his
prophets: his ministers and workmen are crafty companions, such as creep into
houses and lead away the simple as captives with them. A man of a watchful
eye shall know these wolves by two properties. First they are ravenous, cruel,
bloody, they will persecute and kill, they will be as Caine, and not as Abell,
as Ismaell and not as Isaak, as Esau and not as Jacob, as Pharao and not as
Moses, as Caiaphas and not as Peter. The second note is that which Chrysostom
mentions, Chrysostom.
Who so in blasphemy yelleth and howleth with a foul and open mouth against
the truth he is a wolf. Such they were of whom the prophet speaks in the
psalm, saying: Psalm. 73.
They set their mouth against heaven.

14 All must watch that they be not themselves deceived by these deceitful
wolves when they put on sheep clothing. Watching that others be not deceived.
But God gives charge to such as be the pastors of his people, to be watchful
also over others: not only carefully to feed them as his flock dearly
redeemed, in good and wholesome pastures, but also to drive and chase away the
wolves, least Gods sheep be devoured by the^. And this pastoral office does
not only pertain unto priests and prechers, but also unto princes and temporal
gouerners: who^ God has placed in authority to yt end yt they should promote
his glory. Esaias. 44.
For the which cause God calls Cyrus the king, his shephard. Vigilate watch
the wolf to drive him away, Watching over our lives.
watch the flock to feed it.

15 Let every one be watchful over his life that his conversation be
according to his profession. If we walk disorderly we shall not walk alone,
our example will draw others after it, and their sins we shall answer for.
Lucifer fell not alone, he drew company from heaven with him. Jeroboam being
sinful made Israel to sin. And he is burnt in the hand with that mark of
horror, 2. Reg. 31.
for a warning to al succeeding ages. Ieroboa^ the son of Nebat that made
Israel to sin. Let us beware that we play not Simeon and Leui, and so make our
father Jacob to be loathed of the Cananites. We profess Christ and true
Christianity. Praying.
Let us not through our lewd life be a slander to our savior, and a shame to
his gospel. Watch therefore. But because as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 3.
neither planting nor watering will help, except God himself do give increase:
because our watching as the prophet witnesses is in vain, Psalm. 126.
neither can sobriety and heedefulnes serve to keep a city, except the Lord
himself do keep it: let us crave help at Gods merciful hands, and let us
pray as well as watch. When S. Paul has armed Gods soldier he bids him
pray. Man be he never so well appointed for defense, never so strong and
perfect, cannot stand without Gods strength. He that looks but a little into
the world shall epsy just cause to move us to prayer, if any men, now, if
ever. The great devil in these our later days is let loose. Antichrist
rages and seeks our confusion. The wicked glistering world maruelously
deceives and bewitcheth. The flesh reigns and bears swinge. The spirit is
faint, sin ouerfloweth: Christ is coming in the clouds to call us unto
judgment. Therefore be ye sober watch and pray. Pray I say, not in show, but
in deed; not in appearance, but from the heart; not for fashion, but in
earnest. Babble not in words like hypocrites, but power out thy heart before
God as did Hanna. And God grant for his Christ our Jesus sake, that in faith
and love we may lift up pure hands, sincere affections and hearty groans unto
our Lord that we may overcome our many and dreadful enemies, purchase pardon,
and glorify God. Let us with David, with whom we have sinned pray for mercy.
Let us with the disciples of Christ with whom we have wauered pray for the
increase of our faith, because the end of all things is now at hand,

16 It follows, The duty toward men which S. Peter in^erreth upon his
doctrine concerning the end of all things: have fervent charity.
Have fervent charity amongst your selves. This concerns our duty toward
men, as y^ other did toward God. All our duty toward our neighbor
consists in love. He that loves another has fulfilled the law. John the
beloved disciple of Christ, was the preacher of love, it was ever in his mouth
as it is in his writings: in so much that lying upon his death bed, his
disciples requesting to have one lesson from him before his departure, he was
able to devise no one thing more needful to be spoken of then this which he had
often said, Love one another my little children. Peter would have our love to be
earnest and hot. Every one loves himself very vehemently but our love toward
others is very cold and chill. Our love for the most part this way is in word
and in phraise, but not in deed and in truth. This world is dubble hearted,
disse^bling is made a trade to live by. There be many Labans but few Jacobs.
Many that salute and say Aue, but their next word is Apprehendite. If Christ
came now, he were like to find little faith, but less charity: yet without
charity all that we do is vain: yea it is very sin. Let us therefore love as God
has loved us, he loved us not slenderly when he took so bitter a death for
us. A God for his enemies. See therefore that ye have vehement, sincere and
hearty love among your selves: not contenting your selves barely to have it in
show unless ye show it by these effects which Saint Peter in this place
sets down. Vehement love here spoken of is described by these properties.
First it covers ye multitude of sins. Secondly it causes us to be given to
hospitality. Thirdly it will not suffer men to hide those graces which they
have received at Gods hands, but is a cause of bestowing the same to the use
and benefit of their brethren.

17 It is not our charity that can cover our sins from the sight of God.
Charity hides sins.
Christ is the propitiation for our sins. It is I that blot out your
iniquities, (says the Lord). But as Gods love to us ward covers our sins,
so our toward our brethren does cover theirs. If God love us, his mercy is
as a cloak that hides all our shame, he sees no blemish or deformity in us.
If we love our brethren, our charity is as a veil before our eyes: we behold
not their faults. Although they be great, we do not way the^; although many,
we reckon the^ not. For charity covers even the multitude of sins. The eye
of the charitable man is always vewing his own wounds, as for the scarres of
other (...) he sees them not. His hand is always occupied not in picking out
motes from other men's eyes, but in drawing out beams from his own. S.
Augustine to show the great dislike he had of such as uncharitably delighted to
unfold other men's faults, wrote these verses over his table.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam, Possidon* in vi^a August.

Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
Who so loves to gnawe upon men in their absence,

Let him know that this table does not like his presence.

18 The next fruit of love is hospitality. Charity is prone unto hospitality.
Be harborus one toward another without grudging. S. Paul is of the same
judgment. For having used this exhortation, Let brotherly love continue, he
immediately adds: Heb. 13.
Be not forgetful to lodge strangers. Hospitality has respect unto all men,
but chiefly to strangers, namely such as are of the household of faith, and are
driven out of their country for the profession of Christ's Gospel. Such are
chiefly to be relieved. Of such especially it is written and provided for in
the law. The stranger that dwells with you shall be as one of your selves,
Leuit. 19.
and thou shall love him as thy self: for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt: I am the Lord your God. God has offered us at this time great occasion,
to show forth our charity: many of Gods good children are strangers in
England. Let us not omit this good occasion to do good. Abraham and Lot were
liberal toward strangers, and when they supposed to have received men they
received Angels to their great benefit. But we no doubt in receiving these
strangers which wander from place to place being cast out of their countries
for confessing and professing Christ, receive not Angels but the Lord of
Angels. He that receives you, receives me. In doing good to strangers, we
do good also to our selves, for great shall be the benefit when Christ shall
say, Matthew. 25.
I was a stranger and ye harbored me. As great the curse to them to whom it
shall be said, I was harbourlesse, and ye did not lodge me. Saint Peter would
have us given to hospitality without murmuring, and with kindness entertain
strangers. For in showing of benevolence there are three special virtues,
which if they be wanting, our benefits loose their grace and goodness. The
first is willingness: God does love a cheerful giver. The second is
bountifulness: For he that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. The third
is singleness of heart: for if we give vainegloriously to be seen of men, we
loose our reward at Gods hands, as by murmuring we deserve no thanks of men.

19 There be two graunde enemies of hospitality. Enemies to hospitality.
The one is covetousness, the other profuseness. Nigardlinesse would not
suffer Naball that rich carle to bestow a piece of bread to relieve the
necessity of David a king. 1. Sam. 25.
Shall I take my bread and my water and the flesh of my beasts that I have
killed for my shearers and give it to men whom I know not, either who or
whence they are? Others with the prodigal son wast that vnthriftilie
wherewith they should relieve the poor and comfort strangers. Some of them
being eaten up as they say with three H. H. H. Horses, Hawks, and Harlots.
Some with vain apparel: casting away as much upon a garment as would almost
ransom a king. Some with building, some with banqueting, some by one mean
and some by an other: whereby it is come to pass that hospitality it self is
waxen a stranger and needs harbor: we have shut it quite and clean out of
doors.

20 The last fruit of hearty love is the good bestowing of our graces and
gifts to the benefit of others. Charity communicate^h every grace and gift of
God unto others. Iac. 1.
Let every man as he has received a gift minister the same one to another as
good disposers of the manifold graces of God. The gifts that we have which be
good, they be of God: for every good gift comes down from the Father of
lights. And these gifts we receive to bestow upon others as good stewardes
of the Lord. S. Peter does seem chiefly as it were to point unto two sorts
of high and principal stewardes, at whose hands an especial reckoning of the
graces of God will be required: the magistrate and the minister. For God
leads his people like sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron, whose gifts are
the sword and the word: whereof the one may not be borne in vain, but
drawn to the punishment of evil doers, and to the advancement of them that
do well, the other is to be preached in season and out of season, to the
confirmation of the truth, the refutation of error, the exhortation to
virtue, the disswasion from vice, that the man of God may be perfectly enabled
to every good work. Howbeit as magistrates and ministers are principally meant
in this exhortation, so are all sexes and sorts of people called upon. For we
shall all give an account of our stewardship, we must all make a reckoning of
the talentes we have received, be they five two or one. No man is borne nor
brought up to himself, but to the benefit and behoof of an other: and as
stones in one building, or members in one body, so is every man interessed
and invested in the possession each one of an other, to the end no man should
seek his own things, but the things that make for the profiting of an other.
Which one lesson amongst many if once we would hear to learn it, and learn
to remember it, and remember to follow it, and follow to continue and
persevere in it, we should not only declare our selves to be good dispensers of
the manifold gifts and graces of God, but hear also that blessed voice, Euge
serve bone and fidelis, Come my good and faithful servant, I have set thee over
a few small things, I will henceforth place thee over more and greater, come and
enter into thy masters joy: whereunto he bring us that so dearly bought it
for us, even Jesus the price of our redemption, to whom with the father and
the holy ghost a trinity in unity be rendered all thanks and all glory
given from this time forth and for ever more. Amen.

The one and twentieth Sermon. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross at what time a
maine treason was discovered.
PSALM. 4. 5. Offer the sacrifices of righteousness.
THE occasion why the Princely prophet wrote this Psalm is the great
distress, The occasion and parts of the Psalm.
whereunto he was brought by the monstrous and unnatural rebellion which his
ambitious son Absalon raised against him. This forced him to fly unto God
for aid, and by earnest prayer to seek help from heaven. The sum and
substance of the Psalm consists in these points. First he cries unto God
for deliverance from this wicked conspirasie, Hear me when I call O God of my
righteousness, thou have set me at liberty when I was in distress, have
mercy upon me and hearken unto my prayer. Secondly he reprooueth the wicked
enterprise of his foes, and therewithal moves them to repentance, O ye sons
of men how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving vanity and seeking
lies? For be ye sure that the Lord has chosen to himself a godly man, the
Lord will hear when I call unto him; tremble and sin not, examine your own
heart upon your bed and be still, offer the sacrifice of righteousness and
trust in the Lord. Thirdly as one assured of present help, he turns his
talk again unto God, and rejoices in the sweet and comfortable feeling of
his grace, saying: Many say who will show us any good? but Lord lift up the
light of thy countenance upon us, thou have given me more joy of heart than
they have had when their wheat and their wine did abound, I will lay me down
and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

2 The prophet in calling upon the name of God makes mention of his own
innocence, The prophet alleges his innocence and righteousness.
Hear me when I call O God of my righteousness. Not that he thought himself so
just and righteous that God could not charge him with any sin, for so no man
can try his cause and stand in judgment with God; which thing he also
confesses saying in an other place, Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified. For one duty scarce
performed he is able to charge us with a thousand omitted, nay we cannot
allege him one for a thousand, why then does the prophet speak of
innocence? Why does he use this phrase of speech? Hear me O God of my
righteousness? Surely he knew that God is a merciful defender of them whom
the world does undeservedly hate and persecute. And in respect of his enemies,
for any cause which they had so to conspire and rebel against him, he might
justly and truly even in the sight of God protest him self to be innocent.
He was a merciful and a just prince never offering wrong to any, his
rebellious son he had sundry times spared but never offended, he never
grieved his wicked counselor Achitophel, neither yeat the raging people which
unnaturally opposed them selves against him. In respect hereof he alleges
his righteousness and innocence, his heart being a witness unto him that
toward them he had ever showed him self mild and merciful.

3 The Prophet having thus professed his uprightness urges and provoke God
to take the defense of his cause now as at all times he had heretofore
protected him, He makes mention of Gods wonted mercies toward him.
Thou have set me at liberty when I was in distress. David passed through
many trobles, but God delivered him out of all. He strenthened him against
that huge and monstrous Philistine far beyond the reason or expectation of
man. For if ye compare a younling with one of perfect age, a simple shephard
with a soldier exercised in feats of arms, one of small stature, with a vast
giant, a naked manne with one most strongly armed, the combat could not choose
but seem in all points very unequal, in so much that the Philistine
plainly contemned him. But God fought for him and gave him the victory.
Besides this, he deliued him also from the fraud and treachery of wicked Doeg,
from the treason of the men of Caila and Ziph, which labored to give him into
his enemies hands. God delivered him from Achis king of Geth where he was in
great danger. How often and by what miraculous means he saved him out of the
hands of Saul ye histories do manifestly and plainly show. Therefore he puts
God in remembrance of this his wonted mercy. God is well pleased when his
benefits are well remembered. Upon this experience of Gods former mercies he
co^ceiueth great confidence and sure hope, that his protector would not leave
him now in the briars, that the God of whose mercy he had so often tasted,
seeing that his cause was just, would not now leave him as a pray to his
enemies, neither suffer them to trample over him.

4 Thus we see that the security of princes does not rest upon their power be
they never so strongly guarded, He reproves those which conspired against him.
but upon their innocence; we see from whence they ought in their troubles to
look for succor; we see by what means they may assure themselves of help
from heaven. In the second part of the Psalm the Prophet reports the
rebellion of his foes, and withal moves them to repentance. He reproves
them especially for two causes: first for that they labored to displace the
prince whom God had set over them, wherein the ignominy which they did unto
him was not so great as the injury which they offered unto God.

5 The contriuers thereof were not men of meene calling but of high place and
great authority: What kind of men they were which conspired.
and therefore they are not called the sons of Adam but the sons of man,
filii viri, noble personages. Conspiracies are not wont to be bred in the
heads of the meenest sort: which thing the Prophet notes in the second
Psalm, The princes are assembled together in counsel against the Lord and
against his Christ. Marie the very sister of Moses a woman of place and
countenance devised a plot to displace her brother. Moses spared her because
she was his sister, but God plagued her because she was a rebel and cast
upon her a most foul disease. Core Dathan and Abiram which conspired also
against Moses were not the meenest men in their tribe. Jeroboam a man of great
might conspired against Solomon and openly rebelled against Roboam. The kings
son Absolon, the great wise counselor Achitophel rose up against their
lawful Sovereign and armed the people against him. If I should enter into
profane histories and receite unto you the authors and contriuers of ciuel
seditions from time to time, it would appear that they were for the most part
filij viri. It is sometime otherwise. For we read that simple men, that men
whose names are not spoken of without some special note of extreme baseness,
have notwithstanding stirred up dangerous tumultes. But such are either set on
by other of greater calling, or else as heedlesse men they soon vanish and
come to nothing. But if potent and mighty persons attempt the overthrow of a
state, except they be discovered and cut of at the first they ouerwhelme all
like a maine sea. God therefore commanded Moses especially to punish the
princes of the people, Numb. 25.
as the chief authors of all evil. Take all the heads of the people, ha^g
them up before the Lord. It is not safe to think of mercy when the mighty
have determined to cast down them whom God has set up, to displace whom he
has settled, to bring into ignominy whom he has advanced to the seat of
honor.

6 The continuance of these wicked ones in their traitorous purpose shows
both their cankred and incorrigible malice* Their continuance in their wicked
purpose.
and also the patience and long suffering of that good king. Wherefore he says,
O ye sons of man, How long? Such malice they conceived, such desire they had
to advance themselves, so greedy they were of government and to bear the
whole swinge, that they ceased not, they gave not over. Men easily stay
themselves from proceeding in good things but hardly are drawn from
performing evil. This property the Lord did note in them which sought to
make them selves famous by building a tower as high as heaven. Behold says the
Lord, this they begin to do, neither can they now be stopped from
whatsoever they have imagined to bring to pass. But God defeated that purpose
by dividing their language. Such as love to clime aloft, to build in the skies,
to make their dwelling place amongst the stars, will never stay till God cast
them down.

7 Ye sons of man, How long? This rebellion rose not upon a sudden rage,
Their cunning practices against the Lords anointed.
it was with much consultation first contrived, and so continewed from time to
time. After Absolon had imbrued his hands in blood, after he had cowardly
slain his brother, after his heart was inured with so great and grievous
sins, he staid at nothing, but went on adding blood unto blood. If moderate
severity could have bettered him, he was driven out from his fathers presence;
if unspeakable clemency could have caused him to relent, his murder was
pardoned he called home and received into favor. But his ca^kred heart could
never be scoured. It is true which the wise man says, There is no trusting of
a new reconciled enemy. Being now in favor in the court he sought all means
to wreake his wrath and by conspiracy to compass the kingdom. First he
labored to win the favor of the people, he was gentle and humble to every one,
so courteous that he kissed the^, he lamented that they were not well entreated,
that their causes were not indifferently heard, that they were oppressed with
grauntes from the king wherein private men's gain was sought and the common
wealth much hindered, he wished the public benefit were better considered
of. By these means he stole away the hearts of the people, he became popular
and was thought a great good co^monwealthesman, if any thing fell out well he
was reputed the only author and occasioner of it. Touching religion because it
was generally well liked, therefore he neglected no occasion wherein he might
make any plausible show of a mind most religeouslie inclined. He asked leave
of his father to go to Hebron there to pay his vow and to sacrifice unto God.
This holy hipocrite would hide his treason under the cloak of religion. While
he pretended the serving of God according to the law, he minded a lawless
rebellion against God and his anointed, most unnaturally conspiring against
his dear father. Many of the nobles suspecting no treason liked well of him,
honored him as chief next to king David and accompanied him to Hebron the
chief city. In the mean while he sent closely abroad his secret
messengers, his sworn men whom he trusted best, in every coast at one
certain day and hour to proclaim him king: and the same day, by the subtle
advise of crafty Achitophell who was grandfather to Bersabe and therefore
hated David, he was proclaimed in Hebron. Behold this holy traitor who
chose rather to worship the rising then the setting sun. Achitophel gives
shrewd counsel forthwith to apprehend the king and to surprise the city with
all ye treasure artillery and other munitio^s of war that were therein. This
counsel was dangerous to king David: howbeit he being but fainte hearted that
purpose was altered. He looked for greater strength both forre^ and at home:
in the mean time his counsel was disclosed and the king by the providence of
God delivered. Achitopell for sorrow went home and died, he hanged himself.
Treason will not be cured till traitors be extinguished: this hydra has many
heads, if you cut of one more will start up unless the neck be seared. The
Pharisees and Scribes with the Herodians never ceased till they brought our
Savior unto his cross. The Pope with that serpentine generation will never be
pacified, but still practice against the Lord and against his anointed. The
froward rebellious Israelites could not rest till Samuel was taken from them.
It is the nature of the wicked the longer they continue in sin the less to
be werie of it, they have no sooner brought one thing to pass but immediately
they devise another, there is no end of their malice: and therefore the people
asks how long?

8 The wonderful patience of the good king in bearing with these rebels whose
former faults he had often winked at and sundry times pardoned did the^ no
good, The kings patience.
his lenity was abused, neither were such men so to be dealt with, it is not
the way to seek by benefits to reclaim men so grounded and settled in evil.
The obdurate heart of Pharao will never be mollified, Tygres will not be tamed,
it is almost impossible that one which has drunk of the cup of that harlot
should retain in his heart any drop of loyal blood, or any part of a sound
and faithful meaning toward such as are not of their own mark, what
courtesy or kindness soever be showed them.

9 But the Prophet goes on condemning their madness, for as much as the thing
which they devised was but vanity. All their devises were but vanity.
They might sooth themselves in their purpose for a time: but he shows that
in the end it should deceive them as a man is deceived that puts his trust
in a lie. How long will you turn my glory into shame loving vanity, and
seeking lies? They pleased them selves in their subtle inventions devises and
counsels, not considering that there is no devise no counsel that can prevail
against the Lord. The Prophet knew that he which dwells in heaven did laugh
and had them in derision, that he would make Achitophell to snare him self in
his own devises; that he would take them in the pit which they had dug for
others. This he knew, and this he wills them also to know, that whom the
Lord has set up he will maintain and defend. Be ye sure that the Lord has
chosen to him self a godly man, the Lord will hear when I call unto him.
The consideration hereof (if we way it as we should) may give us courage and
strength against that man of blood which at this day does so cruelly persecute
the professors of the Gospel, and so proudly take upon him to depose
Christian princes and to place hypocrites in their rooms at his pleasure. Let
him also know, that the Lord has chosen to himself godly men, the Lord will
hear when they call upon him: he that touches them touches even the apple of
the Lords own eye. Let him tremble that lifts but a finger against them.

10 Contremiscite, They are exhorted to rele^t and ch^unge their minds, to
offer the sacrifice of righteousness unto God.
Be afraid to set your selves against God and your prince, to attempt such an
overthrow to the common state. cease from conspiracy, leave your treacherous
devises, be not deceived, you cannot prevail, you do but work your own
confusion: call your selves to a reckoning betimes, have some quiet and sober
consideration of your doings; when you are in your beds free from all
trouble then common with your own hearts, weigh the cause that you take in
hand. I am your prince God has placed me over you; ye are my subjects God
has so placed you; you should love me and not seek my shame and subversion,
ye owe me obedience and not rebellion, honor and not treason. What occasion
have I given you thus to set your selves against me? I have dealt righteouslie
and graciously with you, I have been merciful not cruel over you, I have
sought your safety more than mine own. But whom would ye have to reign over
you? A false worshipper, an hypocrite, a murderer of his own brother, an
incestuous fornicatour, one that will flatter you, and deceive you, swear and
not perform. Consider these things, weigh what wickedness you have taken in
hand, and be quiet, be still. Cease from rebellion and obey peaceably the
prince whom God has placed over you. So long as ye continue in the hardness
of your hearts, though you offer him all the beasts upon a thousand hills
it is all in vain. Leuit. 4.
Repent and offer up the sacrifices of righteousness. The Israelites when they
had sinned were wont to offer sacrifice to pacify God as appears in the law.
But for the most part this was done without feeling of their sin, without true
repentance, formallie and for fashion sake only. But outward service without
inward remorse and repentance for sin God does abhor. The rebel Absolon
offered sacrifice in Hebron; but in vain, because his heart was full of
treason. Antichrist renueth his oblations every day; but to what purpose so
long as he minds murder stirs rebellion, and maliciously persecuteth the
spouse of Christ? Sacrifice the sacrifices of righteousness, offer God
repentance for your former faults, and put your trust in the Lord. Thus we
see by what occasion the Prophet utters these words which I have chosen to
speak of at this time.

11 To offer up sacrifices it has hen usual in all ages, Sacrificing usual in
all ages.
amongst all people kinreds and nations of the earth. But I will only speak
of such as the people of God have offered up. Before the law Abell, Abraham,
Jacob, Job, and othets: in the time of the law Aaron with the Levites presented
offerings before the Lord. In the time of the Gospel the Apostles had and at
this day also Christians have their sacrifices which being faithfully offered
are graciously accepted in the sight of God.

12 Sacrificing is a voluntary action whereby we worship God offering him
somewhat, Sacrifice God requires.
in token that we acknowledge him to be the Lord and our selves his
servants. 1. Pet. 2.
Ye are made, says S. Peter, an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. God therefore does require this
duty at our hands. It was commanded in the law, the Prophet David calls
for it, and S. Peter teaches that even now it is also due unto God from men.

13 Let us now consider who are priests to offer up these sacrifices. The
priests by whom sacrifice is to be offered.
For there ca^ be no sacrifice without a priest, as there can be no priest
where there is no sacrifice. In the scriptures I find a threefold priesthood
allowed of God: a Leuiticall priesthood such as that of Aaron and his sons;
a royal priesthood figured in Melchisedeck and verified in Christ; a
spiritual priesthood belonging generally to all christians. The Leuiticall
priesthood continued unto Christ then ceased. For being a figure of the truth
which was to come, the truth being come it could no longer continue. Neither
is there in the royal priesthood of Melchisedeck any other that has
succeeded but only Christ. He is a priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedeck, a king and a priest, a God and a man, perfectinnoce^t, undefiled,
unspotted, severed from sinners: yet numbered, punished, plagued with the
wicked; humbled to the depth and exalted far above the highest heavens;
without beginning without end; without father as man, without mother as God.
The third priesthood is that which is common to all Christians. For he has
made us kings and priests unto God, his father. Where the popish priesthood
takes footing, in what ground the foundation thereof is laid I cannot find
in the Scriptures. Antichrist is the author of that priesthood, to him they
sacrifice, him they serve. The sacrifice which Aaron offered the sacrifice of
Christ, and our sacrifice.


14 What sacrifices Aaron did offer up and what sacrifice Christ has presented
to his father we all know. It follows now to be considered what kind of
sacrifice we must offer. Aaron offered sacrifice which could not in it self
be accepted of God, nor take away the sins of them for whom it was offered.
For whether they be offeringes of thanks giving, they were not of that value
that God should take delight and pleasure in them; or sin offeringes, it is
impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sin,
impossible. But the priest according to the orer of Melchisedeck has offered
the sacrifice of his own flesh, acceptable even for the worthiness of it, and
by the virtue which is in it forcible and more then sufficient to wash away
all sin. Esa. 53.
This he did willingly, Heb. 10.
He made himself an offering for sin. He did it perfectly, without offering
he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Where full remission of
sin is there needs no further sacrifice for sin: and the holy ghost
bears us record that we have full remission of all our sins, Their sins
and iniquities will I remember no more. We are healed with his stripes: and
where there is no sore there needs no salve. Not that we have no sin, but
acknowledging that we have it, it is as if we had it not, because he is
faithful to forgive it and just to cleanse us from it. The blood of Jesus
cleanses us from all sin: The blood of Jesus once shed, the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once. So that there remains no other sacrific to be
daily offered, but the sacrifice of righteousness, which we must all offer.
The sacrifice of the minister.


15 At the hands of the minister it is required that he feed the flock
committed unto his charge: this is righteousness in him, it is his sacrifice.
God will have no blind, no lame, no unclean thing to be offered: therefore let
as many as offer the sacrifice of righteousness take heed to that they do. The
words of the Lord are pure words, Psalm. 12.
like silver tried in a furnace of earth fined seven times. 1. Pet. 4.
He therefore that speaks, let him speak as the words of God.

16 Furthermore as it is reason that they which sacrifice at the altar should
live of the altar: The maintenance of the minister to offer sacrifice.
even so it is against all equity and right that the labor of preaching the
Gospel should rest upon any man's backand the maintenance due for the same be
withheld and kept from him. It has been told you often, and some have been
angry to hear it so often told that the ministry is too much pinched, the
living of the Church so fleesed that many worthy ministers have scarce, nay
they have not wherewith tolerablie to sustain themselves.

17 To come from the minister to the magistrate, The sacrifice of the
magistrate.
when heinous crimes are detected and brought to light, there is then a
special sacrifice of righteousness required at his hands: such a sacrifice
as Ioas offered, who following the good advise of Iehoida the high priest his
faithful counselor, put Athalia which had murdered the kings children and
usurped the kingdom to the sword. The Lord sometime does so deal with his
people, that they plainly see his wrath to be kindled and his heavy
indignation impossible to be appeased til this sacrifice be offered him. The
Israelites were overthrown in battle till Achan was stoned to death. Ios. 7.
King David found no rest in his kingdom till Absolo^ and Adonias had that
which their rebellious practices did deserve. God requires as well the
sacrifice of justice as of mercy, yea he sometimes accepts justice for a
sacrifice and plagueth mercy as a grievous sin. If David had not spared his
son for murder, his son had not troubled him with rebellion. For rebellion
he would also in fatherly pity and compassion have spared him: this God could
not suffer, but took execution of justice him self, stretched out the arm of
an oak, and strangled the gallant in his own hair. Saul suffered Agag: but he
felt the wrath of the Lord for it to the loss of his kingdom. Quiparcit lupo
mactat gregem, Chrysostom. Romans 13.
he that spares a wolf spilleth the blood of the flock says Chrysostom.
God appoints the magistrate to be a revenger unto wrath upon him that
commits evil. They which glory to have the sword rustie in the sheath when
they would draw it out peradventure shall not so well be able. Let
magistrates therefore from the highest to the lowest execute justice without
fear or favor when need requires, and so they shall offer up the sacrifice
of righteousness.

18 As this sacrifice belongs peculiarly to them, The sacrifice of all
Christians offering their goods.
so there are others belonging although to them yet not to them alone but to
all Christians. We must all sacrifice unto the Lord with our goods, with our
minds and with our bodies. For all these we have received to serve him
withal. With our goods the needy must be relieved, the naked clothed, the
hungry comforted and fed. Phil. 4.
For this sacrifice S. Paul commends to the Philippia^s, I was even filled
after that I had received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odoure
that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant unto God. The like he
has also to the Hebrews, To do good and to distribute forget not: Heb. 13.
for with such sacrifice God is pleased.

19 To have the sacrifice of the body offered S. Paul is very earnest with
the Romans, Their (...).
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God that ye give up your bodies a
living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God. Let not thine eye behold the
thing which is evil, and it is made a sacrifice; let no unclean word escape
thy tongue, and it is an offering, let thine hand do no harm and it is an
oblation, says S. Chrysostom. To the like effect Origin, when thou subduest
pride, thou do affer a calfe; when wrath, a ram, when lust, a goat; a dove,
when a vain and wandering cogitation. But the most precious sacrifice of the
body is when being mortified it is also offered to the cross for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, in whose cause the death of the Saints is dear in
the sight of God. If the Prophets, the Apostles, the martyrs of all ages have
offered up the glorious sacrifice of righteousness, why should we be acounted
faithful as they were, unless we be willing to do and to suffer as they
did? We have a long time had fair weather: wisdom would that we should
provide for storms. Christ's Church must be tried: such is Gods wont. A rough
storm was rising, but the Lord (such are his mercies) raised up a wind which
scattered the clouds: he has in great favor and tender love delivered us
from the Lions mouth: Let us therefore live no longer in this our senseless
security, but offer him sacrifice as of our bodies so likewise of our minds,
repentance and praise.

20 Our sins no doubt have provoked his wrath, Their souls ^n repentance
our ingratitude has grieved him, our iniquities have kindled his indignation;
we have grieuouslye offended by despising his word from the highest to the
lowest. The Magistrates are for the most part cold in Gods cause, they are not
eaten up with the zeal of his house, justice and judgment they commonly omit
and wickedly pervert. The guides and Pastors of the Church seek themselves
and not those things which belong to Jesus Christ. And the people not well
guided nor ^euerely corrected are of all other farthest out of frame. Dan. 4.
Now if the most high have power over the kingdom of men, to give it to whom
soever he will, and to appoint over it most vile persons when pleases him: and
if because of our unrighteous dealing he should (as he has done many a time
and often unto nations far greater and mightier then ours) power us as it were
out of one vessel into an other, translate the scepter of this kingdom from
hand to hand, in steed of a gracious and religious Lady cause an hypocrite to
reign over us (which the Lord never suffer these eyes to see) what could we
say, but God were just in all his ways and had brought that upon us which our
sins have deserved? To appease his wrath and to stay these or the like
plagues from breaking in and from ouerwhelming the land, there is no other way
but speedily to offer up the sacrifice of righteousness. This is the sacrifice
of righteousness, even a broken and a contrite heart.

21 The other sacrifice of the mind is praise: In thanksgiving.
which consists in thanksgiving and petition. Let us thank our God for his
manifold mercies. Lament. 3.
For it is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not, but are renewed every morning, great is his
faithfulness. Being mindful therefore of these his mercies let us as
thankful servants offer unto this our merciful God this sacrifice of
righteousness, never ceasing to magnify and praise his name. O Lord we
acknowledge this to be thy work without any merit or deserte of ours. We
bless thee, we praise thee, we thank thee for it: accept O Lord this our
service and sacrifice in thy great mercy. In making prayers and supplications.


22 The second part of this our sacrifice of praise is to pour out requests
and supplications. Let us herein with humble and penitent hearts, with sure
trust that God will hear us out of heaven, crave at his merciful hands the
deliverance of his anointed our Sovereign Lady out of all distress, from
the rebellion of Absolon, from the counsel of Achitophell, from the rage and
fury of all that conspire to do her harm. Thou know O Lord that she has
not deserved this treachery at their hands being most mild and merciful,
doing good unto all, hurting none. Therefore O Lord according to thy merciful
wont, as thou have done hitherto, so deliver protect, and defend her still,
finish that which thou have most graciously begune; bridle O Lord her enemies
and ours, let them know their madness, open their eyes and cause them plainly
to see that they cannot prevail against thy chosen servant, that they cannot
cast down or bring into ignominy her whom thou have set up and placed in
honor. Give grace, O Lord, if it be thy good pleasure, that they may enter
into themselves, examine their own hearts, see their sin, repent them of
their wickedness, abstain from farther proceeding, that thou in thie mercy
may show them grace and favor in the end. And grant O Lord that we which
profess thy holy name may still offer unto thee the sacrifice which thou
requirest, even the sacrifice of righteousness, that the minister of thy word
may sincerely and diligently preach thy Gospel, that being a good example to
the flock and leading a godly and an upright life, he may bring thee the
offerings of many souls unto the stretching out of thy glorious kingdom
amongst men. Grant that princes and Magistrates whom thou have set in authority
may without fear or favor offer also this sacrifice in upright deciding of
controuersed causes, and severe punishing of malefactors. Finally give this
grace O Lord we beseech thee to thy whole flock (for we are thy flock, the
sheep of thy pasture) that we all may offer unto thee our goods, our bodies
and our souls, for they are thine. Grant that we may liberally bestow our
goods to the needful relief of thy poor Saints; that we may mortefie
our bodies and cheerefullie offer them if need so require to any kind of
tormente for thie sake, that in soul we may offer thee the sacrifice of true
repentance for our sins, of hearty thanks for thy great grace, and of
earnest suit for continuance of thy mercy and favor toward us. We humbly
beseech thee O father for the merits of thy dear son upon whom as upon our
altar we offer up all our sacrifice, bow down thy merciful ear to our
petitions, extend thy mercies to thy little flock, preserve our gracious Queen
and so direct the hearts of all which bear authority under her, that by their
good government we may lead a peaceable and a quiet life in all godliness
and honesty. To thee O merciful father with thy Son Christ Jesus our only
redeemer and that blessed spirit our sweet comforter three persons and one God
be all honor and praise both now and ever.

The two and twentieth Sermon. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross at his
removing to York.
1. COR. 13. 11 For the rest, brethren fare ye well, be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace: And the God of love and peace shall be
with you.
AFTER that our Apostle S. Paul as a faithful teacher, S. Paul's fare^well to
the Corinthians.
a wise steward, a loving father, a vigilant watchman, a diligent labourer, a
severe punisher of all sin, had with a good conscience painefully travailed a
long time with the famous city of Corinth; omitting no part of Apostolical
duty; opening unto them all the mysteries of Christ, the whole counsel of
God, all the secrets of his truth: at the length by the goodwill and calling
of God being else where appointed to preach the Gospel, he forgets them
not in the time of his absence, but as by word before so still by writing
endeavors to lead them on. Wherefore being now to make an end both of
speaking and writing unto them, he most lovingly takes his leave, and with
his farewell gives them this sweet exhortation, Be per^it, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

2 My present case is not much unlike, The same applied to the present occasion.
although I my self be most unlike; for happy were he that might follow so
blessed a guide though it were with far unequal paces. The city is like, the
people are like, my departure from you is like, but the performing of my office
amongst you, I must confess, has been much unlike. And good cause why: for
God alike has not bestowed his gracious gifts. Yet my conscience bears me
record I have endeavored to tread in the same steps. And in doctrine which is
the chiefest point I dare affirm even the same which the holy Apostle does, 1.
Cor. 11.
I have delivered no other unto you then that which I have received of the
Lord: yea safely in the sight of the most high God I may say with him, 1.
These. 2.
you have received of us not the word of men, but as it was in deed the word
of God. In distribution whereof neither have I used flattery, as you know;
neither colored covetousness, the Lord will testify, neither have I sought
mine own praise, my heart is witness. And this testimony of conscience that
I have dealt sincerely in the house of God as touching doctrine has been my
great relief and comfort in all the stormy troubles which by the mighty
assistance of almighty God I have waded throw. Concerning diligence in the
execution of mine office, although I have had a ready will, yet my weak body
being not answerable to my desire, as all flesh herein is faulty, so for my
part I must plead guilty. One debt and duty with S. Paul I protest I have
truly paid you, for with a tender affection I have loved you. The nurce was
never more willing to give the breast unto her child, then I have been that
you should suck not only milk but also blood from me, if it might stand
you in steed or serve to your safety. God he knows, that with this love I
have loved you. In using correction I have sought reformation and not revenge,
to punish has been a punishment to my self, I never did it but with great
grief, I have always labored rather by persuasion to reclaim transgressors
then by correction: with which kind of dealing because stubborn minds will
not be bowed, my softness I grant has rather deserved reproof then praise.
My life and conversation amongst you I leave wholly to your secret judgments.
I cannot not say (for who can?) that my heart is clear. If in many things
we offend all, how can any man say he is no sinner, except he say also
that God is a lier? Howbeit this the God of my righteousness knows that
wittingly and willingly I have wronged no man: Iac. 3.
if I have, reddam quadruplum I will render four times so much good. If any
have wronged me, I hartelie forgive and will forget it for ever. While I live
I will acknowledge that I have received more good liking favor and friendship
at your hands then I could either look for or deserve. God no doubt has his
people, he has many a dear child in this city. But now that by his
providence not by my procurement, I am called from hence to serve elsewhere in
the church of Christ, I will with S. Paul take my leave of you: and that the
more willingly as well because it is Gods good will and appointment, as also
for that I trust the change shall be good and profitable unto you. My hope is
that the Lord has provided one of choice to be placed over you: a man to
undertake this great charge so well enabled for strength, courage, gravity,
wisdom, skill in government, knowledge as in many other things so
especially in the heavenly mysteries of God, that I doubt not but my
departure shall turn very much to your advantage: Amongst whom since a great
part of my life is now spent, and a few evil days do remain otherwhere
to be bestowed, I must use the words of the blessed Apostle, For that which
remains my brethren fare ye well, my dear and faithful flock farewell, my
crown and my joy farewell, again (with grief I speak it) farewell. I must
in body go from you, yet in heart and good will I shall ever be with you,
you shall ever be most dear unto me, and I shall not cease (God forbid I
should) to power out my prayers before the almighty in your behalf, that the
great sheepeherd of the sheep of the Lord Jesus Christ may take charge of
you, and by his holy spirit direct and govern you in all your ways. In like
sort I most hartelie crave at your hands that ye be not unmindful to
pray also for me, tha^ I may walk worthily in my calling and fulfill the
ministry which I have received, that God may open unto me the door of
vtteraunce to speak the mysteries of Christ as becomes me to speak, that I
may in faith and boldness do his message, that he may deliver me from the
disobedient, and that my service may be accepted of the Saints, that the
word of the Lord may have his free passage, and that I may finishe the
residue of my course in the Gospel of Christ to the glory of God and profit
of the Church.

3 And now brethren for my last and long farewell I can use no fitter words
of exhortation then these are, An exhortation to perfection.
Be perfect, have consolation, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
charity and peace shall be with you. Two special things there are comprised
in these words, an exhortation and a promise. We are exhorted to be perfect,
to be of good comfort, to live in unity and peace: and we are promised that
so doing the God of love and peace shall remain with us. The first part of
the exhortation is as it were the root and fountain of the second, and the
second likewise of the last. For perfection breeds comfort, and comfort
causes peace. But let us particularly consider of every branch of the
exhortation. Be perfect.

4 Integrity or perfection is of two sorts: Perfection in God.
the one is divine, the other human. That which pertains unto God is
absolute, that which is of men is not without defect. In God there is full and
absolute perfection. Matthew. 5.
Your heavenly father is perfect, says our Savior. So perfect, that there is
not so much as any shadow of imperfection at all in him. He is light, 1. Ioh.
1.
perfect light, there is no darkness in him. He is the fountain from whence
all perfection flows, I^c. 1.
every perfect gift is from above. He which planted the ear shall not he
hear? he that formed the eye shall not he see? He that teaches man knowledge
shall not he understand? says the Prophet. Psalm. 94.
Shall I cause to bring forth, Esai. 66.
and shall I be barren? says the Lord. He cannot but be perfect in
himself, which is the cause of all perfection in others.

5 And as he is perfect, In his word. Psalm. 119.
so all things are perfect which are his. His law is perfect, and makes them
perfect which fulfill it. O that my ways were directed according to thy
statutes, then should I not be confounded, says the Prophet. His
commandments are holy and just and good. Scimus quia bona est lex, Rom 7.
the goodness and perfection of it is apparent, 1. Tim. 1.
clear and manifest, we know the law is good. But S. Paul seems to
charge the law with imperfection. The law, says he, Heb. 7.
brought nothing unto perfection. It is true that the law in it self is
perfect, able to save and make perfect all such as are able perfitlie to observe
it. For what says the law? Do this and thou shall live. Yet no man lives by
the law, why so? Because the law in imperfect? God forbid. The cause then why
being perfect it brings nothing to perfection is the weakness and infirmity
of our flesh. Romans 8.
Wherefore that which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak
because of the flesh, God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful
flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled. Although no man therefore be brought to perfection by
the law, yet the law remains perfect even as he is perfect which gave the law.

6 Every work of the mighty God is perfect. In all his works.
When he had made heaven and earth, sea and land, fish, foul, man, beast,
and whatsoever is contained within the compass of the whole world, having
finished all he beheld the works of his own hands, and saw they were all
exceeding good. If there be this perfection in the works of God, then
whatsoever he do in heaven or in earth, seem it unto us never so much out of
order, yea although it be even against all reason in our eyes, yet must we
always set our hands unto this: It is of God, therefore perfect. For woe be
to him that says to his father, what have thou begotten? or to his mother what
have thou brought forth? Esa. 4^.
Shall the claie say to the workman, what make thou? dust and ashes to the
creator of heaven and earth, it is not good and perfect which thou do?

7 As God is perfect in himself, Perfection in us by imputation.
in his word, and in all his works: so, we are exhorted to fashion our selves
according to that similitude and likeness which is in him, and to become
perfect as our father in heaven is perfect. There is a perfection which all
believers have by imputation, whereof although S. Paul do not speak directly
in this place, yet because it is the root of that perfection whereof he
speaks, it is not besides the purpose for me to put you in mind of it. Unto
every son of Adam it may justly be said, Ezec. 28.
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till
iniquity was found in thee. But our sanctification being once defiled and
polluted with sin, he which likes no unclean or imperfect thing if he
look upon us as we are in our selves cannot but loath us. Wherefore except
the perfection of righteousness which is in Christ be imputed unto us and
accounted as ours, except in him we be made the righteousness of God, how
should we ever hope to appear without spot and wrincle in the sight of God? He
therefore is perfect whose imperfections Christ with his perfection has
covered. This is a secret which because the Jews were not able to comprehend,
therefore they stumbled. Israel sought perfection and found it not. Wherefore?
Because they sought it by the works of the law and not by faith, they thought
perfection by imputation to be a mere fancy. Contrariwise the Gentiles not
following that perfection which is by the law, attained unto that which is by
faith: which S. Paul did so esteem that, although he were concerning the
righteousness which is in the law, unreprovable, yet he thought all the
labor and travel lost which he had spent about attaining perfection that
way, and desired nothing more than to be found not having his own perfection
which was of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ.

8 But the perfection whereof S. Paul here speaks is nothing else but the
finishing of that which the grace of Christ has already begun to work in our
hearts, Perfection (...) be sought for by industry and labor.
our growing and increasing in true godliness, our proceeding and going
forward from virtue to virtue, from strength to strength, till we come unto
that whereunto we strive. Brethren (says the Apostle) I count not my self as
if I had attained it, Phil. 3.
or were already perfect. But one thing, I forget that which is behind and
endeavor my self unto that which is before, and follow hard toward the
mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded: let as many as have attained
the former perfection strive unto this which is the latter.

9 For this cause Apostles, Inward perfection.
Prophets, Evangelists, pastors, and teachers at the first were given, unto
this all doctrine and exhortation does tend, that being builded together to be
the habitation of God by the spirit we might rise to a perfect man unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, (...)
and in all things grow up into him which is the head: in all things whether
they be inward virtues or outward duties which God requires at the hands of
men. Touching inward virtues, although we have knowledge, and be established
in the present truth; although our faith be such that it be known and spoken
of through out the world; although we abound in godliness, in brotherly
kindness, and in all love: it is nevertheless a thing needful as long as
we are in this tabernacle that we be always put in mind, stirred up, and
provoked to endeavor that in these things we may abound more and more and go
forward in them to perfection.

10 The word of truth which is the Gospel, In knowledge Colloss. 1.
was fruitful among the Colossians from the very first day that they heard
and truly knew the grace of God. Yet S. Paul ceased not still to pray for
them and to desire that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might increase in the
knowledge of God, and so be perfect. The Hebrews no dout were not utterly
ignorant in the highest mysteries of their salvation: yet are they sharply
reproved for their rawnesse, and exhorted to proceed from the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, and from the first principles of the word of God, that at
the length they might come to some perfection. We must all confess even the
best learned amongst us all that as yet we are but beginning to learn, we
know but little, our skill is of small and tender growth. It behooves us
therefore to pray continually with the prophet, Lord teach us thy statutes,
make us to understand the way of thy precepts, that we may profit in
meditating of thy law, lead us on in our way by the gracious conduction of
thy holy spirit, so direct our course that we may run out the race into which
we are entered, not ceasing till thou have brought us into all truth, fully
instructed us in thy righteousness, made us absolute and perfect unto all good
works.

11 Where there is backwardness in knowledge, In faith.
there must needs be also weakness of faith: if we grow in the one, we are
the nearer to perfection in the other. How great care the blessed Apostle had
that the faith of as many as did believe through his preaching might be
perfited, let that one speech of his to them of Thessalonica serve to show in
steed of many. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
Brethren we had consolation in you in all our affliction and necessity
through your faith. For now are we alive if we stand steadfast in the Lord.
What thanks can we recompense to God again for you for all the joy for which
we rejoice for your sakes before God, night and day, praying exceedingly that
we might see your face, and might accomplish that which is lacking in your
faith? If he were thus careful for the faith of others, shall we neglect to
make perfect our own? 1. Ioh. 5.
When we hear that this is the victory which ouercometh the world even our
faith; that by faith all the fiery darts of Satan are expelled and driven
back; Ioh. 5.
that unto believers all things are possible; that he which believes comes
not into judgment but has passed from death to life: are we not glad to say in
our hearts Lord we believe? If we be, then considering that by how much our
faith is more steadfast by so much we are the more certainly assured of all
these things, let us join in request with the disciples of Christ, Luke. 17.
and beg of him to increase faith in us; let us cry even with tears, Lord
help our incredulity.

12 But how can you believe, In Godliness.
says our savior, that receive glory one of another, and the glory which is
of God only ye seek not? John. 5.
How should we grow unto fullness of faith, which are so empty and void of
godliness? The complaint of the Prophet might never be more truly and
generally applied: there is no fear of God. Zeal is even quenched, religion
almost dead, true devotion abolished from the hearts of men: There is not a
godly man left upon earth; or if there be, if God have reserved to himself at
this present many thousands (as I doubt not but he has) of godly men, yet
how hard is it to find one amongst those many thousands which daily goes
forward profiting and perfiting himself in Godliness?

13 Whereat we can not greatly merueile. In brothe^^ie kindness and l^ue.
For if men grow so cold as we daily see they do in charity, love, and
brotherly kindness toward men whom they see, they must needs be colder in
love toward God, whom no man ever saw. Thus because our profiting in all
these parts of inward perfection has been hitherto very slow, it is
therefore needful to put you in mind of this present exhortation, Concerning
that which remains brethren be perfect.

14 It is not enough to seek for inward perfection unless we also endeavor to
be outwardly perfect. Outward perfection in doing.
If we have the ripeness of men in knowledge, we may not show the fondness
of children in behavior. To say we have faith, what avails it, except we
have works also? See we not that the faith of Abraham was effectual and
wrought with his works, and that through his works his faith was made perfect?
Are we sincerely religious toward God? Pure religion and undefiled before God
even the father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world. Do we profess
love and charity toward our brethren? Let the whole course and practice of
our life, as near as possibly we can be sincere, upright, sound and perfect.
For broken dealinges are as odious in the sight of God, as they are grievous
and offensive toward men. Let your love appear by your good fruits, your
works of Charity. And if ye have laid a good foundation of this already,
finish the work which ye have begun; in that which ye do, study how to
abound. Be not weary of well doing. As in that which is past, so for that
which remains brethren we beseech you and exhort you in the Lord Jesus that
ye increase more and more: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
not only coveting spiritual gifts, and being studious of good works, but
also seeking to excel in them: that in all things ye may be made rich in
Christ, in all virtue, and in all speech.

15 The mouth of the fool (says Solomon) is fed with foolishness. In
speaking. Prou. 15. Colloss. 4.
But let your speech, (says the Apostle) be gracious always and powdered with
salt. Perfection herein ought so much the more earnestly to be desired, by how
much it is the more hardly obtained in this than in other things. As by using
the bitte in the mouth of a horse, his whole body is turned about; and as by
moving the rudder a ship is directed whether soever it pleases the mind of
the governor: so he that is perfect to rule the tongue with skill is able to
rule all the body with ease. Iac. 3.
But the tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. Therefore as many
as desire to be perfect must keep a continual watch before their lips, that
if an unsavory word escape them they may lay their hands on their mouths
betimes, that if they have spoken unadvisedly once they may answer no more,
or if twice yet proceed no further This use shall breed such perfection in
the end that all our talk shall be gracious, all out words well seasoned, all
our speech and communication become such as that whereof the wise man speaks
in the book of Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiast. 27.
saying: The talk of him that fears God is all wisdom.

16 With these things if we join that perfection also which S. James
mentions, In suffering. Iac. 1.
Let patience have her perfect work, we shall then fully answer our Apostles
exhortation, we shall be perfect and entire lacking nothing. Now the God of
all grace which has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus make
you perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablish you.

17 Our Apostle very fitly having exhorted us to be perfect, An exhortation to
rejoice and be of good comfort*
adds in the next place, consolationem habete, be of good comfort. For as
many as seek to be perfect, shall find many grievous hinderaunces to stay
them in their course: necessary therefore it is that in this respect they
should be comforted. There is no one part or degree of perfection wherein the
righteous and godly do not find many great occasions offered, quite to
discourage and daunt their hearts. S. Paul was perfect and ripe in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and it was objected against him as a token of
extreme fury, Act. 26.
Multae literae te ad insaniam redigunt, much learning makes thee mad. Abraham
for the great perfection of his faith is called the father of them that
believe: but how sore were those assaults that withstoode his hope and
assurance in the promise? The godliness of Job was so absolute and perfect that
God him self does as it were make a vaunt of him unto Satan, Has^ thou not
considered my servant Job, how none is like him in the earth, an upright and
just man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? Yet how near was he
brought to the gulf of destruction both of body and soul? The love wherewith
the holy Apostle embraced the Church of Corinth was so strong and perfect,
that he wished even to be bestowed and spent for their souls: 2. Cor. 12.
but what a discouragement was this unto him, that the more he did love the
less he was loved? Touching the prophet Jeremy, whether we consider his
dealinges, his speakinges, or his sufferinges, we see there was great
integrity in all: but his wrestlings and striuinges with the wicked were so
irksome and tedious unto him, that he seemed sometimes more then half
resolved to give over all, as if it were but bootlesse to strive longer. All
which notwithstanding we are here exhorted to be of good comfort, for as much
as although our hindrances be great, yet sure we are safely to pass through
them, they can not damme up the way between us and the kingdom of heaven.
Through this strait way our brethren have passed before us, and we need not
fear to follow after. Christ himself has gone before by a far harder
passage than his meaning is to lead any of us by. Think it therefore no
strange thing for the perfect to suffer, be not discomforted or dismayde at it,
1. Pet. 5.
knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren which are
in the world. If we patiently suffer with him and the^ we shall gloriously be
crowned with him and them. It is true that the godly, the just and perfect
have fierce adversaries, mighty enemies, the devil with his lost and forsaken
train, the world full of baits and allurements unto evil, the flesh ever
ready and greedy to take them. But have confidence (says our savior) I have
overcome. Ioh. 16.
Although ye travail and be heavy laden for a while, yet comfort your selves,
knowing that your anguishes, greefes, and molestations shall have an end, your
tears shall be wiped away and dried up, but the joy which shall be given you is
everlasting. The seed of tears which ye sow now, is nothing to that harvest
of joy which hereafter shall be reaped. Again whatsoever does befall us here,
it comes not unto us by hap or chance, but all is disposed by the will and
providence of almighty God; when we are chastised we are chastised of the
Lord; it is of mere love and perfect righteousness that we are corrected; it
is not for our harm, but to our good, either for the trial of our faith or
for the reformation of our life. So that the man which fears God, which
walks uprightly in his sight having the testimony of a good conscience
cannot want matter of consolation, he has wherefore in the Lord to rejoice
always, God has given enough for his continual comfort. For that which
rests therefore brethren lift up your heads and be comforted.

18 Finally, An exhortation to peace and unity.
to come to the last branch of this present exhortation, be of one mind, live
in peace. These fruits of unity and peace are not gathered but where
integrity and comfort have taken root. One temple was builded for the people
of God, one law written by the finger of God, that the Church of God might in
all things be one. The bond of unity is verity, neither can they be truly
one, which are not one in truth. And therefore although an Angel should come
from heaven with all show of learning and all appearaunce of unspotted and
undefiled purity, teaching things contrary to that one truth which you have
received, reach him no hand, salute him not in token of consent: unity with
him is enmity with God. But if all be builded upon the settled foundation of
Gods truth, if all be members of one body, servants to one master,
soldiers fighting under one banner, children of one and the same father, then
is the name of unity and peace amiable. Behold, says the prophet, how good
and how sweet a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in one. Psalm. 133.
It is good like the dew which waters the hills, sweet like that oil
which was powered upon the head of the High Priest. Oil is pleasant and dew
profitable; the one gives a most fragrant smell, the other makes the ground
fruitful: but the goodness and sweetness of unity, of peace no tongue is
able sufficiently to express. If this oil and dew of peace unity and concord
shall be powered, as upon Hermon and Aaron, so likewise upon the tops of our
mountains upon the heads of our guides, upon our magistrates, and upon our
ministers, and shall thence distill to the lower parts as it were to the
valleys that lie under the one and to the skirtes of the others garments, the
fruit that shall thereby grow unto us and the pleasure which all beholders
shall conceive of it is unspeakable. Wherefore with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. ^.
I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you all
speak one thing and that there be no dissensions among you, but be ye knit
together in one mind and in one judgment. And as it is said that the last
lesson which Saint John the Evangelist gave to his disciples was Filiol^
diligite vos inuicem, my little children love one another: So my dear brethren
receive you also this last lesson at my hands, Be perfect be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace.

19 And then I dare conclude and promise with S. Paul, The promise made to them
which do as they have been hitherto exhorted.
the God of love and peace shall abide with you. That God which has so much
commended peace unto us, that God who is so much delighted in love, yt God
which is the author of love and peace, yt God which is peace and love it self,
he will be with you: a sure tower for your defense against whose power, no
power is able to stand; a present help in all necessities, a loving father
which cannot forget you, a merciful God: a faithful schoolmaister, a good
shephard. He will feed you with the food of life, he will augm^nt and increase
your faith, confirm and stablish you in all truth, his love to the end shall
continue with you, his peace he will give you and leave among you; he will
stand always at your right hand, maintain your lot, lead you through this
vale of tears and conduct you safely to the land of promise; he will pull
from your shoulders this miserable coat of your corruption, and cloth you with
the robes of immortality, he will change this vile body and make it like the
glorious body of Jesus Christ. All this that God which can not lie, has
promised, all this that omnipotent mighty and merciful God will perform even
to all such as labor to become perfect, as joy in the holy ghost, as have
comfort in Christ, as consent in true religion, and live in peace and brotherly
concord. To that God immortal invisible, and only wise, be all honor,
glory, and praise, now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 3. line 3. in the margin read specially 29. 19. Plutarch 39. 20.
diversity 43. 8. fault 83. 8. Constantius 110. 29. Ahimele^h 111. 13. matters
135. 1. for it, can not 136. 25. taken 140. 17. we 144. 26. crafty
undermining; 146. 13. Haman 168. 6. affecte^ 169. 23. Mattathias 17* 12. marg.
magistrate 227. 1^. Needs 231. 8. out our hearte^ 238. 21. say 25. attended
239. 1. Ophni 34 hearts 240. 28. this 245. 21. aliens 27 (...) 250. 12. are
252. 2. put out shall 256* vlt. marg. ad our adversaries 259. 3. marg put out 2
Pet. ^ 279. 15. innocence of man was 291. 32. God, the 305. 12. caused 309.
37. used 333. 11. p^^^ectour 363. 36. Achitophel 364. 10. king


