OF ROMANIZING RECVSANTS, AND DISSEMBLING CATHOLICS. A COVNTER-MAVND of a
counterfeit Embassage. OR, AN ANSWER TO the posthume Pamphlet of Ralfe
Buckland sometime a Popish Priest, secretly printed and published after his
death about a year a go.

I have not sent these Prophets says the Lord, yet they ran: I have not
spoken to them, yet they Prophesied.

Jeremy. 23.21. AT LONDON. Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1611.

These things are performed in this Treatise.
1 THe scope or drift of the Priests Pamphlet is justified. (viz.) That
dissembling Papists in England ought to unmask themselves. 2 The Popish
Doctrine inserted, is controwled by the Positive Doctrine of Truth. 3 The
profane blasphemies and unjust Criminations against the true professors
called Protestants, are justly retorted upon the Popish Synagogue. 4 Unsettled
Consciences among the Papists, are exhorted to continue their obedience to the
proceedings of the English Protestant Church, that by gods grace in the end
they may be settled in the Truth.
TO THE MOST REVErend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England; and of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council; my very good Lord.
Most Reverend Father:
THE DEDIcation of every work framed against the Common Adversary of our Church
and State, seems unto me of right, next under his Majesty, to belong unto
your Grace, in regard both of your Place, and Person. Your Place being as that
of Zadock, or Nathan, to King David: your Person worthy of all Honor. Whom
God and the King have so greatly honored with such high and eminent graces and
endowments; as which, truly, none, save Haereticall and Profane Spirits of
envy and malignitie, can dis-tast; but which the syncerely-christian ought to
prosecute with all Honorable approbation and loyalty. The consideration
whereof, respectively joined with some other congruent motives, has emboldned
me, at this time, submisly to entreat your Graces Patronage of this my first
Onset, in this Kind, which I have given to the Jesuitical Opposite. Wherefore
in all humility presuming to commend the same to your Graces protection, I
pray God almighty to assist and bless your Grace, in all your weighty
affairs, with his most holy Spirit, and happy succes for ever.

Your Graces in all most humble affection, and duty. TH. SANDERSON.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader: In this Treatise, Truth and zeal of Gods glory which were
aimed at, I trust, will appear. But I should hardly have delivered store of
reading, though I had been furnished therewith. For neither does the quality
of the Message controwled, require it: neither is it fitting for him in whose
name it is answered, to make show of it. The Person answering is our blessed
Savior himself, whose word is a proof invincible. In whose name a popish
Priest has audaciously praesumed to deliver an Embassage which he never
received. The Message it self is full of railing, lies, and blasphemies; but
no learning at all. I cannot find that scarcely once he attempteth to prove
any of those idolatrous and Popish opinions, which he every where scatters.
As he lays down false principles of Popish doctrine without proofs: so it
may be found in this Countermand, that they are crossed and checked with the
Positive Truth, supported with some chief and fundamental arguments thereof.
Of this I thought good to advertise thee, because this Answer intends only
to discover the praesumption of a false Ambassador, the impudent calumniations
of a notable Rayler, and the erroneous doctrines of a Romish Priest: to the
end, to controwle the malapert sawcines of the Ambassador, to retort the
injurious criminations of the Railer, to oppose the Truth of God to the Romish
profession; that wisdom may be justified of all her children; and they that
run well may run so still, until the light of God do shine full in their
hearts: and until vnremooueable grace be with all them that love the Lord
Jesus Christ in syncerity.

The Preface.
A Short Horse is soon curried; though a ragged Colt is not so sodenlie
broken. A petty pamphlet may be sodenlie answered; though a profane pedantick
Haeretick is not so readily put to silence. But it is no matter: Dogs will
bark; and evil workers will ever be busy bodies? and the Concision will
never be of the true circumcision. Si pro errore homines and damnabili
dissensione, and conuicta modis omnibus falsitate tanta praesumunt, etc. quanto
magis aequum est, and oportet eos qui pacis and vnitatis Christianae asserunt
veritatem etc. satagere instanter atque impigre, non solum pro eorum munimine
quiiam catholici sunt, verum etia^ pro eorum correctione qui nondum sunt? Nam
sipertinacia insuperabiles vires habere conatur, qua^tas debet habere
constantia, Aug. ad Festu^ ep. 197.
quae in eo bono quod perseueranter and infatigabiliter agit, and Deo placere
se nouit, and proculdubio non potest hominibus prudentibus displicere? It is
therefore expedient, and it shall not be grievous, because it is a work of no
great labor, as to answer words with words again; a fool according to his
folly, etc: so to teach a young coltish Priest, by this Priest, to range about
without an errand; and pretend an Embassage without a message. Whose ragged
Rhetoric, and jmpude^t boldness is the more jntolerable, because he takes upon
him the person of Christ, having been himself a Priest and lym of Antichrist:
and having crept like a Locust out of the bottomless pit; he crowns himself
the king of kings and Lord of Lords as coming down from heaven. Is it any
matter to halter the necks and even to break the hearts of such Colts? Who
dare to entitle their own beastly and blasphemous neighings with the name of,
An Embassage from the son of God, our Lord and savior Jesus Christ? But
because this Ambassador is now departed the mortality of this life, as it
seems to be insinuated in the preface, I leave him to the Judgment of the
Eternal Judge: Augustinus.
whose Judgments are sometimes manifest, sometimes secret, always just.
Neuer-thelesse as one of the Lords Prophets and servants of Christ, in the
cause. and quarrel of my Master though the meanest and weakest of
Ten-thousand I have thought good to take in hand from a true and hearty zeal
that I bear unto the Church of Christ, to examine this Embassage. And first he
might have given leave to some sturdier steed to have rushed into the battle
foremost, whether his meaning were in simple honesty to call back his friends
from the Enemies camp; or in slye subtlety to stir and raise up an open
Rebellion: so to muster all the papists in this Kingdom: (Recusants and
Schismatics (as himself divides them) in one Army. I will not determine his
meaning, because I know not his Conscience, I leave the purpose of his heart to
him that is (...). But (as one says) Quicquid id est, Virg. AEneid. 2. Prove.
12.5.
timeo. I fear whatsoever it be. For I am sure: Consilia impiorum sunt
fraudulenta. The counsels of the ungodly are deceitful. Mat. 7.18.
An evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit: and a bad man can hardly have a
good meaning: (as the Lord said to the Pharisees): Mat. 12.34.
How can ye speak good things when ye your selves are evil? We will not
doubt but the Iesuited Recusant is in his heart traitourously affected: and
waits only for an opportunity to be a Rebel. When time and power should
have offered themselves we make no question but Captain Buckland, Priest,
would have buckled up himself and his harness to the battle; and so will all
that are of his mind, to root out the memorial of English Protestants,
though it be by faggot and fire, or famine, or Sword, or any other violent and
forcible means. But thanks be to God, we hope, that long desired black and
bloody day dawneth not yet, howsoever their many brauadoes and cracking threats
may make perhaps some peoples hearts, of the weaker sort amongst us, to startle
now and then within them. A little puff of a quick wind will easily raise a
small billow in every River, yet no danger of a storm at all. And therefore
not troubling our selves greatly with this petty Captains purpose: though it
were, as it may seem it was, in this Embassage, to strike up an Alarm to an
open Rebellion of the Popish faction: but trusting in him that keeps Israel
neither slumbring nor sleeping: Psalm 121.4.
we leave his jmagined device and drift unto himself and his associats, to
discloze or Cloze up in their own bosoms at their own pleasure. Only this
we advise his (so named by him) Schismatics: that because they are Papists,
they would Correct their opinions, and because no Schismatics in Joining with
our Church, they would hold on their practice: It may in time by Gods grace,
and good means, reform their hypocrisy and dissimulation wherewith they are
charged, whether Justly or unjustly, themselves can tell best, by this Priest.
If they have a good meaning and are coming onwards to the true Christian
faith, they are in a right course to Join with us in our service and Churches.
If they stand resolute as yet in their superstitious devotion: Yet God may
reveal the better part unto them. If they be obstinate both Haereticks and
Hypocrites, and corrupt our people with their leven of Rome, and Creeping into
corners seduce the hearts of the simple; either let them hearken unto their
own priest; or else, Vtinam abscindantur qui perturbant nos. Galat. 5.12.
Would to God they were cut of that trouble us. And so I come to the Embassage.
Wherein not to trouble our selves at all with his method, being, as I conceive
it, nothing else but a bundell of goodly arguments heaped together to persuade
Schismatic dissembling papists to become open and obstinate Recusants: (That
only conclusion being the drift of his whole message:) Let us follow him foot
by foot; and as he nu^breth them up in order, and so prawnceth forward in his
running vain and Rhetorical trappings: so let us observe the foul and
dangerous bogs of filthy Romish way wherouer he trippeth like a wild Irish:
and, as it seems, would have our Protestants who may light upon his book, to
run and fall, as being unacquainted with such paths and Passages. Wherefore
our Chief purpose is only to discover those erroneous and Blasphemous
Positions and Paradoxes which here and there he has tumbled into his Treatise:
whereinto whosoever shall follow him of the Protestant flock may plunge
themselves as into popish and Impious bogs and gulfes before they be aware. The
rest of his Rhetoric tending only to the persuasion of their Hypocritical
Crew to unmask themselves and to appear in outward profession that which they
are in inward resolution. We let Pass, as it were, as not offensive unto us:
wishing, as well as he, that no one of them would dissemble with God and the
world, but show themselves in their own colors that we might know by their
pronunciation whether they be Gileadits or Ephraimits? Judge. 22.5.6.
on our parts, or on our enemies. For if we shall find them hereafter to be
only Temporizers, Cunning Machiauels, underminers, Vault-workers, or the like
because they are in opinion halting Israelites, halfe-baked Ephraimits, luke
warm Laodiceans, and the like: we shall hold it, I trust, a most just and
necessary course to cut them of for notorious Hypocrites against God, and
detected Traitors against their King and country. Lastly, because this false
Ambassador has been so bold to deliver this Message in the name of Christ; we
having greater reason in defense of the very truth, then he had of his Popish
cause, to crave the assistance of our blessed Lord and Savior: do most humbly
entreat his heavenly Majesty to Countermaund this Embassage as being forged in
his name, and to controwle the follies, falsehoods, and blasphemies thereof, in
his own words: Humbly craving pardon of his Highness, and Holiness, being most
unworthy to speak from so great and absolute a Monarch, though we shall
deliver the message with no semblable wisdom, integrity, and perfection as
may beseem so divine a Majesty. Therefore thus we proceed.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL Schismatics.
TO you, oh you miserable, who straying from the paths of peace, run as
confidently forwards in dark and slipperie ways, as if ye traced the steps
of truth and righteousness, neither wandered one jot from the high way to
salvation.

AN ANSWER TO the Epistle;
OR rather to the Title: if it be so much. Vax faucibus haeret. Manum de tabula?
For me thinks his tongue cleaves to the roof of his mouth. Has he taken
so soon and suddenly his hand from the work? what is the matter? does grief
thrattle him, and his spirit burn within him? either does his memory forsake
him? or his heart smite him? Cannot Balaam utter his parable, because God will
not give him leave to curse his people? what motion? what passion is this? what
Lethargy? what Apoplexy possessed the brain of this Priest, that beginning a
sentence, he was not able to bring it forth. Belike the Devil ought him a
foul shame, to trip him down on the threshold: and cut off both his head and
his hands here; for both his wit and his fingers faild him in this entrance. Or
was it not the Angel of the Lord of hoasts that stood in Balaams way to forbid
him? nay, to rebuke and controwle his conscience in this wicked course and
Treatise; and yet to suffer him to go on forward withal. Christian Reader,
mark I pray you, if this be not very memorable, that this false Ambassador is
made to speak, and not to speak: to begin, and not to make an end, like a
cravin Cock that begins to crow, and stops upon a sudden.

To you, oh you miserable, etc. What does he say to them? Nay: that is
abrupted, either by the failing of his memory, or by the feeling of his
conscience: or by both. As he that came upon the Stage, when he had said
(Vtinam ne in nemore) was able to go no farther: so this praunsing Priest
directing an Epistle to all Schismatics, meaning, his Catholic minded that
come to our Churches, beginning at first more like a frantic and furious
Herald, then a sober and prudent Ambassador to rail at them, is choked as it
wereof himself, as chasing and choleric spirits use to be in their overhasty
fumes, not able to deliver one perfect Period. But A Domino factum est istud,
this was the Lords doing, that he became so speechless upon a sudden. ^ob.
38.11.
He that said to the Sea, hitherto shall thou come, and here shall it stay thy
proud waves; gave a notable forewarning to this blasphemer, hitherto to range,
and here to break off his proud words: if he had had the grace to take it.
But as it is our jubred corruption to like best, and be most eager of the
forbidden fruit: and as the Poet spoke of a stomackfull jade, The more he was
held in with Bridle and bit, Vidi ego nuper equum contra sua froena tenacem,
Ore reluctanti fulminis tree modo. Ovid.

The more headstrong and furious he strove against it.


And as a strong Current the more it is stopped, the more it rages till it
run over the banks, like the swelling of Jordan: so it is apparent that this
naughty nature would not be warned, this unbridled Pegasus would not be
tamed, this running Rhetorician would not be restrained; but his voluble tongue
must needs cast out the wild fire of blasphemies against CHRIST and his truth:
of slanders against the Gospel, and Professors thereof: and of revilings
against his own Catholic minded, as in the sequel we shall perceive.

THE COVNTERMAVND of the counterfeit EMBASSAGE.

HEarken ye erring souls who will not enter the Arc ordained for the safety
of my elect: The dangerous estate of Schismatickes.
yet hope, etc.

Come forth before me and justify your selves if ye can, etc.

To all both Angels and Men, I appeal to Catholics and Heretics, etc.


HEARKEN YE FALSE Ambassadors and messengers of the Roman harlot. Ye run,
but I send you not: ye speak, but I have not spoken unto you: your
dissembling Catholics I do not justify, either in their opinions, or in
their dissimulations. Their opinions are haereticall, their dissimulation is
damnable: yet their suting and sorting with my Protestants in England is both
justifiable in it self, and acceptable unto me. Their estate therefore is not
herein dangerous: never trouble them with such account. But yours, who are
Recusants, is. For in your own words to answer you. Ye are the erring souls
who will not enter the Arc: nor refuse to leave Sodom: who forsake not the
Tabernacles of Korah: who neglect to fly from Babylon: ye are the lost sheep
who have worn out My mark, and enter an other fold: ye run with the
thief, and partake with iniquity: ye broken branches ignorant of your own
decay: ye rent my unseamed coat: ye tear my body: ye break the unity of
my Church without scruple of Schism. Could you possibly have devised fitter
words wherein to describe your own Heretical and Schismatic qualities?
Therefore stand up and plead for your selves if you be able before me your
Judge, and Creator of all: your wickedness shall testify unto your own
faces, and let all my Creatures testify against you for notorious Impostors;
Men and Angels; Protestants and Romanists; Christians and Infidels; and your
own Consciences, if ye have any.


I Have tried you and found you faithless, etc. Schismatics no true servants
of GOD.


I have provided for you a plentiful harvest of glorious and eternal merits,
I proffer the purchase of the kingdom of Heaven, but I perceive, etc. Oh seed
of Samaria, etc.


YOu I have tried and found, indeed, a faithles and disloyal generation: ye
have set at naught my wisdom and bounty, and contemned the treasures of my
kingdom. Oh ye seed of Samaria, your idolatrous blindness and frowardnes, as
that of untamed Ephraim, I detest, abhor, and cannot digest. The purchase of
the kingdom of Heaven by my glorious and aeternall merits, how so ever I seem
to proffer unto all, yet I have provided for none but my true believers. As for
them, who only for the fear of a Temporal loss, will not make public and
open profession of the truth, how can I choose but hate their so dastardly
dissimulation? Yet I am no Counselor, as thou would make me here, Oh thou
false tongue, to any vnresolved or unsettled souls, to turn Traitors to their
King and Country, to the hazard of their lives and goods.


Ingratitude of Schismatics and their injurious dealing toward GOD.
IF any man withold your right, an action is ready, he is served with
process and exclaimed against for unconscionable dealing, etc.

But where is your own duty? the honor of your Maker, the love of your
Redeemer, the awe of your God? where are the fruits which my care have
deserved? Long have I travailed in manuring your barren souls: I have sent my
laborers, etc.


TVrne your eyes and look upon your selves ye Runnagates, and ye shall see
that ye are the men of unthankfulness here described. I will and do challenge
you in your own words, that you withold your own souls from me my right
and interest by Purchase of redemption: that you are stubborn servants and
disobedient Children: that I have sent my laborers unto you: who have
travailed much with him: that I have by many occasions solicited you: Recusant
Papists many ways solicited to ^ome to the truth of the Gospel prof^^^ted
in England.
as by the great prosperity and long peace of this Land, by miraculous defense
of the late Queen, and the present King thereof, and strange deliverances of
all the states therein, both from foreign invasions, and domestical treasons,
secret, and open practices: by increasing both the multitude and learning of my
true Pastors according to my mind, as I promised of old unto my Church, Ierem.
3.15
and many other unspeakable blessings besides: yet have you like barraine
souls brought forth no sweet and kindly fruits of truth and Godliness, but
unprofitable and bitter weeds of Popery and Impiety. Stiff and intractable as
ye are; wicked and perverse people: why do ye wrong my patience? and daily
vex me to draw my people from me? yea those among yourselves that are coming
toward me? why do ye your selves thus forsake me, and deny me? despize and
disobey me? oppugn and assault me?


Schismatics deny, despise, and impugn GOD.
YE forsake me and deny me, and say with a bold countenance wherein have we
forsaken and denied thee? Have ye not renounced my service? cast off my
liuerie? departed from my family? Have not I ordained Sacraments for your
special comfort? A Sacrifice, etc.


HEre you lay upon your friends a threefold accusation in my name: but I have
not accused them of Denial, Contempt, and Resistance of God in yielding to the
Profession of a Protestant. Your service is not my service, your Coat my
liuerie, your Synagogue my family, your pitched field my Camp and Colors; or
the Protestants pavilions mine Adversaries Tents: ye are my Adversaries, and
your Tents are the tents of ungodliness, your Camp and Colors are opposite
unto mine. To enter your family, to wear your liverie, to do service in your
assemblies is to forsake and deny mine. But they do well that do the
contrary. Again, I have Commanded all my professors to love me above all, to
confess my Name, my faith, and Church, and to strive for the truth even unto
blood. But your Religion is not the Truth, your Faith, and Church, are none of
mine: so that they cannot despise and disobaye me that depart from you. For
your 5. 5. Sacraments thrust in by papists, which Christ never ordained, see
Sect. 13.
Sacraments added unto my Baptism and holy Supper I never ordained as
necessary to Salvation, or significant symboles of my death and Passion. Your
infernal Sacrifice of the Mass, He. 10.10. etc.
as not only an jdle and odious repeticion of my precious death: But a most
jmpious and blasphemous derogation from the All-sufficient and eternal merit
thereof, I hate and abhor as an Antichristian Idol. They have done well that
have with-drawen themselves from it, and entered into the Congregations of my
faithful Protestants; despizing and refraining your tedious Multiplicitie of
Ceremonies, and altogether ridiculouslie both Superstitious and Profane
obseruances: for herein they have honored and obayed me. Lastly then; let
other Romanized English be discomforted: let their courage fail: and the
number decrease on your part: let the false-Catholicke cause be weakened: and
the enemy thereof be fortified: they do well who are a means of this; and
please me best of all that come from among you: so far it is that they
oppugn and assault me.


Schismatickes wilfully deceive them selves.
YOu flatter your selves, notwithstanding all these injuries soothing your
consciences, etc.


NAy: never persuade them unto that. For having builded upon a false
foundation, how can you choose but infer a false and presumptuous conclusion?
Your foundation was; that they are Sect. 1.
erring Souls, departing from my Church: joining with Heretics: Sect. 4.
denying, despizing, and oppugning me: which they will never grant you: which
I will never yield you: yet thereof you would have them to be persuaded. And to
that end forsooth would rouse up their Consciences, and sound the bottom of
their hearts to search and see their dissimulation. That they are Romanists in
heart and dissemble their faith; I cannot approve it: that they unite
themselves unto the Protestants; I will not blame it: that they do so only in
a color to save their Lands and goods; I do not justify it: that they
therefore must be concluded for deniers, despizers, and oppugners of me, The
Popish Priest t keth upon him to judge his brethren, contrary to the
commandment of Christ. Mat 7.1.
and my faith of truth, in conversing with the Protestants, and coming to
their Service, and Churches; how should I jnferr it? yet you take upon you to
prove it.


Do ye not as Peter deny your selves to be of my Company, etc. By Peter's
denial is proved that Schismatics deny Christ.


Not contented with eschewing the exercise of the Catholic faith, and
participation with the faithful in profession of conscience, ye make no
Scruple to frequent the rites of a false belief, etc.


NO sir: they do not. Doubtful Catholics may come to Protestant Churches to
(...) themselves, Recusant Papists persevere in erroneous Contumacie.
For ye Recusant Papists are none of my company, my followers, my
inheritance, my ^ooke, the household of faith, my Children, and the like: (as
you style your selves.) To deny your company, your Religion, and false
Catholic Church; is not to renounce me their God, Redeemer, and Savior; and
to deny my holy Name, and Majesty. Therefore let this whole comparison
betwixt Peter's denial of me, and theirs (as ye suppose;) go for naught and
cancelled. Only I would have you remember; The Pope is only the presumed
successor of Peter.
that your holy Father, the presumed Successor of this Apostle, and all his
followers have learned well his Apostasy; but cannot find the way to return,
repent, go out with him, and weep bitterly. My blessed Mat. 16.17.
Apostle, had he not slipped from me in the high Priests Hall, Mat. 26.58.
his continuance in the profession of my name had been true Christian
constancy. But your perseverance in your erroneous, heretical, and jdolatrous
course, can be no less the^ profane contumacie, and wicked desperation. Happy
then are they who eschew the exercise of your Catholic faith, and
participation in profession of Conscience with such mis-beleeuers as ye are:
Happy who frequent the Rites of my true friends the Protestants, and partake
with them in the sacred profession of their Religion. Be it known unto you,
Protestants only are true Catholics.
and to all men, They only are accepted of me for true Catholics, and remain
firmly united to the Church my Spouse: and all the rest whatsoever they
profess commit the Acts of heresy; Nay, are absolutely either mis-beleevers,
or unbelievers: Heretics of Christendom, or Panim Infidels.


DAre ye then say that Catholic Recusants are not my proper flock? etc.
Schismatics are not of the Catholic Church.



NAy: dare ye say they are? I say, they are the heard of Antichrist, Recusant
Papists Foxes and Wolves.
the wily Canti 2.15.
Foxes, and the wild Bores that destroy my vine: yea, the Matt 7.15.
ravening Wolves that prey upon the souls of men. If your conceaved
Schismatics be not of their band, nor members, of their Church and
brother-hoode, it is the better for them. For no company is, or can be mine,
which imbraceth their erroneous and false Catholic Faith; which pursues
their traitorous, murderous, and unnatural course of life.


The assured ground where-vpo^ Recusants stand.
REcusants to stand upon an assured ground none can justly deny, or with
reason call their salvation in question, who cleave steadfastly to their
forefathers Faith, etc.

First christened Ancestors, etc.


NO can indeed? Ah ye spirits of presumption: stand they upon the assured
ground of my Apostles doctrine in my word? Popish foundations, traditions, and
show of Antiquity.
No: they are weakelie builded upon the sand of humane traditions. Therefore
I, even I, do call their salvation in question. They cleave not steadfastly,
but stubbornlie, to the superstitious Novelties of their late forefathers
faith, who have departed from the rule of my Religion, whereinto their first
christened Ancestors were converted by mine Apostles and their Coadjutors: And
wherein all their godly Predecessors both virtuously lived, and happily died,
before the patcheries of your Popery came in. They have a shadow and show of
some late praecedent generations: but the soundnes of Antiquity from the purer
times and truly Apostolical, who so ever sifteth their Modern faith shall find
they have not, for all their great cracks and brags. Tertullian^ de praescript.
aduersus haereses. See Jude. Verse. 3.
And so Tertullian the ancient spoke well in that: Dominicum and verum, quod
prius traditum: extraneum and falsum, quod posterius immissum. The truth of the
Lord was first delivered to the Saints: but foreign falsehood crept in
afterward.


THese are they which nourish the sparks of that fire which I came down to
kindle on earth, etc. Recusants highly to be commended for their zeal.



THey are not praise- worthy that praise themselves, 2. Cor. 10.18.
but they whom I the Lord do praise. Now, I do not allow your proud
vaunting of your selves: I know your works, and your ways, that they are full
of wickedness and hypocrisy. Are you the men that nourish the fire which I came
down to cause to burn on Earth? Luc. 12.49.
No: no: ye know not of what spirit you are. Luc. 9.55.
For with the furious fire of a blind zeal which burns in your breasts, have
ye not inve^ted and kindled a subterraneal and sulphurous fire to quench the
light of Israel in this Realm? and all the goodly shining lamps thereof, to
the everlasting memory of your perpetual all shame? Then, at that time, did
you show how you do maintain and uphold that my Law: Exodus 20.13.
(Thou shall do no murder.) How so ever you presume of the rest: when you
intended and attempted the most barbarous, The Gunpowder treason.
tyranicall, unheard of, and Satanicall destruction of King, Queen, Prince,
and all the States, the beauty and honor of this Kingdom, in an hour. Oh
ye sons of Balaam, and of Balack: ye bastard generation, and ye monsters
of Moab! Let my people sing: Faux of Moab is destroyed and brought to silence
in a night. Piercie, Catesbie, and the rest of Moab are destroyed, Ier. 48.10.
and brought to silence in an jnstant. And cursed shall he be that does the
work of the Lord negligentlie, or vnfaithfullie; and withholds his sword
from the blood of all the brood of Moab; when her time and judgment shall be
come. For, do you glorify my name that glory in such works? being sorry for
nothing more, Papists sorry that the Gunpowder treason took no better effect.
Luke 5.^2. Ioh. 2.25.
then that it has not taken your wished and prayed for effect? Dissemble it no
longer, for I know you hearts. Therefore shall you be dishonored for ever: and
the jndeleble blot of your noted infamy shall never be put out: you shall be
known for a spotted and pestilent generation so long as the world endures. Go
to now ye stars in the night: ye green Bays in the winter: ye fresh
fountains in the Deserts: No: no: ye know your titles in mine Apostle, Jude
ve. 12.13
and in the Gospel well enough. Clouds without water, carried about with
every wind, and whiff of vain jmaginations: Wells and pits dried in the
deserts: barraine fig trees, if ye be green in the midst of Summer; when the
Winter comes, corrupt trees, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots:
wandering Stars, fallen out of the jnferior heaven: for whom is reserved the
blacknes of darkness for ever. For, to be short; ye walk in darkness and know
not whither ye go: flatter not your selves: your own sectaries do not
believe, much less do they confess that ye do well: and your vowed enemies,
my true and faithful servants and friends, the English Protestants, long ago
have learned of me to repute and range you in the rank of those who stand
assuredly in the state of condemnation.


Schismatics have no part with Recusants, neither are of the same Church.
WIth these you may wish to consort in conscience. To partake in profession of
faith. Ye may in bare terms avouch as much, but shall never with reason be
able to make it good, etc.


IF they have no part with you how happy are they? If they consort in
conscience, and partake in profession of a false belief with you, they have no
part in me, no part in Heaven; but they most justly and abundantly deserve
unto themselves the vengeance of eternal fire. ^ome out from Recusants ye
staggering Papists.
If they will come from among you wholly both in conversation, and in Religion,
and follow me faithfully with my true professors, serving me, nor in the
oldnes of the Letter with a servile fear, Romans 7.6.
but in the newnes of the Spirit out of thankefulnes in love, from a pure
heart, a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1 5.
and Faith unfeigned; coming out from the Babel of your Superstitions,
Atheisines, and Apostasies: let them never care for your defective and infected
merits. For the kingdom of Heaven belongs unto me by a double right,
Enheritance, and Purchase: In the one, Bernard
I was borne unto it; in the other, I have perfectly deserved it through
obedience and sprinckling of my precious and meritorious blood: 1. Pet. 1.2.
and I will give it them if they can apprehend it by a true and lively faith,
Romans 4.4. etc Ephe. 2.8.9. 2. Cor. 7.1.
without regard of any other merit: provided always if they do their best
without hypocrisy, to walk before me in righteousness and true holiness all
the days of their life. Ephe. 4.^4. Luke 1.75.
But ye perverted Runnagates, because ye are become perverse Recusants, and the
shameless Apostates of my Church of England: return, I advise you, return into
my fold: else I must say unto you as I spoke unto the Pharisees of old: how can
ye escape the damnation of Hell. Mat. 23. ^^.



Schismatics are not Catholics.
ANd are you indeed, ask the Recusant, and he rejects you; ask the
Persecutor, and he imbraceth you not; Ask the Saints and Angels, and they
abhor you; I never yet took you for servant of mine, etc.


YOur meaning is: your miscalled Schismatics, are not Roman Catholics. What
if that be granted? are they aught the worse? But let me hear the proof. Ask
the Recusants; ask the persecutors, you mean the Protestants, ask the Saints
and Angels: and you add of me: (I never yet took them for servants of mine).
What opinion Recusants carry of them neither do they greatly, neither will I
that they should at all, regard. The Protestants finding the^ in their
pauilions, yet not acquainted with their secret purposes, have no reason but in
charity to hope the best; that in time they will become good Christians: Yet
in wisdom to suspect, that, being as it were (...), neither fish nor flesh,
Roman Catholics in opinion, in outward Acts of conversation Statists; they
will prove no better in the end then Obnoxious, that I may not say,
pernicious, unto the state. What talk you fondly of my Saints and Angels? as
though you knew what the spirits and souls of just and perfect men in heaven,
and those Caelestiall and Sempiternall Thrones, Ephesians. 1 21.
Dominions, Principalities, and Powers do judge. If they abhor them, it is
because they are false-hearted Catholics like your selves, not because they
conform themselves unto my Protestants. As for me: I will answer you as I did
sometime the Pharisees: Ioh. 8.15.
(ye judge after the flesh: I judge no man: and if I judge, 16.
this my judgment is true). This I say then: ye reconciled Romanists, ye have
cast away my Cognizance, ye are not of my family, ye are my foes, ye are the
Church Malignant, ye are little better then Infidels, your flock, your fold
is another, and not mine; your pastures, your sheepheards are none of mine: and
if I return your own words upon your selves, which you press upon your
poor Schismatic souls, I am able to make it good. (Have no confidence in
vain lying words, say not in your hearts we be catholics: ye are none: ye are
become like black a Moors brats, and like Egyptian elues.) Sentence your
selves ye naughty servants: For I must tell you plain: the Protestants do
wear my badge and liverie, they are of my family, the true Church and
fellowship of the faithful: how dare you call them persecutors, who have been
so grieuouslie and tyrannously persecuted by your Church; As that, in those
bloody times of Queen Marie, See, Foxij Act. and Clanum.
within the space of 4. or 5. years about 400. Martyrs, even for that
monstrous Article of Transubstantiation, have felt the fury of your fire, and
sword? And I must lay it to your charge. On the other side; they never have
done you any harm, but only have castigated by necessary justice, and the
same tempered with exceeding great mildnes and moderation, the audacious and
horrible Treasons and Rebellions of your popish Sectaries: of whom not one,
all the days and Reign of the late Queen, or of the present King, for his
conscience and Religion only, has been put to endure any Capital punishment.
But contrary: yours have most tenderly and carefully been dealt withal; by
writing, by preaching, by other good means and usage recalled, if not
reclaymed, as wandering and straying sheep, into my pastures, flock, and fold;
and unto my sheepheards among the Protestants. Surely they are the Church which
I have purchased with my own blood: They are my beautiful and beloved Spouse:
Apoc. 14.4.
They are the Virgins undefiled with jdolatry: white and glorious are their
garments; because they are the Robes of mine own jnnocency: and they are the
Israel of God which I have delivered from your Egyptian bondage. Then, those
that join in heart with them are true Catholics, though not Roman
Catholics. Happy are they that are syncerely coming from among you unto them.
And for the rest who only make a show of separation from you for fear of the
world, having evil in their jmaginations; when the secrets of all hearts shall
be disclosed, I the Lord will judge both them and you, 2. Cor. 5.10.
at the last day. In the mean time speak no more, I charge you, of the
supposed punnishments and calamities of the English Church: and the yoke
whervnder your obstinate and wilful Catholics are said to groan; neither
slander my Church of England any more with cruelty; least I jncrease my
justice upon you, and reward you double according to your deserts.


Schismatics shall receive Judgment with Haereticks.
OVt of my sight; whom to behold is my grief, the view of your deformity I
cannot abide. As I did to Chore and his company, etc.

And as in the day of Vengeance I will plague Heretics and Infidels, etc.


WHat do you railing upon my people in my name? yet the time is not come that
I will say to them, or you, or any: Mat. 7.23.
(out of my sight:) the day of doom and Judgment is the day of: Depart from
me ye workers of Iniquity. In the mean time I jnvite in mercy all that will
come unto me; while they are lyving here they may repent, and come: 2. Cor. 7.3.
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation: he that now refuses it
in this world, shall never find it in the next. Yet a little while, Iam. 2.13.
and there shall be Judgment merciles to them that despize mercy. But the day
and time of this mortality must first be past before I shut up all compassion
from them: for I may call offenders, Matt. 20.6.
and give them grace to come to me, at whatsoever hour I will. True: Abac.
1.13.
I am a God of pure eyes and cannot behold iniquity. In which regard let no
man trust to much upon my mercy: and let these take heed how they join
praesumption to infirmity, and grieve my holy spirit, Ephe. 4.30.
whereby I seal up all my chosen unto the day of redemption. And so I counsel
you, and all men. Yea, remember you withal especially, that as I did to Chorah
and his confederates, Number. 16.32.
and all that remained within the compass of their tabernacle; as I have done
not only to Samaria and her Idols, Ezech. 16.
but to Jerusalem and her abominations. 2. These. 2.16.
As I will plague not only the known Heretic and Infidel, but the secret
Hypocrite and dissembler also, who for fear or friendship of any man,
departs from me, and mine, with the like scourges of Scorpions as the rest,
and the vengeance of eternal fire: so except ye also come out from the Sodom,
Egypt, and Babylon of your Adulterous Romish Synagogue; because you love to be
partners with her in her unrighteousness; you shall ere long assuredly be
partakers with her of her Plagues: for her judgment is not far off. In the
mean time, from henceforth I command you, call not the blind any longer out
of the right way wherein they are about to walk: challenge not your poor
unsettled Catholics any more, thus jdly and ridiculously as ye do, of Apostasy
from my holy service, of impugnation of my Faith, of adhearing to faction, of
yealding to fury, of partaking in iniquity, of exhibiting reverence to an
ungodly sect, and performing personal observance to an Adulterous Synagogue,
for joining with my friends the Protestants of England: for, as all these your
slanderous raylings, and odious blasphemies, I utterly abhor: so be ye
certified, that these are with me in far better estimation and account: yea,
whatsoever ye backe-byte and babble to the contrary: I say; they, they the
Protestants, are my only faithful servants, and the lot of mine enheritance;
and I am the lot of theirs.


NO man can serve two Masters, Indifferency in Religion in effect Apostasy.
etc. You say you love my Temple, but you enter into Bethel and Galgala, etc.
Have access to my Priests, frequent my Sacraments, cleanse your selves, etc.


YOur General is true: Mat. 6.24.
No man can serve two contrary Masters; No subject two adversary Princes: but
your application most unjust and ungodly. For, how can this be just which I
will never justify? nay, which I must condemn for the greatest, and most
intolerable blasphemy that can be uttered: not only that you compare my
servants the Protestants to Idolaters and Devils, and their most holy and
Christian services to Idolatrous and Heathnish sacrifices: but my self also
their God and Savior, to the Idols of Bethel, and Gilgal; and the mountain
of Samaria; to Ieroboams Calves; to Malcham, and Baal: nay, to Beelzebub
himself. Oh desperate and hellish blasphemy: what are ye now jnferiour ( ye
Serpents, ye Vipers, ye wicked Generation; Mat. 23.33.
) unto those Cast-awaies of mine own Nation, who so reviled me in the days of
my flesh while I lived with them? nay, how are ye not superior unto them in
wickedness and most damnable praesumptio^? for they spoke of me in the time of
my humility, when I appeared unto them only as a man: but ye in this my day of
Glory, now I am sitting at the right hand of my Fathers Majesty; Ephesians. 1.21.
far above all principalities and powers, and every name that is named in this
world and in the next. Therefore ye are cursed with a curse: and look ye well
unto it, that this be not the unpardonable sin, and Blasphemy against the
holy Ghost, Marc. 3.29. Luc. 12.10. Heb. 6.4. etc.
so that it be impossible for you to be renewed unto Repentance. As for those
your Catholics at whom ye rail under the names of Schismatic Israelites,
of Samaritans, of libertine Corinthians, of Laodiceans, of swearers by God and
Malcham, and of wicked Ahab; if they love my Temple, (that is none of yours);
because they are coming on unto it, and have joined with my servants in
profession, then are they no dissemblers: But if they are still enamored with
your Temple, (which ye say is mine but falsely;) by my self (but not by your
Embassage, ye shall not speak for me:) I aduize them better minds. If they be
my servants and my Children; let them love me with all their hearts syncerely;
not in words and color only: but in works and truth also; and serve me, as
they do, among the Protestants in the faith of truth. That they cannot do; if
they have access to your Priests; frequent your Sacraments; have in reverence
your rites and Ceremonies, honor your service; prostrate themselves before
your defiled Altar, adore at the hour of your direful sacrifice: All which
you call mine, but I disclame them all; as I do also your Confession and
penance. For will you never learn, Popish priests none of Christ's ordination.
that your charactered sacrifizing Priests never spra^g from my divine
ordinatio^? neither can be numbered among any of those whom I, Ephe. 4.8.
when I ascended up to Heaven and led captivity Captive, gave as gifts to men:
some Apostles, some etc. for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the
Ministry, etc. Two Sacraments I have ordained in my Church to confirm and
seal up the faith of my Chosen which they have in me. Baptism and my Holy
Supper: as few as may be; and most significa^t of my death and passion, and
price of my redemption. The other 5. (Confirmation, Confession and Penance,
Matrimony, Extreme Unction, and holy Ordination) Let the most of them be
sacred actions: but as symbolicall signs, and seals of this great mystery of
my Redemption; that is, properly as Sacraments, I never did appoint the^. They
are added so of humane, 1. Confirmation.
and of your own jnue^tion, and jnstitution. Confirmation after Baptism, as it
was in use in the Primitive Church, and in the Apostolical times, is good and
profitable. 2. Confession and Penance.
Confession and penance are by you abused as a snare to entangle the
reputation, and to slay the souls of my people. For ye enforce the same as a
necessary Sacrament; ye call for a particular enumeratio^ of sins, if it be
possible; the Act, with all the circumstances thereof: Vincent. Bruno tract. de
Paenit.
when, where, in what manner, and how often it has been committed: not only
wicked and ungodly, but even foolish, jdle, and unfruitful words: yea the very
secret thoughts and intents of the heart must be remembered and laid open to the
Priest. And ye appoint a most ridiculous Penance as a satisfaction for sin;
3. Matrimony Heb. 13.4. Ephe. 5.32.
for which no man can satisfy but my self alone. Marriage is honorable in
all: and it signifies the mystical vnio^ betwixt me and my Church: yea, and
to be solemnized in the open view of a congregation it is an ancient and most
wholesome Custom, Genesis 29.21. Iudic. 14.10. Tertull. lib. de pudicitia penes
noc occultae coniunctiones, etc. Conc. Carth. 4.
and Ecclesiastical Constitution; for the avoiding of Plagiaries, of
Clandestine adulteries, fornications, jncests, and such like jmpieties. But I
never required it to be held for a Sacrament of the Church; it being also
lawful and commendable among the very Infidels, who are not within the Church.
4. Extreme Unction.
Unction of the sick with oil was a Ceremony both Marc. 6.13.
in, and immediately after the days of my habitation here on Earth, which I
allowed to mine Apostles and Primitive Elders of the Church, because by the
means of that and prayer I was pleased to give unto the^ a gift of healing for
the recovery of the sick and weak. Iam. 5.14.
But now since the gift has been withdrawn, with many other of like quality,
Marc. 16.17.18.
granted for tokens and evidences of believers on me in those days: therefore
it shall be but humane idleness, vanity, and presu^ption, to continue the
Ceremony without a grace. Much more is it audacious, if not extreme, impiety to
deuize a new Ceremony, and a new name of Extreme Vnctio^: and thereunto to forge
a grace. As for any other smeering or anoyling used in your Synagogue, at
Baptism, or other where, I disclame, 5. Orders.
and renounce it, as the scumme, and filth of your own brains. Ordination of
bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as it is in use amongst my English Protestants,
is both ancient and Authentic; being, even from the prime and purer Churches,
Socr. li. 1. c. 11 Sozom. lib 1. cap. 22.
reputed Apostolical: but by you it is Mudded and polluted with a sacrifizing
Priesthood; to the most shameful, and slanderous derogation, and impeachment
of That mine everlasting Offering, Popish Ceremonies apish and ridiculous.
and Office after the order of Melchisedech. Your multiplicity, and absurdity
of most apish, and toyish Ceremonies: as ducking, crossing, closing, and
opening of hands, Host-eleuating, loud-bawling, secret Mumbling, and the like:
are fitter for a Theater, then for the Church. What reverence can ye require
to such jrreuerend, childish, and profane Administrations? To be short: your
dishonorable service; your detestable Altar; your hypocriricall creeping, and
casting down your bodies; your no less odious lifting up jmpure hearts and
hands; your idolatrous adoration; your contumacious endeavor of blind zeal;
your dreadful, nay direful, and abominable, sacrifice; The abomination of
the popish Mass.
and therefore abominable because an offering not only of my passion, but of my
body; a spiritual, and a Carnal; a bloody, and unbloody Sacrifice; indeed, a
Sacrifice, and no Sacrifice: because not only a memory of me the Redeemer of my
Chosen is solemnly celebrated, and lively represented; but a propitiation also
for the living and the dead is pretended to be offered; directly crossing, and
contrary to that one Oblation of my self once offered, not without blood: Heb.
10.14.
whereby for ever I have consecrated and perfected them that are sanctified:
wherein by the Eternal spirit I offered up my self unto God, Heb. 9.12.13.14.
and found eternal redemption for them. All these are not the works of my
Children, and servants; and therefore I command you once again, under the
penalty of my great and Eternal curse, that ye cease any further to lead the
blind out of the way, whom you have perverted too far already, and will not
suffer them so much as to enter a deliberation to return unto the flocks of my
Sheapheards again.


Schismatics justly repelled from the Sacraments.
HEre you strain courtesy, here flesh and blood reclaimeth the spirit taking
the foil, and the old man triumphing. Some of you discharge themselves of
their crimes by my Stewards over rigorous austerity, etc.

How dare you proffer to approach to my Altar, where so great a Majesty is
resident? etc.


IS not this an ouer-Rigorous austerity and most apparent in you? First, to
inhibite them the Churches of the Protestants; and after to exclude them from
your own mysteries and Oratories also. You say nay. For first, you would have
them to Confess themselves guilty for joining with the Protestants, and to
purpose amendment of that fault, to receive your absolution, and to do
penance, and so to be purged, and so be proved worthy to come unto your
Altar. But I say unto you still, your Altar is not my Altar, my great Majesty
is not there resident, but only the petty Majesty of your profane bread,
neither is your penance, your pardon, your Confession, my ordination.
Therefore they who refuse these things from you are guiltles before me: and (as
ye say) in this one thing happy, that they are suspended and rejected of
you. And I denounce a woe against you that Call good evil, and evil good;
sweet sower, and sower sweet; Esaias. 5.20.
put light for darkness, and darkness for light.


WEll then, Schismatics are to be praesumed for Haereticks, and why.
among my Catholics since you are not, where shall I find you? where, etc.

The Caluinist takes you for Proselytes, etc.

The poor Catholic scandalized at your impiety, etc.


WHat? and will you still make me the Patron of your lies? surely, I do not
hold them among my true Catholics, no more then I do your selves: neither yet
do I conclude; The Lord allows not dissembling Catholics.
that cleaving to the Protestants they cleave to sectaries: neither do I
pronounce them Protestants: neither do I allow their reproof, either in
private talk, or in private opinion, of the Protestant proceedings: neither
are those proceedings departure from the faith: nor yet their Temples houses of
Idolatry, as ye blaspheme: So that albeit by their presence with them, in
appearance they honor, by obaying they allow, by example they further, by
deeds they confirm, by dissembling they establish those proceedings: albe-it
they go to those houses as one of them; they sit there as one of them, they
behave themselves reuere^dly as one of them; yet in all this, or in any of
these they cannot be defined either Schismatics or Haereticks. In a word,
howsoever they are reputed Proselyts of the Caluinist (as you term the true
Christian): and howsoever your poor Catholics, poor indeed and void of true
Catholic faith, Dissembling Catholics no Schismatics.
are scandalized of them; though they may be lost sheep (for the time) and
dissemblers, yet are they no Schismatics; being not divided from the true
Church; much less at the brinck of bottomless haeresie in that respect.


Those which go to the Conuenticles of Haereticall rites are justly and
properly called s hismaticks.
Abominable is Schism, and horrible is the name of Schismaticke, etc.

When my Church in her first prime, etc.


Schism is a separation from the faith of truth; and the true Communion of
Saints. What is Schism.
And therefore all those Christians upon whatsoever intent and purpose of
heart, whether for Fear of the Adversity and Crosses, or for love of the
prosperity, ease, and sensuality of this present evil world, who do consort
themselves (though but for a time) with the Jewish, Turkish, or any other
Heathnish profession, let them be censured for schismatic Reuolters, till
they return into the Church again. But hereupon how can you charge your
cunning Catholics of schism, for associating in their actions with the
Protestants? First you are to prove the one to be Haereticks, their Assemblies
also, and rites haereticall; which you can never do: and then forewarne the
other under the penalty of Schismatic reproach to adhaere unto them. Be it
that some of them, (for all, I know, who know the hearts, do not) repute and
take the Protestants for Haereticks; for that is the point you press upon
them; and yet like Ambidexters, Machiauels, and Temporizers, only for fear, or
for love of the earth and earthly things, against their consciences, will make
a show to be on their side: yet I say, never shall their own false opinions, no
more the^ yours, conclude them to be Schismatics in joining with my Church:
howsoever they may be convicted of themselves for notorious hypocrites and
dissemblers; and so be inexcusable in my sight. For I cannot like it that they,
or you, or any should dissemble with me, Iosue 9.9.
or my people. The Gibeonites in that they sought the friendship of my servant
Joshua and his host, did not offend me; in that they sought it by dissimulation,
they did not please me: verse. 21.
Therefore for the one, I spared their lives; and for the other, I adjudged them
to perpetual servitude. The remnant of those Jews who dwell now among the
Nations, who are baptized, and profess Christianity, therein are no offenders;
but being true, as it is reported of many of them, that they still are
judaicall in opinion, and that the veil of Moses is laid over their hearts;
in that I disclame and detest them as forlorn mis-beleeuers, and my sworn
Enemies. So, let every one of yours, either be as they profess, unfeigned
Christians; Perfect schismatics. Schisma facere ab vnitate Christi, aut in
Schismate esse profecto malu^ est, and magnu^ malu^: nec omnino fieri potest vt
Christus det Schismatico non fidem sed sacrilegum errorem, aut in Christo
radicem Schismaticus fixerit, aut Schismatico Christus sit origo and caput.
Aug. lib. 4. contra Crescon. Gramm.
or profess as they are, false-hearted and false opinionated Catholics:
Schismatics they cannot be that profess the truth in the Church; They only
are such who being runnagates and heretics maintain falsehoods, with personal
separation from the Church. Neither yet do I allow them for good and faithful
Christians, who would be so reputed, and are not: for they only are such whose
opinion and profession agree together in the truth; that is, who profess the
truth in syncerity.


I Know, Protestants cannot be of the Catholic church, neither in their faith
can be salvation.
I know what it is that lies at your heart, etc. Ye are not persuaded
forsooth that the Protestants Religion is so abominable, etc. To take your
selves for a particular Church, is impossible for a headless multitude, who
have neither Temple, Altar, Priest, nor Sacrifice, neither distinct members,
nor anyband of Union, as well you may think of going at the latter day neither
to Heaven nor to Hell, as to think in this life a Newtrality, etc.

Will you divide my Church, etc.

To say that Protestants may by their profession be saved, etc.


OH ye wretched and wicked Priests of Antichrist; I know well, I know, that my
Church, my Spouse, my body mystical, my chaste Turtle, my City, my Kingdom,
my Family, 1 Cor. 11.19. Mat. 18.7.
the pillar of Truth, is but one. For albeit in my visible Church there must
be Haeresies, 2. Tim. 2.20. Mat. 13 24. etc. Mat. 3.12.
and Scandals, for the trial of my chosen: for that in my house there are
vessels of honor and dishonor: in my field there is Corn and Tares: in my
garner there is Wheat and Chaff: Mat. 13.47. Genesis 7.8.
in my Net there is good and bad Fish: in my Arc there are clean and unclean
beasts: Phil. 3.2. Romans 6.17.
and there will be always some of whom it may be said; Beware of Dogs. Mat.
7.15. Act. 20.29.
Mark them that make divisions among you, and avoid them. Beware of false
Prophets. Grievous Wolves shall enter in among you. Yet as unto my chosen there
is but one way, Ioh. 14.1.
One truth, one life: so they are all baptized by one spirit into one body. 1.
Cor. 12.13. Ephesi. 4.4. etc.
For there is one body and one spirit, even as they are called in one hope of
their vocation; one Lord, one faith, one Baptizme, one God and father of all,
which is above all, and through all, and in them all: One shepherd and one
fold. My Dove is alone, Ioh. 10. Cantic. 6.
The company of my chosen is but one Communion of Saints, partly triumphant in
Heaven, and partly militant on Earth: But must ye therefore be that one? Do ye
take it for granted that I will not yield you? Nothing but begging of the
Question? How dare ye say in my name that they are blind and impious who
imagine holiness in the Protestants prayers, or salvation to be found in their
Faith? For I, even I, pronounce unto you: their prayers are holy; A true
saving faith.
and their faith is a saving faith; which ascribes and acknowledges the sole
and whole work and merit of redemption, and the purchase of Heaven unto me
alone. And to say, that by any other profession a man may be saved, is indeed,
to make an other God, and Summum bonum, besides me, and to make me none, or
evil, or jnsufficient at the least, which in truth ye proud Papists do,
Papists join their own merits with the Death of Christ in the purchase of
salvation.
in vaunting the merits of your own defective and jnfected works, as
coadjutors to the purchase of Eternal glory, with the obedience and
sprinckling of my precious blood: as though I had not made a full and perfect
satisfaction without your aid or help. But thus ye boldly and presumptuously
diminish and dishonor me, and my all-sufficiently meritorious Sacrifice; and
yet ye malapertlie charge my true believers of that fault whereof your selves
are guilty. Shall I not punnish you for this thing?


The perfect opposition and contrariety of Catholics and Protestants.
IF on the other side, you join Caluinists with Catholics in one Church, then
set together the Woolfe with the Lamb, etc.

For as much as my dreadful Eucharist is irrefragably believed by the one to be
my true body, etc. Of other maine differences consider, etc.


THis general opposition betwixt you Papists, and my true professors the
Protestants I do allow: provided always that ye are the Wolves, the Lions,
the Goshawkes; and they the Lambs, the Hearts, the Partridges; and that your
Religion is the surmized, theirs the sure; yours impossible, theirs infallible;
yours newly reared by man's imaginations, cherished for policy, etc: Theirs
founded by my self from the beginning, upon my self the Rock. What other
Haereticks do, or how they injuriously revile, vpbraide as an Idol, tear,
spit at, and tread under foot my dreadful Eucharist: What is that to these
true Christians, whom opprobriously ye call Hugonots? Sure it is, they for
their parts most constantly and devoutly believe my true body, (jmpute no jdle
Manichean fantasy unto them) and the personal presence of my Deity in the
Eucharist: (I know their faith; Popish adoration of bread.
) and me they adore with due veneration; though not the Element that
represents my true body: Neither do they commit such a mystical and
spiritual kind of murder and mangling of my body asye do, who profess,
Papists feed corporally, they say, upon Christ when they feed on him in the
Sacrament. See Ferus in John cap. 6. The number of Popish Sacraments.
howsoever in terms ye disclame it, not only a spiritual, but a corporal
feeding thereupon: brutish Cannibals as ye are. As touching the other maine
differences between them and you in the particulars; Know ye; that I never
ordained the number of 7. Sacraments, but only Baptism, and my holy Supper:
your use of Images I scorn, and abhor, Images.
being directly contrary to the second Commandment of my moral Law: Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc. Act. and monu^. Fox page 130.
though your Pope Adrian commanded the^ to be taken for Laymens Kalenders:
Invocation of Saints.
your Invocation of Saints is a derogation from my glory which I will not give
to any other: Esaias. 42.8.
I never commanded you by any praecept; I never invited you by any godly
example; I never encouraged you by any promise in my holy word; to any such
devotion. Your forgiveness of sins by your Popes indulgences, Indulgences.
and your selling of pardons is paltry trifling and profane Marchandizing in
my holy Temple. Heavenly glory.
What heavenly glory do you dream of, that my faithful Protestants believe
not much better then ye are able; Popish difference of jnfernall pains.
your difference of infernal pains I am not acquainted withal: I know none
but eternal fire prepared for the devil and his adhaerents; your temporal
purgatory flames are but poetical fables; Purgatory a poetical fable.
Justification.
your Justification of the living by faith and works together, is partly coined
in your own forge, and partly raked up out of the Pharisaicall pride. Prayer
for the dead.
Your praying for the dead is bootles, they having now their Judgment passed
on them: as the day of death has left them, so the day of final Judgment
shall find them, either blessed or cursed for ever. No prayers now shall
prevail, or hurt them any whit at all. Popish faith, hope, and charity.
Moreover your faith is a confused Confidence; nay rather an jmplicite and
unknown assent, you know not unto what; full of distrust and diffidence: your
hope builded thereuppon must needs be hopeles, and void of sound and heavenly
comfort: your Charity to me is very slender and lukewarm like theirs once of
Laodicea: Apoc. 3.15.
for ye love your selves as well as me; your own merits you join with mine,
ungratefully diminishing my meritorious sacrifice and the price of my blood. Oh
sinful Nation; supply ye my pure and perfect obedience with your own foul
and filthy righteousness? Is this your love to me to pretend the purchase of
heaven together with me? thus to be ouer-enamoured of your selves? Fie, Fie; I
cannot endure a Co-partner with me in this great work of Redemption and
salvation. Therefore your jmagined freewill to good: your merits of congruence,
and of worthiness, where are they? your fastings and prayers, conceited, and
practiced, not only as means but as meritorious works of eternal life, I
hate; and will surely punish as the fumes and fomes of the pride of your old
Adam. As for sinnc ye know not the power thereof that suppose any one to be
venial in it self, being committed against so eternal and jnfinit a
Majesty, as I am. And what have you to do with my counsel and decree of
predestination? Predestination
Will you or can you infringe the infallible Certainty thereof that ye teach men
to doubt of my love? why do ye not tell them rather, that though they cannot
choose but doubt, by reason of their many, 1. Cor. 15.58.
and mighty sins, which is humane jnfirmitie; yet they ought to be steadfast
and vnmoouable in their faith, being builded on me, Mal. 3.6. Pro. 19.21. Heb.
13.5.
who am God; and am not changed; whose Counsel is immutable; who will not
fail neither yet forsake them that put their trust in me: yea though they
believe not without great weakness, 2. Tim 2.13.
yet I am God, faithful and true, and cannot deny myself. Finally, what mean
you to add unto my canonical scriptures the Apocryphal writings of Judith,
Tobias, Maccabees, and others: which I never yet allowed to be put into the
canon. Nay, to thrust in your own unwritten Traditions and Papal
constitutions to make them of equal authority with the same: Nesanda secreta.
These your nefarious hidden doctrines I will have cancelled and abolished: I
cannot abide that ye should go a whoring after your own imaginations. Go
and learn what that means: In vain they worship me, Mat. 15.9.
reaching for doctrines men's precepts. And that: verse. 13.
Every plant which mine heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.
Thus have you, in deed, almost in the whole sum of Religion tossed over
every stone, reuersed the whole frame of faith, and turned all vpside down.
And therefore take you heed, ye obstinate Recusants, least your departure and
division from my true Church be a more then sufficient warrant of your heavy
Judgment with Arrius, Nestorius, Eutyches, I add, with Manichees, Marcionits,
Pelagians; and other old Haereticks, in the bottomless pit. for that you have
not in one point, but in many, varied from the christian faith.


How abominable the Scriptures, Prayers, and Churches of Haereticks are.
CAluinisme then being doctrine so diabolical, etc. Oh how illusion bewitcheth
you, etc.

Their profane bread, etc.

Their Rites and Ceremonies, etc. As Fasts and Holy days, etc. Yea, their
Churches and Temples, etc. Bethel was my house, etc.


SVrely, the Scriptures, prayers, and Churches of Haereticks are not well
pleasing unto me: They are abominable Papisme, therefore being the very
doctrine of devils; your popish Scripture as being none of my word, Popish
Scripture. The Latin vulgar edition authe^ticke among the Papists, very
erroneous.
but the word of the devil, so false and adulterated, so poisoned, and full of
corruptions, as it is in your latin vulgar edition authorized by your Trent
Council, oppugning undermining, and overthwarting my true faith, and Catholic
Church I disclame as a counterfeit coppie, and renounce altogether, as no writ
of mine. Popish prayers.
Your prayers also are no better in mine ears then the howling of Wolves that
prey upon the souls of men; the lowing of Oxen, and the roaring of Bulls,
screeching of Owls, and Night-Rauens, yelling and bellowing Infernal
blasphemies against my sacred Majesty, in unknown and vnconceiued, in loud
bawling, in discording from my heart, both tongues and tunes. Popish Priests.
Your priests are perfect Chemarims, and Priests of Baal; officers of the very
Antichrist; his heralds, and proctors, his Apostles, and Angels of his Kingdom
of darkness. Popish Communion.
Go ye and suck the adders Eggs, less poysonable out of doubt then your
Communion bread and cup. Popish Ceremonies.
Your Ceremonies are not few, but most fantastical; offensive both in their
number, and in their nature, apish, and plainly ridiculous jmitations partly of
the Heathnish superstitions, and partly of those Rites which my heavenly
Father sometimes ordained to his people Israel. Your fastes are fish
delicates: wine, Popish fasts.
and other dainty fare; far more jncentiue of filthy Lust in pampering of the
body then any other food: and your abstinence sometimes a feasting, sometimes
a most Pharisaicall and Hypocritical sowring of your faces, and other
ostentation of will worship in neglecting the body: Coloss. 2.22.23.
not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh (as mine Apostle paints it
out in his Epistle to the Colossians.) Your holy days, so your Churches and
your Temples, Churches dedicated among the Papists.
are dedicated not only to the holy Trinitye, and to other true and worthy
saints and Martyrs, many of them, Dunstan.
but some to vile and jmpious Traitors, and Coniurers, and such like
abominable sinners: besides to the exercise of your Idolatrous and
superstitious deuotious, which I cannot abide. Therefore they are not more
holy, no more my howses, no more the places of my sanctuary, which you
frequent: nay, all your meetings, synagogues, and asse^blies I utterly abhor?
what talk ye of Bethel? of Gerizim? of Sichem? of the Christian Churches? For
ye go up to Beth-auen; and stand upon mount Eball: and commit jdolatrie in
the hill of Samaria. The Turkish Temples are Antichristian, The Pope.
and so are yours. Your High Priest of the Roman sea is now deemed fitly of my
Christian Churches the very Apostaticall Judas of the world, Apoc. 17.5.
and the Ecclesiastical Apocalypticall Beast: so is every one, that receives
his mark and jmbraceth his doctrine, a Reuolter from my faith of truth.
Therefore all your prayers and service offered unto me I have in Execration.


OH think not it can be to my worship which is so wicked. The Protestants
public prayer how unlawful and detestable.
Remember that Altar is raised up against Altar etc.

Against my venerable Alter there is erected a plain communion Table etc.

And stolen away with them her ornaments and to cover the rags wherewith they
are rigd, Iet up and down clad in her robes, etc.


It is so: it must be so (ye Papists:) between your Altar, your Priests, your
Sacraments, your service, your faith: and the Altar, the Preachers, the
sacraments, the service, the faith of the protestants there is, and ever will be
an opposition: neither possibly can be any unity, concord, or conformity. The
Papists Altar and Idol.
For your Altar of jmagined Sacrifice propitiatory who has required at your
hands? your abominable host which I never acknowledged to be my blessed Body I
know and condemn for a detestable Idol. The Protestants Communion.
But their plain Communion Table, is both necessary, and seemly, to set my
holy and heavenly bread upon; not a base and unprofitable piece of Bread, as
ye blaspheme, but bread honored, and consecrated by mine own ordinance, for
an everlasting memorial of my death and Passion: To the end that all believing
souls which feed thereon with a true and lively Faith, might be confirmed and
nourished unto Eternal life. Dare ye call this an Idol, (ye wicked jmpes,)
of a contemptible supper? ye are also the ministers of darkness, ye stamped
Priests of Antichrist, they are mine only true and faithful Ambassadors who
faithfully require and entreat my people in my name to be reconciled unto god.
For theirs is the Reverend, worthy, sound, undoubted faith of truth: yours (to
return your own words because they fit you well, as swords and arrows into
your own hearts) a Basterd, Counterfeit, uncertain, and fained miscreance.
But finally what is this your blame in the service of my Saints, and public
prayer, of the Protestants? what positive Corruption find you therein that you
will have it abominable in my sight? Only you allege: (it is a form of
prayer, a shadow of divine service wholly tending to the maintenance of
heresy, not only etc. but directly substituted in defiance of me, and my
mysteries, and of the faith Catholic, which is put into English to Insinuate
that my Church erreth in not using the vulgar) A form of prayer it is indeed,
The Protestants form of prayer.
and an excellent form; not a shadow, but a substantial form of divine
service; wholly tending to the maintenance of the pure faith, and the overthrow
of the popish Heresies, Rites and Ceremonies.
superstitions, and jdolatries. In regard whereof, Ancient and approved Rites,
and whatsoever ceremonies are fitting and significant for edification, it
neither disanulleth, nor suppresseth: not stumbling at every straw, to be
scandalized with things indifferent, whatsoever other opposites say or write to
the contrary: but it retains and ordains prudently and devoutly, Rites and
Ceremonies of such nature and quality as these profane and dissolute times do
much require. Vestiments and ornaments.
As touching the ornaments or vestments used in their Church ye speak
unlearnedly and spitefully to say they were stolen from your Church; and the
protestants Iet up and down in your Robes. They know, the stolen attire of
the Strumpet of Babylon will ill become the virgin, the daughter of God.
Therefore in defiance, not of me; but of you, and your mysteries, and your now
Roman Catholic faith, The reformed service of the Protestants has abolished
Mass. Latin Liturgy. Invocation of Saints. Prayer for the dead. Consecration
of Bells, Books Candels, etc. Elevation of host. Superstitious crossing, and
profane Crosses.
They have well and wisely, and according to my will abolished your abominable
Mass and Mattens with the Mu^meries thereof; your ridiculous liturgy, and
service in a strange and unknown tongue, and therefore vnedifying; your
superstitious Invocation of Saints: your jrreligious prayer for the dead: your
foolish and sottish consecration, or coniuration rather of Bells, Books,
Candells, and such like trifles and toys; your thrice jmpious and odious
elevation of a wafer-god; justly offensive to every good Christian eye: Your
ten-times jdolatrous profanation of Crossing, and Crosses; (at the sight
whereof (say you) the furies quake; Ah ye fools: (...). Homer. (...).
what furies mean you? those fictions of the poets? nay: be they rather the
raging furies of your own distempered brains, and tormented Consciences; as
they may well enough; ye have it in such an execrable use. Images.
And so have the pictures, and Images of saints, in your Temples, and howses,
and high ways: for which cause, howsoever they may be to some, historical
monuments, and memorials of those worthy personages, and lessons of instruction
to the Ignorant, to jmitate their virtues: yet otherwise, quod legentibus
Scriptura hoc Idiotis praestat P^ctura ^crue^tibus. Greg. Romans Epistolaru^.
lib. 9. cap. 9.
seeing they can stir up nothing but a blind and buzzardly devotion; and
those laymens books (as your Gregory styles the^) can be no better then a
doctrine of vanity; though they be demolished, broken, and burnt up, As
Idols; it is no matter: no more then that the sign of the Cross is utterly
abolished and cast away as it is in use, Sign of the Cross not Popish has a
tolerable use. It is generally granted even by most learned displinaricis. in
immortalian la^ac^o. Tertullian. Origin. Cyprian. See conference at Hampton
Court an. 16^4. Page 69. Ta^ers. Mat. 5. Psalm. 116. Prou. 6.^ Vestiments, and
vessels.
or abuse rather among you; howsoever they retain it, as they find it has
bin used in the prime and purer Churches: yea at the sacred Font. Now also;
away with your smoky tapers, and greasy candels, to give you light at noone
day; they are not able to enlighten you in your spiritual Darkness. I
Command: let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works
etc. and to that purpose, let my word be a lantern unto your feet and a light
unto yours paths my Commandment is a lantern, and Instruction a light. Let
these other lights alone. Your Idle vestments, and gay clothes, your vessels
also of your profanation, put of: leave of: and appear no more like heathnish,
or jewish priests in my presence. And in a word: seeing this is all (as I
perceive) that you can except against the service of the Protestants: namely:
because they do not communicate with your popish paltry trash and Traditions,
whereafter ye go a whooring as after your own jnuentions; let them alone to
pray jncessantly for propagation of their reformed and pure profession (no Sect
I-wisse:) against the Turk and Pope together; who are both, my professed
adversaries: 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
the one reigning without, the other raging within my holy Temple. No: your
Pope is not Peter's true and lawful Successiour, The Pope has forsaken the
doctrine of Christ. His personal succession could never yet be proved.
either by doctrinall, or personal Succession; much less the Rock of Faith.
Finally; let their walls and pillars be still more and more witnesses of their
jntegritie, and just departure from your, more then superstious, apparently
Idolatrous, abominations. And seeing their ministry is the more sacred unto
me, the Less agreement and conformity it has, and holds with your old,
our rather new, vpstart paltrie and patcherie; and their service I do and will
acknowledge for mine own: let your poor Schismatic souls (as ye term
them) join themselves to my holy Sanctuaries. And I would not only they, but
all the rest unresolved, that are mine, would speedily make have, and come out
of your spiritual Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon; Leave your dissimulation, or
fear, or whatsoueer hinders; and become, not only in part, but altogether
such, as are my faithful Protestants. I say, Trouble them not to call them
back that are Entering into the old, and good way; but let my people go, that
they may serve me. Ierim. 6.16. Exodus 7.16.



You can say that Priests did in many parishes follow the new course etc.
Schismatics vainly build upon pernicious examples.


And why rather leave ye not unto the example of the Bishops. etc.

Who universally died in long and lingering imprisonment etc.

Oh but great presidents move you and many wise fellows. etc.

Where have these Pastors the key of knowledge, whence fetch these Doctors
their profound Learning?

The Lord Christ.
BY this time you should have ended your pretended Message: but I see, false
Ambassadors as ye are, what you cannot enforce by Arguments, ye will attempt
to persuade by words. But have you never read? ^. Cor. 2.4.
not in the perswasiue words of man's wisdom but in plain evidence of the
spirit and Power. If your Demy-Catholicks held an evil course, no reason they
should build upon examples, either of parish Priests, or learned Bishops, or
any great presidents, or any wise fellows, Nullum carn^ exemplo nesas. Seneca.
or whatsoever Pastors Doctors, Counselors, or holy men. For which of them
confesses not that no man's example is to be followed in sin? But if Priests,
and great presidents, and wise fellows, Pastors, and Doctors; yea but puny
students have gone before them in a right way; to follow them it can be no
fault, but a praise rather. Therefore vainly and Idly do you make your
comparison between the parish Priests, and other presidents, and puny students
on the one side as Corruptest souls, Carcases, Carions, and the like; and the
Bishops whom you mean, great (as you say) for learning, Popish Bishops
neither over learned: neither unkindly used by Q Elizab.
and superior function on the other. Especially seeing those bishops had no
greater measure of learning, and sanctity, then their great places; nor so much
neither as their weighty functions required. But as for that jmpudent and
shameless lie which you are bold to utter in my name of their Imprisonment and
death: I knowing the truth to stand otherwise; it is jntolerable and hateful
in mine ears. For some of them were not jmprisonned at all; See Tortura Torti.
page 146.
some committed to the custody of their honorable and loving friends: some
after an easy jmprisonment for their stubbernnes to the Prince and States
exiled themselves: and only Bishop Bonner, that bloody persecutor of my
Saints, died in the prison. A notable Popishlie and slander.
So untrue it is that they died universally after long and lingering
imprisonment. Though had it bin so as you have declared; yet their stubborn
standing out against the Truth had bin no good president for those whom you
blame, or any other, to refrain the company or Communion of my Saints the
Protestants.


Examples fit to be regarded by Schismatics for their instruction.
WHy rather fix ye not before your eyes so many etc.

If things present please you not cast your regard upon age? past etc.


Examples ye bring, I see, of three sortes' The first of your own false
Catholics:

The second of Certain holy and good men, mentioned, some in the Apocryphal,
and some in my Canonical scriptures: The third of the ancient Martyrs of the
Church. To what end? forsooth, to persuade further your Schismatics, as ye
call them, to withdraw themselves from the protestants service and prayers.
But neither is this any message of mine unto them. For first, the examples of
the first rank which you take and allege to be the Martyrs and Confessors
of your own Church; you mistake, and misaply. You mistake, For they were and
are Traitors to their King and Country, Traitors are Martyrs and Confessors,
with Papists
disloyal and disobedient Subjects to his Just laws; and for their
Treasonable practices, manifest, and obstinate breach of the Law; and not for
the conscience of their superstition, have bin, and are according to justice,
yet with great mercy, both put to death, and imprisonned. Yet are they not
many; much less multitudes, in comparion of those valiant Christians whom
the persecuting Tyrants on your side have murdered, jmprisonned, and many ways
afflicted, In the reign of Queen Mary Popish Tyranny.
in the space of four or five years Therefore these examples ought to have
bin spared in this place; as being misapplyed. For would you have your
Ambiguous, or Ambidexter priests, to follow them in open profession of their
disloyal practices against their natural Prince and natyue Country? But the
other of the second order: viz. Tobias, the Israelits, the seven Brethren,
Eleazar, Maccabeus: also Peter, Paul, and Saint John; are indeed, in themselves
the more remarkable, and worthiof all jmitarion: But yet of them, who are sure
they maintain the truth of god, as those were, and did: not of your Pope-lings
though ye be stout, much less when ye be stammering in your opinions. For
what, say ye, what would Tobias? what would the Israelites? what the 7.
Brethren? what would Eleazar? what Maccabeus? what would Peter? what Paul? or
my beloved John have done in these times? would they not have joined with my
professors the Protestants? I say, yes; they would: and I am sure, You they
would have despised, abhorred, rejected; and all your Babylonish jmpieties, and
Profanations; no less then they did the heathen persecutors, Blud-suckers and
jdolaters of their time; and then they did those named Heretics Simon Magus,
Elymas, and Cerinthus, and all the like, with their heathnish jdolatries and
detestable heresies. But here I have somewhat against you. Will you never
cleanse your filthy tongues? never cease to revile, and rail at my faithful
servants, and worthy Champions of my truth? Luther.
What? is Luther like to Simon Magus? no. But I must tell you: That man of
sin who brags and vaunts him self to be an universal Bishop in Simon Peter's
place, and is not; to be the Vicar general of the universal Church on earth,
and by me was never appointed to that office, is a very subtle Simon, and a
Magical enchaunter of my people. For I never gave to my beloved Apostle Simon
Peter him self any such place or power as this your Peter Pope by many crafty
sleights and deuilish practices has advanced himself unto. Luther? founder
and Grandfather of many falsehoods? No: No: but ordained of old, and borne, by
my great providence and mercy, to be the discouerer of your falsehoods, and
recouerer, and finder out of that holy truth which long had bin lost in the
ground, and dung of your Canonisticall and Sophistical divinity; and many
other of your meet machiauellianly political and practical corruptions.
Therefore you hate him the more deadly; and I love him the more dearly; and
will love and honor him in my heavenly Kingdom eternally. Dare you say of
John Calvin? Calvin.
(An Arch- Haeretick and corrupter of whole Provinces) whom though I know to
have known the truth in part, and to have prophesied in part, 1. Cor. 13.9.
as all my Servants do: yet I have well approved for a choice Teacher and
Instructor of the truth, by his laborious writings and godly jnstitutions
through all the parts of Christendom? I say therefore once more: touch not
mine Anointed, and do my prophets no harm: Psalm. 105.5.
make not the Ministers of my gospel the seducers of souls; 1. Tim. 4.16.
for they shall save themselves and them that hear them. Else I will come
against you shortly and not only consume you with the breath of my mouth, 2.
These. 2.8.
but utterly abolish you by the brightness of my coming. Then shall you see
and know the third sort of your examples, mine Ancient true Martyrs, worthy
jndeed, of all jmitation for their constant laboring, and striving in defense
of my gospel unto the death, to be none of your defiled and corrupted Church:
yea you shall see them, I say, Crowned with jmmortall happiness and glory, but
your selves with a number of false Martyrs whom ye have thrust into your
yearly Calendar, with all haereticks and jdolaters, to be cast out into utter
Darkness: Mat. ^4.51.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.


Participatition in works of Haeresie worse then in Acts of Idolatry.
IF now you be so simple as to think that Heresy is not worse then Idolatry
that to forsake me etc. Greater sacrilege then the courtesy of Cap and Knee
etc. Every Jot of whose rituall Customs. etc.

24. 24. Heresy worse then jnfidelity and jdolatry.
Seeing every falsehood the more it has of truth is the more apt to beguile etc.

A plain fable is laughed at but not hated etc.


WHether Haeresie be worse then Idolatry or no, I do not reason with you;
neither is it to the purpose here. They are both Abominable in my sight: and
damnable it is to communicate with either. But this is your perpetual error,
to take the Protestants for Haereticks: reform that, and this declaration is
altogether jmpertinent. Let Haeresie be worse then Infidelity and Idolatry;
yet if the professed Protestants of England be not Haereticks, and their
service not haereticall, you have no Reason by that reason to call those your
adhaerents in some opinions from those their Congregations, where they may
learn to reform them. but ye say: if ye be so simple as to think that to
cast 2. or 3. grains of frankincense upon an heathen Altar or to lay etc.
(that is) to offer, and do homage to the Idols of the heathen. (Bacchus,
Ceres, Jupiter, and the like:) to be greater sacrilege then the courtesy of
Cap and knee and reuerentiall presence at their thrice Idolatrous Communion; or
then the service to maintenance thereof erected, Every jot of whose rituall
Customs and public prayers was invented, Commanded, practiced, and is still
continewed, only in detestation, defiance, extirpation, and denial of my faith
Catholic: Then, oh then, how are ye deceived? First; why say you thrice
Idolatrous Communion, and not rather thrice haereticall in this place? being
now about to Call your fellows from the Haeresie of the Church of England: by
presuming the same to be worse then Infidelity and idolatry? But this Crazines
in your brain I forgive you; only I would have you show but one point of
Idolatry in that Communion. (...).
There is no worship of bread, as in yours: no veneration, no adoration of a
cross or Crucifixe. They only kneel, and do reverence to me the honorable
son of God, represented unto their faith, when they receive the bread and
wine in remembrance of my death and passion.. 20. page 36. lin. 11.
Again have ye so short and shitlie a memory as to forget what you lately
charged the Protestant Church withal (viz.) That their ministry has stolen
away your Churches ornaments; and let up and down clad in her robes? that now
you say (every lot of their rituall Customs, and public prayers was
invented, Commanded, practiced, and is still continewed only in detestation,
defiance, extirpation, and denial of your faith Catholic?) for mine you call
it falsely.) for if every Jot of their rituall customs and public prayers
were invented only in denial of your faith; then have they stolen away none
of your ornaments, nor let up and down in her robes etc.: And if they have
stolen any, then every Jot of their rituall Customs, was not invented as ye
say. Thus jnconsequently and giddily to speak, is this to bring a message from
Heaven jn my name? Now Fie upon such folly. Idolatry and Haeresy are both
alike abominable. It is Idle to argue which is the worse.
If I should examine your doughty Arguments, whereby ye would make jdolatry a
less sin then haeresie; then, oh then, how should you be confounded? for
what a wordy Difference is this? that Haeresie forsaks me; Idolatry never
followed me: that denies me; this not confesses me: that abiureth me; this
not knows me: that blasphemeth me; this not honors me? A Distinction
without a difference. Who knows not but that jdolatry forsakes, denies,
abiureth, and blasphemeth me Also? said I not of old unto (...) of Israel,
they have forsaken me the fountain of Living Water etc. Ier. 2.13.
) that fell into jdolatry not only haeresie: Do ye not confess page 50. that
I spoke of all.
spoke I not of Idolators as well as of Haeretiks whosoever denies me before
men etc. Do not all Apostates from my truth,) whether into Haeresie or
jdolatry, both abjure me, and blaspheme me? Again, do not both sorts fall
away, some of jgnorance and simplicity, some of Malice and contumacie? and so
both are beaten accordingly; sometimes with few, sometimes with many stripes?
And what a word is this? that to offer unto Bacchus, and Ceres, and to move the
bonnet before Jupiter, is no greater sacrilege then reuerendly to worship in my
holy Temple? But ye bring a main reason. Sect. 24.
Every falsehood the more it has of truth, is the more apt to beguile: the more
apt to beguile the more pernicious to the Destruction of souls, and more
abominable. Therefore Haeresie, is worse then Idolatry. Now I will make
another. Every falshoode the less it has of truth: specially if it have none
at all, the farther it is from me, (The way, the truth, Ioh 14.6.
and the life): the farther it is from me; the nearer to the destruction of
souls; and so Idolatry is worse then Haeresie. Thus: be it that haeresie is in
one respect; yet jdolatry is worse in another: so that the comparison between
them must needs be altogether fruitles and frivolous in this place. Specially
in respect of Protestants, who are no Haereticks, and who are Charged by you
throughout this whole false Message for Haereticks, jnfidels, and jdolators.
Your idle jllustrations, and Impertinent examples in this place, do they prove
Haeresie to be worse than jdolatry, as they are intended? Your first
Illustration is: False prophets which cry (the Lord, the Lord;) when I the
Lord have not spoken unto them, are worse ten-fold then the prophets of Baal)
no, they are both alike Abominable unto me. Luc. 19.14.
But out of thine own mouth will I Judge thee, thou evil servant: For I the
Lord have not spoken unto thee this Embassage, yet have thou cried in my name.
Your second: (Sooner shall the Publican be justified then the Hypocritical
Pharise) sure the one shall be justified by his Faith and repentance; and the
other Condemned for his pride and Hypocrisy. But what is that to this purpose?
Your Third: (The Matron-like adultres is more vile and hateful before me the
Lord, and men, then the open strumpet) Truth: the Matron is a more Cunning
Hypocrit, but the strumpet the more impudent whore. They are both odious in my
sight: but the strumpet is much more scandalous and offensive, howsoever
hateful unto men. Now, if she be: the more intolerable shall it be for your
Pope and Roman Church to answer unto me at the day of Judgment for the
maintenance of open Stews. Your Fourth: A plain Fable is laughed at, but not
hated, because it is not made to deceive). Lib. Conformicatum. B. Franc.
yes the Fable of Saint Francis and the wolf of Eugubium: and how the Freer
rubbed out of his shinne a great spider which he had drunk in the chalice,
without having any hurt: The fable of Saint Dennis that carried his own head in
his hand two miles: The fable of your Lady of Hales how she cured many
sicknesses; and raised 7. persons from the dead; and did more Miracles the^ I
the Savior my self, so justified by Iustus Lipsius in the vneue^ balla^ce of
his unjust and foolish Judgment; Iusti Lipsij Diua.
and many the like in your leaden Legend, that Fardel: Legend.
of Fables, are both laughed at, hated, and made to deceive; and if they were
not, yet are apt to deceit whether the Author will or no. To be short: Georg.
Fabricius. approbat. Legend. Lipsij.
it is a general tale in popery, that God gives power, not only to Saints,
but to their jmages and Pictures to work wonders, both derided, hated, and
invented to deceive. You add: (But a lie forged and obtruded for a truth is
intolerable.) so it is. and therefore so is this your lying Message in my name,
which here you deliver unto your Catholics who hold conformity with the
Protestants. Finally; what speak ye of the Christians in Greece and Africa
against the Arrians? your Schismatics are far unlike the one, both in
practice and in opinions: and ye your selves too to much resemble the other.
Your jdle nominatio^ of Martyrs and Confessors serves not your turn at this
time. In a word; in that you remember, and commend again your Traitorous crew
to the jmitation of your Conformitans; it is a token of a short memory, having
done it so lately; and of much less Grace, in doing it still so lewdly.


By what commandments of God going to the Haereticks prayers is forbidden.
HOw Just cause have I then to exclame against you (Oh disloyal wretches) how
long will ye reject my authority and kick against my commandments etc.

Or will you violently make me to mean before Jews and Heathen but not before
Heretics. etc. Have I not said I am a jealous God. etc.


ANd what needs this? seeing Protestants are no Haereticks jn my sight
howsoever ye papists account them so, yea, as worse then heathens and
Infidels. Therefore you manifestly wrong these your fellow Papists that go to
their Churches to challenge them in my name, for the breach of that great and
maine commandment, the abridgement of the whole law: Deuteronomy. 6.5.
viz. That a man love me with all his heart, with all his strength, with all his
soul.) or of that particular charge in the gospel (to be) leeue in heart and
also profess belief before men- and also (he which denies me before men
shall be denied of me in the presence of Angels. Mat. 10.32, 33.
Luke 12.9.
Moreover I mea^t it of haereticks as well as of jews and heathe^s. What then?
do they therefore of your Popish opinions who go to Protestant Churches deny me
before Haereticks? that is your own conclusion and not mine. In a word: I have
said, Esaias. 24.8.
(I will not give my glory to another. Deuteronomy. 7.5.
) I did severally forbid my people Israel to entermedle in Heathnish rites:
Exo. 23.31.32.
I did interdict them all society and conversation with Infidels: I did
denounce by mine Apostles pen, Romans 10.9.
That as in heart men are to believe to Justification, so with mouth they are
to confess to Salvation. But they give not my glory to another that go to
Protestant Churches: ye do; that adore and worship jmages, Crosses, and
crucifixes. The rites of Protestants are not heathnish, but few, and easy, and
significa^t; yours of the Roman Synagogue, are borrowed both from Jews, and
Heathens; (as I have told you before); and a mighty multitude, both Idle and
cumbersome, for number and for nature. Their Conversation that have society
with English Protestants, js with faithful Christians: yours that are Roman
Catholics, is with Antichrist and his adhaerents. Now then I command and
Charge you all the sort of you, Christ Jesus calls not the wavering Roman
catholics from the Protestant Churches and Companies.
to speak no more to your fellow Catholics after this fashion in my name. For
I the Lord the omnipotent Creator have not thus called them from among the
protestants. But I exhort and warn them rather, to follow their faith: because
it is the faith of truth: that faith also to believe in heart, that they may be
justified: and that Faith to Confess with mouth, that they may be saved. As
for you, you proud flesh and blood, never cast up an jdle and presumptuous
account of merit added unto merits; yours, or theirs, or any man's to mine:
which will never, verily I say unto you, amount to any sum of Felicity: mine
own being only, and altogether all-sufficient to that purpose.


Schismatics violate the law of nature by going to the Protestant Churches.
And what if I had not in such express wise prescribed your duty does not the
light of reason, the Law af nature etc.

Which fails or falls in one point of faith be fully guilty of Infidelity
etc.

The Lord Christ.
NO it does not teach your Catholics who are with Protestants any such thing:
viz. to cleave firmly to their Popish faith and Religion; for that is
stubbernly to persist in error, and to embrace in deed a strange and false
faith, and irreligious proceedings. But what one argument bring you to prove
that the law of Nature herein is violated? Are you so jmpudent to allege
Propositions in my name and bring no proof at all? or do you go about to
prove it thus? (He which breaks one Commandment is guiltye of all, and a
violater of Charity: ergo he which fails or faulteth in one point of Faith
is fully guilty of Infidelity: and so by consequent violateth the law of
nature. The first assersion I grant is mine own in mine Apostle; Iam. 2.10.
if you understand it aright. But this latter, thus inferred, is your paradox.
For if (he which fails or faulteth in one point of faith be fully guilty of
jnfidelity, that is, must needs be charged and taken for a mere jnfidel: then
not only all haereticks and you Papists; who fail in many points of Faith;
but even all true Christians, and good Catholics must be condemned so to: Cor.
13 9.
seeing they all know but in part; and prophecy in part: and so must needs
fail in one point of Faith at least, even that which is hidden from their
knowledge whereto they cannot for that cause yield any manner of assent: no man
consenting unto that which in his knowledge he does not apprehend at all. And
thus ye Condemn by this Paradox all the world; and namely, all Christendom;
and your own Roman Church, for jnfidels: nay; fully guiltye of jnfidelitie:
and so there are no believers at all by your doctrine: There is no Church, no
Faith, No Truth, no Gospel, no Christ, no God among men. Here I must tell you
also. Though in some sense he that is fully guiltye of jnfidelitie, that is,
that believes no one point at all of god or godliness, as he ought; Tit. 1.15.
his very mind and Conscience is defiled: and so the light of reason, and the
law of nature is violated in him: Yet those famous and Renowned Paragons, among
the heathens. Trismegistus; Pythagoras; Socrates; etc. Cato, Aristides, Scipio,
and many others of that rank, for their great and Admirable learning, profound
politic wisdom, and worthy moral virtues, were neuer-thelesse very great
lights; and had the light of Natural reason shining in them gloriously,
concerning many secular and civil affairs, and lived in many things agreeable
to the law of Nature. How be it, concerning Spiritual and heavenly things,
yea, the true knowledge of God they became vain in their Imaginations, Romans
1.21.
and their foolish hearts where full of Darkness, and in that might they be said
to be fully guilty of jnfidelity; because they knew not God the Father in me
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ. So that, John. 3.18. and. 26.8.9.10. and.
17.3.
some may be fully guilty of jnfidelitye; and yet not violate the law of
Nature. Wherefore be not so rash hereafter, I advise you, to project your
Paradoxes in my name: do not challenge them for partaking with haereticks that
go to protestants: neither say any more that your Church, your Faith, your
Sacraments, are mine, as ye do. For I will not acknowledge them: ye do me
jniurie.


Heresy and persecution purposely permitted of God for trial of men's hearts.
I Foretold while I conuersed on earth that heresies of necessity must be for
the trial etc.


True it is, I foretold of Haeresies for the trial of my Saints. But are ye
Romanists therefore the universal Church? No. ye know and allow my servant
Austen answering the Donatists of his time: Augustine.
Africa non est orbis. Therefore I say also unto you: The Synagogue of Rome is
not the universal Church. And do Protestants and their followers prefer
their own Imaginations before it? I tell you, nay; but ye Papists do; and
run a madding after your own jnuentions and Apostaticall Traditions, closed
and clasped up in the bosom of your Pope. Luc. 12.51.
What though I forwarned; that I came not to send peace but separation;
(meaning) not that I do love, or bring division and strife among men; but that
many, whose hearts my self have not reformed, are, and will be ever so bad and
obstinate in their evil opinions and wicked ways, wilfully disobeying my
Gospel, that they will gain say and oppose their own parents, Children,
Princes, Subjects, Masters, Servants, wives, Husbands, Brethren, Kinsfolks,
and Friends that profess my name; yea and will raise up bitter persecution
against them. But I had no meaning to teach Children, or servants or Wives, or
Brethren, or friends, disobedience and disloyalty against their Parents, their
Masters, their Husbands, their Brethren, their frinds; much less to foster
treasons in a state, to raise up mutinies and rebellions, to arm natural
subjects against their natural Princes, and to practice the overthrow of
their Countries, for the pretended catholic cause. These are diabolical
suggestions, and actions of Satan my sworn Enemy, wherewith ye Romanists
are too too much acquainted.


ARe ye Christians and think your selves excused from the precept etc.
Dissembling in religion is abominable.


Revealed you are to your own shame and to my grief. etc.


DIssimulation and double dealing I hate in every thing: and in acts of
Religion I utterly abhor you need not prove it by the Prohibitions in the
law; Deuteronomy. 22 10.11.
of wearing a garment of linsey woolsey, ploughing with an Ox and an Ass,
sowing a field with diverse kind of seeds; Prou. 10.9.
or by the parable of Solomon. He that walks uprightly walks safely, or
boldly. But will ye then remember how I cannot but detest your popish
aequiuocation, and mental reservation? which is nothing else but flat lying
and hypocrisy. As for those of your popish opinions which conform themselves
unto the Protestants, herein they must needs offend me, in that they believe
with you, and profess with them: for I would have them not only profess as
they do, but also change their Faith: as long as they believe the doctrine of
your Antichristian Synagogue, me they cannot please. For as they are Christians
and know full well that my Commandment, Deuteronomy. 13.1.
(not to hearken unto a Deceauer,) belongs unto all: so my will is further,
that they should take knowledge, how that you Papists are the false-prophets of
these times, who compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and to draw as
many as you can unto that new, strange, and false doctrine of your romish
faith; using all diligence and diabolical crafts you can, in imitation of the
devil himself the great compasser of the earth, either to persuade, Job. 1.7.
or else to enforce them to fall down and worship the whore, the beast, and
the false prophet, Apoc. 19.20.
and him only to serve; I say, even that new, and strange abominable Idol,
An^^e. Eudaemo^ etia^ apolog. pro Hen. Garnet. page 137. and 138.
the Lord your God the Pope, of which Title and Blasphemy some of you are now
ashamed. As touching the doctrine of the Protestants: show in what one point it
is not ancient, and Apostolical that you call it new. They tell you, and have
proved it often unto you; Popish new doctrines
that your Canon and Idol of the Mass, your Carnal presence, and
transubstantiation in the holy Supper: your interdiction of the Cup to the
Laity: your adding of salt, and spittle, oil, and cream in the Ceremony of
Baptism; and many other points of your belief, where never heard of in mine
Apostles times, or in many years after. But ye exclame and cry out upon them,
new Doctrine; new Faith; new Gospel: yet are ye not able to say and prove
it of any point thereof: This is new. How is it then that you are so malapert
with my Gospel, and the truth of christianitye which they profess, to begin
the original thereof both foolishly and falsely, slanderously, Luther. Calvin.
and blasphemously from Mart. Luther, and John Calvin? Remowned and worthy
Instruments of my glory they were in their time; and valiant oppugners and
expugnators of your Antichristian haeraesies: But no first founders, or
Authors, of my aeternall truth and gospel. Moreover, Caluins Idol? who? or
what is that I pray you? (The Popes Idol is the Mass:) And which are the
Calamities of this present time whereof ye prate. The hand of Justice is to
remiss and ouerslack upon you, as appears, in that you are so bold to
speak, and write, and print your paltry Pamphlets, and seditious Libels at
your pleasure. Wherefore never tell your supposed Schismatics, that, They are
revealed to their own shame and to my grief:) neither Call upon them any
more to confess your Faith by a conversation pleasing you: but learn your
selves at length, to profes Syncerely the true faith by a godly life; or I will
make it shortly known to all the world to your own perpetual shame and
horror, that ye are the men who have greiued and vexed me with your calumnious
exclamations against my Saints, and jdolatrous abominations against my self.


ADmit that neither reason nor rule of conscience suggested unto you:
Schismatics contemn the authority of the Church.
nor that I expressly exacted of you such firm confession of faith: yet ought
not the authority of my Church, etc.

Nor to my Vicar on earth etc. The declaration of my general Council at Trent
etc.


WHat a do is here? will ye never give over railing, and slander? how long
shall I suffer you? Oh ye disobedient and jmpudent Generation? I tell you
again: your Church, your Priests, your Vicar, your Council at Trent, are none
of mine: I renounce you all: your Church, for the Synagogue of Satan: your
priests, for the ministers of Beliall: your Vicar, for a deceaver, an jdolater,
a grand false Prophet, as Balaam: your council at Trent, for a private
Conventicle of Popish Prelates and Priests of your own faction. Foolishly then
and ridiculously do you charge your Schismatics of contempt of my Church, my
Spouses voice and admonition; Madly do you censure them for worse then
Heathens and Infidels; and divelishly do you accurse them all. It is jndeed as
sacrilegious as Idolatry to obey your Church; to enter your haereticall
Conuenticles; to give external consent to your detestable rites. But to
frequent the service of the Protestant Churches, the Ecclesiastical assemblies
of my true Saints, is so well pleasing unto me; that had these harkned unto
your Priests who called them therefrom, I should have held it grievous
sacrilege by consent between them both; had they refrayned, and refused the
pardon of life upon so godly a condition; (viz:) to communicate with my Church
of England: I should have found them guilty of their own blood; as now I do
these Priests. I had a godly Bishop that gave them a godly rule, Augus.
Dulcitio. ep. 61. Jdem. ad. Festum. ep 167.
if they had had the grace to have kept it. Causa non paenafacit Martyrem, the
cause not the punishment makes the Martyr: And my self have pronounced them
blessed that suffer, But, Mat. 5.10. Addidit magnam differentiam quae vera
Sacrilegio pietas Sec^rnatur. Aug. cont. ep. Permeniani. lib. 1. 1. Reg. 18.28.
Santons. Hagies.
propter Iustitiam, in a righteous cause, or for righteousness sake. But tell
me now: how far unlike herein were these your Papists to the Priests of
Baall, that cut and launced their bodies? and those fantastical Santons or
Hagies, (as they call them) among the Turks and Moors, that disoculate, and
wound, and even kill themselves in the madness of their Superstition? Also, I
know, I know: your Pope (not my Vicar) is after a fashion so solicitous for
souls that he spares neither care nor cost; yet not to save them, but to
destroy and murder them: so that he most aptly resembles even Satan
himself, the great compasser of the Earth: as his jesuitical vasals also do
those their famous Praedecessors, the Pharisees; Mat. 23.15.
that compassed both Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and having made him,
transform him twofold more the child of Hell then they themselves are. What
do I? or what should any of my servants respect, what your Tridentine assembly
decreed against them? They were blinded Haereticks themselves; and they had all
and every one the mark of the beast in their foreheads. Prove. 26.2.
As for their Anathema: The curse that is causeles shall not come; for of my
faithful Protestants I still pronounce: Blessed is he that blesses them, and
cursed be he that curses them.


Haereticks how precisely to be shunned.
BEsides that principal praecept of loving God above all, etc. If you will but
a little look about you, ye shall find that I have yet left you another
commandment, etc. Well then, whose spirit but mine inspired and established as
a perpetual observation to the worlds end, that Haereticks, etc.


WHat an jdle Expostulatio^ is this? for it shall be granted unto you that
Haereticks should be utterly avoided, as such and such whom you have alleged
and described truly out of the scriptures. But that the Protestants are the
Haereticks, and you the true Catholics shall not be granted. So that ye have
impertinently abused the scriptures. Wherefore speak no more presumptuously,
let not arrogance proceed out of your mouth. Not they that come to Protestants,
but rather ye, that hold and hang with Papists, participate with Infidels;
have fellowship with Beliall, and the cup of Devils; are in darkness; Join
with Lucifer; come to the solemnity of Babylon; make a bargain with hell, and
with accursed Death; and that not so much for fear of any worldly loss or
cross; as for affection to your sin. Therefore I counsel you, repent and
turn you, from your abominations: else I will come against you shortly, and
give you your portion with the whore, the beast, the false-prophet, and the
Dragon, whom you serve: in the lake that burns with fire and Brimstone: the
same is the second death. Schismatics are infected with hae^esy and not with
pure schism only.



Shall they then which profess Haeresie with Haereticks be found clear etc.


NOw the Schismatics are infected with Haeresie: and of this you have
challenged them long ago. But thus you sees and boil your coleworts over, and
again, thus for lack of matter you fill an Idle and ungodly message full of
vain and wicked words, charging, and challenging, thundering and thretning, and
drawing, as much as in you lies, poor and distracted seely souls into
desperation of my mercy for entering into the rightway. Thus did your father
the Devil deal with my servant M. Luther when I began to call him first from
your Pauilions. For he would needs persuade him that he shoud be damned in
the Protestant profession, Luther de Missa priuata
because he had been once a popish Priest, had said Mass, had turned the
Eucharisticall bread into my body, and done such other like feats of your
superstition; and now was revolted from it. How absurdly and how jmpudently do
you compare my true believers in England to the Canaanitish jnfidels? but that
you have a Custom to abuse my word, and to misapply the scriptures. I will
surely punish you for this thing. What fire, or flame, or Sea-surges, or pitch
is this you prate of? do not I know, ye err, not knowing what you say? But
let me see how learnedly and divinely you prove your supposed Schismatics to
be Haereticks. Your learning is to say, and not to prove. Your divinity was
never founded on my word, but fashioned and framed in your own forge. For what
are the Haeresies wherewith they are infected? forsooth (every one almost
(rarer is he then a white Crow who does it not) either cancelleth fasting
days by his own Authority, or dispenses with meats prohibited as often as
he list; or doubts of some Article of Faith, if not of all. What? do they
cancel fasting days? and which I pray you? I say, those only of your popish
institution. And how? jn that they fast not after your popish fashion. I wisse,
a very great offense. I but of their own Authority they do it. No: They have
the Authority of the Lawful Magistrate to bear the^ out. They dispense with
meats prohibited as often as they list) By the law of my eternal Gospel there
are no meats prohibited. For does not my Apostle tell you? 1. Tim. 4.4.5.
that every Creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused if it be
received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
If then, ( not as often as they list, that is your calumny:) but as often as
necessity requires, and as they may without public scandal or offense, they
make no difference of meats; but use them all without scruple of Conscience put
between this and that: Oh sure, it is a grievous crime. It is jndeed, among
your superstitious orders: but not among my holy Saints; who have learned, that
this your prohibition of meats proceeds from the spirit of Error; 1. Tim. 4.1.
and is a doctrine of Devils. Are these your Haeresies? to cancel Popish
fasting dais, and eat of meats prohibited by the Church of Rome? But I say:
these are actions crossing the Haereticall doctrine of your Antichristian
Canons: they are no haeresies. Besides, to doubt of this or that Article of
faith, yea, of all the Articles of your faith; call you this jnfection of
Haeresies? But I say: to dissent from the modern faith and doctrine of the
Roman Church, and stoutly to maintain the contrary, is not Haeresie in my
sight: much less only to doubt of any, or of all the articles thereof. For
first, as many of the^ as are different from the Protestant profession, they
are the erroneous articles of a false Church, a synagogue and conventicle
jnfected with many haeresies. Again, if they were all granted to be true; yet
seejng all Haeresie is a confirmed and settled error: Haeresis error
confirmatus. See Aug. cont. Cresco^. Gram.
and whosoever doubts is ever stammering as yet, unsettled, and vnresolved,
because he doubts: therefore he that doubts of whatsoever points, cannot
be said fitly and properly, either to be well affected to the truth, or to be
jnfected with haeresie. why? because he stands jndifferent, and jrresolute;
though declining from the one; yet not as yet embracing, or jndeed, jnfected
with the other. Nevertheless, let it now be yielded unto you: that they who
are not perfect Haereticks; yet may be jnfected with haeresies, or haereticall
opinions: tell me, what, and which they be, whereof you challenge these your
Schismatics? You say: One improoueth Confession; another Purgatory; this man
invocation of Saints, or use of Images; that man prayers for the dead; or the
office in Latin; doubtless, a very greevous accusation; and miraculous points
of Haeresie. But will you never learn? that, your Auricular confession in a
Corner: your Pagan purgatory in an unknown world: your praesumtuous jnvocatio^
of Saints, under color of humility: your Idolatrous use of jmages: your idle
prayers for the dead at rest: your Latin office, and service in an unknown
tongue: I, even I my self, have ever jmprooued, repooued, and condemned? So
have I also them, that suppose Antichrist shall be one singular person, and not
a succession of many; because they directly oppose my holy Revelation therein.
Yet to suppose and believe as I have revealed it to my servant John, Apoc.
17.18. alibique.
you will needs jmpute it for an infection of haeresie. Moreover, you are not
content with me, the true and only head of the Church which is my body; Ephe
4.15.
and the presence of my grace and power, Mat. 28.20.
whereof I spoke when I said, Behold I am with you to the end of the world: But
except there be acknowledged one visible, and ministerial Head; that your Pope
(forsooth) may be the man: and tirannize over the consciences of my people; the
very Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God; 2. These. 2.4.
and advancing himself above all that is called God: it must be haeresie with
you. But, come ye now, and reason with me of these points, if ye be able, if
it be possible that ye can bring any other Arguments then have been brought,
and answered already by my servants: or else because ye are not able, I jmpose
you silence, and charge you henceforth to set a broche no more lies, and
forgeries in my name. For if ye do; I will call you to account at my
dreadful day of Judgment when ye shall not escape. The Councels of my
primitive Church are of good and great authority in their kind; Your Gregor.
was too bold so to compare them.
but not of the greatest; not any of the^ aequall to my 4. Evangelists: your
decrees Ecclesiastical of far less; as containing in them many Cannons both
erroneous, ridiculous, and blasphemous. The gates of Hell cannot prevail
against my Church; for I have grounded it upon a Rock, that is, my self. 1.
Cor. 10.4.
But your Church is not my Rock; as well appears: for the gates of hell have
already prevailed against it; and it has lost the spirit of truth, John. 14.
ver. 16.26.
the promise of my Father; yea, the faithful City, Romans 1.8.
whose faith was famous sometimes in all the world: is become an harlot, like
Samaria, and Jerusalem long ago: and she has played the harlot with all her
neighbor Princes, whom she could jntice. Therefore they do well, and follow
the truth in righteousness, that call in question the authority of many Councels
and assemblies of men; that detract from your Ecclesiastical decrees and
decretals: that, not only fear, but believe, and find; and report abroad;
not, that I have not fulfilled my promise, Act. 2.1. etc.
for I have; and have sent my spirit of truth the Comforter unto my chosen,
which shall lead them into all truth: but, that the same my spirit has been
by you, your Praelats, and your false-teachers diversely abused, and despited;
so that it has been pressed, and as it were compelled to forsake you, and
depart from you many years ago. Cease ye then to cast your filthy haeresies
upon my Saints: or to call them back into your stews; whom I have caused to
come, and join, and dwell with them in my holy house. Else: thou Babylonish
harlot; woe, woe, unto thee? Ah, how shall I punish thee in the end? how shall I
be avenged of thee? seeing thou do all these things of an jmpudent whoorish
woman.


WHence all this? By what means Schismatics grow to be Haereticks.
not because the longer ye live etc. By never talking with Priests, not
conferring of matters touching the Spirit, by being laden etc. As in
domestical Adders and in their familiarity, as in Cocatrice eyes etc.

Flee Babylon, flee Chore, flee Sodom, flee from the aduersarye camp in time.
etc.


HEre again, as else where, and almost every where in this false Embassage, you
diue into the Consciences of your brethren: and you can tell them, without me,
yet very boldly in my name, that they begin to loath your religion, for checking
of their humor. For you challenge them that fear of adversity; love of the
world; never talking with your Priests; nor conferring of matters touching the
spirit; and the load of secret sins; have jnduced them to depart from among
you. Thus you rail upon them; exclaim; expostulate; advize; and command them
in my name; restles as you are. You rail upon them as possessed of sensual,
carnal, and worldly affections. lying open to the enemy, destitute of my grace
and protection, made a prey to the roaring Lion, conuersing among haereticks,
becoming like them in conditions, quickly delighting in their suitable
doctrine. To which they can easily answer if they be wise, that thus have you
deciphered your own selves, ye Runnagates: who have forsaken a good and
pleasant land, to converse among your Roman Haereticks: and so are made like
unto them in evil and ungodly conditions: disloyal to your Prince and
country; having first conformed your selves to their damnable doctrine.
Therefore you are, as you say of them sensual, carnal, and worldly
affectionated, lying open to the Enemy, destitute of the Saviors grace and
protection, and made a prey to the roaring Lion. You exclame: poison, poison
lurketh in their company; meaning the Protestants, you should have meant your
selves, as in domestical Adders, and in their familiarity as in Cockatrices
or Basilisks eyes. Thus do you plainly show that Adders poison is in your
lips; and under your tongue lurketh ungodliness and vanity. You expostulate:
What though they be not conquered at the first? what though the Arguments of
Protestants be but weak and foolish? yet that they may in time be persuaded
and ouerco^e by them. So they may jndeed; for those Arguments, as weak and
foolish as they are, yet you do find them Gordian knots, and like the Trumpets
of the Priests of the Lord of Hoastes, Iosue. 6.20.
at the blast whereof the walls of Ierico fell down: yea, like stones in david's
bag; 1. Sam. 17.49.
whereof some one, or other, when the measure of your wickedness is filled up,
shall stick so fast in the forehead of your Pope, the great Goliath, that he
shall fall groueling to the ground, and never be able to rise again. Then
shall you find those Arguments, which now are but drops of Rain, to fall upon
you as a storm; as hailestones, and Coals of fire. For sure it is, Esaias. 55.10.
as my word is like the snow and rain which comes down from heaven, and
waters the Earth, that it may bud and bring forth, seed unto the sower, and
bread unto him that eats; Heb. 6.7.8.
so the earth that drinks in the rain which falls often upon it, and
brings forth nothing but briars and thorns, is near unto Cursing, whose end
is to be burned. Your unsavory comparisons of the small worm, and
contemptible Iuye, are more agreeable unto your selves; Such eating vermins are
your Jesuits, that neble at my goodly vine: such clasping Iuye, sucking out the
sap of this my noble Plant, and Tree; which in my Paradise of England mine own
right hand has Planted, hedged, and defenced. Therefore; as you counsel and
command them in my name, so do I: with this only difference: that not the
Protestants, but you and your Church are in mine account the Haereticks; the
Babylon; the Korahs company; and the Sodom:) And I would have both them and
you to know; that as I am the mighty God, and Savior of the world: so that
all my counsels are commands. Among your selves, the sons of men, ye have a
Rule; and men of wisdom have great regard unto it. Potentiores cum rogant,
iubent. And can you then jmagine, that whatsoever I aduize, must not carry
with it the force of a Command? This then I say, and command unto your
Schismatics; dissembling papists; false-hearted catholics, Hypocrites,
weaklings, Newters, (term them what ye will; be they as they are, Phil. 3.1.
) to whom you have directed this Embassage. Beware of Dogs: beware of evil
workers. beware of the Concision. Flee the fellowship of Roman Haereticks; be
not jnfected with the leven of their Doctrine; go out of Babell; come out from
among them; be ye separated, and touch no unclean thing: no Idols; no
shrines, no relics, no wafer-gods: or the like: and I will receive you. If ye
will not perish in the error of Balaam; and the gaine-saying of Korah; if ye
will come from Antichrist, and his Adhaerents, mine Adversaries camp, and dwell
among my Chosen, if ye will love me, embrace and learn my true religion,
which they profes, 2. Cor. 6.17.18.
I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters. I am the
Lord Almighty.

The Lords Conclusion.
Hitherto, ye wicked Impes of antichrist, I have vouchsafed to lay abroad your
folly, and jmpiety in your own vain; and even in mine own words to
controwle, and Counter-mand your false Embassage, and blasphemous Message;
which you have divulged as from my self. To the end that all the world may
know how greatly I detest, how deeply I abhor your whoorish, and even devilish
jmpudency; to abuse my person, and breath out blasphemies in my sacred name.
Now, because I see you reele, and tumble back again into your former
accusations, of obstinacy, and jngratitude to God; of jmpugning the Catholic
Faith: ^3.34.35.36. etc.
of greiuously abusing God: and in all the rest of your declamation, only
reason with them, how they can excuse themselves from this your jmputation of
joining with my true professors; alleging many colors, pretenses, and
excuses (as ye suppose) of this their fact: whether they be guilty, or no; they
are in this point wise, and able, and old enough, let them answer for
themselves. If they answer you syncerely, that the love of truth has drawn
them hereunto, never blame them any more. For mine Apostle by my spirit has
commanded. 1 These. 5.21. 1. Ioh. 4.1.
Try all, keep the good. Another; Try the Spirits, whether they be of God or
no. Provided always that they be not ever learning, 2. Tim. 3.7
and never come to the knowledge of the Truth. But if they do indeed, as you
have laid the load upon their consciences, dissemble only, (tell a time shall
serve to unmask themselves) with me their God and Lord: and with the world.
Alas, alas, are they such fools to walk in Darkness in my sight? For the
Darkness is no Darkness to me, Psalm. 139.12.
the Darkness and light to me are both alike. But: let them answer for
themselves, because ye do provoke them: and I will be the Arbitrator between
you both. For I will surely Judge both them, and you, and all the world, Iu.
ep. verse. 14 15.
at mine jllustrious Apparition in the Clouds: when I shall come with Thousands
of my Saints; and I will give sentence against all men; and will take
vengeance, and rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds
which they have ungodly committed; and of all their cruel speakings, which
wicked sinners have spoken against me.

FINIS.
Jgnatius epist. 6. ad Philadel.
(...).

Brethren, be not deceived: if any man follow him that deuideth himself from
the truth he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And if any man withdraw not
himself from a false teaching or a lying Preacher, he shall be condemned into
Hell. For neither ought we to depart from the godly; neither to have
conversation with the ungodly.


