THE FIRST DAY OF THE WORLDS CREATION: Or Of the first week of that most
Christian Poet, W. SALVSTIVS, Lord of Bartas.

Etsi sero serio.

Imprinted at London, by I. Iackeson, for Gregory Seaton. 1595.

The Translator to the Author.
SO, so, Lord Bartas, should all Arts be spent
In truths advancement, and their Authors glory:
Blush Christian Poets, to seem eloquent,
In setting forth a lewd, and lying story:
Let Poets learn the sacred truth to write:
And Heathens take the lying Epithet.
There, there, Lord Bartas has the truth her grace,
Where God is Phoebus, and his sprite the muse,
Where Poets follow Prophets heavenly trace,
And Parnase mount for Zion do refuse:
Let heathnish parasites that cog and flatter,
Call fained muses, to their forged matter.
Then, then, Lord Bartas art and truth accord,
When truth is mistress, and those arts her maids,
When subtle quirks, and questions be abhord,
And damsels follow where their mistress leads.
Truths Poets, let them not be vain disputers:
But take her Prophets for their only tutors.
Thus, thus, Lord Bartas have thou done, and wonn
Arts garland, and truths heavenly blessing,
She was thy dittie, God did set thy tune,
His sprite did guide thee in that truths expressing:
Now whiles thy works in France afford a sunshine,
Vouchsafe this shadow may be Englands moonshine.
To the Right Worshipful, wise, and learned, M. Anthony Bacon: perfect health
of body, increase of virtues and worship; to the honorable service of his
country, the advancement of Religion, and the everlasting felicity of his
own soul.
YOur long experience, both of the French estate, and language (Right
worshipful:) the report of your wisdom blossomed in youth, and ripened in
years, increased by learning at home, and confirmed by travail abroad, have
drawn me, a poor nameles countriman of yours, to make choice of your worthy
title to countenance the forefront of this frame: and your judgment to censure
the privy conueiances thereof. The piece of work which I offer to your
patronage and judgment, was undertaken in the nonage of my studies, before I
was professed, and perhaps had been smothered from the world as an abortiue,
had not some my dear friends weaned it from my hands, and fostered it in their
affectionate bosoms, promising it life and light, if not with me, without me:
yet not in respect, either of the matter which is heavenly, nor the Author
which is excellent, desired I to silence my infantlike pen from proceeding
heerin: but because this most Christian Poet, and noble Frenchman Lord of
Bartas, might have been naturalized amongst us, either by a general act of a
Poetical Parliament: or have obtained a kingly translator for his week (as he
did for his Furies: The king of Scots translated his Furies.
) or rather a divine Sidney, a stately Spencer, or a sweet Daniell for an
interpreter thereof. For so was I put in a false hope by some, that the living
Pen of that worthy deceased knight, had amongst other his charitable legacies
bequeathed a rich suit, after our best English fashion, unto this honorable
Poet: and therefore suppressed my ragged weeds, till I perceived their promise
shrunk, and my expectation still naked. And yet if any of the forenamed
Heroical Spirits have undertaken the performance of that act, I would not have
my seely days work to prejudice their Week, nor my moat to flutter in the
presence of their bright beams: wherefore though my rash quill has took a
further flight into this translation: yet have I pinioned up the rest of her
feathers, and suffered only the first days work to pass abroad: till I may
understand whether any of those sweet recording Swans have waded in the
deriuation of these streams or no: which if it be true (as I rather wish it,
then envy at it) I am content that my homely translation be cancelled: only
this forefront would I have preserved, as an old ruinous wall, not for the
workmanship, but for the monument of some famous inscription therein contained;
so may it stand as an heap of stones, not only rebounding a short echo of
Dubartas his stately voice; but also lifting up the accent in the sounding
praises of Master Anthony Bacon: and subscribing to the manifold prayers for
his health and happiness, with Amen.

The Argument.
THe most Christian Poet in a matter of truth (having made his invocation upon
the true God) addresseth himself to describe the creation of the world,
against the truth whereof because many opinions of heathenish Philosophers
might be opposed, he cutteth them down, as they stand in his way. Some dreamed
of eternity, and seeing the briers of antiquity growing over the clear
account of the worlds age, lost themselves as in a labyrinth, for wane of a
directorie thread, to lead to the original point of the first entrance of the
same. Others stumbled at the beginning thereof, and did seem to hold the
circumstance of time, and a former commencement of motion, yet did they deny
the substance, and miscall the author thereof: for they affirmed the world to
have been patched up of meats, and suddenly so iumbled together by a casual
concourse of the same. Our Poet treading the steps of the true Prophets,
finds out an Immortal author and preserver, being the ancient of days, a
Father of lights, which is he that protests of himself, I am before the light
was created. And if the Epicure demand what that Author did before he made the
world, here is returned the same answer that Spiridion gave to the like
question in the council of Niece, He built a hell for curious questionists: and
for his company, he was alone and yet not solitary, he had his essential
virtues, his distinct persons all concurring in the fulness of his Godhead which
was al in all. Some of the Philosophers harped upon this point, but their
brains were out of tune, and therefore never found out the perfect union of
those three parts in one. Our Poet expresses the Author God, the instrument
his word, being the very beginning and alpha of those lines written in the
royal parchment of the heavens, and made legible to all lands and languages.
This whole frame and organ of the world tuned by the finger of God and breathed
into by his spirit, serves as vocal music to conueigh the significant
dittie of his power and glory into every sense. Neither is this world a work
of Imitation seconded by any former and external pattern: but of mere nothing
was made a rude something at the first, by six days leisure polished and
extended in such ample compass as we behold, to the intent there might be but
one whole entire mound, without whose pales there might neither be purleis nor
plurality of worlds. As it had a beginning, so also must it have an end,
though Plato (of profane men the most divine) should affirm the contrary, and
all the stife conceited sect of Stoickes should necessarity implead a
sempiternitie: Yet such an end shall it have as every venturous. Astrologer is
not able to discover; no, nor any bus the unsearchable knowledge of the
highest. God therefore proved the Author and destroier, is proposed as a
president to us in that he took six days to finish that which at a trice he
could have performed. Amongst his successiue labors the comfortable light is
preferred in time, and made the first fruit of his creatures: the substance
thereof uncertain, the beauty and profits thereof most certain: what cause
moved the almighty to distinguish between day and day, light and light, with
intercourse of night and darkness expressed. The angels creation being touched
and (according to a general opinion) attributed to this days work, the fall of
some of them, malice of these apostate relapses: the persistance and diligent
service of others in the desence of Gods beloved, and offense of his enemies
described, the Poet takes his farewell for the first day.

PHillips fair bloome, sole eye of Macedon,
Having disroabd of all their royalty
The lofty towers of thrice-sackt Ilion,
Was asked by one if he the harp would see,
That Paris used amidst his venerie?
Not that quoth he, but rather THAT would I:
Wherewith Achilles made such melody.
His mind forsooth and voice accorded then,
With THAT which warbled still the worthy deeds
Of heaun-bred ympes, heroic Gentlemen,
The mortal blossoms of immortal seeds,
None such that other twangd but worthless weeds.
As sighs, sobs, sorrows, and lovers languishments,
Or else their wiles, smiles, sports, and wanton meriments.
No such like passions here of carpet love,
No objects fit for lewd and lustful eyes:
Lo here the world, the earth, the heaven above,
The elements, and sense deceiving skies,
All made free denizens after English guise:
You Gentles cast in Alexanders mould,
By choice like his, like mind of yours unfold.
Io. Ho.

THE FIRST DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK OF du Bartas.
THou, that the course of glittring heaven do guide
And checkest trucebound Neptunes surly waves, The poets invocation on God.

Shaking the steedie earth both far and wide:
Whose word can tame th'Aeolian broad that raues,
Or cause them bussell from their vented caves;
Dischardge my mind of cloudie cares and thought:
And to thy self, hale up my sprights aloft.
Drive out this stately drift of me intended,
And by thy cunning let this verse be squarde,
So that thy works, by words may be commended:
Levy those lines with special regard,
Wherein the worlds rare grow the shall be declarde:
That I may sing, and latter age may hear,
How first the worlds rude nonage did appear.
Great father, grant that I may couch in measure, The proposition.

The rarest points of beauty in this frame,
And spread abroad the chief concealed treasure
Containing worthy lectures of thy name,
And serving fit to register thy fame:
Let me thy sacred mysteries discern:
That teaching others them, my self may learn.
The elements from everlasting time
Have not been pitched as we behold them now:
Nor did the nimble fire so ever clime,
That it kept down the tossing air below: The world was not eternal.

Nor did the air about the waters bow:
Nor water shrinking in the earths hollow lap,
With slipprie turnings did the same inwrap.
This mighty Cope, The world not made by chance.
that stretches wide and side,
Was not rough hewde by fortunes chop or chance:
Nor in gross clusters of moates vndescride,
Or time scrapes up ruffeled at a glance:
As vain Democritus dreamd in his trance:
That selfsame word, whereby the world shall fade,
Was once the word, whereby the world was made.
Not made before the measuring time was found,
Without beginning, from eternity:
But world and time, World and time of one standing.
at one the self same stound,
As things coequall, took formalitie:
For you (o heavenly lamps) give certainty.
The seasons, and the times your course confirms
And cuts the years, the months, the days and terms.
Elder then place, then form of arched sky,
Elder then time, which wheels in circle space,
Sat endless Jove in perfect majesty:
Peizing the whole with more then princely grace,
Chearing the parts which all he did embrace:
What that was then, I know not how to call:
Naught else, but God, for God was all in all.
One only mind, and pure intelligence
A virgin spright, unspotted and sincere:
Living for ever, making no expense
Of age or time that wrinkles might appear,
By nature bright, and always shining clear:
Fearles and infinite, a lord unknown,
Conuersing only with himself alone.
Wretches, that beat your brains on frantike toies,
Ask you how mighty Jove was then imploide? An answer to the Atheist, that
demands what God did, before he made the world.

Making inquiry what were then his ioies,
When all the world was uncreate and void?
His prudent mind (say they) might be annoide,
Which having power to counterpoise his will,
Could suffer nothing worse than sitting still.
This curious motive mounts to blasphemy:
Another point were fitter to record:
Before the heavens, and late worlds infancy
Produced were by his effectual word, The Answer of Spiridio in the council
of Niece, to the Epicures demand.

He built a hell for such as were abhord:
A hell, for such a proud ambitious rout,
As Giant-like would cast their maker out.
Does not a Caruer master of his art,
Draw whilome fancide patterns in his brain,
Not using tools nor timber in his draught?
Does not the Webster negligent of gain,
Lay sometimes by both wooffe and warpe in vain?
Does not the Potter leave his tempered clay,
Not forging it in vessels though he may?
And shall the Master workman of them all
Subject his art unto some lumpish stuff,
As though his skill were mere mechanical,
Which in it self is absolute enough,
And by it self can yield sufficient proof?
Never was Scipio solitary less,
Than when alone, and had no other guess.
Could such a Roman captain take delight
Within the closet of his humane breast:
And sole sufficient Jove be thought so slight,
That he could not enioie an active rest,
Amongst such ioies as cannot be expressed?
Might he not live alone (O heavens, what madness?)
As well as men in melancholy sadness?
That ancient sage Prienaes great renown, Bias.

When he should fleet with bag and baggage thence,
Bragd he brought all, Omnia mea mecum porto.
yet nothing from the town,
His mind was all fraught with intelligence:
And should rich Jove in his magnificence,
A Lord and King, and all within himself,
Desire to be enricht with worldly pelf?
God is the fountain from whose lively spring
Conduits of grace, and streams of good do flow,
All turns are serud by his replenishing,
For worlds of plenty from this fountain grow,
He is not suppliant to high nor low:
But Ocean-like his fulness he discharges,
Supplying every want with his frank largess.
Before the winds could breath, or waters breed
The spawning fish: before the earth was storde
With Antleere, or enrichde with any feed,
Or harvest crop that fodder might afford:
Before all this remaind the sovereign Lord,
Imploid in selfe-conceited exercise:
A fit delight for him that's only wise.
His admirable glory, puissant power,
Rich bounty, and his settled providence,
Were sacred objects, present every hour,
To exercise his deep intelligence,
And would thou know his further diligence?
He did contemplate on this worlds huge frame,
Viewing a former model of the same.
That Father solitary could not be,
Which had begot before all worlds begun
An offpring motherles, for company:
His word, his wisdom, and his only Son,
By whose consent all works of weight were done:
They two both one combinde in puissance regal:
The Father Lord, the Son the Fathers equal.
From which two peers, and powers invisible,
Unite in mutual love and majesty,
Issues a third peer indivisible:
And yet to both proportioned equally,
Copartner with the sacred Deity;
Of nature like, although distinct in name:
Of sundry gifts, in Godhead all the same.
My muse strike sail, and launch not in the deep:
Bear of aloof, and hold thy bark at bay:
From hungry gulf of rough Charybdis keep,
And shun the dreadful rocks of Capharee,
Those rocks be wracks and many men's decay: The heathen Philosopherslost
themselves for want of the true Loadstar.

For many slipped in maze of curious doubt,
So whelmde themselves, they never could get out.
A safer course to cut along the shore,
And bear a point, where landmarks may direct:
The shallow waters best can brook an ore:
But trifling wherries by the seas are checked:
In busy points, let faith thy sails erect,
Gods breathing Spirit be thy happy wind:
The Bible be a load-star to thy mind.
What else could blind, our Sages secular,
And make those blind, seduce the vulgar sort,
But keeping of a course irregular:
Counter to that the Bible does exhort:
Leaving whose compass, they must needs come short?
Truths surest card, when once they did abandon,
They lost themselves, and others left at randon.
A busy point so hard and dangerous,
As is none such containd in holy writ:
Apert to those that are not curious,
Presuming on discourse of humane wit,
Or think by reason to discover it:
No point more plain to faithful minds and holy:
No point more dark to minds possessed with folly.
Where am I now? or whither am I pulled?
My clambring mind surchargd with percing rays
Of this celestial majesty, is duld:
Each faculty proceeding thence decaies:
A stately threefold brightness ouerswaies:
My voice forgoes her meditated sound:
And in my heart no heart at all is found.
This glorious Trinity whom I adore
With bending knee, and lowly prostrate heart:
Whom I believe, and trembling search no more,
Than lively faith vouchsafes to impart:
This Trinity by thrice exceeding art, Three persons, one God made the world.

Of nothing framde this Mound of huge receipt:
When all was nothing, but unmeasurable great.
This Trinity, surpassing Dedalus,
This Master builder, singular for skill,
Endewd with worlds of wealth, and sumptuous
In choice of change, yet changelesse resting still,
Does boast the endless riches of his will:
Displaies his native power, and heavenly science;
And gives to all blaspheming Momes defiance.
Mount who so list unto the wheluing spheeres,
As scorning of these mouldie parts below,
Above the heavens let others fetch carreers,
And over bound those balls of sparkling show:
Swell they with pride of lofty things they know:
Let them enioie the counsel of the highest:
And in his courts let them approach the nighest.
And let some other low conceited wight,
Take countercourse, and cowchant to the ground,
Creep in these muddie objects next his sight,
As wholly in these lowly kennels drowned:
Searching what force in petty works is found:
And finding there some notes of Gods own glory,
Eclipse the same, by telling of the story.
Below the former, but above the last,
I train my muse, Mediocria firma: medio tutissimus ibis.
amidst the midmost air:
There shall she houer, in proportion placde,
And peizd with equal wings of heedie care:
Least soaring high, her flight she might impair,
Where blazing lamps would sindge her winged train,
Or buzzing low, the dampe might slug her vain.
I please my self, in prying up and down,
And eying of the worlds fair countenance:
Wherein Gods image makes reflection,
As in the mirror of his excellence:
His Godhead set in this worlds purueiance, The Godhead is seen in the visible
things of the world.

By transparence does fill my feeble eyes:
Which may not view his brightness otherwise.
If he that looks against the fiery sparks
Of glittring Phoebus, gets a sunne-burnd face:
If he that with a fixed eye sight marks
That flaming Globe (although from distant place)
Is purblind, only with that fulgent grace;
Who can sustain the daunting looks of him,
That lightning-like disperseth life and lim?
Of him, that separate in heavenly throne,
Did build this stately Theater beside
For men to soiourne, and converse upon:
Where lively prints of majesty abide,
Though but a glimpse of his power is descride:
And yet his Godhead graven in this frame,
Does teach our childish thoughts to spell the same.
Great Father (whom no lumpish brains conceive)
How do thon intimate to humane sense,
The knowledge of thy self? and give us leave
To feel thy presence in this worlds contents,
And read thy glory in these monuments?
Our fingers feeling, nostrils drawing savor,
Our palate tasting, all bewraie thy favor.
From highest throne thou sendst a roaring noise,
And to instruct us, plaist the Orator:
Heaven starts to understand thy thundering voice,
And speaks to us, as thine Ambassador,
Soothlie, each creature is thine auditor:
The world a public school, where we may learn
Such proper lessons as thy praise concern.
This frame like to a pullie heaues our sprights,
And moves our thoughts to climb by winding stares,
Above the stories of those heavenly lights. Diverse comparisons to show the
use of the worldly frame to Christian considerations.

The mighty God this world a shop prepares,
To make a public show of his rich wares.
This world like to a bridge conducts the stranger
By gulf of Gods deep secret without danger.
And not unlike a thin transparent clowd
Yields passage to the beams of Phoebus light,
(Not Phoebus whom Latonaes womb did shroud,
Lighting by day, and lurking in the night)
But such a sun as always stays in sight:
In thickest darkness still persists to shine,
And never stowpes beneath Orizons line.
Here as in semi-circled Theater,
Love, Justice, Righteousness and Majesty,
Present themselves: which expert actors are,
Their parts discharging so ingeniously,
That humane sense is rapt above the sky.
This world a book in folio, does proclaim
With letters capital, the Authors name:
Each kind, a page, each sundry shape a line;
Each creature, is a character to teach:
Each work, a vowell, sounding discipline:
And all the world does consonantly preach:
But we are trewants, which from masters reach,
On toies and gawds do set their wanton hearts,
Respecting them more than regarding arts.
Our eyes be wandering on the babish gaies,
And flowers that fill the wast comportenance:
On backside of the book we spend our days,
Not using natures text, a furtherance
To help instruct our blindfold ignorance:
Thence might we learn that God is chiefest cause,
Supporting cities peace with wholesome laws.
What do we travel in the multitude
Of languages? and labor to explain
The sense, which Turkish characters include?
Or Aegypts sacred figures do contain?
What those small pricks in th'Ebrew language mean?
To know the notes and accents of the Greek,
These things so slight, what need we greatly seek?
The Scythian and the wildt Tartarian,
The seven years wit, not grown yet to be wise,
And those that have the Pole meridian,
By natures light can scand these mysteries,
Saunce further insight, than by carnal eyes:
But he that is illuminate by faith,
Moves from this mould, and mounts a greater haith.
He vawts above the cristall firmament,
And underneath his feet, beholds the stir
Of spheeres converted by Gods regiment:
Whence reading his celestial calendar,
He proves to be an arch-Astronomer.
Aided with faith, I long to be discerning
The sacred text of Gods inspired learning.
My pleasure is to couch in stately verse
The worlds first birth and tender nurserie,
The eaning, and the weaning I rehearse,
The infant nonage, and minority,
And how it grew to perfect dignity.
I will unfold the bosom of this frame,
That all may read Gods essence in the same.
The founder of this ouerspreading tent,
Took no fantastic copy for his guide,
No borrowed shadow for his president,
Nor melancholy did he long abide, God took no view of any external pattern
to make the world after.

Inuenting how the parts might be applide:
There was no world, before this world, erected:
No former plot nor pattern he respected.
An earthly builder, tossing in his brains,
How best to raise a palace for a king:
First craves respite, counsel, takes pains
To make survey of many a such like thing,
Before he sets his hand to fashioning,
That after diverse palaces beheld,
Himself at last, might exquisitely build.
Where any queint conueiance is comprisde,
He marks the point, the workmanship, and grace:
Here he commends the forefront, well deuisd,
Elsewhere, some pillar raisd on comely base,
Or stares well mounted honoring the place:
Surueying much, he notes a thousand things,
And in his work the grace of all he brings.
No such examples of Ichnographie
Had everlasting Jove to imitate,
That he might forge a second world thereby,
And frame a work, for worlds to wonder at:
He never sweat, nor beat his brains for that,
But cast the world with ease into a square:
Quartered with earth, and water, fire, and air.
Even as the Sun (earths fairest husbandman)
Annexed to the wheeling firmament,
Descends not from his pauilion;
But sends from thence his fruitful increment,
Cheering the loue-sicke earth with meriment:
Although he list not come, yet does he send
Garlands of plenty to his distant friend.
Gods pleasure, and performance, will, and deed,
Conceit, and act, are of one equal age:
Purpose and practice, word and work, proceed,
And march alike, with perfect aequipage,
As ofsprings of one heavenly parentage:
All keep their course inioynd, on God attendant:
He was their maker, and is their defendant.
But yet the matter of this comely frame
Was not forthwith so curious to behold:
Nor so polite, as now we see the same,
Till Jove had cast it in a fairer mold:
For as a shipwright (not to be comptrold)
When he should build a bark to check the seas,
By leisure looks what kinds of stuff he please:
First trees for timber; iron, pytch for strength:
Then he prouides his cables and his cord:
Which all he lays on heaps: until at length,
He singles out a sayle-yard from the hord:
The beak, and stern he makes of some choice board:
The tallest fur he marketh for his mast:
Until by art, each part is fitly placed.
So God before this world was polished,
Produced his pregnant and immortal word;
And then collecting all the parts untried,
He mendgd them all, in one confused hord:
But where the Shipwright to his hands is stord;
God was the author both of form and stuff,
Not borrowing ought, for he had all enough.
Base was the worlds first visage, and vncowth,
An Auerne dungeon, tossed with heedles quoyle:
A rifraffe medley; The world without form, fashion, place, at the first.
and a gulphall mouth,
A sluggish heap of Elements at soil,
Amongst themselves pell mell all one the spoil:
Cold nipt the heat, square things and round did iar:
The hard and rough, with soft and smooth, made war.
Moisture and drouth, high mounting things and humble,
At hurlie-burlie skattered on a rank,
In civil strife vnciuillie did tumble:
The fire, and air, played many a lawles pranke:
The water skornd to keep within a bank:
Nor earth, nor air, retained bound or border:
But all things were, imperfect, out of order.
Sometime the water kept such heave and shoue,
That it incrochde upon the victory:
The air sometimes by struggling did remove
The waters force, and got the masterie:
Sometime the earth did crush the other three:
Eftsoons the fire above them all did skip,
When topsie turuie down the rest did slip.
That high Lord Marshall darting thundershot,
As yet had not his offices disposd:
The shapeles sky had not one glystering spot;
Nor any Planetarie sign that glosd:
The earth had not her motley weeds imposd:
Nor Neptune had his watrish kingdom storde:
Nor any foul amidst the welkin soarde.
All things lay weltring in a slothful shade:
No quickening spright did animate the lump: Genos. 1.^.

The blended fire, no fiery gesture had:
The earth, no earth, the air could make no thumpe:
These first borne creatures stuck as in a dumpe:
No settled course, degrees or bounds ordained,
By which this revel rout might be restrained.
If fire were then; it was not possessed with heat:
If air; it did not thorough shine with light:
If water; yet the moisture was not great:
If earth; it tottering daunc'd for lack of weight:
Do but imagine such an auckwoorth sight,
Where Tellus bald and barren were presented,
Not firm, nor plain, nor yet with dales indented.
Suppose the heavens disrobde of all their pride:
Those eyes pockt out, and lights extinguished,
Debard of motion and all form beside,
And think thou see the first world pictured,
Whose portraiture can not be uttered,
What then was not, I better can declare,
Then what that was, which was of old time theare.
World was it not, but hope of world to come,
A lump that asked six days the finishing,
A likelihood such as in mothers womb
The fruit gives first, when first it ginnes to spring, Embrye.

Which grows so long till it be lively thing:
First face, then eyes, then chin, and nostrils parting,
Then hands distinct, and fingers thereto sorting.
This petty world, thus at the length increasd,
Obtains vigor for his enterprise:
And out of prison strives to be releasd,
Getting a larger prospect for his eyes:
Yet in this mass a secret virtue lies,
Which has by nature force to form and give
A vital act, whereby the flesh may live.
That vaster heap had no selfe-quickning spright,
No natural actiuitie to grow:
And therefore had in dulnes moultred quight,
But that Gods sacred word began to flow,
And with his influence inspird it so,
That it became a vegetable brood,
And was partaker of such liuelihoode.
A darksome horror, such as Egypt felt,
With blindfold eyes, and hearts astonishment:
Blacknes, like that where the Cimmerians dwelt,
Or Sibb unto Mephitis hellish sent,
Belchd from the puddle Styx, Gods punishment:
Or if some darkness be more palpable,
Of that, and all was Chaos capable.
Confused revel and disorder reigning,
This waxing world was like to ruinate:
Had not Gods power their mutines restraining,
Dispersed it self into that rude estate,
And qualified the rage of their debate, The spirit moved upon the water.
Genes. 1.

Had not his virtue like to sodder closd
The chops and rents of matter indisposd,
Had it not bound as with a mastique glue,
The heavens, earth, air, and vagrant Ocean:
And fixed listes to keep apart that crew,
Their natures in the cradell every one
Had bin extinct with self commotion:
But Gods great puissance shed into this hord,
Asswagd the striffe: and bred a sweet accord.
As some brave wit resolved to consecrate
A work of weight unto the Muses shryne:
At home, abroad, at bed, bourd, early, late,
Rippes his discourse and ponders every line,
Hovring amongst his books of discipline:
So Gods great spright which was the only mouer, Genes. 1.2.

Upon the waters superfice did houer.
Even as the brooding bird that sits at once,
To hatch her eggs, and huckle up her young,
Till native and adoptiue eggs breed bones,
And all her flock is fledge and lively sprung:
So Gods own spirit sat, though not so long,
And far and near did spread his ripning wings
Till he had perfected these callowe things.
Out of the suds, where monsterlike they lay,
He did extract them: altering their hue:
Extending such an universal baye,
As ouerreachd this compass which we view;
And was complete with all the residue:
All was but one thing, neither markd, nor bounded:
Nothing remaind that was not there impounded.
If that Archduke from God in Horeb taught,
Had not this certain testimony yielded,
How first the universal world was wrought,
And in six days this stately frame so builded,
By that same God which all things wrought and weilded:
Leucippus might by arguments persuade, A plurality of worlds confuted.

That some great multitude of worlds were made.
Nature (no niggard of her workmanship)
If she had coinde many worlds in number,
The heavy earth would rush, the water drip,
And make one neighbor world another cumber:
So all might fall into their wonted slumber:
Or least the one the others course should hinder,
Some empty space must keep the frames asunder.
But now the engine was so firmly iointed,
So close compact without one creuise void,
With furnished complements so well appointed,
That nothing was by vacant chinks annoid.
We see, how close stopped wine cannot avoid,
Nor issue currantly from out the terse,
Except a vent to take in air we perse.
We see the puffing bellows cannot heave,
If at the nose they snuff not up the wind:
Bungd vessels cannot any frost receive,
Not closed waterpots an issue find.
Forced liquor drawn in pipes against the kind,
Does mount aloft as though it were no water,
So great a foe is emptines to nature.
God, only great, beyond all quantity, God, only infinite the world has
his limited measure of time and place.

Framed the course of nature mutable:
From change exempting his divinity,
Making time measure althings moveable:
For heavens themselves are not unmeasurable:
Time meets the circuit of the firmament,
And rules the motions with his regiment.
The world, is not immortal, though so vast,
But subject unto rauenouse decay:
The parts do languish, and the members wast:
And, like the parts, the whole must wear away:
To every thing prefixed is a day:
The day calls death, still gaping to devour:
And natures wheel is turned every hour.
Now go vain Greece, and weaue heavens curtaincloth
Of brain spun threads, such as thy quintessence: The quintessence of
Aristotle.

Fill all the world with fancies windy froth,
Painting fond fables with fair eloquence:
Dispute, according thine intelligence,
And say; the course of heaven was near begone:
Nor, ever in thy judgment shall have done.
Stand on the urgent laws of destinier
And lock up all within their hard precinct, The stoicall accessitie.

As bound to tocke of stark necessity:
Yet not the stars so slauishly are linked,
But monthly they receive a fresh instinct,
Such fables are not able to defend,
The worldly frame from ruin in the end.
The day shall come, A description of the worlds end.
when rocks rent from the quarrie,
And trembling tops of lofty hills shall rush:
When heavens shall crack, and lowly vales miscarrie,
Stuffed up with sheards, and suffering many a brush
Of huge great heaps, that cannot choose but crush:
The rubbish of the ruinated heaven,
Shall make the mountains and the valleies even.
Gape shall the channels, void of water streams,
Or having moisture, all imbrew'de with blood,
Shall hysse with heat of scorching fiery beams:
The sea shall vomit lightnings as a flood,
And blazing flame shall foam up like the sud:
The Whales half roasted on the bancke shall rore:
And gasping lie upon the new found shore.
The foggie clouds shall muffle up the day:
The cheerful Sun shall mourn in fearful mask:
And Neptunes tail shall sweep the stars away,
Both Sun and Moon shall shun their woonted task,
In fogs shall one, in blood the other baske.
The darting stars shall cleave the earth asunder,
And forth shall march fear, death, dark storms and thunder
Those marshald in their quarters, shall attend
The wrathful vengeance of their Lord approaching:
All wicked hearts shall fail to see that end,
And hear the Judge their own lewd deeds reproching,
With thousand torments on them still incroching:
Naught shall the world be but a flaming ball,
Light fire (like water once) surrounding all.
Alas, what means the misbeleeuing pen
Of sottish wizards, scribbling Almanakes;
To mark the year, the month, or season when
This fleeting world, full point and period makes:
And Saturnes port a Supersedeas takes?
As though some cross aspect of wandering stars
Should crush the world by fury of their iarres.
I tremble to relate: and thorough heart and ioints
A chill cold horror shoots: Against the baser sort of astrologers which dare
set forth their predictions of the time whem doomes day shall come.
when I do ponder
How some base figure-flingers broch these points,
Forestalling God the only worlds confounder:
To move the people to a faithles wonder.
For their conjectures taken by their theme,
Judicials and all, are but a dream.
Yet grope they at Gods sealed closset door,
And would be prying at those mysteries,
Which he has treasured up for secret store:
Keeping the dial of all destinies
Unto himself, that knows all secrecies:
That Calendar he shuts up in his hand,
Wherein Doomes-day with letters red does stand.
That day, whereof no man can read the date,
Shall swiftly strike the rowt of men secure:
And striking warn, when warning is too late:
For times delay no longer may endure.
Then comes thy Son (O Father essence pure,)
Thy glorious Son with majesty shall come, The second coming of Christ.

In shape of man, once formed in the womb.
Immortal God, that glorious Son of thine,
In flaming fire triumphant shall descend:
About whose throne shall troops of Angels shine,
And thousand thousand holy saints attend,
Ioious to see that long desired end.
His chariot wheels shall skud like lightning flame:
Justice and mercy haling on the same.
Then, such as sleep in bowels of the grave,
Oppressed with dust, or weight of marble toombes:
Such as the sea has swallowd in her cave:
Such as by fire receiud their former doomes,
Or paunch of beasts have had for burial rooms:
All shall stand up repaird with manlike shape,
No one, so great or small, that shall escape.
All must appear, appeering must attend
In their own persons, till the Judge proceed,
Awarding life or death to be their end:
Of mercy some, of justice other speed:
Too some is weal, to others woe decreed:
Some to the lowest pit shall be debased,
And others with the highest shall be graced.
O thou (whom once The Italian President
Pronouncing wicked sentence terrifide)
Grant me, Pilate.
that when thy trumpet shall be sent
To sound a sommons upon eurie side,
East, west, north, south, where any men abide:
Rowzing the world with sudden change of state,
I may have thee, my judge and Advocate.
The sage and powerful providence of Jove
Brought out this world as she bear foles her young: The creation of the
worlds matter from nothing.

A lumpish gobbet, first unapt to move,
Till it be lickt, and trickt up with the tongue:
She spares no pains, till all the lims be sproong:
She smoothes it up, with mouth, and mothers moisture,
Till she disclose the shape, hid in the cloisture.
By licking she expresses eurie lim:
She forms the head, and fashions out the feet,
Indents the paws, and makes the visage grim,
Rough casts the shag hair'd shoulders: as is meet,
In every part, she shows her self discreet:
Discreet and diligent, till she have done,
And brought her whelpe to just perfection.
For when Gods wisdom, by his pregnant voice
Powrd out a mass of heat, cold, moist and dry:
In process, he began make exacter choice,
And separate the low lie things from high:
Consorting like with like, dislike laid by:
Fire ioind with fire, things heavy found like matter:
Cold drew to cold, and liquid things to water.
The queintest form, that best beseemes each part,
Is unto each particular assignd:
And in six days God showed his matchless art,
Forming this world conformall to his mind:
Not, but he could have all these things refind,
And perfected in less than times least tittle,
Unlike to man that's long about a little.
The heavens he could have spangled with their lamps:
And storde the airie cage, with winged breed:
The forest where the sauadge Beuie rampes,
He could have furnished forth with for a need:
And filled the seas with fishes in like speed:
But yet it was his vncomptrouled pleasure; Why God would take six days for
his creation.

To work them out in six whole days at leisure.
So many days, such leisure, and such art,
Bestowd in preparation of a seat
For man unformed, seems to impart,
That doubtless his good will is woonderous great
To those, for whom he made this goodly seat:
To whom by promise, he first sealed a warrant
Of thousand favors afterward apparent.
He gave an imitable president,
That we should not, in over eager haste
Post in our toil, till breath and strength be spent:
Nor rashly ruffle up our works to waste,
But make good speed, yet hurrie not too fast,
Aduisement always brings an act to proof: Sat cito, si sat been. Fostina
lent:

And things well done are all done soon enough.
Father of wisdom, father of the light;
What first might be extracted from that trance,
Where all things lay confusde without delight
More worthy then the lights fair countenance?
Whose absence were fair beauties hinderaunce: Light the first fruit of Gods
creatures.

For without light Timanthes had in vain
To carue his antique Cyclops took such pain.
In vain Parrhasius had shapt his piece:
And Zeuxis drawn his queint Penelope:
Apelles had expressed the flower of Greece
Dame Venus, to no purpose, if so be
The Sun had not affoorded light to see:
In vain those masters artificial,
Had raisd their woonders supernatural:
Dianes temple: and that moniment
Of love and death Mausolus tomb much famed:
And Pharos beacon; works of woonderment,
By three great masters exquisitely framed:
Which Sostrat, Scopas, Ctesiphon are named:
In vain those maruailes all had been erected:
If by the light, they had not been detected.
What more has every artsman in request,
When he does frame an exquisite devise;
Then that the worlds fair eye which lights the rest,
Should also glaunce upon his work of price?
For that intent, his window open lies:
He does admit the sunne-light for a witness,
That he observes proportion, art and fitnes.
Either Gods active spirit houering,
Upon the boiling confluence of water,
Which wrapped the Chaos as a covering,
Struck out light fire by secret force of nature, diverse opinions touching
the matter and creation of the light.

As when contrary winds begun to clatter,
In Summer nights, and clap two clouds together:
From hence proceed, bright flames and lightning wether.
Or God by parts disposing of the mass,
Fetchd brightness from the fiery element:
Or heavens clear curtain that extended was,
In twice six hours upon that litterment,
Again by God was darkened: to the intent,
That each Horizon should by turns have light:
And each again an intercourse of night:
Or whether God produced a crystal lamp,
In countenance unlike unto the Sun,
And with another light cleared up the dampe,
While sometimes up and sometimes down it run,
Like Titan brandishing his station;
Let there be light (said God, Genes. 1.3.
) no sooner spoken,
But Light began to show a glorious token.
The glistring rays, acknowledging their duty,
Do shed themselves on nature, being glad,
To feel the cheering sparks of lights fair beauty:
Who skornes the shade wherewith she erst was clad,
And loathes to be, or suffer others sad.
Clear lamp, God give thee many goodly morrowes,
That chasest night, and putst to flight all sorrows.
Thou worlds great candell: and thou truths right parent,
Terror of thieves, and perfect looking glass
Of Gods good creatures, made by thee apparent:
First fruit of God bespread upon the mass;
How does thy beauty and thy grace surpass?
Gods cheerful eye: which all the world suruaies,
Why should not modest men chaunt out thy praise?
And yet because all pleasures do displease,
That have no blancke nor intercourse between: Why God ordained the night to
succeed the day.

And they best know the benefit of ease,
Which long in garboyles of the wars have been:
For contraries comparde are better seen,
The silver Swan, that shines upon Cayster,
Matchd with the swarthy crow, does much more glister.
Therefore the worlds renowned Architect
Ordaind the night to prease upon the day: The commodities of the night.

The day again, nights error to detect,
The night days eager schorches to allay:
And the air with showring vapors to array:
The night makes mellow seeds sprout in the furrows,
Surceaseth toil: and breaks off daily sorrows.
The night which couers all, with wings of pyteh,
Does hush the world, and lull it in a sleep:
Infusing silence, that no creatures quitch:
But drunk with influence of slumber deep,
Both man and beast, do lay their limbs in sleep.
The nights refresh their weary bones with ease,
And make amends for the'anguish of the days.
Sweet night, without thee, and thy welcome presence,
Life were a hell, where (fury like) sad grief,
Revenge, pain, avarice would dash all pleasance,
And thousand deaths, before deaths last repreefe,
Would torture mind and body saunce relief:
Sweet night, thou coulorst every personage
In suits alike, that plays on worldly stage.
Thou blendest states, and all distinction,
Which day light varies in a sundry guise:
Thou equallest the king and cullion,
The rich, and poor, the simple, and the wise,
The judge, and him that in dungeon lies:
Master and slave: foul maukyn and fair may:
Days candle out, the night maks all things gray.
He that for some ungracious deed, remains
A creature damnd to delue in golden mines:
And in those traps of avarice, takes pains:
He that all smokie at the furnace pines,
Whiles he the sulphur of man's heart refines:
Though all day long, his hellish toil does last:
Yet at the night, he takes his due repast.
He that along the river tugs his boat,
With pugs and oars against the stubborn tide:
And dropping ripe, does strain his rugged throat,
That voice and strength may both his litour guide;
At night unto his palate steps aside.
He that the spring proud meadows frizled hair
Does barbe with sith: at night goes to his lare.
Only you children of the bookish maids,
While all the world is ouercast with night,
Trace out a path, by your celestial trades,
Whereby into the heavens you take your flight,
And with your muse raise others to delight.
But the eu'ning chime has rong days latest hour,
The light shut in, the days begins to loure:
The night, vnbender of my head strong studdie,
Approaches near: but new supply of pains,
Appears as soon, as morning pears out ruddie:
And still more work dares on my weary brains:
For now behold in numerable trains,
And squadrons of celestial soldiers muster:
Dazzling mine eyes with their bright orient cluster.
You angels (Gods attentive purseuaunts)
Be it, you are coequall to the light, A discourse of the Angels creation,
which are thought under the name of light to have been created: without
determining upon so difficult a point.

Which drowns the name of your significance:
Or then first took your serviceable flight,
When heaven was spangled with those aglets bright:
Or, be you ancients to each other creature:
Surpassing them in essence, time and feature:
Me lists not to argue pro or con;
Or undertake with stubborn conference,
To dwell in this or that opinion:
In points uncertain obstinate defense
I do dislike, and iangling arguments:
Blind sophistry is bold and full of taunts:
But my sure card is humble ignorance.
Yet this I know, and therefore make no doubt,
You active spirits, once were all created
Immortal innocent, and fair throughout:
And with great choice of heavenly virtues fraghted,
That with no creatures else, you could be mated:
To Gods pure essence you approach the nighest:
Alone inferior unto the highest.
But as desertles wights, whom countenance
And princes favor, deigneth to exalt;
Mounted on honors back, begin to praunce,
And against their founder make unjust assault,
Till down again, they slip for their proud fault:
Even so some rout of these created spirits,
Insur'gde against their maker for his merits.
Some angels, Angels created innocent and pure keep not their first estate.
giants like, attempting far,
In malice of their founder, malcontent,
Banded themselves, and made uncivil war,
(Although in vain) yet with a lewd intent,
To dispossess him of his regiment:
Aspiring Impes, so reared up would wring,
The crown and scepter from their Lord and king.
Their Lord and king als pressed, with armed hands,
Swift to encounter such usurping mights,
Gunnes out his thunder at those fire brands:
And for revenge of such rebellious wights,
He throws them down, and makes them cursed sprights:
Down in the air, or in some other place:
For all is hell, whence God withdrawes his face.
This rakehell rout inchaunted with disdain, Evil sprights.

(Now devilish feends by lewd apostasy)
Can make no braggs of any purchasd gain,
But this: they took the longitude: how high,
The heavens be distant from hels custody:
By their ambitious iumpe, they took the measure
Of heaven from hell: but forfeited the pleasure.
Yet Satan and his rablement,
No whit amended by this overthrow;
Increase in rage, and graceles hardiment,
As fast as unto them their torments grow:
Like to the Lizards, which by many a blow
Dismembered: yet they fiercely turn again,
And show their lively rage in dying pain.
Since which revolt, this prince usurping power,
Amidst the air, has made nor truce nor peace
With mighty Jove: but studies every hour,
How he may cause the memory to cease
Of Gods great acts deserving only praise:
Pressed to supplant the Church of Gods own planting:
And glad to see Gods glory should be wanting.
He bends his force, to taint the perfect head,
And rend it from the body militant:
The kingly guide from city to mislead, The devils assaults against Christ the
head and men the members.

And plant himself therein predominant:
The pilote of the ship he strives to daunt:
For from the Church, (Christ's body) would he wring,
Even Christ that head, that pilote, and that king.
But since Gods everlasting majesty
Is safely seated, in his lofty throne:
Which, neither force, nor threats can terrify,
Nor ladder scale, nor canon play upon:
But all their blasts, themselves are ouerblowne:
For howsoever buzie satan tampares:
His darts rebounde against Gods heavenly rampares.
Therefore despairing to surprise the head
Against the members, now he turns his darts:
He leaves the tree, but would the branches shred:
For neither huntsman has so many arts;
Nor fisher plays so many cunning parts;
Nor fouler lays so many crafty gins,
To catch their seu'rall games: as he lays sins.
As he lays sins, and baiteth secret hooks,
To catch as well the simple as the wise:
The frolike yonker rouing in his looks,
He charms with shows: alluring first his eyes:
For greedy pikes he baits with golden flies:
And princely state he takes as an angle,
The high aspiring climber to entangle.
Such as disdain the worldly blase of riches,
With hundred vain conceits he does distract:
In mask of truth minds zealouse he bewitches,
Obtruding shows, and words for virtues act:
In all good matters is his poison packt:
And like a canker goodly fruits and wholesome,
He blasts with venime, making al things foulsome.
Who could withstand the glosing fallacies,
Of this night prince in malice so profound,
That he can slip into dumb images
Of gold, or wood, late hewn from the ground:
And make them yield some lively speech-like sound:
Which can assume a prophets countenance:
Cause bonefires burn with hidden maintenance. The continual fire of vesta.

The virgin prophetisse of Cumes or Delph, Oracles Sibilla.

He prompted with their answer of foresight:
He raisde a Samuel, shaped like himself, 1 Samuel 28.14.

Which told the king of doomes that happened right:
And yet not Samuel, but a cursed spright.
He struck Jove Ammons priest with fits of woodnes:
Suggesting hurtful lies, in show of goodness.
Who can descrie this great deceivers guile? False miracles.

Which could transmute a rod into a snake? Exodus 7.12.

Which did convert the watrie poole of Nile, Ca. 7.22.

To pulpe blood? which for a shift could make,
Great swarms of frogs produc'de from every lake, Ca. 3.7.

To crawle about the chambers of the king:
All by his forged Magike practicing.
And, as he is a spright invisible,
So can he sincke the thoughts of mighty states:
And grope their minds, though he insensible, The devils knowledge is by
experience.

Till he acquaint himself with their debates,
And private grudges: whence observing dates,
With long experiments, he takes a veiw:
For tatling thence what matters shall ensue.
The brauest wits, with some fantastike glimse,
Of things to come, he can intoxicate:
And to inueigle high conceipted impes,
Of afterclaps he can prognosticate:
We see men provident, whose weak estate,
No sooner stands, but falls: which live and die
The selfsame stound, yet what great things they try;
Men's bodies be but sluggish instruments,
Not like to sprights in active motions:
Yet they by force of metals, and of plants,
Produce a thousand strange conclusions;
As ishuing from some heavenly motions:
And shall we think, that such old soking sprights,
Cannot work woonders far above their mights?
The rather for their immortality,
Plodding in school of long experience:
They can discover every quality
Of hidden simples, and ingredients:
For bodies they have none to clog the sense:
But whatsoever enterprise intended;
Within a moment they can have it ended.
Not that they have the bridle on their necks,
Always to rush, The devil bridled of God.
and revel where they lust:
Or making havoc on the earth play reaques:
And tyrannize, with danger and distrust,
On lewd men's souls, and bodies of the just:
But they are musled, with a greater force:
At whose command they take, or stay the course.
Not without leave, that master spright of liars,
Could play the messenger to Achabs court: 2. King. 22.35.

And by false tales, intise him to the briars,
And make him dare his foe, from out his fort:
Till his own godles soul returned short.
Nor yet without a passe-port to him granted,
Could humble Job, Job. 1.15.
with such assaults be haunted:
His varlets slain, his riches all destroide,
His flocks consumde, his camels made a pray:
His kindred sit aloof, as men annoide
With such a poor base kinsman in their way:
His house turned topsie turuie to decaie:
This was not done but by commission:
The devil making first petition.
Eternal Jove to prove the confidence
Of constant men, that faith might grow by trial:
And choke with errors the erroneous sense,
That in true matters there be no espiall:
To lying sprights he makes not denial,
But lets them slip, which do not cease to further
The lewd attempts commenced in Adams murder.
Still they pursue, and practice wonted feats:
The self same anuill they do hammer still,
And forge new sleights, like to their old deceits:
But yet sometimes, do good against their will.
And though the rout apostate seek to kill,
Yet sometime they vnawres, in midst of blood,
Have made fierce tirants confort with the good.
The hurtles host, Gods everlasting train,
Which kept their first estate, saunce hautie pride: Good angels.

Not mounting up, nor tumbling down again,
Attend Gods pleasure, starting not aside,
But tread the paths, prefixed by their guide:
This is their only delectation:
Gods glory, and the saints salvation.
No strange desire assailes their fantasy:
The pleasant aspect of almighty God
Is better then the sweetest Ambrosie:
The retriue of a lamb, that long has trod
In wailes desert, looslie straide abroad:
The child once lost, reduc'de to penitence:
Delights them as Nectars influence.
Naught else requires the high aspiring mind,
But kingdom unto kingdom to unite;
And Diadem with Diadem to bind,
That all the world might stoop to one man's might:
But heavenly angels have no such delight,
No such desire of greater excellence
But in Gods service spend their diligence.
No sooner sounds the voice of Gods command:
No sooner does a beck of majesty proceed:
No sooner comes a matter to be scand,
Wherein these angels serve in any steed,
But out they fly with more than winged speed:
Bending themselves to execute the word,
And to effect the mandate of their Lord.
One of them follows Agar in her flight,
And shortning her exiled pilgrimage, Gones. 21.17.

By speech does yield unlooked for delight:
Another does conduct with aequipage, Exodus 23.23. cap. 33.2.

The marching armies of Gods heritage:
Others direct young Jacob to the East,
And yield him courage in his first nights rest.
Another skilde in Physics lore applies
A sovereign plaster for decayed sight, Tob. 11.7.

Even such as unto faithful Tobiths eyes
Restord again the long desired light.
To Nazareth one takes his nimble flight,
And therefore truth to Marie does pronounce, Lue. 1.26.

She should be Maid and Mother all at once:
She should conceive, and bear but only one:
Yet at one burden should she bring forth these,
A Father, Husband, Brother, and a Son,
That by this birth men troubled might find ease:
When as the offspring, whom it so did please
To be inclosde within her virgins womb,
Might not be cowpd within a world of roeme.
Another sort in fervent zeal attend,
With hand, and foot to guarde the tempted son:
And Satan's conflict brought unto an end, Matthew. 4.11.

They minister him comfort that had won,
And help to triumph when the combats done:
In fruitles sand, and stony wilderness,
They do not leave Christ comfortles.
One cheares him up to take the bitter chalice,
And drink that off which God had tempered, Lue. 22.43.

To wash from sin, and wring from Satan's malice
The souls of men by Satan blemished:
Another brings glad tidings of the dead, Math. 28.2.5.

And shows the Matrones of their Christ's arising,
Which was reputed dead, by their surmising.
One far beyond all expectation
Brings tidings of John's strange nativity: Luke 1.13.

Another puts in execution
The tenor of Gods purpose faithfully,
Advancing Isreal's herd to dignity. Exodus 3.2.

One makes a fearful slaughter and a sad,
On all the first borne males that Egypt had. Exodus 12.29.

Exempted only from the massaker,
All such as had their door posts painted red,
With blood of lamb slain for the passover:
Another in a moment vanquished
The host of Rabsache, 2. Kings. 19.35.
who thundered
Blasphemous words, and terms of highest slander,
Boasting his gods, against the heavens commander.
His soldiers had subdude the Easterlings:
And now begirt that city, which alone
Adores the only peerlesse king of kings:
Without the walls scarce could a bird have flowne,
For troops beleagaring the garrison.
Which Ezechias viewing, as a prince most wise,
Foresees the event, as present to his eyes.
Foresees the common havoc round about:
His subjects taken captive, cast in bands,
Their tender children squatted in the rout:
Their noble virgins forc'de with bloody hands,
Deslowr'de with rauishment, and rough commands:
His kingly person eide with thousand threats,
Already hackt and hewd in their conceats.
Foresees the naked temple stripped of wall,
The sacred Censors not with mirrhe perfumde,
The Altar bare, no sacrifice at all,
But priests of God, and priesthood both consumde:
Waighing these things, and how his foe still fumde,
He sprinkled ashes, and with penitence,
He cride to God in sackcloth, for defense.
God hears his cry, and whets his lightning darts,
To strike the squadrons of that heathnish rout:
And while dead sleep benums their senseless hearts:
(Their bodies, hemming in the fires about)
He does address and send a champion out:
Hunting the frustrate legar without pity,
And casting friendly looks upon the city.
Charged is the field, a scowre flies out the dart,
Whose single flight is not content to make
A single slaughter: but through cu'rie part
It cuts a lane, and thickest troops does take:
Embrewd in blood, and like a lightning flake,
The sword does brandish, lighting here and there,
As does a whirlewind whiske about the air.
They fly in chase, but too too slow they drag,
To escape the reach of such a ramping blade:
The glittring steel is only seen to wag,
By which, such havoc in one night is made:
Like as the windmill sails with sowpe unstaid,
Do swindge about, yet no man sees the wind,
By whose impulsive force, the sails do grind.
No sooner had the purple morning chac'de
The donker shade, from haughty Liban's top,
But th'Ebrew garders in their sconses plac'de,
Behold whole heaps of men slain at a chop,
(An hundred, four score, and five thousand) stop
And pester all their wonted passages:
As erst with men, so now with carcases.
The Jews rear solemn triumph to the sky,
Insulting on the quailed conqueror:
Ascribing honor for this victory,
Alone unto the worlds chief governor,
Which gave these brauing troops the ouerture.
But you O sacred tutors of the saints, Epilog with a conversion to the Angels.

Swift archers helping when our army faints.
You that in counsel are as delegates,
And posts in needful expedition:
Heralds in sounding out to all estates
The sum of Gods decreed commission:
You that do fear the countenance of none:
Were men like rocks, or sturdie like to giants,
You dare presume to give them all defiance.
Faithful interpreters from God to men:
Feign would I still attend upon your trace,
With laggring pinions of my feeble pen,
But that I journey to a further place,
And therefore doubt, least in so long a race,
Hasting too much, the first outsetting day,
My rash attempt might faulter by the way.
For he that entertaines a brave desire,
(Which well beseemes a worthy Caualeer)
To view strange men, strange manners and attire,
In foreign countries as a traveler,
It boots him not to be swift passenger:
He speedes it well if in his first days rode,
He leaves the place and coast of his abode.
FINIS.

