a female personification of prudence holding a bird in one hand and three
entwined snakes in the other, with another bird on her shoulder PRVDENCE The
first of the Four Cardinal Virtues.

Written by Sr. Miles Sandis Knight.

Printed for W: Sheares, in Britains Burse

W.M. scu:



GYNDANES TO ABAVCVS; That is, MILES SANDYS Presents his best Love, Respect,
Service, or what you will in this Sense, to Henry Sandys.
My Alter Ego,
IF it may stand with Truth, that the Emperor Vespasian, for every day
through the year, made some good Law for the Commonwealth, excepting two
days in the month of February, in which he was led away by the
sensuality of pleasures from the Public good; (the remembrance of which
neglect, caused the industrious Prince to abridge the Month of two days:) Or
that Tostatus (for which Story fames him) did, from the day of his Birth, to
the day of his Death, pen a sheet of Paper for every day, through his life at
least; meaning, That wherein his Youth had been defective, his Age had made it
good; And, that the fruits of his riper years had supplied the slips of his
Minority. If either of these Instances will carry truth, then, questionless,
I am not to be blamed for that small space of late, wherein I have been wholly
addicted to Study, and Reading: And amongst my busied thoughts, have made
choice of Apelles Poesy, Nulla dies sine linea; which cannot be taxed,
unless it be by those, who will say, there was Nulla linea sine die. What to
write of, I made my Books my Counselors: for they were ever so open hearted
to me, that they would acquaint me with others, and inform me of mine own
Faults without Flattery. They told me, Divinity was too deep for my Capacity,
Geographie too laborious, History so various, and so full fraught with
uncertainties, that once begun, never at an end. And so ab Art ad Artem, a
Scientia ad Scientiam, etc. At last, in this time of scarcity, they advised
me to write De Moribus. And herein I conceived, the Four Cardinal Virtues
were most necessary, since they are the Heads of Moral Philosophy. But,
because the name of Philosophy seems odious to ignorant ears, I think it
not amiss to instruct their Simplicity, in telling them in the words of Saint
Augustine, If Philosophers have spoken that which is true, we ought not only
to believe it, but retain it as our own.

There is a Divine, a Natural, and a Moral Philosophy.

The Theological Philosophy is that Knowledge, or Rudiment of Knowledge
concerning God, which may be obtained by the Contemplation of his Creatures,
which Knowledge may be truly termed Divine in respect of the Object. As for
the Natural, I will leave it, for the most part, to the Naturalists. And for
the Moral; If it please you to observe it in its Sapientiall part. Read quod
sequitur, I doubt not to give some satisfaction herein, since all Professions
are from Philosophy served and supplied.

That I have intermingled my Discourse, I want not Authority for it: Plato
mixed Philosophy with Theology: Aristotle with Logic: Proclus with the
Mathematickes. Read Saint Augustine, Bernard, Gregory, I dare say, almost all
the Fathers have linked Morality with Divinity. Nay go to the sacred Text, and
you shall find golden Philosophy inserted in holy Writ: I have heard it
delivered in the Pulpit by a reverend Penman, That Solomon reduced his three
Divine Tracts to the order of Philosophy: As if in his Proverbs he had tutored
his Son with Morality; In his Ecclesiastes, by a Didacticall Discourse, he
had read a Natural Philosophy Lecture; And in his Diviner Canticles, had
framed a speculative supernatural Dialogue: Nor was his Reason to be
disallowed of, since it did proceed from that learned Expositor, Hugo de Sancto
Victore.

Now first, if it should be asked wherefore I write, since I have begun to
build my House, before my stones are gathered; like an ill Cook, serving up my
Dishes before they be seasoned. I answer, that the Activest part of Man is his
Mind; I thought it not fit, that it should be eaten away with the Rust of
Idleness; Idleness being the Grave of Living Man, a thing wherein life dies;
the use of Books being to increase Knowledge, and to bring forth the Dead
speaking with the Living The Dew of Heaven loses it self in the Earth,
unless it be collected into some Receptacle: So learning, and Knowledge soon
perish, and vanish into Oblivion, if they be not preserved in Books. Secondly,
why I quote my Authors, it being thought by some Pedanticall. I answer, I would
not be beholding to so many Creditors, without giving them some note under my
hand. And if mistaken Critics will but look back, and search Antiquity, they
may find that in those flourishing years in the nonage of Nero, the
Commonwealth was never better governed, then it was by Seneca a Pedant: So was
it in the minority of Gordianus by Mesellinus: Nay go to the Bishops of Rome,
you may find Pius Quintus, and Sixtus Quintus, were both Pedanticall Friars,
and never better government then in their times. I have endeavored to hit the
Truth, thereby to muzzle the Mouth of Contradiction: For as I would not please
any in their faults, so I would not be faulty to please any. Lastly, why I
direct this Virtue to you; It is not because I think you want it, but, by
reason of your familiarity with it, I supposed you to be a fitter Judge of it.
True it is, the vanity of most Writers has been to throw their wit in Ink,
as Mad men do stones in the Air, not caring whom they hit; Being free of the
Witbrokers, uttering none but stolen Wares, without Acknowledgment; making
their Brains Quivers of Jests, traveling in their studies till they are
delivered of the Air. What I have done, I think I may avouch, since I was so
thrifty, as not to purchase papers, lest I should be forced to pay more for the
Silence, then for the Work.

In that I write not Great words, nor High-borne Language, it is, because I
have seldom found a Verbalist a Materialist; great Words being commonly
attended on by little Judgments. To please all men in one thing is impossible;
For the same cause, that made Democritus laugh, made Heraclitus weep. The
skilfullest Fisherman, that ever was, could never please all Fish with one
bait; Nor the solidest Writer all men with one Book. The general Fancy of
the World being like Plutarchs Moon, who desired her Tailor to make her a
Peticote, but before the Tailor had brought it home, the Moon was in another
Quarter.

Now are there not some detracting Momusses, who (like the Booke-worme) live
only to destroy Learning, lending long ears against them they love not? And
perhaps supposing me to be like a Statue in the Highway, directing others,
but not following one step my self: Or like Noah's Carpenter, building an Arc
to save others, yet cannot help my self, taxing me as Diogenes did
Musitions, saying, They could skilfully tune, and order the strings of their
Instruments; but the affections of their Mind were disordered, and quite out
of tune. I am apt to believe this and more: For what Flower has entered into
the hive of their hearts, which they have not converted into poison? Nor is
this any wonder, Truth had ever but ill-favored Attendants; Veritas odium
parit. Go on then; dart your quills of Censure, with the Porcupine, at him,
that touches you not. I must rest satisfied, since it is not in my power to
tie loose Tongues; yet I wish, That all Malicious power may loose its sting:
That Envy may fly men's Souls, That it be blind. Yet I shall neither fear,
nor care. Only I will say to them that use it, as Damodoclus said to the
Milesians, That they were no Fools, yet they did the same things, that Fools
did.

As for you, unto whom I Dedicate it, if my pains should be so fortunate, as
to bring forth such issues, as may imprint the least Consolation in your heart,
then, perhaps, I will go on with the three latter Cardinals; knowing, that my
Pen is but as a Cipher in Arithmeticke, which, without the Figure of your
Approbation, adds nothing. If not, that Pen, that wrote this, shall ever be
confined to a Standish. If it please you, I am pleased. Howsoever, I have given
Satisfaction to one, that herein approoves that Martial Resolution: Haec, si
displicui, fuerint solatia nobis:
Haec fuerint nobis praemia, si placui.


CHRON.

PIUS JESUS

HENRICVM SANDYS

AB HOSTIBVS

TVEATVR.

MDCVVVVVVIIII.

1634.

Miles Sandys.

TO MY HONORED TVTOR Doctor Astley Warden of All Souls College in Oxford.
SIR,
IT is not unknown to scholars, and among them approvedly received for Truth;
That Children are more obliged for Education, then for Birth; the one giving
the bare Being, the other the well-Being. The first J had by Nature: As for the
other, In those Annis pube scentibus, when J was under your Protection, you
advised, and set me forward with that care, which might have made me enjoyed it
by Art, had I been so diligent a Scholar, as to have followed your highly to
be commended Instructions. What I have now wrote, you know, is all in
Generals, which none should take exceptions at. Yet lest surmising Judgments
should endeavor to rivet Generals into the narrow and forced compass of
Particulars, J have purposely for borne diverse notes of consequence. Yet
whether in those now urged, or in the other suppressed, J vow and protest the
syncerity of my intent, that J never meant to make any particular person the
subject of them, to whom, either by the laws of God or Nature, I stand bound
either in duty or service: though false murmures have traduced me so far, I
call my Judge in heaven to the witness of what my Pen sets forth, that it was
(without any oblique glancing toward the^) but a bare innocent Essay of my
weak endeavors, and a testimony, that you sent me not from ^he University
so illiterate, as not to speak (though but imperfectly) my Mother tongue. Nay
let ignominy light on me, and mine ad perpetuum, if I deliver not the naked
Truth of my harmless Intention. And further satisfaction then this, if I
would, I could not give. And as for others, if there be any so simple, as to
demand it, they shall have no other then this. That I slight their thoughts
more, then they can, or dare my words. Yet let them know, that, if J had been
bent to have wrote Spleen, I would have penned it with such Characters of
blood, as should have caused another Deluge to have washed them out,

Nor should my prudence have presented her self to a public view without her
Associats, had not the usurped liberty of some endeavored to have wronged me
in her, her in me; Traducing the Author, because they have little
acquaintance with the Subject.

True it is, where injuries are done, Men's thoughts are commonly of ill
digestion: the nature of wrong being not of an easy concoction. Yet none
should wound Reputation, nor set too high price on weakness. Detractors
venomous speeches are as Figures drawn in water, whose malicious words not
prevailing are but like the Fools bolts shot upright, which in the fall in
danger their own heads. For such Malefactors, J conceive, neglect is the best
revenge, it being greater glory to avoid Injuries by Silence, then to overcome
them by Replying. And here J will make choice of Plato's answer (if need
require it) who receiving opprobrious words from his Enemies, being desired, he
should not return the like injury, answered, He had not so much idle time,
as to remember them.

But concerning your self, for your pains and care for my instruction, tam
moribus, quam doctrina, J must give thanks. Thanks J render as freely from my
Heart as can be expressed by Tongue or Pen.

May then the content of your mind enjoy what it most desires, or deserves.
May you live till time shall sicken with your age, And when Death comes, May
you possess the hope of your well spent life in Heaven. Such is the Prayer of
your quondam Pupil, and ever servant,

Miles Sandys.

To the Reader.
REader, I here send forth Prudence to your view; if you be wise, you may
embrace it, Jf not, you may let it alone. If you commend it, I am not therewith
puffed up: If you dispraise it, I am not therewith dejected. An Essay it is of
some few stolen hours, that might have been otherwise lost, or worse spent:
And if distasteful Critickes shall mis-interpret the innocence of my harmless
meaning, I shall but reply, and play with their sporting Censures, as does Ben
Johnson in his Play-workes.

Their Praise or Dispraise is to me alike,
The One does not stroke me, nor the other strike.
M. S.

Imprimatur.

Tho: Weeks R: P: D. Episcopo Land: Cap: Domest.

AN INTRODVCTION to the four Cardinal VIRTVES.
CAP. I.
I Am to write like to the report of a superficial Traveller, who, passing
through the confines of ignote Countries, registers only the continents. I in
like manner, being but superficially read, and presenting that which slight
knowledge cannot exactly perform, like to such a Traveller must record by
view, by reading, and something by report; report of Centaurs and Gorgons I
list not, I have seen no new found Land, nor read of Magellanick Earth, I
speak of no such Parts. Parts hominum mihi sunt, my Treatise shall be
reasonable and confined only to the faculties of reasonable man, such as
inchoats his happiness in this world, and consummates his bliss hereafter.
Virtutes sunt, and those Cardinal; Cardinal if Peraldus mistake not for four
Causes. Peral.
Primo propter stabilitatem, ut Cardo stabilis manet licet ostium in eo
vertatur: sic hae quatuor virtutes stabiles sunt, licet ea circa quae versantur
sint instabilia. Secundo quia sicut ostium Cardini innititur: Sic tota
conversatio bona his quatuor virtutibus innititur. Tertio propter
praeeminentiam primae sunt respectu aliarum. Quarto propter principalitatem:
caeterae enim virtutes ad has aliquo modo reducuntur. First, for the stability,
for as the hinge of a door remains firm and unmovable, although the door
be turned thereon: So these four Virtues are firm and unmovable, although
those things about which they are conversant, are moveable, uncertain and
instable. Secondly, because as the door hangs on the hinge, so all good
conversation depends on these four Virtues. Thirdly, for their Praeeminence,
these being the first in respect of other Virtues. Fourthly, for their
Principality: for other virtues some way or other are reducible unto these. D.
Hier. D. Ambr.
Dicuntur hae quatuor virtutes Cardinales ab Hieronymo and Ambrosio, propterea
quod ut fores Cardinibus, Sic illis omnis moralis vitae honestas, and sanctitas
fulciatur. Saint Ambrose and Saint Hierome called these four Virtues
Cardinal, because that as gates are supported by hinges, so is the honesty
and sanctity of all moral life by these Cardinal virtues.

But here the opinion of Menedemus, Ariston, and others, who abolishing all
plurality and difference of Virtues, suppose there is but one only Virtue,
which is Prudence, and the same is known by diverse names. For, consider we
what ought to be done, or not done, then it carries the name Prudence.
Consider we what is due in co^merce, it has the name of Justice. What in
suffering, then Fortitude; and when we govern our lusts and affections, then
we call it Temperance. For as fire, though it work upon diverse subjects, yet
it is one and the self same fire; or as a knife, though it cut now one thing,
now another, alters not it is property: no more does a good man, being tanquam
ipsa virtus, though he be conversant in diverse matters, and sundry affairs.
True it is, no one Virtue can be without another. D. Ambr.
Saint Ambrose says, when they are perfect, then are they joined, but
disjoyntly, no way can they be perfect. Because Prudence cannot be true, which
is not just, valiant and temperate; nor Temperance perfect, which is not
prudent, valiant and just; According to that of Saint Gregory, D. Greg.
Istae virtutes ita in quadro sunt, ut una aliam non excedat, magna quippe est
Prudentia, sed, si minus est a voluptatibus temperans, minus in periculis
fortis, minus in operationibus justa, profecto minus est Prudens. Magna est
Temperantia, sed, si minus intelligit unde se temperat, si adversa sustinere
per fortitudinem minus valet, atque in timore animum deijcit, si per
praeceptionem suam aliquando ad injustitiae opera prorumpit, minus est
temperans. Magna est Fortitudo sed si minus intelligit, quae bona custodiat,
quibus malis resistat, si minus a voluptatis appetitu se temperat, Sed vincitur
delectatione; si Iustitiae opera minus tenet, atque aliquando ad injustitiae
opera dominatione superatur, minus est fortis. Magna est justitia, sed si minus
quam debet, inter justa and injusta opera discernit, si minus cor a mundi
delectatione temperat, si minus se contra adversa confortat, minus est justa.
Mensuretur ergo perfectorum fidelium vita per quadrum, and tantum habeat
spiritualis atrij latus unum, quantum latera singula, quia unusquisque tantum
prudens est, quantum temperans; and justus tantum, quantum prudens, temperans
and fortis fuerit. And to this purpose says Saint Bernard.

But if I have run too long in Saint Gregory's Quadrature, his Elegance
invited me to it, nor will I make him to speak English, lest I should
prejudice his better Dialect. The whole scope of what I have urged from him, is
to show, Concentum and harmoniam, the harmonious concent and agreement of those
virtues among themselves, and the mutual dependencie of each one upon the
other, by way of union and communion, till they all (as it were) conspire and
meet in one and the same unity, which unity Aristotle conceiteth, Arist.
when he says Prudence alone, and by it self is no way perfect, according
to that saying, He that is prudent, is constant, and he that is constant, is
without molestation, and he that is without molestation, is without sorrow, he
that is without sorrow is blessed; therefore a Prudent man is a blessed man,
and Prudence is sufficient for a blessed life. These virtues are so conjoined
together among themselves, with a certain mutual copulation, as the members
of our body, and so agree in amiable concord as musical harmony, that I may
say, this is that manifold order of rings, which Plato writes to be drawn out
of the Loadstone, Plato.
and hence it may be, that they are termed, Matres virtutum, connexae sunt
sibi virtutes and coordinatae, ita ut, qui unam habet, habeat omnes. Prima
ratio est largitas Dei dantis: quia non dat unam sine alia. Secunda ratio est:
quia sicut unum membrum indiget alio, sic est in virtutibus. Tertia ratio est,
quia sicut in Cithara, si defuerit una chorda, non erit harmonia perfecta: ita
nec in anima erit spiritualis melodia, nisi adsint omnes virtutes. Quarta ratio
est, quia contra singula vitia sunt aliquae virtutes, unde oportet omnes
virtutes habere, ut omnia vitia impugnentur: nam sicut miles mundi non est
expeditus, nisi omnia sua arma habeat: ita nec Miles Christi, si aliqua virtus
sibi defuerit. Quinta ratio est, quia sicut Stellae and Planetae semper sunt in
sphaeris suis: ita virtutes in anima esse debeant. Sexta ratio est, quia anima
est sicut vas auri solidum, ornatum lapide precioso, id est virtutibus. Septima
ratio est, quia anima est sicut hortus nobilis, cui non deest decor alicujus
floris, vel arboris. Octava, quia anima est sicut Apotheca, cui deesse non
debet alicujus radicis vel pigmenti Medicina. These virtues are so knit
together by connection and coordination among themselves, that whosoever has
one, has all, says Johannes de Combis, Ioh. d. Comb.
and adds the eight following reasons, or at least, Illustrations for the
same. The first reason is, The bounty of God the giver, because he does not
give the one without the other. The second reason is, because as in the state
of the Body, one member needs another: so is it in the dependencie of
Virtues. The third reason is, because as in a Harp, if one string be wanting,
there will not be a perfect harmony: so neither will there be a Spiritual
melody in the soul, unless all Virtues are present. The fourth reason is,
because against several vices, there are several Virtues: wherefore it
behooveth to have all Virtues, that they may resist all vices: for as the
Soldier of the world is not skillful unless he have all his weapons: so
neither the Soldier of Christ, if he want any Virtue. The fifth reason is,
because as Stars and Planets ever are in their Sphaeres; so virtues ought to
be in the soul. The sixth reason is, because the soul is (as it were) a sound
vessel of gold, beautified with precious stones, that is, with Virtues. The
seventh reason is, because the soul is (as it were) a fruitful Garden,
wherein the comeliness of any tree or flower ought not to be absent. Eighthly,
because the soul is, as it were, an Apothecaries shop, where there ought no
herb or roots fit for medicine to be deficient.

Now that there are but four Cardinal Virtues, Tullie has done me the office
to prove it; Tullie.
because Honesty (says he) stands upon four parts; One of Knowledge,
another of Community, the third of Magnanimity, the fourth of Moderation.
Knowledge belongs to Prudence, Community to Justice, Magnanimity to Fortitude,
Moderation to Temperance. These four according to Beda, Beda.
seem to be against Ignorance, Malice, Infirmity, and Concupiscence. There
are four Cardinal Virtues (says Thomas Aquinas) whereof Prudence belongs to
Reason, Tho. Aquin.
Justice to Will, Temperance to Appetite, and Fortitude to Anger; and each has
his reference, peculiari quadam ratione, after a certain peculiar manner; thus
he argues: Every moral Virtue either belongs to Reason, or to Appetite; if
unto Reason, it is Prudence; if unto Appetite, it does either incline to an
others, or to our own good; if to an others, it is Justice; if to our own, it
appears either in brideling our Concupiscence, which is Tempera^ce, or our
Anger, which is Fortitude. To this purpose Saint Augustine, D. Aug. D. Greg. D.
Ambr.
Gregory and Ambrose: Quatuor Paradisi fluminibus totam terram intersecantibus
comparant has quatuor virtutes, quae uberrimis fluentis honestarum rerum vitam
nostram irrigant. If this suffice not, five arrows may be drawn out of the
quiver of holy Writ; the first, from the four Rivers of Paradise: The four
Rivers water Paradise; so by these four Virtues the heart is watered, till it
be made fruitful, and is also tempered from the heat of carnal desires. The
second, from the four colors, with which the hangings of the Tabernacle were
graced, which signify these four Virtues, in which the ornament of the Church
consists. The Hyacinthian belongs to Prudence, being of an a riall or
celestial color, whereby we imitate God and Angels. The Flaxie, having
whiteness, appertains to Temperance, because it makes Candidam and mundam
animam. The Purple, to Fortitude, which is prepared Sanguinem pro Christo
fundere. The Scarlet, to Justice, propter zelum ipsius. The third, from the
four ingredients wherewith the Ointment was made, which anointed the
Tabernacle, the Vessels and Ministers thereof. The Myrrh belongs to Prudence,
the Cinnamon to Humility, which is altogether Justice, according to that in
Matthew. For thus it becomes all righteousness, that is, perfect Humility.
Cassia, which grows in waters, to Prudence, which is nourished in the waters
of knowledge. Calamus, that odoriferous tree, to Fortitude. These four (the
Oil of divine love being added) make that most sweet smelling savor of a good
name, according to that of Ecclesiastes, A good name is better than precious
ointment. The fourth from Elias his Chariot, the four Virtues being (as it
were) the four wheels in that fiery Chariot, by which the friends of God are
taken up on high. The fifth, from the figures of Ezekiels four Creatures, the
Eagle, the Calfe, the Lion, the Man. In the Eagle is figured Prudence, whose
property it is, to watch in discerning things: In the Calfe temperance, the
Calfe being ordained for Holy Sacrifice in the Law; in the Lion Fortitude, and
in the man Justice, which is the bond of humane society. Bellarm.
Nor is Cardinal Bellarmines musical comparison altogether untuneable, who,
writing on the ninety eighth Psalm, applies the four Instruments therein
mentioned, to the four Cardinal Virtues. For says he, Cithara Prudentiae
similis est, psalterium Iustitiae, tuba ductilis Fortitudini, tuba cornea
Temperantiae. Cithara variarum chordarum sonos miscens, unum dulcem concentum
efficit: Sic Prudentia, varias circumstantias operis boni conjungens, perfectum
opus reddit. Psalterium december chordis instructum decalogum nobis representat,
id est, omnia praecepta Iustitiae. Tuba ductilis malleorum ictibus extenditur,
and formatur, ut sonum suavissimum edat; Sic Fortitudo, tribulationes, and
angustias patienter ferendo, ita extendit and perficit hominem dei, ut suavem
sonum edat: Denique Temperantia quasi durum cornu carnem mollem excedens, and
superans, id est, Corpus castigans jejunijs, atque vigilijs, and in servitutem
Spiritus redigens, tubam Spiritualem efficit. He apples the Harp to Prudence,
the Psalterie to Justice, the Trumpet to Fortitude, the Cornet to Temperance.
For as the Harp sending out the sound of diverse strings, makes one melodious
concent; So Prudence joining together diverse circumstances of well-doing, makes
up the perfection of good works. The Psalterie adorned with ten strings,
represents the ten Commandments, that is, all the precepts of Divine and
Moral Justice. The Trumpet, as it is extended forth, and fashioned by the
strokes of the hammer, that it might give a sweet sound, so Fortitude bearing
patiently tribulations, and troubles enlarges and perfects the man of God in
such manner, that he utters a perfect sound to all hearers. Finally, as the
Cornet is made of hard horn, that grows forth, and overtops the flesh; so
Temperance, as if it were of a hornish composure, is too hard for the flesh, by
keeping under the body with fastings and watchings, till it bring it in
obedience, and make a spiritual harmony between the flesh and the spirit.
Neither will I forget that luckie observation of Prosper, Prosp.
who writing of the four Cardinal Virtues, has it thus: Principales quatuor
esse virtutes, non solum Philosophi sentiunt sed etiam nostri consentiunt,
siquidem totus orbis Orient, and Occidente, Aquilone, and Merid^e. Et ipse
Adam vel generale nomen, quod dicitur homo, quatuor in literis: Corpus quoque
quatuor elementis, and anima ipsius quatuor affectionibus explicatur; ideo
virtutes istas, quae tantam perfectionem in numero habent, solicit
considerare debemus, quia nihil perfectionis uspiam sit, quod in istis
virtutibus non sit. That there are four principal Virtues is the consent, not
only of Philosophers, but of us Divines also (which the Father manifests
thus:) The whole world is expressed within the circumference of East, West,
North, and South. And Adam himself, as also his general name, which is Homo,
is expressed in four letters. His body likewise by four Elements, and his
soul by four Affections. Therefore we ought diligently to consider of these
Virtues, which have in number so great perfection, because indeed no perfection
is any where to be found, which is not found in these Virtues. Now to quarter
out the Quaternion with Saint Bernard, D Bern. Hugo de S. Victore.
and Hugo de sancto victore; Iustitia quaerit, Prudentia invenit, Fortitudo
vindicat, and Temperantia possidet. Prudentia docet and informat, Iustitia
ornat, and consummat, Fortitudo retinet and roborat, Te^perantia moderatur and
discernit. Prudence instructs, Justice beautifies, Fortitude strengthens,
Temperance moderates. Prudence in elegendis, Justice in distribuendis,
Temperance in utendis, Fortitude in tolerandis. And this is that fourfold
link, that chaineth man to eternity. The last invites me on the left hand, Non
succumbere in adversis, the third on the right hand, Non elevari in Prosperis:
the second, a Posteriori, to satisfy de Praeteritis, and now my ensuing
Prudence gives me a Caveat defuturis.

Though it is held preposterous in the Schools, to divide before we define,
yet let us know from whom, to whom, and then to my Definition, What this Virtue
is, Chrysip.
because as Chrysippus tells me, each has a peculiar quality, and therefore
needs a several Definition.

The Original of all virtue, whence it springs. CHAP. II.
FOr the a Quo, whence Virtue is derived, Deum esse multis modis ostenditur,
hoc enim fides recta testatur, sacra scriptura loquitur, comparatio rerum ad
ipsum idipsum indicat, sancti praedicant, creaturae clamant, ratio naturalis
dictat. And if all these proofs were silent, yet the heathens would confess a
Divinity in its Original, Plat.
Totius rerum natura, origo and causa deus est; God is the cause and beginning
of all things, says Plato, the Philosophical Divine. Socrates, Soc.
no less a Divine Philosopher, held, that there was but one God, and that was
Alpha and Omega: Deus in una existentia omnia habet; God in one existence has
all things, Dio.
(said Dionysius) Esse omnium est ipsa divinitas, omne quod vides, and quod non
vides, the very being of all things, whether of things visible or invisible is
the Godhead it self. And Plato affirms, Pla.
that virtue is given us from God, and not from men. Mercurius Trismegistus
tells us, Tris.
that God is, Principium universorum, the original of the Universe. Arist.
Aristotle confessed, Quod omnes antiquide-creverunt, quasi quoddam rerum
principium, ipsumque infinitum; That all antiquities have decreed as it were, a
certain beginning of things, and the same infinite. For God, whosoever he be
(says Pliny) and in what place soever resident, Plin.
is all Science, all Light, all Life, all Soul, and all of himself. As
Philosophers conjecture, so the Fathers of the Church with all modern Divines
justify, that there is a Celestial power from which al goodness flows. Among
the rest says Raimu^dus Sabundus by way of similitude: Sicut homo non dedit
inferiori rei esse, Sab.
ita neque sentire, neque intelligere, ergo eadem manus omnia fecit, idem
dominus, idem artifex omnia ordinavit, proportionavit, and limitavit; Eve^ as a
man has not given power to any inferior thing, either to live, or to perceive:
so neither does man give unto himself, either to be, either to live, either to
perceive, or to understand; therefore the same hand has made all things, the
same Lord, the same builder, has ordained, proportioned, and limited all
things. Again, Deus est author and co^ditor omnium reru^; God is the author
and founder of all things. If of all things, then of all goodness. Omnia bona,
quae in hoc seculo habemus, per gratiam dei habemus; All the goods, Bern.
which we have in this world (says S. Bernard) we have by the grace of God.
Certainly he is the beginning of all things; the Idea and Pattern of all
Good. He is that Almighty which wants beginning and ending, which, being made
of none, has by his power created all things, and therefore by some he is
termed a Well, both because he has all good things from himself, and also,
for that he does communicate all good things from thence unto his creatures,
without any hinderance to himself. Superior vero, ratione, authoritate,
virtute, sapientia, omnibus Deus est, sub quo voluntary vel invite curvantur
omnes, qui regunt, vel regere cupiunt orbem. Quorum leges, velut aranearum
telae sunt, Si divinis legibus adversantur: imo (ut arctius astringam) si non
obsequuntur; God is, verily superior to all, in Reason, Authority, Virtue,
Sapience, under whom voluntarily, or against their will, all are curbed, who
govern, or desire to govern the world, whose laws are as the webs of
Spiders, if they but cross divine laws: yea (that I may speak more closely)
if they accord not with them (if Simon de Cassia err not.) Sir Thomas Elliot,
Sim. de Cass. Ell.
in his Dialogue between Plato and Aristippus, urges, That Philosophers spoke
too little of God, since they did not conclude, that all goodness proceeded
from him, and that he was the Fountain and Principal thereof. For although
they did, almost all, acknowledge a deity, yet the Philosophers diverse
opinions have justified that old Proverb: Quot homines tot sententiae. To
which purpose Lactantius writes very pithily, Lactan.
Horum omnium sententia, quamvis sit incerta,, eodem tamen spectat, ut
providentiam unam esse consentiunt: sive enim natura, sive ether, sive ratio,
sive men's, sive fatalis necessitas, sive divina lex, idem est, quod a nobis
dicitur Deus; All these opinions, though uncertain, come to this, that they
agree upon one providence, whether the same be Nature, or Light, or
Understanding, or Destiny, or divine Ordinance, and that it is the same, which
is called of us God. Dicitur Dominus quasi dans munus; and nota, quod dicitur
dominus propter triplex munus: Propter terrae fertilitatem, aeris claritatem,
temporis tranquilliltatem.


Primum munus datur divinitus propter nostram sustenstationem;

Secundum propter actionem;

Tertium propter contemplationem.

He is called the Lord, Bonaven.
(says Bonaventure) because (as the Psalmist acknowledges) he loadeth us with
benefits; and note, that he is called the Lord for a threefold benefit given
us: for the fertility of Earth, the clearness of light, and the tranquillity
of time. The first gift is given us from above for our sustentation; the
second, for our action; the third, for our contemplation. Omnes Corporis and
animi vires, omnia membra nostra, Oculi, Aures, Lingua, Manus, Pedes, Affectus,
and quicquid modo in nobis, ejus dilectioni, et obsequio totum intra et extra
mancipetur, et sincere consecretur. All the strength of Body and Mind; all our
members, Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hands, Affections, and whatsoever is in us either
intrinsecall or extrinsecall, ought to obey, and syncerely consecrate
themselves to his will and pleasure (says Theodoricus. Theod.
) Volumes might be written to this purpose, yet all would be but so many
Items to make up one sum, which are included in these words of Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clem. Al^xand.
which serve my turn to conclude this point, Laudemus unum Patrem, and Filium,
una cum Spiritu sancto, qui unus est omnia, in quo omnia, per quem omnia, qui
est undequaque bonus, undequaque pulcher, undequaque sapiens, undequaque
justus, cui gloria nunc est, and in secula.

The true Subject of Virtue, to whom it properly belongs. CAP. III.
NOw let us determine the Quibus, and consider of Virtues subject aright: for
here some scruple may arise from the different opinion of Philosophers and
Divines: For, (says Aristotle) this one Province belongs to a prudent man,
Arist.
Vt recte prospiciat. Therefore certain beasts may be said to be prudent, to
wit, all those that seem to be endued with an eagre desire of providing those
things, which do belong to the defending of their life, to which purpose says
one: Nor are these creatures to be thought to be
Quite void of th'intellectuall faculty;
But that they can discern and understand
The language spoken in their native land,
And might discourse, if to so strange a wit,
Nature had lent them but due organs fit.


Lucan says, It is reported, that Elephants come out of the Rabathaean woods,
Lucan.
and in a flood near adjoining wash themselves, (as if to purify) then
prostrating fall down, and adore the Moon, and with joy return unto the
woods again.

What if I should compare this Story of the Elephants with that of Pliny? Plin.
(perhaps you would judge these beasts wiser than some men) who in his natural
History thus rebukes men for their plurality of gods; to believe that there
be gods innumerable, and those according to men's virtues or vices, to wit,
Charity, Concord, Understanding Hope, Honor, Clemency, Faith, or (as
Democritus was of opinion) that there were two Gods only, Punishment, and
Reward, makes men's idleness the greater. Hereupon it is (says he) that sundry
Nations have gods named according to their devotion; nay, sometimes hurts unto
men have been reckoned gods, which superstition has caused a Chapel to be
dedicated to the Fever in the mount Palatium, even by public order from the
State; Likewise an altar to Orbona, near the temple of Lares; Besides an other
erected to bad Fortune in Esquiliae, which would argue, that there were more
gods in heaven, than men on earth.

And what of those, that account beasts, and some filthy things for their gods.
If all the ridiculous idolatry mentioned in the old Scripture were let slip,
Godw.
yet Godwin in his Antiquities will tell us, that at the last, inferior
creatures were canonized for gods, in way of thankfulness for benefits
received from them; For which reason, these, as the Winds, the Air, the Earth,
the Fruits of the earth, became deified. At last, well deserving men, nay
Crocodiles, Serpents, Rats, Cats, Dogs, Garlike, and Onions were reputed gods.

Lactan.
Lactantius writing of the variety of the Roman, Egyptian, and Lacedemonian
gods, not only blames them, because they did, Deos sibi ex eventis fingere,
feign gods to themselves from each several accident, according to their own
imaginations, but falls fowler on them in these words, Quid, qui lapidem
colunt informem atque rudem? What of those, that worship a rude and
unbeautified stone? And in another place he thus explaines himself, Quid de
ijs dicam, qui colunt talia, nisi ipsos potissimum lapides, ac sripites esse?
What shall I say of those that worship senseless stocks and stones, unless
they, in the highest degree, were stocks and stones? Is it not then safer to
live more pecudum, after the manner of savage beasts, then to be the authors
of such idolatry. But the Scripture tells us, we must not expect grapes of
thorns, nor figs from thistles. It is no wonder then, that these things be,
since they proceed from Barbarians, Quorum religio cum moribus congruit. Some
perhaps admire these Stories, others blame me for urging them; but all must
like that ingenious translation of May on Lucan, May.
who concerning that of the Elephants, thus writes; Should this be true of
Elephants, much more
Wise in Religion are these beasts then men.
But, if this a Fiction be, why then
Did men's Invention faigne them to be
Wiser then are themselves in piety?


Though beasts in the act of generation will accompany with none other, but
such as be of their own proper kind, (though congruous in proportion, and
shape) as Wolves and Mastives, Hares and Conies, etc. Though the Be suffer not
another, that is not of the same kind, to enter into her Hive, though dogs at
the voice of the Faulconer, or Huntsman, seem to joy, as if they should enjoy
pastime; yet this is not prudence. Does the horse know that he is a horse, or,
that he is a beast, and thou a man? or the Be when her hive is broken, whether
it be a man, or a beast that takes her honey combs, and puts her out of her
lodging? or does the Dog (which of all beasts is man's chief attendant) know,
whether thou art a man, or a beast? no certainly. What think you of your
Fauni, your Satyri, your Hippocentauri, and diverse other beasts, some having
the visage, others the whole figure of man's body, are these endued with
Prudence? no; for they want a reasonable soul, which is the sole difference
between man and beast, which soul makes man prudent and wise unto salvation:
do they know that they are such beasts? or, that they do resemble man? no
verily: only man knows that he is man, and every beast in his several kind,
according to that of Socrates; Socrat.
Wisdom is in man, and not in a beast, and all wisdom is concluded in him
in this word, [Nosce teipsum.] Though beasts observe order, yet, I can no way
conceive, that to be otherwise, then an imagination engendered by custom. For
that knowledge which is in beasts, is by a natural influence, if you add
thereunto their senses. In this I refer you to Piccolomineus his judgment,
Piccol.
who says, that Prudence is twofold, one divine, the other proper to
mortality; divine prudence is eminent, separated from all indagation, and
imperfection, which is given to God, Et separatis mentibus. The Prudence of
Mortality is twofold, either natural, or humane: that which is natural, is
not a true Prudence, but a shadow thereof: insomuch as by nature, and the
instinct of nature, beasts do choose those things which also wise men do. So
Ants gather their grane, Bees make their combs, and follow their King, and
Birds for variety of time change their places. Now humane Prudence is also
twofold, either in spe and semine, which are children, when by nature they
show themselves facile to Prudence, and yield a future hope thereof: or in
habitu and forma, which is used for callidity or craft, such are Devils,
subtle Machevilians, and those which are frequently called the prudent or wise
men of this world, but the true humane prudence, properly taken, joined with
moral virtue, seeking means to attain unto honesty, is my ensuing discourse,
which bids me Quaere for'd Quid est.

The Definition of Prudence, the first of the four Cardinal Virtues. CHAP. IV.
THE Stoics say, that it is Scientia bonorum, maloru^, and mediorum. Speusip
pus is of opinion, Spen.
that it is only Scientia bonorum and malorum. Whereby we judge, what is to
be done, and what not: and so says Cicero. Plotinus informs us, Plot.
that Prudence is an understanding, declining inferior things, and directing
the mind to supernall. But the Genus of Prudence is found in none of these
definitions, according to Piccolomineus, Pieco.
for eligere divina and negligere mortalia, is not the office of Prudence, as
it is universal, but as it is heroical; neither is Prudentia, Scientia et
Intelligentia, Arist.
according to Aristotle. Eurip.
Euripides and others say that it is Habitus mentis, whereby every one does
seek that which is profitable to himself, which also is not to be approved,
because the principal gift of Prudence, is to seek out that, which is most
good for the public, not our own proper good, the end whereof is rather to
be accounted honest then profitable: but Audi Philosophum, Prudence is a habit
directing to do those things with true reason which are good to man; whereupon
says one, the habit is the Genus, and the form thereof, it is added (with
true reason) by which is showed that Prudence, does belong to Understanding,
and to that faculty of Understanding, which is called Rationatrix, according
to that in Aristotle, those are prudent, Arist.
who can rightly take Council in those things, which are good and profitable
to themselves, not which is ad valetudinem aut vires, but altogether to reason
of our well living: Again he terms it a virtue of the understanding, by
which we may well consult of Good and Evil things which belong unto
Felicity. Gol.
Gollius closes with him, and thus he says: Prudentia est habitus mentis
secundum veram rationem consultandi, and agendi ea, quae homini in universa
vita sunt bona vel mala. Prudens est is, qui potest been consultare de ijs,
quae ipsi, vel alijs sunt bona, and utilia, non ex part solum aliqua, sed ad
totam been vivendi rationem; Prudence is a habit of the understanding,
according to the true reason of consulting, and doing those things which are
good, or evil, during man's life. He is Prudent, who can well consult
concerning those things, which are good, and profitable for himself or others,
not alone for some particular part, but for the whole course of well living.
Macrobius confesses, Macr.
That it is a Virtue directing all things to the rule of reason, which does
think and do nothing, besides what is right and laudable. And Thomas Aquinas
will tell us, Thom.
That true and perfect Prudence is, whereby we counsel, judge, and obey what
things belong Ad finem bonorum, to the end of all good things in humane
conversation. As for the precedencie, I approve of Gregory's opinion among
Divines, and Platoes among Philosophers, The first instructs us, That Prudence,
inter reliquas Principem locum obtinet, docet alias virtutes, nisi, quae agunt,
Prudenter agant, virtutes esse neutiquam posse. D. Greg.
Amongst other virtues, Prudence obtaines the precedencie, and teaches the
rest, that unless, what things they do, they do wisely, they cannot be
virtues. And Plato, Virtutes omnes ad Prudentiam revocabat, Plat.
illasque sine hujus praesidio, quasi Daedali statuas solutas, fugaces, and
instabiles esse aiebat. Plato reduced all virtues unto Prudence, and affirmed
that those, without its aid, are but, as it were, the statues of Daedalus,
weakened, fading, and unstable. Well then has Charowne termed it, Char.
The superintendent, and guide of all other virtues; Aurigam virtutum, without
which nothing is good; The knowledge and choice of those things, which we
desire or fly, The just estimation and trial of things, the eye, that sees
all, directs and ordains all. Better is that of Tully in his Tusculanes:
Tul.
Non potest esse jucunda vita, a qua abest Prudentia: But best of all, says
Iamblicus, Iamb.
after a long commendation of this virtue: Merito Dei similes facit sui
possessores Prudentia. I need not incite any to the desire thereof, for it is
Gratuita virtus (as Peraldus notes) as it is Gratuita, Per.
so ought it to be Amabilis, every way as much to be beloved, as it is freely
bestowed on us. Bon^v.
Bonaventure urges four Reasons, wherefore it is Amabilis.

1. Because it is Luminosa in quantum temporum discretiva.

2. Fructuosa in quantum futurorum provisiva.

3. Studiosa in quantum praeteritorum recordativa.

4. Operosa in quantum praesentium ordinativa.

And now you have read so many Definitions, or Descriptions, take your choice;
yet this of Saint Augustine I must approve of, D. Aug.
which is, Scire quid anima debet facere. And here a division would be
demanded; yet before I come to it, a word or two of the difference between
Prudentia, and Sapientia. True it is, in holy Writ, the words are promiscuously
handled; An instance or two of the congruitie of the words. Prudentia carnis
mors est, prudentia autem Spiritus vita, and pax; quoniam sapientia carnis
inimica est Deo; The wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of the
spirit is life, and peace; because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God. Qui sapiens est cord, appellabitur Prudens: The wise in heart shall be
called Prudent. And again, Os meum loquitur sapientiam, and meditatio cordis
mei prudentiam, says the Psalmist. Damas.
Damascene dividing the Rational soul into two parts, into that, which is
Active, and into that, which is Contemplative, says, that the Contemplative
belongs to Sapience, the Active to Prudence. But how will this agree with
Aristotle. Arist.
Sapientiam, in ipsis artibus, ijs tribuere solemus, qui in quaque art
excellunt maxim, ut Phydiam sapientem lapidum sculptorem, and Polycletum
statuarium sapientem nominamus; We are accustomed, says he, to attribute
Sapience to those, which do in the highest degree excel in any kind of Art,
As we call Phydias a wise Carver of Stones, Polycletus a wise maker of Images,
which name of Sapience signifies no other thing, than the virtue or excellency
of Art; and in another place, Quod sapientis nomine appellatur, quod vero
prudentis nomine dicitur, aliud atque aliud: What is called by the name of a
Sapientiall man, is one thing, what of a Prudent man* is another thing: And
here he gives another Example; Anaxagoram, Thaletem, caterosque tales
sapientes nominamus, prudentes non item: We call Anaxagoras, Thales, and such
men wise, but not prudent. His reason follows, because they do not perceive,
but are ignorant of those things, which are profitable to themselves. Sapientia
est de rebus humanis and divinis cognitio, Prudentia de moribus; Sapience
(says Tullie) is a knowledge of divine and humane things, Tul.
Prudence appertains unto manners. Est in ratione quiddam, ad superna and
coelestia incendens, and id dicitur Sapientia, and est quiddam ad transitoria,
and caduca respiciens, and id vocatur Prudentia: haec duo ex ratione sunt, and
in ratione consistunt; and dividit se ratio in duo, scilicet, in sursum, and
deorsum; sursum in Sapientiam, and deorsum in Prudentiam; D. Aug.
There is in Reason (says S. Augustine) a certain thing bending toward
supernal, and heavenly things, and that is called Sapience: there is a certain
thing respecting ttansitorie and fleeting things, and this is called Prudence:
These two are from Reason, and consist in Reason, and Reason divides it self
into two, to wit, upward, and downward; upward into Sapience, downward into
Prudence. There he gives a similitude, Quasi in virum and mulierem, ut vir sit
superior, et regat; mulier inferior, and regatur: As it were between a man and
a woman; the man being superior, in the active voice governes, the woman
inferior, in the passive, is governed: so that I might liken Sapience, and
Prudence to those two great and heavenly Lights, the Sun, and the Moon; for
as the Moon receives her splendor from the Sun; so Prudence its from
Sapience: and as the Moon rules the night, and the Sun the day; so Prudence
rules this, Moral Sapience the divine life. And now descend we in the next
place to a Division.

The Division, and several Branches of Prudence. CAP. V.
COncerning the Division of Prudence, I find too too much division in
opinions. Thomas Aquinas brancheth it into more parts, Thom.
than any other mention, to wit, Memoria Intelligentia, Docilitas, Solertia,
Ratio, Providentia, Circumspectio and Cautio. But these may be drawn into a
lesser circle, Per.
Peraldus approves the opinion of Tully and Seneca, Tul.
Sen.
who say the parts thereof, are three, Memoria, Intelligentia, et Providentia,
and so is the opinion of others, no less learned in Divinity, than they in
Morality. Others would add one wheel more, to make it a complete Chariot,
which is Astutia mentis; But in mine own opinion, I conceive it to be, rather
an Appendix on the three former parts, then to challenge any part thereof; and
so intend to handle it. Aug.
Saint Augustine I believe will clear all, (whose opinion Peter Martyr
confirms) who speaking of the parts of Prudence, says thus: Parts ejus
Memoria, Intelligentia and Providentia; Memoria est per quam animus repetit
illa quae fuerunt; Intelligentia per quam ea perspicit, quae sunt, Providentia
per quam futurum aliquid videtur, antequam est; The parts thereof are Memory,
Understanding, Providence; Memory is by which the mind repeates those things,
which were; Understanding, by which she sees those things which are;
Providence by which any thing to come is seen before it comes; Memory has
reference to things past, Understanding to things present, but he is
provident, who can appoint, from things past, and things present, that which
hereafter shall come to pass, says Peter Martyr. Pet. Mar.
And now, if my memory fail me not, I will relate what I have read de Memoria.

Of Memory, the first part of Prudence. CHAP. VI.
MEmoria sumitur tripliciter: primo, pro ipsa facultate, ceu potentia qua
recordamur; secundo, pro recordandi actu; tertio, pro habitu: Memory is taken
three manner of ways (says Albertus): First, Alb.
for the very faculty or power, by which we remember, Secondly, for the act of
remembering, Thirdly, for the habit; but to my definition: Memoria est, qua
repetit animus quae fuerunt, Memory is, by which the mind repeates what things
were (says Cicero) Cic.
Memoria est vis animae accepta retinens, praeterita repetens, elapsa
recolligens; Memory is a force of the Understanding, retaining things received,
repeating things past, recollecting things let slip; According so Saint
Augustine and Hugo de sancto victore. Aug.
Hug.
Memoria est ad mentis intuitum imaginaria quaedam representatio praeteritorum;
Memory is a certain imaginary representation of things past, according to
the intimation of the Understanding. Memory is the treasury of innumerable
imaginations, Aug.
(says St. Augustine) Memoria thesaurus cognoscibilium, Per.
says Peraldus. Omnium rerum thesaurus and custos memoria est, Hug.
says Hugo. Memory is the consort and fellow-worker of reason, because without
it, reason neither can proceed to known things, nor retain the knowledge of
things known. Ingenium requirit incognita, memoria recondit dijudicata, ratio
judicat inventa: ingenium quod invenit, rationi adducit, ratio memoriae,
memoria recondit: Wit (says Bonaventure) seeks unknown things; Bonaven.
Memory puts up things that be judged; Reason judges things, that be found out:
what Wit finds out, it brings to Reason, Reason to Memory, Memory keeps it
safe-guarded. Memory is in place of a Notary, and Secretary, and, as it were, a
Register Book, in which is entered, whatsoever is ordained, and decreed by
Reason: For, as we have need of such a Judge, as Reason, to conclude, and
determine finally in the Mind whatsoever may be called into question, and
doubted of: so it is requisite, that the Conclusion, and definitive sentence,
should be registered in Memory, as it were in a roll, or book of Accounts, that
it may be always ready and found, when need requires. Arist.
Memoria species omnes sensibiles judicatas, and cogitatas, tanquam depositum,
recondit, ac servat, ut eas, cum opus fuerit, exhibeat; Memory keeps and hides
(says Aristotle) as it were a thing deposited, all sensible species judged,
and thought one; that she may use them, when need requires. Sicut lux atque
omnes colores, formaeque corporu^ per oculos discernuntur; per aures omnia
genera sonrou^: omnes odores per aditum narium: omnes sapores per oris aditum:
per sensum autem totius corporis, quid durum, quid molle, quid calidum,
frigidumve, lene aut asperum, grave seu leve, sive extrinsecus, sive
intrinsecus corpori; haec omnia recipit recolenda (cum opus est) and
retractanda grandis memoriae recessus; As Light and all colors, and shapes of
bodies are discerned by the eyes; by the ears all kinds of sounds; all odours
by the passage of the nose; all tastes by that of the mouth, and by the sense
of the whole body, what is hard, what soft, what warm or cold, gentle or
sharp, heavy or light, either extrinsecally or intrinsecally: so all these
things does that grand receptacle of the memory receive; yea she restores and
calls them back to mind at pleasure: Aug.
And here this holy Father is almost puzzled betwixt ignorance and wonder,
Adding, and nescio, qui secreti atque ineffabiles ejus sinus, I know not, says
he, her secret and unspeakable ways of receipt, so infinite is the memories
capacity. You may, by these words of Saint Augustine, perceive, that all
species of things extrinsecally, and intrinsecally belonging to the body of
man, are comprehended within this great receptacle Memory, yet let me advise
that none hoord up all their treasure in memory, lest time should lessen their
stock. Now Memory is twofold, as some would have it, one Sensitive, the other
Intellective: according to this distinction, Memoria est iterata resumpsio
alicujus apprehensi sensu vel intellectu: Memory is an iterated resumption of
some thing apprehended by Sense or Understanding. Others well learned, think
there is only a Sensitive memory; and good reason for it, it being one of the
internal senses, Memoria in part sensitiva ponitur, quia est alicujus, prout
cadit sub determinato tempore; non enim est nisi praeteriti, and cum non
abstrahatur, nisi a singularibus conditionibus, non pertinet ad partem
intellectivam, quae est universalium; Memory is placed in the sensitive part
(says Thomas Aqui: D. Tho.
) because it is of some thing, even as it chances in a determinate time; for
it is not but of things past, and since it is not drawn but from singular and
particular conditions, it does not belong to the Intellective part, which is of
universalls. And Albertus speaks to the same purpose. Alb.
Others would have an Intellective memory, Memoria intellectiva soli homini
peculiaris est, and custos and conservatrix fidissima conceptuum and imaginum,
vel rerum, quarum species sunt ab intellectu perceptae; The Intellective memory
(say they) is peculiar only to man, it is the faithfullest keeper of conceits
and imaginations, or of things, whose species are perceived by the
Understanding: But, by their own confession, this is not Organicall. And this,
I conceive, to be that Memory, which by the Philosopher is called Pars
integralis prudentiae. Evident is the opinion of Pliny, that Dogs, Kine,
Oxen, Plin.
and Goats, etc. do dream, Non somniarent bruta nisi haberent in somnis, etc.
Brute beasts would not dream, unless they had in their sleeps encountering
imaginations kept in the inward sense; which, if it hold true, what shall we
conceive of Tullies saying, Tull.
that Inter hominem and belluam hoc maxim interest, quod haec tantum, quantum
movetur sensu, ad id solum, quod adest, quodque praesens est, se accommodat;
Paululum admodum sentiens praeterium, vel futurum? Between man and beast this
is a special difference, that a Beast, only as far as he is moved by
sense, applies himself to that alone, which is present, very little
perceiving a thing past, or to come. Alij authors manifesta indicia memoriae
probant, quae in brutis deprehenduntur; certa loca, nidos, latibula, and
sobolem suam dignoscunt; Other Authors prove manifest shows of Memory, which
are discerned in brute Beasts; they know certain places, their nests, their
dens, and their offsprings, this opinion causes the distinction between
Memoria and Reminiscentia; quod illa brutis animantibus co^petat solus vero
homo reminiscendi facultatem habeat; Because Memory (as some think)
appertains to brute creatures, but only man has the faculty of reminiscence.
Or better thus, Memoria differt a reminiscentia, quia memoria discrete, and
distinct revertitur ad res, compone^do intentiones distinctas cum imaginibus;
reminiscentia antem sive recordatio est motus quasi interceptus, and abscissus
per oblivionem, et est cum collatione te^poris, and loci, and hujusmodi: Memory
differs from reminiscence, because Memory discerningly, and distinctly reverts
unto things, by co^paring distinct intentions with imaginations, but
Reminiscence, or recordation, is a motion, as it were, intercepted, and quite
lost through oblivion, but is attained again by collation of time, and place,
and the like; Ioh. de Comb
as Johannes de Combis observes. Now Memoriae est retinere species
intelligibiles, Reminiscentiae est mortuas species resuscitare, and oblivioni
tradita recordari; It is Memories office, to retain intelligible species,
whereas Reminiscence does renew lost species, and, as it were, recall to memory
things delivered over to oblivion. To this purpose we may find by common
experience, that, those things which we have heard, seen, or known, and for
a little space kept in memory, when once oblivion has got the superiority, we
think no more of, then if we had never known them: nor could remember them,
were there not some body, or evident token to put us in mind again thereof.
Saint Augustine tells us, D. Aug. Arist.
Memory is in beasts; Aristotle confesses it, but withal, That the memory
that is in beasts, is imperfect, and (in mine own opinion) so imperfect, that
I rather think it a customary imagination, helped by the external senses, then
any memory at all.

And now inquire we where it is seated. Tres, tanquam, ventriculi cerebri
demonstrantur; Vnus anterior ad faciem, a quo sensus omnis: Alter posterior ad
cervicem, a quo omnis motus: Tertius inter utrumque, in quo memoriam vigere
demonstrant; There are, as it were, three Ventricles of the Brain demonstrated
(says Saint Augustine) One before, D. Aug.
toward the face, from which all sense; Another behind, toward the hinder
part of the neck, from which all motion; A third between both, in which they
show that Memory flourishes. But the truth is, Divines, as well as
Philosophers, do conclude, That Memory is seated in the hinder part of the
head. And thus they prove it, by a threefold reason. Primo, quia, laesa illa
part offenditur memoria, and, eo loco percusso, rerum caepit oblivio: Secundo,
quta ejus partis soliditas, ad id videtur potissimum procurata a natura, ut
tenacius haereant infixae species: Postremo, quia, cum recordari volumus, quasi
natura nos docente, occipitium scalpimus, ut memorandi vim quodammodo
excitemus, and acuamus; First of all, because, that part being hurt, the Memory
is offended; and blows or hurts on that place beget oblivion: Secondly,
because the solidity of that place, especially, seems to be procured from
nature: that the infixed species may take the more sound hold: Last of all,
because, when we would remember, as it were by natures instinct) we scratch
the hinder part of the head, that after a sort we may stir up, or sharpen the
faculty of remembering. If these reasons serve not. Fr. Ac.
The French Academie will tell you, That God has assigned Memories seat, or
lodging in the hindermost part of the brain; to the end, that after such
things, as are to be committed to it, have passed all the other senses, they
should be kept there, as by a Secretary; and for this cause that part of the
brain is most solid and firm. His reason you may read at large in his
Chapter of Reason and Memory. Now there are four things necessary to whet the
Memory. The First is, to dispose with good order, things committed to Memory;
Then attentively to meditate, and ruminate of the same; Afterward to fasten
the thing to be remembered by some certain peculiar affection of joy, or
grief; Last of all, when things are infixed, often to repeat and commend them
to Memory. Debemus habere memoriam trium (says Bonaventure) primorum,
mediorum, infimorum: Data sunt enim nobis.

Tria Prima* ad guberna^dum Media ad conserva^dum Infima ad sustenta^dum.


As there are four things necessary to sharpen Memory, and three things to
have in Memory: so there are ten things (as Peraldus notes) for retaining of
which, Per.
Memory is especially to be praised. First, the memory of benefits is to be
commended, especially, the Memory of the Creator and Redeemer: Memento
Creatoris tui. Secondly, the Memory of the Commandments of God, Et memores
sint mandaterum ipsius ad faciendum ea. Thirdly, the Memory of the Justice,
which God does exercise against the transgression of his commandments, Memor
esto judicij mei, sic enim erit and tuum. Fourthly, the Memory of spiritual
war, Memento belli. Fifthly, the Memory of Divine mercy, Memoratus sum
misericordiae tuae, Domine. Sixthly, the Memory of the laudable lives of the
Saints, which we ought to imitate; Facta praecedentium patrum consideremus.
Seventhly, the Memory of adversity in prosperity, Memento paupertatis in die
abundantiae. Eighthly, the Memory of the Rock, whence we were hewed, or the
Root, whence we did spring, Attendite ad Petram, de qua excisi estis. Ninthly,
the Memory of others wants, when we our selves are in prosperity, Memento
mei, cum been tibi fuerit. Lastly, the Memory of private sins, to grieve for
them, Recogitabo tibi omnes annos, in amaritudine animae meae. The contrary to
this is Oblivion, which, Greg.
though it be (as Gregory would have it) quaedam mors: yet in some things to be
approved of. First, the oblivion of injuries. Secondly, the forgetting a good
turn done to another. Thirdly, the not remembering of delights in former
sins. And last of all, the non-recordation of temporal things, To this
purpose was the answer of Themistocles to Symmachus; to whom, being desirous to
teach him the art of memory, he answered, he had rather learn the art of
forgetfulness. A contradictory answer, yet a reason tolerable, Meaning, that
there was no defect in his memory, but that he could not forget those things
that were requisite to be buried in oblivion. I might here tell you what
constitutions are subject to the best Memories, and that you shall seldom see
a quick wit, and a strong memory meet, and hold: What are the causes of good
and bad memories; That surfeits, and colds, according to Galen, Gal.
confound the memory; That the matter of the instrument of the Memory, if too
soft, will cause a quick entertaining, but not a good retaining; if hard, not
easily imprinted, but, when it is once settled, hardly removed. The reasons
might evidently appear, were they not fitter for a natural Philosophy
Lecture, then for my Moral information. And thus have I done with memory, Quae
non est fututurorum nec praesentium, sed praeteritorum tantum: sensus
praesentium, spes futurorum; which is not of things to come, nor of things
present, but only of things past, sense only having to do with things
present; Hope alone being in expectation of things to come.

Of the Understanding, the Intellectual part, and second Branch of Prudence.
CHAP. VII.
HEre I will not be so scrupulous, as to make a difference between Intellectus
and Intelligentia, the one being taken by some for the Understanding faculty,
the other for the Act of the Understanding; but both twofold, Divine, and
Humane. The Divine Intellect is a property of God, whereby he knows all
things most perfectly in himself. Which Divine Intellect of his, may be
understood four manner of ways. First, the understanding of God is a most
simple act, therefore God does not understand discurrendo a noto ad ignotum;
but by apprehending the matter simply, and by it self. Secondly, the
Understanding of God, understands God himself directly, and by himself: but
other things, Tanquam in exemplari, as they are certain Images of God.
Thirdly, all distinctions of times God does understand at one act, Simul and
Semel, those things, which we call things past, present, and to come. Lastly,
the Understanding of God understandes all things necessarily, nothing
contingently, or by Opinion.

Many have been of opinion, that Intellectus, and Opinio are all one. To
confute this, Saint Bernard says, D. Bern.
that Multi suam opinionem, intellectum putaverunt, and erraverunt: and quaedam
opinio potest putari intellectus, intellectus opinio non potest ^ unde hoc
accidit profecto, quia haec falli, and fallere potest, ille non potest: aut si
falli potuit, intellectus non fuit, sed opinio. Verus nempe intellectus certam
habet non modo veritatem, sed notitiam veritatis; Many have thought their
opinion to be Understanding, and have erred; And some opinion may be thought
to be Understanding; but understanding cannot be taken for opinion, which
comes to pass certainly, because Opinion may deceive, and be deceived:
Understanding cannot: or, if it could be deceived, it were not Understanding,
but Opinion. For true Understanding has not only a certain truth: but a
knowledge of the truth: But Divine Intellect is no part of my Prudence; mine is
Humane, which is defined by Saint Bernard, D. Bern.
to be Rei cujuscunque invisibilis, certa, and manifesta notitia. An invisible,
certain, and manifest knowledge of any thing. Others think that the
understanding is a power of the Rational soul, whereby man does perceive,
judge and know Intelligibles, especially Vniversalls: and here is unfolded the
Triple office of the Understanding, Percipere, Iudicare, and Cognoscere. Thus
(according to Saint Augustine) Intellectus est vis animae, Aug.
quae sub visu non cadentia percipit: quemadmodum ipsa quoque anima, sensus
adminiculo, corporatas formas intuetur; The Understanding is a faculty of the
soul, which does perceive things beyond the apprehension of sight, or sense:
as the soul it self does behold corporeal forms by the assistance of the
senses. Here Philosophical insights raise a difference Inter animum, and
animam. Nor is the distinction to be slighted, for Animus est, quo sapimus,
anima, qua vivimus; the mind is it whereby we consider, and grow wise, the
soul whereby we live, and grow men. Diverse trouble themselves with divisions
of the Intellect; In mine own opinion, Pet Mar.
Peter Martyr gives it the plainest, and the best: Vnus vocatur practicus, and
alter speculativus, non quasi sint duae vires aut facultates animae, sed, quia
circa objecta sua speculativa vel practica versatur intellectus, aut
speculativus, aut practicus; The one is called (says he) the Practicke, the
other the Speculative, not, as if they were two distinct faculties of the
mind, but, because about those things that are Speculative, or Practicke, the
Understanding is busied or conversant. Mag.
Magirus jumpes with Aristotle in the division; but does add further, That the
Understanding is first separated in specie from the other faculties of the
soul, next it is separated from the body, for we can understand without the
body, and the Understanding uses not any Organe of the body, but is freed Ab
omni consortio ejus. Lastly, the Understanding is separable from the same, not
only according to operation, but also according to subsistence: because, the
body being taken away, the Understanding subsists, and remains permanent by it
self. It being therefore plain, that the Understanding is a faculty of the
soul, that it has no certain Organ in the body, and can subsist without the
body, it must be, as the soul is. That there is a Vegetative, a Sensitive, and
a Rational Soul, I think few so irrational, but know it. The Vegetative
Soul, Trees, and Plants partake of; The Vegetative, and Sensitive Beasts,
Birds, and Fishes; The Vegetative, Sensitive, and a Rational Soul is in Man
alone. Concerning which Rational Soul, there is a fourfold opinion: The
first is, That it is transferred, and brought forth, as a part of the Substance
of God, who inspireth it into the Body, according to that of Moses; Inspiravit
in faciem ejus spiraculum vitae. The second is, That it proceeds from the
souls of our Parents, and is transferred, even as, and when the seed is. The
third, That the souls of men have been from the beginning all created of God,
made of nothing, and reserved in heaven, afterward to be sent into the lower
parts, as need should require, and that the bodies of men are formed, and
disposed to receive them. The last opinion is, That all souls are created of
God, and infused into Men, and that the Creation and Infusion is effected Vno
eodemque tempore. But among all Opinions, mine is, That it is a Mystery beyond
the Philosophers reach, and not to be understood Absque Numine, I need not have
troubled my self with a definition of the Rational Soul, since I am to write
only, Arist.
where it is placed. Aristotle says. That it is Tota in toto, and tota in
qualibet part; Which is true concerning the souls energeticall information,
but not concerning her Royal Palace of chief habitation. Charown is of
opinion, Char.
That the souls Chief or Tribunal Seat is in the head, and not in the
heart, forgetting, it seems That Cor est primum vivens, and ultimum Moriens:
but about her chiefest place of residence, I find a threefold, and different
opinion. The Physicians hold her Principal seat in the brain: the
Philosophers in the heart: and some Divines (that believe the soul to be Ex
traduce) in the blood.

By reason of this variety in opinion concerning the proper seat of the soul,
Rawlins, an ingenious Friar, Raw.
takes occasion to wonder at the learned, and (as it were) labored Malice of
the Jews, in pursuing the very soul of Christ, even till it left his body;
For (says he) there being three chief opinions, where the soul is chiefly
seated: to wit,

1. Either in the Blood, according to that in Leviticus, Anima omnis Carnis in
sanguine est.

2. Or in the Brain, as many noted Physicians think.

3. Or in the Heart, as your best and soundest Philosophers hold.

That maliciously-wicked rabble of Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees (as if they
had been studied and expert in the several subtilties, and varieties of those
several opinions) sought to force the soul of Christ out of his body, through
those the tenderest and liveliest parts of his body; seeking, if they could, to
let it out

First, Through his Head, and Brain, by a twisted Crown of sharpe-pointed
Thorns.

Secondly, Through his Blood by Whips and Nails, in piercing, and tearing the
veins of his body, especially his hands and feet.

Thirdly, Through his very Heart, when that bloody Soldier, Longinus so named,
if Rome mistake not, ran him through the side with his deadly Lance.

These several opinions do all carry Truth with them in their several kinds.
For the soul has its seat both in the blood, and in the brain; but
Principally, and most Radically in the heart. Plain it is, That the
Understanding is seated with the Soul, and the Soul seated in the Heart, and
both of them, necessarily, joined together. Saint Basil observes, D. Basil.
That the Court has got the attributes of the Queen, that dwells in it, the
Queen the name of the Court; the Heart the attributes of the Soul, the Soul
the name of the Heart; so that the Soul is where the Heart is, the
Understanding inhabiting with them both; According to the words of God to
Solomon, For I have given thee an Understanding Heart. Sir Tho. Ell.
Sir Thomas Elliot, in his disputation Platonicke, says, That the Heart of Man
is the Souls book, wherein all Thoughts are written. And we know there are
two Veins in the Tongue, the one (as it is thought) has recourse to the
Heart, the other to the Head: that of the Heart, what it suggests, it brings up
to the Head, where both meet, and deliver over their joint, and several
errands to the Tongue; According to that in the Gospel, Ex abundantia Cordis
os loquitur. And now will I close up this Point with the words of the ever to
be honored for Learning, Vicount Saint Alban, who, Vic. St. Alb.
in his Book entitled The Advancement of Learning, thus says; The Arts
Intellectual are four in number, divided according to the ends, whereunto
they are referred; For Man's labor is to invent that, which is sought, and
propounded; or to judge that, which is invented; or to retain that, which is
judged; or to deliver over that, which is retained, so that the Arts must be
four; Art of Inquiry, or Invention; Art of Examination, or Judgment; Art of
Custody, or Memory; And Art of Elocution, or Tradition. Thus cursorily have I
run over the Understanding. In the next place I am to Write De Providentia.

Of Providence, the third part of Prudence. CAP. VIII.
THere are three Opinions concerning Providence. The first is the Epicureans,
altogether Ungodly; Who deny, That there is a God, not plainly in Words, but in
Heart; and in like manner, deny the Providence of God. The second, is of the
Stoics, Who rightly allow, That all things are by the Providence of God;
because nothing is done without the Divine care and knowledge: yet, will they
have all things fall out by a fatal necessity. The third Opinion is of the
Peripateticks (which carries more truth then the former) who rightly Judge,
That all things are done by the Providence of God; and yet that some things
fall out casually and fatally both; and those were the Aristotelians,
Platonists, and many Schoolmen at this day. And now give me leave to branch
forth a division, before I give you the Defininition. There is a Divine, and an
Humane Providence. Pet. Mar.
Divine Providence is defined by Peter Martyr to be Ratio qua deus utitur in
rebus dirigendis ad suos fines, in qua definitione non modo notitia, sed
voluntas, and vis id faciendi comprehensa est; It is (says he) a reason which
God uses in directing things to his own ends; in which definition not only
the knowledge, but the will, and power of his doing is comprehended.
Providentia dei est ipsa divina ratio, in summo omnium Principe (Deo)
constituta, qua is cuncta praeterita and futura videt, and praecognoscit: Hoc
est, Providentia Dei est Scientia Dei certa, in ejus mente concepta ab aeterno,
de ijs, quae olim facta, and unquam futura sunt necessario and contingenter;
The Providence of God is the very divine reason constituted in God the chief
Prince of all things, whereby he sees and fore-knowes all things past, and to
come; That is, The Providence of God is the certain knowledge of God,
conceived in his Understanding from eternity, concerning those things which
were necessarily and contingently done in times past, or which any time are to
come. Peter Martyr has it thus; Est facultas Dei, Pet. Mar
qua res omnes dirigit, and adducit ad suos fines; It Is a faculty of God,
whereby he directs, and reduces all things to his own ends. Trelcatius tells
us, Trel.
That Providence is an outward action of God, whereby he keeps all and
several things that are done, to that end, which he has determined according
to the liberty of his will, and that, to the end, he might in all and several
things be glorified. The efficient cause of this Providence or government is
the same, which is of creation, since one, and the self same beginning is of
both, from, and by which all things do proceed, and are conserved, to wit, God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father, or the love and goodness of the
Father, is the first beginning cause: the Son, in that he is the Wisdom
and Word, is the working cause, the Holy Ghost, in that he is the virtue and
power of the Father, and Son, is the finishing cause, Sicut Adam a nullo
homine, Evah ex solo homine, and Seth ex utroque; ita Deus pater a nullo,
filius ex solo patre, and Spiritus Sanctus ex utroque; Even as Adam was from
none, Eve from man alone, and Seth from them both; so God the Father is from
none, the Son from the Father alone, and the Holy Ghost from them both. Now
the works of God summarily are two; That of the Creation, and that of the
Redemption; both these works, as, in the total, they may appertain to the
Unity of the Godhead, so, in their parts, they may be referred to the three
Persons. That of the Creation, in the Mass of the matter (...)

he may be in all his undertakings Magnanimus actu, That British tongues may
triumphantly say, Charolus ille Magnus: and as in my Sovereigns cause, I have
played the Priest, So let the British World be my Clearkes, and say, Amen. That
I may also pray for them. Otherwise, I shall but curse that soul, that will
not say so. But herein I am loath to divulge the utmost of my thoughts; yet I
fear, that tongue will burn in unquenchable fire, that dare presume to
scandalize his Sovereigns name, or detract from his worth. And this dare I
justify. For he cannot be a true servant to God, that bears not a true heart
to his King; But, me thinks I hear Blesensis say, Ble.
Pro regibus orare est nova traditio, To pray for Kings is a new tradition; I
wonder he, or any dare broach such new Heresy, since we are commanded by S.
Peter, and S. Paul, to pray for them which are in Authority, especially for our
Supreme Sovereign. Pro Rege quasi praecellenti. When Abishai would have
slain Saul, the mortal enemy of David, David said to Abishai, Destroy him
not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless, It was King John's very case in the viewing the Castle of Rochester,
as is to be seen in our History. And thus much for the Reciprocal Duties
betwixt Kings and their Subjects.

The mutual Duties between Parents and their Children. CAP. X.
THE Children, says S. Paul, are not for the Parents, but the Parents for the
children; Begin we therefore with their Office and Duty, since theirs is the
Precedence. When the Child is borne, let not the Mother (though good in
disposition) nurse any unless she nurse all. I am not against the general
Opinion, as if it were not meet for a Mother to nurse her own Child: Yet
this I conceive, that if she should nurse one, and refuse another, she should
with much partiality incline to one, rather then another. For Women's affections
are many times transported beyond Judgment, And let the Fathers intentions be
never so upright, yet the Mothers survivorship may find out new inventions to
perform her Natural Affections. Choose, if you be droven to a choice for your
Nurse, a Woman Witty, Handsome, and if you can (having the two former
qualities) Honest; For that Child, that receives nutriment from his Foster
Mother, will go near to Sympathize with her in condition. And now the
Horne-booke appears. If thou have Daughters, Music, Dancing, Needle-working
may serve turn to keep them from Idleness; They are hardly got, and quickly
lost. To make them scholars, were frivolous, it being by some observed, That
Learning in a Woman, is like a Sunnediall in a Grave. And we have a Caveat
given us from our late Solomon in his Proverbs; King James
It has like operation to make Women learned, as to make Foxes tame, which
only teaches them to steal more cunningly. The possibility is not equal, for
where it does one good, it does twenty harm. True it is, diverse Women have
been very well learned. I have read, that Zenobia Queen of the Palmerians,
being skillful in the Greek, Latin, and Egyptian tongues, taught them to her
two sons, and wrote an Epitome of the Eastern parts. Cornelia taught her two
sons the Gracchi, the Latin tongue. And Aretia taught her son Aristippus
philosophy, but he proved a Sycophantical Philosopher. Indeed knowledge in a
Woman commonly purchases more Inconvenience then profit. Exempli gratia. A
Roman and a Grecian Ambassador, meeting in the Senate of the Rhodians; the
Grecian spoke these words; True it is, Roman, you are bold in Arms, but
unskilful in Sciences, for the Women of Greece are more skillful in Learning,
then the Men of Rome in Weapons. These words caused War in Sicily. At last
the Rhodians persuaded, that those Wars should be ended, not by Weapons, but
by Feminine Disputations. It was like to be a solid Piece, when Women took it
in hand, Stout Warriers they are, to end Ambassadors Quarrels. The Arguments
my Author notes not; Nor do I know his Reason, But certainly, as far as
they tended to a Logical Disputation, over and over excellent.
Looking-glasses, are the fittest Books for Women's Studies; For there they may
rectify their Deformities, and take Counsel, which may be the best way to
show that part, which is best. Yet I would have no Woman so far dote on those
Books, as to offer up her Morning Sacrifice to them, Eying her self so long,
till Narcissus like, she fall in love with her own Shadow, I do hate this Face
Physic. Diog.
Diogenes said to one, that had perfumed his Locks, Be careful your
odoriferous Head procure you not a stinking Life. Beware, with Absolon, you
take no Pride in your Locks, lest you be ensnared by them; For I believe these
Daubed ones are in easy possibility, to be Polluted ones. Laert.
I like Laertius Observation, Optimi sunt odores, qui odorant Mores, aliter non
sunt flores, sed faetores; Strong perfumes argue guiltiness of some loathsome
Savor; Glorious outsides, imply some inward Filthiness, that would feign
escape notice: overmuch Ornament: importing Deformity; If she be Fair, she
must be Proud, and she cannot be Proud unless she love her Face, which is the
better beloved, when represented in a flattering Glass. In a word, the
Learned Woman, that ever was, her knowledge being Weighed with an indifferent
Man's, will prove like the Woman and the Feather in the Cardinals Scales, Where
if the Cardinal played right,
The Woman was three Grains too light.


Yet, for all this, I must confess, I would not have them altogether
Illiterate. Let them Read, and Write, but not Indite: Casket them not up for
Holy Relics; but when nature has made them fit for the Rites of Marriage,
marry them, lest they save you a labor. And there is an end with them, and
their Education.

If thou have Sons, in the first place, be careful of their Paedagogue, That
he be Modest, Sober, Learned; And be sure that he have a good Form of
Teaching, lest the succeeding Masters should have more to do, to Vnteach, then
to Teach. Dimo the Musician demanded always a greater reward of them whom
others taught, then of them, who never learned any thing. In this Provision of
Tutors, the Gentry are far short of their Inferiors, as it will appear by
the words of Quintilian, Quin.
urged by Sir Thomas Elliot. And these are they, Common Experience teaches,
That no Man will put his Son to a Butcher, to learn; or bind him Prentice to
a Traveller, if he intend to make him a Scholar: or if he will have him a
cunning Goldsmith, will first bind him Prentice to a Tinker; These things
Poor Men are circumspect in, and the Nobles and Gentlemen (who would have
their Sons by excellent learning come to Honor) or for sparing of Cost, or
for lack of diligent search for a good Schoolmaster, wilfully destroy their
Children; causing them to be taught that Learning, which would require six or
seven Years to be forgotten; By which time the most part of that Age is
spent, wherein the chiefest sharpness of Wit, and also then approaches the
stubborn Age, when the Child brought up in Pleasure, disdaineth Correction.
And herein Poor men and Great men differ, the one esteeming Learning an
Honor, the other (too often) rather a Disparagement then an Ornament.

Diod.
Diodorus the Sicilian Writes, That the Lawmakers Charondas appointed, that
all the Children of the City should learn their Letters at the charges of the
Commonwealth, which was to maintain Public Masters, to teach both Poor and
Rich. Like to this custom are our Free-schooles in England, where, though
perhaps the Schoolmasters or Schoolmasters may very well instruct a
multitude in learning, Yet he or they can hardly order them in good marners.
For what are two men, or three, at the most, to a giddy-headed company of
Boys? My opinion is (if convenience) will permit) Let them learn first at
home, in those annis pubescentibus. Then your own eyes may see their
education. Licurgus his whelps, both of a Litter, may give sufficient
satisfaction, The one being well educated, would kill a Hare; The other instead
of hunting, would fall to gnawing of bones which he found in the Highway. When
Antipater demanded of the Spartans fifty Children for Hostages, they replied,
That they had rather let him have a double portion of those which were at their
full years; For they knew the ingenuity of their Men, but not (by reason of
good education) what their children might come to Education is Prima, Secunda,
Tertia pars vitae. That crookedness which a Tree has in it is tender growth,
increases daily with the growth of the Tree, season them well in their
Infancy, they will Savor of it in their Age, According to the Poet.

Quo Semel est imbuta recens
Servabit odorem
Testa diu. --
And now, I suppose, my Striplings are formally clad, and togated, newly
arrived at the University, where before they are well acquainted with, the
Colleges and Halls, they must be sent for home, to be cockered up in their
Fathers parlours; if they suffer them to stay so long, as to see the Library,
they suppose they are able to discourse of the Universities great Learning, in
that very hour they eyed the Books, though not profited their Understandings.
But every man may take notice; That perfect scholars are perfect Men, half
scholars half Men, no Scholars no Men. For the illiterate are like Statues,
or like a picture, which causes this Motto, This is the Effigies of such a
man. What a lamentable sight is it, to see a good proportion of Body want an
Headpiece? O quale Caput, sed non habet Cerebrum. Nature without Learning has
lost it is eyesight; And certainly it is less pain to learn in youth, then
to be ignorant in old age; Vita hominis sine literis mors est, and vivi hominis
is sepultura: The life of a man without knowledge is a death, and the sepulcher
of a living man (says Cicero. Cic.
) Wit without Learning is like a Tree without fruit; As an untilled field, so
is the mind without Learning. William the Conqueror, finding the defect of
Learning in himself, uttered these words to his son, That an unlearned Prince
was a Crowned Ass. If it be so with Kings, what is it with Inferiors? Now
there are some Pretenders to Learning, who by their silken Outsides would have
the World suppose they had Golden Insides, whose Cringed knees, Anticke
gestures, with a whole rabble of Superlative fooleries (prating as amply, as
unnecessarily, their Tongues being Gentlemen-ushers to their Wits, still going
before) lead vulgar Judgments into Labyrinths of amazements, Who only
measure Inward Sufficiencies by Outward Forms, or Fortunes, Esteeming them
most Wise, who are most Fantastically decked, Rich, Honorable; As if these
things without an Estate Magnified their Wits, and with an Estate did put the
World in mind of their Fortunes. But what has my Pen to do with Folly? Yet
why should I say so? Since the common Opinion is (urge what I can to the
contrary) No Wisdom without Wealth.

Yet I like not to see insulting Ignorance domineere over poor Scholars, Who
are forced to come sneaking in with Paradoxes of Poverty. But if you observe
what is said by Syracides in his Ecclesiasticus, You shall find the words and
actions of the Rich far surpassing those of the poor; So that, make me
Rich, I must be Just, Valiant, Honorable, Wise, Et quid non. For Virtue in
poverty is like a goodly Ship ready rig'd, but cannot sail for want of Wind.
But Quo vado.

To tell you of all the Kings, and Emperors, that were Scholars, and
Favorers of Learning, were but to fill up my Papers with Proper Names. I
reserve them for some other, though not for my better uses. I will only urge
the Emperor Claudius Caesar, Cosroes King of the Persians, the Vespasians,
Ptolomy King of the Egyptians, and the good Emperor Trajane, who at his own
charges maintained five Hundred Children at School, thereby to banish
Ignorance. It is observed, That, from the death of Domitianus the Emperor,
until the reign of Commodus (comprehending the reign of six Princes) all
were Learned, or singular Favorers, and Advancers of Learning. It was a wise
answer of Alexander, when question was made, what should be put into the rich
Cabinet of Darius, he answered, Homers Works. And reason good; For Homer has
given more men their Living, then Sylla, Caesar, and Augustus. Happy then is
it, when Kings are Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings. It was Varroes good
fortune to light upon Anthony, who, being condemned to die, for his Learning
was pardoned by him, uttering these words, Vivat Varro vir doctiss mus; And
Alexander was never more renowned in all his Conquests, then he was in that of
Thebes, when he sold all the Freemen (Priests only excepted) and in the
greatness of that Massacre, not only gave charge for the saving of Pindarus
the Poet; but also s^w himself, both him, his house, and family undamnified.
Whosoever has but seen History, shall not only find the Learning of these,
and many more, but their well wishing, and bounty toward it. I conceive
therefore, that Parents are bound to lend their helping hands, that their
Children may be instructed, Tam Moribus, quam Doctrina: tam Doctrina quam
Moribus; Otherwise the Childrens faults will light upon the Parents heads. And
by the Law Falcidia, if the Child commit an offense, the Father should be
punished. To this purpose was that of Diogenes, who being to buy commodities of
the Father, and the Son, the Son swore, that Diogenes offered less, then
it cost his Father. Diogenes struck the Father for the Sons oath, the Father
demanded wherefore he struck him; Diogenes replied because he had not
instructed his Son better, then to commit such an offense. But in point of
Schollership I might here urge Architrenius; Archi.
At dijs paulo minor plebes Phaebeia secund'os
Vix metit eventus, quicquid serit undique tortu
Vapulat adversis. --


The Labourer blisters but his Hands, but the Scholar his Brains; And when
all is done, he is but as a Fish cast upon the sands, that must stay, till the
Tide of others Good Will flows. Indeed there are too many Politics, that hold
it a needless thing to be any way indulgent to Scholars, (Poverty being
thought to be their Natural Patrimony) terming them by the title of
Scholastici. And some others think schollership to be but the Emblem of
beggary (though I hold it but a beggarly opinion) so that Scholars merits,
like Ciphers, stand for nothing. It is reported, that one of the Philosophers
delivered a stock of money to a friend of his upon this condition; That if it
should happen his Children should be Fools, he should deliver it unto them;
but if Philosophers, then to the Common People. A strange resolution from so
wise a Man, which perhaps drove an other of the Philosophers into a Passion,
the World so industriously heaping up Treasure, and being so negligent, whom to
leave it to. And here abruptly I break off, lest the prosecution of my
Discourse should beget offense, where I meant none; For by a due proceeding, I
should fall upon some points which are Orthodoxall, if the Fathers of the
Church, and Modern Writers of the best sort, as also Expositors as well of
Antiquity, as of latter times, of several religions, and of all sorts near an
hundred be of validity to have steered my several silenced Tenets.

I choose rather to embrace that grand Politicians advise, who bids me not to
come, etc.

A And thus I pass from the descendent to the ascendent duty.

And here, in respect of mine own obedience, as well as others, I will be
more freely bold to set down truth, knowing that none but Children and Fools
can take exception. Where then lies this duty ascendent? Undoubtedly in the
Child's awful service and observance, both of his Parents persons, and
Precepts: For thereto are Children bound, both by natural instinct, and
supernatural injunction. Nature teaches their respect and obedience toward
those, who gave them being: And the God of nature enjoynes them no less in the
first Commandment of the Second Table. And the elder of the two Sons in the
Gospel shows by the expression of his dutious behavior there, what is due
from the Son to the Father, that is service, and obedience to his
Commandemens. If therefore Parents perform their duties, a curse will light
the heavier on the Children, that do not really act theirs; And let them be
sure to receive it corporally in this, or spiritually in the World to come.

Yet Plutarch, Plut.
that great Moralist says; That the Child is not bound to his Parents, of whom
he has not received some good thing. In which point, I doubt whether it holds
truth on the Child's part, for he is bound absolutely to obey: But certainly
it is true on the Parents, they ought to do good to their Children, and not to
grieve, or provoke them, (if Saint Paul be to be believed) but howsoever to
do them all manner of good, unless they will be worse then the worst of the
Jews; For even of them has our Savior said, Ye your selves being evil know
how to give good gifts to your Children. But I proceed in Childrens duties,
Bast.
and must tell them, that Bastingius reduces the duties of Children toward
their Parents unto three principal Heads: The first is, De Obedientia, quam
liberi debent ipsorum fidelibus, and pijs praeceptis; The Second de Fide,
nempe, ne illos pauperes negligant, sed ut vicissim ijs praemia nutricationis
retribuant; The Third, de Amore, hoc est, Vt eorum vitia and mores tolerent,
and pia quadam indulgentia ad senectutis sordes, and errata conniveant; I leave
this for the Reader to translate, and come to the words of Herolt, Her.
who determines their duties in six things, Filij in sex tenentur parentibus
suis, sive sint vivi, sive mortui. Primo, Tenentur servire eis corporaliter,
scilicet, cum proprio suo corpore: secundo, Tenentur filij parents eorum
diligere ex cord, contra hoc faciunt, qui parents odorunt, and optant ijs
mortem, ut eorum haereditatem participent; Quod est valde reprehensibile, and
grave peccatum. Tertio, Tenentur parentibus dulciter, and reverenter
respondere, cum ab ipsis corripiuntur. Quarto, Filij tenentur parentibus in
temporalibus and corporalibus subvenire. Quinto, Filij tenentur parentibus, in
his, quae ad bonum and salutem ipsorum pertinent. Sexto, Tenentur filij
parentibus defunctis subvenire, and animas parentum suorum cum Missis,
Eleemosynis, and Orationibus de Purgatorio liberare; Sons in six things are
bound to their Parents, whether they be alive or dead; First, they are bound to
serve them Corporally, to wit, with their own Body. Secondly, Children are
bound to love their Parents, with their Heart: Against this they transgress
which hate their Parents, and wish their death, that they may participate of
their inheritance; Which is excedingly to be reprehended, and a Grievous
Sin; (and in my opinion such a Sin as will hardly be forgiven.) Thirdly,
they are bound mildly, and reverently to render an answer, when they are
corrected of them. Fourthly, they are bound to relieve their Parents in
Temporal, and Corporal things. Fifthly, Children are bound to obey their
Parents in those things, which belong unto their good and safety. Sixthly,
Children are bound to help their dead Parents, to free their Souls out of
Purgatory by saying Mass, giving Alms, and making Prayers; The Fourth I
believe if need requires. The last shall never be any part of my Creed.
Howsoever let all Children remember the first Commandment of the Second Table,
dividing it self into two particulars; into a Precept, and a Reason, or rather
a Reward, which is annexed unto this Commandment, and none else. The Precept
(Honor thy Father and thy Mother) the Reason or the Reward [That thy days may
be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee:] Now, the word for
Honor in the Original signifies Aggravare; So that we must Addere Pretium
and Addere Pondus, and so Honorem: make it a matter of weight to honor them.
And seeing they bear the persons of God, they must not be set slightly by.
Phil.
And here by the way Philo the Jew conceives this Commandment to be half
Divine, half Humane; and so would have that, which concerns God, to be in the
first Table, that which belongs to our Neighbor in the second Table. Parents
questionless ought to be reverenced and obeyed; As it is in Leviticus, the
Kings, Luke, the Epistle to the Ephesians, etc. Taurus the Philosopher, when
the Father and the Son came to him about a Controversy, the Son being a
Magistrate, the Father none, appointed, that the Father should sit on that one
stool he had, till the Question were decided, whether of them ought to have
the place. Sufficient might be urged for the manifestation of this point, but
all to this purpose. Offend not thy Parents in Thought, Word, or Deed; In thy
Thoughts harbor not the least conceit against them; In thy Deeds do not any
thing to grieve them; In thy Words speak not amiss of them. Remember what
Chrysologus says, Chrysostom.
Lingua in capite est caput mali; The Tongue in the Head is the Head of evil;
especially in this case. And this Duty stands as well in the Action, as in the
Manner of the Action; And neither to be omitted, and in both be sure thou art
not arraigned at the Bar, and proved guilty: for my part, I had better; nay,
rather undergo Isaakes Burden, then offend my Father Abraham. Thus have I
showed the respective duties, both from Parents to their Children, and from
Children to their Parents. And thus I shake hands on both sides, wishing both
Parents and Children answerable unto what I have wrote; Children especially:
For by the Mosaicall Law, You shall fear every Man his Mother, and his Father.
And in the Proverbes you may find, Honor thy Father, that begat thee, and thy
Mother that bare thee: Certainly then, the Child is in a little deeper bond of
duty, then the Parents, if the Wisdom of Solomon failed him not, when he
thus advised, Honor thy Father with thy whole Heart, and forget not the
sorrows of thy Mother. Remember that thou wast begot of them, and how can
thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee? And thus much for
this part of Providence.

Of the mutual Duties between Masters and their Servants. CAP. XI.
ANd now a word or two between Masters of Families, and their Servants. And
First for the Master. The Master of a Family, according to Aristotle, Arist.
exercises a threefold Power; A Power Regal over his Children; A Power
Magisteriall over his Servants; And a Power Aristocraticall over his Wife;
which is not after his own Will, but agreeable to the Honor and Dignity of
the Married estate. But this is not the Duty, which is urged in Saint Paul's
Epistle to Timothy, If any provide not for his own, especially those of his
own Household, he has denied his Faith, and is worse then an Infidel. A
single provision of Victuals is not sufficient to supply this want; There is a
care to be had of their Souls; (For the greatest part of them have little of
their own) I mean not Puritanically to Catechize them; For that is Officium
Sacerdotis; But, as near as you can, to beat down Sin in them, Especially,
that of Swearing. Suffer them not to enterlard their Discourse with Oaths: For
believe it, the hand of God will light heavy upon that House, where
Blasphemers dwell. O Bar not then thy Servant of his due. If he can say unto
thee, as Jacob did unto Laban, These twenty years have I been with thee; thy
Ewes and thy Shee-goats have not cast their Young, and the Rams of thy flock
have I not eaten; That which was torn of Beasts, I brought not unto thee, I
bare the loss of it. Of my hand did thou require it, whether stolen by day,
or stolen by night. Thus I was, in the day the Drought consumed me, and the
Frost by night, and my sleep departed from mine Eyes. Thus have I been twenty
years in the House, I served thee fourteen years for thy two Daughters, and
six years for thy Cattle; and thou have changed my wages ten times. If he
can say thus, give him not then a bleare-eyed Leah, for a beautiful Rachel: In
a word, bar him not of ought, that is his due.

Now, for the Servants Duty toward his Master, it is fourfold. First, In
executing well his Masters Commandes, and Acting them diligently. Secondly, In
not beguiling. Thirdly, In not reporting that before his face, which he will
not justify behind his back. Lastly, In seeking all things for his Masters
good, in his Goods, and otherwise. This last Duty in the chiefest Points
thereof is twofold. First, In not harshly replying to his Masters words, (for
nothing is so odious as a scurrilous Answer, especially, from an Inferior.)
Secondly, In keeping his Masters secrets at home and abroad: But by the way,
He shall not lock up his Secrets safely, that makes choice of his Servants
Heart for a Cabinet. I must confess he is like a Ladder, ascending and
descending; bound like a Shadow, neither to be longer nor shorter: His Livery
being rather a badge of Servitude, then Devotion; And when all is done, he is
but like him, who in a Winters night takes a long slumber over a dying fire, as
loath to depatt from it; yet parts thence as cold, as when he first (...)
down. As for his Duty, you may read it (...) diverse places of Holy Writ,
especially* in Genesis, the Epistle to the Ephesians, Colossians, Titus, etc. I
might here give them a Moral Instruction, but they will perform what they
list, say what you will, they will do what they please. And thus much for
Providence.

Of Subtilty of Understanding, by some esteemed a Branch of Prudence, but
indeed an Appendix to its Intellectual part. CAP. XII.
I Come now to write De Astutia mentis, which (as was formerly said) I
conceived to be an Appendix of the three former Species of Prudence: Yet will I
allow it a distinct Definition, Astutia mentis est, qua in rebus industrijs
cautum captatur consilium, and acute discernitur, quid bonum, quid malum, quid
utile, quid incommodum; The Subtilty of the Understanding is that, whereby we
take wary Counsel in industrious matters, and punctually discern, what is
good, what evil, what profitable, what incommodious. But such is our
broken-bellied Age, that this Astutia is turned into Versutia, and we term
those most Astute, which are most Versute. D. Aug.
Saint Augustine makes a difference between them. For (says he) Astutia est
quiddam, quod nunc in bonam, nunc in malam partem accipitur; Versutia est
observatio nostri commodi in aliqua re cum alterius detrimento; Astutia is a
subtilty, which is taken sometime in a good Sense, sometime in in a bad.
Versutia is a crafty heeding our own profit with another damage; And this is
called Callidity. The end of this base craft is, First to get Riches, then
Honor. The way to attain unto these is, by that ugly, uncouth Monster
(Dissimulation or Flattery) which because it lights casually on my Pen. A word
or two of it.

Of diverse ends of the Understandings Subtilty, and means thereto, and first
of the Highway Flattery. CAP. XIII.
THis is the old Sickness of the Roman Commonwealth, and the most Pestilent
contagion of our British Nation.

The Original of this Flattery first came from the Devil, the Devil put it
over to the Serpent, the Serpent left it to the Woman: Where it had its
beginning, it is probable, it will have its ending. And here, Com.
by the way, Petrus Comestor, in his Scholasticall History, gives us this note;
That at the time, when the Serpent tempted the Woman, he was straight, and
upright like a man, but afterward by the Curse he was cast down to the Earth
to glide along thereon. To this purpose (says Beda) the Devil chose a
Serpent, Bed.
that had a face like a Woman, because Similia similibus applaudant, that like
may be pleasing to like. And Saint Cyril observes, Cyr.
That Man's first destruction was in Paradise, when the Rib was taken out of him
to make Woman: So that the fashioning of our first Mother, has caused
multitudes of her Sons to loose their hearts; For ever since that time Sin
assailes the heart there, where it wants that Rib for defense. And the holy
Father Ambrose seems to be very angry with our Grandmother Eve, D. Ambr.
wishing that either Eves Tongue had been out, or both hers, and Adams ears
stopped, before either the Woman had listened to the Serpent, or the Man to the
beguiled Woman, Vtinam aut surdus Adam fuisset, aut Eva obmutuisset, ille ne
vocem uxoris audiret; ista ne loquatur marito; Would to God, says he, Adam had
been deaf, or Eve dumb, he deaf in not listening to his Wives Serpentine
Tongue, or she Tongue-tied, that she could not have spoken the Serpents
Language to her Husband, Vicissemus, si Eva tacuisset; We had been happy,
says he, and still kept Paradise, could the Woman but have kept her Tongue in
her Head, which Tongue has so sorely broken Man's head, that all the Balsome in
the World can never heal so deep a Wound. But to the purpose. Adulatio est
excessus delectandi alios verbis, vel factis; Flattery is an excess of
delighting others by Words, or Deeds; or, Adulatio est peccatum ex sermon
vanae laudis alicui exhibitae, intention complacendi; laudare enim aliquem,
qui non est laudandus, vel plus quam est laudandus, vel non eo fine, quo fieri
debet, peccatum est, secundum Alexandrum; Alex.
Adulation is a Sin used to any with the speech of vain praise, and an
intention of pleasing; For to praise any one, which is not to be praised, or
more then he is praiseworthy, or not to that end, whereto it ought to be done,
is a sin, if the Author err not. D. Greg.
Saint Gregory speaking of the Egyptian Locusts, says, Locustae vocabulo
linguae adulantis exprimitur; By the name of the Locust, the Tongue of the
Flatterer is expressed, Devorata est herba terrae, et quicquid pomorum in
arboribus fuit; By the first was only devoured the Grass of the Earth, and
the fertility of Trees; But these Flatterers, Terrenorum hominum mentes si bona
aliqua proferre conspiciant, haec immoderatius laudando corrumpunt, Corrupt by
immoderate praising the Understanding of Men, if they regard to publish ought
that is good. The Locusts lasted in Egypt but three days; this is the
customary vice of every day. The Locusts were blown away with a West Wind into
the Red Sea: no one Wind, no not all the Winds can blow these Diabolicke
Servants to their Master the Devil, till there be no more Posterity upon Earth.

But some may allege Saint Paul for authority of dissimulation, because he
would please the Jews in Timothy, and not circumcise Titus to please the
Gentiles. A Question needing no Answer; For it was to save all, Non simulantis
astu, sed compatientis affectu; Not by feigned Dissimulation, but by
compassionate Affection. I would willingly here shake hands with it, but I am
loath to part with it, many do so dearly love it, which makes me tell you, It
is the poisoning of Man's Understanding, the Feeder of humors, the whole Volume
of it is bound up in the Vellome Cover of Deceit; its actions are worse then
Ravenous Beasts or Birds, the one do prey but upon the dead Bodies, the other
upon the living Souls. The Reports thereof are like Echoes, still imperfect,
such shadows that gainsay nothing, yielding with your Body, the
Looking-glasses that represent every thing, that is set against them: Camelion
like, having all colors but White, all Points but Honesty. A Flatterer, as
some say, is either an Ape by imitation; For he will sooth a Man, till he have
got somewhat by him: or a Shadow by Deceit; For he quickly passes by: Or a
Basiliske by stinging; For with his very sight he wounds a Man: He is that
Mus campestris, that still nibles on the hard Rind of sour Leamons, but when
he comes to those, that are sweet and wholesome, his Stomach falls into a
loathing. Indeed Flatterers are like Tailors, who will tell you, that your
Clothes are fit, when you must needs know better then they. We might therefore
paint out Flattery, as the Philosophers did Fortune, diversely, as she was to
them, but certainly good to none. Eele-like, never yielding good hold-fast.
They do, as Ioab did to Amasa, embrace to kill. It is the Aspe, that kills us
sleeping, that Sirens voice, whose Ravishing is Murdering. Those then, that
take delight to be commended by Flatterers, one may take their Understandings
in Pursenets. Yet I grieve with Pity, and pity them with Grief, who had
rather be soothed, then advised: subscribing more willingly to the Tongue of
Flattery, then to the Heart of Honesty, so that a Non-meritorious parasite
shall obtain a Sunshine admission, when dejected desert shall be forced to
freeze in attendance, and pine away in fruitless Expectation.

But let each Wise man scorn those, the Clock of whose Tongue is not
answerable to the Dial of their Hearts. Let him banish such Trencher-flies,
that wait more for Lucre, then for Love; For my part it shall always be in my
Litany, From them all the Lord deliver me. But now a days I muse the Mystery
of Flattery is not made a Science, since it is so Liberally professed. The time
has been, when Flatterers have been altogether ruinated; Philip, and
Constantine banished them from their Courts. The Athenians put Tymagoras to
death, because to insinuate with Darius he saluted after the Persian manner.
Augustus contemned it so much, that he would not suffer his Servants to kneel,
nor Tiberius suffer his Servants to call him Lord. King Canutus being, as it
were, Deified by Flatterers, walked one day on the Sands, at a flowing Water,
and commanded the Waves, that they should not touch his feet, no sooner had
he spoken, but the Sea dashed him: Ye see now my Lords (says he) what reason
you have to extol me, that am not able to stop one Wave. Atheneus reports,
Athen.
that the Thessalians clean raced down a City of the Meleans, because it was
named Flattery. I confess, it were better with Diogenes to bid Alexander stand
out of his light, and not deprive him of that, he could not give him, then
with Aristippus to speak to Dionysius his heels, instead of his ears. The
World is full of Dionysius his Scholars: We know too many Clisophi, that will
imitate Philip; And will not our Platonists array themselves with Impudency
instead of Modesty?

If our Ears must be in our Heels, there our Sycophants Tongues must dance
attendance; If we could let them alone, where God has placed them, they must
pack up their Pipes, and remove their Siege. Now Flattery has so enwrapt it
self into the skirts of Honesty, that we are Oves in front, vulpes in cord;
The Cloak of Sanctity covering the body of Iniquity, that makes me with the
Poet, say Durum, sed levius fit patientia
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.


Where shall Gyndanes find another Abaucus, who will carry out his wounded
Friend, and leave his Children to be burnt: His Reason for the Act is to be
allowed of. Incertum (says he) an hi boni sint futuri, etc. It is uncertain,
whether or no my Children will be good hereafter, He has been long my
Friend, and I shall hardly find out such another as Gyndanes; Or where shall
we find another Damon and Pythias, whose love was such, that (before that
Tyrant Dionysius) the one dares to be pledge for his Friends life, the other
fails not the day of his Return? What think you of Pilades, and Orestes?
Nisus and Euryalus? Perithous and Theseus, whom Death it self could not
separate? or what of Castor and Pollux, who in respect of their realty of
Friendship were translated into Stars? these were as the Verses are.

Alter ego nisi sis, nec eris mihi verus amicus:
Ni mihi sis, ut ego, non eris alter ego.
And therefore a Friend is said to be Animi custos, True Friendship is like
Quicksilver put to Gold, which adheres so close unto it, that it works into
its Intrals, and so far incorporates it self, that both Metals are become
one Lump. Such Friendship there was in the Heroicke times, But now, Friends
are as scarce as Beacons, they stand alone, and far off one another:
Suspicion now-adayes marres Friendship and almost dissolves Natural Affection:
So that I may tell you, If you have a Friend, to suspect him unworthily,
instructs him the next way to suspect you, and prompts him even to deceive you,
Mistrust being that stifling Spirit, which insinuates it self into every
Action, or Passion of the Mind. Suspicion proceeds from self defect, and if
thou do receive an Injury, Neglect destroys with swifter Wings then Revenge;
Howsoever, all kind of Jealousy is worse then Frenzy, there may be some end
of the one, none of the other; Of all Passions no bitterer Potion. It begets
unquietness in the Mind, hunting after every Whisper, and amplifying it with
Interest, as that well skilled Master in Melancholy calls it.

Burt.
Pale Hagge, infernal
Fury, pleasures smart,
Envies Observer, prying in every Part.
Leave these superfluous Thoughts which beget Tormentors to thy Soul.
Isocrates prayed, that he might be safe from the danger of his Friends, rather
then his Enemies, For that he could beware of his enemies, because he would
not trust them. I fear that now adays Friendship is like the journey of the
two Friends in the Fable, whom if the Bear meet, the one will fly to the Tree;
while the other falls to the ground. Such, as this Traveller, are those Friends,
who wither in the Bud, before they come to the Blossom, not like the Indian
Tree, which (as History reports) never flourishes, but in the night, for
whilst the Sun shines it seems to Languish: nor resembling Glo-wormes,
which, darkened in the day of Prosperity, reserve their Splendour for the night
of Adversity. Adversity being that Judge, which discovers our enemies, and
unmasketh our Friends.

But are none to be taxed with this Malady, but the Laity? He were no
injurious Patron, that should herein tax the Clergy too: But I am loath to
pinch on the Parsons side: nor mean I any Reverend Ministers, who make
Conscience of their ways; but those who term themselves Professors,
challenging that, which is none of their due, making Religion nothing, but a
composition of Knavery. If their Habit caracterize them not, yet you may know
them by their Use and Doctrine, and their Doctrine and Use, till there be no
use of their Doctrine. Let them captivate the Illiterate, as Bees by the Basin,
if they list, For my part, I have done with them: let them with Aesops Ass get
on the Lions skin, and terrify the Flock, they shall never cozen me; I
will play the Countryman in the same Fable, and tell him, whatsoever he be,
Vae mi aselle, tam been novi, etc. If any preciser Idiots quarrel at my
distaste toward them, I pass them by as regardlesly, as Master Quarles in his
Poem. Quar.


It Is not thine eyes, which (taught to weep by art)
Look red with tears (not guilty of the heart)
It Is not the holding of thy hands so high,
Nor yet the purer squinting of thine Eye:
It Is not your Mimick mouths, your Antic faces,
Your Scripture-phrases, or Affected Graces.
Nor Prodigal up-bending of thine eyes,
Whose gashfull Balls do seem to pelt the Skies,
It Is not the strickt reforming of your Hair
So close, that all the Neighbor Skull is bare.
It Is not the drooping of the Head so low,
Nor yet the lowering of the sullen Brow,
Nor Woolvish howling, that disturbs the Air,
Nor Repetitions of your tedious Prayer:
No, no, it is none of these that God regards,
Such sort of Fools their own Applause rewards;
Such holy Madness God rejects and loathes,
That sinkes no deeper then the Skin and Clothes.
These kind of Birds were hatched of addle Eggs else could they not have such
idle Heads; making Religion like the Law of Procrustes among Thieves, with the
Iron Bed cutting off all that were too long, and stretching forth all that were
too short. Their Conscience for the most part, is without Wit, and if they have
any Wit, it is without Conscience making the sacred Art of Piety to be the
Bond of Iniquity. But they may take notice of the ingenious Observation of one,
that said Zeal without Wisdom was like Mettle in a blind Horse, which though
it free the Rider from the toil of the Spur, yet it increases his labor in
using the Reins, lest the Iades mettle becomes his own, and his Riders
overthrow. Minerva put a Golden bridle upon Pegasus, that he should not fly too
fast: and (perhaps upon this occasion) the Emperor Vespasian did stamp in his
Coin a Dolphin, and an Anchor, with this Impresse [Soon enough, if well
enough.] A Dolphin outstrips the Ship, that is soon enough, an Anchor stays
the Ship, that is well enough; a Dolphin and Anchor, Soon enough, if well
enough. Their minds riding faster then their horses can gallop, must needs
tire; Nor could their madness so plainly appear, did not the pride of their
own conceit raise up a dust, which blinds them, otherwise should I wonder
that they should not see the senselessness of what they say, even whilst they
are speaking. Whence comes it to pass, that our Pulpits are too often fraught
rather with libellous Pasquills, then with religious Meditations, but that
these men have neither will to Learn, nor wit to Teach: outwardly demeaning
themselves, as if Religion were quoted in their looks, and Sanctity obliged to
their service. (Great difference there is between a Gospeller, and a
Libeller.) And perhaps from hence Saint Gregory groundeth his speech, D. Greg.
That when they neglected to be the Scholars of Truth, they became the
Schoolmasters of Error. And thus much for the Religion of Raylers.

Yet I would have none think that I owe a knee to the Sea of Rome, since I
have read, she is full of Imperfections. Angelo the famous Artizan of Italy
may sufficiently inform; who drawing the Pictures of Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, for a Cardinal, a good Friend, and Benefactour of his, portrayed them
with very red, and high colored faces, whereas neither the Scripture, nor any
Ecclesiastical History, nor any Original Tablet described them by any such
Complexions: And being asked the Reason, because (quoth he) if they were now
living, they could not but blush at the Pomp of you Cardinals, the Pride of
this Court, and the Abuses of the Church in general.

Sir Edwin Sandys writing of the Roman Religion, Sir Edwin Sandys.
especially that of Italy, where it has principally flourished; says, That
they communicating Divine Honor to Saints, and Angels, by building Churches,
erecting Altars, by worshipping their Images, going in Pilgrimage to their
Relics, attributing all kind of Miracles, both to the one, and the other, have
wrought this general effect in those parts; That men have more Affiance, and
assure unto themselves a greater conceit of comfort, in the Patronage of the
Creatures, and Servants of God, then of God himself, the Prime, and Creator.
And touching the blessed Virgin, the case is clear; That howsoever their
Doctrine in Schools be otherwise, yet in all kind of outward Actions, the
honor which they do her is double (for the most part) unto that, they do to
our Savior. Where one does profess himself a Devoter, or peculiar Servant of
our Lord, whole Towns sometimes (as Sienna by name) are Devoters of our Lady.
Not much unlike this was the Story of Gyovandria, Hist. Flor.
when he killed Galiazzo Duke of Millaine, who, after he had heard Mass,
turned toward the Image of Saint Ambrose, and said, O Ambrose, Lord of our
City, thou know our intentions, and the end, wherefore we will adventure
our selves to so many perils; Be favorable to this our Enterprise, and, by
favoring of Justice, show how much Injustice does displease thee. If this will
not serve turn, then hearken to the long dispute between Ignatius and
Machiavel, Ig. Con.
for Superiority in Hell, which may satisfy sufficiently, the Devil himself
being Judge, who gave the Precedencie to the Laity, and took it from the
Clergy of Rome; he was forced to make much of the Machiavelians, because they
came seldom; but for the Jesuits, they tumbled down to Hell daily, easily,
voluntarily, and by heaps, the Reason was added, because they were accustomed
to sin against their own Consciences. More might be urged of this Religion,
but enough, unless it were better: I will therefore close up this Chapter with
the words of our late King of peaceable memory. K. James.
The Papists Religion is like Homers Iliads of the Siege of Troy, or Virgils
Aeneads of the beginning of Rome; both of them had a Foundation of truth, so
had the Papists the Bible, but they have added so much, that the first Truth is
almost lost*

Of the first end whereunto Subtilty tends, Riches. CAP. XIIII.
Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames?
AND is it so, that we must have a voyage into Hell, with an Itum est in
viscera terra? If thou had all the Treasures, that lie hid in the Bowels of
the Earth, envelloped in the Concave of thine own Belly, what would it gain
thee, thou Fool, if thou gain the whole World, and loose thine own Soul? I
Remember a Story of a poor Man, who, for want of sustenance, took an Halter
in his hand, with a resolution to hang himself; and coming to the place,
where he intended to be his own Executioner, found a Bag of Gold, takes
away the Gold, and leaves the Halter in the steed. He that hid the Gold,
coming to the place, where he left it, found it metamorphosed into an Halter,
takes the Halter, and hangs himself. Lord, what strange effects this Gold
works: The one, for the want of it, would have hanged himself; the other for
the loss of it, dispatching his work, did hang himself. Me thinks Midas
his ears should forwarne us of such Hellish thrift. Midas the Image of a
covetous Man, who, while he seeks to augment his Riches, denies to himself
the use of his own, and starves in abundance. And of this Divine Verity, the
Barbarous Indians had a natural notion, who imagined that Gold was the God of
the Spaniards, in that they hunted after it so greedily. There is a Story in
Plutarch, not unlike, Plut.
or unworthy the recital, of one Pithius, an avaritious Prince, in the days
of Xerxes, who exhausted his Subjects in the diging and refining of Gold; whose
Wife, commiserating the cries of the people, caused certain admirable
Worke-men, in the absence of her Husband, to make a golden Table with variety
of Viands, all of the same Metal, which at his return, she caused to be set
before him: Who long feasting his eyes with so rare, and beloved a Spectacle,
at length called for Meat to satisfy his hunger: When the like Artificial
Food was set before him, he in rage crying out, that he was ready to famish,
his Wife replied, we have nothing, Sir, to entertain you with but this; For
while you employ the labor of the Citizens, and their Art in the getting of
Gold, a number dye in the Mines, and all for that, which is least useful, the
Fields lie unculturated, the Vineyards undressed, the Orchards unplanted; so
that you must eat your Gold, or prevent the cause of this Scarcity. Add to
this that of Catiphus, Governor of the City of Susa, who had therein a Tower
full of Gold, and Jewels; but for Avarice would not disperse bis heaped
Treasure amongst his Soldiers; afterward Alan King of the Tartarians,
surprised his City, and taking Catiphus shut him up in his Tower, saying unto
him; If thou had not so greedily walled up this Treasure, thou had saved
thy self, and this City: Now therefore eat, and drink, and take thy fill of
that, thou love so dearly, So died he miserably through Famine in the midst
of excessive Riches. Observe that of Solon to Craesus, who being asked of him,
who was more happy then he, since he was Splendens auro and gemmis; Solon
told three times, who was more happy: This threefold Answer of Solon caused a
triple wrath in Craesus. Indeed it was with Craesus then, as it is with too
many now, making many simple Conversions, Fools Philosophers, and Philosophers
Fools: but let them take heed with Craesus, that they be not taken by Cyrus,
and led to the stake, and then being demanded of Cyrus; who that Solon is, must
confess that he is not Vnus stultorum, but Vnus sapientum; And indeed his
Answer was right; for Vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.


Suppose then thou had the goods of Fortune fast locked in a Coffer; yet thy
case may be, as was this Kings of Lydia, who thought both God, and Men his
Friends. To tell you, what Riches are, perhaps were frivolous, since others are
better acquainted with them then my self.

To attain unto Riches. Many ways we know unto this Wood, but the ordinary
way is Usury which, though it be forbidden in holy. Writ, and, I think,
scarce allowed of by the Fathers; yet some good Authors have approved, that
some kind of Usury may be tolerable; some (certain I am) is intolerable. I
will not insist upon the Point; only acquaint you with the words of Bishop
Andrews. Vsuras cum dico, B. Andr.
hoc dico, pactum ex mutuo lucrum; Tria haec (mutuum, lucrum, pactum) vim omnem
faenoris apposite circumscribunt. Yet I am not so precise, as he that told a
Holy Sister, That she should lend, looking for nothing again. So to clear
his Sister from the Sin of Usury, he kept the Principle.

But I come to treat of those, which are Avaritious, whom I might yoke to
Beggars; You will say, That the linkes are unfit, one being made of Gold, and
the other of Iron; Yet their conditions hold a fit Correspondencie, both not
willing to part with any thing, before they dye; Therefore I make this
Comparison, because there are Multitudes, that Inter opes are mendici opum. S.
Bernard.
Saint Bernard affirms, That Avarus esurit, ut Mendicus, Fidelis contemnit, ut
Dominus; ille possidendo mendicat, iste contemnendo servat; The Covetous man
hungers, as a Beggar, the Faithful contemnes it as a Lord; He by possessing
begs, the other by contemning possesses. Or more properly to the Estridge,
Pliny.
That as Pliny reports, has the wings of an Eagle, yet never mounts; Or they
are like the Cardinal, who would not loose his part in Paris, for his part in
Paradise. These men have an Itch, which has always need of clawing, Never
satisfied, like Tantalus in Hell; or like a Dog in a Wheel, which roasteth
meat for others eating; or like Jonathan, who for Hony-combs endangered his
life. And were not unsatisfied desire too peremptory for Counsel, too
confident for dislike, too potent for Remorse, I would advise a man to live, as
Salust prescribes, Vt nec sordide custodiat, nec prodige-spargat, That he
neither Basely hoord up, nor Prodigally scatter it about, the one denominateth
an ignoble mind, the other an improvident Indiscretion; Spare not then, where
Reputation lays claim for Expense, nor expend, where Frugalitie with
Moderation will arraigne, and condemn thee of Prodigality, lest thou be forced
to look Necessity in the face; for to be a Bankerupt is to be a Thief in an
Honorable kind. Living above Fortune is but to be a History to after times.

Let those Lavishers then, that made the Covetous their Voyders, Live so
thriftily, as to pay their debts in their life time, so may they deprive their
Executors of a trouble. And here, by the way, I meet a difference among the
Philosophers. The Aristotelians were of opinion, that Superfluity of Riches
might cause a tumult in a Commonwealth; Because, if Arrogancy and Riches
should chance to link together (as too often they do) then is great danger of
Bellum civil; I refer you for examples to the History of Florence: Your
Platonists thought poverty the chiefest cause of Insurrection in a
Commonwealth, according to that old Saying, Necessitas non habet legem; For
examples hereof, we see them daily, though not dangerously: Both which tenets
among them are as yet unreconciled; If I might judge, I should conceive the
Golden mean the best: I need not here to bring in old Avarice to act its part,
with Quo plus habet, eo plus cupit; or with Bonaventure, Bonav.
by way of comparison, to liken it Orco, sive Mari; Yet it might serve turn,
since the Water of the one might quench the Fire of the other: I term it old
Avarice; First, for its Antiquity; Next, because it is most subject to old Age.
And here I will tell you a Tale; Guz.
When Jove had made the Fabric of the Universe, all things being perfectly
good, before he created Man, the asses eyes being newly opened, he begins to
leap and bray; At last bethinking himself, why he was made an Ass (it being
proper to Asses to take the ends of things into their consideration, when they
are past remedy) he came to Jupiter, to know wherefore he was created; Jupiter
told him, for the use of Man, and to perform his duty and service. The Ass,
with his eyes set on the ground, demanded how long he should live in that
slavery: Jupiter told him thirty years: He besought Jupiter that he might
live but ten; and that he would bestow the other twenty years upon some other
Creature, that were able to bear them: Jupiter condescended to the request;
The next living Creature that came to Jupiter was the Dog, who partly
understanding what had happened between Jupiter and the Ass, after earnest
soliciting for the curtailing of his days, it befell him, as it did the Ass;
Whilst the Fact was doing, the Ape did the like, and the like did happen to the
Ape: These things being finished, Jupiter created Man, giving him power over
all: Man, being desirous to know the period of his days, desired Jove, that
he might know how long he should live; Jupiter told him, that he had
ordained, ab Origin, thirty years to every living Creature, and that he was
to enjoy no longer time; Man, being desirous of life, besought that those
years, that these creatures had refused, might be conferred on him, Jove
yields to his request: So Man lives (according to the Tale) thirty years;
Quatenus he is a Man, in all uprightness from the Preturbations of the World;
from thirty to fifty, he leads the life of an Ass, tumbling and turmoyling
for the things of this World; from fifty to seventie, the Dogs refused years,
snarling, grumbling, and envying at others; and, if he chance to live from
seventy to ninety, really possessed of the Apes twenty, he will counterfeit
the defects of Nature, using foolish and fantastical Devises; and from thence
I conceive the old Proverb to arise, Senex bis puer.

But it may be asked, whether the Spirituality are not as well troubled with
Avaricious Infections, as the Temporality? I am confident on the Negative part;
for I think if Aesops Dog should bequeath his fifty Pounds for a Legacy,
he should never find any acceptance of the Clergy; yet Saint Ambrose found
fault with Simoniacall Compositions in his days, Amb.
Quod dedit, cum Episcopus ordinaretur, aurum fuit, quod perdidit, anima fuit:
cum alium ordinaret, quod accepit, pecunia fuit, quod dedit, lepra fuit; That
which he gave (says he) when he was ordained Bishop, was Gold, and that,
which he lost, was his soul: That, which he took, when he ordained another,
was money; and that which he gave, was Leprosy. It was stoutly, B. Sandys.
and honestly spoken by Bishop Sandys in a Sermon, whose words my wishes
attend. If Simoniacall affection has corrupted the heart of any Bishop, it is
not amiss, if his heart were given him in his hand, it is easily dealt with
him, if he be disbishoped. And here perhaps it will be expected, I should
descend A majore ad minus, Something of the inferior Levits, for their
Covetousness, if not rather for their Simoniacall contracts: So that he that
has the greatest Purse, shall have the best Living. But, I hope, of this fault
very few are guilty. As for your ingenious Clergy, they so handle the Cause,
that all their actions are not, Propter privatum lucrum, sed propter honorem
Ecclesiae, howsoever such Ingenuity, for the most part, is deprived, and
Ignorance preferred. Certainly, there is an error all over, but whether are
most to blame, you may judge between the Doner, and the Donee; If one would
not give, the other could not receive. But quo vado? I conclude on either side
with a false verse, though true sense, Improbus ille Parson, crudelis tu quoque
Patron.

Let none set their hearts on worldly Riches, lest they be served, as the Rich
Miser, who having filled a Chest with bags of Gold, wrote on the top of it, Hic
est Deus meus; A mad Knave being desirous to see the Rich Man's God, broke open
the Chest, and finding Gold, took it away; and, under Hic est Deus meus, wrote
this Motto: Resurrexit, non est hic. Anxie quaeruntur, difficile custodiuntur,
adultimum omnino relinquuntur; They are doubtfully got (as you see) hardly
kept, and at last, whether you will or not, to be left. Si divitiae
effluxerint, non auferant nisi semetipsas; If Riches pass away from thee, let
them carry nothing with them, but themselves. Riches, without Gods blessing,
are but the Fountain of mishap, they make young men Fools, and old men
Atheists- But, me thinks, we are like the Young Man in the Gospel: we can
say, we can keep all the Commandments, but we are loath to part with our
Possessions: But by his favor, though he would try a Nisi prius with our
Savior, yet he sent his Mittimus along with him. It is easier for a Camel,
etc. Chrysologus observes, Chrysostom.
That Dives his Dogs were set to fear away Beggars, yet they licked Lazarus
his sores; whence it may be noted, that Dogs are more naturally kind then
some Rich Men. But all may take notice, that Misericordiam qui seminat inopi,
sibi metit; coeli pluvia infundit terram, lachrymae pauperum coelum rigant; Who
sowes Mercy to the Poor, mowes it to himself; the Rain of Heaven refreshes
the Earth, the tears of the Poor water Heaven. I cannot here pass by
Fulgentius his Comparison, Fulg.
betwixt the Rich Miser, and the poor Beggar, without observation. For Dives
ille, says he, purpura and bysso indutus, and quotidie splendide epulans, quam
inanis fuit in illis epulis? quam pauper in multitudine divitiarum? quam nudus
in pulchritudine vestium? quam infirmus in sanitate corporis? quam famelicus in
saturitate ventris? quam miser in gaudijs? quam desolatus inter amicorum
colloquia? quam dejectus inter obsequia servulorum? Attend contra Lazarum in
paupertate divitem, in miseria beatum, in infoelicitate foelicem, invulneribus
sanum, and quidem sine domo, sed non sine Domino; sine vest, sed non sine
fide; sine bona valetudine corporis, sed non sine robore charitatis; sine cibo,
sed non sine Christo; canibus expositum, sed socium Angelorum; qui non
accipiebat de micis, quae cadeba^t de mensa divitis, sed coelestem panem
visceribus ructabat aeternis; The Rich man was clothed with Purple and fine
Silk, and daily feasted gloriously, but how empty was he amidst his
banqueting? how poor was he in his riches? how naked in his beautiful
garments? how infirm in the sanity of his body? how empty in the fullness of
his belly? how miserable in his joys? how desolate in the conference of his
Friends? how destitute in the dutifulness of his Servants? Mark again
Lazarus, Rich in Poverty, Blessed in Misery, Happy in Infelicity, Sound for all
his Ulcers, not without the Lord, though without a Landlord; without Raiment,
but not without Faith; without the outward health of the Body, but not without
the inward strength of Charity; without Meat, but not without Christ; exposed
to Dogs, yet accompanied with Angels; who did not receive the Crumbs, that fell
from the Rich man's Table, but had his internal bowels glutted with the Bread
of Heaven. Though the Leper be an Hospital of Diseases, yet (as Saint Cyprian
very well observes) the flesh of the Leper is as fair to God, as he, that is
bathed in Milk, and Spices. How often shall we read, Beati pauperes, in Holy
Writ? but never, Totidem verbis, Beati divites. Mistake me nor, I am not of
that common Opinion of those, who say, Quo auctior in divitijs, eo copiosior in
vitijs. A man that is poor in Earthly treasure, may think himself rich in
Heavenly; You may be both rich on Earth, and rich in Heaven, poor on Earth,
and poor in Spirit toward Heaven. We know Abraham has his poor, and his
rich Sons in his bosom. But me thinks, I hear the words of a Reverend
Father, Quisque Dives, quisque pauper; nemo Dives, nemo pauper, animus omnia
facit; It is somewhat to be rich or poor, it is nothing to be rich or poor;
it is as the mind is, the mind makes all. D. Chrysostom.
Saint Chrysostom speaking of what mind Dives carried, gathered it out of
Abraham's doubling and trebling, Tu, Tua, and Tua recepisti, tu, bona tua, in
vita tua, which words are working words, as he conceives, and contain in
them great Emphasis, understanding by Tua, not that so much, that he had in
possession, as that, he had made special reckoning of: For that is most
properly termed ours. In a word, once again, Animus omnia facit; Let me then
give this Caveat, that no man so far dote on them, as (with Ahab at the
persuasion of Iezebel) to sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, though he be resolved to put on Sackcloth and Ashes to appease the
wrath of God; lest the iniquity of the Father in the Sons days fall upon the
house. Or, with Ananias and Sapphira, for gain to lie to the Holy Ghost, lest
they fall down dead at the Apostles feet. Or last of all, with Judas, for a
small Portion of Silver to sell his Master, lest they should with Judas, buy a
Halter, and hang themselves. I conclude this with Architrenius. Arch.


Inopsque,
Plus animae, quam dives, habet, levioribus alis
Pauper ad astra volat, dulcique pecunia mole,
Quos aluit, laesura premit, nec Craesus in auro
Fata fugit, perdensque Deos non perditur umbris.
Of the second end, whereunto Subtilty tends, Honor. CAP. XV.
ANd now of Honor; which Aristotle terms Benefactivae gloriae initium. Arist.
Aquinas says, Aquin.
That Honor is Cujuslibet virtutis praemium; If I should here tell you, where
this matchless Lady Honor keeps her seat, you may marvel at my
presumptuous Enterprise. Some think in the Soul only, or else in the Soul
and Body together: some in Prudence, others in Goodness of manners; but I
think all Nobility has its Original from Virtue; True Nobility being
composed of Blood, Virtue, and Power. Questionless, Kings never made any
Nobleman Propter Lucrum; but as they thought, Propter Meritum; Perhaps some by
By-ways may buy Honor, but those, that enjoy it so, reap only the
commendations of good Politicians: For what they give in Money, for the most
part, they save in Hospitality. And herein (by the way) those Heralds may be
blamed, who Honor, where it is not due, and shape so many new Coats for
upstart Gentlemen. In this have they no way to avoid a Censure, but to compound
with Africa and America to produce more Monsters, or else they must make fewer
Gentlemen. Vain Honor is but the Idol of Fools, for no wise man ever sought
felicity in shadows. Eurip.
Indeed Euripides says, The honest-minded man is only Noble, and not he, that
descends of ancient Race. For we know, in process of time, though the
stallion be good, yet, by the Mares fault, the breed may alter, and so prove
Jades. To this purpose valiant Ephricates a Shoo-makers Son, being upbraided
by Hermodius a Peer, told him, my blood takes its beginning from me, and thine
from thee its farewell. Observe Seneca, Senec.
He first asks you a Question, then gives you his Resolution, Quis generosus?
Ad virtutem a natura been compositus animus facit nobilem, cui ex quacunque
condition supra fortunam licet surgere.

But as I shall herein justly commend Seneca; so shall I not unjustly tax the
too severe Censure of Salust toward the Nobility of his time in general,
Salust.
When he thus upbraids them, Contemptor animus, and superbia commune
nobilitatis malum; For where shall we see superlative Arrogance more settled,
then in an upstart Gentleman?

Histor. Flor.
True it is, that the Nobility of Florence had once so ill behaved themselves,
that the Citizens made a Decree; That, if any one had received a blow, or loss
in goods, the party damnified might call him to the Councels, and protest him
for one of the Nobility; so odious was the name. Among the Heathenish Romans,
they joined the Temple of Virtue to the Temple of Honor, and so linked them
together, that whosoever would come to the Temple of Honor, must first pass
through the Temple of Virtue. Boast not then thy self of thy Honorable place,
but see, that thou be justly worthy of it; use rather the Spurs of Industry,
then the Stirrops of Insolency.

I must confess, Honor is a good Brooch to wear in a man's Hat yet in this*
Wise men sometimes and fools, take their Fortune. Every man knows, that
Lubrica est scala fortunae, Slippery is the Ladder of Fortune; and Quo altius
scandis, eo gravius cadis; The higher thou climbest, the more dangerous is thy
fall; and the higher thou growest, the more subject to the danger of Winds;
Why do thou then wax proud, thou frail earth and ashes? We have read, that
Caesar cum pompa, Alexander cum Sceptro cecidit; Ambition is like a Torrent,
that never looks back. Run then an easy Current, not over high, take not an
Inventory of thine own worth, nor wing thy thoughts with too high flying
Feathers, lest they spread themselves so wide, as to cover thy little world
with their Shadows. Beware of Icarus. Was it not Plinies Pride to find out
the secrets of Aetna? and what became of him? we read it was his ruin.
Observe what became of that Tyrant Dionysius, who, being stripped out of his
Royalty, was glad to play the Schoolmaster at Corinth, and instead of a
Scepter, bore a Rod, so that of a cruel Tyrant, he became a frowning Pedant.
Or that Ruler Bladud, or Baldud, Graft.
who by his Necromanticke Art, and Daedalion-like endeavoring to fly, falling,
broke his neck at Troy-novant, now London. Nay, go to the Text, and you shall
find that Pride was the downe-fall of Babel, the Gallows for Haman, the
butcher for Nichanor, the consumption of Herod, the destruction of Antiochus,
and was not, for the same offense Pharaoh, and his host drowned in the red
Sea? Remember the words of S. Bernard, D. Bernard.
Quid tu igitur superbis, terra et cinis? Si superbtentibus Angelis Deus non
pepercit, qua^to minus tibi, putredo et vermis? Nihil ille Lucifer fecit, nihil
operatus est, tantum cogitavit superbiam, and in momento, in ictu oculi
irrecuperabiliter separatus est; What therefore would thou have proud earth
and ashes? If God has not spared the Pride of Angels, how much less the pride
of Man, who is but putrefaction and a worm? Lucifer did nothing, wrought
nothing, only he had proud imaginations, and in a Moment, in the twinkling of
an Eye, he is irrecoverably separated from the blessed society of the Angels,
Si igitur Diabolus propter superbiam de coelo dejectus est, multo minus,
superbus illic non intrabit, Bad.
If therefore (says Badeus) the Devil for Pride was cast out of Heaven, how
then is it possible, that a proud man should enter therein?

Neque enim deberent ultra coelum aspicere, qui in creatorem coeli peccaverunt,
and dominum Majestatis; Neither indeed (says Origin) ought their Pride to
behold Heaven, Orig.
who have sinned against Heaven, and the Lord of Majesty.

And note, Superbia dicitur initium omnis peccati, triplici ratione. Primo,
propter causam, quae invenitur in omni peccato, quia in omni peccato invenitur
contemptus dei, qui est quaedam causa peccati, iste autem contemptus est
aversio a creatore: secundo, quia primum peccatum fuit: Tertio, quia ex eo
nascuntur alia vitia, secundum prius and posterius, hoc est, mediate, and
immediate; Pride is said to be the beginning of every sin, for a threefold
reason. First, for the cause, which is found out in every sin, because in
every sin appears the contempt of God, which is a certain cause of sin;
and this contempt is a proud Aversion from the Creator. Secondly, because it
was the first Sin. Thirdly, because other vices are begot from this Secundum
prius and posterius; That is, mediately, or immediately, as you may read more
at large in Johannes de Combis; Ioh. de Comb.
True happiness stands not either in Riches, or Honor, or any kind of
terrestrial thing. Do not then like the Day-labourer lift up thy hands to
Heaven, and strike thy Mattocke into the ground. Be not like Plinies Eagle,
having one Foot shut more Anseris, whereby he swims; another sharp after the
manner of Eagles, whereby he snatcheth; have not Cum pede aquilino pedem
anserinum; Worldly affections joined with spiritual.

These two things do parallel as ill,
As an Eagles Feather and a Goose quill
Joseph.
Josephus is so far from these feet of two Proportions, that Prius-quam
incipias communem habere cibum, magnis execrationibus adjurat te primum colere
Deum; Before thou beginnest to take thy common sustenance, he adjures thee
with great execrations, that thou first praise God. Theod.
And Theodoricus invites us to this Action by the example of the Dove, Columba,
quum singula grana rostro deglutit, rostrum and oculos in altum, Deo quasi
gratias actura, extollit. Accipit unum granum, and oculos in altum elevat,
accipit alterum, tertium, and quartum, and sic demum similiter ad singula grana
facit; The Dove, when she takes up with her Beak several Granes, lifts up
her Beak, and eyes toward Heaven, as if to give God thanks; she receives one
Grane, and elevates her eyes on high, she receives an other, and again stirs
up her eyes, she receives a third, and a fourth, and so in like manner she
does for every Grane: And now he comes with a Quidni ergo and nos, ad singula
Dei beneficia, oculos, and corda sursum attolleremus, and benefactori nostro
optimo gratias ageremus? And shall not we then lift up our eyes and hearts for
the several benefits, we have received from God, and give thanks to our best
Benefactour? Have thou with Adam, by the Woman's temptations offended in
Paradise; Have thou with Noah, by overmuch tippling, been overcome with
Drunkenness; Have thou with Herod for a Dancing Damsel cut off John Baptists
Head; Have thou with Solomon, by the allurement of strange Women worshipped
Idols; Have thou with Lot, taken so much: of the Grape, as to lead thee to an
incestuous Bed; or have thou with David, got a Pearl in one Eye, and the other
bloodshotten: Pray then with him, that thy eyes be opened, that thou may see
thy ways; For when thou see another suffer for those sins, whereof thou
art guilty, art thou not then executed by Atturnie? Pray therefore in season,
and (if it were possible) out of season; For how can it be presumed, that God
ever thought of one, that never dreamt of him? Let not thy Prayer be like
Jonas Gourd; grow up in one day, and perish in another. Let not then the
Cinque Ports of thy senses allow of such enticing inlets, as may make thee a
Slave to Satan. Let not thine Iniquity be frozen in Error, nor benumbed in the
custom thereof, lest from Suggestion should issue Cogitation; from Cogitation
Affection; from Affection Delectation; from Delectation Consent; from Consent
Action; from Action Custom; from Custom Obstinacy; from Obstinacy Hardness
of heart; from Hardness of heart, Boasting; from Boasting Desperation; from
Desperation Damnation. Man's Soul is a precious Jewel, his Body the Cabinet,
he the Keeper of both. And, since he is the Salt-celler of his own Soul
(the Soul being imprisoned in the flesh) he should not suffer Ill-seasoned
thoughts to usher him to ill Actions, lest by an hellish Arithmeticke, he make
one sin a thousand. For let him be assured, the first fruits of evil will
be punished in this World, the After-crop he must leave to God. Serve then
thy sins, Plin.
as Plinies Pigmies do the Cranes, destroy them in the shells; or, at
leastwise, as soon as they are hatched, lest they grow to multitudes, and then
it will prove a hard matter to overcome them. Zanc.
Zanchy observes in his Book, De operibus Dei, that the Devil has twelve
several names in the Hebrew, and twenty and one in the Greek text, and all
either of Seduciae or Astutiae. We know the Devil had four several fields,
wherein he might exercise the part of a cunning Seedsman. In Heaven, as it is
in Esayah; In Paradise with the Woman, as it is in Genesis; In the Church, as
it is now; And lastly, in every Man's heart. D. Chrysostom.
Saint Chrysostom makes a Comparison between the Devil, and a Dog; for
(says he) as a Dog waiting at the Table, if you give him any thing, will
still wait for more; if nothing, he will depart: So the Devil, if once you
make much of him, he will wait diligently for farther Courtesies; but if you
reject him, he will forbear his temptations. Man is in perpetual Action,
where Non progredi est regredi; non procedere recedere est; For goodness
without perseverance, is like an Almanacke out of date. We are like
Spring-locks, readier to shut, then to open, to shut goodness from us, then to
receive it to us: Or like loose Stones on the tops of Hills, willing enough to
tumble down, but slow enough to mount up without aid. Like the Bird, that
Saint Anselme found tied to a Stone, D. Ansel.
which no sooner mounted, but presently was pulled back: The consideration
whereof procured tears from this Holy Father, who bewailed the miserable
estate of man, who endeavors by the Spirit to fly to Heaven, yet is stopped by
the Flesh. It is with men, as it is with Raspisses, one Stalk growing, another
grown up, and a third withered. Or as with Flowers: Grow up, Seed, and dye.
Like the three Sisters of Destiny, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos: The first
spinning, the second drawing out, and the third cutting off the Thread of man's
life. Men are like billows of the Sea, which tumble, one after another, till
they come to the Shore. Or like water powered out of a Bucket, which the earth
quickly sucketh up, and it appears not again. Or (if you will) like a
Glasse-house, wherein no man knows what Glass shall first be broken, but he
that owes the house. Plain then it is, That we must die; the Poet can tell us,
That there is no Redemption from Death, Hor.
Non si tricenis, quotquot eunt dies,
(Amice) places illachrymabilem
Plutona tauris.


Hence is it, Iuv.
that Iuvenall plays with the danger of Mariners, and concludes them not
certain of an hours Lease of their lives, because at all times there is but
an Inch betwixt them, and Death. And aptly does my Kinsman translate the danger
of one under Shipwreck in his Ovid, George Sandys.
Art fails, Heart sinks, on every rising Wave
Death sits in Triumph, and presents a Grave.


It is concluded, that we must dye; observe then the rule of Seneca, Sen.
Who, in his Youth, exercised the Art Been vivendi; and in his Age, Been
moriendi; For thy life is like a Journey, the lighter thy Burden, the easier
thy Journey. Life is but a Parenthesis in a long Period, and who knows, what
will become of us, till we hear that Watchword, Venite Benedicti, or Abite
maledicti; Let the heart then of each Christian embrace Saint Bernards Legacy,
which, if Story lie not, stands in this manner on his Tomb,

Tria vobis, fratres, observanda relinquo, quae, ut potui, observavi. Primo,
nemini scandalum feci, si quando incidit, sedavi, ut potui. Secundo, Minus
semper sensui meo, quam alterius credidi. Tertio, Laesus de laedente nunquam
vindictam petij. Ecce, Charitatem, Humilitatem. Patientiam vobis relinquo;
Brethren (says he) there be three things, that I bequeath to your observation,
which, as well as I could, I have observed my self; First, I never gave
scandal to any person, if any scandal happened, I pacified the matter to my
power. Secondly, I stood upon mine own conceit less, then I did upon other
men's. Thirdly, when I was, wronged, I never sought Revenge. Behold, Charity,
Humility, and Patience I bequeath unto you.

What was said of all the Kings, that were mentioned in the Hebrew Text? They
lived, they dyed, Well or Ill. For our parts let us live, that we may dye;
dye, that we may live. For, as there is no Habeas Corpus from death; so, no
Habeas Animam from Hell: that remains for ever.

Each man is a Comedian, Acts his Part, then to the Tiring house, and there is an
end; Snore not then supinely in the state of sin; Let us expect the first
hour of the day to be the hour of our death; Brevis est hora passionis,
sequitur gloria sempiterna; Fer.
As Ferus notes. Let every Third thought be thy Grave, and climb up by the
rounds of Contemplation into Heaven, Mentem in sublimi supra illum eximium
coeli globum defixam habe. Death is but the Orient of Weal, and the Occident
of Woe; The uprising of Consolation, and the downe-setting of Perturbation; The
deliverer from Servitude, the curer of Cares, the Period to Pain, the Porter
to Paradise, and the conductor to the Deity. Think not then of any worldly
thing, for all comes within the compass of Vanity, and vexation of the
Spirit; And whosoever thinks any Temporal thing to be Summum bonum, fast^eth
felicity but to a rotten Cable. Only think thou of that ^ver blessed name,
Jesus, which is Mel in ore, In aure melos, and in cord Iubilum. I conclude
with those old but true Verses, Si tibi pulchra domus, si splendida mensa; quid
inde?
Si species auri, argenti quoque massa; quid inde?
Si tibi sponsa decens, si sit generosa; quid inde?
Si tibi sint nati, si praedia magna; quid inde?
Si fueris pulcher, fortis, divesque; quid inde?
Si longus servorum inserviat ordo; quid inde?
Si doceas alios in qualibet art; quid inde?
Si faveat mundus, si prospera cuncta; quid inde?
Si Prior, aut Abbas, si Rex, si Papa; quid inde?
Si rota fortunae te tollat ad astra; quid inde?
Annos si foelix regnes per mill; quid inde?
Tam cito, tam cito praetereunt haec, and nihil inde,
Sola manet virtus, qua glorificabimur inde,
Ergo Deo servi, quia tunc tibi provenit inde,
Quod fecisse voles in tempore, quo morieris,
Hoc facias juvenis, dum corpore sanus haberis.


FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF each several Chapter.
CHAP I. AN Introduction to the Four Cardinal Virtues. page 1. CHAP. II. The
Original of all Virtue, whence it springs. page 26. CHAP. III. The true
Subject of Virtue, to whom it properly belongs. page 36. CHAP. IV. The
Definition of Prudence, The first of the four Cardinal Virtues. page 47.
CHAP. V. The Definition and several Branches of Prudence. page 60. CHAP. VI.
Of Memory the first part of Prudence. page 63. CHAP. VII. Of the Understanding,
the Intellectual part, and second Branch of Prudence. page 85. CHAP. VIII. Of
Providence; the third part of Prudence. page 100. CHAP. IX. Of the general
Duties of Providence, and first of the Mutual Respect between Kings and their
Subjects. page 112 CHAP. X. Of the Mutual Duties between Parents and their
Children. page 126. CHAP. XI. Of the Mutual Duties between Masters and their
Servants. page 161. CHAP. XII. Of the Subtilty of the Understanding, by some
esteemed a Branch of Prudence, but indeed an Appendix to its Intellectual
part. page 167 CHAP. XIII. Of diverse Ends of the Understandings Subtilty, and
means thereto; and first of the Highway Flattery. page 170. CHAP. XIV. Of the
first End, whereunto Subtilty tends, Riches. page 199. CHAP. XV. Of the second
end, whereunto Subtilty tends, Honor. page 227.
LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM SHEARES. 1634.


