A WARNING TO TAKE HEED OF FOVVLERS PSALTER, given by Th. Sampson.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI


Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier, for George Bishop. 1578.

TO MY VERY GODLY LOVING FRIEND, AND BROTHER, M. ROBERT ASK GOLDSMITH, AND ONE
of the Bridgemaisters, of the City of London.
YOU did send of late unto me, at one time (as you know) two books, which
the Louanistes had sent into England: the one was a Primer, the other a
Psalter. The Primer is in latin, and is as I think, but a nevve burnishing of
their old popish pelf. I did not peruse it, neither do I entende to bestovv
any labor thereabout. For many years are passed, sithence I did leave my
Primer, neither have I any pleasure now to look upon those pudles of
popery, in which I was plunged in the days of my youth, and ignorance,
^sal. 25.
I do rather with the Psalmist humbly pray the Lord not to remember the
faults and ignoraunces of my youth, but according to his own kindness and for
his goodness sake to forgive me. It is besides all this now become a tickle
piece of work (M. Robert) to meddle with Primers: will you know why? The
old Primers are of late greatly disgraced by pope Pius. ^nst. Pij v.
For he says, that they were filled with superstitious errors, and says:
that many forged prayers were thrust into them under false and feyned names of
Saints. He calls also all the pardons granted in the^, and printed in
their rubrikes into doubt. Thus does this Pope dashe the devotion of papists.
Therefore let old papists look well what Primers they use, and take
heed which of them they do trust, least they do not only lose their labor,
but fall into the displeasure of the Pope. And by the doings of late Popes
they may see how unsavory and unsafe the doings of former Popes are, for that
which one allows, an other disallovveth, one promises, an other denies.
Therefore I thought good now to leave both them, and their Primer. And because
the Psalter seemed to be some strange novelty, with which the authors
thought to make some freashe melody, I did take this their Psalter into my
hand: I did but touch the stringes thereof, to taste what sound it did give:
but I did not find that in it, which the name seems to promise, rather I
find in it unsavory discord, stringes false, and out of tune, and other such
iarres, as by perusing this little pamphlet you may perceive. Which I do not
send to you (my good brother) as though I thought that you either delighted in
such instruments as is that popish Psalter, or that you needed my help to
dravv you from the delighte or danger of such trumpery, in which Papists do
take their pleasure. God has by his grace separated you far from that sect,
and brought you into his own school, where you may, and do, with joy,
hear, learn, and taste of the sweetness of the Lord, and have the songs of
life, and salvation, praise the Lord for it. And pray him to hold you ever in
this way of life, that you may alvvayes have your heart, and ear open, and
wholy set to hear the voice of Jesus: and also closed, shut and fully
turned from those false flatteringe, and entising, Syrene, popish voices: unto
which who so hearckneth pearisheth remediles. Now though you need not my
labor herein taken, yet in recompense of your freindly and kind remembering of
me with such nevves as do come to your hands, I have thought good to send you
this written paper, to remain with you as a token of my good will toward
you. And if your son John Ask, of whose well doing in God, I have some
care with you, may be admonished by it to learn even in his youth to bevvare
of such Popish pastime, as is made in that Popish Psalter, and to give heed
to the truth of Jesus Christ, the only true doctrine of our life and salvation:
I shall be glad, and rejoice to see him enryched with that faith which
dvvelled in Gillian his natural mother, does dwell in you his natural father
now, and so I hope shall unto the end. That increase of true understanding
which does give life in God, I vvishe to you and all yours, vvishe you the
same to me and mine. Lecester the 10. of October. 1577.

LAME Tho. Sampson.

Ephesians. 5. Be fulfilled with the spirit, speakinge unto your selves in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the
Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all things unto God, even the
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

A WARNING TO TAKE HEED OF FOWLERS PSALTER, GIVEN By Tho. Sampson.
IT has been always the manner of such as do depart from the truth and faith
which is in Christ Jesus only, and do betake them selves to the error, and
untruth of their own choice, and are settled therein, their manner has been,
and is (I say) to inuente and devise such proper things as may serve to
induce other men to like of that which they do, and by little and little to draw
them to become like to them selves. And to this end they do use to paint
their own foul doings with fair colors: for they think if they should
at the first openly show that grosenes which is in their error, they should
drive all men from them rather then allure any to them. And therefore they do
make a choice of goodly words, and do set the same as closely as they can upon
their error, because they would by a show of that which is good, deceive men
the more readily, and draw them to their evil. So many old Heretics did in
their heresy retain the name of Jesus Christ, and under that most holy name
they did hyde all their poison. They did speak some good things, and cited
also some sentences of holy Scripture, under these good couers to conueye their
errors into the minds of men. Likewise do the Papists now. They have and hold
for the cover of their filthes and abhominacions the names of God, of Christ,
of Jesus, of the Church, of the spirit, of truth, of Catholic, and what not?
But all these they do use, but as a sconse to deceive, and under these fair
titles to draw simple souls into their filth. They have heretofore fought
for them selves in this land with fire and sword feircely: but when that
tyranny was, as now it is, ouerturned, through Gods great mercy toward us,
blessed be his name for it, by the most merciful and mild government of our
gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth, whose life among us and reign over us,
God almighty prosper and prolonge: They sought a while to hold and maintain
their own with books and writings full of forgeries and of furiouse
speeches, threats, and cursed speakinges. They have also had their practices
to recover again into their hands that government which once they had, and now
they have lost. In which desire they have been, and are, as desperately set, as
any cruel tyraunte ever was, or can be. And though our good God hitherto has
of his most gracious goodness disappointed them of all their purposes (blessed
be his name for it) yet they do still biggly breath forth blood, and
slaughters, and cease not. For even at this day, they do by libells and letters
threatten our ruin, and blow forth their own triumph. And herein they are
so forewarde, that they do name the persons which shall be (they say) their
captains. They assign the time in which they shall reign over us: they shall
florishe, we shall smoke, or else their calendar fails them, yea they do
note the men almost by name whom they have appointed to the slaughter, and thus
they do blow up the trumpette of their triumph, but before the victory
thanks be to God. Surely we do not fear them at all, but we do fear God,
whose just wrath we do provoke, by our unholy handling of his most holy Gospel.
This, this is it, that does most fear us, for by this we know, that we do
deserve that he should once again scourge us with the whippes of these Popish
Philistines. But we do pray him, that he will have mercy on us, even for his
own goodness sake. For he is kind, merciful, and slow to wrath, yea he says
of him self. Isai 27. Anger is not in me. May it please him therefore to give
us the grace to be at peace, and at one with him, we care not then, though all
the Papists in the world, and all the Devils in hell, do set them selves
against us. Whilst they fume and freatte at us, we learn to believe that
goodness of ye Lord which for our comfort he does lay forth, Isai 48. where he
says: For my names sake I will differ my wrath, and for my praise I will
restrain it from thee, that I cut thee not of, for mine own sake, will I do
it. And we humbly pray as they did Ier. 14. We acknowledge o Lord our
wickedness and the iniquities of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee:
Do not abhor us for thy names sake: cast not down the throne of thy glory:
remember, and break not thy covenant with us. And to this also we trust, that
he will have an eye now, as ever he has had, to his enemies, and cut them
short of their purpose, according to his own good pleasure, that they do not
triumph over him: and so we know that God, as he is able, so he will deal
against them for us. ^sai 2.
He does bid us not to fear man whose breath is in his nostrells. For wherein
is he to be esteemed? Matthew. 10.
He bids us not to fear them, which can but kill the body, but to fear
him, who when he has killed the body, has power to cast the soul into
everlasting fire. Notwithstanding all the big and brave bragges which Papists
make, it seems that all things as yet do not come about, to serve the turn
so roundly as they would, and therefore in the mean time they do content them
selves, to take a lower course, and will by cullor of prayer, creep into our
bosoms. 2. Cor. 11.
But the Apostle says that the devil can turn him self into the fashion of
an Angel of light: And therefore it is no great thing though his ministers
transform them selves as though they were the ministers of righteousness, but
their end shall be according to their works. By libells at Oxford, and bulls
from Rome, they breath out the furye of their conceived malice, and suddenly
they change their mode, into their kind of prayer. They do now herein, as
their king the Pope has done hertofore against us. The last Pope Pius
thundered out a bull of his currish censure against our good Queen Elizabeth,
to turn her out of her royal state, and life, and after that he sent into
England closely a messenger whose name (as Doctor Saunders tells us) is
Nicolas Morton, by office a priest, a meet officer for such a Pope and
purpose. This man was sent to follow that Popish bull, and he did it so
freashly, that thereon did follow a rebellion in the North parts of this
land. But God almighty quenched this fire in his most rich mercy. The
rebels ran their country, Pope Pius by death is picked over ye pearche: Our
Queen Elizabeth does still hold her place, thanks be to God, and reigns in
Godly quietness: O Lord grant that she may long so do. Pope Gregory that now
is, seeing this roughe attempt of his predecessor have so evil succes,
changes the course of his Popish proceading, and has now sent by his
suppostes certain bulls into England, in which he promises full remission of
sins to them which after that dissembled devotion which he puts down,
shall pray for the conversion of England (he says,) to the Catholic faith,
but he does mean the peruertion of England from the true Christian faith,
into that filthe and falsehoode of the Romish error. Thus the Popes are co^te^t
to fall from arms, fighting and cursing, to fair promises flattery, and
praying. But I trust English men for whose pleasure the Pope will seem to have
brought forth this bull, have learned more wisdom in the Gospel of God then
now to be made calves by such a Popish bull. In like manner our Louanistes,
having spente (as it seems) the greatest part of their common shot at us,
but in vain (thanks be to God) begin to allure us to like of them by
teaching us to pray. But we have already learned to pray of the best
schoolemaister that ever was, is, or shall be, even of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore we have no ear to hearken to these Popish bunglers and corrupters of
holy things. They have to this end published in prince of late a thing, which
they call Jesus Psalter, and the author thereof, or Master Fowler, the printer
thereof does tell us: That there be three manner of Psalters: the first is
called David's Psalter, which contains thrice fifty Psalms: the second (says
he) is called the Psalter of our Lady, co^teining thrice fifty Aues: the third
is called the Psalter of Jesus, or the invocation of Jesus, containing fiftene
principal petitions, which ten times repeated make also thrice fifty.

What mean these men so far to forgette them selves that they do now commend
to the Reader but these three manner of Psalters? Their forefathers have been
more liberal to us as shall forthwith appear. The Psalter of David containing
150. Psalms we do acknowledge to be delivered to us by the spirit of God for
our comfort and instruction. For Christ Jesus himself teaches us, Marc. 12.
that David in his Psalms does speak inspired by the holy Ghost. And therefore
with all humblenes of heart and reverence, we do receive the same as a book of
holy Scripture delivered to us as other books of the holy Scripture are, even
by God him self. We do not receive it as a Psalter given to us by the
Papists: For it is no Psalter of theirs, although it pleases them now in the
account of Psalters, to match it with theirs, to make up their pack of
Psalters. But what are these other two Psalters of which they tell us? Who has
blown them forth into the world? Let them tell us also why they do not add
to this number of Psalters, those which their forefathers have heretofore
published as Psalters to the world in printe? Be they now ashamed of them? so
may they be of this. They printed at Parris a Primer anno 1554. in the 160.
leaf of that book they do give us an other Psalter which they do there call,
The Psalter of Saint Hierome, and they do in their Rubricke there tell us, for
how many purposes good (if we will believe them) the same Psalter was printed.
In the same book also Fol. 125 they tell us how S. Bernard was on a time in
his prayers, and the devil said to him, I know that there be certain verses in
the Psalter, who that does say them daily shall not pearishe, for he shall
have knowledge of the day that he shall dye, but the feinde (say they) would
not show them to S. Bernard. Then said S. Bernard, I shall say daily the
whole Psalter. The feinde considering that S. Bernard should do so much profit
to labor so, he showed him the verses there following. This is their Rubricke
in that place, in which might be noted many things, which now I pass over. As
first, that the devil is busy to dasill men in prayer. Again that this was a
pack of verses bound together by the devil him self: An handsome piece of
work be ye sure. And thus he does now busy him self, by this new found
Psalter to play his old pranckes. But why be not these verses thus packed
together called S. Bernard his Psalter, as well as his verses? and why be they
not joined together as one Psalter, with that other Psalter of S. Hierome, to
increase the number of Psalters? For so might our Papists yield unto us more
Psalters then three. They may know also if they will, how that same their
seraphicall doctor S. Bonauenture did most shamefully corrupt the most holy
Psalter of David, changing through the whole Psalter the name of Lord into
Lady to turn his reader from the Lord God, whom the prophet David praised,
and to whom he prayed, unto yt Virgin Mary as his souerain. The book is in
printe, and therefore I leave it to the veiw of them who lust to see such
corrupt Popish blasphemies. But how happens it now, that our Papists do
make no account of that Psalter, to be a Psalter? Truly as full of filth and
blasphemy as it is, yet is it adorned by some of their forefathers in popery
with this glorious title: The Psalter of the Virgin Mary, compiled by the
devout doctor Saint Bonauenture.

Then the Virgin Mary with papists has two Psalters, or else some of them do
lie: why does not M. Fowler tell us of them? Surely I think he is as much
bound to tell us of the one, as of the other. But it may be that by advise he
does omit these psalters, because our papists now be ashamed of the filth,
and corruption of their forefathers: I would there were so much grace in them.
Truly if there were, they would never have sent forth this new corruption of
theirs. They do therefore but deal doubly with the reader, to tell him but of
three psalters, as if there were with them no more but three psalters, whereas
they have so many. But they would feign make a way for this their new
psalter, therefore they suppress the number and naminge of others. They tell
us that this is the psalter of Jesus, good words. But why call they it a
psalter? There are some of their good masters in popery, The Psalm. ^
which do tell us that a psalter is an instrument of ten stringes, and these
men do now tell us that this their psalter has 150. stringes, I mean
petitions: therefore it is some new kind of instrument devised by their own
idle and corrupt brains. Their said masters teach us, that the psalter, that
is the instrument, which has ten stringes, does signify the ten
commandments. And will M. Fowler tell us on his credit, that this his new
psalter does signify the ten commandments? If he do so tell us, we shall be
able I hope to prove that this his psalter, is but a counterfaite and false
sign. More their masters do teach us, that an hymn does thus differ from a
psalm. For an hymn (say they) is that song which is song with the natural
voice: but a Psalm is that which is played upon an instrument. Now sithence it
is their pleasure to give us a psalter, they will I think assign some
instrument whereupon the psalms of this psalter may be played. And so they do
full devoutly forsooth. For they do assign to them which shall handle this
their psalter, to play the same upon their Ten fingers. A proper instrument
and sounds as sweetly, as when an Ape lays his fore hands cross one upon
an other, and is taught to swear by his own ten bones, full sweetly kissing
his proper paws. This verily is but apes play. But how aptly or unaptly
soever it is to be called a psalter, all is made up by adding unto the psalter
the name of Jesus: for they call it the psalter of Jesus. The name of Jesus has
in it an heavenly and glorious sweetness, when it is rightly looked into. For he
that does know him self to be a sinner, and that he is to receive the reward
of sin, that is death and damnation by the most just justice of God: When
this man with a trembling and troubled spirit does look about quaking for
fear, and hungry of help, and finds that Jesus is the true and only Jesus,
that it is he that saves his people from their sins, and therefore is even
the same in deed which his name notes, that is a Savior: This poor soul
reioyseth with joy unspeakable, because he has found a Jesus, and fealeth in
him self a taste of that kingdom of God which is righteousness, joy and peace
in the holy Ghost. If M. Fowler did mind to teach his reader to understand
what the name of Jesus does mean, he would I think have told him ye same
thing which the Angel did tell Joseph: Thou shall call his name Jesus: Matt
for he shall save his people from their sins. Where we learn that the name
of Jesus does signify a Savior: and Jesus is he called because it is he that
does save his people from their sins. And this sauinge health has such a
sweet taste in it, that it makes the Virgin Marie, Simeon, and all other well
taught children of God, which do rightely taste of this salvation, to rejoice
in God their savior. M. Fowler might also have told us out of Bernard that
Jesus is honey in the mouth, Ber. in Sermon. 1^
and melody in the ear, and myrthe in the heart. And also that the name of
Jesus, is light, it is meat, it is medecin. For Jesus is light to them
which sit in darkness, he is meat to them which do hunger, and thrist after
righteousness and salvation: he fills the hungry with good things: he is a
medecin and a plaster of life for the sick soul and broken heart. Yea if
all these had misliked him, he might have told us yet, Ri. de s. ^ict. ex Io.
^ath.
that one of his own elders says, that ye name of Jesus is a sweet name, a
name full of delighte, a name comforting a sinner, a name of good hope, and
that this man thus speaking of this name Jesus, brusteth forth into prayer, as
it should seem feeling some excellent sweetness in that name, and says, O
Jesus be unto me a Jesus, that is, O Savior, be unto me a savior, or O
savior save me. All these things M. Fowler does pass over, and gives us as
he says a psalter of Jesus, in which he does teach us often to name the name
of Jesus. But it is a matter of understanding, sense and feeling truly to
speak of Jesus, it is not a matter of fidling with ten fingers as M. Fowler
teaches. They which have experience of Jesus do know this best. This is not
had nor feelt by looking on the letters, nor spelling of the name of Jesus by
sillables, nor yet by bare pronouncing the name Jesus. The old heretics called
Marcosij made them selves much ado about this name and the letters thereof,
yea and curiously devised on some number which might be noted by the letters
of this name as Epiphanius does write. And notably does this ancient writer
say to them all as in one: Epiph. contra her. lib. 1. to. 3.
Vocem enim solum habes, virtutem vero ipsius ignoras: that is, thou have only
the word or voice, but the virtue or power thereof thou do not know. It is
one thing to pronounce the word, and an other to understand and feel the
virtue and power noted by that word. This, this gives life and therefore to
speak of Jesus with understanding and sense of that life and salvation which
Jesus does give, is such a thing as the holy Ghost does work in the elect
alone, whereof the Apostle says 1. Cor. 12. No man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy Ghost. If we say the Lord Jesus truly, we are taught
so to do by the holy Ghost, for it only does frame our tongues to make a true
confession of the Lord Jesus, and of the salvation which by faith we do feel
in our hearts that we have by him: It teaches us to speak of Jesus not in
bare speech alone, but waying what we say, as Hierom notes in these words:
Hier^ Joel.
Tamen hoc ipsum dicere non sermon sed affectu cordis est ponderandum, that
is, this saying is to be wayed with, and in affection of heart, not in, or with
bare speech. Otherwise many have used this name Jesus, and pronounced it, but
evil, and to their own hurt. Act. ^
We do read of certain vagabounde coniurers which took in hand to name over
them that had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying: We do adjure
you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. They abused the name of Jesus, they did not
understand the virtue and power of Jesus. Though they did pronounce the word
Jesus, yet had they not faith in Jesus nor feeling of his power and saving
health. They spoke not of Jesus by the holy Ghost, and in true understanding,
and they did speed thereafter: For the evil spirit answered them: Jesus I
acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye? Thus were these coniurers driven
away, beaten and wounded even by the evil spirit, whom they thought to have
driven away by pronouncing the name Jesus. You may see that coniurers, and
the devil him self can name and pronounce the name of Jesus, and yet are no
whitte the better for so doing. It is not therefore the bare pronouncinge of
the name, that does profit at all, as by this example is to be seen. Act. 13.
We do also read of a certain sorcerer that made him self so boulde of this
name Jesus, that he called him self Bariesus as though he were the very man of
salvation. And yet did this wretched man withstand so much as he could the
doctrine of Jesus preached by Paul, and sought to turn others from the faith,
and labored to peruerte the straight way of the Lord. Math^
We are by Jesus Christ him self forwarned to take heed of such as shall
abuse and counterfeit his name to deceive and seduce us, believe them not says
Christ. Such a company of counterfeits are in Popery. For in it they have
their brotherhoodes of Jesus, their feasts of the name of Jesus, their pardons
of Jesus, their Mass of the same, mattens hours and even song of it. And of
late days the Papists have hatched and brought forth a swarm of such vermin
as call themselves Jesuits, whose travel is like to that of Bariesu, that is,
to peruerte the right ways of the Lord Jesus, to turn men from the true
understanding of the virtue and power of Jesus. To this purpose be they sent
forth to carrye men from hearckening to the Gospel of Jesus, and from
believing truly in Jesus, and yet they be called Jesuits, under this fair
name to work their feate, that is to seduce men and lead them from Jesus.
They are enemies to Jesus, to his doctrine, power, and saving health, as both
by their name, doing and doctrine is proved at large, by that learned writer of
our age Martin Kemnitius. And even so to their new found psalter, is the name
of Jesus by them added, but as a snare whereby the psalter maker would draw
his reader from the truth of Jesus into the puddle of popery. It may be
maruailed greatly that Papists dare thus boldly and impudently abuse the name
of Jesus, the name of our blessed God and Savior. Have they no conscience of
breaking Gods commandment? Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain, for the Lord will not hold him giltles that takes his name in
vain. Though now they do not fear to commit the fault, yet shall they not
escape but by a true verdicte be found guilty of it before God. For to take
his name, to confirm a falshoode, is to take his name in vain, and to break
his commandment. But thus do they now take the name of the Lord Jesus,
therefore let Papists hold up their hands and answer guilty, or not
guilty? if they plead, not guilty, they shall abide the trial before God by
his law, and then they will be found guilty. I know it will grieve them to be
thus charged, but if any of them do think them selves to be ouercharged
herein, let them tell us truly who made them so bold to apply the holy
name of Jesus to their own devises, to their Masses, pardons, brotherhoodes
and such trumperie, or to call their sectaries Jesuits, or to call this their
new devise, the psalter of Jesus? did Jesus Christ ever give them commission
thus to use his name? or did he ever make this psalter? Let them show this by
the holy Scriptures. If he did not, then let them tell us if any of his
Apostles or disciples did make this psalter, or did deliver this psalter to us,
and did tell us on their creadite that it was the psalter of Jesus? If neither
Christ Jesus him self nor any of his Apostles, nor disciples did deliver this
psalter to us, from whom then did it come? who did make it? who can assure us
that it is as they say, the psalter of Jesus? Who was so bold with the name of
the Lord Jesus, to put it to this psalter as though it were made by Jesus? We
know that there have been some old deceauers which have published their own
forgeries in the name of Jesus, as there have been also many double dealers
which have foysted out their falshoodes under the name of good men which have
been of great creadite in the Church of God. Surely our Papists could not
have picked out a more glorious name then is this name of Jesus, under which
they might have set forth this their new found psalter. But this to do is
to the authors thereof a thing most dangerous. For it makes them guilty of
taking the glorious name of Jesus in vain, and shows that they have no
deutifull regard of the glory due to the Lord Jesus, and to his most glorious
name. S. Paul entreating Philip. 2. how the Lord of glory Jesus Christ did
for our sake, humble him self and became obediente to the death even the death
of the cross, says also, that now God has highly exalted him, and given him
a name, above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of
things in heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the glory of
God the father. Thus does the holy Apostle teach, that God has given to Jesus
a name, a dignity and power above all names, dignities, and powers. For all
power in heaven and earth is given unto him. He is so above all, that they all
must bow the knee at the name of Jesus which as Hierom says: Hieron. in
epist. ad Ephesians. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Non ad genua corporis, sed ad subiectionem mentis, and inclinationem animae
cordisque obsequium pertinet: does not pertain to the bowinge of the knee of
the body, but it pertains to the subjection of the mind, the bowinge of the
soul, and obedience of the heart, for all must obey him and be subject to
Jesus, to the will, majesty and power of Jesus Christ. Sithence this glory is
due and to be given to our Lord Jesus and to his glorious name, how dare
Papists be thus bold to use and abuse it, to filthy sects of their own
setting forth, to brotherhoodes, to pardons, feasts, Masses, mattens,
psalters and such like things as they devise them selves? under that most holy
name to get creadite to their falshoodes and sale to their marchaundise. Now
we Christians do know by the doings and preachings of Jesus, which are set
forth unto us by the most true witnesses of him, that is by his holy Apostles
and disciples, we do by their witness perceive, that Jesus made no such
brotherhoodes, feasts, Masses, mattens, hours, Euensonges, pardons, no such
psalters, for if he had, they would have made some mention of them. Yea and by
the comparing of that which they did truly write of Jesus, with these forgeries
of Papists, we see the contrariety between them so great, that their first
most ancient and true writing does sufficiently condemn these popish
novelties, and this new psalter as a novelty of falshoode and error. I call
it a novelty as it is. If Papists will disprove me, then let them show what
Apostle, what ancient apostolic man, what approved ancient catholic
doctor, what ancient general council has commended unto us this psalter as
the Psalter of Jesus? If any, show us: but if none, then is it a novelty
devised either by that sect of Jesuits, or else it may be that Fowler now
wanting work to occupy his press (for his old masters which were wont to
set him on work have spente their stoare, and do not occupy him so
freashely as they have done and him self desires) has devised with some of
his brethren how to make this psalter, and so it may be called Fowlers
psalter, but not the psalter of Jesus. He does adorn his work with this brave
title: Certain devout and Godly petitions, commonly called Jesus psalter.
What devotion and godlynes is in them shall hereafter appear. But let M.
Fowler tell us when did this common calling begin? I say when did it
begin? and among whom? It must have a large compass that is common. Is it
enough to make it common because now the Papists do call it common? or
because M. Fowler does by his printe call it common? Truly this is but a
straighte, narrow and short common: but even such a common is this as is their
catholicisme. In this their psalter they do as truly name common, as they do
in the rest of their religion name Catholic: for there is no truth in either
of the^. Neither is this psalter so commonly called, nor their religion
Catholic, but only so called by them selves. It seems also that the work
of this psalter did fall out shorter, then M. Fowler thought it would, and
therefore he has filled up above three score leaves of his book as in one of
his copies is to be seen, though it be left out in the lesser book, with a
certain new devised Imagerie, so ye sithence words failed him, he might yet
fill up his book with some thing to feed the eyes of his simple reader, that
is with a new stamp of Imagerie. This his workemanshippe of Imagerie he does
adorn with this title: Godly contemplations for the unlearned. He does also
for confirmation of this his work add a sentence out of Basil which he
turns into English meeter, and yet cannot this his whole work of Imagerie be
warranted by that sentence of Basil. For it speaks of such Imagerie only as
is reported unto us by history. But there are among the images made by M.
Fowler some, whereof we have no reports by history. In what history does he
read, that the Lord God almighty which made both heaven and earth, did in
the creation of them show him self in the likeness of an aged person with a
crown upon his head? It was wont to be among popish painters a triple and
Popelike crown, but with M. Fovvler it is now but a single crown, not so
much as a close crown, such as kings and monarchs do wear, but even such a
one as it pleases M. Fowler to put upon his head. Who taught M. Fowler to be
thus bold with the Lord God, to make such a base and earthly image of his
glorious and heavenly Majesty? Let us look for his answer. In the mean
season we will be so bold with M. Fowler and his fellow helpers to ask of
them the same question which is asked in the prophecy of Isay 40: To whom will
ye liken God: or what similitude will ye set up unto him. And again, to whom
will ye liken me? that I should be like unto him, says the holy one? Answer
M. Fowler, answer to these questions, and let us hear how you can defend
this your bold doing, and this your likening of the immortal God to a mortal
and corruptible man. Let him show us also in what history he finds that
there was before Christ on ye top of the mountain on which he prayed, a
Chalice with a little round host or cake in it, holden (as he does grave it) in
the hand of an Angel. And where did he read that Christ Jesus did descend
into hell corporally with a long staff in his hand, having a cross and a
banner cloth in the top of it, and did there draw souls by the hands out of
hell, by a pair of stayres at a great gate of hewn stone, as his imagery
shows: let not M. Fowler now cavil and say that I do deny an article of our
christian faith. For I do firmly believe, that Article, he descended into
hell: but I do not believe that this image which M. Fowler has graued, does
truly set forth the truth of the descending of Christ into hell. Let M.
Fowler therefore show by what true history, he can prove this his image and
all the parts thereof. Likewise let him show us what history it is that
reports unto us the truth of that his image, in which he graueth how the
virgin Mary was personally or bodily assumpted into heaven, by the hands of
Angels, a great company of people kneeling by and worshipping. And last of all
let him tell us in what history he finds the report of the next followinge
image. That is, how the virgin Mary being in heaven was crowned by two men,
the one sittinge upon the one side, and the other man sittinge on the other
side, of her: Let us know what these two me^ were? what be their names? and
when the solemnity of this coronation was kept? And let him also tell us by
what catholic sense this coronation is proved by that place of holy
Scripture which he does there cite Cantic. 4: to underprop this his image? we
know the place of holy Scripture, but we know not where this catholic sense
which M. Fowler does gather thereon, where (I say) the understanding of that
place, to serve the coronation of the virgin Mary, was coined. There are none
of all his images, but that they have M. Fowlers approbation by coatinge some
chapters of some book of the holy bible. But a number of them stand there but
to fill up a place to make a show of some thing and say nothing. Thus he is
bold with naminge the books of the holy bible, to shore up his imagerie,
which can not stand by them. With such images, which have neither history nor
writer of credit to report them, it pleases M. Fowler for want of better
matter to fill up his book, to please and feed the eyes of his simple reader
which is not done according to that rule which him self cites out of Basil.
But let us leave M. Fowler with his new imagined imagery to him self, and
let me ask this. Dare Fowler, or any of his fellows devise a psalter, and
father the same upon the lord Jesus as though he were ye author thereof?
Surely this his boldenes draws nigh to blasphemy and very nigh to the sin
against ye holy Ghost: for (as I said before) it is a plain breaking of Gods
commandment. He takes the name of ye Lord Jesus in vain. And he also
speaks of ye Lord Jesus an untruth against his own conscience and
knowledge, in calling it the psalter of Jesus as though Jesus had made it. But
it may be yt M. Fowler will say for him self yt he will not auow, that Jesus
made this Psalter, or that it is ye Psalter of Jesus. If he will not auowe, but
deny his own words, I am content herein, to take his denial, and think that
it is not as he terms it, the Psalter of Jesus. And so I may well make my
self the more bold to deal with this Psalter, and to touch the stringes
thereof, to try whether they be in tune or not. Yea if it were so in deed,
that Fowlers meaning is not to set out this Psalter, as though it were made
by Jesus Christ, why does he call it the Psalter of Jesus? I will take mine
answer out of his own words. It is (says he) the Psalter of Jesus, or ye
Invocation of Jesus. M. Fowler seems to explicate this word Psalter by ye
following word Invocation. Then with M. Fowler, the word Psalter is all one
with that word which out of the Latin tongue we borrowe into our English, and
do term it Invocation, which in proper english is, a calling upon, so that
this Psalter of Jesus, is as much to say in English as the calling upon Jesus.
And this may be gathered to be his meaning, because that the name of Jesus is
so often repeated in his Psalter. But if M. Fowler will suffer his great
master Thomas to tell us what a Psalter is, and what it does signify as I
have cited out of him before, then can not (I trow) this his interpretation of
the word Psalter stand. But I am content to leave him to try this matter
with his said master him self. The name of Jesus is glorious, precious and
of great power as I have said, and therefore none can name that name rightly
but by ye holy Ghost. Whereof it is also, that they which do rightly name the
name of the Lord Jesus, are taught to depart from iniquity. If the meaning
of M. Fowler be to teach his simple reader to Invoke or to call upon the
Lord Jesus, he must do that he means truly by the word of God, which is ye
only ground work of Invocation. And M. Fowler must first teach his reader to
believe truly in the Lord Jesus before he can well invoke or call upon him.
For the Apostle teaches To. 10. that men do call on him on whom they do
believe. They believe that which they have heard by the word preached, if there
be no word of God heard, there is no true belief, if there be no true
belief, there is no calling upon, or to use his term, no Invocation and so
no Psalter. Now Master Fowler preaches not the word of God, nor the Gospel
of Jesus, to warrant unto us this his Psalter, neither does he in it teach us
truly to believe in the Lord Jesus. But in this Psalter he does teach his
reader to pronounce some things which are contrary to the word of God, and
against the truth of Jesus, as shall appear by that handeling of this Psalter
which follows. If then the Reader of this Psalter does not by Master Fowler
hear to believe, he can not invoke nor pray: For how shall they call on him
on whom they do not believe? Christ our Savior and master teaches us thus of
prayer, Math. 21
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it. And
again, whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, Mark. 1
believe that ye shall have it and it shall be done to you. Thus does our
heavenly master teach us to join faith to our prayer, and prayer to our
faith. And his Apostle James instructing us how to pray, Jacob. 1.
bids him that prays ask in faith and waver not, for he that wauereth is
like to a wave of the sea tossed with the wind and carried away, neither let
that man think that he shall obtain any thing of the Lord. As for this kind
of inuocacion which M. Fovvler teaches in his Psalter is to train his Reader
only to name Jesus, but that is a thing which many have done without faith,
and a thing unprofitable as ye have heard. A most certain and comfortable
rule is given us whereby we are to be ruled in prayer, that is: If we ask any
thing of God according to his will, it shall be given unto us as holy John says
1. lo. 1. Now how God would have us to pray: Jesus him self has taught us,
not only in that prayer which he did teach us, and is therefore of him called
the Lords prayer, but also in those precepts in which he does command us to
ask of the father in his name, and without doubting as you have partly heard
before. These and other like to them, verily be the right rules of prayer
taught in ye word of God, by the rule of which we must frame all our prayer,
if we will so pray that we may be heard and obtain. For it is deeply to be
weighed of us, that Jesus Christ does couple our praying together both with
faith as you have heard, and also with our abiding in him and the abiding of
his word in us. Joan. 15.
If ye abide in me says he, and my words abide in you, ask what ye will
and it shall be don for you. If we will pray profitably, we must abide in
Christ, and his word in us. But Master Fovvler gives us an invocation or
Psalter of Jesus, for which he has no word of Christ, and by which he draws
his reader and follower from Christ and from his word as shall appear
hereafter. There can be no profit the^ in this Psalter of Fovvler. The only
true and comfortable rules of prayer (once again I say) are those which are
given unto us by Jesus Christ, his Apostles and disciples in the word of God:
he that shall give us any other rules of prayer contrary to those, is but a
deceauer, what fair work soever he make in outward show of them. They are
therefore but filthes and forgeries, with which Papists have farced their old
Prymers, and called them prayers received by revelation, though they be
bombasted with popish pardons in plenty. Now let us try and examine this
Psalter, which M. Fowler calls Jesus Psalter, by those true rules of prayer
which Jesus Christ has given us. The name of Jesus is holy, sweet, and
comfortable: but M. Fowler has joined unto it a Psalter very unsavory and
hurtefull. True Christians which have right faith do not lightly receive wicked
things, they do separat right things from those which are evil as the
christian emperor Justinian did write to certain Bishops. Let us therefore
separate the addicions which M. Fowler in his Psalter has joined to the good
name of Jesus, that the christian may co^template that blessed name as it is by
it self, and that things differing from it may be espied out and refused. But
before I do come to the petitions by which M. Fowler patcheth up his psalter,
somewhat more must be spoken touching those other Psalters which M. Fowler
does so boldly publish and commend to the world. He tells us that there be
three manner of Psalters, he might have told us of more Psalters as I have said
before. David's psalter we know we read with comfort and thank God for it: we
do with humble hearts receive it, with all the whole number of 150. Psalms,
which number M. Fowler divides into thrice fifty, to make a way into some
mystery belike of his other Psalters. The second is (says he) called the
Psalter of our Lady. Is it called so M. Fowler? by whom? or who has given it
that name? did your Lady make it? did she so call it? If not she, who then? We
will not take things upon your bare report M. Fowler. Tell us therefore the
author of this Psalter as you do of the first which is David's, else you will
make this your stuff suspected. You pass from the name to the matter of this
Psalter, and do tell us that this Psalter of your Lady contains thrice fifty
Aues. I told you before that M. Fowler did divide the number of the Psalms of
ye Psalter of David into thrice fifty, to make thereby a way into some
mystery of his other Psalters. And now ye see, that his second Psalter
though it does in nothing else resemble that of David, yet he makes it to
resemble the same in the number of thrice fifty, and in the term Psalter. A
proper piece of work. But once again I ask who has told M. Fowler that his
Lady Psalter contains the just number of thrice fifty Aues? Truly I think
there are more then thrice fifty men and women in England and else where yet
plunged in popery, which can not tell us by just account that thrice fifty
Aues do make their Lady Psalter. And no marvel: for it is a very hard thing
for an unlearned person to know the perfection of that thing which has so
obscure a beginning as has this Lady Psalter. But let it pass upon the
credit of M. Fowler, if any like upon his credit to accept it: yet may I ask
why these Aues thus packed together are called a Psalter? It is no instrument
of ten stringes therefore no Psalter. But Fowler teaches his reader to say
it upon his ten fingers, what instrument call you that? surely these are but
childishe and a pishe toys. It is no invocation, it is no prayer, for it has
no petition in it, as it is granted by M. Fowler his great friend M. Vaws,
even there where he makes the most that he can of the Aue Maria: how can it
be then any invocation? or how can it be a Psalter. M. Fowler must take the
pain to make this matter more plain to us, in better show of truth, or else
we will tell him plainly that this his Psalter must be turned over to him
self, for his own pastime, to be played upon his ten fingers. For I do not
else think that any man of good understanding will dance after his pipe. But
let us come to this his third Psalter unheard of before this our age, that
is, the Psalter of Jesus: which M. Fowler does say, does contain fifteen
principal petitions, which ten times repeated make also thrice fifty. Thus
is the mystery made up which M. Fowler brotched to us, when in the account
of the Psalms of David, he did divide the number of the^ into thrice fifty.
And all this is but to show the reader that these Psalters as M. Fowler does
temper them do agree in name and number, though in nothing else. But we think
not that this agreement in name and number only, either can, or does make this
new Psalter of M. Fowlers a perfect Psalter, considering how this Psalter of
M. Fowlers trimming does differ from that sound Psalter of David, and from the
doctrine of God. M. Fowler does tell us that in his Psalter and Invocation, the
glorious name of Jesus, is called upon four hundred and fifty times. Tell us
not how often, but how well you do call upon this name most holy, and glorious
in deed. For it is not in invocation enough to pronounce the letters and
syllables of the word Jesus, but we must look into that name by faith and so
by faith feed on the virtue, saving health, and power of Jesus, that it may
encorage us to call upon him in faith and sure confidence, knowing that he and
he only, yea he, and none other under heaven but he, is given to men by whom
they must be saved. which thing S. Peter preaches in that sermon Act. 4. a
part of which M. Fowler does cite. If I should find falt with his translation,
he would say that I did but pick quarrels. But to the matter. If nothing at
all be given to men whereby they must be saved, then are all men damned: but
there is one and but only one thing for all given, whereby men must be saved,
and that one thing, as Peter does there tell us, is the Lord Jesus. Other name,
power, or thing, there is none in which men must be saved, but that one only
name, virtue and power, the Lord Jesus. And if as Augustine says, De verb. Ap.
sermon. 14.
we must be saved in this name, doubtless that is no salvation which is promised
without this name. And therefore does S. Peter say that there is no salvation
in any other, for among men there is given none other name under heaven whereby
we must be saved. This translation seems to express the mind and purpose of
S. Peter somewhat more plainly then that of M. Fowlers, where he does
translate, In the which it behooves us to be saved. What preaty thing it is
that M. Fowler would co^uey under this term behooves I know not, and therefore
I leave it. But the mind of S. Peter is to teach us, that Jesus is that
person by whom only and alone, the good pleasure of God is to save men, and by
whom only they must be saved, that shall be saved. To perceive this, is not
only to name Jesus, but to have true understanding of, and faith in Jesus.
Without this true understanding and faith to sownd out, or to pronounce ye name
of Jesus does profit no more men now, then it did the old exorcists and
coniurers, yea, or the devils which pronounced that name, or the old
heretics which did also retain that name in their heresy, and pronounced it
with their lips. And therefore M. Fowler your assuring of your reader to find
such commodity by your Invocation, which with you consists only almost in
the often and bare pronouncing of the name Jesus, is not so sure, as you would
seem to make it. You tell us also that our savior has taught us in the
Gospel of S. John: that we should make our petitions in his name. In deed we
do hear our Savior Jesus say in that holy Gospel written by S. John 14.
chapter. Whatsoever ye ask in my name that will I do, that the father may be
glorified in the son: If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it. For to
this, as to one end, are true Christians ordained, that whatsoever (says
Christ) Joan. 15. ye shall ask of the father in my name, he may give it you:
and again, Joan. 16. Verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask
the father in my name, he will give it you. These and the like precepts of
prayer, and promises of obtaining our requests, we know that ye same son of
God our most gracious Lord Jesus has made to us, and in them we do rest. But
what means that which follows in this Psalter of M. Fowlers? in these
words, which (Jesus he does mean) is the Mediator of our salvation. It is true
verily M. Fowler, that Jesus is the only alone Mediator mean and worker of
our salvation, as the former saying of Peter does teach. But M. Fowler this is
not all that is in Jesus. In these your words you do leave out a piece of the
office and dignity of our Savior Christ Jesus. And herein you do follow
some of your old popish masters, who to find out some place for the
intercession of their Saints, are bold to spoil Christ of one piece of his
office, and to bestow it on Saints. For they say that Christ is our
Mediator of salvation, but thoffice of intercession they do commit to saints,
who they say do make intercession for us. But we do learn in the holy
Scriptures, that as Jesus Christ alone is the Mediator of our salvation, by
whom we are saved: so is he our Mediator of intercession, for it is he which
makes intercession for us. That same very place which M. Fovvler cites out of
the Gospel of S. John, in which he says that our Savior does say that we
should make our petitions in his name, teaches that Jesus is ye Mediator also
of intercession. For to make our petitions in his name, is to acknowledge him
to be our intercessor. Romans 8.
S. Paul likewise speaking of the most happy state, in which ye faithful do
stand before God by the redemption which they have by Christ Jesus, says
among other things: It is God that justifies, who shall condemn. It is Christ
which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, he means which
justifies. And of Christ his office toward us he continues saying: who is
also at the right hand of God and makes intercession for us. Here ye holy
Apostle teaches us so to look to Jesus Christ, yt we may know that as it is
he which died for us, did rise again, and ascend, and is at the right hand
of God for our salvation, even so he it is also, that makes intercession or
request for us. And in ye epistle to the Hebrews the 7. chapter, the Apostle
speaking of ye everlasting priesthood of Christ says: wherefore he is able
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he lives ever to make
intercession for the^. He says likewise afterward He. 9. That Christ is entered
into heaven to appear now in ye sight of God for us. Again that blessed
Apostle John in his epistle teaches us 1. Ioh. 2. If any man do sin we have an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteus and he is the
reco^ciliation for our sins. The Apostle teaches us ye Christ Jesus is our
only and sufficient advocate and atonement with the father. For ye office and
work of intercession and reco^ciliatio^ are joined together in Christ Jesus
alone. August. in Epi. Joan. tract. 1.
And here M. Fowler his friends could have told him that Augustine intreatinge
upon this place of S. John, does count it a thing antichristian, heretical,
and schismatic, to assign any other advocate or intercessor between God and
man but Jesus Christ. But perhaps they would make deintie so to do, least
the christian reader should thereby be encoraged to account Fovvler and such
papists as he is, which do rob Christ of this glory of being our advocate
and intercessor with the father, and do bestow that office and honor upon their
Saints, to account them (I say) to be antichrists, heretics, and
schismatikes, as they are in deed. The christian which can content him self
with the doctrine and word of God, is taught as you do hear, that Christ
Jesus is now at the right hand of God, and makes request for us, that we
must go to God by him, who lives to make intercession for us, that he is our
advocate with the father, and so Christ him self says Joan. 14. of him self:
I am the way, the truth, and the life: No man comes to the father, but by
me. Sithence then we have Jesus the everliving, almighty, and most merciful
advocate and intercessor with the father, let us give unto him the honor due to
him with faithful confession thereof, and thanks giving therefore, and also
do our selves as the Apostle does exhort us, Hebr. 4. Let us therefore go
boldly (says he) unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. Thus much touching this piece of
legierdemain which M. Fowler uses even at the entrey into his Psalter to
spoil Jesus Christ of his office, and glory of being our intercessor and
advocate, to make place for his Psalter which is patched up, as shall hereafter
appear, with praying to Saints to make intercession for us. By the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, such patches of popery are to be pared
away, and the christians are to be left to their Jesus Christ alone, both for
salvation and intercession. If it shall please God to make this point of our
Christian faith and religion well known, understood, and the comfort thereof
felt in the consciences of men, they will fall as fast and thick from popery to
Christ his Gospel, as bees do fly out of the rain to their hyues. But it
shall be good to proceed in this Psalter. The Reader may think that I do
hang long in the beginning thereof, but M. Fowlers entry into it being so
foul, it is meet that the reader should be admonished thereof, to the end he
may be warned of it, and delivered (if it so be the good pleasure of God) from
sticking or sincking into so foul a puddle with Fowler, as is this Psalter.
Let it be marcked then, that M. Fovvler does give us a Psalter of Jesus (he
says) in which he takes from Jesus at the first dashe a principal piece of
his honor and office. Such sacrilege Fowler and his fellows can commit, and
dare cover their villainy with ye name of Jesus. But this is but to fill up the
number of their sins. Then M. Fowler takes pains to teach his reader, how
he must say this psalter, and (says he) he may say it upon his ten fingers,
and why not upon his ten toes? He says also that his scholar which will
learn of him how to say this psalter, must begin with devout genuflection, or
at the least wise, with Inclination to Jesus. M. Fowler forgets him self (I
trow) for he will seem to set out this Psalter for the unlearned, but the
unlearned know not what these terms genuflection and inclination do mean.
Therefore let Master Fowler speak English to his unlearned scholars. After
that he has thus prepared his Reader to this Psalter, he begins the first
petition and does in it name the name of Jesus thirty times together, adding to
every thryse naminge of Jesus, this word Mercy. If he means to teach his
Reader to pray the Lord Jesus to have mercy on him, we do agree with him in
that good prayer, and so pray we. But if there be any mystery in this often
repeatinge of the word or name Jesus, it is a thing hidden from us, so often to
repeat that name without further instruction. Is it Master Fovvlers mind to
teach his Reader to think that this bare and often repeatinge of that name,
and that in such a just number as is by him prefixed, is therefore an
acceptable prayer, because it is so often repeated only? Surely that conceipte
sauoreth strongely of that battologie, and lip labor which Jesus Christ
rejects. Matthew. 6. I might also note the straungenes of the phrase of that
petition which he puts down in these words, where he speaks of sinners.
Turn (says he) their vices into virtues: this is one in all his petitions.
But it is but a strange transmutation that he asks. It had been more plain
to have said, Turn sinners from their vices to virtues, but to let this
pass. That sauoreth strongly of the Popes pumpe which follows in these
words: Have mercy (says he) on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter
passion I beseech thee; and for thy glorious name Jesus. It shall not be amiss
now to say somewhat to the reader of this purgatory which has been and is the
common pickepurse, for the Pope and his chaplains the massinge priests. I
know it will anger the papists to hear of this, for it touches their free
hold (as the common saying is.) But I will lay before the reader, this
popish purgatory in as few words as I can, that he may smell what a sweet
flower it is. Whatsoever it be, it seems to savor very sweetly with M.
Fowler, and therefore he does very diligently place it, as one in every
petition of his Psalter. Such is his charity to their souls which are in
purgatory, forsooth. But let us see somewhat of this purgatory, and partly
even as some of the masters of Rome have written thereof, I might divide this
matter into two branches: first of prayer for ye souls of men departed out of
this mortal life: then of this kind of prayer for the souls which are in
purgatory. But I will speak of this purgatory prayer only, for because M.
Fowler prays in his Psalter for souls in purgatory only, as though that they
only of all other souls departed had need of this prayer. It is also
confessed by some masters of that popish sect, that the prayers, or to use
their own terms, the Suffrages of the church be auailable only for souls in
purgatory. They have a reason for this their assertion, but I pass it over,
because that M. Fowler him self does seem to incline to the judgment of
those his masters. For in the petitions of his Psalter he makes mention only
of such souls as are in purgatory. But if there be no purgatory at all, then
are there no souls in purgatory to be prayed for. A vain petition then it is
in this Psalter, and a needelesse diligence, when M. Fowler shows him self
so diligent in praying for the souls in purgatory. Yea and it is more then
vain to abuse the glorious name of Jesus, and of his bitter passion to this his
vanity of purgatory. Now let us consider whether there be such a purgatory
in which souls do suffer (as they say) the pains of scorching, broyling, or
burninge, till they be purged from their sins, and relieved by the charitable
deeds of the living, yea, or no. Let us see who they were, that did first
speak of purgatory, and how it passed from them to some of the old christian
writers, which do make mention thereof, but very doubtfully, and diversely in
their wrytinges. So shall it appear upon what fainte grounds purgatory is
founded. First it is granted that purgatory can not be proved by any place of
the holy Scripture: Petr. a soto August. Hy^ognost.
It is I say granted by one Archepapist of this our age, and also by an old
writer of good antiquity. But the holy Scripture is the rule whereby our
prayers are to be framed, and it is the word of truth which does truly teach
us of the true being of things. So that unless God in his word did teach us
that there were a purgatory, we are not to believe that there is any. And again
upon that which God does promise us in the holy Scripture we must grownd our
faith in the prayers which we do make to God. For if we will dewly regard Gods
good will with trust that he will hear our prayers and grant our requests, we
must have both a promise of hearing, and a rule warrantinge the rightnes of our
requests in the most holy word of God, without which we can not truly have
any faith or assurance of the hearing of our prayers: without this knowledge we
can make no true prayer. It is no true prayer therefore which those men seem
to make which have no understanding of Gods will, nor trust in his promises.
Turks, Jews, and Papists do prate in their ignorance and unbelief, but
that prating is not right praying. Now then let us admit it as a truth,
which is as you have heard confessed, that there is no holy Scripture, no
word of God to warrant us this purgatory, then have we by the word of God no
assurance to assertaine us that there be any souls in purgatory, nor
commandment of God given to us to pray for souls in purgatory, nor promise
to believe that our prayers made for them can do them good. If we have no
assurance nor certeinety hereof, we can not pray for souls in purgatory. Will
you know then from whence this opinion of purgatory does come? The first and
most ancient promoter thereof was (so far as I learn) not God, but Plato
the Philosopher, a man which did not truly know God. His opinion of purgatory
as Eusebius does report it, Libr. 1. de praepar. Euang.
is the most ancient record that I have red. Virgill the Pagan Poette has
spoken also of such a thing as purgatory is fained to be, but from Plato it
should seem to be conveyed to other, who according to their fantasy laid
the first platform of a purgatory, even yt whereon the Papists have builded
this their purgatory. Which building by the papists, is not yet so handsomely
cowched together, but that their own fathers assembled in the last council of
Trent thought good by way of correction to give this admonition to them of
their seete, Council. Trident.
that they do not hereafter in their sermons before the common people, handle
the hard and dark questions touching purgatory, and that they should not
meddle with such uncertain things touching purgatory as are thought to be
false. They do also forbid them to handle those things touching purgatory
which do savor of curiosity, or concern supersticion, or savor of filthy
lucre. And those fathers as popish as they were, do yet command them whom
they may command, that they let these things alone as offenses. By this
forbidding now, it appears that before this time, the purgatory Proctors
used to publishe such things of purgatory, and for it, as this council now
forbids, else why does it now forbid them? And so by the words of Papists
them selves we may perceive that they have had among them such Proctors for
their purgatory, as have handeled it so corruptly that they them selves are
ashamed thereof, and do forbid the like, and yet do these popish fathers in
that council underprop this purgatory by their authority still. But if they
did mean in good earnest, to take from their purgatory all such things as are
uncertain and false, or curious or superstitious, and such as served for
filthy gain or lucre, let them I say pare al these things from their
purgatory in good earnest, and surely they shall leave to their Pope then,
such a simple purgatory, as is not able to be a sufficient pinfold to impounde
a poor pigge. But as is said, they and their fathers will needs maintain
their purgatory, for they have taken in hand the defense thereof, and it
serves so well for their purse, and purpose, that it deserves their defense.
They say that their Church has learned it of the holy Scriptures. But I
say nay, and some of their own men and their elders also do say nay, as
is touched before. Neither do they them selves show unto us any one place of
the holy Scriptures in which we are taught the same purgatory, on which they
do conclude. This now is the manner of the catholic church (as papists call
their romish Church) in their councelles to conclude canons and articles of
the faith without any Scripture. They tell us that they have it also of the
ancient tradition of the fathers: hereof the reader shall be informed more
hereafter. Again they say that this purgatory is delivered to them in holy
councelles. A man would think that these Tridentine Prelates did mean some of
the first ancient holy cou^cells, as that first council holden at Nice, or
that at Ephesus, or some of the other old holy counsels. But there is no
mention made in any of them either of this purgatory, or of the souls in it,
or how they are to be releued by the doings of living men. Yea if search be
made in the Tomes of the councelles, it will be found true (I think) that the
first general council which did set this purgatory on foot by concluding
thereon, was that late council begone by Pope Eugenius at Ferrara, continued
and ended at Florence about the year of our Lord 1439. So young a thing among
ancient counsels is this proper springalde their popish purgatory: before
then it was not concluded in any ancient holy council: so that yet the head
of it need not to be gray for age. It is no marvel then that the papists
have now again in Trent concluded thereon. For it serves so well for their
kitchins that they had rather loose heaven it self, then this proper
purgatory. And now our papists may say that it is a thing decreed in
counsels, sithence a second council, now again has concluded it: but yet
such counsels as are neither ancient, nor holy. Thus pleases it the papists
now to burnish and refresh the old forgeries of old infidelles, and to set
the same forth as an article of their catholic faith. The opinions of Pagans
touching purgatory, some ancient writers sithence the ascension of Jesus
Christ and the time of the Apostles have repeated, as Eusebius does: some have
given their addition to them, as Origin and some other, and yet that purgatory
was not like unto this of papists. For papists do allow that the souls fried
in the fire of their purgatory, may be releued by the deeds and helps of
living men. But this is not seen in the old purgatory of Origin, nor in that
of the Pagans so plainly as papists now talk of it. When purgatory had once
thus put in a foot into the church, it went forward yet for a good space of
time, but weakly and waueringely. The opinion thereof was cited by some
followinge writers after Origin. For Ambrose whose manner is (as some have
noted) to take many things out of Origin, does make mention of this
purgatory. So does Hierome and also Augustine, but very diversely. For sometime
they do as it were, but dispute and reason of the matter, as if it were a
question to be doubted of: Sometime it is affirmed: Sometime that which one
affirms: an other denies. And here is a piece of the false dealing of the
papists to be marked. For their manner is to cite the old fathers and their
sentences, in which they make this mention of purgatory as though they had with
one consent written so of purgatory as them selves do at this day hold. They
will not make known to the people in truth neither from whence this
Purgatory did first come, nor how it crept into ye Church, nor how some of the
old fathers doubled about it. Some doubted of it, some denied it, all this I
say the Papists now do conceal, for the knowledge thereof would mar their
market, and not serve well for their kitchen. Therefore they do still draw
closely the sayings of the old writers to prope up this purgatory, as though
there were no doubt in the matter, but that all the old fathers did faithfully
believe that to be true, which now they do hold of purgatory. And yet
because their own consciences do bear them witness, that they want sufficient
warrant of the word of God and true antiquity to uphold their purgatory, they
have been driven to make other shifts for ye same. And therefore where truth
and antiquity do not serve their purpose, they have busied them selves to
sustain purgatory by other follyes, as by their forgeries of satisfactions,
and by that same their preattie profitable devise of praying for the dead. To
this they have added strange visions, voices, and sightes of such as were by
their conceits revealed in purgatory and delivered out of it (say they:) yea
they have added some such strange sightes as living men have seen in
traunses: and they do not stick also to father some of their own new false
forgeries for purgatory, upon some writers of antiquity which never taught any
such thing. And thus for their purgatory, for proof whereof they have no
direct word of God, they draw in fathers, yea and Angels, and spirits (they
say) but lyinge spirits (I say.) They bring in also dead men, yea and the
sculls of dead men to speak to men living on earth for purgatory. And not
content with all this they do still proceed, and ye better to setle this
purgatory in their church as an article of their faith, they make them selves
so bold even with God him self, yt they do draw his most holy word with new
racking and wrasting ye same out of time, to serve this their purpose: wherein
verily they show them selves to be corrupt handlers of the word of God. Upon
these proppes did their purgatory stand stowtly till the light and heat of
the glorious Gospel of God did bewray it, and consume it to ashes. Then did
this Dagon fall before the Arc of the God of Israel, blessed be his name for
it. And now that they see their purgatory does begin to decay, they do
roar and cry for grief, and do still seek to maintain it by new
additions, or reparations, so loath they are to have it so decay, that it
should serve their turn no more. Some time they tell us of the kind of those
sins which are to be purged in purgatory: some time they tell us of the
greatness of the pains which souls suffer there: some time of the relief
which souls do feel there: some time they tell us of the place where
purgatory is. But these their tales be not all one, nor they them selves in
telling these tales do agree in one. For towching the place where this
purgatory is: Some of them have found this purgatory (as they say) in
Irelande, and this they call the Purgatory of Patricke, unto which also they
say that once they had a keye. I know not whether they have lost it. And in
this purgatory one lusty Champion Noble Nicolas (as they say) traveled and
did see the strange pains and sights which were in it. One other purgatory
their holy Saint Odilo did find for them in the island of Sicily in ye fiery
hill Aetna. And of this invention by the good advise of their pope John did
spring up ye solemn feast of al souls, and al ye busy pains yt they do take
about ye same, which yet the church of Christ both could and did well spare
above the space of one thousand years after Christ's ascension, although the
popish sinagogue can not now spare it for pinchinge their bellies not one
year. These men not content with these purgatories, and fearinge the ruin of
it without it be continually repaired, have gotten of late the favorable help
toward this work, of a new Archbishop of theirs named Aolaus Magnus: This man
has found a third purgatory in the Island of Thyle which we call Iselande, for
there (says he) are hills which have snow on their tops and burning fire at
their foot, and he tells us that there is ye place to purge souls. Thus
grows the popish purgatory in error and ignorance, and gets ground
still more and more among ignorant men. This popish palace of purgatory should
be very large truly, if it did reach so far as is Iseland from Sicily. What
fire there is I know not, but surely there is good stoare of sea water between
these forenamed Islands Irelande, Sicily, and Iselande, yet all the water which
is in the sea will not quench that purgatory which the Pope and his kitchen
clerks have blown and set on fire to roast their meat. Thus much of ye
beginning and growing of this purgatory have I shortly written, that the reader
may know out of what forge this purgatory is flowen of which M. Fowler makes
so often mention in his Psalter, and does so bitterly pray for the souls which
are in it. But as I said before, if there be no purgatory at all, the^ are
there no souls in it nor any thing else: and will M. Fowler teach his
scholars to pray to God for nothing? This purgatory has no ground of the
word of God: We have neither commandment to pray, nor promise to be heard,
if we do pray for souls in purgatory, therefore we can neither do the one,
nor believe the other. He then that will pray with M. Fowler for souls in
purgatory, prays without faith, which is a faithless labor, at the least,
though I say no more. But he that will consider rightly what a fault it is, for
a man to present him self before ye Majesty of God, to make prayer to him for
nothing, for a forgery and false thing, it will make him (I trow) afeard to make
such strange prayers, though M. Fowler be very busy with them. But now will
I leave this purgatory, I will in this treatise touch it no more, supposing
that this which I have said, is sufficient to unfold the forgerie of this
popish poppet. M. Fowler teaches him which will dance after his pype to
pray: That he may execute the works of virtue, whereby he may come to
everlasting joy and felicity. To exercise virtue to the pleasing of God, is a
good thing, and our dewtie. But if Master Fowler does mean to teach his
Reader to do this, with this mind, to hope thereby to come to, yt is to gain,
and to obtain everlasting joy and felicity, this is, but to labor vainly
and prowdly, to get that by our doing, which is freely given to the elect by
the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. For life everlasting is the gift of God by
Jesus Christ, Romans 6.
as thApostle teaches. Jesus Christ is the only way, that true way by which
that happy thief of whom we read Luke 23. went into Paradise. Jesus is he
only and alone, by and thorough whom everlasting life is given to the
believers. The christian reader may well perceive therefore wherein this
petition fails. Then follows a petition in which he teaches his reader to
pray thus: Grant me firm purpose merciful Jesus to amend my life and to
recompense for those years which I have misspent to the displeasure of thee in
evil thoughts, delectations, etc. Also in breaking thy commandments whereby
I have deserved damnation and thine enimitie. To pray for amendment of life is
necessary. But in that which follows, M. Fowler does fowly abuse the holy
name of Jesus. For to pray to Jesus to have a firm purpose to make recompense
for those sins whereby we have deserved damnation, is to pray for purpose to
deny and forsake the salvation which we have in Jesus. For Jesus is he which
does save his people from their sins. And therefore he is called Jesus. M.
Fowler has given us (as he says) A Psalter of Jesus, and he seems to make
great account of ye often repeating of ye name Jesus. But now he does show him
self not only not to know what Jesus does mean, but to be willing to draw his
reader to deny that Jesus is Jesus in deed, which is to deny the Lord that
bought him. We have learned that in that redemption which Jesus has wrought
for his elect, he only has made the full recompense to God by him self alone
for all their sins, and therefore he is their Jesus, and so is most truly
called Jesus. Jesus did give him self for us, when we could give nothing in
recompense for our selves, he did give his body to be broken and his blood to
be shed for the forgiveness of our sins, for which we could make no
recompense. He did bear the pains due to us for our sins, and as the
Prophet says Isai 53. he has borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows,
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: ye
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.
Here is the true recompense made for sin set forth, and this recompense
verily did Jesus make in his own blessed body. In if he paid the price of our
redemption, and made that only satis^^cing, and fully sufficing recompense for
us, wherein his own self did bear our sins to his body on ye tree 1. Pet.
2. and by this reco^pense by him made we are set free, for by his wounds are we
healed. Sithence Fowler is not content with this recompense thus made by Jesus
for us, but asks an other, let him tell me wherein that recompense which
Jesus Christ has made for us is imperfect* if it be imperfect, show wherein? If
it be not imperfect but most full and perfect, then what means M. Fowler to
pray for full purpose to make any other recompe^se him self for his sins.
Again I would know what it is, that he or any child of Adam can give to God to
make a recompense for his and their sins? What Jesus has given we know. Now
let us know what Fowler has to give? Fowler can give nothing verily but that
which is corrupt, but such things are not available, they are no recompense
at all for sins. And therefore God of his great mercy prouidinge better for
us, then we could do for our selves, has given unto us Christ Jesus, to make,
and to be the recompense for us. For we are not as S. Peter says redeemed
with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ. For Jesus has with this most precious price made full recompense for
us, and thereby has he so fully redeemed us, that therefore he is become the
author and prince of our salvation, our redeemer, our Savior, to him only do
we give the glory and praise of and for this work of our salvation wrought by
him self for us. God our heavenly father has set forth his son Jesus to be
a reconciliation through faith in his blood Romans 3. It is Jesus only which did
give his life a ransom for many. ^ath. 20.
Our (...), is his life, which Jesus did give for the price, ransom, and
recompense of our delivery. For Christ only is he, in whom as the Apostle
says we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins,
Colo. 1. And Jesus alone is the reconciliation and atonement for our sins 1.
Ioh. 2. Thus as we are taught, we do learn of God him self, that it is
Jesus alone, which does deliver us from that dampnation which through our
sins we do deserve, eue^ by that recompense, which he has already made for
us in his own most bitter death, and bloody passion. It is ye blood of Christ
which through the eternal spirit offered him self without spotte to God,
which purges our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. It is
Jesus Christ who has appeared once to take away sin, by the sacrifice of him
self. Heb. 9. Now as the same Apostle says, Heb. 10. Where the remission of
these things is, there is no more offeringe for sin: and I say where the
recompense for sin is thus made by Jesus, there is no more recompense to be
made for sin. How dare Fowler then teach us to require to have a firm
purpose in us to make our selves a recompense for this which Jesus only both
could do, and also did fully, and sufficiently for us? What is this else, but
to ask of Jesus a firm purpose to renounce and forsake him? It is nothing
else verily, but to forsake ye redemption which we have in Christ Jesus, and to
repose our selves upon our own making of recompense, to pray as Fowler
teaches. But what Prophet, what Apostle, or Saint did ever so pray? or taught
us to pray? That which none has done ever, Fowler now dare do. David prays
humbly to the Lord in his Psalter that he will forget and forgive the faults
of his youth Psalm. 25. And he rejoices that the Lord has forgiven him his
sins, that he has forgotten the^, yt he has removed them from him as far as
is the East from the West: that he has thrown them into the bottom of the
sea Psalm. 103. David prays not to have a firm purpose to make recompense for
his sins, but rests in the blessed remission of his sins given him by God
of his free goodness and mercy through Christ Jesus. And again, David in the
Psalm. 31. confesses of him self this: I acknowledge my sin unto thee,
neither hide I mine iniquity, for I thought I will confess against my self
my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou have forgiven the iniquity of my sin.
Thus does David in his Psalter, singe an other manner of Psalm then Fowler
does in this his Psalter. For the true Prophet David prays for forgiveness
of his sins, and rejoices in this, yt God did forgive him, which is such a
thing to be desired, that David says immediately in that Psalm: Therefore
shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee etc. What account then
shall we make of Fowler who prays not for this, but clean contrary to this?
for he will have a firm purpose to make him self a recompense for his own
sins. Surely neither is this prayer of Fowlers like to that of the godly, nor
him self godly in this praying. For if every one yt is godly prays for
forgiveness of sins, Fowler is ungodly who prays not for forgiveness, but for
a firm purpose to make a recompense for his sins. The holy children of God
are all most holily taught by Jesus our very Jesus and Savior to pray, Forgive
us our trespasses. This is an other manner of thing then to pray for a firm
purpose to make our selves reco^pense for our sins. Simple is he that will
forsake that form of prayer which Jesus Christ has taught, and holy David
used in his Psalter, David (I say) who was that sweet Psalm singer of Israel
2. Sam. 23. and will follow this faithles fiddle of Fowler. Simple is he that
will forsake that recompense which Jesus Christ has once made for him and
trust to a recompense of his own making. This were fowly to fall from Christ and
to run headlong into the dungeon of despair. All the Angels and heavenly
spirits in heaven, all the men in earth can not make such a recompense. Only
Jesus Christ, Jesus (I say) alone was able to make, and did make the full
recompense for sin, and did it fully for the faithful, and therefore he has
found everlasting salvation for them which shall be saved, as ye Apostle says
Heb. 9. which truly he could not have gained unless the recompense which he
made for them had been fully sufficient. Now to take this work of making
recompense into our own hands, is either to deny, or to dout of the fulness of
that recompense which Jesus Christ has made for us, and this to do, is to
rob Jesus of his glory, and the robber does rob him self of comfort and
salvation in Christ, and so does but deceive him self, and double his own
sin and damnation. Yet thus would M. Fowler have his Reader to pray to Jesus,
to have not only his purpose, but his firm purpose to make him self
recompense for his sins, which is to rob Jesus of his glory, and to be him
self a deceit to him self, and to make his way to most spedy and certain
damnation. If M. Fowler mistrust the recompense which Jesus has made, and does
desire to make his own recompense for his own sins: then does he not believe
that Jesus has made either any recompense at al, or not a full recompe^se for
his sins, which is a point of plain infidelity. Such as flows in the
Romish Catholic Church. This piece of poison lies in this Psalter of M.
Fowlers, even this robbing of Jesus in M. Fowler his Psalter of Jesus. An other
petition followteh containing these words. Grant me the seven gifts of the
holy Ghost, the eight beatitudes, the four Cardinal virtues, and in receiving
of the Sacrament devoutly to dispose me. M. Fowler delights him self
greatly in set numbers, and yet he is no good Arithmetrician. When he
speaks of the seven gifts of the holy ghost he should have told his Reader
what they be, and where he learned that there be but seven. Surely we know
that there are many more gifts then seven which the holy Ghost does give to
the elect children of God, I say many more. Likewise I say of the Beatitudes
of which he speaks as though there were no more but eight. It may be that I
am so ignorant that I do not know to what places of the holy scriptures M.
Fowler had his eye in these his set numbers. Therefore let him name the places
him self, and prove to us if he can, either that they do contain these
precise numbers of seven or eight, and no more, or that there be no more
gifts of the holy Ghost but seven, nor more beatitudes but eight. In the
mean time the Christian Reader, which loves with godly reverence to search
the Scriptures, in searchinge shall find that there be many more gifts of the
holy Ghost then seven, and many more beatitudes then eight. Let not him
therefore be thus abridged of his blessedness by Master Fowler, if he do love
sanctification and blessedness. M. Fowler seems also to have some smattering
of Philosophy in telling us of four cardinal virtues. But some of his Masters
in teaching virtues have spoken of the three divine or Theological virtues,
and this he might have learned in his pops Primer lately printed, and have
named them faith, hope and charity. Wherein they do speak more like Divines
then M. Fowler does either like a Divine or good Philosopher. Among the
Philosophers them selves he might have found more virtues then four. He might
also have done somewhat for the help of his simple Reader for whose pleasure
he has made this Psalter, if he had told him what those virtues were, and why
they be called Cardinal virtues. For a simple man may think that they are so
called of the Romish Cardinals, a sect of men most void of virtues, as by their
particular doings may be easily found out. And to speak of the virtues
needful to a Christian, there are many more then four which a christian is
to learn in the blessed book of God, the holy Scripture I mean. So M. Fowler
in this piece of his Psalter strikes but like a bungeling fiddler, not clean,
not full, but strikes very short, and does but fumble and dally with them,
whom he would have dau^ce after his pipe. In his fourth petition he teaches
them which are minded to play on his Psalter, to say, Grant me the spirit of
penance, contrition, confession and satisfaction, to obtain thy grace, and
from filthy sin to purge me. True penance we do know, and pray that it may
be truly practiced: we do also know those terms which M. Fowler does use:
They are the same, by which the popish schoolmen do set forth their three
parts of their Sacrament of penance. But this their devise is already so
evidently undone, and the filthe and forgery thereof, so unfolded by the
learned writers of our age, that I will no further meddle therewith, then to
refer the reader to the readinge of the fourth chapter of the third book of
the Institutions of M. Calvin, which if he will diligently read over, he shall
perceive that in this popish partition is no perfect penance, and that this
piece of work as M. Fowler does pen it, is unmeet to have place in the
prayer of a true Christian, how meet soever it be, to be placed in this
Psalter of M. Fowler. And where he adds that by this parted Penance, he
might obtain Gods grace, he knows not verily what grace means. For as the
Apostle teaches: If grace be of works, it is no more grace: he falls from
grace that does by his works thrust on him self, to gain, deserve merit and
get grace. In the fifte petition he teaches us to pray thus: The catholic
obseruances of the church make me to keep truly. What he means by these
catholic obseruaunces, I dare not take on me to judge, I know them not. But
if he do by them mean those five commandments of the church, which his
friend and companion M. Vaws has set forth in his Catechism, in which he does
but bungel, and would feign imitate the Jesuits in their Catechism. If these
be the catholic obseruances of the church of which M. Fowler speaks, or if
he do mean those precepts of the church which his Pope Pius has packed
together in his new Primer, I answer thus. First, we do deny that they be
catholic: Then that they be any obseruaunces of the true church of Christ. As
for that romish church which both has and does take upon her to deliver such
commandments as God did never give to his church, we do abhor that proud
harlot, and all her commandments, neither has a Christian any warraunt of
Gods word to assure his conscience either to make this petition, which is
here set down by M. Fowler, nor promise to be heard, if he make it, and
therefore it is to be left to the deuisers of it. And surely this his
petition, does not agree with the first piece of the next petition followinge,
that is: Make my soul obedient to holy doctrine. He whose soul is made
obedient to holy doctrine, does detest all such unholy doctrines, and
obseruaunces as men do deliver out of their own devises, such as are the
commandments and obseruaunces of the catholic church of Rome, and he
prays God to keep him from them, he can not pray to keep or obey them. In
the seventh petition, he has put in this for a prayer: Thy blessed mother be
mediatrice for me, and purchase me a contrite heart, for that I have offended
thee. You have heard before how Master Fowler has called the Lord Jesus, the
Mediator of salvation, as though this were all that is in the Lord Jesus* And
you have heard how I have proved that our Lord Jesus is the Mediator of our
salvation, and is also our Mediator of intercession. Now Master Fowler as
though Jesus the only Mediator did not content him, finds us out a new
Mediator the Virgin Marie, whom he will have to be a mediatrice for him, and
a purchaser for him. But we christians do know, no other Mediator nor
purchaser for us, but one, even that one only Lord Jesus the son of the
virgin Mary, for he is the Mediator between God and man, even that man Christ
Jesus. Jesus is as the Apostle calls him, He. 12. the Mediator of the New
Testament. The Gospel and word of the New Testament does teach us to know
Jesus to be the Mediator of al them, which do appertain to the New Testament,
and are received into that covenant of life. It does not assign us any other
Mediator, not the virgin Mary, not any Saint, nor Angel. We dare not take
this office from the son, and give it to the mother: we will not forsake the
son who is our certain, sure, and only Mediator, and go to the mother, who
has no such office committed unto her. We learn also that a contrite heart is
wroughte in the elect by the spirit and word of God. We do not know how
the virgin Mary can purchase this for us. Again, in that petition he places
these words: All thy Saints pray for me, that I be not separate from thee,
and their blessed fellowshippe in the heavenly city. Though it be granted to
M. Fowler that the Saints in heaven do pray for us, yet has he given us no
warrant of the word of God, to assure our consciences, either to make our
prayers to the^, or to pray the Lord Jesus to speak to them, or to appoint
them to pray for us. The Lord Jesus prayed for Peter, that his faith might not
fail, if it had failed he had bien separated from the Lord Christ. Let them
therefore which fear this separation, pray the Lord Jesus to be even so good
to them in this point as he was to Peter. For Christ prayed not for the
Apostles only, but for all them which shall believe in him truly. I pray not for
these alone (says he) but for all them also which shall believe in me through
their word, Ioh. 17. We know that the Lord Jesus him self makes
intercession for us, and with that we do content our selves, and therefore we
leave Saints to M. Fowler. In the eight petition he puts in this piece:
When I offend thee, smite me not with sudden death I beseech thee: and in
the fifteenth petition, he prays likewise: from sudden death and vnforeseene
Lord preserve me. What means M. Fowler to ask this one thing thus twice?
Would he have the world understand that he is afraid of death, and afraid
to dye? Cip. sermon. de mort.
He fears death says Cyprian, that is unwilling to go to Christ. M.
Fowler makes by his Psalter a show as though he were well acquainted with the
name of Jesus, and is he (I say) afraid to die? Then he is not well acquainted
with Jesus himself, how busy so ever he be with his name. For that fear is
of want of faith in Jesus verily. This fear has been seen in some
cloisterers, if all be true that they do write, which do write the lives of
cloysterers. For of cloysterers we may see some which have earnestly desired
the puttinge of, Vit. patr.
of death, and the prolonging of life. But yet other of them have corrected
this fear in them selves by faith, as they write of Hylarion who feeling him
self to be afraid of death, said to him self: O soul thou have served
Christ these fourscore years, and art thou now afraid to go out. Exi quia
misericors est: that is: Go out for he is merciful. This correction of fear
by faith in Christ is much better then M. Fowlers fearful prayer. But this
term, vnforeseene death may give us occasion to think that M. Fowler and
such as he is, do lead a very secure, and careless life, which do never
foresee death. That manne that so leads his life, that he does not in his
life time foresee his death draw on him daily, is maruelously misled. Blind he
is which can not foresee death which is daily seen, and dull he is, whom so
many warninges of death given can not prepare to death. The life of a christian
has in it a continual premeditation and foresight of death, and that death
which is so foreseen rightly, shall not (I trow) be sudden when it comes.
Neither shall any death be sudden to him, or vnforeseene of him, that is both
godly and daily prepared to dye. Therefore let M. Fowler acquaint his heart
with that desire which the Apostle had in his breast, when he desired to be
loased and to be with Christ. And let him teach his reader that lesson, after
that he has well digested it him self, which the holy Apostle teaches 2.
Cor. 5. That is, that the faithful do sigh, desiringe to be clothed with
their house which is from heaven. They have their desire that mortality might
be swallowed up of life, and to remove out of the body and to dwell with the
Lord. If M. Fowler will learn to acquainte him self well with the godly
desires of the faithful, truly then he shall not need to make this petition
of his either single or double, as now he does. The first part of the ninth
petition is: Jesus grant me grace for to remember perfectly the danger of
death, and the great account which I must give to thee, and to dispose me that
my soul may be acceptable to thee and to thy glorious mother the blessed
virgin Mary. The right remembrance of death is very necessary and profitable
to the living. But it is strange that M. Fowler prays Jesus so to dispose
him that his soul may be acceptable to him and to his glorious mother the
virgin Mary. It is sufficient truly that our souls be made acceptable to God
our father by the Lord Jesus, for so be they sufficiently accepted to
salvation, and they which are made so acceptable, can not but be welcome to the
company of that blessed virgin Mary, to ye Saints which are in heaven with
her, and to all the Angels also: why Jesus should make our souls, which by his
own grace are accepted to salvation, acceptable to his mother, I know not,
unless M. Fowler thinks that ye thing which Jesus Christ does accept, his
mother may, or will mislike. But I think not so evil of that blessed virgin
Mary, whatsoever M. Fowler does. For I think that she does rather adore the
grace of her son Jesus, by which he does accept our souls to salvation, then
either mislike it, or join with him in the office, and authority of
acceptinge. It follows, in the same petition: Then with the assistance of thy
glorious Angel Saint Michaell, deliver me from the danger of my ghostly
enemy. This name of the holy Angel we know, and we know also that the
deliverer of the faithful from their ghostly enemy the devil, is Jesus Christ
alone, for he thorough death did destroy him that had the power of death,
that is the devil as the Apostle says, Heb. 2. And S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3.
That for this purpose the son of God appeared that he might loase the works
of the devil, he it is by whom only it is, that the God of power treads
Satan under the feet of the faithful. Romans 16.
Why does M. Fowler flee from this grace, and power of the Lord Jesus to S.
Michaell. We know not who has assigned S. Michaell the Archangell to this
office to be a deliverer of souls in danger of death, from the danger of the
Ghostly enemy. If Master Fowler lists to make him self bold to assign
offices to Aungelles in heaven, it is but a popish pride. It follows: And
thee my good Angel I beseech than to help me. And what do you say Master
Fowler, to your badde Angel? will you say nothing to him? you do dream in
popery that every manne has his two Angels, that is his good Angel, and his
bad Angel, as al ye world knows. Heb. 1.
But in the word of truth we do learn and by it we know that God has
appointed his Aungelles to be ministringe spirits sent forth to minister for
their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation, but that each man has his
several Angel appointed to help him I do not yet certainly know. But I will
leave this question to the time and place of more full knowledge. And in the
mean time till I do know it, I would feign learn of M. Fowler, where he has
learned to pray to his good Angel, or to any Angel. We know that the holy
Angels do not suffer men to adore or worship them Apoca. 21. How will they
then admit that men should pray to them? Will M. Fovvler pray to them whether
they will or no? Prayer is a service which we are taught to do to God, to whom
Christ Jesus commands us to pray. But neither Jesus nor his Apostles, did
ever teach us in any place to pray to our good Angel. Who then has taught
Master Fowler to pray to his good Angel for help thus solemnly? Let M.
Fowler tell us this in truth, or else we will turn it over to him self, as
one of his own dreams and forgeries. In the tenth petition he says: Jesus
send me here my purgatory and preserve me from those torments of fire which
ever shall punish sin and iniquity. I will not, without further proof,
presume to say that M. Fowler is fallen into that beastly filth of Pithagoras,
who dreamed of a monstrous kind of purgatory and purginge of souls in this
mortal life. But let M. Fowler awake out of his own dream and tell us, how
and where he has found us out this new purgatory, that is such a one as he
does pray to have in this life here. Of which belike he is not greatly
afraid, for be teaches his scholar to pray for it ten times together. But
this is not that purgatory (I trow) out of which he prays in every one of the
petitions in his Psalter so bitterly to have souls delivered, nor yet is it
that purgatory of which his catholic fathers in the last council of Trent do
conclude: Neither is this fire which does ever punish sin, that fire of the
popish purgatory. For if it do ever punish sin, then does it never cease nor
end. But the fire of the popish purgatory has an end, as Papists them
selves do say, if they say truly. And therefore a Master of that sect does
call that their purgatory fire ignem transitorium, a fire transitory or passing
away. This purgatory then, is none of those purgatories of which we have heard
before, neither is this fire that fire of purgatory. It is needful therefore
that M. Fowler do tell us what fierles purgatory this is which he so busiely
prays to have in this life. We must know what it is, before we do pray for
it. If it shall please him to tell us, what that purgatory is which he calls
my purgatory, and desires to have it in this life, we shall consider the
matter more diligently with him, in the mean time I leave it to him self. It
follows in his Psalter: Mother of God, Patriarchs, etc. (he reckneth up a
number of Saints) I offer me to your merits and beseech you to pray for me,
and at my passing help to protect me. I suppose M. Fowler will account Abraham
to be one among the Patriarchs to whom he prays. But what if Abraham do not
know him? In the prophecy of ^saica. 63. We read of some who in their prayer
to God seem to be sturred up the more vehemently to pray unto God himself
for help, by this doubtless (say they) thou art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, yet thou O Lord, art our father and
redemer, thy name is for ever. Lo here is a people which do offer them selves
to God their father, and say that the Patriarchs Abraham and Israel do not
know them. If these Patriarchs do not know nor understand of the living
men, what other Patriarchs do it? Let M. Fowler tell us this, and also let
him tell us by what warrant of the word of God, he does teach his Reader to
offer him self thus to the merits of the mother of God, of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Saints etc. We are taught to offer our selves to God. The
sacrifices and offeringes which are to be made of our selves, are to be made
to God alone whose we are Romans 12. And S. Peter 1. Peter 2. does teach that
the believing Christians are made a spiritual house and holy priesthood to
offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. We have not learned to
offer our selves to the merits of the mother of God or of any Patriarche,
Prophet or Saint living or departed. There were a kind of old heretics
which did make offeringes and sacrifices to the Virgin Mary as Epiphanius does
write. Epiph. li. 3. tom. 2.
This offering of which M. Fowler speaks, sauoreth strongly of that old
heresy, and therefore I leave it as a stinking sacrifice to M. Fowler him
self. We have likewise learned in the book of God to trust to be saved by the
merits of Christ alone, and belike M. Fowler has heard of such a thing. For he
does immediately in the same petition say. My Lord Jesus crucified for me, by
the merits of thy glorious passion, I beseech thee grant me these petitions.
And him self does say in an other place of his Psalter: Thy mercy and thy
merits my Savior, ever be between them, (Gods wrath and judgment he means)
and me. Why does M. Fowler like an Infidel in the tenth petition show him
self to mistrust the merits of Jesus, and does therein offer him self to the
merits of Gods mother and other Saints, and now does commit him self to the
merits of Jesus. Is not this a foul jar and discord in this Psalter of his?
I say again that we Christians have learned to trust to the merits of Jesus
Christ alone, and to pray him to make intercession for us. We have not learned
to pray Saints to make intercession for us, for this is to depart from
Christ. We have learned to pray the Lord Jesus both in our living and in our
passing to protect us. We have not learned in any teacher of truth to ask this
protection of the mother of God, or other Saints. The Prophet David having
him self good hope in Gods might and mercy, does both commend him self, and
teaches us to commend our selves into the hands of God the Lord our Redeemer
Psalm. 31. Into thy hands (says he) I do commend my spirit, for thou have
redeemed me O Lord God of truth. Thus David does acknowledge God to be his
protector and safe keeper, he does not pray the mother of God, he does not
pray Saints to protect him. The same David Psalm. 121. says. The Lord is thy
keeper, the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand. And again, the Lord shall
preserve thee from all evil, he shall keep thy soul. The Lord shall
preserve thy going out and coming in from hence forth and for ever. He says
likewise Psalm. 97. The Lord preserves the souls of his Saints, he will
deliver them from the hand of the wicked. The same Prophet David Psalm. 18. does
with thankful heart to God and full mouth confess this. Thou have given me
(says he) the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has staide me.
But what did M. Fowler never read, neither these, nor those sweet sayings of
the Lord our God in which he promises to be the protector of his elect, and to
grant them his saving help. Isai 41. God says, fear thou not, for I am with
thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee and help thee,
and will sustain thee with the right hand of my justice. The faithful man does
learn of David to say Psalm. 28. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my
heart trusted in him and I was helped, therefore mine heart shall rejoice, and with
my song will I praise him. The faithful do say as Psalm. 32. Our foul waits
for the Lord, for he is our help and our shield. And of the Prophet he
learneth, Psalm. 37. That the salvation of the righteous men shall be of the Lord:
he shall be their strength in the time of trouble. For the Lord shall help them,
and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and shall save them
because they trust in him. And they have such a courage and faith in God his
goodness, might, and mercy, that they say Psalm. 23. Though I do walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. And they say also, Psalm. 48.
This God is our God for ever and ever, he shall be our guide unto the death. Thus
does the Lord allure his people to look for salvation and protection at his
hand, and for his saving help in all their perils. And we read that Christ
our Savior at his death cried out with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit Luc. 23. and by his example does teach us to do ye same.
Act. 7.
For God is our protector and defender. Stephen also stoned to death cried,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit: to the Lord Jesus as to his only protector, he
does commend him self, and by his example he has taught us to commend our
selves to this protector as he did, and therefore in Jesus alone let us rest and
abide, so shall we be most safely kept and protected, as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 91. Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the
shadow of the Almighty. For truly he that makes God his defense and trust
shall perceive his protection to be a most sure safeguard, as it is at large set
forth in that Psalm, which I wish the godly reader diligently to read and
mark, and he shall learn of David in his holy Psalter that God is his
protector. But M. Fowler in this his Psalter, or rather in this his fiddle,
assigns us to an other protection then David does in his Psalter, whereby the
reader may perceive that these Psalters do not agree. We have not learned to
pray the Lord Jesus by ye merits of his glorious passion to grant such
petitio^s as M. Fowler makes here: as that we should offer our selves to the
merits of Gods mother, and other holy Saints, and ask their protection. The
merits of Jesus Christ crucified for us, are of such a merit, that for our
safety, protection, and salvation, we need no other merit either of the
mother of God, or of any Saint, but the only merit of Jesus Christ alone.
The merits of Jesus Christ alone have fully merited and deserved for us which
do trust in him only, and seek at his hand only all our safety and full
salvation. He does not send us to seek ye merits of his mother or of any
other saints. And this value and force of Christ's power and merits M. Fowler
him self seems to have found out once again. For in his eleventh petition,
he prays ye Lord Jesus thus: Thy power protect me, and again, thy passion
preserve me from everlasting damnation, and terror of mine enemy. In deed
these words have some good savor and sound of truth, but he would never have
mingled ye merits and protection of Saints with the merits and protection
of Christ, if he had heartily reasted on the protection of Jesus, and upon ye
merits of the Lord Jesus alone, for he should have found him self so safe
in the merits of Christ, yt he would never have sought others as even now he
did. And here you may once again mark a jar, that Fowler in his Psalter
makes not only with David his Psalter, but even with him self also. We know
that Jesus Christ alone, is the sufficient protector of his elect, they are all
given unto him of his father, none can take them out of his hand, he has not
joined with him in this protectinge power any other person, neither his mother
nor Saint. And therefore the sheep of ye Lord Jesus do greatly rejoice in
this, that they may rest protected and conducted by Jesus Christ alone, whereof
the Psalmist does sweetly singe Psalm. 23. In the same eleauenth petition Fowler
prays: That God would keep his mouth from slanderous speaking, lying,
false witness bearing, etc. If this request had been granted, Master Fowler
had made no such Psalter as he has at this time, in which is much lying, false
witness bearing, and sclaunderous speaking, as in part you have heard and yet
more shall hear by Gods grace. In the twelf petition he has this: In my
temptations Lord I beseech thee to help me, for the tender love that thou
did show to thy mother and she to thee. It is well that he prays the Lord
Jesus to help him in his temptations, but to require him to do it for the
love that he did bear to his mother and she to him, is a thing far
featched. Why M. Fowler has not the Lord Jesus borne any love to you your
self, that is worth the remembering? We know that the Lord Jesus did tenderly
love his mother and she him again, but that love which he does bear to
mankind is no less, and is also of his own free goodness. Joan. 15.
Of love he did give his life for his sheep, and greater love then this has
no man, when any man bestows his life for his freindes. This is that great
love which Jesus has borne to us, the Christians which do believe in him and
harken to his voice. And the holy Ghost teaches us to learn, to understand
and to taste how sweet this love is, wherewith the Lord God our heavenly
father and our good Lord Jesus have loved us, for that love is our life. Of
this love the Lord Jesus does teach us saying Joan. 3. So God loved the world
that he has given his only son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have life everlasting. The same our loving Lord Jesus says of this
his love toward us Joan. 13. As the father has loved me, so have I loved you.
And in his prayer Joan. 17. he asks thus. That the love wherewith thou have
loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Thus are we taught in the holy
Scriptures to understand the love of the father and the love of the son
toward us. Nothing is there said to teach us to look to the love which his
mother did bear to him. Yea he says Joan. 10. I am the good shepherd, the
good shephearde gives his life for his sheep. And again, therefore does my
father love me, because I lay down my life. And S. John teaches us. Behold
what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called the sons of
God. 1. Joan. 5. And again he says, In this appeared the love of God toward
us, because he sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live
thorough him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins. 1. Joan. 4. Thus does the
spirit of God lay forth that love before us in which lies our life. Of this
love S. Paul having a right good taste writes Gal. 2. I live (says he) by
the faith of the son of God, who loved me and has given him self for me. In
this love which Christ Jesus bears to us, is the very life of ye faithful,
and therefore to it they must and they do look. As we read Apoca. 1. unto him
that loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us kings
and priests unto God his father, unto him be glory and dominion for evermore.
Thus are we taught to taste the love wherewith Jesus Christ has loved us our
selves, howsoever either he loved his mother or she loved him. In the
thirteenth petition he has put in this patche: Make me patiently to suffer
injuries and rebukes in recompense of my disobedient heart to thee. To suffer
injuries and rebukes for Christ's sake patiently, and for well doing is a
blessedness. And can not this suffice Master Fowler? but he must also make his
patience a recompense to God for the disobedience of his heart? Of this his
conceipte of recompencing God for sin, I have spoken before, and the less
shall I need to speak of it now, because M. Fowler him self also, even in
this same petition, belike misdouting his own recompencinge of God for his own
sins, does flee to the recompense which the Lord Jesus has made for us, and
says: Let thine obedience recompense for my obstinacy, thine abstinence for
my superfluity, thy meekenes and thy patience for my pride, irefull heart and
enmity, thy charity for my malice, thy devotion for my dulnes, thy louinge heart
for my unkindness, thy holy death for my wretched life and for all my misery.
These are the words of M. Fowler in this same thirteenth petition, in which he
does require the Lord Jesus to make the recompense for all his sins and
misery. And what is it then wherefore he would him self make recompense by
his patience? He says for his disobedient heart. But for this he prays the
Lord Jesus to make recompense. He seems in these words not to trust to the
value of recompencing by his own patience, but prays that the patience of
the Lord Jesus may be a recompense for his own pride, irefull heart, and
enmity. You see now once again how contrary M. Fowler is to himself in this
petition, and what a jar this contrariety does make in this his Psalter. In
deed the recompense which he would him self make by his patience for the
disobedience of his own heart, is far out of tune, and sounds vnsauerily in
the understanding of any true christian. But this recompense which he finds
that Jesus has made for his elect, is a sweet savor of life to the souls
of true christians, and agrees with the saying of the Prophet Isai. 53. He set
or made his life for a sacrifice of sin. This recompense which Jesus Christ
has made, and that which M. Fowler would himself make, can not be coupled
together. For Jesus alone and only made the just and full recompense for the
sins of all them which are to be saved. In the last, that is, in the
fifteenth petition M. Fowler adds: This invocation and Psalter of thee by the
mediation of thy most entirely beloved mother purchase to me gracious life, and
blessed ending, free from debte, and deadly sin I beseech thee, and after my
bodily death everlasting life, with endless bliss and felicity. M. Fowler
must first prove, yt this is the Psalter of Jesus before he can thus call and
commend it, or attribute such force unto it, as he does. And let the reader
mark how M. Fowler him self, as it were doubting of the value, virtue, or
force of this his Psalter, joins to it, as a poor help to help it forward,
the mediation of the blessed virgin Mary. For he would have his Psalter to be
of valor to purchase for him, by the mediation of the blessed virgin Mary. Of
her mediation we know nothing as I have said before: we do trust only to the
mediatio^ of her most gracious son our good Lord Jesus, who is the one, and
so the only Mediator between God and man. For we are taught by S. Paul, 1. Tim.
2.
that there is one God and one Mediator between God and man, even the man
Christ Jesus. But M Fowler like a sloue^like apoticary mingleth this his
Psalter and the mediation of the virgin Mary both together, to the end belike,
that if the one failed ye other might serve the turn. And he prays that this
his medly may purchase first gracious life. This term gracious which he
uses, teaches us, whatsoever he means by gracious life, that it is the
work of Gods free grace, and therefore comes not by purchase either of this
Psalter, or of the mediation of the virgin Mary. He adds that by this mingle
he would purchase blessed endinge free from debte, and deadely sin. Touching
the payment of his debtes, it may be that M. Fowler thinks to provide some
poor help, by printing of this Psalter, and that the good vent thereof may be
a great help to him, if he be in debte. But it is hard dealing to get the
money of true men for false ware. It is more hard to lay such snares of deceit
to intrappe the simple souls of Christians, as M. Fowler does, for getting of
money to pay his debtes. Whatsoever M. Fowler dreameth of payment of his
debtes, we know the payment and satisfaction for all our sins is the price
which Jesus Christ paid in his most precious bitter and bloody death suffered
on ye cross for us. That only makes us free, other freedom purchased either
by this Psalter, or by the mediation of the Virgin Mary, or any other way which
M. Fowler and his fellows can devise, we know none, we will none. We do by
Gods grace know that freedom into which we are called by Jesus Christ, who as
he only could, so he has most graciously made us free. In that fredom by his
grace we do and shall stand. By this mingle M. Fowler would purchase also life
everlasting. He thinks but simply and basely of life everlasting, which does
think that it may be purchased by such a filthy fiddle as is this Psalter, or
by such a mingle mangle as Fowler makes. But we have learned and do believe
that life everlasting is (as I said before) the gift of God thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord. It is his gift, it is not by this Psalter, nor by the
mediation of the Virgin Mary to be purchased. We do give unto God the glory
and praise due, of, and for the gift of life everlasting by Jesus Christ. We
will not seek it by any other means, nor go about to purchase that our
selves, which is thus graciously and freely given unto us. Thus ends this
Psalter (says Master Fowler) and yet he adds an admonition, a point of
holsom doctrine be ye sure, and a Narration of nothing verily in effect, yet be
they solemnly added to furnishe up the train of this his Psalter. But
Master Fowler wants one thing usual in such preatty popish devises. That
is some Bull to be granted by his most holy father Pope Gregory that now is,
of pardon for such as shall devoutly say this Psalter. Popes were wont to be
liberal to beawtifie such conceiptes with large pardons for thowsandes of
years. Master Fovvler was much ouerseene that he did not sue to Rome for
such a pardon to have annexed it to his Psalter. Such a Bull would have
gotten easy sale of his Psalter among the Romish Calves, and so have made
well for the payment of Master Fovvlers debtes. And we may think that Master
Fovvler might have come in a very seasonable time to his father Pope Gregory on
this message. For it does appear that this Pope was so full of his popish
grace about the time of the publishing of this Psalter, that at an easy
entreatie of Master Inglefeilde, and one Master Allen he did liberally grant
pardon and pardon again to such as shall have but one of the beade stones
which he has blessed. What would not this Pope then have granted upon small
entreatie, to him that should have had, and said this Psalter of Fowler? But if
it were so that this Psalter was offered to the Pope to be blessed and dubbed
with a pardon, and he refused so to do, and yet he has so plentifully
bestowed his blessing upon a poor beadstone, surely it is enough to mar M.
Fowlers markett. For then every man will think that Pope Gregory did not
esteem so much of Master Fowlers Psalter as he did of a simple beadestone. A
thing of small price and value surely, not unlike to the value of the Popes
blessing bestowed on it, that is of no valor at all. But if a blessed
beadestone may bring by the popes Bull full remission of all sins, as his
blasphemous Bull imports: Then let Master Fovvler go hang up his
psalter upon some pynne on the wall, for it can profitte no other man, nor yet
him self any way that I know. If Pope Gregory that now is would have done
so much for this Psalter of Master Fowler as Pope Pius did for his own primer,
it might have served much better M. Fovvlers turn then now it can, For Pope
Pius does solemnly revoke and put out of use all other primers, to make place
for his own Primer now printed by Plantine at Andwarpe, and also gives
preattie pardons to them which shall use it. If Pope Gregory had been so good a
fellow to provide for Fowlers psalter, that is, if he had adnihilated and put
out of use all other psalters, and then dubbed this psalter of Fowlers with a
pardon, what had M. Fowler I pray you then wanted? Nothing verily but truth. It
may be that Master Fowler thought that the romish popes had already dealt
forth their blessed graces in their pardons so plentifully for many thowsandes
of years yet to come, that now they had no more stoare of such graces left
them to bestow by pardons. So might it also have been thought that the Romish
seduced sect had already gotten such stoare of pardoned years for ages to
come, and by pardons such full remission of all their sins, yt they neded not
now to care for any more newpardo^s. But in error there is no stay. I will leave
therefore M. Fowler, to sue at Rome, if he be so foolish, for a pardon to
furnish this his fiddle which he calls a Psalter. But I do wish rather to M.
Fowler with all my heart that true christian understanding, which may show him
his error, and grace to forsake it, and to embrace the truth of Christ Jesus
our Savior, as it is taught and set forth in the word of truth, the most
holy word of God, I mean. Here I would end as he ends his Psalter, saving
that I think good in concludinge to answer an objection which may be made to
me. It may be said, that I have not touched all his whole Psalter, but have
left much not spoken of, which is contained in it. It is true, I have only
touched some such stringes as do make a foul jar from the soundnes of our
christian faith and of the holy Scriptures. And yet I have not touched all but
left some untouched, supposinge that this which I have written may give the
godly reader sufficient warning of all the rest. This little leaven which I have
touched, sowreth his whole psalter, and makes it unsavory to him that tastes
how sweet ye Lord is in his truth and mercy. But he will say that Fowler
printeth also some good words in his Psalter. What thereof? The devil him
self sometime speaks truth, but he is to be put to silence. For his purpose
is by uttering some truth to get credit to be believed in his falshoode. Hieron.
in Ierem. 23.
We are forewarned by an old writer, that falsehood does imitate truth always,
and that unless it have some likelihoode of truth it can not deceive. So it may
be that M. Fowler speaks of purpose in some points of his psalter a truth,
but under that we must take heed that he creep not into such creditte with
us, that therefore we should receive as truth all that he printeth, for then
you see what stinking filth we shall receive. It is a manner of foysters to
set forth their falshoodes with some show of truth, else should they lay them
selves to open, and mar their own market. It is the duty of all them which
will pray well, and acceptably unto God, to make those prayers which are sound
and wholly agreeing with Gods most holy will witnessed in his holy word. Let
men take heed of offering straung fire to God, I mean that they do not make
strange prayers to God, for if they do, they shall feel the pains thereof
and suffer bitter reiection. Let us learn to pray to God him self, sithence
he does vouchsafe to become our Scholemaister herein, and does teach us how to
pray in his sight acceptably, and to our selves most profitably. If we do
despise such a scholemaister, if we will refuse his teaching, and will be
teachers to our selves, and thrust upon him our own devises, we do show our
selves to be stubborn and proud rebels, he will not accept us, but reject us,
the loss and pain shall be ours. It had been the part of M. Fovvler to have
learned of Jesus our Lord and most gracious Savior how to pray, and then
would he not have presumed thus to pack up this peevish Psalter, and to set
it on vent under the blessed name of Jesus. This is a boldness intolerable. To.
2. council. cap. Grec. Synod.
I read that there were some psalms or himnes devised by men which were
forbidden to be used of Christians in the congregation, and that by the consent
of some Elders gathered together in council. Mention is made also in Eusebius
how some heretics had their new psalms of their own. Such a psalter is this,
and such psalms here has M. Fovvler made, if not worse then they were, as
worthy to be forbidden as they, and to be avoided of al true Christians, who
are as I said to learn of the Lord him self how to offer this sacrifice of
prayer to him: and it is our duty both to thank him that it has pleased him
to become our teacher, and also to suffer our selves to be taught of him, yea
and to harken to that which is said, and by the spirit of God taught us.

Coloss. 3. Let the word of Christ dvvell in you plenteously in all wisdoms,
teaching and admonishing your own selves in psalms and himnes and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord, etc.


Praise God. TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
FOwler adds unto his fiddle which he calls a Psalter, an admonition. It
may (I trust) be as lawefull for me, now in the end of this book to add a
few words in way of a necessary admonition. When the Pope shows himself
liberal in giuinge of Pardons to them which will pray so as he appoints them,
and when papists are busy to make us Psalters and such pretty instruments
whereon to pray, a man would think that both he and they were become very
devout. But even these very same men, when this word prayer is most busy in
their mouths, have in their hearts and hands foul and bloody practices, to
cut the throats of the^ whom they do allure to pray with them. In which they
do not so closely work, but God of his goodness, does discover the^, blessed be
his name for it. He does bewray unto us that blood thrist which lies in
their hearts. For, they do in deed secretly labor and practice the sheding of
our blood and the murdering of us all, whilst they do allure us to pray, as
they prescribe us. And therefore just cause we have now to complain on these
enemies as David does upon his: Psalm. 55. The words of his mouth were softer
then butter, yet war was in his heart: His words were more gentle then oil,
yet they were swords. We may likewise complain as he does, Psalm. 120. My
soul has to long dwelt with him that hates peace. I seek peace, and when I
speak thereof, they are bent to war. In these practices of the seed of
Cain, that is of these romish catholics (for so they vvil be called) we do se
that fulfilled which was foretold us by our Savior Christ. Ioh. 16. That
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. Thus are the
children of God forevvarned that they shall find enemies so devout and cruel,
that they shall think them selves to do good and acceptable sacrifice to God
in slaying and killing of them. This is an opinion which is put into their
minds by the devil that old murderer and liar: and in this murdering, the
murderers do this their service to the devil him self. The old persequutinge
Pagans thus served their Gods, that is, the devil him self in bloody
slayinges and murtheringes of Christians. In deed it is the delight of the
devil to smell the savor of such sacrifices. And therefore even among the Pagans
and Idolaters, the devil that old murderer had sowed this delusion, that
they were induced to think it to be a most acceptable service to their
Idols, to offer unto them men, women, and children in slain sacrifice like
beasts. Yea some of the^ did doat herein so egregiously, that they spared not
their own sons, and daughters, but made unnatural slaughters of their
natural children to the devil him self in their Idols. And this was among
them a thing so common and horrible, Cl. Alex.
that even of this their cruel inhumanity did some old doctors and vvryters
of Christ's church gather arguments to prove those Idols false devils and
their vvorshippe Idolatry, and to dravv those Idolaters from their barbarous
infidelity to the faith of Christ. The same pagans also were taught by the
devil their schoolemaister to think sometime that it was meet for them to
pacify their gods, and to procure them selves felicity by making of havoc
and cruel slaughters of the godly old Christians. The same murderer the
devil which wrought these mischiefs then, does use still his old pranckes,
and does stir up papists now to practice the like inhumaine and cruel
slaughters upon the poor flock and sheep of Christ, as he did by Pagans then.
They think it an acceptable service and sacrifice to their God. But it is only
a pleasing service to the devil of hell, and the devil it is whom papists do
serve herein. They think by these means to extinguish the faith, the
religion, and true profession of Christ, that their popish Idols may keep the
place of God, and be counted and worshipped as God only and alone upon earth,
wherein they serve the devil himself to the uttermost of their power. Many
are the unnatural slaughters which not only before us, but even in our age
papists have made in France, at Merindoll, Paris, and through that whole
realm, in Flaunders also and Spain, England and else where as the histories
of our age do bear testimony. But if that God whom Papists worship be such
a cruel belly god, that he is best pleased when men are slain for his
pleasure, we may safely say then that, that which the Papists do vvorshippe
with such service, is the very devil of hell. For the Lord God the maker of
heaven and earth, God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only true
living God, accepts no such service, no such sacrifice, and he will in his
appointed time call these butchers and men quellers to as fearful an account
for these their cruel doings as once he called Cain for the slaughter of his
brother Abell. Yea let them proceed, they shall but fill up the measure of
their sins, that upon them (as Christ says) may come all the righteous blood
that was shed upon the earth, Matthew. 23.
from the blood of Abell the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias the son
of Barachias, etc. But you will say these men be devout in their prayers.
They do pray: so did Cain: so did Doeg, make a semblance of praying and
sacrificing, but this was but the counterfetting of these cast-avvayes. And
the Papists do think that vvhilest they do thus nourish this insatiable malice
and devise of these bloody massacres in their hearts, yet that they do pray
so well themselves, that they may allure others to pray with them. But in
these their thoughts they do err, and are deceived. For the Lord him self
says by the Prophet. Isai. 1. When you shall stretch out your hands I will
hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear,
for your hands are full of blood. The prayers therefore of these bloody papists
are not heard, thanks be to God for it. But let us al which do profess the
religion of Jesus Christ in truth, be admonished with care and diligence to
practice right prayer acceptable to God by Jesus Christ our Savior, and not
forget that vvhilest we do pray, papists have still their secret practices
to cut all our throats, and therefore let us be prepared for them.

Psalm. 72. He shall redeem their souls from deceit, and violence, and dear
shall their blood be in his sight.


