The castle of love, translated out of Spanishe in to English, by Johan
Bowrchier knight, lord Bernis, at the instaunce of the lady Elizabeth Carew,
late wife to sir Nicholas Carew knight.

The which book treats of the love between Leriano and Laureola daughter to
the king of Masedonia.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Prologe.
FOr the affeccyant desire and obligacyon that I am bownde in, toward your
right virtuous and good lady: as well for the goodness that it has pleased you
to show me, as for the nyrenesse of consanguinite, has pleased me to
accomplish your desire, as in translatynge this present book. And though my so
doing, can not be correspondente any thing to recompense your goodness. yet
not being ignorante of your will and desire, the which in this cause I take
for the hole effect: thinking thereby to do you some small rememoracyon. And
also because the matter is very pleasante for young ladies and gentle women.
Therefore I have enterprysed to translate the same out of Spanyshe in to
Englysh^, not adorned with so fre^she eloquence, that it should merit to be
presented to your goodness. For or I first entered in to this rude labor I
was brought into great doubtfulnesse, and found my self in diverse
ymagynacyons. For seeing the quycke intellygence of your spyrit, I feared: and
again the remembrance of your virtue and prudence, gave me audacyte. In the
one I found fear, and in the other suertie and hardynesse. Finally I did chose
the most vnuaylable, for mine own shame, and most utility in any
reprehencion or rebuke for the much boldness, in that I have not taken such
respyte as I ought to have done. yet in consyderacyon of your gentleness,
mine affeccyo^ is always in trust to skape blameles. I have taken this
entrepryce on me, more be desire to have blame thereby, then to atteyne by my
praise or laud. wherefore right virtuous lady, may it please you of your
goodness to accept this little present treatise, and to receive this my good
will, or ye condemn the fault. And also to have the more affection to the
presenter, then to the valewer of the thing presented: requyrynge you to hold
and repute me always as one of the number of them, that always shall be ready
to do you pleasure. And for the surplus, I desire the creator of the first
cause long to endure and to increase your happy prosperity. Amen.

The end of the prologe.
The Auctor.
AFter ye wars done and finyshyd in my country, being in my poor mansion,
in a morning when the son illuminyd the earth, in a shadowyde dark valey,
in the mountain called Serua de Marenus, in the country of Masedonia: as I
walked in a strayte way shadowyd with fayer trees Suddenly I met with a knight
fyers and furious, whose presence was ferfull to regard. Coueryde all in here
like a savage creature. In his lift hand he bare a bright schilde of stele,
and in his right hand a shynynge image entaillid in a clear stone, of such
pleasure and bewtle, that ye clerenes troubled the syghte of mine eyes, out of
the which there issuyde diverse Rays of fire enbransing and enflaming ye body
of a man. The which the said knight forceably led behynd him, wh^^with
dolorous playntes and sorrowful passions said: By reason of my hope, I suffer
all this, and wheir he aprochyd, and that I was nere him, he said with mortal
anguysh friend, for the love of god I pray the follow me and aid me in this my
great be^ynes, and I as then had more cause of fear, then reason to answer,
but I set mine eyes on this strange vision, iudgyng in my heart dyuerce
consideracions^ as to leave my way, me thought it symplenes, and to accomplysh
the desire of the pacient, I thought it dangerous to follow him was perell, and
to leave him in that turbacion was pite, so that I wiste not which was best to
chose, how be it after that fear had left mine alteracion in some ease, and
that my spirits began to respyre, then I co^syderyd well that I was more
bound to the virtue, then to the life. And then determynyde for the dought
that I was in, to follow ye way of him who desired mine ayede, and I hastyde me
to go after in such sort that shortly I ouertoke them. Do we went all.iii. a
long space, with no less anoyance, then to be solytary alone fro pleasur or
company, and though the desire of the dolorous, was cause of my following, yet
to speak to him that led the pacient, I faylyde audacyte, and to desire him,
me thought nothing auayleable, nor I had not deseruyd it, though in this
case I failed counsayll, yet after I had reuoluyde my thoughts in the
remembrance of many things, I thought it best to put to him some manner of
purpose, to thentent that according to his answer I should determyne further.
And with this delyberacion I requyrede him in the most curtes wise that to me
was possible, to show me what he was: who answered me, and said: Friend,
certainly according to my natural condycion, I ought to give the none
answer: because mine office is rather to assure evil, then to answer well:
how be it in that I have been always norished among men of good nourture: I
shall use to the of the gentylnes, that I have lernyd, and not of the fercenes
of my nature. Thou shall understand sense thou wylt know it, that I am
principal officer in the house of the god of love: and I am named by my right
name, desire. And with the force of this child / I resyst and defend all
hoopes: And with the beauty of this Image I cause ye affections where with I
broyle and inflame the lives as thou may se by this prisoner whom I led in
to the prisone of love: who all only by death hops his delyuerance. When
this tormentour had showed me all these things, we mountyd up a sharp and
an high mountain, that further to trauaylle, my for^e failed, and with great
pain, we aryuyd to the heyght. In receyuynge this answer, then I studied, how
to thank him of the grace that he had showed me: and therwt suddenly he
vanyshed fro my presence. This was in the beginning of the night, wherefore I
could not keep my way, nor know whether I should draw, for the darkness of
the night, and the small knowledge that I had of the country. Howbeit I
thought it best not to return, nor to depart fro the palce, that I was in.
Then I began to course ^yne adventure, abandonyng my self fro all hope,
abiding there my p^rdicio^. Thus in ye mids of my tribulacyon, I never
repentyd of that I had done, for I estemyd better to lose my life,
accomplyshynge virtue: then to save it, doing the contrary. Thus I was all ye
night in heaviness and trauelous contemplacion. And when the light of the day
discoueryd ye ways, I saw before me, on the most highest place of ye
mountain, a tower so high, that me semyd it atteynyd to the heuyn. Hit was
made by such artifice, that of the strangnes thereof, I began to meruayll, and
I joined my self to the foot thereof. The time offeryd me more to fear, then
to regard or note it, beholding the strange ouerage and newelte of the edefice.
The fundacio^ whereon it was foundyd, was of a stone clear and strong of
nature, whereupon was raised.iiii. great pillars of violet marble, so fair, and
so high, beyond the common form, that it was meruayll how they were systeynyd.
Above the which was fabricate a tower iii. square, the most strongest that
could be devised: on every square thereof, on ye height there stood an humayn
Image, made of metal, painted with their own colors, one tawny, a another
black, and the third gray, each of them holding a chain in their hands,
made of great force. And on the heyght of the tower, there was a pynacle full of
great clerenes and light, coming fro a raye of light issuyng out of the tower.
I hard.ii. watches who never seaced, but still wakyd. Of these things greatly
I mernayled, and could not tell what to think or to say. Thus being in great
dought and confusion^ I saw ioynynge to the marbell a stayre mountyng to the
gate of the tower, whereof the enter was so dark, that to mount up, semyd
impossible: how be it, I deliberyd, willing rather to go to my perdicyon in
mountyng, then to save my self with tarieng. Thus taking heart, I began to
mou^te and when I was up.iii. steps, I found a door of Iron, the which
satisfied me rather to taste with my hands, then to attain thereto by syghte, by
reason of y^ darkness that I was in, And when I came to the gate, I found there
a porter, of whom I demaundyd licens to enter. He answered, how he was
content, so that first I should leave behind me mine armure. I grauntyd him to
leave such as I bare customably upon me. Then he said: My ffrend, it aperith
well, that of the usage and custom of this house thou know but lytle^ The
armoure that I demand, and those that it behooves the to leave, are such as
the heart is wont to be defendyd withal, fro heaviness and sorrow, as are:
hope, rest, and contentacion: for to have those conditions, there may none joy
of the demand that thou desyrest. And when I knew his entension, without any
further advise, I answered and ass^^ryd him, that I was come thither with out
any of those armours. The^ he grau^tyd the openyng of the gate, and so with
great trauaill and sore trouble, I aryuyd to the height of the tower, where I
found a another porter, who demaundyd of me as ye other did. And when I had made
him like answer, he gave me place to enter. Then I went all the length of the
tower, and enteryd in to a halle, where in ye mids thereof stood a chair
brennynge full of fire: in the which satte he who made to me the request, and
causer of my perdicion. And mine eyes were so chargyd with regarding of this
ouerage, and my tongue was so oppressed, that I could demand no question of all
these meruails. And as I regardyd them, I saw the.iii. chains that the Images
held on the height on y^ tower, were fast tied about this poor captyue
prisoner, who always brent, and never consumyd. Then I saw two sorrowful women,
their faces full of wepynges and dolours. They ordained to set on his head with
great crueltie^ a crown full of sharp points of steal, without pity,
persyng his head to the brain. Also there was a black morion, vestured in
yelowe, who came often times with a great fawchon, to strike him, and ever I saw
how the pacient received the strokes with a shield, subtly i^suyng out of his
hedde: the which covered him to the feet. I saw other.iii. servants right
diligent, who brought him meat on a black cloth, and with great fury gave him
mete of bitter taste. And on the one side of the table I saw an old man sit in
a chair lenynge his hedde in one of his hands, like a man solitary in thought
and pensyfenes. All these things I could scant se for the darkness of the
tower: but by reason of a clear shynynge light, that issuyd out of the
prisoners heart, which gave clear light over all. And when this prisoner saw
me so astonyd, to se things of such mystery: And that he saw time to pay me
with his words, though he were not in my det yet to give me some rest, and
solacious comfort, with his discrete reasons, medlyd with piteous wepynges, he
began to say in this manner.

The prisoner.
SOme part of my heart I shall discover, as I ought to do, for the sorrow
that I have of the, according to thy deserte, how be it, thou seist well that
in my trybulacio^ I have no power, to feale any other man's evil, mine own is
so great, I pray the take for satisfaction, not that I do, but that I desire,
of thy coming hither I am the cause, I am he whom thou saw led as a
prisoner, because of the tribulacio^ that thou art in, thou know me not.
Torn again to thy spirits and take rest, and quiet judgment, to thentent
thou may be ententyue to that I will say. Thy coming was to remedy me, my
words shall be to aduertyse y^, who I am. I shall show the, and of the
mysteryes that thou have seen, I shall infourme the. The cause of my prison, I
would thou knewdest, and I require the to deliver me if it be in thy puissaunce,
know for certain, I am Lereano son to duke Guerro, whom god perdon, and
of the duches Colerea, my birth was in this realm, where thou art present,
named Macedonia, my fortune ordeynyd that I became amorous of Laureola daughter
to king Guallo, who at this present time reygneth, who^ I should rather have
fled fro, then to have fallen in to the trace of love, and specially in so
high a place, but as the first mouynge, may not excuse me instead of
forsakynge thereof, by reason I have confermyd it by good will. Also love has
vanquyshed me, and brought me in to this house, named the Castle of love, who
never perdonyth, for he seeing displayed the vailes of my desire, has brought
me in to ye state that thou seist me in, and to the intent, thou should the
better note, and mark the fundacion of this, and of all that thou have seen,
thou shall know that the stone, whereon the prison is foundyd, is my faith, who
determines utterly to suffer the dolor of this pain, for the wealth of his
evil. The great pyllers that are assysted to this stone, ary my
understanding, my reason, my memory, and my will, whom amors commaundyd to
apere before his presence, or he would give any sentence upon me. And the
better to execute on me his true justice, demaundyd of each of them, if they
consentyd that I should be taken prisoner, because if any of them would not have
consentyd, he would have asoyled me fro pain and blame, to the which demand
all.iiii. aunswerd in this manner. First understanding said: I consent to the
evil of the pain, for the wealth of the cause, wherefore my will is, that he be
taken. Then said Reason: and I consent not allonely that he be in prison, out I
ordeyne that he there abide, and dye: for it were better for him the happy
death, then to live in despair considering for whom he shall suffer it. Then
said Memory, syn that understanding and reason, co^sentyth that without death he
can not be delivered, I then pinyse, he shall never forget it, but always have
it in his remembrance. Then said will: seeing it is thus I will then be the key
of his prisone, and determyne always to be persecuter, of will and desire.
This seeing the god of love who ought to have sauid m^e, condemned me, and gave
this cruel sentence against me. As for ye.iii. images standing on ye walls of
ye tower each of them of a contrary color, as tawny, black, and gray, The one
is heaviness, the other anguish, and the third trauaill. The cheynes in their
hands are their strengthes, where with they hold falte tied the heart in such
wise that it can recover none ease nor rest. The great clerenes and shynyng,
that the Egle has in his bek and wings as thou have seen in the highest part
of the tower, which is mine inwardes thoughts, which has so great clevenes
in it self, that it suffiseth to enlumyne ye darkness of this clowdy prison,
and the force thereof is so great that the strength of the thick walls, can not
le^ it, but that it will attaigne to the Egl^ in such wise, yt they will go
together in company, because they are the things that mountyth and ascendyth
highest, for the which cause my prison is in the highest place of the land.
The.ii. watches that thou he^est, so dilygently watchyng be Mishap, and Hate.
They be of that devise yt no hope nor remedy should enter into me. ye dark
stayres to mount on, is anguysh, whereon I mountyd, as thou seyst. The first
porter was desire, who to all heaviness openyth the gate. Therefore he said to the
yt thou should leave al thine armure of pleasoure. The other porter was
torment, who brought me hither, who is of the same co^dicyo^. The chair of
fire wherein thou seist me sit, is my just affection, whose flames always
brynneth in mine entrayles. The.ii. women yt gave me the crown of martyrdom are
called pain and passion, who satisfyeth my faith with this present reward. The
old man yt thou seyst sit in so great study, represents great thought and
pensyfenes with grievous care and soli^itude. The which (joined with ye other
euyls) manisheth my poor life. The black more ve^^uryd in yelowe, who
traueyleth to take away my life, is named despair, and the sheld that issues
out of my head defending me fro his strokes, is my wit, who (seeing ye
despair would slay me) commands me to defend my life, co^syderyng the
deserte of Laureola, he commands me to desire long life with sufferance,
rather then with death to make an end. The black board for me to eat on, is
ferme steadfastness whereon I eat. Think and sleep, thereon are the heavy
meats, of mine conteplatio^s. The.iii. dilligent servants yt serves me, are
named, evil, pain and dolor. One bears the meat of doubtfulnesse, whereof I
eat. a another bears despair wherein ye meat is brought, and another bears ye
cup of tribulation, wherein I drink drawing water fro ye heart to the eyes, and
from y^ eien to the mouth. Now judge thy self, if I be well served, if I have
need of remedy you seyst. I require the syn you art here aryued that thou wylt
search for me some remedy, and sorrow mine evil, I desire of the none other
good, but that Laureola may be aduertysed^ and know by the state how thou
seyst me, and peradventure thou wylt excuse the because thou seyst me fail
power to make the a recompense. I require the let it not be undone for that
cause, for more virtue it is to remedy them that be in tribulation, then to
sustain them that be in prosperity: let thy works be such, that thou repent
not thy self, for lack of doing it, when thou myghteste have done it.

The answer of the auctour to Laureola.
THy words show well, that love has taken and occupies thy liberty, but
not thy virtue, the which I prove by that I se in the, to be more redyer to
dye, then to speak: how be it, thou have forcyd thy will, to prove the werynes
of my life, judging what for travels passyd, and for my solycitude present,
that I have but small hope to live, and without doubt, so it is, for thou
causest my perdicion, desiring doughtes remedy, and yet thou do remedy the
same, as a perfight judge. And surely. I have had no less pleasour to hear
the, then I have had sorrow to se the. For by thy person is well seen thy
pain, and by thy reasons known is thy bounty, in gyuynge socour and aid to
the nedy^lyke as thou have do^e now to me. For I considering the strange
mysteries of this thy prison, I doubted of my salvation, beleuynge all had been
but illusions done by art diabolycke, rather then by any co^dycyon amorous.
For this thou have showed me I thank the, and now I know what thou art, I
think well enployed the trauayll that I have enduryd for thy sake, the
knowledge of the moralite of these figures, has right well pleased me, for
though I well regardyd them yet for lack of knowledge my heart was in
captyuyte and prisone, and now I am out of doubt and fear. And where as thou
have co^maundyd me, that I should give knowledge to Laureola in what cas^ I have
seen y^, the which to do I find great perel for a man of a strange nacio^, what
manner and form should he find to execute such a message, I have not alonely
this doubt but dyuerce other: The rudenes and dulnes of my wit, the
dyfference of our speech and tongue, the noblenes of Laureola, and the grauite
of this be synes, so that in this case I find but small remedy, but alonely my
good will, which vanquyssith all other inconuenientes and dangers for to thy
service I offer my self as much as though I had been thine own servant all
the days of my lyffe. And I promise the yt with good heart I shall accomplish to
my power al thy co^mandeme^tes. I pray to god, I may be as happy as I am
desirous to serve the so that thy deliverance may bear witness of my true
dilygence so great affeccion I bear to the, and so much I am bound to love
thy noblenes that if I might remedy thy trybulacions I should repute my self
well rewardyd for all my trauyls, so that in the mean time thou wylt bear al
manner of assautes pacyently in trustyng upon me that when I return and bring
y^ any remedy yt thou may take such courage in thy life, that thou may
feale the sparkels thereof.

The Auctor.
WHen I had endyd mine aunsewre to Lereano, then I deptyd fro him and lernyd
the way to the city of Suria where as lay ye king of Mazedonia, which was
half a journey fro y^ prisone fro whence I deptyd. Thus I came to the court,
and went to ye palace to treat, and to se ye manner of the people of that
court, and to regard the form and situacion of the palayce, and how I might
resort, goo, come, or abide, to enter in to the enterprice, that I had in
hand. And this I did diverse days, to learn and to se, what way should be best
and most couenable to my purpose, and the more I studied the less disposycion
I found to attain to that I desired and when I had serched al manner of ways I
thought most auayleable to my purpose to acquaynte my self with the young
courters and with the principal of ye court: for generally among them is
found good manner and curtesye, and thus I drew so long to their company with
in a breue time I was estemydde among them as though I had been one of their
ppre nation, and at last I fell in aquayntance among the ladies, and little and
little I fell in acquayntance with the lady Laureola, and dyuerce times I
recountyd to her of the meruayls of spain and of other places, where as I had
been. The which she greatly delyghtyd to here. Then I seeing my self in manner
with her as a servant I tho^ght then I might show her that thing that I
desired, and on a day as I saw her aparte fro other ladies I knelyd down and
said as folowith.

The Auctor to Laureola.
IT is less goodness to perdone the great and puyssante persons, when they
have dseruyd trespace then to be reuengyd upon the simple and small psonages,
when they have done injury, for y^ one will make amends by reason of their
honor and the other are perdonyd by virtue, the which is due to be vsyd,
among great personages, and most specially to noble ladies and gentle women
having noble hearts according to their birth, they ought naturally to have pity
in their conditions. Lady I say this for peradventure in showing to you mine
intent, I shall be reputyd to bold, not having respect to your great
magnyficens. In the beginning or I was determined to speak to you, I was in
great doubt. But at the end I thought it for the best, that if ye entreat
me, inhumaynly, to suffer ye pain for my speaking, rather then to endure in
dolor for being still. Lady ye shall know that riding on a day among
sharp mountayns, I saw by the commandment of Amors, how Lereano son to
duke Guerro, was taken and led to prison as a prisoner, who prayed me to aid
him in his trouble and besynes. By whose occasion I left the way of my rest,
and took the dangerous way of his travail: and after that I had long gone
with him, I saw how he was put in to a sweet prisone as toward his will, but
it was right bitter, as to his life: for there he susteyneth all the euyls and
pains of the world: Dolor turmenteth him, passyo^ follows him, despair
distroieth him, death manasheth him, pain executes him, thoughts waketh him,
desire troubles him, heaviness condemns him, his faith will not save him, and
I knew by him, that all this ye are the cause. And I judge by that I saw him,
his dolor (which he kepethe secret in his mind) to be more greater, then he
has discovered to me by wepinges, but by reason of the syghte, yt I se of your
presence, I find that his torment is not without a just cause. And with sore
syghes issuynge fro his heart, he desired me to give you knowledge of his evil:
his request was with pain and dolor, and my obedience, of pure co^passyon of
his pain and torment, though I judge you cruel^ yet by ye freque^tatio^ of
your ge^tlenes I se and think ye be piteous, and not without reason: for by
reasou of your excellent fayrenes and dignite, he believes the one, and by your
noble condition hops on ye other: and his pain whereof ye be causer, if ye
will remedy with pity according to his deserving, ye shall be the^ praised above
al other women yt ever were. Remember now, and behold whether it is better to
be praised for gyuynge remedy, orels to be blamyd for sleyng of him. Consider
how much ye be bound to him, y^ for all his passion and aduersite, yet he does
serve you, and if ye remedy him, the^ he is ye occasion to cause you to do as
much as god may do, for it is of no less esteem, the redemer, then is ye
creator: for in taking fro him the death, ye shall do as much, as god to give
him life. I know not what excuse ye can make not to remedy him, without ye
believe that sleynge is a virtue. I desire of you none other good, but to be
sorry for his evil and pain. This desire shall be to you nothing greuable:
for he had rather endure in him self still pain and aduersite, then to cause
you to feale any pain and displeasour. This my bold speaking condemns me,
but the dolor of him that has sent me, assoyleth me again, his pain is so
great, that none evil can come to me to be equal to his pain. I require your
gentleness, let your answer be comfortable to your virtue, and not to the
fercenes that ye show by your regardes And in your so doing, ye shall be
praised, and I reputyd a good messenger, and the paynefull prisoner Lereano,
delivered quyte fro all payne^

The answer of Laureola to the auctour^
Likewise as thy reasons be temerous and fearful to declare, semblably they
are great and grievous to perdone. if thou were of Macedonia as thou art of
Spaygne, thy reasons and thy life should fynishe together, but thou being a
stranger shalt not receive the pain that thou deseruyste. And as for the
pytie that thou thynkest to be in me, I would thou knew, that in such like
cases, doubtefull justice and cruelty is as ryue and dew, as is clemence or
pity, the which if. I should execute upon the, should be cause of.ii.
welthes. The one, thereby al other should take ensample of fear. And the other,
all noble women should be esteemed and reputed according to their demerites.
How be it, if thy fool hardynes, require punycion, yet my mekenes and benignite
consents to perdone the, though it be against the right way of justice: for
not alonely for thy fool hardynesse thou oughteste to dye, but also for the
offense that thou have done against my bounty and virtue, yt which thou haste
set in the balance of doubt, because this that thou haste said to me, if it
came to knowledge of sundry persons, some would believe that thou foundeste me
ready aparelled to accomplish thy desire, as in having pytie of the pain of
Lereano. Thou ought to think that my dignyte should have put the in fear,
rather then his fool hardines to have made the so bold. if thou entend any
further to procure his liberte, thou may well seek for his remedy, and fall
thy self in perell: therefore I advise the seeing thou art a stranger, seek
for thy natural sepulture, and not in Macedonia, and to common with the in such
matters, I offend my tongue, therefore I will say no more, but I will thou know
that this that I have said is suffycyent, and if any hope be in the to speak
any further in this case, thy life shall be short, or if thou think to come to
me with any mo such ambassades.

The Auctor.
WHen Laureola had endyd her words, I saw well her reasons were short, but
long was her trouble and displeasour. So I departed fro her, and thought upon
many things, the which grievously tormentyd me, I remembered how far I was out
of Spain, and of my long taryeng thence. Also I called to my mind y^ great
dolor of Lereano sore mistrutyng his health, and I perceived well I could not
acco^plysh that I was purposyd to do, as to bring Lereano to lyberte without
great perel yet I determined to follow mine enterprise, during my life, orels to
bring Lereano some hope of relefe. And with this purpose, the next day I went to
ye palace to se what countenance Laureola made: and when she saw me, she
entreated me as she was accustomyd to do before, without changynge of her port
or chere: whose sure demeanor brought me in great suspecte. I thought she did
it to prove if I would return again to enter in to my first reasons, I
fearyd lest she had dissimuled to cause me to take courage to have spoken
again for Lereano, and then to have punys^hed me for my folyshe enterprice. So
I could not tell whereto to trust, thus I passed that day and dyuerce other,
and ever me thought by the appearance that I could se by her, that I had more
cause to be bold, then reason to fear. And in that believe, I waited a time
convenient, and spoke with her again, showing, my self fearful, though I
was not so indede. For in such besynes, and with such persons, it is behouable
to find some doubtful turbation: for in such cases, to much boldenes is
reputyd folly, for thereby might be thought that the dignyte, nor auctorite of
the person were not esteemed. Therefore to save me fro that error, I spoke to
her with no great audacite, but in a fearful manner So I showed her all that I
thought convenient, for the remedy of Lereano, but her answer was according to
the first saving she was not so force, nor in such displeasour with me, as she
was before. How be it, in her words, she gave me knowledge, that I should be
still and hold my peace, but yet me thought her continance gave me license to
speak. And thus ever when I found time and place, I required her to have
pity upon Lereano. And so diverse times I found her aunswers sharp in words,
and meke in countenance. And when I had well aduysed al her demeanor, I hoped
upon some profytte, scynge in her diverse things, whereby an amorous heart
might be known: for ever when I saw her alone, she was pensyfe and full of
study. And when she was among compauy, she would not be merry, she abhorred
company, and to be alone was her pleasour, often times she would feign her
self syke, to eschew other pleasurs and if she were espied, she would feign
some dolor or pain, and often times she would give sore sighs. And if
Lereano had been named in her presence, she would suddenly starte, and leave
her coming, and blushe red as a rose and again pale: her voice would
change, and her mouth wax dry, and though she coueryd her thoughts as much
as was possible, yet her piteous passion, surmounted her discrete
dissimulation, (I say) pitefulnes, for without doubt, according as she showed
after, she received these alterations, more of pytie, the^ of love. Howbeit I
thought otherwise in her, seeing the tokens that I saw in her, I thought my
self half spedde of some good hope, and therewith I spedde me to Lereano, and
after that I had showed him all yt was passyd between me and Laureola. Then I
counsayled him to write to her, offering my self to bear the lettre, and
though he was as then more redyer to remember what was best for him to do, to
write or not. At last he took ynke and paper, and wrote such reasons as
follows.

The lettre fro Lereano to Laureola.
IF I had as good reason to write to you, as I have to love. Then without
fear, I durst be bold to do it but to think to write to you troubles my
wit, so that I lose mine understanding. Therefore or I begin, I find my
self at a great confusyon: My believe says I may do it boldly: and your
hyghnes puts me in fear and doubt. In the one I find hope, and in the
other despair: at the end I agreed to write, but mine unhap is to begin in ye
hour of sorrow, for ouerlate it is, now to complain me^ for I am now in yt
case, if I have deseruyd any grace or merit, there is nygh no thing left
living in me to feel it saving alonely my true faith, which can not dye, as
for my heart is without strength, and my soul without power, and my wit
without memory. How be it if it would please you to show me so much mercy, as
to these my present reasons, to make some answer: the true faith that I bear
you, should then suffice, to restore again in me, all the parts that are
destroyed, I repute my self culpable, to demand of you any reward, and never
did you service, and though ye take my service and pain in good gree, yet ye
pay me always with doubtful thoughts. ye may say: how ame I so bold to
write to you, yet have no meruayl thereof, for your beauty causes mine
affection, and the affection mine desire, and desire ye pain and the pain
causes the boldness. And for this that I have done, if ye think I have
deserved death, command to give it me: For it were better for me to dye for
your cause, then to live without the hope of your good will. And to say the
troth, without ye give me the death, I shall give it my self, to find thereby
the liberty, the which living I have serchyd for. This would I do, and it
were not that I should leave you defamyd, as to be renomyd a murderer. Unhappy
should be that remedy to deliver me out of pain, and to cause you to bear
blame. Therefore in eschewynge of all such inco^uenientes, I require you send me
your lettre, as a reward for all mine euyls, that I slay not my self, for I
can not live with that I suffer, and my death should so toche your honor, that
all the days of your life ye should be defamyd. And if it may please you to do
me any relefe tarry not, nor be not slow lest ye shall have no time to repent
you, nor no place to redeem me.

The auctor.
ANd where as Lereano according to the grauite of his passyo^s would further
have executed his writing, but then vsyng prudent discrecio^, for all hi^ pain
wrote no larger, for that he had written was sufficye^t to cause Laureola to
know his evil and pain, for when letters be written at length, that is vsyd
when the writer thinks, that the rede^ has as good will to read them, as the
sender has to write them, but Laureola was quyte delivered fro that p^sumpcio^
wherefore he extendyd his letter no larger. The which when it was endyd, I
receyuyd. with great heuines, to se the sore weeping that Laureano made, the
which I felt more, then I can express Then I went fro him and spedde me to
Laureola, and when I came there as she was, I found a time propyse to speak to
her, and or I delivered the letter, I said to her as follows.

The auctor to Laureola.
Right excellent Lady, first or I say any thing to you I require you to
receive the dolor and pain of me your poor kaytiue, for the discharging of
mine importunat suet, for where so ever ye shall find me of custom, I shall be
ever more ready to serve you the^ to be importunate. And surely Lereano endures
more pain for the trouble that ye receive, then for the passion that he
suffers, whereof he would excuse him self though his will desire to suffer it,
to the eutent that it should not trouble you, yet his soul desires not to
suffer but rather to be in rest. The one commands him to be still, and the
other byddeth him put out his voice. But trustyng in your virtue, his dolor
is oppressyd, desyryng to put all his evil in to your presence, beleuyng on
the one part ye should be dangerous, and on the other part that it should
cause you to have compassyon. Behold now many ways he deseruyth merit, to
forget his trouble he desires the death and not without ye consent thereto, and
because it should not be said that ye consent thereto he desires the life, in
that he receued his pain to be happy, and for lack of his desire, he loses
his understanding, and to praise your beawte, he desires aid of all the
world. Behold how much ye are bound to him, for he prayseth them that
distroyeth him, he has all his remembrance upon that thing that is the
occasyon of all his evil, and by adventure I should be so unhappy that he should
lose his love by my intercession, which he has deseruyd by reason of his
faithful heart: yet I had rather I were deed, wherefore I require you to
receive this letter fro him, and in the redyng thereof to show him some mercy,
for the pain that he has suffered, and if ye blame him ye are more culpable
then he, for that ye have suffered him to endure pain so long, ye perceive
well the sorrow that he is in, by the words in his letter, the which though his
mouth spoke them, and his hand wrote them, yet his dolor did ordeyne and
devise them, and as god send you part of heaven as ye have deseruyd in the
earth that ye will receive this his letter, and make him an answer, and
alonely with this reward ye may redeem him, and thereby do away his debilite,
and mynysh his torment, and favor his sykenes, and bring him in to that state,
that he will desire no more wealth, nor endure no more pain, and if ye will not
thus much do for him, to whom ye are so much bound, nor at my request, I may
then well repute you cruel, but I hope so much in your virtue, yt according
to yuor old custom, ye can do no thing but virtue.

Thanuswere of Laureola to the Auctor.
THe perseverance in thy pursewt brings me to so straight a case, that many
times my thought is dought what to do, other to banysh the out of this land,
orels to Ieobarde my fame, in gyuyng the place and leisure to say what thou
list, yet I am agreyd not so to do, nor to put the to that extremyte, by
reason of the compassyon that I have of the: for though thine ambassade be
evil yet thine entensyo^ is good as to find remedy for ye sorrowful. And the
other way I will not take because of mine honor, for he can not be delivered
fro pain, without I be defamed. if I could remedy his evil without danger
or blottyng of mine honor, I would do it with no less affection, then thou
desyrest: but thou know well how that women are bound to preserve their good
fame, rather then their life, at the lest they should esteem it more then their
bounte: for though ye life of Lereano, should fynysh by death, yet judge thy
self, whether I ought rather to be piteful to me self, or to his evil. And if
all women ought thus to do, then specially such as be of noble blod ought so to
do: for all people sooner regards a small spot in noble persons, then a great
fawte in low psonages. Therefore in thy words conferme the to reason, for thy
demand is unjust: you thynkest I am pleased with thy comoni^g, which is
contrary, though thy demand trouble me; yet thy co^dycio^ pleases me, and I
have pseasour to show the mine escuse with just reasons, to save me fro charge,
blame, and sclaunder. The letter that thou would have me to receive may well
be excusyd, for my defense is of no less power, than the perceuerance of his
hope: but syn thou haste brought it, I am pleasyd to receive it, but hope not
of any answer, trauayll no more to desire it, nor at lest speak no more
thereof, less that my dysplesure trowble yt not asmoche as thou now prayseste
my pacyence and sufferyng I blame my self, and that in: ii. things, because I
common so long with the. The one is because ye qualyte and heat of the cause
has brought me in trouble. The other is because thou may think yt I am
well pleasyd to speak with the in this matter, and beleuest how I should agree to
Lereano though thou think so I have no meruayll: for words is the Image of
the heart. Go thy way, content the with thine own Judgment, and carry with the
good hope, of that thou desyrest, and not to be condempnyd in thine own
thought: for if thou return again to make new request, thou wylt repent it, I
will advise the let this be the last spekyng of that matter oreles you may
well know thou shall repent it, for sekyng remedy for a another, shall fail
remedy for thy self.

The Auctor.
THe words of Laureola did bring me in to great co^fusyon, for when I thought
best to understand her then I knew lest of her will: wha^ I had most hope, then
I was farthest out of ye way. And when I thought my self most sure, then I was
in most fear for ye dyuersyte of her. Iesture and behauour blyndyd mine
understanding. The receyuyng of the letter satisfied me, but the end of her
words put me in dyspayre, so that I know not what way to follow, nor how I
should find any hope. And thus as a man without counsayll, I departed fro her,
and went to Lereano thynkyng to give him some counsayll and to seek ye best
means that I could deuyse to remedy part of his evil, and when I came to him
I said as follows

The Auctor to Lereano.
FOr the expedicio^ that I bring, ye may well know where words fail,
dylygence can not preuayll. Thou dyddyst reco^mau^de thy remedy to me, but
fortune has been to me so contrary, in that she would not be to me so
favorable, as to satysfye me in any thing that is passyd, but fortune is
rather mine enemy. Though in this case I had good excuse to aid the, for
tough I was the messenger, thine was the besynes. The matter that I have passyd
with Laureola I ca^ not understand it nor can not show it, because it is of so
new and dyuerce co^dycyons, a thousand times I thought to have been at the
point, to have given the remedy. And again as often, to have given the thy
sepulture: al tokens of her will, (won and vanquysshed) I saw in her
co^tenance, and all the folysh frowardenes of women without love, I hard in
her words, Iudgyng upon her demeanor. I was joyful, and heryng her words,
I was sorrowful. Sometime I thought she did prudently dyssimule, and again I
thought she wantyd love, but finally when I saw her so moveable and changable,
I believed then verily that there was no love in her: for if a person be taken
with love, the heart shall be constante, and where as love lacks, there is
mutabylyte. On the other part I thought she did it for fare of the cruel
heart of the king her father what shall I say she has received thy letter, and
manyshed me to the death, if I speak any further in thy cause, behold now this
grievous case, There semyth in one point.ii. dyfferences, if I should show the all
that was passyd between her and me, I should want time to speak yt. I require
the enforce thy wit and aswage thy passion, for in following thy pain, thou
have more need of sepulture then of comfort: for without thou take some
repose, thou shall leave here thy boones, instead of thy true faith, the which
thou ought not to do: for satysfying of thy self, it were more conuenyent
for the to live rather then to dye, for to be out of pain. This I say, because
I se the gloryfye in thy pain but in sufferyng pain, thou may attaygne to
the crown of lawde and praise In that it may be said, yt thou enforcest thy
felfe to suffer pain for the ladies sake. Such as be strong and virtuous in
their grettyst mysfortune, show grettest heart. There is no dyfference between
the good and evil, without the bountye be tempt and prouyd. Consider that with
long life, a thing may be won: have good hope in thy faith. Think yt the
purpose of Laureola may change, and thy ferme steadfast love never. I will not
say all that I think for thy consolacion, for I perceive by thy wepynges and
complaynt, that ardent death has lyghtened his flames, but what so ever thou
thynkyst that I can do for the, command it: for I have no less will to serve
the then I have to remedy thy health.

Lereano to the auctor.
THe dysposycion that I am in, ye seyst. The priuasyo^ of my understanding
thou know, ye turbasyon of my tongue thou may well note and merke: therefore
have no meruaylle though mine answer be more with weeping, then with ornate
words, because ye Laureola puts fro her heart, the sweet appetyght of my
will, the things that be past bytwen yt and her, for all that thou art at
thy liberte, yet thy judgment can not understand her meaning, how should I
the^ know them for I am so passyonyd: than I can not live but alonely to
praise her beauty and to repute my last end happy. I would these should be ye
last words of my life: because they be to praise her^ what gretter wealth can I
have then yt if I were so happy to be rewardyd therewith, as I deserve by reason
of the pain that I suffer. who then should be like me? better it were for me to
dye, syn I have served her, the^ to live causyng her to have any trouble or
dyspleasour. The thing that most shall grieve me, is when I dye that the eyes
shall peryshe that has seen her, and the heart that remembers her. The which
consyderyng what she is, al my wits are past, the order of reason. I say thus
because thou seyst, that in the warkes of my heart in stead of faynte love, my
steadfast love increases if in my captyue heart they consolacio^s could take
any fruit. This that thou have done to me, suffyseth to enforce me but as the
heryng of them that be in heaviness and lockyd in passyo^, in to whose soul can
enter no words of comfort, and where thou saest I should suffer none evil,
Give me the strength thereto, and I shall put to my good will. As for things of
honor that thou show me I know them by reason, and I deny them again by the
same reasone: I say I know them, for a man fre in liberte, should use honor, and
again I deny it, as consernyng to my self: yet I seek in my grievous pain to
chose an honorable death. The trauayll that thou have receyuyd for my sake, and
ye desire that I se thou have to deliver me fro pain, byndeth me to offer for
the my life as often as it were needful. But syn there is but small life left in
me, take for satysfaction my desire, and not my power: yet I require the (syn
this shall be the fynall good deed, that thou can do for me, and the last
that I shall receive) as to bear fro me a another letter to Laureola with such
news as she shall be glad of, and whereby she shall know how I dyspose me to
pass out of this transytory life, and no more to trouble her: and to the
intent that with good will thou should bear it to her, I will begin it in
thy presence whereof the matter shall be as folowith.

The letter of Lereano to Laureola.
Syn that the sepulture is the reward of all mine euels, I am ready now to
receive it, beloue that death shall not dysplease me, for he is of small wit
that abhorryth that thing yt gives liberty: but one thing dyspleaseth me,
that is in dyeng I shall lose all my hope ever to se you again, the which sore
greueth me. It may be said in so short a space as I have been your servant, how
should I so sone lose my puyssance: ye ought not to meruail thereat, for ye hope
that ye have brought me in, and small comeforte, with my great passion,
suffyseth to put away and to destroy greater force, then mine, yet I can not
believe, that ye are cause thereof, without your works do certify the same, but
always I have believed, that your co^dycyon piteous, should surmou^t your
obstynate will, but sin ye will that my life shall receue this damage, ye fault
thereof is mine own mysfortune. I am sore abashed that ye sorrow not in your
self, your own ingratitude. I have given you my liberte, and intyerly have
given you my heart, nothing retaynyng to my self: for all that, I can have no
reward of love, yet I desire to serve you. Who would think that ye should
dystroy that thing that is your own certainly ye are your own enemy with out
ye find some remedy to save me. This ye onght to do, orels ye condemn your
self, for my death and perdycyon can not profyght you. But I desire that ye
would sorrow for mine evil: yet if your sorrow should do you any pain, then I
desire it not, syn that living I never did ye service. It were no right that
dyeng I should cause you to have trouble. They that look against the son, ye
more they regard it, the blynder they be. And so the more I remember your
fayrenes, the blynder is mine understanding. This I say to thentent that of
this my rude writing ye should have no meruayll, for in the hard case that I am
in, according to my will, I am better dysposed to end my life, then to make
any reasones: yet I would that thing that ye ought to regard, were so orderyd
that ye should not occupye your understanding on a thing so fair fro your
condycio^. if ye consent that I shall dye because ye would have it publyshed, ye
have the power to slay me^ then be ye evil cousayled, for without hope your
beauty has sertyfyed me thereof. And if ye esteem my death to be good, because
I am not worthy to receive your grace, the which I have ^^^pyd to win, by
reasone of my true faith, the which I lose for lack of deseruyng, and with this
thought I thynk to suffer all my pain. And if it seem to you that the pains
that I endure for your sake can not be remedyed, with out offense to your
honor. Thyuk that I will never desire ye thing, that should torn you to blame:
what profyght should any thing do to me that should be evil to you. Allonely I
desire your answer: for my first and last reward and to be brefe, I require
you, syn ye make an end of my life: yet at lest honor my death, for in the
place where as the desperate sowles becomes, if there be any wealth: There I
desire, to feale none other joy, but yt ye will honor my deed bones that I may
joy a little with that great glory.

The auctor.
THe words and letter of Lereano finyshed, Instead of words myn^ eyes were
satysfyed, with great weeping, and so withonte power to speak, I departed,
thinking my judgment yt it should be the last time that I had any hope to se
him again alive. And as I was on my way I wrote a supersc^ypcion upon the
letter, to thentent that Laureola should be in doubt fro whence it came. And
when I came in to her presence, I delivered her the letter, who beleuyng that
it had come from some other person, receyuyd it and began to read it. And all
the season that she was redyng, I regardyd still her vysage, and when she had
made an end, I saw well she was sore troubelyd as though she had suffered a
great evil: yet the regardyng of her turbacyon, excusyd not my trouble Then to
assure my self I demaundyd of her other questyons no thing concerning to that
purpose. And to deliver her self fro company, yt which in such case is
perelous, less that the manifest mutacions discover not the secret thoughts
of the heart. Therefore she withdrew her self a part and all that night she
was without spekyng of any word to me, as tuchyng that purpose. And the next
day she sent for me and showed me many virtuous resons to dyscharge her self
fro any thing consentyng to release ye pain of lereano, howbeit, she said yt
she thought great inhumanite to lose such a man as Lereano, for so small a
price, as in writing of a letter, how be it in the redyng of his letter I take
but small pleasour. Therefore here I have written a letter, not with so pleasant
and swet words, as be in his reasons: for who so ever here the words in this
my letter, may well know yt I have little studied in the art of eloquence. So
for shamefastnes suddenly her face was inflamyd, and as suddenly again pale, she
was so sore alteryd and short wyndyd, that in manner she brethed for ye death:
her heart and voice so sore trymbled, that her dyscrecion could not enforce her
self to speak therefore her answer was short, and also the place required no
longer time. So she took me the letter, and kyst her hand, and I receyuyd it.
The tenor whereof ensuyth.

The letter fro Laureola to Lereano.
THe death that thou lokest for, by reasone of thy pain I have rather deseruyd
it, if I should put my will to thine: but that is not so, for this my wryttyng
is more to redeem thy life, then to satisfy thy desire, what should it profytte
me to accomplysh it, for if I were accusyd thereof, I could have no wytnes to
salve me, but alonely my pure entensyon, which is so pryncypall a pertye, that
his words should not be taken nor believed And with this fear, I have put to
my hand to this paper, my heart and mind being in heuyn making him judge of
my mind, to whom the truth of all things is, manifest and known. The
cause why y^ I doubtyd to answer the, was, because without my condemnacion
thou can not be assoyled, as thou may well se: for though no creature know
of this letter, but thy self and the berer: yet I know not what judgment, any
of you may make upon me, though it be but good, yet I am spottyd with ye
suspecte thereof. Therefore I defyre the, when you have seen mine answer,
remember the fame and reuome of her that has sent it, of this I hertely desire
the, for often times such fawors, are publyshyd, for some has more regard to
the victory, then to honor of them that she with such favor. And whether it
were better for me to be blamyd for cruelty, or to be spotted or defamyd for
being to piteous, I report me to thy self: and yet to give the some remedy, I
use now the contrary, thou have that thou desyrest: and I that I fear, I
require the to turn and wind, and keep secret my letter in thy remembrance,
for if thou do believe it, then it need not to be seen: for that I have written
if it were seen, it should be thought that I love the, and if thou be leave, the
reasons that I have sayde^ to be spoken rather by dissymulacio^, then of
troth: then art thou begyled, in that believe, for yt is clean contrary, for
surely I say them rather with a piteous entenscio^ then with any amorous entent^
And to cause the to believe this, I would further extend my words, if I had
leysour. But to put the in to none other suspeccion, I make an end of my
letter and to thentent that my warkes should receive, a just reward, thus will
I endure my life days.

The auctor.
WHen I had received this letter of Laureola I departed to go to Lereano,
thynkyng then to have with me some company to aid me in the glory of mine
ambassade, and to encorage thereby Lereano, I called then to me, y^ grettest
enemies yt we had before, as co^tentacio^, hope, rest, pleysour mirth and
comfort. I took these with me for fear that ye kepers of the prisone would
resist and defend me the enter. Wherefore I thought to go in order of batayl:
and when I came to the heyght of an high hill, I had a syghte of the prison,
then I dysplayed my baner all of grene, so that our enemies took them to ye
flight in such wise that he that fled fastyst thought to be next the
ieoperdye. And when Lereano hard this great rumor not knowing what it was, he
came to a wyndow of the tower, and spoke more with wekenes of spirit, then
with hope of socour, and when he saw me coming in battle with such a goodly
company, then he knew what the matter meant, and what for his feebleness, and for
his sodeyn joy, lost his fealyng, and fell down in a trance in the house,
where he was. And when I came to ye steyres whereon I was wont to mount, Rest,
auauncyd to march on before, who gave clerenes and chasyde away all the
darkness of the tower, and when I came to him and saw him in that mortal
manner, I feared I came sone enough to weep, and to late to give him remedy.
Then with great dylygence, hope stepped to him, and cast a little water of
comeforte in his face, and therewith he returnyd again to him self, and the
better to strength him, I delivered him Laureolas letter. And all the season
that he read it, all such as I brought with me procured for his health, Mirth
gave joy to his heart: rest comfortyd his spyrytes, hope brought him in to good
remembrance. Contentacio^ cleryd his eyes. Comeforte restoryd his health and
strength. Pleasure quyckenyd his understanding: they treatyd him in such wise,
that when he had read over the letter, he was all hole, as though he had
never felt passyo^, and when he saw that my dylygence gave him lyberte, he
took me often times in his arms, offering him self to be mine, and thought
that but a small reward, for the deseruyng of my service. His offers were to
me in such manner, that I wist not how to answer him, as I ought to have done
according to his degree, and after that many things were passyd between him and
me, he determy^ed to go to the court and first we went to a town of his, and
tarried there a certain season, to recover his strength, and to new aparell
him against he should go to the court. And when he saw his time, he set forth
on his journey. And when his coming was known in the court, many great lords
and young courtyaers went to receive him, but he took more consolacion of his
secret glory, then of all the open honor that was done to him. Thus he was
nobly accompanyd to the palace, and his duty done to the king, he kyst the
hand of Laureola, wherein was many things to be notyd, and specially to me who
knew the matter between them. The one was overcome with trybulacion, the other
faylyd color. He wist not what to say, nor she to answer, such force has
the passions of love, always it draws the wit and dyscrecio^ down under his
baner, y^ which I saw there by clear experyence. And though that no man saw
there demanour, nor had no suspecte between them: yet Persio son to the
lord of Gania beheld them, and was as far in love, as Lereaon was. And by
reasone that all gelous suspecte disordereth all things secret, he regarded
over there words and co^tenau^ces, in so much yt he gave full crede^ce to his
own suspect, and gave not alonely faith to yt he saw, y^ which was nothing, but
also believed it surely in his imagynacio^, and with yt evil thought of ielosy,
without deliberacyo^ or cou^sayll, he fydyng the king in a secret place, said to
him (affermyng yt Laureola and Lereano louyd to gether) how that he had seen
them together, dyuerce nyghtes, when the king was a bed, sayng how he showed
this for the honor and service, that he bare to the king. The king then being
sore troubelyd with those news was in great doubt, and studied long or he was
determynyd to answer. And after he had slept on y^ matter, he bileued Persius
saying to be true, consyderyng his virtue and auctoryte, he would show no
thing, but of trought. Then the king determynyd what he would do, and thereupon
he sent his daughter Laureola in to a tower in to a prysone, and then sent for
Persio, and commaundyd him to accuse Lereano of treason, according to his
laws, of the which commandment he was sore abashyde, but the heat of the
busynes enforsyd him to grant it. The^ he acceptyd the kings co^man^dement
and said, how he thankyd god that he was offeryd such a case, yt his hands
might bear wytnes of his bounte and virtue: and because that in Macedonia such
deades were accustumed to be done, by writing and not in the kings presence by
words, therefore Persio sent a writing to Lereona with such reasons as ensue.

Persius writtyng to Lereano.
Syn that of good works, proceeds virtuous renome and fame it is a just
thing that euylnes be chastysed, to thentent that virtue may be maynteynyd,
and with great dylygence bounte ought to be exaltyd. So that the enemies
thereof, when there wylfull operacions be to ye contrary, they ought to be
constrained to use bountie^: for dread and fear of punyshement. I say this to
the Lereano, for the pain that thou shall receive, for the trespace that thou
have co^myttyd, shall be a chastysement to the, and an ensample for all other to
fear, for if such things should be perdonyd, and left vnponyshed, vylany should
then be no less fauoryd in them y^ do evil, then noblenes in them y^ be good.
Certainly evil has it profited y^, all the gentleness and honest of thy
lynage, who gave the ensample to follow bounte, and thou folowest the works of
treasone, thy progenitors bones would be ready to rise against the if they knew
how thou defoilyst (with such error) their noble deeds, therefore now is the
time come that sor thine evil deades, thou shall receive the end of thy life,
and defoyll thy fame. Cursyd be all such as thou art, that can not chose an
honorable life, and thou not regarding thy service nor duty to thy king. To
be so bold wtoute shame as to fall in love with Laureola the kings daughter,
with whom with out shame, thou have spoken dyuerce times aloone, after the
kings being a bed not following the clear lynage, by which reasone I appeal
the as a traitor, and upon that quarrel I thynk to s^e the, orels to drive the
out of the feld, orels to cause the confess with thy mouth my saying to be
true, the which as long as the world endures shall be an ensample of my troth.
And thus I leave, trustyng to prove thy falsenes, and to verify my treuth. chose
thou the manner of our battle and armur, and on the kings part I shall make the
assurance

The answer of Lereano.
MOre shall be my mysfortune then the malice without the fault y^ thou chargest
me withal of falsenes shall give the pain by justice according to thy
deserte: if thou were as discrete as thou art evil, in escheweng of such
perels. First thou should have known mine entension or thou had given
sentence upon my works, but now I know by the that thou semyst better then
thou art in dead. I thought surely to have comoned with the as with my
friend, having confidence in thy virtue, but now thou shewyst thine evil
condition, like as here before thou shewydyst thy bounti^ with friendly amyte,
in likewise now you discouerest thy falshod, wherefore you ca^sest enuyte between
us: or I may say by reasone, enemy to thy self for by thine own witness thou
leuyst the good memory of thy life with infamy^ and shalt end thy life with
shame. why have thou put thy serpentyne tongue upon Laureola, whose alonely
bounte suffiseth, that if bounte were lost throughoute all the world, it
might be recoueryd and found in her. Thou mayntaynyst a celre falsehodde, and
I shall defend a just cause, and shall deliver and discharge her fro all fawtes
and shall charge thyn honor with shame. I will not answer thine unmeasurable
wordes^ for I repute it a more honest way, to vanquysh the with my hands
rather then to sacisfye the with words. I desire no thing, b^t alonely to come
to the case to try our debate. Thou accusyst me of treason afferming how I
have been dyuerce times in the secret chamber with Laureola after ye kings
being a bed and at his rest as well to the one as to the other. I say you
falsely lie: yet I deny not but that I have regardyd her beawtie with an
amorouse desire. But though the force of love order the thoughts, yet ye
virtue of troth causyth, clenlynes of honest, I would be glad to have her
favor, but for none evil thought. And moreover I shall defend the quarrel,
and say that I alone never enteryd in to her secret chamber, nor never spoke
words of love to her: so that when the entension synnyth not, the judgment
then should always be hole without^ deformyte. And syn the determynacion hereof
can not be without death of one of us, and not determynyd with our tongues,
therefore let us leave raylyng with our tongues and abide upon the day of our
sentence the which I trust in god shall be for my profyght, and honor to
Laureola, and shame and rebuke to the, because thy deeds of malice: and I to
defend by reasone, the trough shall be determined by justice. The armure that we
shall chose shall be all pieces acordynge to the custom of our country. Our
horses bardyd with like speres and swords, and with any other armure or wepyn
that is vsyd, with the which I trust to s^ee the or to cause the to deny,
that thou have said, orels to chase the out of the field.

The auctor.
THus evil fortune, enuyous, of the wealth and prosperity of Lereano, vsyng
against him her natural chaungeale condycion, she gave him a torn, when she
saw him in his most prosperity, whose mysfortune to behold, was great passion,
and constreyned the here is to pain. Thus leui^g to speak of this trouble. After
Lereano had answered Persius letter, the king knowing y^ couenaut of this
battle, assuryd the feld, assyngned out the place where the battle should be
determined and all things necessary was ordained, that perteyned to such
deades, according to the custom of Macedonia. And on a day ye king went to
his stage, and the knights came in to the field, each of them accompanyd as
they were favored, and as they had deserved, saving the equalnes of both
pertyes honors. They were like brought in to the field, so they (after their
reverence done to the king) ran each at other, so that by the force of their
strookes, they showed the virtue of their hearts. And their speres broken at
their first encounter: then they drwe ont their swords, and fought so
fercely, that it was m^ruayll to behold their deades and compassyon for that
they suffered. And to be brefe in this history, Lereano in gyuynge his heavy
strokes at a stroke struck of Persyus right hand, so that it fell to the earth,
sword and all. When Lereano saw, how that Persyo had lost y^ best part of his
defense (said) Persyo to thentent that thy life pay not his duetye, for thy
falseyes, reny that thou haste said. Then Persyo said: do as thou ought to
do, though mine arm fail me to defend, yet my heart faylyth not to dye.
Lereano heryng ye answer preasyd to him, and gave him many sharp and heavy
strokes. And when Persyus friends saw him in ieoperdy of his life they
requyryd the king to cast down his batone, assuring him that Persyo should be
brought forth to abide such judgment as it should please him, if he were found
culpable and gyltye. To the which request the king co^discendyd, and so they
were depertyd, wherewith Lereano was sore agreuyd, and not without good
reasone. For he had great meruayll, why the king delte so with him. Then they
were conueyede out of the feld with like seremonyes: how be it, they were not
like in fame and honor. So they were brought to their lodgings and there
tarried all night. The next day in the morning, Lereano determynyd to go to ye
palace to desire the king in presence of all his court to restore his honor,
and to do upon Persio ryghtwyse justice. But Persyo, who was malycyous of his
condycion, and sharp wyttyd, to thentent yt he might by some means attayn to
his purpose, whyls yt Lereano spoke with the king, he called to him.iii. false
men like to his own condycions, and took their oath that they should show them.
To y^ which they agreyd. Then he gave to them much money, so that they should
say, and swear to the king that they had seen Lereano spekyng with Laureola in
places suspect, and in time dyshonest: which they proferyd to afferme, and to
swear it, to the lefyng of their lives. I leave to speak of the doloure that
Laureola suffered, by cause the passion should not trouble so my wit, but that
I might make an end of yt I have begone, for I have no less pain to
remember her sorrow being absent, then as thought I were present, and saw it
with mine eyes: but I will torn to Lereano, who had more sorrow for her
prysonement, then glory of his victory. When he knew that the king was ryson he
went to the palayce, and in the presence of the knights of the court he said
to the king as folowith

Lereano to the king.
SIr of suertie with better wyll^ I would have suffered the chastisement of your
justice, then y^ shame to have come to your presence, if I had not atteygned
yesterday the better of the battle: The which if ye had taken well, I should
have been clean quyte and delyueryde fro the false accusacion of Persyo, for in
the sight of every man I should have given him the reward, that he deseruyd, It
is great dyfference to have power to do a thing, and to do it in dead. Great
advantage ye showed him, y^ reason why, I can another think nor imagine^ ye
co^mau^dyde to deperte us, and specially syn our debate tochyd your self so
nere, as he that should desire to be reuengyd for the love of Laureola, like a
pytefull father, and I believe well that as now ye be well satysfied of her
dycharge and ignorance. And sir if ye did it for compassion, ye had of
Persyo, ye ought as justly to have regardyd mine honor, as well as his life,
seeing I am your natural subget. And if ye did is by reasone of the
inportunate^ suet of some of his friends, ye ought as well to have remembryde
the service that I and mine have done you, syn ye know with what constau^ce of
heart, many of them in dyuerce bateyls have lost in your service their lives,
which none of them have done, the.iii. part. Therefore sir I require you that
by uistice ye will satysfye the honor that I have won with my hands. Sir keep
your laws if ye think to conserve your natural subjects, nor sir consent
not, that so false a man, should live that kepith so evil preemynence of his
predecessors, to the intent that his venyme do not corrupt them, that be his
part takers. Certainly I am culpable in no thing, but in that I have been so
good a friend, to my wrongful accuser, and if for this I have deserved pain,
let me have it, yet my clear innocence shall assoyll me. I have conseruyde
his amyte, beleuyng he had been good, and not iudgyng his evil nor falsenes.
If ye suffer him to serve you, I say he shall be the best servant to make
dyscorde and lies, that shall be in all your court. Sir remember in your self
how ye be bound to do right to eury man. Wherefore determyne this cause with
prudence, and give sentence with your acustomed justice. Sir the things of
honor ought to be clear, and if ye perdone him for any request: though yt be
by the pryncipall of your realm, or for any other thing at your pleasur, I
will not then abide ye judgment of dyuerce of your me^, to be taken as clean
dyscharged. For thought some believe the troth by reasone, yet some wylbe
troubelyd, and say the worste. And though in all your realm, the troth be not
known, yet comenly the fame of the troth by reasone of fouour of the party
will not be borne far of: so yt I can not be clean dyscharged out of all
mennys fantasyes, if this man escape without open punysheme^t. Sir for
goddessake set mine honor with out any dysputacion, and as for my life
ordeyne at your pleysour:

The auctor
TO the sayng of Lereano, the king gave good intent, and answered that he would
take counsayll what was best to do, and said that in such a case delybercion
would be taken, or any sentence should be gyuyn. Of troth the kings answer,
was not so sweet, as it ought to have been: for by that I saw, if the king had
put Laureola at her liberty, Lereano had enduryde no trouble. For he thought
to serve her, for all yt he was reputyd culpable, though his intent were clear
without fault, Thus the king to eschew the rumor and besynes that was
lykely to fall between Lereanos friends and Persius, co^maundyd Lereano to go
to a town of his own, a.ii. leages fro y^ court cally^ Susa, and there to
tarry till he had set a dyrection in ye matter. The which Lereano did with a
joyful heart, thynkyng that ^aureola was clearly dy^chargyd, which was ye thing
he most desiryd^ But then Persyo who always trauelyde to offend and to shame
his honor and to defend it by malice, he sent for ii. of his complyses, or
Laureola was delyuerede and said to them: That each of them a part should go
to the king, and of them self to show him, how that the accusacion of Persio
was true and to bear wytnes that they had ^een Lereano dyuerce times speak with
Laureola aloone suspyciously. The which wytnes and affirmation, when the king
hard it, he was sore trowbelyd therewith, and examynyd each of them a part by
subtyle and sharp persuasions to se if they any thing swaruyd in there
sayenges. But they were such persons, that if a man should have wastyde all his
life in falsenes, could not be like them. They were so sure of their words,
the more they were examynyde the surelyer they fortefyed their false lies. So
that thereby the king gave to their false sayenges, faith and believe. And by
reasone of their informacio^, ye king reputyd Persyo for true servant and
believed that it was more by reasone of his fortune, rather then by his vntrw
quarrel, that he lost the battle. O Persyo better it had been for the to have
suffered the death at one time, then to deserve so many death. So the king in
purpose to punysh ye innocensy of Laureola, by reasone of the treasone of the
false wytnes, ordeynyd yt his daughter Laureola should have the sentence of
justice. The which when it came to the knowledge of Lereano, he was there with
nere out of his wit, and wi^h great fury and passion desperate, determynyde
to go to the court to deliver Laureola, and to slay Persyo, orels to lose his
own life in the quarrel. And when I saw him wyllyng to follow that fantasye,
wherein was more perell then hope. Then I desired him to work sagely, and so by
reasone of the alterasyon that he was in, he was in a great perplexite. And
when I saw him stand in such a dysmayde trance, I thought then to serve him
with my counsayll, to thentent he should not do that thing in haste, whereby to
repent him after. And considering the way that I tho^ght most sure, I said to
him thus.

The auctor to Lereano.
SIr I desire you to be dyscrete to thentent that I may praise your wit, that
ye may so deal to remedy your evil, that ye may be joyful as I desire, and
praised as ye deserve. This I say for the sage patience that thou should show
in the time of thine aduersyte: for though I se well ye thine understanding be
occupied with passion: yet thou should consider what thou wylt do, and with
what dyscrete knowledge. Thou should rather follow my simple counsayll, then
to put to execucion thy foresaid will. Thus: thou should do by thine own
natural in tysemente. Much have I studied on that thou ought to do in this
thy great fortune: And according to my power judgment. The first thing to
accomplysh it for the, to take rest, the lack thereof trowbl^th the in thy
present case. And after mine opynion thy first determynacio^ shall be the last
to put to execucion: for as thine enterprice is great and weyghty, according
there to, demuer delyberacion should be determynyde or yt were executyd all
ways in a thing doughtfull. The most surest way would be taken. And if thou be
disposede to slay Persyo, or to deliver Laureola. First thou must consider by
what ways thou may do it, and skape away with both your honors, for her
honor is more to be estemyd, then the life. For if thou ca^ste not acco^plyshe
thine enterpryce, thou shalt leave her co^dempnyd, and thy self dyshonouryd.
Thou knowyst that men workyth, and fortune iudgith. And if things pass well,
then they be praised: if they fortune evil, then they be dyspraysed, and taken
for evil. If you deliver Laureola thou shalt be callyde valyant: if thou assay
and fail, then you shall be reputyd a fool. Carry here a.ix. days, for then
shall be y^ execusio^ of the sentence against Laureola. In the mean seasone let
us prove and assay all other remedies, that any hope is in. And if we find no
remedy in that, then execute thine intent, though thou lose thy life thereby,
yet it shall be to thine honor and fame. One thing thou shulde^te provide for,
or thou begin, I put case thou haddeste now broken the prisone, and taken
out thereof La^reola, and carried her away, into thine own land: yet she
should be condempnyd and reputyd culpable, and where soever thou should set
her, yet she should suffer pain, the which then should be gretter evil, then ye
first. Therefore the best way as seems me is to do after this manner. I will go
in thy name to Galleo, brother to the queen, who for part desires ye
delyuerance of Laureola, asmoche as thy self doste. And I shall show him what
is thine intent: and desire him (to the entente he should bear no charge nor
blame) that he would be ready with a certain number of men, the same day that
thou should do thine enterpryce, that if thou fortune to get Laureola out
of prisone. Then to put her in to his hands in the presence of eury man, in
wytnes of his ignorance, and of thy clennes, and so he to receive her till the
king have prouyd the troth in every thing, and to keep her in his castle:
whereby this business may come to a good end: but as I have said this way must
be ye last shote ancre. Therefore first I will go to the court, and speak with
the cardynall of Gaula and with other lords and prelates that I can find there.
And I shall desire them to speak to ye king, desyryng him to grant Laureola her
life. And if we find no remedy in this, then I will desire the queen that she
with all other ladies and honest women of her court and of the city, to go to
the king, and desire perdone for her daughter. To whose wepynges and peticions,
I can not believe that pity shall be denied. And yet if that can not auayll: then
I shall cause Laureola to write to the king her father, certyfyeng him of her
innocence, and if all these ways will not serve: then shall I offer to the
king that thou shall find a person that shall do deades of arms against
those.iii. false witnesses and if none of these ways can preuayll Then prove
thy strength, and thereby peradventure thou shalt find ye pity in the king
that thou sekeste for. But yet or I deperte me thynkyth you should write to
Laureola in strengthyng of her fear, with suertye of her life. The which thou
may well do: syn heuyn dysposith, that is wrought upon the earth it can be
none other wise, but that god will receive ye wepynges of innocents, and thy
just petycions.

The auctor.
SO Lereano swaruyde no point fro mine advise, because he thought it the most
sure way, for the expedicion of his purpose. Howbeit his heart was not sure:
for he dough^yd lest the king in his ire should have given sentence upon
Laureola or the day came. How be it by the laws of the land she should
have.ix. days respyght. Though his heart fearyd this it was no meruaill: for
they that be true lovers, all yt is contrary to them, they lightely believe it.
And that they desire most, they think them self thereof most uncertain. How
be it he concludyd to write to Laureola with great dought, that she would not
recyue his letter. The tenor whereof was as folowith.

The letter of Lereano to Laureola.
RAther would I put my hands to rydde mine own life, then to begin to write
if I knew that my works were cause of your prisone, asmoch as mine evil
fortune is, ye which is to me so contrary yt it can not cause me to dye well
wtoute I may save you. The which I purpose to do. And if I dye in that quarrel
(ye shall be delyueryd quite out of presone, and then I clean rydde fro all my
mysaduentures: and so the death of one shall be cause of.ii. liberties. I require
you take me not as your enemy, for any thing that ye suffer syn my merits are
not the cause, but rather it is mine evil fortune. And ye may well believe that
though your dolours be never so great, yet I feel more torment in ye thinkyng
upon them, then ye do in the suffrynge. Would to god that I had never known
you, and yet thereby I should have lost the sight of you: the which to me is the
gretest wealth of this world. I should have been right happy, and I had never
seen nor hard, of the dolor that ye suffer and I am so accustumyd to live in
heaviness that I am feign to take counsel for your cause: but in the pain yt
I feel now I take no counsayl, nor I have no rest, nor my heart can not be quyt
for the pain that ye suffer: Fear not the death, for my propre hands shall
save you therfro. I shall search all the remedies that I cane find to apeace
ye kings ire. And if yt faylle, trust in me that for your liberte I shall
deal in such wise, that as long as the world endures, there shall be
remembrance and ensample of hardy valiantnes. For this that I say is no great
thing to be done for besilde your excellent valeure. The cruel Justice of your
presone causes my hardynes, who ca^ resist my strength syn I have it by your
means. What thing is it that the heart dare not enter price, your beauty being
fixed therein. There is allonely but one evil in your saluasion, the which may
be bought with an easy price according to your deserte that is, losing of my
life. And though I so do it is but a small loss, so it may deliver you. With
my good hope, strengh your feble^es: for and ye should set your thoughts upon
al ieoperdes ye might sone thereby end your life: whereby.ii. great
inconuenientes should ensue. The first and principal is your death. The.ii. is I
should the^ be preuatyd fro the gretest honor that any man might have, as in
that I should not then save you. Lady, believe in my words and trust my
promise, do not as some other women do, to take great fear: for a small cause.
If your femynyne condycion accuse you with fear: Then let your discrecion
strength you again, which ye may well do by mine assurance: and because this
that I say shall be well prouyd. Therefore I require you believe me, I write not to
you at length as I would do, but I shall prove to further your life.

The auctor.
While Lereano wrote his letter I made me ready to deperte and receyuyd his
letter, and made all the dylygence that I could, till I came to the court and
did my devour that in me was to have spoken with Laureola, to have given her
some comeforte: but I was denied to se her. Then I was enfourmyde of the
chamber where she lay, where was a wyndow with a great grate of irone. And at
night I came thither, and wrappyd the letter together, and set it on a spear
point, and so with much trauaill I did cast the letter in at the wyndowe in
to her chamber, and ye next morning I came thither again, and saw the wyndow
open, and I saw where Laureola stood, but the latyse was so thycke, yt I cowlde
have no perfyght sight of her. Finally I aprochyd nerer to the wyndowe, and
when she saw me marchyng for by ye wyndowe. She cast suddenly out a letter,
without spekyng of any word: because of the prease that was nere hand. And
as I was going away, she said: Take there the reward of the pite that I have
showed, and by cause her kepers were nere about her I durst make none
answer: but her words did put me in to such passion, that who so had
folowyd me by the trace of my weeping, might well have found me out. The tenor
of her letter folowith. Laureolas letter to Lerea.

I Cannot tell the Lereano, how to answer, and where as every man lawdith pite
and reputith it for a virtue, and in me it is taken for a vice. And according
thereto I am chastysed, I do as I ought to do according to pity: and I have
as I deserve according to my mysfortune. For surely thy fortune nor thy works
is no cause of my presone, nor I complain not of the nor of none other person
living, but alonely upon my self, who to keep the fro the death, charge my
self culpable, howbeit, this compassyon that I have of the is more paynefull,
then charge. I do remedy as innocent, and yet I am punyshed as culpable. How
be it, much more pleasyth me this presone being without error, then to be
at liberte, and infectyd therwt. And though yt be paynefull to suffer, yet I am easyd again that I have not deseruyd it. I am she that among all living
creatours, ought lest to live, without the king save me. I hope upon no
thing but death: for if thou deliver me, or any of thine, in what so ever manner
it be, I shall be dolorous. And if thou do not remedy me, I am sure to dye: and
if thou deliver me and take me away I shall be condemned as culpable. Therefore
I require the to trauayll to save mine honor and fame, rather then mine life:
for the one must end, and the other will endure. As I have said, search to
apeace the furour of the king my father: for otherwise I can not be saved
without the destruction of mine honor. How be it, I remytte all to thy good
counsel and adnyse. Thy wisdom can chose the best way: thou may se the
reward that I have for the favor, that I have showed the. I am put in
prisone where as murderers were wont to be kept: and I am tied with cheynes,
and with sharp torments, my tender flesh is tormented, and with force of
arms I am kept, as though I had the force and power to skape away. Thus
delicate is my sufferynge, and my pains so cruel, that beside ye sentence of
death, my father might otherwise have taken vengeance upon me, then to suffer me
to dye iu this cruel prison. I have great marvel how of such a cruel
father, should issue so pacyente a daughter: if I should be like him in
condition, I should not fear his justice, syn he will do it so unjustly. As
to that touched Persio I will make none answer, because I will not defyle my
tongue, as he has done my fame and renown. I had rather he would revoke and
deny his words that he has said, rather then he should dye for them: but
what so ever I say, determyne thy self as thou list, thou may not err in
that thou will do.

The Auctour.
Right dowtious I was when I had received and read the letter sent fro
Laureola to Lereano, whether I should send it to Lereano, orels keep it still,
till I weut my self. At last I determined not to send it for two
consyderacyons and inconveniences. The one was, I feared to put our secrets in
perell of discoueryng by reason of puttyng trust of any mean messenger. The
other was for fear lest the trouble that the letter should put him unto,
should cause him to execute his purpose in have, before the time agreed between
him and me: and thereby all might have been lost. So to turn to my first
purpose: The first day I came to the court, I proved and tempted the wylles of
such, as I thought would be of our opinion, and I found none of the contrary
desire, saving the friends of Persio, to whom me thought it but a folly to
speak. And then I went to the Cardyna^l, and desired him yt it would please
him to make supplicacion to the king for the life of his daughter Laureola. The
which he grauntyd to do with no less love and compassion, then I desired it.
And so incontinent with diverse other prelates and great Lords together, they
went to the king. Then the cardynall in his own name, and in all theyrs, said
to the king as folowith

The cardynall to the king.
Sir it is not without reason that noble princes in time past ordyned their
counsaillors, to order by them what was to be done: whereby they found great
profytte. And though cou^saill were stablished for many good causes, yet I
find.vi. reasones that ye same law ought to be observed. The first is because
that men may much better order other men's matters, rather then their own: for
the heart of him that the matter tochyth can not be with out some ire,
couetesnes, affection, or desire, or some other like condition. So that he
shall not determyne the cause, as he ought to do. The.ii. is when matters be
pleatyd and arguyd: the traugth is the better known. The.iii. if the
counsaylours ordeyne justly, and bring the matter well to pass: the glory and
honor is to them that folowyth such counsayll. The.iiii. is if by another
man's counsayll the besynes fails and takyth none effect: yet he that
demands the counsayll is out of blame and charge: and they that gave the
counsayll must bear the charge and fault. The.v. is because good cou^sayl
often times assuryth things that be dobutious. The.vi. is if a man be faulen
in evil fortune: yet in all aduersites good counsayll puts the pertye in
good hope. Certaynely sir it is but a blind counsayll, a man to counsayll him
self, knowing him self in any furour or passion. Therefore sir blame us not,
though in the fercenes of your ire, we be come to trouble you: for we had
rather that ye should in your ire reprehende us for our coming to you: Then
that after ye should repent you and condempe us, because we gave you no
counsayll. Sir things done by good delibercyo^ and accord, procurith profyt,
and praise to them that so does: And things done in have and with fury,
repentance must make amends. Such wise and noble men as ye be, when they
should do any warke, first they should determyne, or they dyspose, as well in
things present, as in things to come and as well in those thyuges that they
hope to have profit by, as in those things that they fear the contrary. And
if they find them self troublyde with any passion, till they be cleryd
therfro, they should give no sentence. And if they debate, and delay there
deades, then they do well: for in all such weighty matters, have is
daungerouse, and tariynge is surety. A wise man that will do instly must
think on all these things, and or he do any thing, follow reasone, and
establish the execucion honestly. It is the properte of them that be discrete,
to prove their counsailours, and not to determyne upon a light credence: And
there as a thing femyth do^btefull, hold then the sentence in balance: for all
things is not of truth, that semyth to be true The thought of the wise man,
now agrees and now demands, and now ordeyn, and all ways cast in his mind
what may fall, and be ielous of his fame, and keep him self fro erryng, and
for fear of falling therein will remember that is past and take the best
thereof, and ordeyne for the time present with a temperance, and to remember
what is to come, and in all these to take auysemente. Sir all this that we have
said is that ye should remember your wisdom, and ordeyne your deades not
furyously: but like a wise man, and torn the force of your natural wisdom
against the accydent of your ire. Sir we have knowledge that ye will condemn
your daughter Laureola to death if her bounty, and goodness have not deseruyde
to be iustyfyde: Then of truth, ye are not ryghtwyse judge: never trouble
your glorious fame with such a judgment. And we put case though she had
deserved this punyshement, yet in your so doing, ye shall be defamyde and
reputyde rather for a cruel father, then a ryghtwyse king. ye give credence
to.iii. evil men, and of shameful conversation, certainly as good reasone
had it been, to have shortyd their lives, as to have given credence to their
wytnes. They be men sore defamyd in your court, for they conferme them self
to all iniquite. They glorifye them self in their false reasones makyn^, and
in the begylynges that they make. And sir why give you more faith to their
informacio^, rather then to y^ judgment of god, the which was clearly seen in
the battle between Persio and Lereano. Be not the sheder of your own blodde:
for then of all men, ye shall be dyspraised and dispysed: blame not the innocent
for the cou^sayll of the enuyous. And if ye think that for all the reasons
that we have said, that Laureola ought not to be sauyd: yet for that ye ought
to do for virtue, and because ye be bound of your royalnes for the service that
we have done you, in our most humble wise: we require you to have mercy of her
life. And because that fewer words then we have spoken should suffice to your
clemency, to convert you to pytie. Therefore we will say no more, but that ye
will remember how much better it is that your i^e should peryshe, rather then
your noble fame.

The kings answer.
Syrs I repute me, well counsaylyd by you if I were not more bound to punyshe,
then to perdone^ ye need not show me the reasone, how that great princes ought
to receive conusayll, as in that and in other things that ye have showed, I
knew them right well, but ye know well, when the heart is chargyd with
passione, then is it locked fro herynge of any counsel and in yt time, the
fruteful words, to mytigate the passion of ire, causes it the sorer to
increase bringing to the memory the cause thereof wherefore I say if I were quyte
for that impedyment, I think then I should dispose, and ordeyn sagely for the
death of Laureola the which I will show, she has dese^uyd by just causes
determined acordyng to honor and justice, and if her error should be left
vnpunnisshed, I should then be no less culpable, then Lereano. As tochyng my
dishonor and shame, if it were publisshed that I should perdone such a case,
of my neigbours I should be dispraised, and of mine own subgettes disobeyed,
and of every man smally e^^^ed. And also I might well be accused yt I have evil
conserved the generosite of my predecessors. And this fault might be so far
exstemed, that it might spotte and defowle the fame of mine auncettours passed,
and blemysh ye honor of them that be present, and steyne ye blud of them that
be to come: for one spotte in our lignage, might confound all our generation.
The perdonynge of Laureola should be cause of other great evils, the which
should follow by reason of my perdonyng: wherefore I had rather to cause fear,
by reasone of my cruelty, then to cause boldness to do evil by reasone of my
pity. And in my so doing I shall be esteemed as a king ought to be, by reason of
doing justice. Be hold how many reasons there be, that shlude led, yt she
ought to have sentence ye know well, our laws has stablisshed, that a woman
accused in such causes should suffer death, and ye se well, how it were better
for me to be called a king in mynystrynge justice then to perdone the culpable.
And it ought well to be noted yt instead of consernyng the law, if I do break
it my self, ye which I ought not to do, then I condemn my self. The right
way ought equally to be kept and observed: for the heart of a judge ought not
to be mouede for favor, for love, nor couetyse, nor for none other accide^t:
following the right justice is laudable. And if it be favorable, then it is
abhorred. Justice ought never to go out of the right way, syne it is cause of
so much goodness. It cansith fear to them that be evil, and it susteynyth
them that be good. It pacefyeth all differences: it determynyth al questions
it expelith all stryues and contensions and it agreith all debates, it assurith
the ways, it honourith the people, it fauourith the small people, and of base
condition, it bridilith the mighty men, and to the common weal, it is right
profitable. Then to conserve such a welthe and that the laws susteynyth it, It
is right that I should use justice. if ye desire so much the health of Laureola,
and praise so much her goodness, bring forth one witness of her innocensy, as
I have.iii. to charge her, then she shall be perdonyd with reasone, and praised
with troth. Also where as ye say that I should give faith to the judgment of
god, as well as to the wytnes of other men: it is no meruayll thought I do not
so, for I se the wytnes certain at mine eye: and as for the judgment is not
yet endyd, For though Lereano had the better of the battle we may judge the
my^^es, but we know not the end. I will not answer to al your alegasyons and
sayenges, because I will make no long process, and at the end send you away
without hope. I desire much to accept your requests because of your well
deseruyng thereof: and if I do not, yet I require yon take it for none evil,
for ye ought no less to desire the honor of the father, then the salvation of
his daughter.

The Auctor.
THe desperate answer of ye king, was to the herers great heaviness. And when I
saw that this remedy was to me cont^ary, then I sought for a another way,
trustyng that should be more profitable. And yt was I thought to go to the
queen that she should desire the king for the saluacyo^ of her daughter
Laureola. So I went to her, who was partaker of her daughters sorrow. And I
found her in an hall aco^panyd with many noble ladies and other. who were
suffycyente to have atteygnyde their desires, other just or unjust, though
the mttaer had been never so great, yet their desires ought not to have been
refused, because of ye auctorite of the queen, who knelyd down and spoke
words to the king, as well leyeng charge to him for his ire, as also words of
pity to apeace him. And she showed him the moderacyon that a king ought to
have, and reprehendyd the perceuera^ce of his ire: and showing him how he was a
father, and allegyd reasones right dyscrete to note and full of sorrow: sayng,
that if he would needs execute his cruel judgment, to do it rather upon her
self (seyeng great part of her years were passyd) then upon Laureola in her
young age, aprouyng that by her own death, the fame of the judge should be
sauyde, and the life of her that is iudgyd, and the mind of the desyrer
fulfilled. But the king still was indurate in his first purpose. All the
queen's rasones could not serve nor yet her bitter wepynges. And therewith the
queen went in to her chamber with small strength sore weeping, and as ready to
dye. And when I saw that the queen could get no grace of the king, I went to
the king without any fear of his fers^es, and said: how he ought to give his
sentence with clear justice, for Lereano should find a man to fight against
all those.iii. false witnesses, orelles to do it his own proper person, and to
pay them according to their deserts, and then god shall show where the right
is. Then the king answered me, that I should leave mine ambassade for Lereano:
saying how the heryng of his name encresyd his passion and ire. And when the
queen knew there was no remedy to save the life of Laureola: She went to the
prisone and kyssed her dyuerce times, and said, as folowith.

The queen to laureola.
O Bounty, by malice accusyd. O virtue, by ire co^demnyd. O daughter borne of
thy mother to sorrow: thou shalt dye without justice, and I must weep by
reason. Thine unhappy has more pusance to condemn the, then thyn innocency
to save the, without the I shall live accompanied with doloures, the which in
thy stead thou shall leave me. Thy death shall end.ii. lives, the one is thine
without cause, and mine by good reasone and right. To live after y^ should be to
me a sorer death, then that thou shalt receue: for it is far greatter
tormente, to desire the death, then to suffer it. Would to god, thou myghtest be
called the daughter of the mother yt should dye, rather then to be she yt I
should se dye. Of every man thou shalt be bewailed^ as long as the world
endures: all that of the have any knowledge, will set little by this realm,
y^ which thou should enheryte according to thy deserts: for all that you art
fallen in to thy fathers displeasour, yet all such as knowith the affyrmyth,
that there is none in all this land that deserve thy merytes: such as be
blind desire to se y^: the dome desires to speak with the: the power and ye
rich to serve y^, all the world is well content with the, you art be hatyd with
no creature, but alonely with Persio. if I may live a seasone, he shall receue
for his demerites, just reward: And thouhe I have noone other strength, but
to desire his deth^ and to be reuengyd of him if I could: the evil will I
bear him, should then soon be vtteryd. yet this can not satysfye me: for I can
not heal the dolor of the spotte of the execucion of the vengeans. O my dear
daughter thy honesty has prouyd thy virtue. why does not the king give more
credence, to thy presence, then to the wytnes of thy false enemies. In thy
words, deades, and thoughts, all ways thou have showed a virtuous heart. Why
then should god suffer the to dye, I can find none other cause, but by reason
of my sins that I have co^myttyd, rather then for any meryt of thy
ryghtwisnes. I would my deades might be co^paryd to thine innocence. Dear
daughter lift up thine heart to heuyn, take no sorrow, to leave that must needs
end, for that thing that is permanent I: assure the our lord god will that
thou shall suffer as a marter, to thentente yt thou shalt joy in his
beatitude. In me have none other hope, but that and I were worthy to go
thither, as thou art suer to go, I would shortly bear the company. Thynkyst
thou not, that it is a hard trouble to me to remember how many supplicacions
has been made to the king for thy life, and yet they can not obtain. And at
this hour, a sharp knyfe may rydde and make an end of thy life, and thereby
leave the father in fault, and the mother in sorrow, and the daughter without
health, and the realm without an herytour. O the lantern of mine eyes, I say
to the these fearful words to the intent they should break thine heart a
sonder: for I had rather thou shuldeste dye in my power by sorrow, then to se
the dye by justice: for though I should shede thy bludde, yet my hands should
not be so cruel, as is the condition of thy father. O virgyne immaculate syn I
can not accomplysh my desire, and that I must deperte fro the: yet receive the
dolorous last kissing and blyssyng of thy sorrowful mother: And thus I will
go fro thy sight, and fro thy life, and most desyring to go fro mine own life.

The Auctor
WHen the queen had endyde her words she would not abide the answer of ye
innocent her daughter Laureola, because she would not receive doble sorrow. Thus
the queen and such lords as were in her company departed, with the grettest
lame^tacions that ever was made. And when she came in to her chamber, she sent
to Laureola a messenger, aduysing her to write to ye king her father. Thynkyng
that he would take more compassion by reasone of her piteous words, rather
then by the peticious of any other that trauellyde for her liberte. Who at the
commandment of her dolorous mother ^oke pen and ink and wrote with greater
turbacio^, then hope of remedy. Her letter specyfyed as folowith.

The letter of Laureola to the king
Dear father I understand, that ye have given sentence upon me to dye, and
that the term of my life shall be accomplyshede within these.iii. days, and I
know well the innocents ought no less to fear their fortune, then such as
be culpable to fear the law. And syn it is so that my mysfortune has brought
me in to this parell that I am in, and not for any defaute that I have done,
the which lightly ye moght know, if the furour of your ire would suffer you to
se the troth. ye are not ignorante of the virtue that the auncyante cronicles
and historyes manyfestith of the kings and queen's: fro whom I do proceed.
Then why was I borne of such a blodde that will believe rather the false
informasion, then the bounte natural. if it pleace you to slay me, for your
pleasur, ye may well do it: But as toching justice, ye have no cause thereto.
The death that ye will give me, though I refuce it for fear: yet by reasone of
obedience I do consent thereto, as she that louyth better to dye under your
obedyence, rather then to live in your dyspleasure. Howbeit I require you, or
ye determyne, take good advise for as sure as god is true I never did thing to
deserve to suffer any pain. But sir I say to you, it is as convenient the
pity of the father, as the rygoure of justice. Without dought I desire as well
my life, because it tocheth your honor so nere, as I do, because it perteyneth
to my self: for at the end I am your daughter. Consider sir who soever uses
cruelty, serchith for his own perell: more surer it is to be beloved, for
using of pity and clemence rather then to be fearyd by cruelty. He that will
be fearyd, must fear. Cruel kings are of every man behatyd, and such, some
time in searching to be avenged, losyth them felfe: for their subgettes rather
desire trouble and change of the time, then the conseruacion of their astates.
For good people fear such conditions in a prince, and such as be evil fear
their cruel justice: so that thereby often times, their own servants study to
put them downe^ and to slay them: using with them the same condition of
cruelte, such as they vsyd them self before, and gave them ensample. Sir I
say this because I desire to sustain your honor and your life. Small hope
your subgettes shall have in you so cruel against me. They shall fear the
same, and there by have you in a marvelous suspecte, and he that is not sure,
can make no surety. O how freely delyueryd fro such occasions are those
prynces^ whose hearts are endeued with clemencye and pity. Their natural
subgettes cares not to dye in their quarrels, to save them fro perell. They
will wake all night, and defend^ them on ye day More hope and strength these
benynge and pitefull kings have, by reasone that they be beloved o^f their
people, then in the strenght of the walls of their strong forteresses: And
other wise, if the king be behatyd of his subgiettes^ if he had need, they
that come most slackest to save him, shall have most thank of the people.
Therefore sir regard well what hurt and danger, cruelty causes: and what
profyt gentleness and pity procures: Howbeit if ye think the opinyon of your
furour better than good counsel and natural prudence, then unhappy is that
daughter to be borne, to bring her fathers life in to co^dicio^ of sclaunder
prouyd with such cruel deades. Thus no man shall trust in you, nor ye shall
trust no man: for if men procure your death, ye can be in no surety. And the
thing that most greuith me is, i^ gyuyng sentence against me, ye do justice
against your own honor, the wiche all ways shall be reco^dyd, more for the
cause, then for justice in it self. My blood shall occupye, but a small place,
but your cruelty shall sprede over all the yerth: ye shall be called the cruel
father, and I the daughter innocent. For syn god is just he shall clear my
troth: for I shall be left with out fault, when I have receyuyd the pain of
death.

The Auctor.
WHen Laureola had endyd her letter, she sent it to the king by one of her
kepers, who loved and favored her in such wise, yt he would gladly she had
been at her liberty: for he was asmoche moved te pytie her, as to obey the
kings commandment. And when the king had received ye letter and read it,
he commanded streygthly that the berer thereof should avoid his presence. And
when I saw that, then newly again I cursed my mysaduenture, and thought that
my tormente was so great that it occupied my heart in dolor: yet my mind
forgot not to do yt I ought. And though I had more space to endure pain,
rather then to find remedy: yet then I went, and spoke with the lord Gawlo
her uncle, and showed him how Lereano was determynyd to take Laureola perforce
out of presone, wherefore I desired him to be ready with a certain nombre of
men, that when Lereano had taken her out of preso^, then he would deliver her
to his power to set her in sauegarde. Because that if Lereano should carry her
away with him, it should veryfy the wytnes of the false accusers. And because
that ye death of Laureola was as dear to him, as to the queen his suster: he
answered me and said, how he was content therewith. And when his will and my
desire were confyrmable together, then I depertyd secretly, because that or any
brute were made ye dead might be executyd suddenly. And when I came to Lereano,
I showed him all that I hade done, and of the small effect thereof. And then I
delivered him Laureolas letter, and what for the compassion of the words
therein and with the thoughts that he determined to do, his heart therewith was
so oppressyd, yt he wist not what answer to make me. He wept for compassion,
any could not refrain his ire, and was sore discomefortyd by reasone of his
evil fortune, and yet he hopyde according to justice. When he thought to
reskew Laureala, he was joyful. And again when he doughtyde to bring it
about, his heart changyde. Finally leueng al doubts, and knowing the answer
of Galleo, then he began to study what way to accomplish, his enterprice. And
like a wise knight, well prouydyde while I had been in the court: he had
assemblyd to gether of his own servants.v. C. men of arms without knowledgyng
of any of his kynne or friends. Some peradventure would have agreyd with him
with discrete consideracion, such as were made privy. Some of them said, ye
king did evil. And some said it was a ieopdous enterprice and perilous to
accomplysh. Therefore to exchew al such inco^uenie^ts he thought to execute his
dead alone with his own men. So the day before that Laureola should have been
judged, Lereano called before him all his servants and said to them: how the
good virtuous men were more bound to fear their shame, then the perell of
their lives. Also saying, how yet lives the fame of them that be passyd, by
reasone of their deades that they have done. And he desired them that for
couetyse of worldly goods ye which shall have an end, that they should not
for that, lose the glory of them, that lives perpetually. And he desired them
to have in their memory, the reward of well dyeng, and he showed the^ what
folyshnes it was to fear death. And in their so doing, he promised them great
gifts and rewards. And when he had made to them a long sermon, then he
declared ye cause that he sent for them: and all they with one voice proferyd
to live and dye with him. And when Lereano saw their good wylles, he thought
him self then well accompanyd, and so depertyd in the night, and came in to a
valey nere to the city, there he tarried all the night, and infourmyd his me^
what they should do. He apoyntyd one captain with a. C. men of arms, that
they should go straight to the lodging of Persyo, and to slay him, and asmany as
did resyst them. Then he apoyntyde other.ii. capitayns with each of them.l.
footmen, to go up the two principal streates, going to the presone where as
Laureola was `co^maundyng them that when they came to the preson, then they to
torn their faces to the city ward, and keep and defend that no person
should enter in to the castle until such time as he with other.iii. C. men
came to take out Laureola. And the captain that he had co^maundyd to sle
Persio he cha^gyd him that when he had done to come and mete with him at the
preso^ and they to defend the passage, if any came to enter in to the castle,
while he were taking out of Laureola. And all this thus agreyd and concluded,
when the gates were opened in the ^ornynge suddenly he and all his men entered
in to the city and every capitayne^ took head to his charge. The captain
that had the charge to sle Persio, executed his commandment, for he slew
Persio, and all other that were in his way to let him. There Persio endyd his
miserable life, and Lereano went to the preson and what with the furour of his
ire, and with the virtue of his force fought so fercely with the kepers of the
presone, and slew so many that he could not get for deed bodies, but with mo^he
pain. But as i^ al pe^els the bounty encrea seth by force of arms. So by
clean force he came in to the preson where as Laureola was, and there he took
her with as great seremony and honor as thought hit had been in time of
peace, he knelyd down to the yerth, and kyl^ her hand, like the daughter of a
king, and with that present turbacion, she stood without strenght, so that she
could not move her self, Her heart dismayed, her color faylyd, little part of
any life was left in her. Then Lereano took and carried her out of prisone,
and then met with Galleo her uncle according to his promise, who came
thither with a certain number of men, and there in the presence of every man
Lereano delyueryd, Laureola in to his hands, and still his men fought against
them that came against him: but he set Laureola upon an hakeney, that Galleo
had there ready, and again kyste her hand, and then went to aid his men, that
were still fyghtyng, and still he regardyd after Laureola, till he had lost
the sight of her. So Galleo her uncle led her to a castle of his own not
far thence, and when ye brute of this dead, came to the heryng of the king,
he called for his armure, and sownyd trompettes, and caused all the men of his
court to be armyd, and many of the city. And when Lereauo saw that of
necessite it was time for him to get out of the town in to the feldes, then
he comfortyd his men, with sweet and hardy words. And all ways in his
reculynge, he defendyd the multitude of his enemies with a valiante heart, and
to keep an honest manner in his reculynge, he went in good order, and not with
so great haste, as the case requiryd Thus lesyng some of his men, and sleyng
of, many of his enemies, he came thither where he had left al their horses So
such order as he had set before was well and truly kept, and so without
perel he and his lept upon their horses, the which was hard to have been done if
he had not wisely provided the remedy thereof before hand. Then the horsemen put
before them their foreme^, and took the way to Suria, fro whence they came And
when Lereano saw.iii. bands of the kings aproche nere him, then he went out
of the way, and conductyd so wisely his company by ways of a vauntage, that
he scapyd with as great honor in his reculynge, as he had won in the
fighting: so he enteryde again in to the town of Suria without loss of any
of his men, which was great meruayll: for the king was there in propre person
with.v. M. men of arms, who was inflamyd with ire: and so beset the town
about, in purpose not to depert thence till he had taken vengeance of Lereano.
when Lereano saw how he was besegyd, he set his men like a wise man of war
to the walls, where as was most feblyst part, there he set most defense,
and where as he might best issue out in to the feld, there he set such men as
were mete for that purpose, and there as he fearyd other craft or treasone,
there he set such as he trustyd best. Thus he vsyd him self like a wise
captain. The king thynkyng to bring his enterprice to an end co^maundyd to
fortefy his camp, and to provide for all things necessary perteynynge to a
camp royal, as engyus, bastides and bulwerkes to beat the city with
artilery, and made great dykes that none should issue out, when the king saw
so long tariynge at this siege his ire encreasyde: for he had thought to
hade taken Lereano by reasone of famyne, and for all that he saw the town
right strong, yet he determynyd to sawte it the which he prouyd with such
fercenes, that they within had great need to put to their strength and
dilygence to resist. Then Lereano went and visytyd his men with a.C. men such
as were deputyd for that purpose, and every where he saw any fyghtyng, he ever
encoragyd them, and where as he saw valiantnes he praised them, and where he
saw any evil order he found remedy. Finally the king caused to sown the
retrayte with loss of many of his knights, and specially of the young lusty
courteers who ever sekyth for perel^s, to win thereby glory. Lereano at the
same assault was hurt in the face and also lost many of his princpal men.
This assault past, the king gave other.v. assaults within the space of iii.
months, so that in manner men began to fail on both parties, so that
Lereano was doubteous of that enterprice, how be it in his words and
countenance, nor in his deades nothing of fear could be aspied, so that ye
courage of the captain, incoragyd all the other capitayns, and then to give
courage to his men such as were left, he said to them as folowith.

Lereano to his company.
Certainly syrs as ye be but few^ in number, so our strength is not great I
have doubt in our enterprice according to our evil fortune, but in that,
virtue is estemyde more then is great number, and considering your noble
deades passed, I think I should have more need of good fortune, then of great
number of knights: wherefore alonely in you is all my hope, and syne our health
is in our hands, as well for the sustentacion of our lives, as for the glory of
good fame, we ought valia^tly, to fight, now ye case is offeryd us orels to
leave the profyt of our enherytance to them that would disheryte us. Thus we
should be unhappy if for fear and faynte courage we should lose our heritage:
therefore let us fight, to deliver our blude fro shame and dishonor and my
name fro enfamy, this day let us make an end of our lives, orels conferme
our honors, let us defend our self, and not to be shamyd, for greater is
the reward of vyctory, then the occasions of perel. This paynefull life that
we live in, I know not why we should somoche desire it, the days thereof are
but short and long in trauayll, y^ which for fear increseth not, nor for
hardynes shorteth not: for when we be borne, our time is lymyted, the which we
shall not pass, thereby fear is subdued, and hardynes lawded, we can not put
our fortune in a better state, then to hope of an honorable death. O glorious
fame. O couetyse laudable the auerise of honor whereby is ateyned greatter
deades, then this of ours is, let us not fear the great company that is in
the kings camp for at the first encounter, the weke shall first fight, and
overcome them, and ^hey shall abashe the multitude and the small nombre will
enforce themself by virtue: many things dryueth us to be hardy, bounty and
virtue byndeth us, and justice enforseth us, necessity shall reward us,
wherefore we ought not to fear, for their is nothing that should cause us to
dye. Syrs all these reasones that I have said is but superflew to enforce our
strenght. Syn we have it naturally but I will say to you that in every time our
hearts onght to be occupied in noblenes, and our hands in deades of arms, and
our thoughts in good works and good words among company, as we do now I
^eceue equal glory as well for the amorous good will that ye show me as for the
deades of arms that ye have done, and because I se our enmyes prepayre them to
fight we be constrained to leave our talkyng, and every man to get him to his
charge and defense.

The auctor.
LEreano was au^swerd of his knights with great constance and courage of heart,
whereof he thought him self right happy, that he had such men in his
company, so every man went to his defense, where as they were apoyntyd and then
anon, they hard the trompettes blow, and wihtin short space there came to
the walls, a.l. M. men, and began fresly to give assault. Then Lereano showed
his virtue, and by reasone of their defense, the king thought they within hade
lost never a man. This assaut endured fro y^ mids of the day, till it was
night, the which depertyd them: there were slain and hurt of them without
a.iii. M. and asmany of them within, so that Lereano had lefet no mo with him
but. C.l. persons and yet by his contenance, he semyd as though he had lost
never a man, how be it he was inwardly sorry for them that he had lost. All
that night he buried the deed bodies, and praised and lawdyde the valiantnes of
them that were left alive and gyuing no less glory to them that were deed,
then to them that were a live. The next day at the relyefe in the morenynge,
Lereano determynyd that.l. of his men with him should issue out, and sit
upon a lodgyng that ioynede to the walls perteynynge to a kynnesmans of
Persyos. Lereano did this because the king should not thy^ke that he lacked
men. And this he did with ferme boldness and so burnt the said lodging, and
sleu many such as made defense. And as god would in the same busynes there was
taken one of them that had accusyde Laureola, he was brought to Lereano, and
was put to pain till he was caused to show all the troth of the hole matter,
and so he confessed the hole circumstance of the matter. And when Lereano was
enfourmed of the troth, he sent him to the king, besechynge him to dyscharge
Laureola fro all blame, and to do justice upon them, for the pain that they
have caused Laureola to endure. And when the ^yng knew the certaynte, he was
right glad, and thought it was reason that he requiryd, and to make short
process The king did justice upon y^.iii. falc^ witnesses accodynge to their
deserts, then incontinent he reised up the siege and reputyd his daughter
Laureola discharged, and Lereano without fawte and so went to his city of
Suria, and then sent for Laureola by ye grettest lords of his court, and she
was brought with equal houour acordynge to her deseruynge, and was joyfully
receuyd of the king and of the queen, who wept for joy and there the king
discharged her fro blame, and the queen kyst her, and all other served her Thus
the pain passed was turned to great joy present. Then the king sent to Lereano
co^maundyng him not to come to his court till he had apeased ye kynnesmen and
friends of Persio, the which commandment he received with great sorrow,
because he might not se Laureola. And when he saw none other remedy, he felt
him self in a strange manner, and seeing him self depertyd fro her. He left
the works of chyualry, and returned again to his old amorouse thoughts and
trowbles desyryng to know what case Laureola was in. He desyrede me to find
some honest manner, how he might se and speak with her, and yet his desire was so
honest, that he desired not to speak with her in such wise that any suspecte
should be laid to her, of the which he deseruyde to have had great thank.
And I who was glade to follow his desire deperted fro him, and went to Suria:
and when I came there, and had kyste Laureolas hand, then I showed her
Lereanos desire, And she answered me and said, that in no wise she would
speak with him, for dyuerce causes that she alledgyde. And though she was not
content to grant me at that time, yet ever after as often as I might speak
with her, I made still my supplycacion, and fynaly at last she aunswerede me
and said ons for all, that if I spoke any more to her in that matter, she would
be utterly displeased with me. And when I hard her answer, and saw her
displeasure then I went to Lereano with great heaviness and dolor, and when I
had showed him how it was: then he began newly to complain, and sorrow, for
his mysaduenture: so that with out doubt he was in the condition to have
dispayred. And when I saw that yet to entertayne him I said and counsaylyd him
to write again to Laureola, recordynge therein what he had done for her, and
maruaylynge of her change, seeing she had rewardyd him before with her
writynge. Then he answered and said how he was well content to write but not
to recite therein any thing that he had done for her: the which he said was
nothing according to her deseruynge. Nor also he said he would make no
remembrance in his letter of any reward yt he had receyuyd of her. For he
said, the law of love defends any such thing to be written. What
satisfacion should I receue thereby: for the great perell that might fall, if
the letter were seen. Thus not tochynge those matters I will write to Laureola
The tenor of his letter folowith.

The letter fro Lereano to Laureola.
Fair lady Laureola according to your virtuous pytie sin ye know my passion
I can not believe but yt ye will co^sente to my demand, syn I desire nothing
that shall be to your dishonor saying ye know mine evil, why do you dought,
without reason I dye. ye know that great pain occupyeth so mine heart, that I
feale the evil, and can not show it: if ye take it for good that I should dye,
thynking to satisfye me with the passion yt ye give me, syn it proceeds fro
you, hit is the grettest wealth that I can hope for, and justly I shall take it
for the end of my reward, if ye judge me vncourteise in yt I should not be
content with that ye do to me, gyuinge me cause of so gloriouse thoughts^ yet
blame me not for though the will be satisfied. The understanding makes
quarrel, and if my dolor do pleace you, because I never did you service that
might atteyne to the heighnes of your deseruyng. when I remember these things,
and many mo, I think yt because that ye will not grant my supplycacion,
because I can do nothing that should deserve it, yet hardynes has caused me to
hope upon mercy, not according to my deserving, but according to your bounty
that may give it. And I thynk that your virtue, co^passyon, and pity, should
aid me, because they be agreeable to your condycion. When a man has any
busynes with a great personage: thynkyng to attayn to have grace: first he
must win the good wylles of the servants, whereby a man lightely shall come
to his intent. But as for me I can find no remedy. I have done my devour to
search for aid whom I have found always ferme and stable for all they have
required you to have mercy upon me: ye soul because he sufferet, hand the life
because it su^teyneth, the heart because it endures, the understanding
because it feleth. And syn ye will give no reward for all these, in that they
desire, and by reasone have deseruyd, I am the most unfortunate of all other
unhappy. The water refressheth the yerth: but my wepynges can not molefye your
endurat hardness. The water gives liquor to the feldes, herbys, and trees, but
my weeping can not enter in to your heart. As I find my self disposyd,
dyspayre should rydde my life, if I might be alone. But always I am accompanyd
with the thoughts that ye give me, and with y^ desire yt ye ordeyne me. Also
the remembrance of that I would do comforts me: remembrynge how they kept me
company, in such wise, that what soever cause I have desperacion yet it keeps
me fro dispayryng: if it be your pleasure that I shall dye, let me have some
knowledge thereof, then I shall not be all unhappy: for then I shall pass it
the more wyllyngly, and at the end it shall be to me, the more ease: bycau^e it
is for your gift. And syn ye will not se me, I must be enforsed to go that
trace.

The auctor.
This letter I bare to Laureola, with much pain she received it, and to
dispache her fro Lereano honestly she wrote again in this manner with full
determynacyon never to receive again fro him other letter or message The
tenor of her letter folowith.

The letter fro Laureola to Lereano.
LEreano the displeasure that I have of thine evil should be satisfaction for
thy love, if thou knew how great it is. And this alonely take for thy remedy
without demanding of any other. Though it be but a small paymente, for that
thou have deserved against me. For as I am bound to do if thou wylt demand of
my goods and riches, as thou do desire against mine honor, I would gladly
gyne it the. I will not answer every article of thy letter for I considering
that I do thus write to the, the blood rynneth fro my heart and my reason
vanyssheth fro my judgment. There is no cause that thou have written of, that
causes me to consent to be sorry for thine evil, but it is alonely by reason
of my bounte yet I have no doubt, but that thou enduryst much evil: for the
perell that you have been in, bears wytnes of that you have suffered. Thou
say, thou dyddest me never service. That thou have done for me, I shall never
forget, but always desire to satisfye it, but not as thou desiryst, but
according to mine honestye. The virtue pity and compassion, that thou thynkyst
should aid the against me because they are agreeable to my condition. How be it
in this case they are enmies to my fame: and therefore thou find them
contrary. When I was taken thou sauyddest my life, and now yt I am quyte, thou
would condemn me with thy desire. Rather I ought to seek thy pain with mine
honor: then to remedy the with mine own fault and shame. Believe not that the
people live so holily, but and they knew yt I spoke with the, they would judge our
clear entensions to the worste: for the world is so dyuerce, that men will
rather defame bounty, then to praise virtue. Thus thy demand is excu^syd
therefore take no hope therein, though thou should dye as thou say. For
better is honest cruelty, then pity culpable Herynge this peradventure thou
will say I am moveable, because I began to show the some mercy, as in
writing to the, and now determined not to remedy y^, Thou know well under
what manner I did write to the, and for what intent, and though it had been for
any othere cause, yet as conueniente is the mutacion in things that be
hurtefull: As is ferme stedfastnes in things that be honest. I require the,
strenght thy self, like a valiant knight, and remedy thy self discretly. Put
not thy life in perell, and mine honor in disputacio^, syn thou somoche
desyrest it. What shall be said if thou dye, that I do reward service done to
me with taking away their lives, to the which I will show y^ contrary^ if I
outelyue, the king my father, for then shall I give the what part of ye reame
that thou will desire. And I shall increase thine honor, and double thy
rentes, and enhaunce thine astate, and all that thou will ordeyne, nothygne
shall be denied. And thus by thy life I shall be iudgyd a good rewarder. And if
thou dye I shall be reputyde of evil co^dicions, and if it were for none other
thing but for this. Thou should enforse thy self, but for the trouble that
thy pain puts me unto, I will say no more to the. Because thou shalt not
think that in thy demand I should give the counsayll, or put the in any hope.
Would to god, that thy desire were honest. Thus I conusayll the on the one
part, and satysfye the on the other. And at this point I send to the this
letter on the purpose never to answer, nor to hear the speak more.

The auctor.
WHen Laureola had written this letter she said to me with a determynate
answer that this should be the last time that I should apere before her
presence^ saying that her comnyng with me caused much suspect, and that in my
going and coming, there was more perell to her, then hope to me of any remedy.
Then I seeing her determynate will, it semyd to me that my travail was more
paynfull to me, then remedy to Lereano. So I went fro her with more weeping then
words. And after I had kyst her hand, I went out of the place with sobbing,
and gulpynge in my throat, that I was nere strangeled to keep in my weeping,
and to thentent to cover my passion. And when I was out of the city alone,
then I began to weep in such wise, that I could not retain my voice fro
brayng, so that I thought it was better for me to dye in Masedonia, then to
return into Castile, ye which desire was reasonable, for by the death, mine
evil adventure should make an end: and with life, my sorrow should increase,
Thus all the way weeping and syghyng feylede me not: and when I came to Lereano,
I delyueryd him the letter fro Laureola, and when he had read it, he said he
would another take strength nor receive any counsayll, syn it was so good reason
that he should dye. Then he said to me, that always he would take me, for
more then his friend, because of the good counsayll that I had gyuyn him. Then
with voice and color mortal he began to complain, not blaming his wekenes nor
dispraysynge his fall, for every thing that might shorte^ his life, he
praysede, he shewyde him self, friend to dolor, and took recreacion with
torments, he louyd sorrows, all these he called his welthe, to be messengers
to Laureola. And because they should be entreatyde according as fro thence as
they came, he fyxyd them in his heart, he ioynyde them to his understanding
and conveyed them with his memory, he desiryde them to make a short end of
that they had to do, to the intent that Laureola might be seruyde, and thus
being without hope of any wealth, and trobled with mortal pains, could not
sustain him self no le^ger, but perforce co^streynede to lie down, upon his
bed where he would another eat, drink, nor s^epe, nor take any thing for
suste^tacion of his life, ever calyng him self happy to come to the case to do
some service to Laureola, as by his death, to bring her out of all trouble,
so anon it was publyshed abroad in the realm, and in the court how Lereano
was like to dye. Theu his kynne and friends came to comfort him, and to torn
his purpose, they said and did asmoche as they could Imagyne to prevail his
life, and because his infyrmite was to be curyd by wholesome reasones, every man
sharpyd their wits to do the best they could. And there was a knight called
Teseo a great friend of his, he considering that his sekenes was for love,
though he knew not for whom it was, he said and shewyde to Lereano all the
euyls of women that he could devise, and to conferme his own reasones, he
alegyd asmany things as he could, in the defamyng of women, thynkyng thereby
to have restoryd Lereano to his helthe^ when Lereano had well hard him, and
consyderyde that Laureola was a woman, he rebukyde greatly Teseo for speaking
of such words, and though as then his disposicion was not much to speak, yet
he enforcyd his tongue, and with the passion of great iri: said as folowith.

Lereano against Teseo, and against all evil spekers against women.
Friend Teseo if another man, that owed the not so good love as I do hard my
words, it would cause the to receive pain according to thy deserte: howbeit
my reasons shall be to the such an ensample, to cause the to keep thy tongue, and
it shall be a chastisement instead of thy pain, in the which I shall follow the
condition of a true friend, for if I showed the not thy fault by quyke reasons,
peradventure thou would utter forth again in other places such like words
as thou right now said, it shall be most for thy profyt to amend thy self by my
contradictions rather then to shame thy self with perseverance, the intent of
thy words was as a friend, the which I well considre thou sayedest them,
because I should abhor them that has brought me in to the case that thou
seist me in. And by reason of thy saying evil of women, thine entension was
thereby to give me remedy of my life, and thereby thou have given me the sooner
death: for the shameful words that thou have said, puts me to such
torment, because it is a woman, that has put me to this pain, therefore by
reasone of herynge of thy words, I shall live the less season, whereby I shall
receue a great wealth for the receyuynge of this dolorous death were better to be
shortly, then to sustain ye life any longer: for it is a thing delectable to
suffer, and with a swet rest to make an end of this life, the which sweet
end shall be by reason that these my last words shall be in the prease of women,
and my will is somewhat to satisfye her in whom resith all the cause, and to
begin to show the thine error, I will allege.xv. points against all them
that erreth in speaking evil of women, and.xx. other reasones I shall lay
whereby we are bound to say well of all women, with dyuerce other samples of
their bounty and goodness. And as to the first let us found our reasone, how
that all things made by the hand of god, are necessarily good: for according
to the warkeman, the warke ought to proceed: then knowing that women are his
creatures, they that speak evil of them, offend not allonely them, but also
they blaspheme the workman, the which is god. ye.ii. cause is, ye before god
and man there is not a more abhomynable sin, nor harder to be perdoned, then
is ingratitude, for where can there be a greatter sin, then to put out of
knowledge, and to forgette the wealth that is to come to us by reasone of the
vyrgyn mary and daily comes: she delivered us fro pain, and causes us to
merit the glory of heaven, she saves us, she susteyneth us, she defe^deth us,
she gydeth us, she gives us light of grace. Then seeing she was a woman, then
all other for her sake ought to be crowned with lawde and praise. The.iii. is,
because it is defended to all men according to virtue, to show any strength
against the weke sex femynyne. And this is observed among brewt bestes,
wherefore men should follow the same, yet some such as list to speak evil say,
though that women can make but small resystence with their hands, yet they
have no less liberte with their tongues. The iiii. is, a man ought not to say
evil of women, without he dishonor him self because he was creatyde and
noryshede in the womb of a woman, and is of her substance, and also because of
ye honor and reverence, that every child ought to do to his mother. The.v. is,
because of the disobedience to god who said with his own mouth, that father
and mother should be honouryde, therefore such as do other wise do serve sore
punisheme^t and pain, The.vi. is because noble men are bound to occupye them
self in virtuous deades as well in words as in works, then if foul words
defowle clenlynes then in perell of slander and defamy, is the honor of such
persons that wastes their life in such vain words. The.vii. is when that
the order of chyuaylry was first stablysshed among other things, who soever
should take the order of knighthod, he should be bound to keep and defend all
women, and to give them all reverence and honest and who so does the contrary,
breketh the law of noblenes. The.viii. is to defend honor fro perell, the
ancient noble men with great deligence and study, kept and observed always
such things as perteyned to bounty, and they reputed that so great that they
had no greater fear, of any thing in the world then they had to leave behind
them the remembrance of infamy and reproach, ye which they kept not, ye
prefers turpitud and fowlnes before virtue, putting spots in their fame,
by reason of their evil tongue. For oftentimes a man is iuged to be according
to his wor^es. The.ix. and most princypal is for the conde^nacio^ of y^ soul:
al thiges wrong fully taken, may be satysfyed, but y^ fame robbyd and taken
away, the satisfaccio^ thereof is doughtfull, y^ which is more completly
determynyde in our believe. The.x. is to eschew hatryd for such as bestow
their time in evil speaking against women, they make them self not only
enemies against them, but also to them that be virtuous: for like as virtue
and vice are contrary, and have dyfferente propreties so the evil speker can
not be without hate and evil will and many enemies. The.xi. because of the
hurtes yt by such malicious deades are encreasyde, for words geuith license,
and are joined to the herynge, of the rude people, as well as to them ye be
discrete, and herynge of such tails, such as be but of small spe^yte will
reprove the evil speker, and cause them to repent their words, and entreat
them evil, ye and peradventure sle them the causes may toche so nere. The.xii.
to eschew the murmuracions, the which every man ought to dought: for a man
being defamed, and called an evil speker in every place as well within houses
as a broad in y^ feldes, men will speak shame of him, and murmr at his vice.
The.xiii is for y^ perell that may ensue, for when such be taken for evil
spekers, they are behated of every man, and some peradventure to please their
ladies, will set there hands upon them that speak evil of any woman. The.iiii.
^s for ye beauty and grace y^ is in women, the which is of such excelence,
that though they had all such other vices in them, as the evil spekers do
slander them withal yet it were better to praise one thing of troth, then
to dysprayse all with malice. The.xv. and the last is for the great wealth and
goodness, that women be causers of, for of them are borne emperors, kings,
lords, and all other noble men, and all other ve^tuous men doing deades
worthy of praise, and also of them proceeds wise men, who seeks to know, what
is good, in whose believe we be saved. Also of women comes these inuentyue
persons, who makes cities and strong buyldynges of perpetual excellence, and
by them are brought forth such men as seek for all things necessary for the
sustentacion of the humayn lynage.

The other.xx. reasons that Lereano showed, whereby that men are bound to love
women.
NOw Teseo syn thou have hard the causes wherein thou art culpable, and all
other that follow such aronyous opinyon, let us leave all prolixite, and
here.xx. reasones whereby I will prove that men are bound to women. The first
is because by their means, ye simple and rude persons dispose them self to
attain to virtue, and to prudence, and not alonely, they cause the simple to
be discrete, but they cause them that be discrete to be more subtle: for if
they be luryd with the passion of love, they study then somoche for their
liberty and in sufferynge of their dolor they study and imagyne to speak
reasones so sweet and so mete for their purpose, y^ often times for compassyon
thereof they are delyuerd: and such as be simple, and rude of nature, if they be
enteryd in to love though they begin rudely, yet they quycken so their
understanding, that often times they come thereby to wisdom. This they have by
women thought their natural reasone fail. The.ii. reason is that by reason of
justice they cause men to have the virtue of sufferance, for such as be in the
trayn of love and suffer pain out of mesure they take it in manner for a
comeforte, iustifyinge, yt they suffer it ryghtwy fly and yet they make us not
alonely joy for this virtue, but also for other as natural. For they that be
steadfast lovers, to be praised of them that they serve, they seek all y^ ways
they can to pleace, for which cause they live justly not exceeding in any
thing, in that is honorable nor mete to be done, because they would not be
famyd to be of evil condycions, or to use any evil customs. The.iii. cause
is they make us worthy in the virtue of atemperance, because they should not
abhor us, nor that we should not be behatyd of them, they cause us to use
atemperance in eating and drynkyng and slepyng, and in all other things that
perteynith to the virtue of atemperance as well in speaking as in all other
warkes, so that we woll not excede in no point from hones^ie. The iiii. is,
they that lack strength, women do give it to them, and such as has strength
by the means of women, it does increase, they cause us to be strong to suffer,
they cause hardynes to enterprice, they cause the heart to hope, when they
put their lovers to any ieopedy, they cause them to be ^ glory, they cause us
to repute fear, a great vice, for we esteem more y^ praise of our lover, then
the price of long life. For their sakes they begin, and make an end of many
great e^terprices, puttyng their strength in the state as they deserve:
wherefore we may well indge, yt we be bound to them The.v. is they endue us
with no less vertuos theogecals, then they do with vertuos cardynals. And to
speak of the first, the which is faith, if any man be in dought of his believe,
if his mind be ones set in love, then he shall truly believe in god, and laud
his puyssance to create such a creature as his lover is, with so excellent
beawtye, and they will be so devout, that the apostels in holiness shall have
of them none aduau^tage The.vi. reasone is because they engender in our sowles
the virtue of hope, so though y^ subgiettes to the law of love endure much
pain, yet always they hope in their believe, they hope in their stedfastnes,
they hope in y^ pity of them that cause their pain, they hope in the
co^dycion of their lover, who distroyeth them, they hope in the adventure
seeing they have so much hope upon them that gyuith them their passion, then
they must nedys have hope in god who offerith and promyseth perpetual comfort
and rest. The.vii. reason is, they cause us to deserve charity, the propretie
there of is love: this restith in our will, this we put in our thoughts, this
we draw in to our memory, this we ferme in our hearts. And though it be so
that we use this love toward our loueres, yet it redoundithe to the sovereign
vtilyte, and welthe in time to come, so that with quyke contricion it shall
bring us to god: for love at y^ pynche of death causith us to do alms
deades, and co^maundith to say masses and occupies us in charytable warkes to
thentent to deliver us fro our cruel thoughts, and by cause that women
naturally are devout and because we would be pertakers of their deades, it
enforsith us to do such good warkes as we do. The.viii. reason because they
make us contemplative, for the prisoners of love, do give them self to
contemplacion, in remembrynge the beauty grace and excellence of them that they
love, and so much they think upon their passions, that often times they
remember god, and set so their hearts upon him, that they think them self
well worthy to receive their pains and torments. Thus it may be known clerly
that women help and aid men, to win the glory perdurable. The.ix. reasone
is they make our hearts contryte, not with standing that some be sore peyned, by
cause they ca^ not attayn, to their wylles and desires, then with wepynges and
syghynges they desire of their ladies, some remedy. And the accostumyng of
this doing bryngith them to go confess their sins with weeping and waylynge in
such wise that they deserve perdone and absolucio^ of their sin. The.x. is
the good counsel that women geuith us, often times it falls that we find i
their ready cou^sayll, that we have long studied for before, and sought for with
great dylygence: and by their peaseable counsaylls without sclaunder, they
have withstand many euylls, and sauyde many lives: they conserve the peace,
they refrain ire, and apeace furiousnes, and set amyte between enemies. The
xi. is men be honouryd by them, they cause great maryages with great riches and
rentes, some peradventure will say that honor restith not in riches, but
rather in virtue, I say thereto, they cause as well the one as the other. I
presume, that there be great v^rtue in us yet the great honors and praise
that we desire to have co^myth by them, because of women, we esteem more shame,
then our lives, for their sakes we study to do al warkes of noblenes. The.xii.
reasonne is, they separate fro us all auerise the which is the rote of all
evil, and causith us to be accompanyd with lyberalyte, whereby lightly we get
the good will of every man: they cause us lyberally to spend that we have,
whereby we are praised and fast tied to every man with good love, so that in what
soever necessite we fale in, we shall receive aid and service, and not alonely
they profyt us, as in cau^ynge us to use lyberalyte as we ought to do, but
thereby they cause us to be much set by and made of, and what surer thing can
be then to have the good will of the people. The.xiii. reasone is women
increase and keep our goods and rentes, and that we have gotten, they con^erue
it with great dylygence. The.xiiii. is the clennes that they procure us to use
as well in our persons as in our habylymentes, and in every thing that we
meddle with. The xv. is for ye good bringing up of children, the which is a
princypall thing, whereof men have great need, for if we be well brought up we
shall use all curtesye, and eschew the contrary, thereby we shall honor the
small, and serve the great, and not alonely they cause us to be well brought up
but also to be beloved, for if we entreat every man as he deseruyth, they
shall entreat us according to our deserts. The.xvi. is they cause us to be
galante and fresh in our aperell, for their sakes we study how to aperell us,
and what we may were, and for their sakes we array us by good industry, and
craft to bring our personages in to a dew form, y^ which sometime
peradventure nature denies, then to hyde that deformyte, craft must be vsyde
and occupied, deuysyng the aperell according, some time long, some time
short, some time straight, some time wide, as best may become the person,
these galantes for love of women deuyse new entayles^ and cuttes with discrete
borders, and diverse other new inuensions. The.xvii. reasone is often times
they cause musyke to be had of all instruments, and many of them occupy the
same, so that we joy of their sweet armony, for their sakes are song these
sweet romanses in as subtyle ways as can be deuysyd. The.xviii. is they cause
our force and strength to increase, for when men come before ladies, and gentle
women, they enforce them to cast stones, bars, and darts, and to wrestyll,
rynne, and leap, and the sight of the women utters their feats with more
force, then if the women were absent, and all this is to thentent, to atayne y^
love of their lady. The.xix. is they quykken the inward spirit, as well as the
body for if we know that our lover take pleasure in any thing, other in
synginge, daunsynge or playeng, upon any instrumente, they will then apply
them self to learn it and to travail their sprytes there about, and though
they were but dull before, yet with such diligence, they will attain to the
perfection of ye art, thereby to give recreacion to their lover. The.xx. and
the last reason is because we be women's children by the which respect we are
most bound to women, rather then for any other cause said before or to be
said. For pleasure of women, are ordyned these iustes royal and pompeous
tourneis and these bankettes, and joyful feasts, for them is begone things
of gentleness, there is no cause why they should be by us disprayede. O trespass
of grievous chastiment, what woman is there in all the world that will not have
compassion of the cries and lamentacions that we show them, or of the paynefull
words and syghes that we utter before them, or of the swerynges and promyses
that we make to them, or what is she, that will not believe the steadfast faith
that we promise, what heart can be without fruit herynge the commendable
praises that we give them by ferme heart and will, and by none adulasio^ nor
malice. what woman is she of so ferme and stable a mind that can defend her
self, if she be contynually pursued, considering the deades of arms,
wherewith they be fought withal, though they make but small defense, it is no
meruayll, and yet such as can not defend them self ought to be praised and
named pitefull, rather then to be reputed culpable.

The proof by ensample, of the bounte and goodness of women showed by Lereano
TO thentent that lawdable virtue of y^ sex femenyn, should be declared
according to their deserts. I purpose to allege certain ensa^ples, howbeit
my desire was to have restyde with this that I have said to thentent that my
ignorante and rude tongue should not have troubled their clear bounte by reason
of my vnwysedome: howbeit my praise can not increase their goodness, nor my
disprayse can not abate their, propertye, if I should make rehersall of the
chaste virgins time past and present I had need to have the deuyne reuelasion,
for therbe and have been so many that no humayne wit can co^prehende them. And
to be breue I shall show of some as I have read, as well crystened as gentyls
and jews. I will make ensample by the few, to co^prehende the virtue of the mo,
as for such as be auctorysed to be saints, I will not speak of them for.iii.
causes. The first because it is manyfeste, and openly known, then it were but
symplenes and waste to reherce it. The.ii. cause is y^ church gives them
universal praise. The.iii. because I am not worthy to put in my rude words,
their excellent goodness, and specially of our blessed lady. All the doctors
and devout contemplatyues, could never speak nor praise her as she is worthy
nor reche to the lest part of her excelle^t^ wherefore I will come lower and
declare of them that I may spek more liberally. I will begin at the chaste
gentiles, Lucresia chief crown of the nation romayne wife to Colatyne,
knowing her self enforsed and defowled by Traquyne, she said to her husband
Colatyne, dear spouse, know for troth that a strange man has defowled thy
bed. Howbeit though my body be enforced, my heart is innocent, though I be
fre fro the trespace, I can not be assoyled fro ye pain, and to thentent that
no lady nor other woman hereafter by mine ensample should err, and so with
speking of those words with a sharp sword she ryd her own life. Also Porcia
who was daughter to the noble Catone and wife to the noble and vertuos Bruto,
and when she knew the death of her husband she took such grievous sorrow, that to
the end of her life, she did eat hot coals, to make sacrefice of her self.
Penolope wife to Ulixes, she knowing that he went in to war against the
Troyans, knowing that young men of Italy were sore enamored upon her beauty,
in the absence of her husband, dyuerce desired to mary with her. And she
desiring to keep her chastity, and to defend her self against them, said
how she would make a web as ladies used in those days: and when it was
finished, she promised her wowers then to accomplish their desires. And when
she had granted this, by her subtle wit asmoche as she made in the day, she
brake it again in y^ night. And by that means she drove of the seasone xx.
year, and then Ulixes came home alone old and in great poverty, yet the
chaste lady receued him ad though he had come in great prosperytie. Also
Iulia daughter to Caesar first enperour being wife to Pompeye she loved him so
entierly, that on a day she finding his clothes bloody, beleuynge that he
had been deed fell suddenly to the earth and dyed for sorrow. Atrenisa among
other mortayll creatures worthy to be praised, she being married to Mansall
king of Icaria she loved him with so ferme a heart that when he was deed, she
gave him sepulture, within her own breast, she burnt his bones, and ye ashes
of them she drank little and little, and the seremonies made of his obsequy
thinkinge that she would go to him, slew her self with her own hands. Argea
daughter to king Adastro and wife to Polymytes son to Egisto king of
Thebes, when Polimites was slain in a battle by the hands of his brother,
she knowinge thereof (without fearing of her enemies, or of any other wild
bestes, nor fearing the emperous law) went out of Athenes in the night in to
the field, and found out among the deed bodies her husbands body, and carried
it in to the city, and caused it to be brent according to the custom with
bitter weeping, putting the ashes in to a cofer of gold, and then promised
her life to perpetual chastity. Ipola of Greece saylynge by thy see, by her
evil fortune she was taken by her enemies, and they would have enforsed her,
and she to conserve her chastity, went to the one side of the ship, and
wyllyngly fell over the boorde in to the sea, and there was drowned. Howbeit
the fame of her dead was not greatly laudable. No less worthy of praise was
the wife of Amede king of Thesale, she knoweng by y^ answer of the god
Apollo, that her hu^bnad should receive the death, without voluntaryly some
other person would dye for him, and so wyllyngly to save the king, she
disposed her self to dye. Now of the nacio^ of the Iues. Sara wife of father
Abraham, when she was taken, and in the power of king Pharao, defending her
chastity with the arms of prayer, desired god to deliver her out of his
hands. And when the king thought to have fulfilled his enyll dead, god heryng
her petecion, the king waxyde seek, in such wise that then he knew well it
was for his wanto^ desire. Then he commaydyd to deliver her quyte wtoute any
spotte of vnclennis. Delbora enduyd with so many virtues, deseruyd to have the
spirit of prophesye, she showed not alonely her vou^te in arts femenyne, but
also in strong batayles feyghtynge against her e^emyes with a valyante and a
virtuous heart. And she was of such excellence that.xl. year she ruled the
people of the iues. Hestere brought in captyuyte in to Babilone for her virtue
and fayernes she was taken to wife to king Assuara who at that time ruled
a.C.xxvii. prouynces And by her merits and prayers delivered the iues, fro
their captyuyte. Also the mother of Sampson desiring to have a son, deseruyd
by her virtue that an angel shewyde the natyuyte of Sampsone, Elisabeth wife
to Sacarias, as she was the very servant of god, for her deseruynge she had a
son sanctified or he was borne which was saint John. Now of old stories of
christian women, I can not write them at lenght: but to be breue to show some of
a latter time of the nation of Castile. Don Marya Coronell by whom began y^
lynage of the Coronelles, because her chastity was praysede and her bounty not
hyd, she was accusyde of a crime, wherefore wyllyngly, she burnt her self
having less fear of the death then to be found culpable. Also Done Isabell
mother to the master of the order of Calatrane. Done Rodigo and mother to.ii.
earls, of Urema. Done Alonso and Don John, she being a widow fell in to a
sikenes, and the phisycions to procure her health said how she could not live
without she married, or had the company of man then her children knowing what
case she was in, desired and counsayled her to take an husband, she aunswerd
and said, by the grace of god that shall I never do for I had rather dye, to be
called mother to such children as ye be, then to live and to be called wife to
another husband. And with this chaste consyderacyon, and by the pleasoure of
god, when she dyed, there were mysteries seen of her salvation. Also Don Maria
gracia the blessed woman borne in Tolledo of the gretest lynage in all the
city, she would never mary, keeping her vyrginite.iiii. score year, at whose
death were seen dyuerce miracles, the which yet in Tolledo be had in perpetual
remembrance. O what may a man say of the pure vyrgyns of gentiles. Atrisalya
Sybela borne in the city of Babilone for her merits she prophesied by divine
reuelacion many things to come after always conseruinge her vyrginytie till
she dyed. Pallas and Mynerua first seen about the river of Tritonia, new
inue^ters of many offices perteynynge to the femynyne sex, and also to men,
always living as vyrgins. And so ended Atalanta she that first struck the
porke of Calydonia, in virgynite and noblenes she co^tynuyd. Canulla daughter
to Macabeo king of ye Bostos, she did no less then other did in keeping of her
virgynite. Cala^dea, Uesta, Clodya, Romayne they kept the same law till their
death. if it were not to length my trouble if I should live this M. year, I
could not resite the ensa^ples, that I could reherce: therefore Tesio according
as thou haste hard, thou and such other as do blaspheme the nature femenyne,
are well worthy of just punysion, the which I counsel the not to abide to
receive it of a another, but rather punyshe thy self if thou do it of malice
condemn the shame thereof.

The auctor.
ALl such as were present had great maruayll of his words seeing by his
speaking to be so nere the death as he was for when he had ended his words, his
tongue began to fayll, and his sight nere lost, then his servants began to
cry, and wayle, and his friend begane to weep, and his subjects cryynge out
in the streates so that all joy was turned to sorrow, and the lady his mother
being absente, for his sekenes was kept fro her knowledge, howbeit she gyuynge
more credyte to her fear, then to that was showed her with boldness of
maternall love, she deperted fro her own house and came to Susa, and when she
entered the gate every person that she saw gave her euydence of dolor with
words of extreme passion, rather then with words well ordered, she herynge
how her sone Lereano was in the extremyties of death, her strenght failed her so
that she fell down to the earth in a trance, and so long she lay that every
man thought that y^ mother and the son should take their sepulture at one
time: howbeit with hard remedy she came again to her self, and then went to
her sone and when she saw him in that astate, with great weeping and passion
of death she said as folowith.

The complaynte of Lereanos mother.
O Lereano, the mirth, comfort, rest and supporte of mine old days O sweet
companyon to my will, this day I am like to leave calling the any more son,
nor thou to call me mother, of this I have great fear by the signs that I se
of thy short days, often times I had such dremes, where with I have been
in great fear all the night during, other times, when I have been in my
oratory, prayng for thy health my heart has faylede me, and a cold sweat has
taken me in such manner, that of along time I wist not what to do, also ye
bes^es have cretified me of thine evil, for on a day as I came out of my
chamber there came to me a dog and made suddenly such a howlyng that for fear
there of, I lost the strength of my body, and could not speak, nor could not
remove out of the place that I was in. And thereby I gave more credence to my
suspecte, then to thy messengers, and to satysfie my self, I am come to se
the. O the light of my syghte and life. O blyndnes of the same if I se y^ dye
and I can se none occasion of thy death, you being in age to live, you have
always ben fearful of god, and lover of all virtues, and enemy to all
vices, friend to fre^des and belouyde, think for certane, this day y^ force of
thine evil fortune takith away the right of reason, syn thou dyest or thy
time, without any infyrmytie. Happy be they, that be of low and base
co^dicio^, and rude of wit for they feale no thing, but take every thing as
it comyth. And unhappy be they that by subtle wit and sharp understanding
know every thing. would to god thou werte one of the rude and dull, for I had
rather to be called mother to a rude person having thy life, then to have thy
death, being never so wise. O cruel death enemy to all mortal creatures thou will perdone no sinners, nor a^soyll the innocents, thou art such a
traitor, that no man can make defense against the, thou thretenyst age, and
take away yough: the one thou sleyste by malice, and ye other for envy,
though thou tarry long, yet thou will not forget to come at last, thou
gouernyst thy self with out law or reasone, it had been better for the to have
co^seruyd my son being of xx. years rather then to leave me his mother of.lxx.
years of age, why doste thou turn ye right vpse down. I have lived long
enough, and he is young yet for to live: perdon me yt I thus say to the, for
thou by thy cruel warkes causyste dolours, yet again thou gyuist comfort
taking away them shortly, that thou leuist behind them, that thou take
away: for the which, if thou will so do with me I were much bound to the,
that I might go with my son Lereano, but if he might live, and I to dye, it
should be my comeforte. O sone what shall become of my age reme^bryng the end
of thy yough, if I live it shall be rather to weep and bewayll my sins, then by
reasone to have any will or desire to live with what thing could I receive
more cruel pain, then to live long, thine evil is very great, that there
can be found no remedy, what auay lyth now the strength of thy body, or the
virtue of thine heart, or the hardynes of thy courage, all these things that
should auayll ye faylythe, if for the price of love, thy life might be bought,
I would desire death to do his office upon me, and to deliver the quyte fro him,
but thy fortune will not suffer it, nor I ca^ not therefore sorrow shall be my
drink and my mete, and my thought my sleep until the time that the force of
death, and my desire shall bring me to my sepulture.

The auctor.
THe weeping that Lereanos mother made, encreasyde the pain of all them that
were present, and all ways Lereano had Laureola in his remembrance, of that
was past he had but small memory, and co^syderyng that he should joy but a
short space with the sight of the.ii. letters that Laureola had sent him,
he wiste not how to order them, when he thought to break them, he thought he
should offend there by Laureola, in casting away such words of so worthy
price as was wryte^ in them, and when he thought to put in to any of his
servants hands, he fearyd lest they should be se^e, whereby perell might
follow, then in all these doubts he took the sureste way, he called for a cup
of water, and then brake the lettres in to small pieces, and so set up in his
bed, and drank up the water with the pieces of the letters, and so he satisfyde
thereby his will and then drawing to his end ward, he cast his sight upon me
and said, friend now all mine euylles be endyd^ and therewith gave up his life
in witness of his true faith. Then what sorrow I felt, and what I did is lightly
judged, the wepynges that was there made of his death, are of such esteem, that
me think it cruelty to write it: the^ his obsequyes and buryals were done most
honorably, according to the deserdes of his virtues, and as for my self, with
a better will I would have depertyd this life, then to have tarried on the yerth
alive: so with sighs I went my way, and depertyd with weeping, and with
lamentacion I sore complaynyde, and with such thoughts I went to my
lodging. And when I saw that the consenting and desirynge of my death could
not remedy him that was passyd, nor could be no comfort to my self, the^ I
determined to deperte, and to go in to mine own country, and yet first I
purposed to go to the court to here and se what was said for ye death of
Lereano and to se how Laureola took the matter: Thus I thought to go thither,
what for this cause, and for other busynes that I had there to do with some of
my fre^des also I purposyd to speak with Laureola if I might, to know if I
might se in her any repentance, and to se what true lovers would say of her
crueltye vsyde against him, that deseruyd high reward And also I was glad to
deperte fro the place where as Lereano dyed to put part of my sorrow out of my
mind. So I came to the court more accompanied with sorrow, then with any
desire to live remembryng how he that made me begin this matter, was in his
sepulture. At the palayce I was receyuyde with much heaviness of many that knew
the death of Lereano, then I resyted to such as were his friend, the secretenes
of his death Then I went in to ye hall, where I was acustumed to speak with
Laureola to se if I might se what chere she made. And I who by reasone of sore
weeping had nere lost my sight, I lokyd all aboute^ but I culde not se her, yet
when she saw me^ like a dyscrete lady suspectynge that I would have spoken
with her wenynge that I had not seen her she tur^ed toward her chamber and
as she came by me. I spied well it was she, who had brought Lereano fro his
life and me almost without knowledge then I with sore weeping and payneful
sighs began to speak to her in this manner.

The auctor to Laureola.
LAdy much more it had been better for me to have lost my life, then to have
know^n your cruelnes and small pytie, I say this because I had rather with
reason have praised your gentleness, with ^einge you to have satisfied the
se^uyce that has been done to you by Lereano, then to praise your beauty and
great deseruynge gyuyuge death to him that so often times with so good will to
do you service has desired to dye, but syn your mind was to give him the
death, ye have not begyled him nor me, for ye have paid him there with, ye have
bleryd the clennes of your lynage. Remember that such as be of so high blud as
ye be, are asmoch bound to satisfy the lest service that is done to them, as well
as to keep and defend their honor. And certainly I say that if ye had seen his
death, all the days of your life, ye would weep. Remember now what charge of
conscience ye brought him in, for when he died where as he should have had most
memory upon his soul, and what should have been done with his body, he then
remembered more the letters that ye had sent him, the which he took and tare in
pieces, and drank them in water because they should never be seen, and because he
would carry with gym some thing that had been yours, to the intent that ye
should have more compassion of his death then ye had of his life. I show you for
certain thus I saw him dye, because ye showed him no compassion Now ye show
your self to be sorry that in the absence of your small love was clean
forgoten. O how many now do weep for his death, and yet they know not the cause.
But as to me (fro whom the secretnes was not hiden) then much more it must
needs grieve me, remembrynge, how in your hands restyd his life, and seeing
your cruelty and his small remedy, ye caused him to dye and cause his mother
to live in sorrow because she can not dye, and as for me living, I am always
dyeng: and I believe ye couytte not greatly your own life, to remember what ye
have done, but that ye know well there be but few persons that know what ye
have done. I think ye fear but little the fame of your evil name, for ye se
clearly how I am like to dye, therefore ye fear not yt I should publishe you
cruelty, think not that I am in fear to say thus to you, for if I trouble
you with the quality, content you then with the quantite, syn I have so great
reason to speak, and not to end properly, and for this my boldenes^ if I
deserve any punyshement, cause me to be slain, for ye shall better reward me
with death, then to suffer me to live in this case.

The auctor.
Sore troubelyd stood Laureola, yet for all that every I said, her face showed
no alterasion of her heart, howbeit like a discret lady, refreynynge weeping
dissimuled her sorrow, and not blamyuge my boldenes with an heavy chere she
answered me as follows.

Laureola to the auctor.
I would I had asmoche wisdom to satisfye the, as I have reasone to discharge
my self, and if it were so thou should find me as well discharged as I repute
the dylygent. Thou say thou would thou had asmoche case to praise my
pytye, as thou have cause to blame my cruelty, and on that condition y^
desyryst no longer to live: thon blamyst me sayng how I thought to sle Lereano,
and that begylyde him, and weryde the. I would thou knewyste I never thought to
give him the death, for doing as thou say, what is it that I have done, I
never brake any promise what do I owe the or him, that thou dyddest trawayll
for: or what did I to satisfye thine entensio^, I did put him without doubt,
and the wtoute charge, if I had been believed, then mine is but a small charge:
thou say I ought to regard the clennes of my lynage, lokyng profoundly
thereon, has causyde me to do as I have done, thou knowyst well, all women are
more bound to regard their honors, rather the^ to accomplysh any amorous will
or appetight. Then syn all women are bound to this how much more then by
reasone, are those bound that be dyscedyd of a blude royal thynk not that I
receive any pleasure for the death of Lereano, nor believe not that it ca^ somoch
grieve y^, as it sorowith me how be it the fear of my honor, and the fear of
my father did more in me, then the evil will that I bare him, nor think not
that the knowledge of his service, was forgoten, but that I gave him great
thank, and if with any reward I might have paid him, saving my honor, it should
have been done, and cost him nothing then both he and thy self should asmoche
have praysede as now thou blamyste me for unkindness in his life without the
loss of life I could not reward him according to his desire, I will thou
know, that his death causith me to live always dyenge, now shalt thou se how
much it sorowith me and how much he pleasyde me, now thou shall judge what
love I bare him, and know if I did well to suffer him to dye thou knowist well
that with his life he might have won, that by his death he dysparyd and lost
it, but syn I can not now pay nor reward him, I shall satisfye the and make
the bear witness, if I reward not service as I ought to do.

The auctor.
SHe endyd her words with such heaviness, that she could scante make an end
for sorrow: then she went fro me subbyng, and sore weeping whereby her tongue was
sore troubelyd, and changed color, and so went in to her chamber with sore
inward lamen^acio^, for fear she should have been hard. Then I went to my
lodgyng with so great sorrow that often times I was desperate of my life, with
mine own death I would have been reuengyd if I could, not putting my self in
dyspayre. And thus being alone without pleasure as well as with out friends
to speak unto, for werynes I laid me down, and as though I had seen Lereano
before me present, I said to him as folowith.

The auctor to Lereano.
O Lereano enemy to thy adventure, and friend to thy myshape, who can be cause
of thy life with this ambassade, as I was cause of thy death with my message, for
now if thou knewyst the repentance of Laureola, thou would change the glory
celostyall, for thy life temporal: for by thy death, thou have lost thy desire,
if thou had sauyd thy life without doubt, thou should have won, that
by thy death thou have lost. Did I not say to the, when thou lay a dyenge, that
by thy death thou should lose all, and by thy life thou myghtest attain to
thy desire. O unhappy yt I am, yt I were not in y^ place where as I might show
the all that Laureola has said to me, and of the thought that she tak^th for
lesynge of thy life, though with the death thou have won the desire of thy will,
by that she shewith now, thou ought to think thy death well bestowyd, great
joy I should recene, if I knew that thou dyddeste here me and believe m^: for
thou may se that alonely her repentance suffy seth to pay y^ thy reward. if
thou haddeste lyuyde, thou shuldeste have had no cause to have be^ in trouble
now thy pain shall be without hope of sufferance, now thou nediste not to be
troubly with thy life, nor take no joy of thy death. O what wealth should it be
for me, if god would suffer me to lose my life to recover thine, why does god
leave me here without the. who can lose the, and live after, would to god, that
the good will that I have in thy life that thou myghtest pay me with my death yt
which I hope thou should do, if thou had as good will to se me, as I have
desire to serve ye. Thus I will leave, any further to trouble the.

The auctors dreme.
THus I was so weary that I left my talking, and as he that wist not what he
did, I fell in a slombere and among other things I began to dreme, whereby I
had more pain then pleasure. I drempt that I saw Lereano before me aparelled
after this manner, he had on his hedde a bonet of scarlet with a grene ryband of
an evil color, with a word enbrowdered saying thus: hope is dead with his
color slain by your unkindness, and when he came nere me, I saw he had on a
shyrte wrought with blak sylke with a border of letters, saying: encreasyng my
stedfastnes, at the end I found death. Also he had a doblet of yeolow saten
enbrowdered with this word: my passion with my joy satisfied, in doing that
I have done. Also he had on a iaket of blake veluyt with a border of saten of
the same color, and thereon a writing that said: in my stedfastnes showed is
mine evil, and your trespace. Also he had a gerdell of gold with letters
reportynge: more rather was my death, then life, if ye would be served
therewith. He had also a dager, y^ knyues and pomell of asure, with letters
saying, right sore was the passion that ye gave me, and yet ye never repentyde
it. Also he had a sword with the sheth and gyrdell of sylke enbrowderyde with
this word (gyuyn to my life such torment) that diyng and living I was content.
Also his hosen one white a another blew with this word: chastity ielus of my life
and could not be suffered to serve. And over all this he had a cappe of black
enbrowderyd with dark tawny with a word that said: heaviness can not so
trauayll me, that it should change my stedfastnes. His slippers were
enbrowdered with small letters that said: mine euyls are at an end for my
service, and denied me is the benyfyte. And on his gloves was written: thus
begynnyth and ends the name that most deseruyth. So when I had at length
regarded his aparell, and the steadfast thoughts that by lykelyhod he enduryd,
I beheld his face, and I saw his iesture so beautefull that it seemed he had
never taken thought, and with an amorous semblant. After he had curtesly
salutyd me with the same voice, as he was wont to speak, me thought he began
to say in this manner.

Lereano to the auctor.
O Thou my true friend, thou have thought that my presence has been long fro
the so that I could not tell what you dyddest nor hard what thou have spoken,
think not so, for I shall never be so far fro the, but that I shall always
be joined with the, for though by adventure in my life I deperted fro the,
never in the death I shall deperte fro the, I shall always be ionyed with the.
And all that thou have said of Laureola and of me I was present and hard it,
god knowith if I might I would have spoken to the, but I could not, nor fear
would not leave me, for I certify the that this that I do, though my speech be
short, yet it tormenteth me, and therefore acordynge to the trust that I have in
thy great virtue I will not put the to the pain with long words therefore I
will goo to the effect of thy words and to my answer. Thou say thou
would gladly put me again in to life as thou puttedest me to death, believe
not that thy message gave me the death, nor I in the beginning can not be
excused fro coming to this end: thou say thou would that I were in the
dysposicion that I might joy me for the repenting of Loureola. I can not
thank the therefore, because I can not make y^ a recompense, for the gretest
seriuce that I could make is not so great, but the lest deseruynge that I huae
received of the is much gretter. As for her rewards I desire them not, for I
can have as now no joy of them, though I desire them never somoche, and though
now with her repenting she thynk to satysfie me yet her cruelnes was so
trobelous, that though she did more, yet I can not be rewardyd. Thou say I
should think my death well enployede, syn I have won by her that without her
I lost, now would I do it, if life were left with me, for though I might joy
therewith what profyt should it be to me to believe this without I might se what
she does, and I believe if she might se me again to live, she would give me
more pain and less hope, but the best to be delyueryd fro hope is death, for
it is better to suffer a good death, then to endure with an evil life, believe
not but and I had believed that I should have served her, better living then to
dye, I would not have dyed yet, but syn that with my life I could not preuayll,
I thought then with death to remedy me, think not that I was so far without
wit, that I knew not that it was good to live to serve her, though I could
have no joy of her, but I could never know by her answer, that she was
co^te^t with my service as you knowist right well, but she did let me dye, for I
desiryd life to leave me, also you seist that you desire to recover me and to
lose thy life, I believe y^, and I thank y^ thereof, though I ca^ do none other
thing you desirist me to pray for thy death, because we might like friends joy to
gether syn we could not in our life be not of y^ believe for I had rather her
speaking of thy life without sight of the, then to know thou should be with
me deed, howbeit by thy death thou should but change thy life, for thy fame
should never dye but ever live, thus I will leave the, not because I will go
far fro the. wherefore I require the take it for none evil that I speak no
more to the, for though I would I can not.

The auctor.
WHen Lereano had made an end of his words I thought to have aunswerd him,
but then in my dreme me thought I saw Laureola enter into my chamber as
vysyble, as though I had been wakyng me thought she was in a strange aparel,
and with a new companyon, and in ye regarding of so new a vision I left
aunswerynge Lereano, and began to mark the manner of her aparell^ and I so
regarded her^ that I left lokyng upon Lereano. She had upon her head a fresh
atyer frete and enbrowdered with letters saying: my cruel condition gives no
death to service, nor yet reward. Her smock wrought with white sylke tied with
letters saying: thy death is so fastened to my life that I can not escape without
death. Her kertell of black saten with a folyage of tawny with letters saying:
thy stedfastnes might have given me such pain, that at the end it might have
won me. Her gyrdell was wrought with thredes of gold reportynge: More rather
should have been my glory with thy life, then with thy death. Her mantel was
of.ii. colors the one part red, the other blew, with a writing that said:
now joy can not enjoy me without great thought. She had a tabard of blew
russet with letters saying, with thy death my memory is certain so that living
my glory is deed. Also on her gloves was written thus, with that I began I make
an end though I deserve no death: her slyppers were enbrowdered with this word:
I have more pain for thy pain then for mine own, yet more deserves my shame.
So when I had well regarded her aparell, and marked well the sygnificacions of
the wrytynges, I saw how with much sorrow and small pleasure (by semblant more
lykely to dye then to live) she turned her face toward Lereano where as he
stood and began to say in this manner.

Laureola to Lereano.
Friend Lereano never think that the force of thy strenght for so little an
inconvenience, that I should consent to lose, for as thou have said to be
desirous to serve me, more honor you should have done me in living, then I
to give y^ death, for surely thy wekenes nor thy pain, nor yet thy love could
not make me believe, that thou should have died, therefore thou may clearly
se what evil thou have done, if you thynk, that I did was to mock the or to
prove the, what error then I have done to thy purpose, if true lovers cane not
suffer, how shall they come to their desyrs he that can not suffer, can not
joy, nor but seldom attain to his glory, there is no virtue, but in
sufferynge of pain thereby to have joy of their good adventure, thou ought
more to be blamed, being discrete for that thou have done, then to be praised
for a true lover. And believe surely that if I had not ben surer of thy faith I
would have given no credence to thy stedfastnes nor yet have given the none
occasion at the beginning to have come to this end, and more to show the, the
trouth^ then to reward the of thy pain, I make the sure if I had believed that
you should have died I would rather have taken the death my selfe^ then to have
consented to thy death, for it should have been great conscience to me to have
sffuered the to dye, for the trust that I had, in that thou dydest for my
service caused me in manner to believe thy writing, but then again the surety
yt I thought had been in thy wisdom and dyscrecion, caused me to doubt it, and
in this manner I gave more credence to thy discrecion, then to thy determined
death, Lereano it ought to have suffysid the to remember in what case mine
honor stood in and perell of my life, and to have been content to know that I
ought the my favor, for thy evil greuyd me worse, the^ mine own, though I
showed it not to the, if thou will deny this, remember what I was, and how
small necessite I had of thy service, ones writing to the should have sufficyd,
though I did not put the in no surety for thou knewist well, that my writing
procedyd of no fear, but of mine own good will, and thou canste not deny,
when of my message, thou dyddeste despair and dyed, did I not put the in hope
when I said, that if I lyuyd longer then my father, then should se how I
would reward thy deseruyng, so that thou shuldeste not blame me for any
unkindness, I will speak no more syn I shall no more se the, and by cause I can
receive no more passion then I do for thy death, therefore I make short my
words, though my pain be large making the sure, I shall reward thy soul,
syn by mine unhap, by reasone of thy death I can not reward thy body.

The auctor.
WHen Laureola spoke these words to Lereano I stood in a strange manner right
sore abasshyde to se her great pite and ioynynge her wisdom and knowing her
will, and heryng of her amorous reasones, these over came my strength, though
she spoke not to me, yet I praysede much her saying, though it auaylyd but
little, how be it me thought her reasones were so just y^ Lereano could make
none answer, to satisfye them, not for the small co^fydence that I had in
his wis^ome, but because of the trouble of his spirytes in seeing present
before him the creature whom he most desiryd, yet me thought he cast up his
eyes to heuyn, and with great curtesye he answer her in this manner.

Lereano to Laureola.
O Dear lady if I had the wisdom to show you the case and quarrel of mine
evil, as well as I have reasone to suffer it, I could then as well answer you
as if I might live to serve you, ye say, ye could never believe yt the force of
my death could overcome my strength: Have no meruayl thereof, for without my
desire I could find no thing to defend me, but of that ye blame me, ye
deserve the pain, for ye might have gyuyn me remedy, and ye co^sentyd that I
should dye. And where as ye say I erred, because I would not defend my self
affermynge that I should have sought all the ways thereto, if ye did it to prove
or to mock me, judge what ye say, and behold what case I was in, and ye shall
say that a heart full of sorrow never takyth good news: for certain and of
evil news it makith no doubt and all this that ye have said, I believe it
true, of your own part knowing your great cruelte and my small hap think not
that the small trauayll that I took was in defe^dyng of my life, but that it
was to serve you, for it had been more pain for me to have defe^dyd my self
fro the death, then to suffer it, reme^brynge my self that I had no desire to
live, but alonely to serve you, and when I ^aw that I erryde and that ye would
not of my service living, the^ I thought to serve you with my death, and think
not yt I joy so little of my death, but that I think it well enployed, syn ye
have now discoueryd your pity, the which in my life always ye denied, ye say
the hope that ye gave me should have suffisyd me, I deny it not according to y^
ye be, for one look of you had been sufficient for any service that I could have
done, for where as the less hope aperyd certain, then much more was your
deseruyng, and of my deseruyng I was in doubt: for the gre^ter that y^ reward
was, the less I believed it, and therefore I did as ye have seen, And where as
ye speak of, is honor and life, ye know well for certain, if ye forgette it
not what small charge it was to you, and the experience which geemd me ye know
your self, ye warkes are witness, Also ye say that at the beginning ye were
wtoute any charge, and after what perell I saw you in, and that I was ready to
have given occasion to have brought you in to suspect. I begyled you not, for
afterward I showed your clennes ye never said in your writing any thing for
certain, but always I was in doubt of any reward, and the less I ^o^yd the
more I feared, and thus ye may se that by your own excuse, ye condempe your
self, and syn I can not serve you, I will not trouble you, nor speak no more,
save I desire of you in reward of my true faith, to let me kiss your hand,
because with that glory, I may joy in my death, seeing I co^ld not in my life,
nor ye would not suffer me, and thus I will deperte fro you, besechyng you as
ye say to have remembrance of my soul, syn ye have forgoten my body, nor I
desire no more to trouble you, nor to be inportunate with any mo words, thus I
make an end, desirynge you of perdone, and if any thing may presume to auayll
for the riches of my service, that ye will remember my troth and good will, the
which I set^e before your eyes, to thentent that of my death ye should have some
compassion, syn ye had none of my life.

The auctor.
WHen this matter was thus passed between them I stood and beheld the curtesy
that Lereano made and the small thought that he showed of his death for then he
knowing, that she was no less sorrowful for his death then him self was,
therefore to thentent not to trouble her, he suffered the pain, and would speak
no more of his death, and asmoche as it pleased me to se them to gether, asmoche
it grieved me the remembrance of the death of Lereano, and according to there
reasones, they ioyed me so that I would their reasons should neur have endyd,
for then I knew well that Lereano received glory to se her, and Laureola
received no pain to se him, though he were deed I desire that their speech
should never have endyd, nor their ^yght depertyd a sounder, but always the
things of pleasour, seldom end^rith long. And as I thus lay dremyng at last
me thought I hard a heavy voice that said, come away Lereano and tarry no
longer. And then with adolorous sygh Lereano with his bonet in his hand went to
Laureola, and kyst her hand, and she to give him some glory sufferyde him the
which in his life time she would never do, and so kyssyng her hand he said O y^
death you have slain my memory yet to my death is given glory^ and therwt he
vanished away. And when I saw I could se him no more, the^ I regarded Laureola
to se what co^tena^ce she made, I saw her stand in great heaviness, her eyes
bathed in water, and her beauty ^adyd of color pale and wanne, and had lost
her spech, and I seeing her in such manner of disposicion, had compassion to
se her, then Lereano that was deed what with the sight of the one, and of the
other, was in such perell, and so disperate, that to say the truth, I desired
rather to have followed Lereano deed, then to have folowyd Laureola living, who
with great heaviness, asmoche as she might, dyssimuled her pain that she enduryd
for the death of Lereano, and discretly she did refrain her weeping and said to
me as folowith.

Laureola to the auctor^
Friend truly with a better heart and will I will contynew this life, rather
then to goo out of thy chamber without it were^ that I believe in my going
away, my soul shall depart, for surly, if I had believed to have seen Lereano
i that case, as I have seen him now I would never have come hither to se him,
but rather have suffered pain with his absence, then glory to se him saying I
can not remedy him, I had thought never to have had such pain for him, for
the more that the greatness of astate withstode and denied yet for all that, I
thought to have done the contrary, or my life had departed, for with great
trauayll, I thought to have suyd to the king my father for his liberty it was
not by my consent, that he was co^maundyd, not to come in to ye court, where
as he might have place to have seen me, yet for all yt he neded not to have dyed
for the time might have come yt he should have had no cause to have disparyd,
for thought I by my cruelty had consentyd to have put him to passion, yet I
might as well again have rewarded him by my bounty and pity, as to have
denied him, I will as now make no quarrel to my will, syn his service and good
warkes I thought to have rewardyd, but I quarrel with the bautie that god has
given me, and so might Lereano have done: for that more begyled him, then other
condition or will: But because the time is short and the passion great, I will
no more say but I make the sure, that thought Lereauo were not worthy of a
state nor lynage, to have had me to his wyfe^ yet he should not have been in
despair there of, but syn I can not as now reward his warkes and good service,
I desire the not to depart fro the court, thouhg thy desire be in to thine
own natural country, and so doing thou shall know, by the rewards that I
shall give the, what honor I bare to Lereano living

The auctor
WHen Laureola had endyd her words she was so heavy, and so full of weeping, yt
in a manner hre payneful life greuyde me as sore as the death of Lereano. And to
all this that she had said I would have aunswerde her, and thankyd her of her
great bounty to me showed, as well as for the curtesye of her meke speech. And
so me thought as I was mouyd suddenly with a great sighe she depertyde fro me,
and with a loud voice said: I can no more sorrow ye death which is ever
certain, then the loss of the life of him that is deed: the^ I lokyd all
about, and saw how I was left all alone, and therewith awoke out of my dreme,
then was I so sorrowful, that I wist not what to do, nor think of my dreme,
and when I saw no man to speak unto, I was so pe^syue that often times with
mine own hands I thought to have ride my lyfe^ thereby thinking to have
found that I had lost, and when I remembryd that with my death I could not
recover the life of the deed, then I thought it a great error to lose mine own
soul without the ioyeng of his body And as it is a sure xeperie^ce that musyk
encreasith pain to him yt is in sorrow, so like wise it encreasith pleasur in
the heart of them that be content and in joy, then I took an harp and song
as folowith. Heart take no pain in this life for it may be overcome, for it
can not endure long because we be mortal the evil that shewith her force,
is ready to take the death, sin that life is most evil, the^ I cou^sayl the
show no strength against ye overcome, for who that sleith the life, with death
is pleasyd, therefore that life is good, that takith death after the best sort,
he that dies living has not much to suffer, but he that lives dyenge his
evil and pain is strong, who can not suffer evil, when they be satisfied
with evil, and though they be mortal, yet the sorrow is equal, thus I make an
end of my song, and then without any more studyng that I had to do. I
commanded to sadell my horse for I thought it was time for me to deperte to go
in to my own country, And thus I departed fro them that I met in the streate
more acompaned with sorrow and weeping yes then with any other consolasion of
pleasoure my heaviness so increased, and my health so payred that I never thought
to come a live in to my country, and when I was well entered on my way there
came so many things to my fantasye, that thynkyng on them I was nere out of
my wit, howbeit at last remembrynge my self that it was no profyt to muse on
them I traueled my self asmoch as I might to bring them out of my remembrance
So I traueled my body in this yourney and my soul in sundry thoughts, and
finally I arrived at my own poor mansion, and thus I bydde fare well and adieu
all true lovers. And all ye readers an herers of this process, desyryng them
where they find fault to amend it. and I shall pray to god for their
prosperyte and at their end to send them the joys of paradyce. Amen.

Finis.
Prynted at London in Paul's churcheyarde, by Johan Turk, at the sign of the
bible.


