A VVARNYNG For the city of London. That the Dwellers, there in may Repent
their evyll Lives for fear of Gods Plages.
To speak the truth, Let me nothing spare.
But without fear, the veretie to declare.
For sclaunderus words, I do not care
Repent ye cittysnes of London.
Seek all the plasys, in Christys dominyon.
And I do believe, in my opyngnyon.
That non has hardemore, of the treu evanglyon
Repent ye cyttizyns of London.
Have ye not had, of Gods word such store.
As never no city, has had here tofore.
And yet amendment of Life, is nere the more.
Repent ye cyttizyns of London.
What preachyngs ye have had, even in our age
Of learned men, Both sapient and sage.
Whereof some has gone, to the counter or cage.
Repent ye cittizyns of London.
Where has the Gospel, byne more freely preched.
Where has the verity, byne more truly teached.
Where has Gods flock, been more apeached.
Repent ye cittizyns of London.
I think if the cities, of Gomer and Sodom
Had had such warning, as to you has come.
They would have Repented, their shamful Hordom.
Repent ye cittizyns of London.
The people that were drownyd in Noes Floude,
Suerly in noughtines, were no more wood.
Then is the sittizyns, which should be good.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
Have not your Bishops, with strange sacrifise.
Which they have offered, before Gods eyes.
with Nadab and Abyhu, to have death lykwyse?
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
Have not your Priests, offered unto Ball.
And do yet on strange Gods both cry and call.
Deseruynge a Danyell on them to fall.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
What is the cause, that God has sent,
Such blind gydes, over you to have Judgment,
But that you were never yet wyllyng to Repent.
ye sittizyns of London.
Has not God sent you, both bussardes and kytes
To mynister unto you wrong instead of ryghtes.
and have been dombe dogs with lacking there sightes
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
These have you mayntayned, and do to this day.
Fedynge their panchys, and clothing them gay.
And maintain them with Horses, to ride in rich array
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
But he that truly preached with you at any time,
Was never bydden, with most of you to dyne.
But was sent to newgate, in chains to pyne.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
Have you not accusyd, the Innocents to death.
And brought the^ to smythfyld, there to lose their breath
God of you will axe their blood, as ye scripture says
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
The good creature of God, called An Askewe.
For declarynge the verity, both Just and true.
Was she not Bourned in Smythfield of you?
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
For speaking against ye abuse of the sacrme^nt.
And for not apeachynge other to your intent.
Was she not for these, both rackyd and brent.
Repent ye sittizens of London.
Was not he glad, that had a Pollax in his hand
with it as a witness, at her death to stand.
Thinking thereby, to inherit the heavenly land.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
O what blood has been shed in your city.
To rehearse all their Names, in this simple dittie.
It would provoke Tourkes, with lamentable pity.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
Has not the married Man, here lost his Life.
And has not the Housbande here lost his Wife.
And all for the Truth, such was your strife.
Repent ye sittizyns of London.
Has not the Father, seen his Child bourned?
And ye Mother, the Daughter unto asshys turned.
For which deed done, the parents sore morned.
Repent ye citizens of London.
With you the brother, has betrayed the brother.
And has accused, the one the other.
I am right sure, you can say none other.
Repent ye citizens of London.
Not only this, but you have also.
Hanged the true man, and let the theeffe go.
Example by Hunne, that it was so.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
This blyndnes, has God let in you to rain.
Because his true prophets, ye have always slain.
And yet ye shall here of a another plage again.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Because to resyst God, you have things discust.
God has geune you up, unto your hearts lust.
Causynge you to worshype, things made of doust.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
What shamfull Idolatry, has and douth rain.
Amunge you in sarnynge Gods, folyshe and vain.
The present deeds douth declare, it plain.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
And now that your Gods, of wood and stone.
Of seluer and goulde, be almost gonne.
Now other come, for mean to look on.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
I dare say that there, is many a one.
That be glade that Images, be gonne.
Because that them selves, may be looked apone.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Men may with some women, in london be aquanted
That carved Idoldes, were never more painted.
With shinynge Facys, as though they sayncted.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
And this also, I may truly say again.
That many men, be also as vain.
And would be looked, apone as feign.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Some make their Gods, of their chyldern.
And will not suffer, them to learn.
Gods holy Laws, but of it them warn.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Some make their Gods, of goods vile.
Which they have gotten, with craft and gylle.
They never think, to leave but a whylle.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Some make their Gods, of their dwelling placys.
And never have this, before their facys.
That the buldyng of Heaven, this buldyng out facis.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Alas with my tears, I can not exprese.
The a boundance of, the great wyckednes.
That rayneth in the city, doutlese.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Se what it is from Gods, Laws to run.
How many great evells, straight way does come.
It may be well seen, by the city of London.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
When did any Mayer, know his Just dowtie.
When did any shereffe, do his office truly.
When did any sargant, use him self godly.
Repent ye citizyns of London
When did any Constable, see good order kept.
When did any bedells, look to poverty yt wept.
When hard ye of Kepers, yt from cruelty slpte.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Where dwells any, yt has his wife in subieccion.
Where dweleth any under her Husbands correccio^
Where dwells man and wife, of godly affeccion.
Repent ye citizyns of London
Whre dweleth a father, yt techeth his child gods law
Whre dweleth a child, yt is under his fathers awe
Whre dweleth he, that often this saw.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Where dweleth a master, yt keeps his sarua^tes well.
Where dweleth a sarua^t, yt follows his masters good co^nsel.
Where dweleth these to yt truly by and selle.
Repent ye citizyns of London
If I should speak of their byinge and selling,
The craft therein, pass my tongue telling.
Her provoke against the Gospel great rebellyng.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
That they have a delyght, to walk in the night,
And can not abide, of the gospels sight.
Is seen in selling their wares with small light.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Of great Pentysis, they have no lack.
Payntynge their howsys, round about with black.
Though the ware be naught, the pryse is not slack.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
The light of the son, they can not abide,
Nor to have their wyndowes open and wide.
And this do they only, that their craft be not spyde.
Repent ye citizyns of London
ye and though the ware be stark naught.
yet will he swear, by him that us bought.
That there can no better in England be sought.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
First he lies, and says that it is good.
Then he swears, as though he were wood.
And him self forsweareth, in the same mood.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Here is a Plage for liynge and a Plage for swering
A Plage for perjury, yt deserves hell tearing.
Three Plages ar deserved, a heuey heareryng.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Hayll, Brymstone, and also wild fire.
Shall come from Heaven, to pay your hyere.
Unles shortly you, recompense the byear.
Repent ye citizyns of London
ye bring the curse of God, daily on your head.
which shall fall upon you, as heavy as any lead.
For Poverty with you, has the street for his bed.
Repent ye citizyns of London
Oh what Hordome Adultery, and Fornycation*
Is used among you, and not looked upon?
with all kinds of other abhomynation.
Repent ye citizyns of London
Amend Amend, I say and Repent,
And say not but warning, God has you sent.
If you do not, you are like to be rent.
Repent ye sittizyns of London,
Acknowledge your sins to ye living god almighty
And repent, from ye bottom of your hearts hartyly
And have Faith in ye Blood of Jesus Christ only.
Repent ye citizyns of London,
Pray unto God, to increse your Faith.
And believe all things, that scripture says.
And god shall save you, through Christis death.
Repent ye citizyns of London,
you may well say, that Faith you have.
Sufficient your souls to save.
But your daily works, do you deprave.
Repent ye citizyns of London
Christ says, that every good tree,
By his Fruit, is known manyfestly.
your works, declare that Faythlesse you be,
Repent ye citizyns of London
Can thorns bear grapes, by any mean.
Or Briars Fygges, was it ever seane.
So a corrupt Faith, show works unclean.
Repent ye citizyns of London,
A good tree must nydes bring forth good Frut.
Exsample by Christ, I may plainly dispute.
Which first with his deeds, did the Jews confute.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Every tree, that bryngethe not forth.
Good frut, it is nothing worth
But to be cast into fyere, that all wayse (...).
Repent ye citizyns of London
Let your works, Before mean so shynne.
Acordynge unto, the scryptures Devynne.
That god may be praised, your Father and mine.
Repent ye citizyns of London,
And If amendment, do not now apere.
That all mean may se it open and clyer
Dowt ye not, but more shortly you shall here.
Repent ye citizyns of London.
Let the voyse of you, unto God be hard.
To pray for your Lord and King, Edward.
Confessyng you have not, so good a king desarue^
Repent ye citizyns of London,
Also pray ye, for the holle Counsel,
That the spryte of GOD, in them may dwell.
And then no dowt, they shall do well.
Repent ye citizyns of London,
FINIS.
(Quod) Wyllyam Samuel.

Imprinted at London by me Humfrey Powell, dewellinge above Holburne conduit

And are to be soulde by Hugh syngelton at the sign of saint Augustine in
Polles Churcharde.


