A second and third blast of retrait from plays and Theaters: the one whereof
was sounded by a reverend Bishop dead long since; the other by a worshipful and
zealous Gentleman now alive: one showing the filthiness of plays in times past;
the other the abomination of Theaters in the time present: both expressly
proving that that Commonweal is nigh unto the cu^sse of God, wherein either
plaiers be made of, or Theaters maintained.

Set forth by Anglo-phile Eutheo.

Ephesians. 5, verse. 15, 16. Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly,
not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

Allowed by authority. 1580.



Anglo-phile Eutheo to the Reader, S.
THou have here, Christian reader, a second and third blast of retrait from
plays and Theaters. The first blast in my count is The School of abuse:
School of abuse.
a title not unfitly ascribed unto plays. For what is there which is not
abused thereby? Our hearts with idle cogitations; our eyes with vain aspects,
gestures, and toies; our ears with filthy speech, dishonest mirth, and
rebaldrie; our mouths with cursed speaking; our heads with wicked imaginations;
our whole bodies to uncleanness; our bodies and minds to the service of the
Devil; our holy days with prophanes; our time with idleness; al our blessings,
health, wealth, and prosperity to the increase of Satan's kingdom, are there
abused: that not unfitly they are termed, as of late The school of abuse, by
one (...) his inuectiue against plays, called ^he School of abuse.
; The school of Bauderie by another 3. Blast of retrait (...) plays.
; The nest of the Devil, and sink of al sin, by a third M. Spark in his
rehearsal sermon at Paul's cross, 29. of April. Ann. 1579,
so long ago, The chair of pestilence, by Clement Alexandrinus Clement.
Alexand. ^. 3. Pedag. cap. 12.
; by Cyril, Cyril. Catech. 1. Mystagogica.
and Saluianus 2. blast of retrait from plays.
The pomp of the Devil; the sovereign place of Satan, by Tertullian Tertul.
lib. de spe^lach^is.
.

And albe I call them, A second and third blast* etc. yet do I not so, as though
there were no more blastes, or dehortations from them, or inuectiues against
them beside. For in all ages the most excellent men for learning have condemned
them by the force of eloquence, and power of Gods word (as I am to prove upon
any good occasion offered). But so do I tear^^ them in respect of the time
present wherein none, that I know, besides these Autors have written, though
many, thanked be God, in the principal places of this land have, Author of ye
second blast.
and daily, yea and openly do speak against plays and Theaters.

The former of these two was written in the Latin tongue by that reverend man
Saluianus Saluianus (...) Episcopus lib. 6. de gubernat. Dei.
Bishop of Massilia, who for his wonderful eloquence and zeal is called,
Magister Episcoporum, The master of Bishops, by Gennadius Gennadius de
illustribus viris.
; and that 1100* years sithence. VVherebie thou may gather, first, that it
is a most odious, and intolerable thing in a Christian Commonweal, which so
learned a Bishop would stand to confute; and secondly, that to dehort from
plays is no new thing, being condemned so long ago.

The Lord of his infinite mercy grant, that his blast may do more good with
Englishmen, than it did with the Romans, to which he sounded the same.
Otherwise I know right well, that must needs betide us which happened unto them.
For they contemned his saiengs, and the warnings of such like good men.
Therefore first came the foraine enemies, the Goths and Vandales who overcame
them, and oppressed them with most grievous bondage; and afterward they fell
into the hands of Satan, who carried them headlong into al impuritie of life,
and abomination, under which curse of God they as yet continue. So we,
assuredly, unless we listen unto the dehortations of these good men, and shun
plays, with such like pompes of Satan, the which once we, when it was, before
God and his congregation, renounced, shall fall into some one intolerable plague
of God or other, into the hands if not of foraine enemies, which I fear; yet
of our spiritual adversary, the Pope or Devil, which I am sure of.

Touching the Author of the latter blast, thou may conjecture who he was, but
I may not name him at this time for my promise sake: yet this do I say of
him, that he has bine, to use his very words, A great affecter of that vain
Art of play making, etc. Yea, which I ad, as excellent an Author of those
vanities, as who was best. But the Lord of his goodness has called him home; so
that he did not so much delight in plays in times past, but he does as much
detest them now, and is heartily sorry that ever he was such an instrument to
set vice afloate: as more at large in his discourse, thou may perceive.
Whereby first, note with me, the goodness of our God toward us, who seeing that
we will not shun plays for any dehortations of his godly Preachers, who day
by day in all places of greatest resort denounce the vengeance of GOD to them,
be they hie or low, that favor plays, Theaters, or plaiers, stirs up the
very Autors themselves to inueigh against them, that we may be ashamed any
way to allow that, which the very Autors do utterly condemn. Secondly
praise God, I beseech you, for bringing this Author, and Master Gosson, who
made the School of abuse out of Babylon. And thirdly pray unto him, that al
^^kers of plays may follow their ^^ample: then sure I am, that both (...)
rude multitude, if not for fear of Gods displeasure, yet because they (...)
hear nothing but what is stale (...) leave haunting of stinking (...) and also
plaiers themselves (...) their unlawful, ungodly, and abominable exercise, for
lack either of Autors, or of auditors.

Loath was the Author, I must needs confess, to have his work published, not
because he would not have plays openly reproved, which from his heart he
wishes were most straightly forbidden, but through a too too base conceit of
his own work, thinking that some grounded Divine were more fit to dehort from
so profane an exercise, than he, whose profession (if so I may say) is
otherwise. But hearing partly by me, and partly by others, what a joy to the
children of God, and grief to the servants of (...) would be to hear, that
he, who (...) so famous an Author, was now (...) a religious dehorter from
(...); yea, thinking how the one sort would with more Zeal avoid them, and
the other with more shame appear on stage, when they should understand that all the world knows that their exercise is neither warranted by Gods word, nor
liked of Christians, but disalowed utterly by Scripture, by reason, by Doctors,
by Bishops, by their very Autors themselves, yea and by all other good men, as
the enemy to godliness, and the corruption of the well disposed, and so
consequently a special engine both to subvert al Religion, and to overthrow
the good state of that Commonweal where it is maintained, he altered his
mind, and gave me his book, wishing me to do therewithal as I thought best
for the glory of God, and thy commodity.

Which I have now, together with the inuectiue of that reverend Bishop
Saluianus, published, that one of them might show the abomination of Theaters
in the time present, and the other how odious they have seemed to the godly in
time past, and both allure thee utterly to forbid them, if thou be a
Magistrate of power, and to avoid them more than any pestilence, be thou
whosoever. Which God grant.

A Second blast of retrait from plays and Theaters, sounded by that reverend,
godly, and learned Bishop Saluianus, sometime Bishop of Massilia, in his sixth
book De gubernatione Dei.
SVch things are committed at plays and Theaters, as cannot be thought upon,
much less uttered without sin. For other vices challenge their several
portions within us, as filthy cogitations the mind; unchaste aspects the
eyes; wicked speech the ears: so that when one of these does offend, the rest
may be without fault. But at Theaters none of these but sins, for both the
mind there with lust; and the (...) with shows; and the ears with hearing be
polluted: al which (...) so bad, that no man can well report or declare them
with honesty.

For who, without passing the bounds of shamefastnes, can utter those
imitations of dishonest things; that filthy speech; that vile motion, the
beastly gestures, used there? The vileness whereof may be gathered even by the
vnlawfulues to name them. For some sins, though most heinous, may well and
honestly both be named, and blamed too, as murder, theft, adultery,
sacrilege, and such like: only the filthiness of Theaters are such as may not
honestly be no not so much as blamed. Such new matter arises against the
reproouer for finding falt with this most horrible filthiness; that albeit he be
a most perfect honest man that would speak against it, yet can he not so do
and keep his honesty.

Again, al other evils pollute the doers only, not the beholders, or the
hearers. For a man may hear a blasphemer, and not be partaker of his
sacrilege, inasmuch as in mind he dissenteth. And if one come while a roberie
is a doing, he is clear, because he abhors the fact. Only the filthiness of
plays, and spectacles is such, as makes both the actors and beholders guilty
alike. For while they say naught, but gladly look on, they al by sight and
assent be actors, that truly may be applied unto them that saying of the
apostle, Romans 1, 31.
How that not only they which commit such things are worthy death, but also
which favor them that do them.

So that in that representation of whoredom, all the people in mind play the
whores. And such as happily came chaste unto shows, return adulterers from
plays. For they play the harlots, not then only when they go away, but also
when they come. For as soon as one lusts after a filthy thing, whiles he
hasteneth to that which is unclean, he becomes unclean.

Now this being so, behold I pray you, what parts either al or almost al
Romans, do play. And yet, we doing thus, say we are not regarded of God; we
say GOD has forsaken us, when in very deed we forsake God.

For, God cannot favor such as haunt plays.
suppose we, that our Lord will respect us, not deserving his favor? let us see
if he can. Lo, infinite thousands of Christians (...) daily abide at the
shows of (...)seemly things. Can God the (...) such kind of persons? (...)
God cast his gracious counten^^^^ upon such as rage in circles, (...) play the
harlots in Theaters? Or is this our meaning, and do we think it meet, that
for so much as God sees us in circles, and Theaters, that what things we see, he
beholds; and what filthiness we look on, he sees it also for company? For
one of these must needs be: for if he vouchsafe to look upon us, it follows,
that he must behold al those things, where we are: or if, which is most true,
he turn away his eyes from those things, he must likewise turn his
countenance from us who are there. And the case standing thus, yet naie-theles
we do these things which I have said, and that without cessing.

Or think we that God has his Theaters, and circles, as had the gods of the
Gentiles? For thus did they in old time, because they were persuaded their idols
delighted in them. The Devil delights in plays; God detesteth them.
But how is it that we do so, who are certain that our God detesteth them? Or
if we know that this abominatio^ does please God, I will not gaine-saie, but
we may frequent it day by day. But if it be in our conscience, that God
abhors, that he detesteth, that God is offended as the Devil is fed by
Theaters; how say we that we worship God in his Church, which serve the Devil
always at plays, and that wittinglie, and willingly? And what hope shall we
have with God, who not ignorantly, or by chance wound him, but after the
example of those gigants whom we read, full madlie bent themselves against
God, and against the clouds. So we through the injuries which all the world
over continualie we infer, do beat the heavens, as it were, with a common
consent.

To Christ therefore, O monsterous madness! even to Christ do we offer plays
and tomblers; yea and that especialie then when we receive goodness at his
hands, when we enioie prosperity through his blessing, or God has given us
victory over the enemies, whereby what else do we show our selves, but even
injurious to him which has done us good; to rail upon him, who blesses us;
to strike him over the face with a sword, who lovingly does kiss us.

For I ask the mighty and rich men of this world, of what offense is that
servant guilty, which wishes il to a good and gracious master; which raileth
on him that deserves well; and rendereth despiteful words for benefits
received? without controversy al men will judge him a most heinous offender,
which for good renders il to him, to whom indeed he might not yield il for
evil: even thus do we, which are called Christians; we stir up against us a
merciful God by our uncleanness; we strike a gracious God by our filthiness; we
wound a loving God by our wickedness.

To Christ therefore, o monsterous madness! even to Christ do we offer plaiers
and tomblers; to Christ we do render for his benefits the filthiness of
theaters; even to Christ do we sacrifice the oblations of most beastly sport.
As though our Savior, who for us became man, taught us to do so, and had
preached the same either by himself, or by his Apostles; as though that to
this end he took upon him the shame of man's nativity, and the contumelious
beginnings of an earthly Luke 2, 12. 13.
generation; to that end he lay in a cratch, at what time notwithstanding the
very Angels ministered unto him; to that end he would be swadled with rags of
cloth, who governed the heavens in simple cloth; to that end he hong on the
cross, at whose hanging the very world was astonished. 2. Cor. 8, 9.
Who being rich, says the Apostle, for your sakes became poor, that ye
thorough his poverty might be made rich. Phil. 2, 6.
And being in the form of GOD, he humbled himself unto the death, even the
death of the cross: Even this did Christ teach us when he suffered these
things for our sakes.

Well do we requite his passion, who, receiving through his death redemption,
lead a most filthy life. Tit. 2, 11.
For the grace of God that brings salvation unto al men has appeared, 12.
says blessed Paul, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberlie, and righteouslie, and
godly in this present world, 13.
looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God,
14.
and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from al iniquity, and purge us a peculiar people unto himself,
Zealous of good works.

Where be they which do these things, for which the Apostle says Christ came?
where be they which fly thedesires of this world? where be they which live
godly and righteouslie, that look for the blessed hope by well doing, and
leading a pure life, show thereby that they look and long for the kingdom of
God; where be such?

Our Lord Jesus Christ came, Tit. 2, 14.
says he, that he might purge us a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of
good works. Where is that pure people? that peculiar people; that good people,
that people of holiness?

Christ, says the Scripture, 1. Pet. 2, 21
suffered for us, leaving us an ensample, that we should follow his steps. And
we follow the steps of our Savior in circles, and in Theaters, we follow the
steps of our Savior: as though our Savior left us such an ensample, whom we
read did weep, but that he laughed, we never read. And both these for our
sakes, because weeping is a pricking of the heart, laughter the corruption of
manners. Therefore said he, VVoe to you that laugh, Luke. 6, 25.
for ye shall wail and weep: and, 21*
Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye that laugh. But it is not enough for us
to laugh and be merry, unless we rejoice with sin and madness; unless our
laughter be tempered with filthiness, and mixed with impiety.

What error, I say, is this, naie what foolishnes? Can we not daily be
merry, and laugh, unless we make our laughter and mirth to be wickedness? Or else
think we simple mirth to be nothing worth? and can we not laugh except we
sin? what a mischief is this, naie what fury? Let us laugh, I pray you,
yea immeasurable; and let us be merry, yea continualie, so we sin not. What
foolishnes, naie madness is it, to think mirth and joy nothing worth, unless
God be iniuried therebie? yea iniuried, and that most hainouslie?

For in shows there is a certain Apostasy from the faith; To see plays a
kind of Apostasy.
and a deadly declining from our belief, and the heavenly sacraments. For
what is the first profession of Christians at their baptism? They protest they
will renounce the Devil, and al his works, his pompes, and vanities. Therefore
by our own confession, shows and pompes are the works of the Devil.

How then, o Christian, do thou haunt plays and Theaters after baptism,
which thy self confessest are the works of the Devil! Once thou did renounce
the Devil and al his shows, wherebie it follows, that whiles thou go
witting and willingly unto common spectacles, thou must think thou returnest
again unto the Devil. For thou have renou^ced both, and did confess one of
them to be both. So that returning unto one, thou wentest back unto both. For,
thou say, I renounce the Devil, his pompes, shows, and works. And what
afterward? I believe, thou say, in God the Father almighty, and in Jesus
Christ his son. Therefore before we can believe in God, the Devil must be
renounced. For he believes not in God, who renounceth not the Devil. So then
he forsakes God, who returns to the Devil. But the Devil is in his pompes and
shows, then it follows that by returning unto his pompes we forsake the
faith of Christ. Then hereby all the mysteries of the Belief are unloosed; and
al which follows in the Creed, is weakened, and tottereth. For the building
cannot stand, if the principal be down.

Then tell me, o Christian, how can thou think thy self to keep that which
folowes in the Creed, when thou have lost the beginning of the same? The
members without an head be nothing worth; and to their beginning al things have
respect; which once being decayed every thing goes to wrack. For the root
being gone, either nothing remains; or if there do, it serves to small profit,
for without an head nothing can stand.

He therefore that thinks it a light offense to see plays, let him consider
al what we have said, and he shall see that in plays there is destruction, and
no pleasure. And what else is it, but to fall into destruction, to forgo the
beginning of life? For where the fundacion of the Belief is ouerthrown, life
it self is destroyed.

Then again we must needs return unto that which we have often said: what
such thing among the barbarous? where be any stages among them, or Theaters?
where is the sin of many sins, that is the destruction of our hope, Pagans
might better erect and frequent Theaters than Christians.
and salvation? which notwithstanding if they, being Pagans did use, they
should err with less offense of God: because albe such doing were a defiling
of the sight, yet were it not a breaking of the sacrament.

But now, what can we say for our selves? we hold the belief, and we
overthrow the belief; we confess the duty of salvation, and also deny the
same. And therefore where is our Christianity? who, as it seems, hereunto
are baptized, that afterward more hainously we might offend? we prefer pastimes
before the Church; we despise the Lords table, and honor Theaters; at a word,
we love al things, reverence al things, God alone seems vile to us in
comparison of other things.

Finalie among the rest which prove the same, this which I now say, does show
it to be true. For if it fall out, as often it does, that at one and the same
time an holy day be kept, and common plays proclaimed, I demand, whether do
men flock most, to the court of God, or to the den of plays; to the temple, or
to Theaters? And what do men hear most willingly, the saiengs of the
Evangelists, or the toies of plaiers; the words of life, or the words of
death; the words of Christ, or the words of a fool in a play? doubtless we
love that best, which we prefer. For if the Church keep any feast on that
day when deadly pastime is showen, men, such as say they are Christians,
either come not at al unto Church; or, if not thinking of plays they come and
hear in the same plays to be abroad, they leave the Church. The temple is
despised, to run unto Theaters; the Church is emptied, the yeard is filled; we
leave the sacrament, to feed our adulterous eyes with the impure, and whorish
sight of most filthy pastime. But forsooth we, whom prosperity does mar, must
do something in the beginning. And therefore full rightly says the Lord God
unto us; For your uncle annes, are ye with destruction abolished. And again,
The altars of this mirth shall be rooted out.

But now it may be answered, that in all the towns of the Romans plays be not
used. True it is, and I ad moreover, that neither be Theaters where in times
past they were. For they are not used neither at Magontia, norat Massilia,
because those towns be overthrown, and destroyed; They are not used at
Agrippina, for the enemy has subdued the same; not in Treuers that famous
town, because being foure-times subdued, it is now brought to ground; to
conclude they are not used in most towns both of France, and Spain; and
therefore woe to us men, and to our uncleanness; woe to us, and to our wickedness.
What hope is there for Christian people before God? inasmuch as those evils
have never ben in Roman cities, since they came into the hands of Barbarians.
Whereby it appears that wickedness and impuritie, Romans singular wicked.
is proper and peculiar unto the Romans, and their very nature as it were. A
goodly praise of the Romans.
For there wickedness does chiefly reign, where the Romans be.

But happily this may seem a grievous, and unjust complaint* grievous indeed,
if it be false. But how, thou will say, how can it be otherwise, sithence what
we have said, are done in a few cities of the Romans? And most of them are not
polluted with this spot of filthiness, where although the place and dwelling of
ancient error do abide, yet are not those things now done which were in times
passed.

It will be good therefore to consider both these things, that is, both why the
places and houses of plays are yet up; and yet no plays used. The places and
houses of filthiness are therefore yet standing, because in them all impure
things were wont to be showen: and now the vain pastime is not used, for that
the misery of the time, and men's poverty will not permit. So that it was of
their impiety, why in time past plays were frequented, and necessity is the
cause that they are not now. For the miserable case of the exchequer, and the
emptines of the Roman treasury will suffer no money to be wasted commonly
upon trifling things. And although much is lost, and cast as it were upon the
dunghill: yet nothing so much can be consumed, because they have not wherewithal
to do so. For such is our insatiable desire of filthy pleasure, that we could
wish to have more, only to lay it upon this dirte of abomination. And the
thing shows what we would prodigalie consume, if we were rich, when we wast so
much being in so poor a state. For this is the spot, and misery of the
present time, that although through poverty we cannot, yet through our
impiety we would consume much.

There is no cause then why we should deceive our selves, in saying that in all
cities those things are not, which were before done. For therefore they are not
in this time used, because the towns where they were used, are not to be
seen: and where they have a long time been used, there is not to bring it to
pass: as God himself speaks unto sinners by the prophet, And it ascended
upon his heart, and the Lord could bear it no longer: for the wickedness of
your studies, and for the abominations which you have committed, and your land
is brought into desolation, into barrennes, and accursed. This is the cause
then why the mayor part of the Roman empire is brought into desolation, into
barrennes, and accursed.

And would to God they were only done in times past, and not now in these
days, happily then, as it is written, God would be merciful to our sins.
But we take not the way to have Gods favor. For vncessantlie we ad sin to
sin, and heap wickedness upon wickedness, that as the better part of us are
destroyed, so we may al come to naught.

For, I demand, who sees another slain before his face, and is not afraid?
who beholds his neighbors house on fire, and will not by all means provide for
the salfetie of his own? we do not only see our neighbors to burn, but also
are set on fire our selves from the chiefest part of our bodies. And, o
abomination! what a mischief is this? we burn, we burn, yet dread we not the
fire wherewith we burn. For, as I said, the cause why those things which before
time were used, are not now done, is to be ascribed to the misery we are in,
not to any discipline or good order which we have.

Finalie, I do easily prove the same. For make the time as it was, and
forthwith al things shall be as they were in those days. Yea moreover, as
touching the desire of men, though those things are not every where, yet in
respect of their minds every where they be. For the Romans would have them
used every where. For when necessity only makes an evil thing to be left
undone, the very desire of a filthy thing is condemned in such sort as if it
were done. For, as I say, according to the words of our Savior, Matt. 5, 28.
Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart: whereby we may gather, that albe we leave things
filthy and damnable undone, and that only through necessity; yet because
our will is good to have them, we are guilty of condemnation.

And what speak I of will? when almost every where those things are committed.
For what stranger soever comes either to Rauenna, or to Rome, shall find a
part of the Romans at shows; and a part of the Rauenians at Theaters. And
although any be either absent, or distant by place, yet is he not excused
thereby. For as many as are joined together in likeness of affection, are
guilty alike of the same wickedness which either do commit.

Yet for all this we flatter our selves of our good behauior; we flatter our
selves of the rarenes of impuritie. But I say yet more, that not only those
foul spots of infamous plays are yet to be seen as before time; but also be
more abominablie set forth, than ever they were. For in those days every part
of the Roman empire was in health and sound; the riches of other towns made
the common barnes to be large and big; citizens did abound in wealth and
pleasure, so that it was very hard in such abundance of al things, for
religion to continue pure, and manners vncorrupt. Then every where Autors of
filthy pleasure were cherished; for in all places men were fat. No man waide
the charge of the Commonweal, no man feared to come behind hand; for expenses
was not perceived. The Commonweal after a sort did seek where, and how to
wast wealth, having almost no place to keep it. And therefore heaps of
wealth, even well nigh above measure, were consumed upon vain things.

But now what may be said? old abundance is gone, gone is the wealth which
once we had. Poor we are, yet cease we not to be vain. And whereas poverty
does reclaim prodigal and prodigious pupils, so that when their wealth is
gone, they leave wickedness: we show our selves a new kind of pupils and
unthrifts, who lacking wealth will not leave wickedness. Whereby it appears,
that the cause of our wickedness, is not in the inticements, as of other men,
but in our hearts: and that our minds, is our wickedness; that in deed not by
the taking away of riches, but through the desire of evil things we sin.

And although we have hitherto recited many vices of the Romans, which the
barbarous people are not polluted withal: yet are there many mo, which I will
now ad. But first this I warn you by the way, that you account no kind of
sin light, which tends unto the dishonor of God. For if no man may
dishonor him that is noble and mighty; but if he do so he is made to answer
it where he would not, and condemned by law: how much more heinous is that
offense, whereby the glory of God is defaced? For always the fault does
increase, according to the worthiness of him that is iniuried. Because by how
much the person is greater that suffers reproach, by so much is he faulty
that does the same. Exodus 31, verse. 13. 14.
Whereof it is which we read in the law, that they which to man's thinking did
but lightly offend, Nomb. 20, verse. 25. 26, etc.
were most severely for all that punished: which was to give us to understand
that nothing, Nomb. 25, verse. 4. 9.
which concerns God, should be lightly accounted of: and that that which man
esteemed a small offense, because it was committed against the glory of God, 1.
Chr. 13, verse. 9. 10.
was a most grievous crime.

To be short, Vzza Vzza.
that Leuite of the Lord, what did he contrary unto the commandment of God,
when he assaied to keep up the Ark of God from falling? no precept was there
by law to forbid him; yet while he held up the same, presently through the
wrath of God he died: not because he had done any thing rebelliouslie, or at
leastwise not dutifullie, but by showing duty he proved undutiful, for taking
more upon him than he was commanded.

That man among the people of Israel, Gathering of sticks. Nomb. 15, verse.
32. 35. 36.
that had gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day, died the death, and that by
the judgment, and commandment of God, even the most gracious and merciful
judge, who out of doubt had rather pardon than kill, had not the consideration
of severity prevailed over his mercy. For one rash fellow perished, that
many afterward through rashness might not perish.

And what should I speak of each particular man? Nomb. 11, verse. 4. 31. 32.
33.
The whole nation of the Jews traueling thorough the wilderness, because they
lusted after their wonted meat, lost a part of their people. Psa. 78, 30. 31.
Yet was there no commandment that they should not lust, but God, as I
suppose, would provide before hand for the due observation of the moral law, by
restraining their rebellious concupiscence: even that all the people might the
more easily confess, how earnestly they should avoid those things, which God
in his holy Scripture should forbid, when they were punished for that, which
as yet they were not forbidden.

The same people also complained that they took such pains, for which cause
the Lord plagued them from heaven: not because a man oppressed with labor might
not complain; but for that therebie they showed themselves unthankful toward
GOD, making God, as it were, the Author of their immoderate business. Whereby we
may gather, how zelouslie he ought to serve God, which enioieth prosperity,
when as he may not complain being in adversity.

But perchance, some will say, whereto serves all this? whether to? doubtless,
that we should count nothing a small thing, which hurts the glory of God.
Plays the mockery of religion.
We speak of common plays, the very mockery of religion, and the toies of
our life. For while we play at Theaters and stages, we are ravished with the
love thereof, according to that in the holy Scripture, Prou. 10, verse. 23.
It is a pastime for a fool to do wickedlie. And so, in laughing at filthy
and abominable things, we commit wickedness: and those no small sins, but
therefore the more damnable: because though they seem small at the first sight,
yet are they most pestilent in the end. For inasmuch as there be two most
notorious evils, Two most notorious offenses committed by frequenting plays.
as when a man either slaieth himself, or defaceth the glory of God, both
they are done in common plays. For at plays both the everlasting salvation of
Christian people is quite extinguished thorough wicked filthiness, and the
majesty of God violated, through sacrilegious superstition. For it is certain
that it offends God, being consecrated to idols.

For Minerua in schools of exercise, Venus at Theaters, Neptune at circles, in
the field Mars, Mercury at wrestling places is adored, and had in honor: and
so, according to the quality of the Autors, superstition does increase.

Al uncleanness is showed at plaieng; al luxuriousnes at wrestling; at tumbling
al unshamefastness; al madness in caves. Uncleanness is one where; wantonness
anotherwhere; anotherwhere intemperancie; and madness anotherwhere: but the
Devil is eueriewhere; yea in every particular place where plays be, are all the sorts of Devils. For they govern those places which are dedicated unto
them. And therefore the only inticement is not there, nor wickedness only in
such spectacles, or shows. For it is a kind of sacrilege beside for a
Christian to be at such superstition; because he takes part with their
idolatry, whose feasts he is delighted withal.

The which albeit always it has been a lamentable thing: yet then is it most
intolerable, when as besides the customable use of life, either our
adversity, or prosperity does make it the more heinous. And that because God
in adversity should be the more pacified, and less offended in prosperity.
For Gods favor should be sought for when he is angry; and when he is merciful,
he should not be dishonored. For we fall into adversity through the
displeasure of God; and by his favor, we enioie prosperity.

But we do al things clean otherwise. Prosperity abused.
How so? do you ask? mark what I say. And first when God being entreated of
his own mercy (for we do never so live, that we can deserve to have him
entreated) but, as I say, when God has entreated himself, and given us a
peaceable time, great increase, a rich tranquillity, and store of al things
more than we can desire; then we so corrupt our selves with such prosperity,
and so defile our lives with wickedness, that we utterly forget both GOD and
our selves. And whereas the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 2, verse. 2.
that The fruit of peace which God does send, consists in this, that we
should lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness, and honesty: we use the
same as though God gave it to the end, that we should live in all dro^kennes, in all riotousnes, in naughtines, in theft, and in all wickedness and dishonestie: as
though the benefit of peace given, were leisure to do wickedlie; and we
should take the truce of tranquillity at Gods hand the more licentiously, and
securely to sin.

Therefore we are unworthy Gods gifts, which use the benefits of God so
wickedly. We make the occasion of good works, to be only the matter of
wickedness. Wherebie comes to pass, that peace it self is against us. For so
we deal, that better it were for us to be without that thing whereby we prove
the worse.

Who would think it? we change the course of things by our wickedness; and what
God of his mercy made good, we make the same il for us, through our vile
behauior, etc.

It remains that we now prove that neither the gifts nor allureme^ts of God
do better us one jot. And what are they? what, but even our peace, quietness,
and tranquillity which we enioie according to our wish and desire. Wherefore
because the matter does so require, let us utter some special thing.

Then, as often as we are in fear, in affliction, in perils; when either
cities with enemies are besieged, or countries by invasion or any other
adversity are wasted: then we beat the members of a Commonweal, and by
prayer call for the assistance of God: If by the aid of God either towns by
saved, or spoil and pilling has an end; or the host of enemies foiled; and al
fear through the blessing of God is taken away, what do we straight after al
these ehings? I believe we endeavor to requite the benefits that we have
received from our Lord God with serving, honoring, and reuerencing his holy
Name. (For this follows, and experience does prove, that they who are
thankful get more benefits, and they are blessed with most ample and fresh
rewards that requite good turns.

So happily we do, and requiting our GOD at leastwise after the manner of men,
we render good for his benefits, that is, we forthwith make recourse unto the
house of the Lord, throw our selves upon the ground, pray unto him with joy
and tears together, set forth the temple with our gifts, and bestow rewards.
And because thorough his gift we are made merry, we show the signs of our
joy in his temples, or least wise, which he likes as well, we renounce the
former wickedness of our life, slaie the sacrifices of good works, and for new
consolations we offer the sacrifice of a new conversation, finalie we proclaim
an holy war against al uncleanness, shun the madness of stages, abhor the
filthiness of plays, promise a new life to the Lord, and finalie for the
attainement of his perpetual protection we offer up our selves wholly unto God.

Now, forasmuch as these things which we have mentioned, should be done for
Gods benefits newly extended upon us, let us consider what is done. We run
forthwith unto plays, we fly unto madness, the people disperse themselves in
Theaters, the whole multitude revel it out at stages. He bestows good things
upon us, that we should be good; we contrariewise when we have received good,
increase our wickedness; He by his benefits calls us unto godliness, we thereby
fall to sin; He by his gifts allureth to repentance, we rush unto uncleanness; He
calls unto purity of life, we follow filthiness.

Thus we well requite him for his liberality, we do well either acknowledge, or
honor him for his gifts, who as greatly do recompense him with injuries, as
he has mercifully blessed us with benefits.

FINIS.
A third blast of retrait from plays and Theaters, showing the abomination of
them in the time present.
KNowledge makes her seat and abode in the minds of those men, who are
neither addicted to their own opinion; nor yet carried away with every
likelihood of troth. For as he that is unwilling to hear, is farthest from
knowledge: so he that is carried away with every likelihood, before he have
waded far and deeply in the cause, shall prove but slender of judgment. But
he who will never be satisfied with reason may rightly be counted obstinate
and perverse; and without reason to be persuaded comes either of simplicity,
or compulsion.

I write this to none other end but to show, that as I ought not, being wedded
too much to mine own opinion, to be carried to the defense of a wrong cause: so
it beseems me not to be ouerlightlie misled unto error through the censure of
those, whose bare affirming or denial serve only to maintain, but not to
prove; for that men are not to be satisfied with words, but with reason.
Which if I may be, I will not be counted a perverse wrangler, but frankly will
condescend into the opinion of the wise: otherwise am to be pardoned though I
stand ernest and stiff against that which is contrary to virtue; disagreing
from good religion; furthest from civility, and may neither by argument of
reason, nor power of learning be defended.

Such doubtless is mine opinion of common plays, usual jesting, and riming
extempore, that in a Christian-weale they are not sufferable. My reason is,
because they are public enemies to virtue and religion; allurements unto
sin; corrupters of good manners; the cause of security and carelesnes; mere
brothel houses of Bauderie; and bring both the Gospel into slander; the Sabbath
into contempt; men's souls into danger; and finalie the whole Commonweal into
disorder.

Great and heinous speeches, no doubt: yet not so heinous, as the exercise of
them is odious; biting words, yet not so bitter as the cause requires.

It were il painting the Devil like an Angel, he must be portraied forth as he
is, that he may the better be known. Sin has always a fair cloak to
cover his filthy body. And therefore he is to be turned out of his case into
his naked skin, that his nastie filthy body, and stinking corruption being
perceived, he might come into the hatred and horror of men. For as we are
naturalie of our selves evil and corrupt: so are we naturalie given to love our
selves, and to be blinded with our own affections, insomuch that, what we
know to be evil, we are not ashamed either openly to defend, or slilie to
cloak.

The excuse of wickedness is but the increase of punishment; and an il cause
defended by authority, and maintained by learning, bringes Magistrates into
slander, and learning into contempt.

This I speak, for that I know those aforesaid do want neither countenance
to uphold, nor yet skill to defend them. But yet, under correction, an evil
cause maintained is nearetheles evil; and, as pitch defiles the toucher
thereof, be he never so clean: so the virtuous bring their life into question
either by suffera^ce, or maintenance of evil. For who will not judge but what a
man's allows in another, he commendes in himself?

I therefore with reverence not as a teacher, but as a wel-willer both to the
noble and learned, would wish them with Adrian the Emperor to suffer no
pastime, that may bring them to vanity; nor to frequent that recreation*
which tendes either to the hurt of a Commonweal, or to the overthrow of
religion.

It is true that one opinion may be contrary to another; and that for the
disliking of one, or two the quality of plaieng were not to be laid of, being
so highly esteemed of al sorts of men, for that every man conceaueth of the
goodness or badnes of a thing according as it seems in his own opinion. And
therefore the thing which they discommend, may be both liked, and allowed.

I confess the judgment of one or two is not to be allowed in such cases:
nevertheless the opinions of the rude multitude are not alwais the soundest,
which are moved with unconstant motions, whereby manietimes they like of that
which is most hurtful; and dislike that which is most profitable: because the
one pleases their humors and the other restrains their affections. The
censure therefore of them who carry best ground from Gods word; and is most
agreeable to reason, most profitable for the Co^mon-weale; least hurtful to our
brethren; and tending alwaie to the reformation of abuse, is soonest to be
allowed, and followed.

Then whether this my judgment to be admitted or no, as being the soundest,
and respecting the benefit of this our country, I leave it to the judgment of
the godly wise, and learned. And that I may seem to write nothing without
ground, or to find fault without cause, I will, GOD to friend, set down
nothing to prove mine assertion good, but what Scripture shall warrant,
examples confirm, reason allow, and present experience ratify.

Which mine arguments, if any by more color of truth can overthrow, I am
ready to recant, and to allow that for good, which I can yet but condemn as
wicked, and think of al other to be the most intolerable abuse in our
Co^mon-weale. For otherwise I cannot think, unless I be constrained, as
Petrarch says, to judge by other men's judgments; which who so does, judges
not of himself, but reporters the opinion of others.

Many run on their courses very vainelie til it please God to call them home
by the Spirit of his grace unto amendment of life. For when it shall please him
to touch the conscience of the wicked with repentance, the whole state of their
life does alter from that it was before as may appear in S. Paul at his
conversion. And assuredly the Lord does suffer us manietimes to run past our
selves, that when he has called us home, we may become examples of virtue and
godliness unto others.

I confess that ere this I have been a great affecter of that vain art of
Plaie-making, The Autors former study; and life.
insomuch that I have thought no time so well bestowed, as when my wits were
exercised in the invention of those follies; I might scarcely with patience
hear any man speak, wear he never so learned and godly, that thought to
persuade me from them. So far was I from receiving of their good and godly
admonitions, that I stopped mine ears, and hardened mine heart against their
counsel. Such is our peevish nature; we can like of nothing which does
dislike us, or seems contrary to our vain opinions. And therefore it is God
only, that must turn our minds, otherwise we shall never discern profitable
from hurtful things. For able we have some about us who counsel us the
best,and seek our profit: yet for all that our nature is so perverse and
froward, that what is well said will take no place. This found I by my self, and
this I now perceive to be in others: but the Lords purpose is good in all his
dealings.

It might have been said of me then, Hereby learn thou, good Reader, how to
shun not only the vanity of plays, but al other vanities, after the example
of the Author, who by diligent reading the holy Scriptures, and repentance fell
into an utter detestation of plays.
as it was written of the wicked, that they considered not the ways of the
Lord, but after when it pleased God of his mercy to call me to the reading of
his word, and diligent study of the Scriptures, I began to loath my former
life, and to mislike my own doings; and I was no sooner drawn with an hearty
desire to return unto the Lord, but I found my self strengthened with his
grace unto good desires. For the Lord never fails them that seek him.
Assuredly his promise can never deceive men, Luke. 11, 9.
but when they knock, the gate shall be opened unto them; and when thy seek,
they shall find. There is nothing more required in us, What God requires at our
hands.
than a ready desire of well doing, who no doubt, being truly ingraffed in our
minds, shall be so watered with the dew of Gods holy spirit, that it will
increase and grow up in us to a more full grouth and perfection.

When I came to a streit examination of my life, which I had vainelie consumed
in those exercises; Plays cannot abide the truth of Gods word;
and that I began to call mine old doings into question, and to try them by the
true tuch of Gods word, I found what I counted for gold to be but dross, vile,
and of none account, Vain plays make vain folks.
having the property to make their favorers of their own nature.

Then to the end that others should not be deceived with that wherewith my
self was overtaken, The end why this book was made.
I thought it my part to lay open to al men's eyes the horrible abuse as well of
plays as of the Inactors, and the disorder of their Auditorie; that the abuse
being perceived, every man might reform himself, and be weaned from their
wickedness; or otherwise, that the Magistrates being informed might take such
good ways, that the intolerable exercise of plays might be utterly put
down. For I am verily persuaded, that if they may be permitted still to make
sale of sin, we shall pull on our heads Gods vengeance, and to our realm bring
an utter confusion.

What I shall speak of the abuse by plays of my own knowledge, I know may be
affirmed by hundreds, to whom those matters are as well known as to my self.
Some citizens wives, Fruits of plays for the Devils own mouth
upon whom the Lord for ensample to others has laid his hands, have even on
their death beds with tears confessed, that they have received at those
spectacles such filthy infections, as have turned their minds from chaste
cogitations, 1. Cor. 6, verse. 19. 20.
and made them of honest women light huswiues; by them they have dishonored the
vessels of holiness; and brought their husbands into contempt, their children
into question, their bodies into sickness, and their souls to the state of
everlasting damnation.

Such is the nature and inclination He that touches pitch will be defiled.
that we run whether affection leads us, and are withdrawn by company. And
therefore, 2. Sam. 22, verse. 26. 27.
as David says, With the godly thou will show thy self godly; with the
upright man thou will show thy self upright. Psa. 18, 25. 26.
With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward, thou will
show thy self froward.

The repair of them that are honest to those places of evil resort, Avoid
suspected places.
makes their own good life to be doubted of; for that the place breeds
suspicion as well of good, as of bad. For who can see man or woman resort to an
house which is notoriously wicked, but will judge them to be of the crewe of
the wicked and ungodly?

The most honest wife, The best soonest tempted.
is the soonest assalted, and has such snares laid to entrap her, as, if God
assist her not, she must needs be taken.

When I gave my self first to note the abuse of common plays, I found mine
heart sore smitten with sorrow (sin did there so abound and was so openly
committed, Horrible sins openly committed at Theaters.
that I looked when God in justice would have presently in his wrath have
confounded the beholders.) The Theater I found to be an appointed place of
Bauderie; Mark this, o ye favorers, freque^ters, and vpholders of plays.
mine own ears have heard honest women allured with abominable speeches.
Sometime I have seen two knaves at once importunate upon one light huswife,
whereby much quarrel has grown to the disquieting of many. There servants, as
it is manifestly to be proved, have consented to rob their masters, to
supply the want of their harlots; there is the practicing with married wives
to train them from their husbands, and places appointed for meeting and
conference.

When I had taken a note of al these abuses, Who can favor plays when the
Autors themselves abhor them.
and saw that the Theater was become a consultorie house of Satan, I concluded
with my self, never to imploie my pen to so vile a purpose, nor to be an
instrument of gathering the wicked together.

It may seem I am over lavish of speech; and that which I have publiqulie
expressed ofothers by mine own knowledge might have been dissembled. But I
have learned that he who dissembles the evil which he knows in other men, is
as guilty before God ofthe offense as the offenders the selves. And the Lord
has expreslie commanded in Exodus, Exodus 23, verse. 2.
that we should not follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a
controversy to decline after many, and overthrowe the truth. I cannot
therefore but resist such wickedness, least I might seem to maintain them,
For he that dissembles ungodliness is a traitor to God.

Since therefore that the cause is Gods, I dare press forth my self to be an
Advocate against Satan unto the rooting out of sin. For I am fully resolved
in Gods truth, to build so strong and fure a fundation against these sellers,
and setters forth of sin, as neither they, nor their adherents shall ever be
able to overthrow. And my trust is that the godile will ionie with me to the
suppressing of those which fight against his word, waging their battle on the
Sabbath day the more conuenientile to destroy the souls of the children of
God.

The cause is generalie to be defended, for that the contention of the
Adversaries is about religion, and therefore none can be discharged for bare
saying they consent not to the wicked. For it is the part of every true
soldier of lesus Christ with all power to withstand, and resist such as offer
wrong to the majesty of GOD, by hindering the service which we owe unto him.
We are to be enemies unto the death against those uphiolders of wickedness; and
never to give over the battle in so holy, and just a quarrel.

We see the wicked are always ready to maintain evil causes, and in these
days the worst men shall find bearers, and bolsterers, and be supported by
those, who by justice are to supress them, or at least to reform their abuses,
which are intolerable. If the wicked lurk together to uphold their lewdenes,
how much more ought the faithful to join themselves together to pluck down
vanity!

I know my self a worm of al other the weakest to meddle in these cases: yet
such is my desire to overthrow their wickedness, that I dare, inflamed with the
holy zeal of David in the quarrel of God, unprouided both of armor and weapon,
with one poor sling resist the strength of their hugest Champion, and endure
the brunt of his fierce assalts; doubting not but to find some that will stand
with me to overthrow the enemies of GOD, and to pull down those flags of
defia^ce, which Satan has set up against the preaching of the Gospel to the
decaie of the Church.

Let us delaie no time, dear brethren, their doings are abominable in the
sight and ears of God, and condemned of the righteous: if therefore sentence
against their evil works be not executed speedily, The hearts of the children
of men, as Ecclesiastes says, will be fully set in them to do evil. Eccl. 8, 11.


If there were nothing to move you, Plays do not only hinder the Gospel, but
hurt the Commonweal.
it were great cause to stir up your godly fury, and zeal to discommend
plays utterly: but their abuses stretching further into the Commonwealth,
are by sufferance grown so huge, that it is hard dealing with them as against
foes; for they are become private friends. Ways how to suppress plays.
They are therefore to be dealt withal by degrees. For it is very hard to root
out that from our hearts, be it never so great an abuse, whereof we have
conceived a good opinion.

Let therefore the Magistrate but repel them from the liberty of plaieng on
the Sabbath day. The Magistrates duty in suppressing plays.
For that is abuse which is generalie found fault withal, and allowed of none
but those who are altogether destitute of the fear of God, and without
conscience. To play on the Sabbath is but a privilege of sufferance, and
might with ease be repelled, were it thoroughly followed. The warrant which
Magistrates have to forbid plays is great, and passed unto them by such a
Prince, whose authority is above al auctories of earthly governors.

God has given us an express commandment that we should not violate the
Sabbath day; Exo. 20, 8. 9. 10. 11.
and prescribed an order how it should be sanctified, namely in holiness, by
calling into mind the spiritual rest; Works which God requires on the
Sabbath.
hearing the word of GOD; and cessing from worldly business. Whereupon Isaiah
the Prophet showing how the sabbath should be observed, Esaie. 58, verse. 13.
says, If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on
mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it, as glorious to
the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine
own will, nor speaking a vain word, Esa. 58, 14.
then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon the hie
places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iaakob thy father: for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Here we see how the Lord requires that this day should be observed; How the
Sabbath day is consumed.
and what rest he looks for at our hands. But, alas, how do we follow the
order which the Lord has set down! Is not the Sabbath of al other days the
most abused? which of us on that day is not carried whether his affection
leads him unto al dissolutenes of life? How often do we use on that day
irreverent speeches! which of us has his heart occupied in the fear of God?
who is not led away to the beholding of those spectacles, the sight whereof
can bring but confusion both to our bodies and souls?

Are not our eyes (there At plays.
) carried away with the pride of vanity? Every member of man defiled at
plays.
our ears abused with amorous, that is lecherous, filthy, and abominable
speech? Is not our tongue, which was given us only to glorify God withal, is
not our tongue there employed to the blaspheming of Gods holy Name, or the
commendation of that is wicked? Are not our hearts through the pleasure of the
flesh; the delight of the eye; and the fond motions of the mind, withdrawn from
the service of the Lord, and meditation of his goodness?

So that albe it is a shame to say it, yet doubtless whosoever will mark with
what multitudes those idle places are replenished, and how empty the Lords
sanctuary is of his people, may well perceive what devotion we have. We may
well say, we are the servants of the Lord: but the slender service we do him,
and the small regard we have of his commandments, declares our want of love
toward him. For, If ye love me, John. 14, verse. 15.
says Christ, keep my commandments. We may well be hirelings, but we are
none of his household.

Wherefore abuse not so the Sabbath day, my brethren, leave not the temple of
the Lord; sit not still in the quagmire of your own lusts: but put to your
strength to help your selves, before your own weight sink you down to hell.
Ephesians. 5, 16.
Redeem the time, for the days are evil.

Alas, what folly is in you, to purchase with a penic damnation to your selves?
why seek ye after sin, None delight in common spectacles, but such as would
be spectacles.
as after a banquet? None delight in those spectacles, but such as would be made
spectacles. Account not of their dross; their tresures are too base to be
laid up in the rich coafers of your mind. Repentance is furthest from you,
when you are nearest such maiegames. Al of you, for the most part, do leese the
time, or rather wilfulie cast the same away; contemning that as nothing, which
is so precious as your lives cannot redeem.

I would to God you would bestow the time you consume in those vanities in
seeking after virtue, Time would not be lost.
and glory. For to speak truly, whatsoever is not converted to the use
wherefore it was ordained, may be said to be lost. For to this end was man
borne, End of ma^s creation.
and had the benefit of time given him, that he might honor, serve, and love
his Creator, and think upon his goodness. For whatsoever is done without this
is, doubtless cast away.

Oh, how can ye then excuse your selves for the loss of time! do ye imagine
that your careless life shall never be brought into question. Think ye the
words of S. Paul the Apostle are spoken in vain, when he says, 2. Cor. 5,
verse. 10.
We must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. When that account shall be taken, I fear me your
reckoning will be to seek.

But you say, tush al is well, can the Lord see this? well, follow the thoughts
of your own hearts, and see what shall come upon you? ye shall find al your
imaginations to be wicked; and though you flatter your selves in your sins,
tempt the Lord in his mercy, and prick forward his slownes of wrath by your
presumption: yet he will strike in the end to your utter confusion. Be thou not
wicked overmuch, Eccl. 7, 19.
neither be thou foolish; wherefore should thou perish not in thy time,
says Ecclesiastes godly. And Solomon, Prou. 30, verse. 32.
If thou have been foolish in lifting up thy self, and if thou have thought
wickedlie, lay thine hand upon thy mouth. Cesse from il doing.
Again, Prou. 28, verse. 14.
Blessed is the man that fears alwaie, but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into evil.

What shall I say? None but the wicked favor iniquity. The despisers of GOD,
look where they take any pleasure, and find sweetness, there they hold
themselves, and feed their greedy humors; and it falls out, as Solomon
says, that he who is thoroughly an hungered, thinks the meat which he eats
to be sweet, although it be as bitter as wormwood.

Those unsavory morsels of unseemly sentences passing out of the mouth of a
ruffenlie plaier does more content the hungry humors of the rude multitude,
and carries better relish in their mouths, than the bread of the word, which
is the food of the soul.

They are always eating, and never satisfied; ever seeing, and never
contented; continualie hearing, and never wearied; they are greedy of
wickedness, and will let no time, nor spare for any weather (so great is their
devotion to make their pilgrimage) to offer their penie to the Devil.

It is the nature of the wicked to find alwaie such sweetenes in their
misdoings, The nature of sin.
as they will never give over, til they be overthrown by Gods righteous
judgment, or reclamed by the secret working of his holy spirit.

Look upon an whore-master, Calvin upon Job, chap. 74.
if he be once chased with his own lust, the Devil blindes him, and makes him
take such pleasure in his wickedness, that al his delight is therein. If a man
be given to dro^kennes, or to other wickedness, he will hardly be reclamed, or
give it over, so great sweetenes does he taste in those unseemly pleasures, if
so I may say. Thus you may see the despisers of God do find sweetenes in all
their misdoings.

O my dear brethren, let not your affections carry you to wickedness; it
behooves you to be very wary, and circumspect how you thrust your selves
into public assemblies of profane plays, since there be so many
inticements unto loosenes, and so many means to train you to unthriftiness
there, as wonder it is, if you haunt them but your souls will be grieuouslie
hurt.

Pleasure their captain is so politic an enemy, that he knows how to
train you into danger. But when ye are once within his lap, hard will it be for
you to escape. because he can use you so friendly, and so fitly apply
himself to your appetites, that ye will rather wish to be in bondage with him,
than at liberty without him. So that ye are warelie to shun his ambushes, and
so to retire, that Satan be not able to endamage you any kind of way. And
that you may do it the better, it is meet that ye be made privy to his
subtle policies.

It was truly said of Chrysostom, that none is hurt but of himself; no man
has so dangerous a foe, as that he caries about him. The snake in our bosom,
which we nurish with such care, will soonest annoie us. Let us throw away our
fleshly minds, and bridle our affections. For if they may have the head, they
will never leave running til they have overthrown us, and brought us to a
wretched state.

In the beginning cuerie disease is to be stopped, and cured; but if a sore run
ouer-long it will grow past the cure of the Physician.

The Magistrate is therefore to provide in time a remedy to redress the
mischiefs that are like to ensue by this common plague. Duty of a Magistrate.
They which govern the state are to try, and decerne each cause, that they
appear not to deal unadvisedly. They are to be diligent to find out the
truth of things; and when a matter is known of them to be evil, it is their
part to reform it; otherwise by negligence they shall run into the displeasure
of God.

The Magistrates heart must be as the heart of a Lion. Virtues of a Magistrate.
He is not to shrink in the Lords cause, or to stand in fear to reform
abuses of the Commonweal, because of some particular men of authority. He
must have both stoutnes, and constancy to repress evil. And then doubtless the
Lord will bless them in their enterprises. Let not therefore the intercession
of the mighty move the Magistrate to staic his sword from doing justice on
the wicked.

The parcialitie which is used in these days for favor, makes these yonkers to
become bolder by reason of those liberties which are granted them. They uphold
themselves by the countenance of their masters: as if their authority were a
warrant sufficient for them to do evil, and to bear them out against good
orders.

Let not the abuse of the Sabbath proceed further and further, and in the
mean while the judge be a looker on, daring not for fear to reform their
disorder til al be out of order. A note for Noblemen.
Alas, that private affection should so reign in the Nobility, that to
pleasure, as they think, their servants, and to uphold them in their vanity,
they should restrain the Magistrates from executing their office! what credit
can return to the Noble, to countenance his men to exercise that quality
which is not sufferable in any Co^mon-weale? whereas it was an ancient custom,
that no man of Honor should retain any man, but such as was excellent in some
one good quality or other, whereby if occasion so served, he might get his
owneliuing? Then was every noble ma^s house a Commonweal in it self: but
since the reteining of these Caterpillars, the credit of Noble men has
decayed, and they are thought to be covetous by permitting their servants,
Plaiers bold beggars.
which cannot live of themselves, and whom for neerenes they will not
maintain, to live at the devotion or alms of other men, passing from country
to country, from one Gentleman's house to another, offering their service,
which is a kind of beggerie. Who in deed, to speak more truly, are become
beggars for their servants. For co^monlie the goodwil men bear to their
Lords, makes them draw the stringes of their purses to extend their
liberality to them; where otherwise they would not.

By such infamous persons much time is lost; and many days of honest travel
are turned into vain exercises. Wherein is learned nothing but abuse; poor
men living on their handie labor, are by them trained unto unthriftiness;
scholars by their gaudes are allured from their studies.

Thus the people are robbed; youth corrupted; the Sabbath profaned; and of al
these evils, who are counted the vpholders but the Noble, who of right should
establish the law of the Roman Traiane, Traiane the Emperor.
who commanded that no plaier, iester, nor iugler should be admitted in his
Commonweal to pick the purses of his subjects, but that they should either
learn some occupation to maintain themselves in their own houses, or
otherwise be banished out of Rome. But now such like men, under the title of
their masters or as reteiners, are privileged to roaue abroad, and permitted
to publish their mametree in every Temple of God, Temples profaned with
plays.
and that throughout England, unto the horrible contempt of prayer. So that now
the Sanctuary is become a plaiers stage, and a den of thieves and adulterers.

It was ordained in Rome by that aforesaid Emperor, Why the Emp. Traiane
ordained but 22. holie-daies throughout the year.
that the Romans should observe but 22. holy days throughout the whole year.
For he thought without al doubting, that the gods were more served on such
days as the Romans did labor, than on such days as they rested: because the
vices were more then which they did commit, than the sacrifices they did offer.

And trust me I am of that opinion, God worst served on the Sabbath days.
that the Lord is never so^l served as on the holie-daies. For then hell breaks
loase. Then we permit our youth to have their swinge; and when they are out of
the sight of their masters, such government have they of themselves, that what
by il company they meet withal, and il examples they learn at plays, I
fear me, I fear me their hearts are more alienated in two hours from virtue,
than again may well be amended in a whole year.

But let us leave to speak hereof, and return we to the further abuse of
these plays, which is in breach of the first Table of the commandments. Is it
not expreslie commanded of God in Deuteronomie, Deu. 11, 5.
That we should not take his Name in vain, either by swearing rashly, or
falsely? Are we not flatly warned, if we do infringe the same, that he will
not hold us giltles? yet how well this commandment is kept at plays, no man
which resortes to hear them, but can report.

How often is the sacred, The blasphemous speeches used at plays.
and reverend Name of God blasphemed on the stages, without regard of his
judgments! Is not he held the gallantest rufler, that can rap out the most
disguised oaths, to tempt the Lord withal! As who should say, it were
allowable to swear, so it were done covertly. As if it were none offense to
resemble the wicked; and that to dissemble were commendable.

Christ has willed us not to swear at al, Matthew. 5, verse. 34.
but these fellows think they may iugle with God, as they do with the world.
Therefore to verefie their false-hoodes they take the names of Jupiter,
Saturn, Juno, and such like profane Gods, as they are called, and Goddesses
of the Gentiles, and that they think they may do lawfulie. But, if that be
not lawful which by the Scripture is not warranted, I dare auar that that
swearing is as odious as the other; and as plainly forbidden by the word of
God. As we may read in Exodus; Exodus 23, verse. 13.
where among other things that God sets down for the Israelits to do, he
gives this unto them as a principal charge, that they make no mention of the
names of other Gods; that they open not their lips to speak of them; or to
swear by them, or otherwise. And hereupon David says, Psalm. 16, 4.
That the sorrows of them which offer to another GOD shall be multiplied, their
offerings of blood, says he, will I not offer, neither make mention of their
names with my lips.

How then can these men excuse themselves, Plaiers open idolaters.
that they have not offered this sacrifice of blood! when they not only name
those profane gods in their mouths, and take them as witnesses of their
falsehood, shall we not say they have confented to idolatry? I refer their
cause to be considered of the learned, my self may not pass beyond my
latchet: but this much I dare affirm, that these men which dally with God
with their blasphemous swearings, are not out of the danger of his indignation,
and without repentance shall be no partakers of Christ, nor of his merits.

For all their oaths what are they but open reproaches against the Name of God?
When these men swear, as they swear at adventure, does it not declare that
they regard not the Name of GOD, which ought to be holden holy in our sight
Who so swears vainlie by the Name of the Lord, Leuit. 19, verse. 12.
defiles it. The Israelitish woman's son for blaspheming the Name of the
Lord, Leuit. 24, verse. 10. 11, etc.
was stoned to death.

How is it, Who can hear plays and not abhor them.
my dear brethren, that we can hear the Name of the Lord uttered from the
mouth of these blasphemers, without casting down our heads, and acknowleging
his infinite majesty! How is it that we can hear, without stopping our ears,
so many counterfeit oaths uttered of plaiers! which, Hearers of plays are
accessarie to the wickedness of plaiers.
as light as they seem in our eyes, are great reproaches, and injuries to the
Majesty of GOD. Whereunto ye are accessarie, inasmuch as ye can vouchsafe to
hear them without scruple of conscience. But it appears ye have little
conscience, and therefore be so little moved.

Others there be which flatter themselves in evil, Defenders of plays.
acco^pting that precious which is most profane. They will stand in contention,
and defend the cause of the wicked, yea they have prepared arguments against
Gods children; so small power have they to withstand the fancies which the devil
puts into their heads. Well, let these men make their arguments, as sure as
they can, though they have an hundred replies in the defense of the wicked,
yea, and such as may seem to carry good likelihood for the maintenance of
their cause: yet shall they be as nothing, but fall to the earth, when the judge
of the cause shall argue against them. What shall I say? wickedness so
increases, and grows more and more to ripenes, when men give it scope, and
seek not to redress it in convenient time. A note of Magistrates.
When the wicked are suffered and not repressed, we must needs say the
Magistrate is a cause of such misbehauior. Six score years before the flood,
the world did so exceed in voluptuousnes and pleasure, as if the Lord had left
to take the charge of men: but whilst they lived so at pleasure and ease,
their arrainement was preparing in heaven; and when their sin was ripe, the
Lord pronounced judgment against those wicked livers; rained from heaven, and
made a general submersion of the whole world. I cannot otherwise think, but
that the wrath of God hanges over us, and that our arrainment is alredie
drawn: we lack but our judgment, which can pronounce nothing but death and
damnation, the sins of al men are so grievous.

If we would consider the shortness of our life, which with the turning of an
hand may be cut off, we could not be so careless of our selves. But the
pleasures of this life so beguile us, and draw us from the consideration of
our estate, that we are utterly unmindful of our duties, and forgetful of God,
and his word. But let us not think that God in sparing us of his mercy, does
give liberty for to sin; as though we might do wickedlie because we are
unpunished. Oh let us not delaie our amendment til he smite, but rather with
the repenting Ninevites advisedly prevent his judgments: otherwise, when we
shall say like reprobates, Peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 3.
and salfetie, then shall come upon us sudden destruction.

Alas that we should so immeasurable follow those vanities, which God
condemns. Those pleasures of the stage, what are they, but the drifts of
Satan, which he uses to blind our eyes withal, the more easily to carry us
from the obedience of GOD! Such knacks from time to time he has set up, and
men have willingly followed that which they have liked of, and which the
pleasure of the flesh has drawn them unto. Yea now adays we see many that
only seek after those vain delights, counting no time well spent, but that
they consume in beholding of gaudes.

And albe these pastimes were not (as they are) to be condemned simply of
their own nature: yet because they are so abused they are abominable. For the
fool no sooner shows himself in his colors to make men merry, but
straight-waie lightly there follows some vanity, not only superfluous, but
beastly and wicked.

Yet are we so carried away with his unseemly gesture, and irreverent
scorning, that we seem only to be delighted in him; and are not content to
sport our selves with modest mirth, as the matter gives occasion, unless it be
intermixed with knauerie, dronken merie-ments, crafty coosenings, indecent
iuglings, clownish conceits, and such other cursed mirth, as is both odious in
the sight of God, and offensive to honest ears, being forbidden by S. Paul in
his epistle unto the Ephesians, where he wills us expreslie, that Neither
filthiness, Ephesians. 5, 3. 4.
neither foolish talking, nor jesting, which are things not comely, should be
once named among us. Al which things we now count but light sins (so blind
we are, and so far past our selves, and the knowledge of God.)

No zealous heart but must needs bleed, to see how many Christian souls are
there swalowed up in the whirle-poole of devilish impudency. Whosoever shall
visit the chapel of Satan, Theaters the chapels of Satan.
I mean the Theater, shall find there no want of young ruffins, nor lack of
harlots, utterly past al shame: who press to the fore-frunt of the
scaffoldes, to the end to show their impudency, and to be as an object to al
men's eyes. Yea, such is their open shameless behauior, as every man may
perceive by their wanton gestures, whereunto they are given: yea, they seem
there to be like brothels of the stews. The open wickedness of harlots at
plays.
For often without respect of the place, and company which behold them they
commit that filthiness openly, which is horrible to be done in secret; as if
whatsoever they did, were warranted. For neither reverence, justice, nor any
thing beside can govern them.

Alas, An admonition to Magistrates.
that youth should become so devilish, and void of the fear of God. Let
Magistrates assure themselves, that without speedy redress al things will
grow so far out of order, as they will be past remedy. Shamefastnes, and
modesty is quite banished from young men: they are utterly shameless,
stubborn, and impudent.

It was well said of Calvin, that a man settled in evil, will make but a scofof
religion. He preaches in vain, that preaches unto the deaf. Tell many of
these men of the Scripture, they will scof, and turn it unto a jest. Rebuke
them for breaking the Sabbath day, they will say, you are a man of the Sabbath,
you are very precise; you will allow us nothing; you will have nothing but the
word of God; you will permit us no recreation, but have men like Asses, who
never rest but when they are eating.

Seek to withdraw these fellows from the Theater unto the sermon, they will
say, By the preacher they may be edified, but by the plaier both edified and
delighted. So that in them the saying of S. Paul is verified, where he says,
that The wisdom of the flesh is nothing but enimitie against GOD. Romans 8, 7.
How small heed take they of the^felues, which suffer their own wicked
affections to withdraw them from God, and his word. We need not voluntarily
seek our own destruction. For he that is virtuouslie disposed, shall find
lewd persons enough to withdraw him from well doing by the promise of
pleasure, and delightful pastime, Theaters the schoolehouse of Satan, and
chapels of il counsel.
whereunto we are naturalie inclined, unto the Schoolehouse of Satan, and
chapel of il counsel, where he shall see so much iniquity, and loasenes; and
so great outrage and scope of sin, that it is a wonder, if he return not
either wounded in conscience, or changed in life.

I would wish therefore al masters, Counsel to masters.
not only to withdraw themselves, but their servants also from such wicked
assemblies. For it is always wisdom to shun the occasions of evil.

Youth will be withdrawn by company, if they be not restrained of their
liberty. They need not to seek out for schoolmasters, they can learn evil
too fastof themselves, and are pregnant enough at home to learn unhappiness.
Many of nature honest, and tractable, have been altered by those shows and
spectacles, and become monsterous. Man's mind, which of it self is proane unto
vice, is not to be pricked forward unto wantonness, but bridled: if it be left
unto it self, it hardly stands; if it be driven forth, it runs headlong.

Flee far from Baby lon, ye that carry the Lords vessels. Romans 6, 3.
For So Much as ye are baptized into Christ, it stands you upon to be holy
both of body and mind, and to dedicate your felues to his service, which ye
shall never do, unless ye withdraw your selves from the inticements of vanity,
and eschew the occasions of evil, which that ye may the better do, ye are to
fasten your eyes upon God, by whom we are sanctified.

Let not the examples of the wicked be a president unto us; Ilexamples to be
shunned.
neither let us be drawn away to evil with the multitude. Custom shall but
make us bold in sin, and the company of scorners make us more impudent, and
disordered of life.

It is not enough for us to excuse our selves by the doings of other men; it
will not be taken for an excuse, although we could allege that every man does
as we do. For it is no means to acquit us before God, to say that other be
no better than our selves. I would rather wish that the evil conversation of
others might be an occasion to draw us back; least perhaps we be wrapped in
the vices that reign in all the wicked, and so be partakers of the punishment
due to them. For we are not to walk as men that look but only upon the
creatures, but our part is to set God before our eyes, whose presence we cannot
possibly escape.

It is marvelous to consider how the gesturing of a plaier, Motion of the body.
which Tullie terms the eloquence of the body, is of force to move, and
prepare a man to that which is il. For such things be disclosed to the eye,
and to the ear, as might a great deal better be kept close. Whereby a double
offense is committed; first by those dissolute plaiers, which without regard of
honesty, are not ashamed to exhibit the filthiest matters they can devise to
the sight of men: secondly by the beholders, which vouchsalfe to hear and
behold such filthy things, to the great loss both of themselves and the time.
There comes much evil in at the ears, but more at the eyes, by these two
open windows death breaks into the soul. Nothing enters in more
effectualie into the memory, than that which comes by seeing, things heard
do lightly pass away, but the tokens of that which we have seen, says
Petrarch, stick fast in us whether we will or no: and yet they enter not into
us, unless we be willing, except very seldom.

Alack what violence carries us away, to be merry an hour, and always after
to be sad; to see that at one time, which a thousand times after we shall rue
that ever we saw it!

Many have been entangled with the webs of these Spiders, who would gladly
have been at liberty when they could not. The webs are so subtillie spun, that
there is no man that is once with in them, that can avoid them without danger.
None can come within those snares that may escape untaken, be she maid,
matrone, or whatsoever; such force have their inchantements of pleasure to
draw the affections of the mind. Snares of plays.


This inward fight has vanquished the chastity of many women; some by taking
pity on the deceitful tears of the stagelouers, have been moved by their
complaint to rue on their secret friends, whom they have thought to have tasted
like torment; some having noted the ensamples how maidens restrained from the
marriage of those whom their friends have misliked, have there learned a
policy to prevent their parents, by stealing them away; some seeing by
ensample of the stage plaier one carried with too much liking of an other man's
wife, having noted by what practice she has been assailed and overtaken, have
not failed to put the like in effect in earnest, that was before showen in jest.

The wilines and craft of the stage is not yet so great, as is without on the
scaffoldes. For that they which are evil disposed, no sooner hear any thing
spoken that may serve their turn, but they apply it unto themselves. Alas,
say they to their familiar by them, Gentlewoman, is it not pity this
passioned lover should be so martyred. And if he find her inclining to foolish
pity, as commonly such women are, then he applies the matter to himself,
and says that he is likewise carried away with the liking of her; craving that
pity to be extended upon him, as she seemed to show toward the afflicted
amorous stager.

These running headed lovers are grown so perfect scholars by long continuance
at this school, that there is almost no word spoken, but they can make matter
of it to serve their turn. They can so surely discover the conceits of the
mind, and so cunningly handle themselves; and are grown so subtle in
working their matters, that neither the ielosie of Juno, who suspecteth al
things; nor the straight keeping of Danaes may debar; nor the watchfulnes of
Argoes with his hundred eyes epsy.

Credit me, Fly Theaters you that would be honest.
there can be found out no stronger engine to batter the honesty as well of
wedded wives, as the chastity of unmarried maids and widows, than are the
hearing of common plays. There wanton wives fables, and pastorical songs of
love, which they use in their comical discourses (al which are taken out of the
secret armorie of Venus, and practicing bawderie) turn al chastity vpside
down, and corrupt the good disposition and manners of youth, insomuch that it
is a miracle, if there be found any either woman, or maid, which with these
spectacles of strange lust, is not oftentimes inflamed even unto fury.

The nature of their Comedies are, for the most part, after one manner of
nature, like the tragical Comedy of Calistus; where the bawdresse Scelestina
inflamed the maiden Melibeia with her forceries. Do we not use in these
discourses to counterfeit witchcraft, charmed drinks, and amorous potions,
thereby to draw the affections of men, and to stir them up unto lust, to like
even those whom of themselves they abhor. The ensamples whereof stir up the
ignorant multitude to seek by such unlawful means the love, and goodwil of
others.

I can tell you a story of like practice used of late by a ielous wife to her
husband, A strange example.
whose heart being, as she thought, estranged otherwise than of custom, did
practice with a sorceresse to have some powder, which might have force to renew
her husbands wonted goodwil toward her: but it had such a virtue in the
operation, as it well nigh brought him his bane: for his memory thereby was
gone: so that if God had not dealt miraculouslie with him, by revealing it, it
had cost him his life. The like we read of Lucullus and Lucretius, who by
drinking such amorous confections lost first their wits, and afterward their
lives.

The devise of carrieng and recarrieng letters by landresses, practicing with
pedlers to transport their tokens by colorable means, to sell their
merchandise, and other kind of policies to beguile fathers of their children,
husbands of their wives, gardens of their wards, and masters of their
servants, is it not aptly taught in the School of abuse He means plays,
who are not unfitly so called.
? But hush no more.

I am sorry this school is not plucked down by the Magistrate; and the
schoolmasters banished this city. London.
Thus much I will tell them, if they suffer these brothel houses to continue, or
do in any wise allow them, the Lord will say unto them, as the Psalmist
says, If thou saw a thief thou wentest with him, and had thy part with
adulterers; thou have done these things, and because I have held my peace, thou
have believed, wicked man, that I am like unto thee, but I will accuse thee, etc.

The reverend word of God, and histories of the Bible set forth on the stage by
these blasphemous plaiers, are so corrupted with their gestures of scurrilitie,
and so interlaced with unclean, and whorish speeches, that it is not possible
to draw any profit out of the doctrine of their spiritual moralities. For
that they exhibit under laughing that which ought to be taught and received
reuerendlie. So that their auditorie may return mad merry in mind, but
none comes away reformed in manners. And of al abuses this is most indecent
and intolerable, to suffer holy things to be handled by men so profane, and
defiled by interpositio^ of dissolute words.

The writers of our time are so led away with vaineglorie, Against Auctors of
plays.
that their only endeavor is to pleasure the humor of men; and rather with
vanity to content their minds, than to profit them with good ensample. The
notablest lier is become the best Poet; he that can make the most notorious
lie, and disguise falsehood in such sort, that he may pass vnperceaued, is
held the best writer. For the strangest Comedy brings greatest delectation,
and pleasure. Our nature is led away with vanity, which the auctor perceauing
frames himself with novelties and strange trifles to content the vain humors
of his rude auditors, faining countries never heard of; monsters and prodigious
creatures that are not: as of the Arimaspie, of the Grips, the Pigmeies, the
Cranes, and other such notorious lies. And if they write of histories that are
known, as the life of Pompeie; the martial affairs of Caesar, and other
worthies, they give them a new face, and turn them out like counterfeites to
show themselves on the stage. It was therefore aptly applied of him, Writers
of these days.
who likened the writers of our days unto Tailors, who having their sheers in
their hand, can alter the facion of any thing into another form, and with a
new face make that seem new which is old. The shreds of whose curiosity our
Historians have now stolen from them, being by practice become as cunning as
the Tailor to set a new upper body to an old coat; and a patch of their own
to a piece of another.

So that ye shall find in all their writings three differences, The best thing
at plays is stark naught.
many things good, many things indifferent, and many struck naught: but by
reason that thing which is good is applied unto il purpose, and mixed with
evil, the good has changed property, and is become of the nature of the bad.
Otherwise goodness and badnes, being two co^traries, cannot be made to agree
together. And therefore there can be no difference of choice, but al must be
evil: because it is generally il applied, and by altering property, has
changed his nature. Yet nevertheless that it keeps his virtue, of being good,
and reduced to his proper substance.

I do not deny, but that writers inal their works may be pleasant, so far
forth as they be profitable, and swerve not from honesty, and therein deserve
commendation. But what praise may they deserve who set forth those works which
are vain and naught, and contain in them no matter of good example, who write
of those things, which may corrupt the life of men, thereby making them worse
by ten to one, than they were before they heard them?

What do they leave behind them? monumentes of wanton wicked life, and doting
things for men of these latter days. O Lord, how do those* wanton words of
theirs entice unto wicked life, and with a poisoned bait allure men to sin!
Their wanton speeches do pearse our secret thoughts, and move us thereby unto
mischief, and provoke our members to uncleanness.

But some perhaps will say, An Objection.
The Noble man delights in such things, whose humors must be contented,
partly for fear, and partly for commodity: and if they write matters
pleasant, they are best preferred in court among the cunning heads.

Cunning heads, whose wits are never well exercised, but in the practice of such
exploits! But are those things to be suffered and praised, Answer.
because they please the rich, and content the Noble man, that always lives in
ease? not so. A two legged Ass may be clothed in gold, a man of honor may be
corrupt of judgment, though by his authority he may seem wiser than
Socrates, whom Phoebus for wisdom judged to bear the bell. Those goodly
persons, if they be void of virtue, may well be counted like fair clothes
over a foul wall; big bladers full of wind, yet of no weight. Where wealth is
abundant, pleasure is present: pleasure brings folly into estimation; and
thereby the light of reason is utterly extinguished.

Who writes for reward, Writers for reward.
neither regards virtue, nor truth; but runs unto falsehood, because he
flattereth for commodity. Need and flattery are two brothers, and the eldest
seruitors in the Court: they were both scholars unto Aristippus, and learned
both of them to apply themselves to the time, and their matter to the
disposition? No marvel then though none can please Dionysius but Aristippus,
nor any the courtier but the flatterer.

The rich that follows the pleasures of this life, Conditions of the worldly
rich.
may not abide to be reformed, or to be drawn away from his desires, be they
never so wicked and unseemly. Talk to him of amendment, he will say, he is
not dieng. He that reprehends him, is a Preacher; he that sooths him, is a
Saint. Who meddels with nettles cannot pass vnstinged: and he that deals with
men of authority otherwise than may like them, cannot escape from his danger
without hurt. I may not stay longer on this point.

As I have had a saying to these versi-fieng Plaie-makers: Against training up
of boys to plays.
so must I likewise deal with shameless inactors. When I see by them young
boys, inclining of themselves unto wickedness, trained up in filthy speeches*
unnatural and unseemly gestures, to be brought up by these Schoolmasters in
bawderie, and in idleness, I cannot choose but with tears and grief of heart
lament.

O with what delight can the father behold his son bereft of shamefastnes,
Plaiers, the schoolemaisters of sin, in the school of abuse.
and trained up to impudency! How proane are they of themselves, and apt to
receive instruction of their lewd teachers, which are the Schoolemasters of
sin in the school of abuse! what do they teach them, I pray you, but to
foster mischief in their youth, that it may always abide in them, and in
their age bring them sooner unto hell?

And as for those stagers themselves, Disposition of plaiers for the most part.
are they not commonly such kind of men in their conversation, as they are in
profession? Are they not as variable in heart, as they are in their parts? are
they not as good practisers of Bawderie, Plaiers can not better be compared
than to the Camelion.
as inactors? Live they not in such sort themselves, as they give precepts unto
others? does not their talk on the stage declare the nature of their
disposition? does not every one take that part which is proper to his kind?
does not the Plough-mans tongue walk of his plough; the Seafaring man of his
mast, cable, and sail; the Soldier of his harnes, spear, and shield; and
bawdie mates of bawdie matters? Ask them, if in their laieng out of their
parts, they choose not those parts which is most agreeing to their
inclination, and that they can best discharge? And look what every of them
does most delight in, that he can best handle to the contentment of others. If
it be a roisting, bawdie, and lascivious part, wherein are unseemly speeches,
and that they make choice of them as best answering, and proper to their manner
of play: may we not say, by how much he exceedes in his gesture, he
delights himself in his part? and by so much it is pleasing to his
disposition and nature? If (it be his nature) to be a bawdie plaier, and he
delight in such filthy and cursed actions, shall we not think him in his life
to be more disordered, and to abhor virtue?

But they perhaps will say, An Objection.
that such abuses as are handled on the stage, others by their examples, are
warned to beware of such evils, to amendment.

In deed if their authority were greater than the words of the Scripture;
Answer.
or their zeal of more force than of the preacher, I might easily be
persuaded to think, that men by them might be called unto good life. But when
I see the word of truth proceeding from the heart, and uttered by the mouth of
the reverend preachers, to be received of the most part into the ear, and but
of a few rooted in the heart: I cannot by any means believe that the words
proceeding from a profane plaier, and uttered in scorning sort, interlaced
with filthy, lewd, and ungodly speeches, have greater force to move men
unto virtue, than the words of truth uttered by the godly Preacher, whose
zeal is such as that of Moses, Exo. 32, 32
who was contented to be raced out of the book of life; Romans 9, 3.
and of Paul, who wished to be separated from Christ for the welfare of his
brethren. If the good life of a man be a better instruction to repentance than
the tongue, or words, why do not plaiers, I beseech you, leave examples of
goodness to their posterity? But which of them is so zealous, or so tendereth
his own salvation, that he does amend himself in those points, which, as
they say, others should take heed of? Are they not notoriously known to be
those men in their life abroad, as they are on the stage, roisters, brallers,
il-dealers, bosters, lovers, loiterers, ruffins? So that they are always
exercised in plaieng their parts; and practicing wickedness; making that an art,
to the end they might the better gesture it in their parts. For who can better
play the ruffin tha^ a very ruffin? who better the lover, than they who make
it a common exercise? To conclude, Chief end, of plays.
the principal end of all their interludes is to feed the world with sights,
and fond pastimes; to iuggle in good earnest the money out of other men's purses
into their own hands.

What shall I say? Plaiers infamous persons.
They are infamous men; and in Rome were thought worthy to be expelled,
Plaiers banished out of Rome.
albe there was liberty enough to take pleasure.

In the primative Church they were kept out from the Communion of Christians,
In the primative Church plaiers kept from the Communion.
and never remitted til they had performed public penance. And thereupon S.
Cyprian in a certain Epistle counseleth a Bishop; not to receive a plaier into
the pension of the Church, by which they were norished, til there was an
express act of penance with protestation to renounce an art so infamous. And
thus much for those plaiers.

Some have objected, Objection.
that by these public plays many forbear to do evil for fear to be
publicly reprehended. And for that cause they will say it was tolerated in
Rome, wherein Emperors were touched, though they were present.

But to such it may be answered, Answer.
first that in disguised plaiers given over to al sorts of dissolutenes, is
not found so much as a will to do good, seeing they care for nothing less than
for virtue. Secondly, that is not a good means to correct sin. For that if
it be secret, it ought not to be revealed openly, but by such means to be
reformed as Christ himself allows in his Gospel. If, Matthew. 18, verse. 15.
says he, thy brother trespass against thee, speaking of those secret and
particular sins, which are not open, and made known to others, go and tell
him his fault between thee and him alone; if he hear thee, thou have won
thy brother. But if he hear thee not, Matthew. 18, verse. 16.
take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be confirmed. 17.
And if he will not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church: (which is,
to those ancient and expert men of the Jews which were appointed to reform
manners, and execute discipline. For those assemblies of ancient Fathers did
represent the Church; because they had the charge thereof appointed unto them)
and if he refuse to he are the Church also, let him be unto thee as an Heathen
man, and a Publicane.

You see then that every fault being privately known is to be kept secret,
and not to be openly uttered to the defamation of the offender. And that on
the otherside, if it be a matter openly known, it is to be put to the
reprehension of the Magistrate, and not of the plaier, whose reprehension is as
irreverent, and odious, as the reprehension of a Magistrate is decent, and
commendable.

The antiquity of plaieng is An objection answered.
likewise often used for an argument to prove it allowable. But the custom of
evil is not to be maintained, Against the antiquity of plays.
because of antiquity. Gods truth is not to be oppressed under that color,
what examples of antiquity soever do serve to maintain wickedness, I am not
bound to allow of them, or to maintain them. For my part I disallowe al
those antiquities which are contrary to the Scriptures. Those spectacles were
used of the Gentiles to the setting up of idolatry, and to the honor of their
false gods: as Pesa and Elis. Such games were exercised in the honor of Jupiter
worshipped on the hill Olympus. Theseus ordained in the straightes of Corinth
the Isthemian games in the honor of Neptune. There were also Pythij ludi,
Ludifunebres, Lupercalia, Saturnalia, and Circenses ludi, and many other
devised as well by Romans as Greeks to the great charges of their
Co^mon-weales. The exercise whereof was both bloody and beastly, and yet
among them sufferable and allowed.

Notwithstanding, these are not examples unto Christians to allow that for
good, which was sufferable among them. For then one might slaie another; one
might wound another; then should we encounter with wild beasts; our hearts
should then delight in shedding blood; and be al guilty of the death of the
murdered.

As for the plaiers in these days which exhibit their games for lucre sake,
as did those two Romans Esopus, The account which good men have of our common
gamesters, and plaiers.
and Arossus, who showed their wonderful cunning on the stage to gather wealth
and substance; they are of the most part of men either of authority, or
learning held for vagabondes, and infamous persons; they may aptly be likened
unto droanes, which will not labor to bring in, but live of the labors of the
paineful gatherers. They are therefore to be thrust out of the Bee-hiue of a
Christian Commonweal.

This dishonest trade of gain, has driven many from their occupations, in
hope of easier thrift. What success they have had, some of them have reported,
finding the Proverb true, that, Il gotten goods are il spent.

The city Marsiles, Would to God London would follow the example of Marsiles.
as Valerian writes, kept so great gravity, that it would receive into it no
stage-plaiers: because their arguments, for the most part, contained the acts
and doings of harlots; to the end that the custom of beholding such things
might not also cause a license of following them. Hark Magistrates of London.
I would to God the Magistrates of our city of London would have the like
foresight. The permission of plays so long a time has already corrupted this
city; London defamed thorough plays there used.
and brought the Name of the citizens into slander: the examples of Gods
judgment is at this present an example in this city. Judges. 19, verse. 1. 2,
etc.
The sin of whoredom being winked at by the children of Benjamin, they were
punished by the destruction of their whole tribe. If we slack to punish
offenders, and give our selves to maintain the wicked in their lewdenes, we
are to look for none other than a general confusion. For the Lord himself will
take part against the wicked to destroy them. They may be well let alone for a
time, but yet that which is deferred will one day come.

In the reign of Tiberius the Emperor, the Lord by overthrowing the
Amphitheater in A worthy example of Gods justice upon a play house, or Theater.
the city of Tidena slew 20. thousand of the beholders. A notable example of
Gods justice. For notable offenders he appoints strange and notable
punishments: And look wherewith a man sins, Wisd. 11, verse. 13.
by the same also shall he be punished.

Wherefore, The conclusion.
my dear brethren, leave these Cretan liers with their wicked inventions* Do
not company with the wicked; Prou. 24, 1 Romans 12, 2.
facion not your selves like unto this world; but be ye changed by the renewing
of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable,
and perfect, eschew evil and do good. Psa. 34, 14. 1. Pet* 3, 11
He that shall say to the wicked, Prou. 24. verse. 24.
Thou art righteuous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor
him. 20.
For the Lord is far from the wicked; their house shall be destroyed, there
shall be none end of their plagues, their light shall be put out. Yield not your
selves to them, lest ye perish in their wickedness; yield not your selves to
those vain pleasures and delights. For ye shall find nothing more hurtful, nor
prejudicial to your souls; they deprive you of al good cogitations; enemies
they are unto virtue; increasers of wickedness; the nurses of al vice; the
corrupters of manners; the subuerters of religion; and so bring at the end unto
everlasting sorrows and gnashing of teeth in the pit of hell.

The Lord of his infinite mercy look upon us, and direct us with his holy
spirit; and so order our lives, that we may be holy and acceptable in his
sight. The Lord open our eyes, that we may see our sin, and loath it in our
selves, repress it in the wicked, and condemn it in our Commonweal. Lord
increase our devotion, that our hearts may be made zealous to hear the word of
God, which is a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths.

Preserve this Church of England; increase thy flock universal; be a safeguard
unto us against the force of our enemies, for our trust is in thee.

Bless our worthy Princess, and renowned sovereign Queen ELIZABETH, and
establish her state, as the seat of David; let thy spirit direct her doings in all things; that she may be as the zealous Josias to uphold the state of the
true Church; to root out superstition and idolatry; that she may be as a
continual enemy to the enemies of thy truth. Be thou, o Lord, her supporter,
that thou by her may defend thine own cause.

Merciful God, inspire her honorable Counsel with the wisdom of Solomon, that
their counsel may be wise and good; and their hearts linked vnseparablie
together to the preservation of her state, and the welfare of this land.

Lord strengthen the hand of Justice against the wicked, that our Magistrates
may root out the memorial of wickedness from the earth, that our Realm may
flourish, and our lives be as a lamp on a mountain, to give light unto other
nations how to direct their lives after our good example.

Perform al wantes, O God, in thy Church; increase our faith and love toward
thee; continue thy Gospel among us for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be al honor and glory, world without
end, Amen.

Ephesians. 5, 13. Al things, when they are repr^oued of the light. are manifest.
For it is light that makes al things manifest.


1580

OS HOMINI SVBLIMI DEDIT



Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star, being the assign of William Seres.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


