TEN SERMONS PREACHED I. Ad Clerum. 3. II. Ad Magistratum. 3. III. Ad Populum.
4.


BY ROBERT SAVNDERSON Bachellor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Lincoln
College in Oxford.

1. Cor. 3.8. He that planteth, and he that waters are one.

LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN, at the sign of the Bible in Fleet Street
near the great Conduit. 1627.

THREE SERMONS, AD CLERVM: PREACHED AT THREE SEVERAL VISITATIONS AT Boston, in
the Diocese and County of Lincoln.

The Third now first published, By ROBERT SAVNDERSON, Batcheller in Divinity,
and sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford.

ROMANS 14.19. Let us follow after the things which make for peace; and things
wherewith one may edify another.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for R. Dawlman, at the Sign of the Bible near the
great Conduit in Fleet-streete. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of London, my
singular good Lord.
My good LORD:
I Had ever thought, the interest of but an ordinary friend, might have drawn
me to that, whereto the despite of a right bitter foe should not have driven
me: till the Fate of these Sermons has taught me my self better, and now
given me at once a sight both of my Error and Infirmity. The improbitie of
some good friends, I had out-stood, who with all their vexation could never
prevail upon me for the publishing of but the former of them: when lo, at
length the restless importunity of hard censures, has wrung both it, and the
fellow of it out of my hands. So much have we a stronger sense of our own
wrongs, than of our friends requests: and so much are we forwarder to justify
our selves, than to gratify them. How ever, if (by Gods good blessing upon
them) these slender labors may lend any help to advance the peace and quiet
of the Church, in settling the judgments of such, as are more either timorous
than they need be, or contentious than they should be: I shall have much cause
to bless his gracious providence in it, who, with as much ease, as sometimes
he brought light out of darkness, can out of private wrongs work public good.
In which hope, I am the rather content to send them abroad: though having
nothing to commend them, but Truth and Plainness. Yet such as they are, I
humbly desire they may pass under your Lordships protection: whereunto I stand
by so many dear names engaged. By the name of a Visitour; in respect of that
Society, whereof I was of late a member: when founded by your Lordships godly
Richard Flemming, and Thomas Rother^am, Bishops of Lincoln,
Predecessors, has had plentiful experience of your Lordships singular both
Care and Justice in preserving their Statutes, and maintaining the rights of
their foundation. By the name of a Diocesan; in respect of the Country,
wherein it has pleased God to seat me: which has found much comfort in your
Lordships religious and moderate government. By the name of a Master; in regard
of that dependence I have upon your Lordship by special service. Which, as it
puts a boldness into me, to tender this small pledge of my thankfulness
to your gracious acceptance: so it lays a strong Obligation upon me to tender
my best prayers unto Almighty God for the continuance and increase of his
blessings upon your Lordship, to the good of his Church upon earth, and your
eternal crown in heaven.

Booth by Paynell Linc. Nouem. 20. 1621. Your Lordships Chapleine in all
dutiful observance, ROBERT SAVNDERSON.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
GOod Christian Reader, understand, that in the delivery of these Sermons
(because it was fit I should proportion my speech as near as I could, to the
hour) I was forced to cut off here and there part of what I had penned: which
yet now, together with that which was spoken, I here present to thy view,
distinguished from the rest with this note (") against the lines. Thus much I
thought needful to advertise thee (because I see men are cap^^^us more than
enough,) le^t I should be blamed of unfaithfulness, in either adding any thing
unto, or altering any thing of, that which I delivered: which I have avoided,
as near as the imperfection both of my Copies, and memory would permit. Read
without gall, or prejudice: Let not truth fare the worse for the Plainenes:
Catch not advantage at Syllables and Phrases: Study, and seek the Churches
Peace: Judge not another servant. Let us all rather pray one for another; and
by our charitable support, help to bear the burdens one of another: and so
fulfill the Law of Christ. Amen. Amen.

The Texts of the several Sermons.
I. AD CLERVM. 3.
LEt not him that eats, I. Romans 14.3.
despise him that eats not: and let not him that eats not judge him that
eats. page 1. And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say; II. Romans 3.8.
Let us do evil, that good may come: Whose damnation is just. page 50. But
the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. III.
1. Cor. 12.7.
page 96.
II. AD MAGISTRATVM. 3.
I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: IIII. Job 29.14.
my judgment was as a roabe, and a diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet
was I to the lame. 15.
I was a father to the poor: 16.
and the cause which I knew not, I searched out. And I brake the jaws of the
wicked, 17.
and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. page 147. Thou shall not raise a
false report: put not, etc. V. Exodus 23.1. etc.
page 199. Then stood up Phinehes, and executed judgment, and so the Plague
was stayed. VI. Psalm. 106.30.
page 238.
III. AD POPVLVM. 4.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? VII. VIII. IX. 3. Kin. 21.29.
because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his
days: but in his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house. page 283.
Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, X. 1. Cor. 7.24.
therein abide with God. page 401.
Some Aduertisements to the Reader.
Know, Christian Reader;
reason I had, to induce me to print these Sermons, was, the irkesomenesse I
had found in transcribing copies of some of them, at the request of some
friends that had desired it: by my facility in yielding to whose desires
therein, I had so far provoked others, that thought they had some interest in
me, to request the like; that I had now no other way left to put them off, and
to redeem my self from an endless drudgery in that kind, than this of
sending them to the Press. Sundry men's importunities, I have stayed hitherto
for a good space, by promising to print those they desired; and have now (so
far) satisfied, by doing it at last.

Aduertisements prefixed before the two first Sermons once before printed,
concerning the meaning of this mark (") before the lines in some places, ought
to be extended to the other eight Sermons also, (now first published,) as well
as to those two.

Contents of each Sermon are so placed in the Margent after this note () in the
beginning of every Section or Paragraph; that the Reader, with running over the
Margent only, may have a brief and summarie abstract of the several Sermons.
God bless them all to thy Instruction and Comfort. Amen.

THE FIRST SERMON. At a Visitation at Boston Linc. 17. April. 1619.

ROMANS 14.3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not
him that eats not, judge him that eats.


IT cannot be avoided,. 1. The occasion.
so long as there is or Weakness on earth, or Malice in hell, but that
scandals will arise, and differences will grow in the Church of God. What
through want of Judgment in some, of Ingenuity in others, of Charity in almost
all; occasions (God knows) of offense are too soon both given and taken:
whilst men are apt to quarrel at trifles, and to maintain differences even
about indifferent things. The Primitive Roman Church was not a little
afflicted with this disease: For the remedying whereof, S. Paul spends this
whole Chapter. The Occasion, this: In Rome there lived in the Apostles times
many Jews; of whom, as well as of the Gentiles, diverse were converted Acts
28.24.
to the Christian Faith, by the preaching of the Gospel. Now of these new
Conuerts, some better instructed than others, as touching the cessation of
legal Ceremonies, made no difference of Meats, or of Days, but used their
lawful Christian liberty in them both, as things in their own nature merely
indifferent: Whereas others, not so thoroughly De nouo conuersus, and de lege
Catholica minus sufficien^er instructus. Lyra.
catechized as they, still made difference for Conscience sake, both of Meats,
accounting them Clean or Unclean; and of days, accounting them holy, or
servile, according as they stood under the Leuiticall Law. These later, S. Paul
calls Verse 1.
(...), weak in the Faith: those former then must by the law of Opposition, be
(...). Romans 15.1.. 2. Scope,
Strong in the Faith.

It would have become both the one sort, and the other, (notwithstanding they
differed in their private judgments, yet) to have preserved the common peace of
the Church, and labored the 2. Cor. 10.8.
edification, not the ruin one of another: the strong by affoording faithful
instruction to the consciences of the weak; and the weak, by allowing
favorable construction to the actions of the strong. But whilst either
measured other by themselves; neither one nor other did Gal 2.14.
(...), as our Apostle elsewhere speaks, Walk uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel. Faults and offenses there were on all hands. The Strong
faulty, in Contemning the Weak; the Weak faulty in Condemning the Strong.
The strong proudly scorned the weak, as silly and superstitious; for making
scruple at some such things, as themselves firmly believed were lawful. The
weak rashly censured the strong, as profane and irreligious; for aduenturing
on some such things, as themselves deeply suspected were unlawful. The blessed
Apostle, desirous all things should be done in the Church in love and 1. Cor.
14.26.
unto edification, Caietan in locum.
aequa lance, and Bulling. in locum.
eodem charitatis moderamine, as Interpreters speak, takes upon him to
arbitrate, and to mediate in the business: and like a just vmpire Job 9.33.
lays his hand upon both parties, impartially shows them their several
ouersights, and begins to draw them to a fair and an honorable
composition: as thus. The Strong, he shall remit somewhat of his
superciliousnesse, in dis-esteeming, and despising the Weak: and the Weak,
he shall abate somewhat of his edge and acrimonie, in judging and condemning
the Strong. If the parties will stand to this order, it will prove a blessed
agreement: for so shall brotherly love be maintained, Scandals shall be
removed, the Christian Church shall be edified, and Gods name shall be
glorified. This is the scope of my Text, and of the whole Chapter.

In the three first Verses whereof, there is (...),. 3. Coherence,
(...), and (...). First, there is (...), in the first Verse; the Proposal of
a general Doctrine as touching to, nor take offense at, the weakness of any.
Him that is weak in the Faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.
Next, there is (...), in the strong in the Faith; he is infallibly resolved,
there is no meat Verse 14.
unclean of it self, or (if received with thankfulness and sobriety) 1.
Cor. 10.23
unlawful: and because he knows he stands upon a sure ground Verse. 2.
(...), he is confident he may eat any thing, and he uses his liberty
accordingly, eating indifferently 1. Cor. 10.27
of all that is set before him, making no question for conscience sake, One man
believes he may eat all things. There is another man Weak in the Faith; he
stands yet unresolved and doubtful, whether some kinds of Meats; as namely,
those forbidden in the Law, be clean; or he is rather carried with a strong
suspicion that they are unclean: out of which timorousness of judgment, he
chooses to forbear those meats, and contenteth himself with the fruits of
the earth; Another who is weak, eats Herbs. This is Species Facti; this the
Question is, in this Case what is to be done, for the auoidance of scandal,
and the maintenance of Christian Charity? And this question my Text resolves
in this third Verse: wherein is contained (...), Saint Paul's judgment; or his
counsel rather, and advice upon the Case, Let not him that eats, despise,
etc. The remainder of the Verse, and of the Chapter being spent, in giving
reasons of the judgment, in this and another like case, concerning the
difference and observation of Days.

I have made choice to entreat at this time of Saint Paul's advice;. 4. and
Division of the Text.
as useful for this place and auditorie, and the present assembly. Which
advice, as the Parties and the Faults are, is also twofold. The Parties two: He
that eats, that is the Strong; and he that eats not, that is the Weak. The
Faults likewise two: The Strong man's fault, that is Literally, setting at
naught; so it is translated, Luke 23.11. and the Latin translation, which
Tertull. followed, reads here fitly to the Greek, Qui manducat, ne nullificet
non manducantem. Tertul. de ieiun. aduersu^ Psych. cap. 1.
(...), despising of his brothers infirmity; and the Weak man's faults, that is
(...), judging of his brothers liberty. Proportionably, the parts of the
advice, accommodated to the Parties, and their Faults, are two. The one, for
the Strong; that he despise not, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not. The other, for the Weak, that he judge not, Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats. Of which when I shall have spoken somewhat
in their general use, I shall by Gods assistance proceed by way of
application to enquire how far the differences in our Church, for conforming,
and not conforming, agree with the present case of eating, and not eating: and
consequently how far forth S. Paul's advice in this case of eating and not
eating, ought to rule us in the cases of conforming, and not conforming in
point of Ceremony. And first of the former rule or branch of the advice, Let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not.

The terms,. 5. We must not despise others.
whereby the Parties are charactered, He that eats, and He that eats not,
have in the opening of the case been already so far unfolded, as that I
shall not need any more to remember you, that by him that eats, must be
understood the strong in Faith, and by him that eats not, the weak. And so
reducing the words ab hypothesi ad Thesin, this part of the advice [ Let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not] bears sense as if the Apostle
had said [ Let not the strong in faith despise the weak.] Weak ones are
easily despised: Strong ones are prone to despise: and yet despising is both a
grievous sin in the despiser, and a dangerous scandal to the despised. In
all which respects, it was but needful the holy Ghost should lesson us, not to
despise one another weakness. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not.

. 6. Though they be never so weak,
Weakness and Smalnesse, be it in what kind soever, is the fittest object to
provoke contempt. As we travel by the way, if a fierce Mastiffe set upon us,
we think it time to look about, and to bestirre our selves for defense: but
we take no notice of the little Curres that bark at us, but despise them.
When Goliath saw little David make toward him, 1. Sam. 17. the Text says, 1.
Sam. 17.42
He disdained him; for he was but a youth. And S. Paul charging Timothy so to
behave himself in the Church of God, as that none should 1. Tim. 4.12.
despise his youth, implies, that youth is obuious to contempt, and likely
enough to be despised. And though Eccles. 9.16.
Wisdom be better than strength, yet Solomon tells us, the poor man's wisdom
is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccl. 9. Psa. 119.141.
I am small, and of no reputation, says David, Psalm. 119. And our Saviors
Caveat in the Gospel is especially concerning little ones, as most open to
contempt: Mat. 18.10.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones. But of all other,
that weakness is most contemptible, which is seen in the faculties of the
understanding Soul: when men are indeed weak in apprehension, weak in
judgment, weak in discretion; or at least wise are thought so. Far from any
real weakness this way, or any other, was our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Col. 2.3.
In whom were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; yet because upon
conference with him, he seemed such unto Herod, not answering any of his
questions, nor that expectation which the same of his miracles had raised of
him in Herod* Herod took him for some silly simple fellow, and accordingly
used him: for he Luke 23.11. (...).
set him at naught, and mocked him, and put him in (...). ibid.
a white coat, as he had been some fool, and sent him back as he came, Luke
23. And of this nature is the weakness my Text has to do withal: a
weakness in judgment; or as it is verse. 1. a weakness in Faith. Where, by
Faith, we are not to understand that justifying Faith, whereby the heart of a
true believer lays fast hold on the gracious promises of God, and the
precious merits of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins: nor by weakness
in Faith, that (...), wherewith the Apostles are Mat. 8.26, 14.31, 16.8.
sometimes charged; when the Faith of a true believer is sore shaken with
temptations of incredulity and distrust. But by Faith we are to understand an
Fides hic significat persuasionem de vsu rerum indifferentium: per Synecdochen
generis. Piscat. Schol. in Romans 14.1.
historical Faith only, which is nothing else but a firm and secure assent
of the judgment unto doctrinall truths in matter of Faith or Life: and by
weakness in such faith, a doubtfulnesse and irresolution of judgment
concerning some divine truths appertaining to the doctrine of Faith or Life;
and namely, concerning the just extent of Christian liberty, and the
indifferent or not indifferent nature or use of some things. Which weakness
of judgment in Faith, bewraying it self outwardly in a nice, and scrupulous,
and timorous forbearance of some things, for fear they should be unlawful;
which yet in truth are not so, but indifferent: does thereby expose the person
in whom such weakness is, to the contempt and despisings of such as are of
more confirmed and resolved judgments, and are stronger in the Faith.

. 7. and we never so strong:
Weakness then is in it self contemptible, yet not more than Strength is
contemptuous. Passive contempt is the unhappiness of the weak; but Active the
fault of the strong. They that find truly, or but ouerweeningly conceit in
themselves abilities, either of a higher nature, or in a greater measure than
in other men, be it in any kind whatsoever; it is strange to see, with what
scornful state they can trample upon their weaker and inferior brethren, and
look upon them (if yet they will at all vouchsafe a look) from aloft, as upon
things below them: which is properly and literally to despise. For so much the
very words, (...) among the Greeks, and among the Latins Despicere do
import. The Pharisee, it is like, cast such a disdainefull look upon the poor
Publicane, when in contempt he called him Luke 18.9, 11.
Iste Publicanus: sure I am, that Parable was spoken of purpose concerning such
as trusted in their own righteousness, and (...). Luke 18.9.
despised others, Luke 18. And they are ever the likeliest thus to despise
others, that conceit something in themselves more than others. Wealth, honor,
strength, beauty, birth, friends, alliance, authority, power, wit, learning,
eloquence, reputation, any trifle; can leaven our thoughts, (partial as they
are toward our selves) and swell us, and heap us up above our brethren: and
because we think we do ouer-top them; we think we may ouer-looke them too,
and despise them as vulgar and contemptible. Agar could despise Sarah; the
bond-seruant, the free woman; the maid, her mistress: only for a little
fruitfulnes of the womb beyond her; because Genesis 16.4, 5.
she saw that she had conceived, and her Mistress was barren, Genes. 16. All
strength and eminency then we see, be it in any little sorry thing, is apt to
breed in men a despising of their weaker and meaner brethren: but none more,
than this strength of knowledge and of faith, wherewith we now deal. It should
be quite otherwise: our knowledge should praeferre facem, hold the light
before us, and help us for the better discovery of our ignorance; and so
dispose us to humility, not pride. But pride and self-love is congenitum
Malum; it is a close, and a pleasing, and an inseparable corruption: which by
sly and serpentine insinuations conueyeth it self, as into whatsoever else is
good and eminent in us, and poysoneth it; so especially into the endowments of
the understanding part. Sharpness of wit, quickness of conceit, faithfulness
of memory, facility of discourse, propriety of elocution, concinnitie of
gesture, depth of judgment, variety of knowledge in Arts and Languages, and
whateuer else of like kind; are but as wind to fill the sails of our pride,
and to make us swell above our brethren, in whom the like gifts are not, or not
in like eminency. Scientia inflat, our Apostle might well say, 1. Cor. 8.1.
Quo didicisse, nisi hoc fermentum, etc.

Pers. Satyr. ^. Vide Casaub. ibi.


Knowledge puffs up: And that it does so readily and vnmeasurably, that
unless there be the greater measure both of humility to prevent, and of
chari^y to vent it, it will in short time breed a dangerous spiritual tympany
in the soul. A disease, from which the strongest constitutions that have
been, have not been altogether so free, but that they have had, if not a spice
of it, yet at least wise an inclination unto it. Even this our blessed Apostle,
who had so much humility, as to account himself 1. Cor. 15.9.
of Apostles the least, but 1. Tim. 1.15.
of sinners the chiefest; was in so great danger 2. Cor. 12.7. (...).
to be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations; that it was
needful he should have a ^har^e in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2. Cor. 12. No marvel then, if
these new Conuerts, but lately called by God ou^ of the darkness of their
ignorance, 1. Pet. 2.9.
into his marvelous great light; and not having their understandings well
informed, and their judgments thoroughly settled in the Doctrine and Use, in
the nature and extent of that Evangelical liberty whereunto they were called:
no marvel I say, if these, upon so sensible a change, were more than a little
distempered with this swelling above their brethren; even as far as to despise
them. So hard is it, even for the most exercised Christian, not to take
knowledge of his own knowledge: or doing so not to despise and neglect the
infirmities of his lesse-knowing brother. It was not then without good need,
that Saint Paul should become a remembrancer to the strong in faith, not to
despise the weak. And there is as good need, the very strongest of us all
should remember it, and take heed of despising even the very weakest. This
despising being hurtful both to the strong, and weak: to the strong, as a
grievous sin; and to the weak, as a grievous scandal.

Despising, first is a sin in the strong.. 8. both for the sins sake.
Admit thy weak brother were of so shallow understanding and judgment, that
he might say in strictnes of truth, what Agur says but in modesty, and that
with an Hyperbole too, Prou. 30. that Prou. 30.2.
surely he were more brutish than any man, and that he had not in him the
understanding of a man: yet the community of nature, and the common condition
of humanity should be sufficient to free him from thy contempt. His body was
formed out of the same dust, his soul breathed into him by the same God, as
thine were: and he is thy neighbor. Let his weakness then be what it can be;
even for that relation of neighborhood, as he is a man, it is sin in thee to
despise him, Pro. 14.21.
[ He that despises his Neighbor, sins, Prou: 14.] But that is not all: He
is not only thy Neighbor, as a man; but he is thy Brother too, as a Christian
man. He has embraced the Gospel, he believes in the Son of God; he is
within the pale of the Church, as well as thou: though he be not so exquisitly
seen in some higher mysteries, nor so thoroughly (...) in some other point,
as-thou art. If it have pleased God to endow thee with a la^ger portion of
knowledge, thou first; that thou art bound to be so much them one thinkefull
to him that gave secondly, that it is expected, thou should do so much the
more good within; and thirdly again, that thou art charged with so much the
deeper acc^u^t for it. If the same God have dealt these abilities with a more
sparing hand to thy brother: in despising his weakness, what other thing
do thou than even despise the good Spirit of God, John 3.8.
that blows, where he lists, and 1. Cor. 12.11
gives to every one as he lasts? For though there be 1. Cor. 12.4.
diversities of gifts, (both for substance, and degree;) yet it is the same
Spirit, 1. Cor. 12. And the contempt that is cast upon the meanest Christian,
reboundeth upwards again, and in the last resolution reflecteth even upon GOD
himself, and upon his Christ. 1. These. 4.8.
He that ^^spiseth, despises not man but GOD; who has given unto us his holy
Spirit? 1. Thessal. 4. And 1. Cor. 8.12.
when ye^ sin so against the (...) and their weak consciences, ye sin
against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.

Thus you see Despising is hurtful to the despiser, as a sin: it is hurt
full also, as a scandal,. 9. and the Scandal.
to the despised. And therefore our Savior in Math. 18. discoursing of Math.
18.6. etc.
not offending little ones; anon varieth the word, and speaks of Ibid. 10.
not despising them: as if despising were an especial and principal kind of
offending, or scandalizing. And verily so it is, especially to the Weak.
Nothing is more grievous to Nature, scarce death it self, than for a man to
see himself despised. Plaut. in Cistel Act. 4. Scaen. 1.
Ego illam anum irridere me vt sinam? Satius est mihi quouis exitio interire,
could he say in the Comedy. It is a thing that pierces far, and sinketh
deep, and strikes cold, and lies heavy upon the heart: Habet enim quendam
aculeum contumelia; quem Pati prudentes ac boni viri difficillime possunt, Cic.
Verr. 5.
flesh and blood will digest any thing with better patience. The great Arist.
lib. 2. Rhet. 2. c. 2. where he thus defines Anger.

(...).


Philosopher, for this reason makes Contempt the ground of all Discontent; and
sufficiently proves it in the second of his Rhetoriques: there being never any
thing taken offensiuely, but sub ratione contemptus; nothing provoking to
Anger, but what is either truly a contempt, or at leastwise so apprehended.
We all know how tenderly every one of us would take it, but to be neglected by
others; to have no reckoning at all made of us; to be so reputed as if we
were not, or not worth the looking after Vide opus Adag. Megarenses neque
tertij nequequarti.
(...), as the Ora^cle said to the Megarenses. And yet this is but the least
degree of Contempt; a (...). Arist. vbi supra.
privative contempt only. How renderly then may we think a weak Christian
would take it; when to this privative he should find added a (...). Ibid.
Positive contempt also? when he should see his person, and his weakness,
not only not compassioned, but even (...). Chrysostom. hom. 23. in Genesis
taunted, and flouted, and derided, and made a laughing stock, and a jesting
theme? when he should see them strive to speak and do such things in his
sight and hearing, as they know will be offensive unto him, of very purpose to
vex, and afflict, and grieve his tender soul? Certainly for a weak Christian
newly converted to the Faith, to be thus despised; it were enough, without
Gods singular Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the
scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm.
123.3.4.
mercy and support, to make him repent his late conversion, and revolt from the
Faith, by fearful and desperate Apostasy. And he that by such despising
should thus offend, though but Math. 18.6.10.
one of the least and weakest of those that believe in Christ: a thousand times
better had it been for him, that he had never been borne; yea, ten thousand
times better that a Millstone had been hung about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the Sea; ere he had done it. Despising is a grievous Sin, in
the despiser, in the Strong: and despising is a grievous scandal to the
despised, to the Weak. Let not therefore the Strong despise the Weak; Let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not. And thus much for the former
branch of Saint P^uls advice: The other follows, Let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats.

. 10. Despising and judging compared.
Faults seldom go single; but by couples at the least. Sinful men do with
sinful prouocations, as ball-players with the Ball. When the Ball is once up,
they labor to keep it up: right so when an offense or provocation is once
given, it is (...); Max. Tyrius (...).
tossed to and fro, the receiver ever returning it pat upon the giver, and that
most times with advantage; and so betwixt them they make a shift to preserve a
perpetuity of sinning, and of scandalizing one another. It is hard to say who
begins oftener, the Strong, or the Weak: but whether ever begins, he may
be sure the other will follow. If this judge, that will despise; if that
despise, this will judge: either does his endeavor to cry quittance with other;
and thinks himself not to be at all in fault, because the other was first,
or more. This Apostle willing to redress faults in both; begins first with
the strong: and for very good reason. Not that his fault simply considered in
it self is greater; (for I take it a certain truth, that to Judge one that is
in the right, is a far greater fault, considered absolutely without relation
to the abilities of the persons; than to despise one that is in the wrong:) But
because the strong through the ability of his judgment, ought to yield so
much to the infirmity of his weak brother, who through the weakness of his
judgment, is not so well able to discern what is fit for him to do. What in
most other contentions is expected, should be done in this: not he that is
most in fault, but he that has most wit, should give over first. Indeed in
reason, the more faulty is rather bound to yield: but if he will be
unreasonable, (as most times it falls out,) and not do it; then in
discretion, the more able should do it: as Genesis 13.9.11.
Abraham in discretion yielded the choice to his Nephew Lot upon the contention
of their Herdsmen, which in reason Lot should rather have yielded unto him. But
where both are faulty, as it is not good to stand debating who began first; so
it is not safe to strain courtesy who shall end, and mend first. In the case
of my Text, both were faulty: and therefore our Apostle would have both mend.
He has schooled the Strong, and taught him his lesson, not to despise another
infirmity; Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Now the weak
must take out his lesson too, not to judge another liberty; Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats.

. 11. We must not judge others.
I will not trouble you with other significations of the word; to Judge, as it
is here taken, is as much as to Ne condemnato. Beza.
Condemn: and so the word (...) is often taken in the worser sease for (...).
Tropically, by a Piscator in Schol. ad hunc locum.
Synecdoche generis, say Scholiasts: and they say true. But it is a Trope, for
which both in this, and Evil manners have bin the spoiling of many good words;
as (...), Tyrannus, Sophista, Latro, (...), Venenum, Magus; and in our English
tongue, Knave, Villain, Churl, etc. See Minsheu, Verstegan, etc.
in diverse other words, we are not so much beholden to good Arts, as to bad
manners. Things that are good, of indifferent, we commonly turn to ill, by
using them the worst way whence it grows, that words of good or indifferent
signification, in time degenerate so far, as to be commonly taken in the worst
sense. But this by the way. The fault of these weak ones in the case in hand,
was, that measuring other men's actions and consciences, by the model of their
own understandings, in their private censures they rashly passed their
judgments upon, and pronounced peremptory sentence against such, as used
their liberty in some things, concerning the lawfulness whereof themselves
were not satisfied; as if they were loose Christians, carnal professors,
nomine tenus Christiani, men that would not stick to do any thing, and such
as made either none at all, or else very little conscience of their actions.
This practice my Text disalloweth, and forbids: and the rule hence for us is
plain and short, We must not judge others. The Scriptures are express; Matthew.
7.1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, Matthew. 7. 1. Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, etc. 1. Corinthians. 4. Kom. 2.1.
Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that iudgest, Rom* 2. And Iam.
4.11.
if thou iudgest, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge, Iam. 4.

Not that it is unlawful to exercise civil judgment,. 12. This kind of
judging being
for such ^s have calling and authority thereunto in Church (...) for this
public politic judgment is commanded Exodus 22.9. 2. Chron. 19.6. Romans
13.4. and elsewhere.
in the Word of God, and reason shows it to be of absolute necessity for
the preservation of States and Commonwealthes. Nor that it is unlawful
secondly, the outward actions of men; when the Law of God is directly
transgressed, and the transgression apparent from the evidence either of the
fact it self, or of some strong signs and presumptions of it. For it is
stupiditie, and not charity, to be credulous against sense. Charity is 1.
Cor. 13.5. (...).
ingenuous, and will Ibid. verse. 7. (...).
believe any thing, though more than reason: but charity must not be As Walter
Mapes sometimes Archdeacon of Oxenford, relating the gross Simony of the Pope
for confirming the election of Reginald, bastard son to Ioceline, Bishop of
Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe; concludes the narration thus: Sit tamen domina
ma^erque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus; and absit crederae, qua videmus.
Mahap. de nugis Curialium, distinct* 1 cap. 22.
servile, to believe any thing against reason: Shall any charity bind me to
think the Crow is white, or the black Moore beautiful* Nor yet thirdly that
all sinister suspicions are utterly unlawful, even there where there wants
evidence either of fact, or of great signs: if our suspicions proceed not from
any corrupt affections, but only from a cu^ (...) sieve nostris, sieve alienis,
expedit ad hoc, vt se^^^ius remedium (...) quod (...) id quod est deterius:
qu^d remedium quod est efficax c^ntra m^tus malum, multo magis est efficax
contraminus malirit (...) 4. (...). 3.
charitable ieal^usie of those over whom we have especial charg^, at in whom
we have special interest, in such sort as that it may conceive us to admonish,
reprove, or correct them when they do amiss* so was Job Job* 1.5.
suspicious of his sons, for sinning and cursing God in their hearts. But the
judgment (...) and elsewhere condemned, is; either first, when in our private
thoughts ^n speeches, upon slender presumptions we rashly pronounce men as
guilty of committing such or such sin^, without sufficient evidence either of
(...) or pr^g^ant sign that they have committed him. O^ secondly, where upon
some actions Aperta non ita reprehendamus, vt de sanitate desperemus. Gloss.
Ordin. in Romans 14.13. Non quicquid reprehendendum, etiam damnandum est. Sen. l.
6. de benef. cap. 39.
undoubtedly sinful, as blasphemy, adultery, perjury, etc. we too severely
censure the Persons either for the future, as Reprobates and Castawaies, and
such as shall be certainly damned; or at leastwise for the present, as
hypocrites, and unsanctified and profane, and such as are in the state of
damnation: not considering into what fearful sins it may please God to
suffer, not only his As Paul, Marie Magdalene, etc.
chosen ones before Calling, but even his As David, Peter, etc.
holy ones too after Calling, sometimes to fall; for ends most times unknown to
us, but ever just and gracious in him. Or thirdly, when for want either of
charity or knowledge, (as in the present case of this Chapter) we interpret
things for the worst to our brethren: and condemn them of sin for such
actions, as are not directly, and in themselves necessarily sinful; but may
(with due circumstances) be performed with a good conscience, and without sin.
Now all judging and condemning of our brethren in any of these kinds is
sinful and damnable; and that in very many respects: especially these four;
which may serve as so many weighty reasons, why we ought not to judge one
another. The usurpation, the rashness, the uncharitableness, and the scandal
of it.

First, it is an Usurpation.. 13. 1. Unlawful.
He that is of right to judge, must have calling and commission for it. Exodus
2.14.
Quis constituit te? sharply replied upon Moses, Exodus 2. Who made thee a
Judge? and Luke 12.14.
Quis constituit me? reasonably alleged by our Savior, Luke 12. Who made me
a Judge? Thou take too much upon thee then, thou son of man, whosoever thou
art that iudgest: thus saucily to thrust thy self into Gods seat, and to
(...); etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 42.
invade his Throne. Remember thy self well, and learn to know thine own
rank. Quis tu? Iam. 4.12.
Who art thou that iudgest another? Iam. 4. or Who art thou that iudgest
another servant? in the next following verse to my Text. As if the Apostle had
said; What art thou? or what have, thou to do to judge him that Romans 14.4.
stands or falls to his own Master? Thou art his fellow-seruant, not his
Lord. He has another Lord, that can and will judge him; who is thy Lord too,
and can and will judge thee: for so he argues anon at verse. 10* Why do thou
judge thy brother? We shall all stand before the Iudgement-seate of Christ. God
has reserved Mali operis vindictam, Boni gloriam, vtriusque Iudicium.
three Prerogatives royal to himself; Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Vengeance, Isai. 42.8. Romans 12.19.
Glory, and Romans 14.4.10 Iam 4.11, 12.
Judgment. As it is not safe for us then to encroach upon Tres hominum species
maximam Deo faciunt iniuriam: Superbi, qui auferunt ei Gloriam; Iracundi, qui
Vindictam; Rigidi, qui Iudicium.
Gods royalties in either of the other two; Glory, or Vengeance: so neither in
this of Judgment; Dominus iudicabit, Heb. 10.30.
The Lord himself will judge his people, Heb. 10. It is flat usurpation in us
to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

. 14. II. Rash.
Secondly, it is rashness in us. A Judge must Et nunc Reges, intelligite:
^radi^ini, qui iudicutit terram, Psalm. 2, 10. Si iudicat cognosce, Sen in Med.
Act (...). Phocylid.
understand the truth, both for matter of Et Normam and Causam. Normam,
secundum quam; and Causam, de qua statuendum. Ad Factum haec pertinet: illa ad
Ius: ad illam, Paricia opu^ est* ^d h^^c ^rudentia.
fact, and for point of Law; and he must be sure he is in the right for both,
before he proceed to sentence: or else he will give rash judgment. How then
dare any of us undertake to sit as Judges upon other men's consciences,
wherewith we are so little acquainted, that we are indeed but too much
unacquainted with our own? We are not able to search the depth of our own Ier.
17.9. I know nothing by my self; yet am I not hereby justified: but he that
judges me is the Lord 1. Cor. 4.4. If our heart condemn us, God is greater
than our heart, and knows all things, 1. Joh. 3 21. Latet me faculta^ mea,
quae in me est; vt animus meus de viribus suis ipse se interrogans, non facile
sibi credendum existimet, quia and quod in est plerunque occultum est. Aug.
lib. 10, Confess. cap. 32.
wicked and deceitful hearts; and to ransacke thoroughly the many secret
windings and turnings therein: how much less then are we able to fadome the
bottomes of other men's hearts, with any certainty to pronounce of them either
good or evil? We must then leave the judgment of other men's spirits, and
hearts, and reins, to him that is Heb. 12.9.
the Father of spirits, and alone Psalm. 7.9. and 26.2.

Ier. 11.20. and 17 10. and 20.12. Revel. 2.13.


searches the hearts and reins: before whose eyes all things are Heb. 4.13.
(...), as the word is most Emphaticall, Heb. 4. Wherefore our Apostles precept
elsewhere is good to this purpose, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts. Unless we be able to bring these hidden things to light, and to make
manifest these counsels; it is Temeritas est, damnare quod nescias. Sen. Epist.
91. Sunt quae dam facta media, quae ignoramus quo animo fiant, quia and bono
and malo fieri possunt, de quibus temerarium est iudicare. August. lib. 2. de
Sermon. Dom. in morte, cap. 18.
rashness in us to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Thirdly, this judging is uncharitable.. 15. III. Uncharitable:
Charity is not easily suspicious; but upon just cause: much less then
censorious and peremptory. Indeed when we are to judge of In rerum iudicio
debet aliquis niti ad hoc, vt interpretetur vnumquodque secundum quod est: in
iudicio autem personaru^, vt interpretetur in melius, Aquin. 2a secundae qu.
60. art. 4. ad 3. and he gives a substantial reason for it, ibid. in resp. ad
2.
Things, it is wisdom to judge of them secundum quod sunt, as near as we
can, to judge of them just as they are, without any sway or partial
inclination either to the right hand, or to the left. But when we are to judge
of Men, and their Actions; it is not altogether so: there the rule of Charity
must take place, Glossa Ord. in hunc locu^; and Theologi passim. Semper
quicquid dubiu^ est, humanitas inclinat in melius, Sen. Epist. 81.
Dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda. Unless we see manifest cause to
the contrary, we ought ever to interpret what is done by others, with as much
favor as may be. To err thus is better, than to hit right the other way;
because this course is Error charitatis, salutaris error.
safe, and secureth us, as from Melius est, quod aliquis frequenter fallatur,
habens bonam opinionem de malo homine, quam quod rarius fallatur, habens malam
opinionem de bono homine: quia ex hoc fit iniur i^adicui; non autem ex primo.
Aquin secunda secundae qu. 60. art. 4. ad. 1.
iniuring others, so from endangering our selves: whereas in judging ill,
though right, we are still Aequum licet statuerit, han^ aequus fuit, Sen. in
Med. Act. 2.
unjust (...), the event only, and not our choice freeing us from wrong
judgment. True Charity is ingenuous; it 1 Cor. 13.5.
thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13. How far then are they from charity, that are
ever suspicions, and think nothing well? For us, let it be our care to
maintain charity; and to avoid, as far as humane frailty will give leave, even
sinister suspicions of our brethrens actions: or if through frailty we cannot
that, yet let us not from light suspicions fall into uncharitable censures: let
us at leastwise suspend our Si suspiciones vitare non possumus, quia (...), id
est, definitiuar firmasque sententias continere debemus, Gloss. Ordin. in 1
Cor. 4.
definitive judgment, and not determine too peremptorily against such, as do
not in every respect just as we do, or as we would have them do, or as we
think they should do. It is uncharitable for us to judge, and therefore we
must not judge.

Lastly, there is Scandal in judging.. 16. IIII. Scandalous.
Possibly he that is judged, may have that strength of faith and charity; that
though rash uncharitable censures lie thick in his way, he can lightly skip
over all those stumbling blocks, and escape a fall. Saint Paul had such a
measure of strength; 1. Cor. 4.3.
With me it is a very small thing, says he, that I should be judged of you, or
of humane judgment, 1 Cor. 4. If our judging light upon such an object, it is
indeed no scandal to him: but that is no thanks to us. We are to esteem
things by their natures, not events: and therefore we give a scandal, if we
judge; notwithstanding he that is judged take it not as a scandal. For, that
judging is in it self a scandal, is clear from ver. 13. of this Chapter; Let
us not therefore, says S. Paul, judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way. And thus we see four maine Reasons against this judging of our
brethren. 1. We have no right to judge; and so our judging is usurpation. 2. We
may err in our judgments; and so our judging is rashness. 3. We take things
the worst way when we judge; and so our judging is uncharitable. 4. We offer
occasion of offense by our judging; and so our judging is scandalous. Let not
him therefore that eats not, judge him that eats.

And so I have done with my Text in the general use of it:. 17. Application to
the case in our Church.
wherein we have seen the two faults of despising, and of judging our brethren
laid open; and the ugliness of both discovered. I now descend to make such
Application, as I promised, both of the case and rules; unto some differences,
and to some offenses given and taken in our Church in point of Ceremony. The
Case ruled in my Text was of eating, and not eating: the Differences which some
maintain in our Church, are many in the particular; (as of kneeling, and not
kneeling; wearing, and not wearing; crossing, and not crossing. etc.) but all
these, and most of the rest of them, may be comprehended in gross under the
terms of conforming, and not conforming. Let us first compare the cases; that
having found wherein they agree, or disagree, we may thereby judge how far
Saint Paul's advice in my Text ought to rule us, for not despising, for not
judging one another. There are four special things, wherein if we compare this
our Case with the Apostles; in every of the four we shall find some agreement,
and some disparity also: 1. The nature of the matter: 2. The abilities of the
persons: 3. Their several Practice about the things: and 4. Their mutual
carriage one toward another. And first, let us consider how the two cases
agree in each of these.

. 18. Agreement betwixt the two Cases.
First, the matter whereabout the eater and the not-eater differed in the case
of the Romans, was in the nature of it indifferent: so it is between the
conformer, and not-conformer in our Case. As there fish, and flesh, and herbs
were merely indifferent; such as might be eaten, or not eaten without sin:
so here Cap, and Surplis, Cross, and Ring, and the rest, are things merely
indifferent; such as (in regard of their own nature) may be used or not used
without sin; as being neither expressly commanded, nor expressly forbidden in
the Word of God.

Secondly, the persons agree. For as there, so here strong in faith, some
weak. There are many, whose judgments are upon certain and infallible
grounds assured and resolved, and that certitudine Fidei, that Cappe, and
Surplis, and Cross, and the rest, are things lawful, and such as may be used
with a good Conscience. There are some others again, who through ignorance, or
custom, or prejudice, or otherwise weakened in their judgments; cannot (or
will not) be persuaded, that these things are altogether free from superstition
and Idolatry: nor consequently, the use of them from sin.

Thirdly, the practice of the persons are much alike. strong did use his
liberty according to the assurance of his knowledge ((...)) and did eat freely
without scruple; and the weak did forbear to eat, because of his doubting
and irresolution: So here, most of us in assured confidence that we may wear,
and cross, and kneel, and use the other Ceremonies and Customs of our
Church, do willingly, and ex animo conform our selves thereunto; yet some
there are, who out of I know not what niceness and scrupulositie make dainty
of them, and either utterly refuse conformity, or at leastwise desire respite,
till they can better inform themselves.

carriage of the parties one toward another. For as there the Eater despised
the Not-eater; and the Not-eater judged the Eater: so here, it cannot be
denied, but that some Conformers (although I hope far the lesser, I am sure
far the worser sort,) do despise and scandalize the non-Conformers more than
they have reason to do, or any discreet honest man will allow. But is it not
most certain also, that the non-Conformers (but too generally, yea, and the
better sort of them too, but too often and much) do pass their censures with
marvelous great freedom; and spend their judgments liberally upon, and
against the Conformers? Hitherto the Cases seem to agree. One would think,
mutatis mutandis, the Apostles rule would as well fit our Church and Case, as
the Roman; and should as well free the non-Conformers from our Contempt, as us
from their Censures. Let not him that conformeth, despise him that conformeth
not: and let not him that conformeth not, judge him that conformeth.

. 19. Difference betwixt them: I. in the Matter.
But if you will please to take a second suruiew of the four several
particulars, wherein the Cases seemed to agree; you shall find very much
disparitie and disproportion betwixt the two Cases in each of the four
respects. In the case of my Text, the matter of difference among them, was not
only in different in the nature of it; but it was also left as indifferent for
the use: the Church (perhaps) not having determined any thing positiuely
therein; at least no public authority having either enjoined, or forbidden,
the use of such or such meats. But in the Case of our Church it is far
otherwise. Cappe, Surplis, Cross, Ring, and other Ceremonies, which are the
Matter of our differences, though they be things indifferent for their nature,
and in themselves: yet are not so for their use, and unto us. If the Church had
been silent, if Authority had prescribed nothing herein; these Ceremonies had
then remained for their use, as they are for their nature, indifferent:
Lawful, and such as might be used without sin; and yet Arbitrary, and such
as might be also forborne without sin. But men must grant (though they be
unwilling, if yet they will be reasonable) that every particular Church
Article 20. agreeably to the confessions of other Protestant Churches.
has power, for (...). 1. Cor. 14.20.
decency and orders sake, to ordain and constitute Ceremonies. Which being
once ordained, and by public authority enjoined, cease to be indifferent for
their use, though they remain still so for their nature: and of indifferent
become so necessary, that neither may a man without sin Constit. and Canon.
30.
refuse them, where Authority requires; nor use them, where Authority
restrains the use.

Neither is this accession of Necessity,. 20. The maine objection, from
Christian liberty, answered.
any impeachment to Christian Liberty; or Ex. 1. Cor. 7.35
insnaring of men's consciences: as Lincolnsh. Abridg. page 34.
some have objected. For then do we ensnare men's consciences by humane
Constitutions, when we thrust them upon men as if they were divine; and bind
men's consciences to them immediately, as if they were immediate parts of Gods
worship, or of absolute necessity unto salvation. This Tyranny and Usurpation
over men's Consciences, the Mar. 7.8. etc.
Pharisees of old did, and the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and
we justly hate it in her: In Spiritum Sanctum blasphemant, qui sacros Canones
violant. 25. qu. 1. Violatores.
equalling, if not preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of God. But our
Church (God be thanked) is far from any such impious presumption: and has
sufficiently Constit. etc. Can. 74. Art. 20 Act for uniformity; and Treat. of
Ceremonies prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer.
declared her self by solemn protestation, enough to satisfy any ingenuous
impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these ceremonial
Constitutions, she has no other purpose, than to reduce all Without pre^udice
to the liberty of other Churches. See Praef. to Commun. Book.
her children to an orderly uniformity in the outward worship of God; so far
is she from seeking to draw any opinion, either of divine The Church ought not
to enforce any thing besides the holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of
salvation. Artic. 20.
necessity upon the Constitution, or of effectual holiness upon the
ceremony. And as for the prejudice which seems to be hereby given to
Christian liberty: it is so slender a conceit, that it seems to bewray in
the obiecters a desire, not so much of satisfaction. as cavil. For first, the
liberty of a Christian to all indifferent things, is in the Mind and
Conscience: and is then infringed, when the Conscience is bound and streitned,
by imposing upon it an opinion of doctrinall Necessity. But it is no wrong to
the Liberty of a Christian man's Conscience, to bind him to outward observance
for Orders sake, and to impose upon him a Necessity of Obedience. Which one
distinction of Doctrinall and Obedientiall Necessity well weighed, and rightly
applied, is of it self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point. For, to
make all restraint of the outward man in matters indifferent an impeachment of
Christian Liberty; what were it else, but even to bring flat See Conference at
Hampton Court, p. 70.71.
Anabaptisme and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond of
subjection and obedience to lawful Authority? I beseech you consider, wherein
can the immediate power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers
over their inferiors consist; or the due obedience of inferiors be shown
toward them: if not in these In rebus medijs lex posita est obedientiae,
Bernard. Epist. 7.
Indifferent and Arbitrary things? For, things De huiusmodi quippe nec
praeceptor expectandus, nec prohibitor auscultandus est, Bernard. de praec. and
dispensat. See Agell. 2. Noct. Attic. 7. and Bernard. Epist. 7.
absolutely Necessary, as commanded by God, we are bound to do; whether humane
Authority require them, or no: and things absolutely Unlawful, as prohibited
by God, we are bound not to do; whether humane Authority forbid them, or no.
There are none other things left then, wherein to express properly the
Obedience due to superior Authority, than these Indifferent things. And if a
See Sam. Collins Sermon on 1 Timothy 6.3. page 44. etc.
Father or Master have power to prescribe to his child or servant in
Indifferent things; and such restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian
Liberty in them: Why should any man, either deny the like power to
Church-Gouernours, to make Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning indifferent
Things? or interpret that power to the prejudice of Christian Liberty? And
again Secondly, Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things merely Indifferent:
I mean in the general. For howsoever every particular Ceremony be
indifferent; and every particular Constitution Artic. 34.
arbitrary and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies, it is
necessary, Necessitate absoluta, in as much as no outward work can be
performed without Ceremonial circumstances, some or other: and that there
should be some Constitutions concerning them, it is also necessary (though not
simply and absolutely, as the former; yet ex hypothesi, and) See Calvin. li. 4.
Instit. cap. 10.. 27.
necessitate conuenientiae. Otherwise, since some Ceremonies must needs be
used; every Parish, nay every Quot capita, tot Schismata. Hieronym.
Man would have his own fashion by himself, as his humor led him: whereof what
other could be the issue, but infinite distraction, and unorderly confusion in
the Church? And again thirdly, to return their weapon upon themselves; If
every restraint in indifferent things be injurious to Christian Liberty: then
themselves are injurious no less by their negative restraint from some
Ceremonies, Like that, Col. 2.21. Touch not, taste not, handle not.
Wear not, Cross not, Kneel not, etc. than they would have the world believe
our Church is by her positive restraint unto these Ceremonies of wearing, and
crossing, and kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let themselves that
are parties judge, whether is more injurious to Christian Liberty; public
Authority by mature advice commanding, what might be forborne, or private
spirits through humorours dislikes, forbidding what may be used: the whole
Church imposing the use, or a few brethren requiring the forbearance; of such
things, as are otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, or for
forbearance.

But they say,. 12. And the purpose and practice of our Church herein justified.
our Church makes greater matters of Ceremonies than thus; and prefers them
even before the most necessary duties of preaching, and administering the
Sacraments: in as much as they are imposed upon Ministers under pain of
Suspension and Deprivation from their Ministerial Functions and Charges.
First, for actual Deprivation; deprivation; she has ordinarily by her fair,
and slow, and compassionate proceedings therein, sufficiently manifested her
unwillingness thereto: and declared her self a Mother every way indulgent
enough to such ill-nurtured children, as will not be ruled by her. Secondly,
suspended or deprived; suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt.
For howsoever they would bear the world in hand, that they are the only
persecuted ones, and that they suffer for their consciences: yet in truth, they
do but abuse the credulity of the simple therein; and herein (as in many
other things) iumpe with the Papists, whom they would seem above all others
most abhorrent from. For as Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out, they are
martyred for their Pro inficiatione pontificatus foeminei. Aqui. pont. in resp.
ad Sol. de Antichristo, These. 15. speaking of the Priests executed in the
Reign of Qu. Elizabeth.
religion; when the very truth is, they are See Donnes Pseudo-Martyr per totum;
especially, c. 5. etc.
justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and felonious or treacherous
practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the Brethren pretend they are
persecuted for their consciences; when they are indeed, but justly censured for
their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of lawful authority. For, it is not
the refusal of these Ceremonies they are deprived for, otherwise than as the
matter wherein they show their contempt: it is the The practice of our Church
sufficiently confirms this: which censureth no man for the bare omission of
some kind of Rites and Ceremonies now and then; where it may be presumed by
the parties cheerful and general conformity otherwise that such omission
proceeds not either from an opinatiue dislike of the Ceremony imposed, or
from a timorous and obsequious humouring of such as do dislike it. Whosoever
willingly, and purposely does openly break, etc. Artic. 34.
Contempt it self, which formally and properly subiecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical Censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of
authority, though in the In minimis quoque mandatis culpam facit non minimam;
and conuertit in crimen gravis rebellionis navum satis levem simplicis
transgressionis, Bern. de praec. and dispens.
smallest matter, deserves no small punishment: all authority having been
ever sollicitous (as it has good reason) above all things to vindicate and
preserve it self from Contempt; by inflicting sharp punishments upon
contemptuous persons in the smallest matters, above all other sorts of
offenders in any degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared the first
and maine difference betwixt the Case of my Text, and the Case of our Church,
in regard of the Matter: the things whereabout they differed, being every way
indifferent; ours not so.

. 22. II. In the Persons.
And as in the Matter; so there is secondly much odds in the condition of the
Persons. The refusers in the Case of my Text, being truly weak in the Faith;
as being but lately converted to the Christian Faith, and not sufficiently
instructed by the Church in the doctrine and use of Christian Liberty in things
indifferent: Whereas with our refusers it is much otherwise. First, they are
not new Proselytes; but men borne, and bred, and brought up in the bosom of
the Church: yea many, and the chiefest of them, such as have taken upon them
the Calling of the Ministry, and the Charge of Souls, and the Office of
teaching and instructing others. And such men should not be weakelings.
Secondly, ours are such as take themselves to have ignorance and simplicity of
the vulgar, and to lament (which is, God knows, lamentable enough; though not
comparable to what it was within not many years since:) the want of knowledge,
and the insufficiency of some of the Clergy in the Land. And with what reason
should these men expect the privilege of weak ones? Thirdly, our Church has
sufficiently declared purpose and meaning in enioyning the Ceremonies: not so
only; but has been content to hear, and receive, and admit the objections
and reasons of the refusers; and has taken pains to answer and satisfy to
the full all that ever yet could be said in that behalf. And therefore it is
vanity for these men (or their friends in their behalf) to allege
weakness; where all good means have been plentifully used for full
information in the points: in doubt. Lastly, upon the premises it does appear
that the weakness of one Brethren, pretended by those that are willing to
speak favorably of them, proceeds for the most part not so much out of simple
ignorance, arising from the defect either of understanding or means; as out of
an ignorance at the best in some degree of wilfulness and affectation, is not
seeking, or not admitting such ingenuous satisfaction, as they might have by
reason: if not out of the poison of corrupt and carnal affections (as they
give us sometimes but too much cause to suspect) of pride, of singularity, of
envy, of contention, of factions admiring some men's persons. By which, and
other li^e partial affections, men's judgments become oftentimes so blinded;
that of unwilling at the first, they become at length unable to discern things
with that freedom and ingenuity they should. And so the Cases differ in regard
of the Persons.

. 23. III. In their practice.
They differ thirdly in the practice of the Persons. There the strong did eat,
because he was well assured he might do it, (...), in the Verse before my
Text: and the weak did no more but forbear eating; as indeed he might do,
no authority interposing to the contrary. But here, we conform, not only
because we know we may lawfully do it; but for that we know we must of (...).
Romans 13.5.
necessity do it, as bound thereunto in obedience to lawful authority, and
in the Not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ibid.
conscience we ought to make of such obedience. And the refusers do not only
defacto, not conform* to the contempt of authority, and the scandal of
others: but they stand in it too, and trouble the peace of the Church by their
restless Petitions, and Supplications, and Admonitions, and other publications
of the reasons and grounds of their such refusal. And verily, this Country and
County has been not the least busy in these factious and tumultuous courses:
both in troubling our most gracious, indicious, and religious Sovereign with
their Meditations on the Lords Prayer, page 12 in the Margent.
petitions; and also in publishing their reasons, in a Book called, The
Abridgement, printed 1605. to their own shame, and the shame of their
Country. He who (as I have been informed) was thought to have had a chief
hand in the collecting of those reasons, and printing of that book; was for his
obstinate refusal of conformity justly deprived from his Benefice in this
Diocese, and thereupon relinquished his Ministry for a time, betaking
himself to another Calling; so depriving the Church and people of God of the
fruit and benefit of those excellent gifts which were in him. But since that
time he has, upon better and more advised judgment, subscribed and conformed:
and the Church like an indulgent Mother has not only received him into her
bosom again, but has restored him too, though not to the same, yet to a
Benefice elsewhere of far better value.

Lastly,. 24. IIII. In their behavior.
there is difference in the faulty carriage of the persons: and that on both
parts; especially on ours. For though our Nonconforming Brethren condemn us
with much liberty of speech and spirit, having yet less reason for it than the
weak Romans had for the Strong among them might have forborne some things for
the Weakes sake; and it would well have become them for the avoiding of
sca^dall so to have done; which we cannot do without greater scandal in the
open contempt of lawful Authority:) yet we do not despise them, (I mean
with allowance from the Church: if particular m^n do more than they should, it
is their private ^ault, and ought not to be imputed to us, or to our Church)
but use all good means we care to draw them to moderate courses and just
obedience; although they better deserve to be despised than the Weak Romans
did: they being truly Weak* our^ Obstinat^; they Timorous, ours also
Contemptuous.

. 25. We despise not our Brethren.
Now these differences are opened betwixt the Case in any Text, and the Case of
our Church: we may the better judge how far forth S. Paul's advice here
given to the Romans in their case of eating, and not-eating, ought to rule us
in our case of conforming, and not-conforming in point of Ceremony. And first,
of not-despising: then of not judging* The ground of the Apostles precept for
not despising him that are not, was his weakness. So far then as this
ground holds in our case, this precept is to be extended, and no further. And
we are hereby bound not to despise our Nonconforming Brethren, so far forth
as it may probably appear to us they are weak and not wilful. But so far
forth, as by their courses and proceedings it may be reasonably thought their
refusal proceeds from corrupt or partial affections, or is apparently
maintained with obstinacy and contempt: I take it we may, notwithstanding the
Apostles admonition in my Text, in some sort even despise them.

But because they think they are not so well and fairly dealt withal as they
should be:. 26. Their grieuances propounded*
Let us consider their particular grieuances, wherein they take themselves
despised; and examine how just they are. They say, first, they are despised in
being scoffed, Puritanes, and Brethren, and Precifi^^s, and in having many
jests and fooleries fastened upon them, whereof they are not guilty. They are
secondly despised, All benefit of Law being denied them, and they debarred of
other means by conference or writing for their Defense. Def. of Ministers
reasons. part. 1. pref to Reader. We do accuse the Reverend Bishops in the
sight of God and Man, for their hard and extreme dealing toward us. Remouall
of imputations, page 40.
they say, in that when they are conuented before the Bishops and others in
Authority, they cannot have the favor of an indifferent hearing: but are
proceeded against as far as Suspension; and sometimes Deprivation, without
taking their answers to what is objected, or giving answers to what they
object. Thirdly, in that many honest and religious men, of excellent and
useful gifts, cannot be permitted the liberty of their Consciences, and the
free exercise of their Ministry; only for standing out in these things,
which our selves cannot but confess to be indifferent.

To their first Grieuance we answer,. 27. and answered: The first.
that we have nothing to do with those that are popishly affected. If they
wrong them, as it is like enough they will (for they will not stick to wrong
their betters) we are not to be charged with that: let them answer for
themselves. But by the way, let our Brethren consider, whether their stiff and
unreasonable opposing against those lawful Ceremonies we retain, may not be
one principal means to confirm, but so much the more in their darkness and
superstition those that are wavering, and might possibly by more ingenuous and
seasonable insinuations be wo^ne over to embrace the truth which we profess.
And as for loose persons and profane ones, that make it their sport upon their
Ale-benches to rail and scoff at Puritanes; as if it were warrant enough for
them to drink drunk, talk bawdy swear and stare, or do any thing without
control, because forsooth they are no Puritanes; As we could wish our
Brethren, and their Lay-followers, by their uncouth and sometimes ridiculous
behavior had not given profane persons too much advantage to play upon them,
and through their sides to wound even Religion it self: so we could wish also
that some men by unreasonable and unjust, othersome by unseasonable and
indiscreet scoffing at them, had not given them advantage to triumph in their
own innocence, and persist in their affected obstinacy. It cannot but be some
confirmation to men in error; to see men of dissolute and loose behavior, with
much eagerness, and perulancie and virulence to speak against them. We all
know how much scandal and prejudice it is to a right good cause; to be either
followed by persons open to just exception, or maintained with slender and
insufficient reasons, or prosecuted with unseasonable and indiscreet violence.
And I am verily persuaded, that Many by their factious behavior were driven to
be Papists. The K. Majesty in Confer. at Hampt. page 98.
as the increase of Papists in some parts of the Land, has occasionally sprung
(by a kind of Antiperistasis) from the intemperate courses of their neighbor
Puritanes; so the increase of Puritanes, in many parts of the Land, owes not
so much to any sufficiency themselves conceive in their own grounds, as to the
disadvantage of some Profane; or Scandalous, or Idle, or Ignorant, or
Indiscreet opposers. But setting these aside, I see not but that otherwise the
name of Puritan, and the rest, are justly given them. For appropriating to
them selves the names of Brethren, Professors, Good men, and other like; as
differences betwixt them and those they call Formalists* would they not have it
thought, that they have a Brotherhood and Profession of their own, freer and
purer from Superstition and Idolatry, than others have, that are not of the
same stamp? and doing so, why may they no^ be called Puritanes? The name, I
know, is sometimes fastened upon Of late our English A^minians have got the
trick to fetch in within the compass of this Title of Puritanes, all orthodox
Divines that oppose against their Semipelagian subtilties; of purpose to make
sound truth odious, and their own corrupt novelties more passable, and
plausible.
those that deserve it not; ask all people will call any man that bears but
the face of honesty, a Puritan: but why should that hinder others from
placing it where it is rightly due?

. 28. The second.
To their second Grie^ance I answer: Public means by Conferend^s,
Disputations, and otherwise, have been often used: and private men not seldom
afforded the favor of respite and liberty to bring in the allegations. And I
think it can be hardly, or but ^a^ely instanced; that ever Depri^ation has
been used but where fatherly Adm^nitions have first been used, and time given
to the Delinquents to consider of it, and info^^e themselves better. This
course usually has been taken* though every private particular man has no
reason to expect it. The Reverend Fathers of our Church* we may well think^
(...) much other imploiment, cannot be solv^ thrifty of their good hours as to
lavish them out in hearing contentious persons candem cantilenam, sing the same
note a hundred times over; and require farther satisfaction after so many
public and unanswerable satisfactions already given. Yet have the Witness
the learned Books of diverse Reverend Prelates; John Whitgift, John Buckeridge,
Thomas Morton, etc.
Bishops, and other Church Governors, out of their religious zeal for the
peace of Gods Church, been so far from despising our Brethren herein* that
they have dispensed sometimes with their other weighty ^ccasio^s; and taken
pains to answer their ^ea^on^, and confute their exceptions, satisfy all
their doubts, and discover the weakness of all their ground^ in the points
questioned.

. 29. The third.
And as to their third Grieuance. First, for my own part, I make no doubt,
neither dare I be so uncharitable as not to think, but that many of them have
honest, and upright, and sincere hearts to God ward, and are unfeignedly zealous
of Gods Truth, and for Religion. They that are such, no doubt feel the comfort
of it in their own souls: and we see the fruits of it in their conversation,
and rejoice at it.

But yet I cannot be so ignorant on the other side, as not to know, that the
most sanctified and zealous men are men, and subject to carnal and corrupt
affections; and may be so far swayed by them in their judgments, as not to
be able to discern without prejudice and partiality, truth from error. Good
men, and Gods dear children may continue in some Sancti stante charitate
possunt errare etiam contra Catholicam veritatem. Occham Dial. part. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
error in judgment, and consequently in a sinful practice arising thence; and
live and die in it (as some of these men have done in disobedience to lawful
Authoriti^) and that unrepented of otherwise, than as in the lump of their
unknown sins. It is not Honesty, or Sincerity, that can privilege men from
either erring or sinning.

Neither ought the unreproved conversation of men, countenance out their
Opinions, or their Practices, against the light of Divine Scripture, and right
Reason: As we read Cyprians error in old time; and we see So Pelagius, from
whose root Popery (in that branch) and Arminianisme sprouted, was a man as
strict for life, as most Catholics: yet a most dangerous and pestilent
Heretic. Pelagij, viri vt audio sancti, and non paruo profectu Christiani.
Aug. 3. de peccat. merit. and rem. 1. Istum sicut eum qui^ nouerunt loquuntur,
bonum as praedicandum virum. Ibid. cap. 3.
Arminius his corrupt doctrine in our days have spread much the more for the
reverend opinion men had of their personal endowments and sanctity. Secondly,
though Comparisons be ever harsh, and most times odious; yet since honesty
and piety is alleged, (without disparagement be it spoken to the best of
them,) there are as good, and honest, and religious, and zealous men every way
of them that willingly and chearefully conform as of them that do not. In the
times of Popish persecution, how many godly Bishops, and conformable Ministers
laid down their lives for the testimony of Gods Truth, and for the
maintenance of his Gospel. And if it should please God in his just judgment
(as our sins, and amongst others ou^ Schisms and distractions most worthily
deserve,) to put us once again to a fierce trial (which the same God for his
goodness and mercy defend;) I make no question but many thousands of Conformers
would (by the grace of God) resist unto blood, embrace the Faggot, and burn at
a ^take in detestation of all Popish Antichristian Idolate^* as readily, and
chearefully, and constantly, as the hottest, and precisest, and most scrupulous
non Conformer. But thirdly, let men's honesty, and piety, and gifts be what
they can must not (...) of honesty and piety, and gifts, live under Laws? And
what reason these, or any other respects, should Non enim in cuius quam persona
praetermittendum est, quod institutis generalious continetur. Leo did. 61.
Miramur.
exempt any man from the just (...) of the Church in case he will not, obey
her (...) and conform to her Ceremonies: especially, since such men's immunitie
would but encourage others to presume upon the like favor: and experience
teaches us, that no men's errors are so exemplarie and pernicious; as theirs,
who for their eminency of ours, or sanc^itie of lif^ ^re beast followed with
popular a^^lause, and the small admiration.

We see their Grieuances against us,. 30. Our Brethren how they judge us.
how unjust they are, in the matter of Despising. I would they did no more
despise the Churches authority, than we do their infirmities! But in the
matter of judging: see if we have not a just grieuance against them. As might
be declared at large in many instances, out of their printed Books, and
private Letters, and common discourses. I will but give you a I refer the
Reader for more particular satisfaction to Fr. Masons Sermon on 1 Cor. ^^ 40,
page 30. Sam. Collie^ Sermon on 1. Tim. 6.3. p. 21, 22. and others; but
especially to their own writings.
taste, because I know I grow tedious, and I long to be at an end.

First, they judge our Church as half Popish and Antichristian,. 31. I. The
Church.
for retaining some ceremonies used in (...) though we have purge them from
their Superstitions, and restored them to their Primitive use. Their great
admired Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
opener of the Revelation, makes our Church the Dinsey-W^lsey La^dieca^
Church; neither hot nor cold. And some of them have ^^oue^ly compared our late
gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth of most blessed memory, to a This Simile
was first used by a very Reverend, grave and worthy Deane, (who has many ways
deserved well of our whole Church) in a Sermon before, Queen Elizabeth: and
modestly and moderately urged, not at all against the Ceremonies (which by his
practice he did allow) but for the further restraint of Popish Priests and
Jesuits, who lay thick in Ireland, and the Western coasts of England and
Wales, as he pu^ of dust and dirt behind the doors. Yet I here ascribed it to
the Puri^anes, who (though they father it upon that good man) must own it
(...) their own brat; because by mis-applying it to the Ceremonies, they have
(...) their own -- Mu^^ ^mni (...), incipit esse tuum.
slattish housewife; that having swept the house, yet lose the dust and dirt
behind the doors; meaning thereby the Ceremonies. If our Church were but
(...) so ill, as these men would make i^, I think every honest religious man
should hold himself bound to separate from it, as hi^ most excellent, Majesty
Meditations on the Lords Prayer. page 11. etc. primae edit. 1619. See Hookers
pref.. 8.
has observed the Brownists have done upon their very grounds: accounting them
as luke warm for not quite separating* as they do us for no further reforming.

. 32. II. The Bishops.
Secondly, they judge our Bishops, and other Church-Gouernours, as Limbs of
Antichrist; Locusts of the bottomless pit; domineering Lords over Gods
heritage; usurpers of temporal Jurisdiction; Spiritual Tyrants over men's
Consciences, etc. seeking by all means to make the name of Lord Bishop odious
to the Gentry and Commons. Witness their Ma^-prelate; and other infamous and
scandalous Libels in (...) Having power in their hands, if the Bishop should
use more rigorous courses toward them (...) they have done* could ye blame
them*

. 33. III. Conformers.
Thirdly, they judge those that subscribe and conform, (...) time seruers;
formal Gospellers; State-Diuines; men that know no conscience, but Law, not
Religion, but the Kings* and such as would be as forward for the Mass, as the
Communion, if the State should alter.

. 34. IV. Ministers of inferior gift^.
Fourthly, all such Ministers as are not endowed with gifts for the Pulpi^, ^hey
(...), as hirelings, and not Shepherds: calling them idol-Shepheards;
betrayers of Christ Flock; intruders into the Ministry without a Calling;
dumb Dogs, and I know not how many names besides. Yea, although they be such
as are diligent* according to their measure of gifts to perform such duties as
the Church requires; to present the prayers of the people to God; to declare
(by reading the holy Bible and good Homilies for that purpose appointed) the
will of God to the people; to instruct the younger sort in the points of
Catechism; to visit and comfort the sick and afflicted; and to administer
reverently and orderly the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Fifthly, they judge all such as interpose for the Churches peace, and oppose
their novelties,. 35. V. Them that oppose them.
as enemies to all goodness, men of profane minds; haters of Religion;
despisers of the Word; persecutors of the Brethren, impes of Satan; instruments
of Hell; and such as utterly abhor all godly and Christian courses.

Sixthly, and lastly (for I irke to rake longer in this sink) they bewray
themselves to be manifest Judges of all that are not of their stamp;. 36. VI.
All but themselves.
by singling out unto themselves; and those that favor them; certain proper
Appellations, of Brethren, and Good men, and Professors: as if none had
Brotherhood in Christ, none had interest in goodness, none made Profession of
the Gospel, but themselves. Whereas others have received the sign of their
Profession in their foreheads after Baptism, which perhaps they did not:
whereas others daily stand up in the Congregation to make Profession of their
Christian belief, which it may be they do not or, (if those things be not
material) whereas others by the grace of God are as steadfastly resolved in
their hearts, if need should be, to seal the truth of their Profession with
their blood, as any of them can be.

. 37. Their mitigation removed.
But they will say, these peremptory Censures are but the faults of some few:
all are not so hot and fierio^* There be others that are more temperate in
their speeches, and Moderate in their courses, and desire only they may be
spared for their own particular: but they preach not against any of these
things, nor intermeddle to make more stirs in the Church.

Yet of some that carry themselves with tolerable moderation outwardly; we
have some cause to su^pect, that they do inwardly and in their heart judge as
deeply, as the hottest-spirited (...) And we gather it from their
forward^^sse (...) and upon every slender occasion obliquity to gi^d, and
indirectly to glance at our Church and the discipline and the Ceremonies
thereof, as far as they well dare. And if such men meddle no further, we may
reasonably think, Eadem velle cos cognosces: d^ posse, quantum volunt. Senec.
Epist. 42.
it is not forward of good will to do it; but because they d^^e not.

Congregations; yet in their private Conuenticles it is not unknown some do.
Though their Pulpits do not ring with it; yet their houses do: though their
ordinary Sermons ad populum be more modest; yet their set conferences are
sometimes but too free, especially when they are required their opinions by
those that inuit them* And what themselves for fear of Censure thus preach
but Mat. 10.27.
in the ear; their Lay Disciples openly preach on the house top.

Thirdly, although both their Pulpits and Tables Practice sufficiently
preaches their dislike. And who knows not that a Real and Exemplary
seducement makes the Author guilty; as well as a Verbal and Oratory? Saint
Peter did not preach Iudaisme; but only, for offending the Jews, forbear to
eat with the Gentiles: yet S, Paul reproves him for it to his face, and
interprets that Fact of his, as an effectual and almost compulsure
seducement; Cogis Iudaizare, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.14. Vtique conuersationis fuit
vitium, non praedicationis. Tertul. de praescript. cap. 23. Non imperio, sed
facto. Lyra. Non docentis imperio, sed conuersationis exemplo. Gloss. Ord.
Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Iudaize?

Lastly, it is to be considered, whether it may be Pastor, not to meddle with
these things: and whether he be not in conscience bound, especially in case he
live among a people distracted in opinions, to declare himself expressly
either for them, or against them. If they be utterly unlawful, and he know it
so; how is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that use them, or
require them? otherwise he betrayeth the Otherwise what else do we, but deny
and betray the truth? Defense of Min. reasons part 1. Pref. to the Reader.
truth of God by his silence, and suffers men to go on in their superstition
without rebuke. But if he be sufficiently resolved of their lawfulness; how
is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that refuse them, or oppose
them? otherwise he betrayeth the peace of the Church by his silence, and
suffers men to go on in their disobedience without rebuke. Nay more, every
Minister that has received pastoral Charge, has twice or thrice (if not
oftener) witnessed his allowance of all and singular the 39. Articles of the
Church of England. Once at his Ordination before the Bishop; then at his
Institution into his Benefice, before his Ordinary; and both these by
Subscription under his hand: and then after upon his Induction, before his own
Flock, and that by verbal Approbation. By which Subscription and Approbation,
he has not only acknowledged Artic. 20.
in the Church the power of ordaining Rites and Ceremonies, Art. 20. but he
has after a sort also bound himself Art. 34.
openly to rebuke such as willingly and purposely break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, as offenders against the common Orders of the Church,
and wounders of the Consciences of the weak brethren, Art. 34. He then, that
for any respect whatsoever is meal mouthed in these things wherein he is bound
both in Conscience, and by virtue of his own voluntary Act to speak freely:
neither is constant to his own hand and tongue; nor is Heb. 3.2.
faithful in Gods ^ouse; (...) was Moses, in discharging a good Conscience,
and revealing unto his people Act. 20.27.
the whole Counsel of God.

. 38. The conclusion.
Thus have I endeavored, having the opportunity of this place, as I held my
self both in Conscience, and in regard of my Subscription bound) to deliver my
opinion freely, so far as my Text gave occasion, concerning the Ceremonial
Constitutions of our Church: and therein labored to free, not only the
Conformer from all unjust Censures; but even the Non-conformer also, so far as
he has reason to expect it, from all scandalous Despisings. I beseech you
pardon my length, if I have bin troublesome: I had much to say; and the matter
was weighty; and I desired to give some satisfaction in it to those that are
contrary-minded; and I have no purpose (for any thing I know) at all to trouble
this place any more hereafter. Let us all now humbly beseech Almighty God to
grant a blessing to what has been presently taught and heard: that it may work
in the hearts of us all charitable affections one toward another, due obedience
to lawful Authority, and a conscionable care to walk in our several
callings, faithfully, painefully, and peaceably; to the comfort of our own
souls, the edification of Gods Church, and the glory of the euer-blessed
Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God. To whom
be ascribed by us and the whole Church, as is most due, the Kingdom, the Power
and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

At a Visitation at Boston Linc. 24. April. 1621.
THE SECOND SERMON.
ROMANS 3.8. And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm
that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come: whose damnation is just.


. 1. The Occasion.
A Little before, at the fourth verse, Saint Paul had delivered a Conclusion;
sound and comfortable: and strengthened it from David's both experience, and
testimony in That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might
overcome when thou art judged Psalm. 51.4.
Psalm. 51. A place pregnant, and full of sinews to enforce it. The Conclusion
in effect was; that Nothing in man can annull the Covenant of God. Neither the
original unworthiness of Gods children, through the universal corruption of
nature, nor their actual unfaithfulness bewrayed (through frailty) in
particular trials; can alienate the free love of God from them, or cut them off
from the Covenant of Grace: but that still God will be glorified in the truth
and faithfulness of his promises, notwithstanding any unrighteousness or
unfaithfulness in man.

But never yet was any Truth so happily innocent,. 2. Coherence,
as to maintain it self free from Calumny and Abuse. Malite on the one hand,
and Fleshlinesse on the other; though with different aims, yet do the same
work. They both pervert the Truth, by drawing pestilent Corollaries from sound
Conclusions, as the Spider sucketh poison from medicinable herbs. But with
this difference; Malice slandereth the Truth, to discountenance it: but
Fleshlinesse abuses the Truth, to countenance it self by it. The cauilling
Sophister, he would feign bring the Apostles gracious Doctrine into discredit:
The carnal Libertine, he would as feign bring his own ungracious behavior
into credit. Both, by making false, yet colorable, Inferences from the former
Conclusion. There are Triplex inconueniens, Lyranus hic.
three of those first; If so, then cannot God in reason and justice take
vengeance of our unrighteousness. The Color: for why should he punish us for
that, which so much magnifieth and commends his righteousness? Verse. 5.
But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say?
Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance? The second Inference: If so; then it
is Color: for why should that action be censured of sin, which so abundantly
redoundeth to the glory of God? Verse 7.
For if the Truth of God has more abounded, through my lie, unto his glory,
why yet am I also judged as a sinner? The third, and last, and worst Inference:
If so, then it is a good and a wise resolution, Let us sin freely, and boldly
commit evil. The Color: for why should we fear to do that, from which so
much good may come? in this verse of my Text, And not rather, Let us do evil,
that good may come.

. 3. Division,
This last cauilling Inference, the Apostle in this verse both brings in, and
casts out again: brings in, as an objection; and casts out by his
answer. An answer which at once cutteth off both it, and the former inferences.
And the Answer is double: Ad rem, ad hominem. That concerns the force and
matter of the objection: this, the state and danger of the obiectors. Ad rem,
in the former part of the verse; [ And not rather (as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may
come.] Ad hominem, in the latter end; [ Whose damnation is just.] In the former
part, there is an Objection; and the Reiection of it. The Objection, And not
rather, Let us do evil that good may come. The Reiection thereof with a Non
sequitur; implying not only the bare in consequence of it upon the Apostles
Conclusion, but withal, and especially the falsenes and unsoundness of it taken
by it self; As we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,
Let us do evil, etc.

. 4. and Sum of the Text.
My aim at this present is to insist especially upon on a Principle of practike
Divinity; which by joint consent of Writers old, and new; Orthodoxe, and
Popish; resulteth from the very body of this verse, and is of right good use to
direct us in sundry difficulties, which daily arise in vitae communi, in point
of Conscience. The Principle is this; We must not do any evil, that any good
may come of it. Yet there are besides this, in the Text diverse other inferior
observations not to be neglected. With which I think it will not be amiss to
begin, and to dispatch them first briefly; that so I may fall the sooner, and
stay the longer upon that which I mainely intend.

Observe first the Apostles Method,. 5. OBSER. I. Divine truths must be cleared
from cavil.
and substantial manner of proceeding: how he clears all as he goes; how
diligent he is and careful, betimes to remove such cauils, (though he Propter
hos arguendos, fecit Paulus hic quasi digressionem tractando haec. Caietan hic.
step a little out of his way for it) as might bring scandal to the Truth he
had delivered. When we preach and instruct others, we should not think it
enough to deliver positive truths: but we should take good care also, as near
as we can, to leave them clear; and by prevention to stop the mouths of such,
as love to pick quarrels at the Truth, and to bark against the light. It were
good we would (so far as our leisure and gifts will permit) wisely forecast,
and prevent all offense that might be taken at any part of Gods truth: and be
careful, as not to broach any thing that is false, through rashness, error,
or intemperance; so not to betray any truth by ignorant handling, or by
superficial, flight, and vnsatisfying answers. But then especially concerns
it us to be most careful herein; when we have to speak before such, as we
have some cause beforehand to suspect to be, through ignorance, or weakness,
or custom, or education, or prejudice, or partial affections, or otherwise
contrary-minded unto, or at leastwise not well persuaded of those Truths we are
to teach. If the ways be rough and knotty, and the passengers feeble-ioynted
and darke-sighted: it is but needful the guides should remove as many blocks
and stones out of the way, as may be. When we have gone as warily as we can to
work, Cauillers (if they list) will take exceptions: it is our part to see we
give them not the advantage, lest we help to justify the Principals, by
making our selves Accessories. Those men are ill advised, how ever zealous for
the Truth, that stir in controuersed points, and leave them worse than they
found them. Aut animo demas, aut viribus addas. Dictum Archidami ad filium.
Stomach will not bear out a man without strength: and to encounter an
adversary are required As Zuinglius said of Carolostadius (whom he judged too
weak to undertake the defense of the Truth against Luther in the point of
Consubstantiation) Non satis humerorum habet. Sleidan.
Shoulders, as well as gall. A good cause is never betrayed-more, than when it
is prosecuted with much eagerness, but little sufficiency. This from the
method.

. 6. OBSERVE. II. The Slander of the Ministers regular doctrine, is more than an
ordinary Slander.
Observe secondly the Apostles manner of speech, (...). Translators render it; As
we are wrongfully blamed, As we are slandered, As we are slanderously reported.
And the word indeed from the (...).
Original imports no more: and so Writers both Profane, and Sacred use it.
But yet in Scriptures by a Specialtie it most times signifies the highest
degree of Slander; when we open our mouths against God, and speak ill, or
amiss, or unworthily of God: that is (...), and properly the sin we call
Blasphemy. And yet, that very word of Blasphemy, which for the most part
refers immediately to God, the Apostle here uses, when he speaks of
himself and other Christian Ministers (...), as we are slandered, nay as we
are blasphemed. A slander or other wrong or contempt done to a Minister, qua
talis, is a sin of a higher strain, than the same done to a common
Christian. Not at all for his Persons sake: for so he is no more Gods good
creature than the other; no more free (...). Act. 14.15. and Iam. 5.17.
from sins, and infirmities and passions than the other. But for his Callings
sake; for so he is Gods 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassador, which the other is not: and for his works sake; for that is Gods
1. These. 2.13
message, which the others is not. Personal Slanders and Contempts are to a
Minister, but as to another man: because his person is but as another man's
Person. But Slanders and Contempts done to him as a Minister, that is, with
reference either to his Calling, or Doctrine, are much greater than to another
man: as reaching unto God himself; whose Person the Minister represents in
his Calling; and whose errand the Minister delivers in his Doctrine. For
Contempts, Saint Paul is express elsewhere; 1. These. 4.8.
He that despises, despises not Man, but God. And as for Slanders; the very
choice of the word in my Text infers as much. The dignity of our Calling,
enhaunceth the sin: and every Slander against our regular Doctrines, is more
than a bare Calumny; if no more, at least petty We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, Acts 6.11.
blasphemy (...), As we are slandered, as we are blasphemed. That from the
word.

. 7. OBSER. III. The best truths are subject to Slander.
Observe thirdly, the wrong done to the Apostle, and to his Doctrine. He was
slanderously reported to have taught that, which he never so much as thought:
and his Doctrine had many scandalous imputations fastened upon it, whereof
neither he nor it were guilty, [ As we are slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say.] The best truths are subject to mis-interpretation: and
there is not that Doctrine, how firmly soever grounded, how warily soever
delivered; whereon Calumny will not fasten, and stick slanderous imputations.
Neither Matthew. 11.17, 18, 19.
John's mourning, nor Christ's piping can pass the pikes: but the one has a
Devil; the other is a glutton and a wine-bibber. Though Matthew. 5.17.
Christ come to fulfill the Law, yet there be will accuse him as a destroyer
of the Law, Matthew. 5. And though he decide the question plainly for Caesar,
and that in the case of Tribute, Matthew. 22. Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: yet there be that charge him, as
if he Ioh. 19.12.
spoke against Caesar, Ioh. 19. and that in the very case of Tribute, as if he
Luke 23.2.
forbade to give Tribute unto Caesar, Luke 23. Now if they Mat. 10.25.
called the Master of the house Beelzebub; how much more them of his household?
If Christ's did not; think we the doctrine of his Ministers and his Servants
could escape the stroke of men's tongues, and be free from calumny and cavil?
How the Apostles were slandered as Seducers, and Sectaries, and vain babblers,
and Heretics, and broachers of new and false and pestilent doctrines; their
Epistles, and the book of their Acts witness abundantly to us. And for
succeeding times, read but the Apologies of Athenagoras, and Tertullian, and
others: and it will amaze you to see what blasphemous, and seditious, and
odious, and horrible impieties, were fathered upon the ancient Christian
Doctors, and upon their profession. But our own experience goes beyond all.
The Doctors of our Church teach truly, and agreeably to unanswerable evidences
of Scripture, the Act. 17.28. and Esaias. 26.12.
effectual concurrence of Gods will and power, with subordinate Agents; in
every, and therefore even in sinful actions; Gods Romans 9.11.15.18, etc.
free election of those whom he purposes to save of his own grace, without
any motives in, or from themselves; The immutabilitie of Gods Ioh. 13.1. Romans
11.29. and 5.9.10. and 8.35.38.39.
Love and Grace toward the Saints, and their certain perseverance therein
unto Salvation; The Romans 3.28.
Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ, apprehended
and applied unto them by a lively faith; without the works of the Law. These
are sound, and true, and comfortable, and profitable, and necessary doctrines.
And yet that impudent Strumpet of Rome has the forehead, I will not say to
slander, my Text allows more, to blaspheme God, and his Truth, and the
Ministers thereof for teaching them. Bellarmine, Gretser, Maldonate, and the
Jesuits; but none more than our own English Fugitives, Bristow, Stapleton,
Parsons, Kellison, and all the rabble of those Romish hellhounds, freely spend
their mouths in barking against us; as if we made God the author of sin: as
if we would have men sin and be damned, by a Stoicall fatal necessity;
sin whether they will or no, and be damned whether they deserve it or no: as
if we opened a gappe to all licenciousnesse and profaneness; let men
believe, it is no matter how they live, heaven is their own cock-sure: as if
we cried down good works, and condemned charity. Slanders loud, and false;
yet easily blown away with one single word, (...). These imputations upon us
and our doctrine are unjust: but (...), let them that thus mis-report us, know,
that without repentance their damnation will be just.

. 8. With the Causes;
It would be time not ill spent, to discover the grounds of this observation,
and to press the uses of it something fully. But because my aim lies another
way; I can but point at them, and pass. If seldom Truth escape vnslandered,
marvel not: the reasons are evident. On Gods part, on Man's part, on the Devils
part. God suffers, Man rayseth: and the Devil furthereth these slanders
against the Truth. To begin ordine retrogrado, and to take Devils part: a kind
of Contrariety and Antipathie betwixt him and it. He being the Ioh. 8.44.
Father of lies, and Ephesians. 6.12.
Prince of darkness, cannot away with the Truth, and with the Light: and
therefore casts up slanders, as Fogs and Mists against the Truth to belie it,
and Light to darken it. Secondly, on man's Understanding; when the judgment
either of it self weak, or else weakened through precipitancie, prejudice, or
otherwise, is deceived with fallacies instead of substance, and mistaketh
seeming inferences, for necessary and natural deductions. Partly in the Will;
corrupt minds set themselves purposely against the known truth, and out of
malicious wilfulness (against the strong testimony of their own hearts)
slander it, that so they may disgrace it, and them that profess it. Partly in
the Affections; when men overcome by carnal affections, crooken the Rule to
their own bent, than to level themselves and their affections and lives
according to the Rule. Thirdly, on Gods Justice; as a fearful 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11.12.
upon wicked ones, whereby their hard hearts become yet more hardened, and
their most just condemnation yet more just. Partly, in Goodness; as a
powerful fiery trial of true Doctors, whose constancy and sincerity is the
more 1 Cor. 11.19.
approved with him, and the more eminent with men, if they Ioh. 10.12.
fly not when the Wolf comes, but keep their standing, and stoutly
maintain Gods truth, when it is deepliest slandered, and hotliest opposed. And
partly, in his Wisdom; as a rich occasion 2 Timothy 1.6.
(...) to awaken their zeal, to quicken up their industry, to muster up their
abilities, to scowre up their spiritual armor, (which else through dis-vse
might gather rust) for the defense, and for the rescue of that 1 Timothy 6.20. and
2 Timothy 1.14.
(...), that precious truth whereof they are depositaries, and wherewith he
has entrusted them.

. 9. and Corollaries thereof.
These are the Grounds. The Uses, for instruction briefly are, to teach and
admonish every one of us: that we be not either first, so wickedly malicious,
raise any slander; or secondly, so foolishly credulous, as without severe
believe any slander; or thirdly, so basely timorous, as to flinch from any part
of Gods truth for any slander. But I must not insist. This from the slander.

. 10. OBSER. IV. Every slander,
Observe fourthly, how peremptory the Apostle is in his censure against the
slanderers or abusers of holy truths: Whose damnation is just. Ambrosius; Lyra;
Piscator; Pareus, etc.
Some understand it with reference to the Slanderers; As we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say: Whose damnation is just: that is,
their damnation is just, who thus unjustly slander us. Chrysostomus; Caietanus;
Erasmus, etc.
Others understand it with reference to that ungodly resosolution: Let us do
evil, that good may come; whose damnation is just: that is, their damnation is
just for the evil they do, who adventure to do any evil, under whatsoever
pretense of good to come of it. Both expositions are good; and I rather embrace
both, than prefer either. I ever held it a kind of honest spiritual thrift;
where there are two senses given of one place, both agreeable to the Analogy
of Faith and Manners, both so indifferently appliable to the words and scope of
the place, as that it is hard to say, which was rather intended; though there
was but one intended, yet to make use of both. And so will we. Take it the
first way: and the slanderer may read his doom in it. Here is his wages, and
his portion, and the meed and reward of his slander; Damnation. And it is a
just reward. He condemns Gods truth unjustly: God condemns him justly for
it; Whose damnation is just. If we be countable (and we are countable at the
day of Judgment) for Math. 12.36.
every idle word we speak; though neither in it self false, nor yet hurtful
and prejudicial unto others: what less than damnation can they expect, that
with much falsehood for the thing it self, and infinite prejudice in respect of
others, blaspheme God and his holy Truth?

But if it be done of purpose,. 11. Whether malicious.
and in malice to despite the Truth, and the Professors thereof: I scarce know
whether there be a greater sin, or no. Maliciously to oppose the known
Truth, is by most Divines accounted a principal branch of that great
unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost: by some, the very sin
it self. I dare not say it is so; nor yet that it is unpardonable, or has
final impenitencie necessarily attending it: I would be loath to interclude
the hope of Repentance from any sinner; or to confine Gods Mercy within any
bounds. Yet thus much I think I may safely say; it comes shrewdly near the
sin against the holy Ghost, and is a fair (or rather a foul) step toward
it, and leaves very little hope of pardon. That great sin against the holy
Ghost, the Holy Ghost it self in the Scriptures chooses, rather than by any
other to express by this name of Math. 12.31.32.
Blasphemy, Mat. 12. And whereas our Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. says, That though he
were a Blasphemer, yet 1 Timothy 1.13.
he obtained Mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: he leaves it
questionable, but withal suspicious, whether there may be any hope of Mercy
for such as blaspheme maliciously, and against knowledge. If any man's be;
certainly such a man's demnation is most just.

. 12. or not, is damnable.
But not all Slanders of Gods truth are of that deep die: not all Slanderers,
sinners in that high degree. God forbid they should. There are respects, which
much qualify and lessen the sin. But yet allow it any in the least degree, and
with the most favorable circumstances; still the Apostles sentence stands
good: Without repentance their damnation is just. Admit the Truth be dark and
difficult, and so easily to be mistaken: admit withal, the man be weak and
ignorant, and so apt to mistake; his understanding being neither distinct
through in capacity to apprehend and sort things aright, nor yet constant to
it self through vnsettlednesse and leuitie of judgment. Certainly his
misprision of the Truth is so much Inuoluntarium minuit de ratione peccati.
lesser, than the others wilful Calumny; as it proceeds less from the
irregularitie of the Will to the Judgment. And of such a man there is good
hope, that both in time he may see his error, and repent expressly and
particularly for it; and that in the mean time he does repent for it
implicit, and inclusiuely in his general contrition for, and confession of
the massy lump of his hidden, and Psalm. 19.
secret, and unknown sins. This Charity binds us both to hope for the
future, and to think for the present: and Saint Paul's example and words in the
1 Timothy 1.13.
place but now alleged, are very comfortable to this purpose. But yet still
thus much is certain: He that through ignorance, or for want of apprehension
or judgment, or by reason of whatsoever other defect or motive, brings a
slander upon any divine Truth; though never so perplexed with difficulties, or
open to cavil: unless he repent for it, either in the particular, (and that
he must do, if ever God open his eyes, and let him see his fault,) or at
leastwise in the general; it is still a damnable sin in him; His damnation
is just. We have the very case almost in terminis laid down, and thus resolved
in 2 Pet. 3. 2 Pet. 3.18.
In which are some things hard to be understood, (observe the condition of the
things; hard to be understood) which they that are unlearned, and unstable,
(observe also the condition of the persons; unlearned, and unstable,) wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Where we have
the matter of great difficulty, hard to be understood; the persons of small
sufficiency, unlearned, and unstable, and yet if men, even of that weakness,
wrest and pervert truths, though of that hardness, they do it (...), to their
own destruction, says S. Peter there; to their own just damnation, says S.
Paul in my Text. This from the Censure in the first sense.

. 13. We must not do any evil, for any good.
Take it in the other sense, with reference to this ungodly resolution, Let us
do evil, that good may come: it teaches us, that no pretension of doing it
in ordine ad Deum, for Gods glory, to a good end, or any other color
whatsoever, can excuse those that presume to do evil; but that still the
evil they do is damnable, and it is but just with God to render damnation to
them for it; Whose damnation is just. And thus understood, it opens us a way
to the consideration of that maine Principle whereof I spoke, and whereon by
your patience I desire to spend the remainder of my time; namely this: We must
not for any good, do any evil. For the farther opening, and better
understanding whereof, (since the rule is of infinite use in the whole practice
of our lives:) that we may the better know when, and where, and how far to
apply it aright for the direction of our Consciences and Actions; we must of
necessity unfold the extent of this word, evil, and consider the several
kinds and degrees of it distinctly and apart. We must not do evil, that good
may come.

. 14. Touching evils of pain.
First, evil is of two sorts. The evil of fault, and the evil of punishment.
Malum delicti, and Malum supplicij; as Tertul. l. 2. adu. Marcion cap. 14.
Tertullian calls them: or as the more received terms are, Malum Culpae, and
Malum Paenae. The evil we commit against God, and the evil God inflicteth
upon us. The evil we do; unjustly, but yet willingly: and the evil we suffer
unwillingly, but yet justly. In a word, the evil of sin, and the evil of
pain. Touching evils of pain; if the Case be put, when two such evils are
propounded, and both cannot be avoided, whether we may not make choice of the
one, to avoid the other. The resolution is Inter haec datur electio; and minus
damnum facere licet, vt euitetur maius, Pareus hic.
common and good from the old Maxim, e malis minimum, we may incur the
lesser, to prevent the greater evil. As we may deliver our purse to a Thief,
rather than fight upon unequal terms to save it: and in a tempest cast our
wares into the Sea, to lighten the Ship that it wrack not: and endure the
launcing and ^earing of an old sore, to keep it from festering and spreading.
And this Principle in my Text is not a rule for that Case: that being
propounded concerning evils of Pain; whereas my Text is intended only of the
evils of Sin. We are herehence resolved, that we are not to do any evil,
that good may come of it: for all which yet we may suffer some evil, that good
may come of it. Although (to note that by the way) the common answer e malis
minimum, even in evils of Pain is to be understood, (as most other practical
conclusions are) not as simply and universally; but as commonly and ordinarily
true. For (as Slater on this place.
one says well) perhaps there are Cases, wherein two evils of Pain being at
once propounded, it may not be safe for us to be our own caruers.

But I must let pass the Questions concerning evils of Pain, as
impertinencies.. 15. Evils of sin simply such.
The evils of sin are of two sorts. Some are evil formally, simply, and per
se; such as are directly against the scope and purpose of some of Gods
Commandments: as Atheism against the first, Idolatry against the second, and
so against the rest, Blasphemy, Profaneness, Disloyalty, Cruelty,
Adultery, Injustice, Calumny, Avarice, and the like; all which are evil in
their own nature, and can never ( positis quibuscunque circumstantijs) be done
well. Othersome are evil only respectively, and by accident: but otherwise in
their own nature indifferent; and such as may be, and are done sometimes well,
sometimes ill. To know the nature of which things the better, since they are of
singular use for the resolution of many Cases of Conscience: we must yet more
distinctly inquire into the different kinds (or rather degrees) of indifferent
things; and into the different means, whereby things otherwise in nature
indifferent, become accidentally evil for their use.

. 16. Things equally indifferent,
Indifferent things are either equally, or unequally such. We may call them for
distinctions sake (and I think not altogether unfitly) (...).
indifferentia ad vt rumlibet; and (...).
indifferentia ad vnum. Indifferentia ad vtrumlibet, or equally indifferent
things are such, as (barely con^idered) are arbitrarie either way, and hang in
aequilibrio between good and evil, without turning the Scale either one way
or other, as not having any notable inclination or propension unto either
rather than other: as to drink fasting, to walk into the fields, or to life
up ones hand unto his head, etc. Now concerning such things as these, if any
man should be so scrupulous, as to make a matter of conscience of them, and
should desire to be resolved in point of Conscience whether they were good or
evil; as namely, whether he should do well or ill, to walk abroad into the
fields a mile or two with his friend, the thing it self is so equally
indifferent, that it were resolution enough to leave it in medio, and to answer
him, there were neither good nor hurt in it: the Action of walking, barely
considered, being not greatly either morally good, or morally evil. I say,
morally; for in matter of health or civility, or otherwise it may be good, or
evil: but not Quia eorum obiectum non includit aliquid pertinens ad ordinem
rationis. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 18. art. 8. in corp.
morally, and spiritually, and in matter of conscience. And I say withal
barely considered, for there may be circumstances, which may make it
accidentally evil. As to walk abroad in the fields, when a man should be at
Divine Service in the Church, is by accident morally evil; through the
circumstance of Time: as on the contrary, not to walk, if we have promised to
meet a friend at such a time, and in such a place, who stands need of our
present help, is by accident morally evil, through the obligation of that
former promise. But yet still, these and other circumstances set aside; barely
to walk, or barely not to walk, and the like, are Indifferentia ad
vtrumlibet, things in their own nature (and that equally) indifferent.

Things unequally indifferent are such,. 17. And things unequally indifferent.
as though they be neither universally good, nor absolutely evil; yet even
barely considered, sway more or less rather the one way than the other. And
that either unto good, or unto evil. Of the former sort are such outward
actions, as being in Moral precepts indefinitely commanded, are yet sometimes
sinfully and ill done: as, giving an Alms, hearing a Sermon, reproving an
offender; and the like. Which are in themselves good; and so to be accounted,
rather than evil, though some unhappy indefinitely prohibited, are yet in some
cases lawful, and may be well done: as, swearing an oath, traveling on the
Sabbath day, playing for money; and the like. Which are in themselves rather
evil, than good, because they are ever evil, unless all circumstances
concur to make them good. Now of these actions, though the former sort carry
the face of good, the later of evil; yet in very truth both sorts are
indifferent. Understand me aright: I do not mean indifferent indifferentia
contradictionis, such as may be indifferently either done, or not done; but
indifferent only indifferentia contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing) may
be indifferently either good or evil: because so they may be done, as to be
good, and so they may be done also, as to be evil. But yet with this
difference, that those former, though indifferent, and in some cases evil, are
yet of themselves notably and eminently inclined unto good, rather than evil;
and these later proportionably unto evil rather than good. From which
difference it comes to pass, that to the Question barely proposed concerning
the former actions, whether they be good or evil; the answer is just and
warrantable, to say indefinitely they are good: and contrarily concerning the
later actions, to say indefinitely, they are evil.

Which difference well weighed (to note that by the way) would serve to
justify a common practice of most of us in the exercise of our Ministry,.
18. A profitable digression, occasioned from the premises.
against such as distaste our doctrine for it, or unjustly otherwise take
offense at it. Ordinarily in our Sermons we indefinitiuely condemn as evil,
swearing, and gaming for money, and dancing, and recreations upon the Sabbath
day, and going to Law, and retaliation of injuries, and Monopolies, and raising
of rents, and taking forfeitures of Bonds, etc. and in our own coat
Non-residency, and Pluralities, etc. Most of which yet, and many other of like
nature, most of us do, or should know to be in some cases lawful; and therefore
in the number of those indifferent things which we call Indifferentia ad vnum.
You that are our hearers should bring so much charitable discretion with you,
when you hear us in the Pulpits condemn things of this nature; as to
understand us no otherwise, than we either do or should mean, and that is
thus: that such and such things are evil, as now adays, through the
corruptions of the times, most men use them; and such as therefore should not
be adventured upon without mature and impartial disquisition of the
uprightness of our affections therein, and a severe trial of all
circumstances, whether they carry weight enough with them to give our
consciences Let every man be fully persuaded ((...)) in his own mind, verse. 5.
sufficient security, not only of their lawfulness in themselves, and at
large, but of their particular lawfulness too unto us, and then. But this by
the way.

. 19. How things become accidentally evil.
Now to proceed. There are diverse means whereby things not simply evil, but in
themselves (either equally, or unequally) indifferent, may yet become
accidentally evil. Any defect or obliquity, any unhappy enteruening
circumstance, is enough to poison a right good action, and to make it stark
naught. I may as well hope to graspe the Sea, as to comprehend all those means.
I make choice therefore to remember but a few of the chiefest; such as happen
often, and are very considerable. Things not simply evil, may accidentally
become such; as by sundry other means, so especially by one of these
Conscience, Scandal, and Comparison. First, Conscience; in regard of the
Agent. Though the thing be good, yet if the Agent do it with a condemning, or
but a doubting Conscience, the Action becomes evil. Romans 14.14
To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean; and
Ibid. verse. 23.
he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats Chap. 14. of this
Epistle. Secondly, Scandal; in regard of other men. Though the thing be good,
yet if a brother Ibid. verse. 21
stumble, or be offended, or be made Weak by it, the action becomes evil.
Ibid. verse. 20
All things are pure; but it is evil for that man who verse. 20. there.
Thirdly, Comparison; in regard of other actions. Though the thing be good, yet
if we prefer it before better things, and neglect or omit them for it, the
action becomes evil. Matthew. 9.13.
Go, and learn what that is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: Matthew. 9.

The stuff thus prepared,. 20. Nothing simply evil, may be done for any good
to come thereby.
by differencing out those things, which vndistinguished, might breed
confusion: our next business must be, to lay the Rule, and to apply it to the
several kinds of Evil, as they have bin differenced. I foresaw we should not
have time to go through all that was intended: and therefore we will content
our selves for this time, with the consideration of this Rule, applied to
things simply evil. In them the Rule holds perpetually, and without
exception: That which is simply evil, may not for any good be done. We know
not any greater good (for there is not any greater good) than the glory of God:
we scarce know a lesser sin (if any sin may be accounted little) than a
harmless officious lie. Yet may not Vide fuse Augustinum in lib. de Mendacio;
and contra Mendacium; and alibi.
this be done; no not for that. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Job 13.7. If not for the glory of God; then certainly not
for any other inferior end: not for the saving of a life; not for the Ad
sempiternam salute^ nullus ducendus est opitulante mendacio. Aug de mendac. c.
19.
conversion of a soul; not for the peace of a Church; and (if even that were
possible too) not for the redemption of a world. No Ea quae constat esse
peccatae, nullo bonae causae obtentu, ^ullo quasi bono fine, nulla velut bona
intention facionda sunt. Aug. contra Mendac. c 7.
intention of any end can warrant the choice of sinful means to compass it..
21. The first Reas.


The reasons are strong. One is; because sin in its own nature, is Suapte
natura repugnat peccato, quod sit eligibile: and propterea nec propter se, nec
propter aliud bonum, est eligibile. Caiet. in hunc locum.
de numero ineligibilium: and therefore as not eligible propter se, for it own
sake, (there is neither form nor beauty in it, that we should desire it;) so
neither propter aliud, with reference to any farther end. Actus peccati non est
ordinabilis in bonum finem; is the common resolution of the Schools. In civil
and popular elections, if men make choice of such a person, to bear any office
or place among them; as by the local Charters, Ordinances, Statutes, or other
Customs which should rule them in their choice, is altogether ineligible: the
election is de iure nulla, naught and void; the incapacitie of the person
elected, making a nullitie in the act of election. No less is it in moral
actions and elections: if for any intended end we make choice of such means,
as by the Law of God (which is our rule, and must guide us) are ineligible; and
such is every sin.

. 22. The second reason.
Another reason is grounded upon that Principle, Aquin. 1. secundae. qu. 18 art.
4. ad. 3. and qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1. ex Dionysio, cap. 4 de divine. nomin.
Bonum ex causa integra, Malum ex partiali. Any partial or particular defect,
in Object, End, Manner, or other Circumstance, is enough to make the whole
action bad; but to make it good, there must be an universal Non est actio bona
simpliciter, nisi omnes bonitates concurrant: sed quilibet defectus singularis
causat malum. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad. 3.
concurrence of all requisite conditions in every of these respects: As a
disfigured eye, or nose, or lip, makes the face deformed; but to make it
comely, there is required the due proportion of every part. And any one short
Clause, or Prouiso, not legal, is sufficient to abate the whole writ or
instrument, though in every other part absolute, and without exception. The
Intention then, be it granted never so good, is insufficient to warrant an
Action good; so long as it fails either in the object, or manner, or any
requisite circumstance whatsoever. 1. Sam. 15.20. etc.
Saul pretended a good end, in sparing the fat things of Amalek; that he might
therewith do sacrifice to the Lord: but God rejected both it and him, 1 Samuel
15. We can think no other, but that 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
Vzzah intended the safety of God's Ark, when it tottered in the cart, and he
stretched out his hand to stay it from falling: but God interpreted it a
presumption, and punished it, 2 Samuel 6. Doubtless Math. 16.22.23.
Peter meant no hurt to Christ, but rather good; when he took him aside, and
advised him to be good to himself, and to keep him out of danger: yet Christ
rebuked him for it, and set him packing in the Diuils name, Get thee behind
me, Satan, Mat. 16.

But what will we say (and let that stand for a third reason) if our pretended
good intention prove indeed no good intention?. 23. The third Reason.
And certainly, be it as fair and glorious, as we could be content to imagine
it, such it will prove to be, if it set us upon any sinful or unwarranted
means; indeed no good intention, but a bad. For granted it must be, that the
Intention of any end does virtually include the means: as in a Syllogism, the
Premises do the Conclusion. No more then can the choice of ill means proceed
from a good intention; than can a false Conclusion be inferred from true
Premises: and that is impossible. From which ground it is, that the Greg. lib.
28. Moral. cap. 13. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 26. and others.
Fathers, and other Divines do oftentimes argue from the intention to the
action, and from the goodness of the one, to the goodness of both: to that
purpose applying those speeches of our Savior, in the twelfth, and in the
sixth of Matthew, Math. 12.33
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt: And, Math. 6.22.23.
if thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light: but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. The light of the body,
is the eye; and of the work, the intention. No marvel, when the eye is evil,
if the whole body be dark; and when the intention is evil, if the whole
work be naught. That which deceives most men in judging of good or bad
intentions, is, that they take the end, and the intention, for one and the same
thing: betwixt which two there is a spacious difference. For the end, is the
thing propter quid, for which we work, that whereat we aim in working, and so
has rationem causae finalis: but the intention is the cause a qua, from which
we work, that which sets us on working; and so has rationem causae
efficientis. Now between these two kinds of causes, the final and the
efficient, there is not only a great difference, but even a repugnancie; in
such sort, as that it is impossible they should at any time coincidere, which
some other kinds of causes may do. It is therefore an error to think, that
if the end be good, the intention of that end must needs be good: for there
may as well be Sed videte ne forte non sit vere oculus simplex, qui falletur.
Bernard. de praecept. and dispensat.
a bad intention of a good end, as a bad desire of a good object. Whatsoever
the end be we intend, it is certain that intention cannot be good, which
puts us upon the choice of evil means.

. 24. The first Inference against the Church of Rome.
Me thinks the Church of Rome should blush, (if her forehead dyed red with the
blood of Gods Saints, were capable of any tincture of shame,) at the discovery
of her manifold impostures, in counterfeiting of Relics, in coining of
Miracles, in compiling of Legends, in gelding of good Authors by expurgatory
Indexes; in iuggling with Magistrates by lewd Equivocations, etc. Practices
warrantable by no pretense. Yet in their account but Sancta Hypocrisis, was
Dominicus his word.
piae frauds; for so they term them, no less ridiculously, than falsely: for
the one word contradicts the other. But what do I speak of these, but petty
things, in comparison of those her louder impieties? breaking covenants of
truce and peace; dissoluing of lawful, and dispensing for unlawful marriages;
assoyling Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance; plotting Treasons, and
practicing Rebellions; excommunicating and dethroning Kings; arbitrary
disposing of Kingdoms; stabbing and murdering of Princes; warranting unjust
invasions; and blowing up Parliament houses. For all which, and diverse other
foul attempts, their Catholic defense is the advancement (forsooth) of the
Catholic Cause: Like his in the Poet, Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Quocunque modo rem, is their Resolution: by right, or wrong, Gaudeo, sieve per
veritatem, sieve per occasionem, Romanae Ecclesiae dignitatem extolli. Joseph.
Stephanus de Osc. ped. in Epist. ad lect.
the State of the Papacy must be vpheld. That is their vnum necessarium: and
if heaven favor not; rather than fail, help must be had from hell, to keep
Antichrist in his throne.

But let them pass, and touch nearer home.. 25. The second Inference against a
vulgar error*
There are (God knows) many Ignorants abroad in the world: some of them so
unreasonable, as to think they have sufficiently non-plus't any reprouer; if
being admonished of something ill done, they have but returned this poor
reply, Is it not better to do so, than to do worse? But alas, what necessity
of doing either so, or worse; when Gods law binds thee from both? Iam.
2.10.11.
He that said, Do not commit adultery; said also, Do not kill: and he that
said, Do not steal; said also, Do not lie. If then thou lie, or kill, or do
any other sin; though thou think thereby to avoid stealth, or adultery,
or some other sin: yet thou art become a transgressour of the Law; and by
offending in one point of it, guilty of all. It is but a poor choice, when a
man is desperately resolved to cast himself away; whether he should rather
hang, or drown, or stab, or pine himself to death: there may be more horror,
more pain, more lingering, in one than another; but they all come to one
period, and determine in the same point; death is the issue of them all. And it
can be but a slender comfort for a man, that will needs thrust himself into
the mouth of hell by sinning wilfully, that he is damned rather for lying, than
for stealing, or whoring, or killing, or some greater crime: Damnation is the
wages of them all. Murder can but hang a man; and (without favor)
Petty-Larceny will hang a man too. The greatest sins can but damn a man; and
(without Gods mercy) the smallest will damn a man too. But what? will some
reply: In case two sins be propounded, may I not do the lesser, to avoid
the greater? Otherwise must I not of necessity do the greater? The answer is
short and easy: If two sins be propounded, do neither. Emalis minimum,
holds as you heard (and yet not always neither) in evils of Pain: But that
is no Rule for evils of sin. Here the safer Rule is, e malis nollum. And the
reason is sound; from the Principle we have in hand. If we may not do any
evil, to procure a positive good; certainly Eadem doctrina qua horremus
facere mala vt eueniant bona, horrere debemus facere mala vt euitemus peiora.
Euitare enim peiora, multo minus bonum est; quam euenire bonum, Cajetan. hic.
much less may we do one evil, to avoid or prevent another.

But what if both cannot be avoided,. 26. The objection from the seeming case
of perplexity removed.
but that one must needs be done? In such a strait may I not choose the
lesser? To thee; I say again, as before, Choose neither. To the Case, I answer;
It is no Case: because, as it is put, it is a case impossible. For Nemo
angustiatur ad peecandum* the Case cannot be supposed, wherein a man should be
so straightened, as he could not come off fairly without sinning. A man by
rashness, or fear, or frailety may foulely entangle himself; and through the
powerful engagements of sin drive himself into very narrow straites, or be
so driven by the fault or injury of others: yet there cannot be any such
straits, as should enforce a necessity of sinning; but that still there is one
path or other out of them without sin. The Perplexity that seems to be in
the things, is rather in the Non enim datur perplexio ex part rerum: sed
contingere potest ex part hominis nescientis euadere, nec videntis aditum
euadendi absque ali quo peccato. Caiet hic. See the gloss on did. 13. item
aduersus, where he proves against Gratian that there can be no perplexity.
men; who puzzle and lose themselves in the Labyrinths of sin, because they
care not to heed the clue that would lead them out, if it were well followed.
Say, a man through heat of blood make a wicked vow to kill his brother: here
he has by his own rashness brought himself into a seeming strait, that
either he must commit a murder, or break a vow; either of which seems to
be a great sin, the one against the fifth, the other against the third
commandment. But here is in very deed no strait or perplexity at all: Here is
a fair open course for him without sin.

He may break his vow; and there an end, Neither is this the choice of the
lesser sin; but only the Non docet eligere minus peccatum, sed solutionem
minoris nexus. Caietanus hic. speaking of the Council of Toledo. See c. 22. q.
4. per tot.
loosening of the lesser bond: the bond of charity being greater, than the
bond of a promise; and there being good reason that (in terms of
inconsistencie, when both cannot stand,) the lesser bond should yield to the
greater. But is it not a sin for a man to break a vow? Yes; where it may be
kept saluis charitate and iustitiae, there the breach is a sin: but in the
case proposed, it is no sin. As Christ says in the point of swearing, so it
may be said in the point of breach of vow, Math. 5.37.
(...). Never was any breach of vow; but it was peccatum, or ex peccato: the
breaking is either it self formally a sin; or it argues at least a former
sin, in the making.

So as the sin, in the case alleged, was before in making such an unlawful
vow; and for that sin the party must repent: but the breaking of it now it is
made, is no new sin; (rather it is a necessary duty, and a branch of that
repentance which is due for the former rashness in making it,) because a
hurtful vow is, (and that virtute praecepti) rather to be broken than kept.

The Exodus 1.16, etc.
Egyptian Midwiues, not by their own fault, but by Pharaohs tyrannous
command, are driven into a narrow strait, enforcing a seeming necessity of
sin: for either they must destroy the Hebrew children, and so sin by
Murder; or else they must devise some hansome shift to carry it cleanely from
the Kings knowledge, and so sin by lying. And so they did; they chose rather
to lie, than to kill: as indeed in the comparison it is by much the lesser
sin. But the very truth is, they should have done neither: they should flatly
have refused the Kings commandment, though with hazard of their lives; and
have resolved rather to suffer any evil, than to do any. And so S. Augustine
contra Mendac* c. 19.
Lot should have done: he should rather have adventured his own life, and
theirs too, in protecting the chastity of his Daughters, and the safety of
his ghests; than have Genesis 19.8. Perturbatio animi fuit, non confilium. Hist.
Scholast. in Genesis cap. 52.
offered the exposall of his Daughters to the lusts of the beastly Sodomites,
though it were to redeem his ghests from the abuse of fouler and more
abominable filthiness. Absolutely; there cannot be a case imagined, wherein it
should be impossible to avoid one sin, unless by the committing of another.
The case which of all other comes nearest to a Perplexity, is that of an
erroneous conscience: because of a double bond; the bond of Gods Law; which to
Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4.
transgress, is a sin; and the bond of particular conscience, which also to
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23.

Omne quod fit contra conscientiam, aedificat ad gehennam. c. 28. q. 1. Omnes..
Ex his.


transgress, is a sin. Whereupon there seems to follow an inevitable
necessity of sinning; when Gods Law requires one thing, and particular
conscience dictateth the flat contrary: For in such a case, a man must either
obey Gods Law, and so sin against his own conscience; or obey his own
conscience, and so sin against Gods Law. But neither in this case is there
any Perplexity at all in the things themselves: that which there is, is
through the default of the man only, whose judgment being erroneous
mis-leadeth his conscience, and so casts him upon a necessity of sinning.
But yet the necessity is no simple, and absolute, and unavoidable, and
perpetual necessity: for it is only a necessity ex hypothesi, and for a
time, and continues but stante tali errore. And still there is a way out
betwixt those sins, and that without a third: and that way is deponere
erroncam conscientiam. He must rectify his judgment, and reform the error
of his Conscience, and then all is well. There is no perplexity, no
necessity, no obligation, no expediencie; which should either enforce, or
persuade us to any sin. The resolution is damnable, Let us do evil, that
good may come.

. 27. The Rule applied in two instances.
I must take leave, before I pass from this point, to make two instances; and
to measure out from the Rule of my Text an answer to them both. They are such,
as I would desire you of this place to take due and special consideration of.
I desire to deal plainly; and I hope it shall be (by Gods blessing upon it)
effectually, for your good, and the Churches peace. One instance shall be in a
sin of Commission; the other, in a sin of Omission.

The sin of Commission wherein I would instance, is indeed a sin beyond
Commission:. 28. The former instance.
it is the usurping of the Magistrates Office without a Commission. The
Question is; whether the zealous intention of a good end may not warrant it
good, or at least excuse it from being evil, and a sin? I need not frame a
Case for the illustration of this instance: the inconsiderate forwardnes of
some has made it to my hand. You may read it in the disfigured windows and
walls of this Church: Pictures, and Statua's, and Images; and for their sakes
the windows and walls wherein they stood, have been heretofore, and of late
pulled down, and broken in pieces and defaced: without the Command, or so much
as leave of those who have power to reform things amiss in that kind.
Charity binds us to think the best of those that have done it: that is,
that they did it out of a forward (though mis-gouerned) zeal; intending
therein Gods glory in the farther suppression of Idolatry, by taking away these
(as they supposed) likely occasions of it. Now in such a case as this, the
Question is, whether the intention of such an end, can justify such a deed?
And the fact of Numb. 25.7, 8
Phinehes, Numb. 25. (who for a much like end, for the staying of the people
from Idolatry, executed vengeance upon Zimri and Cosbi, being but a private
man, and no Magistrate;) seems to make for it.

But my Text rules it otherwise.. 29. Resolved from the rule of my Text.
If it be evil; it is not to be done, no not for the preventing of Idolatry.
I pass by some considerations otherwise first, whether Statua's and Pictures
may not be permitted in Christian Churches, for the adorning of Gods House, and
for civil and historical uses, not only lawfully and decently, but even
profitably? I must confess, I never yet heard substantial reason given, why
they might not: at the least, so long as there is secondly, whether things
either in their first erection, or by succeeding abuse superstitious, may not
be profitably continued, if the Superstition be abolished? Otherwise, not
Pictures only, and Crosses, and Images; but most of our Hospitals, and
Schools, and Colleges, and Churches too must down: and so the hatred of
Idolatry should but Usher in licentious Sacrilege, contrary to that passage
of our Apostle in the next Chapter before this, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest? And thirdly, whether these forward ones
have not bewrayed somewhat their own selfe-guiltinesse in this Act, at least
for the manner of it, in doing it secretly, and in the dark? A man should not
dare to do that, which he would not willingly either be seen when it is a
doing, or own, being done. To pass by these; consider no more but this one
thing only, into what dangerous and insufferable absurdities a man might run,
if he should but follow these men's grounds. Erranti nullus terminus: Error
knows no stay, and a false Principle once received, multiplieth into a (...).
Arist. li. 1 Phys. tec. 22.
thousand absurd conclusions. It is good for men to go upon sure grounds, else
they may run and wander in infinitum. A little error at the first, if there
be way given to it, will increase beyond belief; as a small spark may fire a
large City, and a 3. King. 18.44, 45.
cloud no bigger than a man's hand, in short space ouerspread the face of the
whole Heavens. For grant, for the suppression of Idolatry, in case the
Magistrate will not do his office, that it is lawful for a private man to
take upon him to reform what he thinks amiss, and to do the part and
Office of a Magistrate (which must needs have been their ground, if they had
any, for this action:) there can be no sufficient cause given, why by the same
reason, and upon the same grounds, a private man may not take upon him to
establish Laws, raise Powers, administer Justice, execute Malefactors, or do
any other thing the Magistrate should do; in case the Magistrate slack to do
his duty in any of the premises. Which if it were once granted (as granted it
must be, if these men's fact be justifiable;) every wise man sees, the end
could be no other but vast Anarchie and confusion both in Church and
Commonweal: whereupon must unavoidably follow the speedy subversion both of
Religion and State. If things be amiss, and the Magistrate help it not;
private men may lament it, and as occasion serves, and their condition and
calling permits, soberly and discreetly put the Magistrate in mind of it:
But they may not make themselves Magistrates, to reform it.

. 30. The example of Phinehes examined.
And as to the act of Phinehes: though I rather think he did; yet what if he
did not well in so doing? It is a thing we are not certain of: and we must
have certainer grounds for what we do, than Phinehes had the Magistrates
authority to enable him to that attempt? It is not altogether improbable (to
my apprehension) from the fifth verse of the chapter, where the Story is laid
down, Numb. 25.5. especially paralleld with another Story of much like
circumstances, Exodus 32.27. that as there the Levites, so here Phinehes drew
the sword in execution Moses the supreme Magistrate. If neither thus, nor so:
yet thirdly, (which cutteth off all plea, and is the most common answer
ordinarily given by Divines to this and the like instances drawn from some
singular actions of Gods Worthies;) Men of Heroical spirits and gifts, such as
were David, Samson, Ehud, Moses Elias, and some others, especially at such
times as they were employed in some special service for the good of Gods
Church, were exempt from the common rules of life: and did many things, (as we
are to presume) not without the Nec Samson aliter excusatur, quod seipsum cum
hostibus ruina domus oppressit, nisi quo latenter Spiritus Sanctus hoc
iusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. Aug. l. 1. de ciu. Dei ca. 21.

Si defenditur non fuisse peccatum, priuatum habuisse Consilium indubi^anter
credendus est. Bern. de praec. and dispensat.


secret motion and direction of Gods holy and powerful Spirit, which were
therefore good in them (that secret direction being to them loco specialis
mandati, like that to Genesis 22.2.
Abraham for sacrificing his son) but not safe, or lawful for us to imitate.
Opera liberi spiritus, Chytr. in Genesis 14. and in Exodus 32.
say Divines, non sunt exigenda ad regulas communes, nec trahenda in exemplum
vitae. The extraordinary Heroical Acts of Gods Worthies are not to be measured
by the common rules of life, nor to become exemplary unto others. Of which
nature was 1. Sam. 17.
David's single combat with Goliath; and Judge. 16.30.
Samsons pulling down the house upon himself and the Philistines; and Exodus
2.12.
Moses slaying the Egyptian; and Judge. 3.15, etc.
Ehuds stabbing of King Eglon; and 4. King. 1.10.12.
Eliahs calling down for fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their
fifties, and diverse others recorded in Scripture. Of which last fact we have
our blessed Saviors judgment, in Luke 9. that it was done by the
extraordinary and peculiar instinct of Gods Spirit, but is not to be imitated
by others, without Imitand^ ab alijs exprimi nec possunt, ne^ debent, nisi
eadem (...) Spiritus excitentur. Chytr. in Exodus 2.
particular certain assurance of the like instinct. Where when the Disciples
would have called down for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritanes, and alleged
Elias for their precedent; Luke 9.53.
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them, as Elias did? His answer was with a kind of indignation (as both his
(...) Luke 9.55.
gesture and speeches show) Nescitis cuius spiritus estis; You know not what
manner of spirit you are of. Elias was endued with an extraordinary spirit, in
the freedom whereof he did what he then did: but it is not for you or others
to propose his example, unless you can demonstrate his Spirit. And if Phinehes
Act also was (as most De Phinees autem dicendum est, quod ex inspiratione
diuina, zelo Dei commotus, hoc fecit. Aqui. 2.2. qu. 60. art. 6. ad 2. and
Theologi passim.
think it was) such as these: it can no more justify the usurpation of
Magistracy; than David's act can bloody Duels, or Samsons selfe-murther, or
Moses's secret slaughter, or Ehuds King-killing, or Eliahs private revenge. I
have stood the longer upon the discovery of this sin, that men might take
right judgment of it; and not think it either warrantable, or excusable by
any pretension of zeal, or of whatsoever other good: and that both such as
have gone too far this way in their practice already, for the time past, may
acknowledge their own oversight, and be sorry for it; and others seeing their
error, may for the time to come forbear such outrages; and keep themselves
within the due bounds of Christian sobriety, and their particular Callings.
And thus much of the former instance, in a matter of Commission. I am to give
you another, in a matter of Omission.

. 31. The later instance.
Every omission of a necessary duty is simply evil, as a sin. But affirmative
duties, are but sometimes necessary; because they do not obligare ad semper:
as, being many, it is impossible they should. And many times duties otherwise
necessary; in case of Superior reason and duties, cease to be necessary pro
hic and nunc: and then to omit them, is not to do evil. Among other necessary
duties this is one, for a Minister furnished with gifts and abilities for it;
to acquaint Gods people with all material needful truths, as he can have
convenient occasion thereunto. And (such conueniency supposed) not to do this,
is Sacerdos debtor est, vt veritatem quam audiuit a Deo libere praedicet. 11.
qu. 3. noli timere. Ex Chrysostom.
simply evil. Now then, to make the Case and the Question. The Case thus: A
Minister has just opportunity to preach in a Congregation, not his own: where
he sees or generally hears some error in judgment, or outrageous sin in
practice to be continued in with too public allowance: He has liberty to
make choice of his Text and theme, and leisure to provide in some measure for
it; and his conscience tells him, he cannot pro hic and nunc direct his
speech with greater service to Gods Church, than against those errors or
sins. He sees on the other side some withdrawments: his discretion may
perhaps be called in question, for meddling where he needed not; he shall
possibly lose the good opinion of some, with whom he has held fair
correspondence hitherto; he shall preserve his own peace the better, if he
turn his speech another way. This is the Case. The Question is, Whether these
later considerations, and the good that may come thereby, be sufficient to
warrant unto him the omission of that necessary duty?

The rule of my Text resolves it negatiuely:. 32. A Minister, in what Cases he
may conceal some divine truths from his auditorie;
they are not sufficient. The Duty being necessary, pro hic and nunc, it is
simply evil to omit it; and therefore it may not be omitted for any other
good. I deny not, but a Minister may with good discretion conceal many truths
from his flock; at least the opening and amplifying of them: if they be not
such, as are needful for them to know, either for the stablishment of Faith,
or practice of Life; as not only many nice Schoole-points and Conclusions are,
but also many Genealogies, and Leuiticall rites, and other things even in the
Scriptures themselves. Nay more, a Minister not only in discretion may, but is
even in Conscience bound, at least in the public exercise of his Ministry, to
conceal some particular truths from his Auditorie; yea though they be such as
are needful for the practice of life, and for the settling of men's consciences:
if they be such withal, as are not fit to be publicly spoken of; as are many
Resolutions of Cases appertaining to the seventh Commandment ( Thou shall not
commit adultery;) and some also appertaining to the eighth (Thou shall not
steal.) Our men Moulin. Buckler of Faith, part. 2. sect. 4. and not only
ours, but some of their own too: See Espenceus ad Tit. cap. 1.
justly condemn the Popish Casuists, for their too much liberty in this kind
in their Writings: Whereby they reduce vices into an Art, under color of
reproving them; and convey into the minds of In quibus plus proficit vitiorum
ignoratio, quam cognitio virtutis. Justin. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2.
corrupt men, Notions of such prodigious filthiness, and artificial
Leger-du-maine, as perhaps otherwise they would never have dreamed on, or
thirsted after. The loose writings of the unchaste Poets are but Quis veterum
Poetarum plus obscoenitatis, impuritatis, flagitiorum, professus est, quam
docet Poenitentiale Burchardi? Quot sunt, qui ignorarent multa, quae ibi
leguntur, nisi ex ipso didicissent? I.R. in confut. fab. Burdon. page 305. Quo
Principum sacerdotum, negociatorum, ac praecipue mulierum vitia in concionibus
suis insectentur: quae saepius ita depingunt, vt obscoenitatem doceant. Erasm.
in Adag. (...).
dull tutors of Lust, compared with the authorized Tomes of our severe Romish
Votaries. There be enourmous sins of this rank, which a modest man would be
ashamed so much as to name, especially in public. Now of these, only the
generalities would be touched in the public; the specialties not unfolded, but
in the private exercise of our Ministry: nor yet that promiscuously to every
one, that should out of curiosity desire satisfaction in them; but only to
such men, (and that but only so far,) as they may concern in point of
conscience, and of practice. Besides these, there are other Cases many, in
which it may be more convenient to conceal, than to teach some divine truths
at some times, and in some places.

But yet as the Case is here proposed,. 33. and in what he may not.
if it be a truth questioned; about which Gods people are much distracted in
their opinions; much mistaken by some through error in judgment; much abused
by sinful, especially public practice; occasioning Scandals and offenses
among brethren; likely to be overwhelmed with custom, or multitude of those
that think or do against it; and be otherwise of material importance: I
take it, the Omission of it upon seasonable opportunity, is a grievous sin,
and not colorable by any pretense. Beloved, the Minister is not to come into
the Pulpit, as a Fencer upon the stage, to play his prize, and to make a fair
(...). 1 Cor. 9.26.
flourish against sin, (Here he could have it, and there he could have it,
but has it no where:) but rather as a Captain into the Field, to bend his
forces especially against the strongest troops of the enemy; and to squander,
and break through the thickest ranks; and to drive at the Fight neither with
small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. 3 King. 22.31.
fairest. It is not enough for a Prophet to Esaias 58.1.
cry aloud, and to lift up his voice like a trumpet, and to tell Judah and
Israel of sins, and of transgressions at large: but if he would whet them up
to the battle, he must give a more If the trumpet give an uncertain sound,
who shall prepare himself to the battle? 1 Cor. 14.8.
certain sound; he must tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her
transgressions. If there be in Damascus, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus, or Judah,
or Israel; Amos 1. and 2.
three transgressions, or four, more eminent than the rest: it is fit, they
that are sent to Damascus, and Moab, and Ammon, and Tyrus, and Judah, and
Israel, should make them hear of those three or four, more than all the rest.
Sins and Errors, when they begin to get head and heart, must be handled
roughly. Silence in such a case is a kind of flattery: and it is Pene idem est
fidem nolle asserere, and negare. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Thrasim. cap. 1. Sicut
incauta locutio in errorem pertrahit, ita indiscretum filentium in errore
relinquit. Greg. in Moral.
almost all one, when sins grow outrageous; to hold our peace at them; and to
cry Peace, Peace unto them. Our Apostle in Act. 20. would not have held
himself sufficiently discharged from the guilt of other men's blood; if he had
shunned (as occasion was offered) to have declared unto them Act. 20.26, 27.
(...), even the whole counsel of God.

. 34. A more particular Application, in defense of the former Sermon.
In my Application of this Instance and Case, blame me not, if I do it with some
reference to my self. Being heretofore by appointment, as now again I was, to
provide my self for this place against such a meeting as this is; as in my
conscience I then thought it needful for me, I delivered my mind, (and I dare
say, the Truth too, for substance) something freely, touching the Ceremonies
and Constitutions of our Church. And I have now also with like freedom, showed
the unlawfulness of the late disorderly attempts in this town; and that from
the ground of my present Text. I was then blamed for that; I think unjustly;
(for I do not yet see what I should retract of that I then delivered:) and it
is not unlikely, I shall be blamed again for this, unless I prevent it. You
have heard now already, both heretofore, that to judge any man's heart; and at
this time, that to slander any truth, are (without repentance) sins justly
damnable: (...), they that offend either in the one, or the other, their
damnation is just. To preserve therefore both you from the Sin, and my self
from the Blame; consider, I pray you, with Reason and Charity, what I shall say.

You that are our hearers, know not with what hearts we speak unto you: that
is only known to our own hearts; and to 1 Ioh, 3.20.
God, who is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. That which you
are to look at, and to regard, is, with what (...). Act. 17.11. Non requiritur
quis, vel qualis praedicet; sed quid praedicet. Distinct. 19. Secundum. (...).
Plat. in Charmide.
truth we speak unto you. So long as what we preach is true, and agreeable to
Gods Word, and right reason: you are not, upon I know not what light surmizes
or suspicions, to judge with what spirits, or with what dispositions of heart
we preach. Whether we Phil. 1.15 16.17.18.
preach Christ of envy, and strife, or of good will; whether sincerely, or of
contention; whether in pretense, or in truth; it is our own good, or hurt: we
must answer for that; and at our peril be it, if we do not look to that. But
what is that to you? Notwithstanding every way, so long as it is Christ, and
his truth which are preached, it is your part therein to rejoice. If an Gal.
1.8.9.
Angel from heaven should preach any untruth unto you, (...), Let him be
accursed: but if the very Devil of hell should preach the truth, he must be
heard, and believed, and obeyed. So long as Math. 23.2.3
Scribes and Pharisees hold them to Moses's Text and Doctrine, let them be as
damned Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Math. 23.13, 14, etc.
Hypocrites, as Scribes and Phrisees can be: yet all whatsoever they bid you
observe, that you are to observe and do.

Let me then demand: Did I ever deliver any untruth? It had been well done
then to have shown it, that I might have acknowledged, and retracted it. Did I
speak nothing but the truth? with what conscience then could any that heard me
say, as yet I hear some did; That I preached factiously, That I came to cast
bones among them, That I might have chosen a fitter Text, That I might have had
as much thanks to have kept away? For Faction; Peace of the Church, and the
Unity of Brethren. casting bones (if that must needs be the phrase) they were
cast in these parts long before my coming by that great enemy to peace and
unity, and busy sower of discord, the Devil: otherwise I should not have
found at my first coming such snarling about them, and such Gal. 5.15.
biting and devouring one another, as I did. My endeavor was rather to have
gathered up the bones, and to have taken away the matter of difference, (I
mean, the error in judgment about, and inconformity in practice unto, the
lawful Ceremonies of the Church) that so if it had been possible all might have
been quiet, without despising or judging one another for thanks; I hold not
that worth the answering: alas, it is a poor aim for Gods Minister, to preach
for thanks.

For the choice of my Text and Argument, both liberty and plainness in
reproving sin, should not allow those that come amongst them that liberty and
plainness against themselves and their own sins? I dare appeal to your
selves. Have you never been taught, that it is the Ministers duty, as to
oppose against all errors and sins in the general, so to bend himself (as
near as he can) especially against the apparent errors and sins of his
present auditorie? And do you not believe it is so? Why then might I not; nay,
how ought I not, bend my speech, both then against a common error of sundry in
these parts in point of Ceremony; and now against the late petulancy, (or at
least oversight) of some mis-guided ones? The noise of these things abroad; and
the scandal taken thereat by such as hear of them; and the ill fruits of them
at home in breeding iealousies, and cherishing contentions among neighbors:
cannot but stir us up, if we be sensible (as every good member should be) of
the damage and loss the Church acquireth by them, to put you in mind and to
admonish you (as opportunities inuit us) both privately and publicly. Is it
not time, trow ye, to thrust in the sickle, when the fields look white unto
the Harvest? Is it not time our Pulpits should a little echo of these things,
when all the Country far and near ringeth of them?

For my own part; how ever others censure me, I am sure, my own heart tells
me, I could not have discharged my Conscience; if being called to this place,
I should have balked what either then or now I have delivered. My conscience
prompting me, all circumstances considered, that these things were pro hic and
nunc necessary to be delivered, rather than any other: if for any outward
inferior respect I should have passed them over with silence; I think I
should have much swarued from the Rule of my Text, and have done a great evil,
that some small good might come of it. But many thousand times better were it
for me, that all the world should censure me for speaking what they think I
should not; than that my own heart should condemn me for not speaking what
it tells me I should. And thus much of things simply evil.

. 35. The conclusion.
I should proceed to apply this Rule, We must not do evil, that good may
come; unto evils, not simply, but accidentally such: and that both in the
general, and also in some few specials of greatest use; namely, unto evils
which become such through Conscience, Scandal, or Comparison. In my choice of
the Scripture, I aimed at all this: and had gathered much of my provision for
it. But the Cases being many and weighty; I foresaw I could not go onward with
my first project, without much wronging one of both: either the things
themselves, if I should contract my speech to the scantling of time; or you, if
I should lengthen it to the weight of the matter. And therefore I resolved here
to make an end; and to give place (as fit it is) to the business whereabout we
meet. The Total of what I have said, and should say; is in effect but this: No
pretension of a good end, of a good meaning, of a good event, of any good
whatsoever; either can sufficiently warrant any sinful action to be done, or
justify it being done: or sufficiently excuse the Omission of any necessary
duty, when it is necessary. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. Now to God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, etc.

At a Visitation at Boston, Lincoln. 13. March 1624.
THE THIRD SERMON.
1. COR. 12.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every man, to
profit withal.


. 1. The Occasion.
IN the first Verse of this Chapter S. Paul proposes to himself an Argument,
which he prosecuteth the whole Chapter through, and (after a profitable
digression into the praise of Charity in the next Chapter) resumeth again at
the fourteenth Chapter, spending also that whole Chapter therein: and it is
concerning spiritual gifts, [ Verse. 1.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant,
etc.] These gracious gifts of the holy Spirit of God, bestowed on them for the
edification of the Church; the Corinthians, (by making them the (...). Chrysostom.
in 1. Cor. hom. 29.
fuel either of their pride, in despising those that were inferior to
themselves; or of their envy, in malicing those that excelled them therein,)
abused to the maintenance of schism, and faction, and emulation in the Church.
For the remedying of which evils, the Apostle enters upon the Argument:
discoursing fully of the variety of these spiritual gifts, and who is the
Author of them, and for what end they were given, and in what manner they
should be employed; omitting nothing that was needful to be spoken anent this
subject.

In this part of the Chapter,. 2. Coherence,
entreating both before and after this verse, of the wondrous great, yet sweet
and useful, variety of these spiritual gifts: he shows, that howsoever
manifold they are either for kind, or degree, so as they may differ in the
material and formal, yet they do all agree both in the same efficient, and
in the same final cause. In the same efficient cause, which is God the Lord by
his Spirit, verse. 4, 6. [ Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit; and there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord; and
there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works all
in all.] And in the same final cause; which is the advancement of Gods glory,
in the propagation of his Gospel, and the edification of his Church; in this
verse, [ But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.]

By occasion of which words,. 3. and division of the Text.
we may enquire into the nature, conueiance, and use of these gifts. First,
their nature in themselves, and in their original; what they are, and whence:
they are the works of Gods Spirit in us, [ The manifestation of ] Secondly,
their conueyance unto us; how we come to have them, and to have property in
them: it is by gift; [ is given to every man.] use and end; why they were given
us, and what we are to do with them: they must be employed to the good of our
Brethren, and of the Church; is given to every man [ to profit withal.] Of
these briefly, and in their order; and with special reference ever to us that
are of the Clergy.

. 4. The explication of the words.
By manifestation of the Spirit here our Apostle understands none other thing,
than he does by the adjective word (...) in the first, and by the substantive
word (...) in the last verse of the Chapter. Both which put together, do
signify those spiritual gifts and graces whereby God enableth men (and
especially Churchmen) to the duties of their particular Callings for the
general good. Such as are those particulars, which are named in the next
following verses; Verse. 8-10.
the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, the gifts of healing,
workings of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of tongues,
interpretation of tongues. All which, and all other of like nature and use,
because they are wrought by that one and selfsame Verse. 11.
Spirit, which divides to every one severally as he will; are therefore called
Verse. 1.
(...), spiritual gifts; and here (...), the manifestation of the Spirit.

The word [ Spirit] though in Scripture it have many other significations,. 5.
By Spirit is meant the Holy Ghost:
yet in this place I conceive to be understood directly of the Holy Ghost, the
third Person in the euer-blessed Trinity. For first, in verse. 3. that which is
called the Spirit of God Holy Ghost: [ Verse. ^.
I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls
Jesus accursed; and that no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost.] Again, that variety of gifts, Verse. 4-6.
same Spirit, is said likewise in verse. 5. to proceed from the same Lord, and
in verse. 6. to proceed from the same God: and therefore such a Spirit is meant,
as is also Lord and God; and that is only the holy Ghost. And again, in those
words, in verse. 11. [ Verse* 11.
all these;] the Apostle ascribes to this Spirit the collation and
distribution of such gifts according to the free power of his own will and
pleasure: which free power belongs to none but God alone, Verse. 18.
who has set the members every one in the body, as it has pleased him.

Which yet ought not so to be understood of the Person of the Spirit; as if
the Father,. 6. not as excluding the other Persons;
and the Son, had no part or fellowship in this business. For all the
Actions and operations of the Divine Persons, (those only excepted which are
of intrinsecall and mutual relation) are the joint and undivided works of the
whole three Persons: according to the common known maxim, constantly and
uniformly received in the Catholic Church, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indiuisa. And as to this particular, concerning gifts the Scriptures are clear
Wherein, as they are ascribed to God the Holy Ghost in this Chapter; so they
are elsewhere ascribed to God the Father, [ Iam. 1.17.
Every good gift and every perfect giving is from above, from the Father of
Lights: I am. 1.] and elsewere to God the Son, [ Ephesians. 4.7.
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: Ephesians. 4.] Yea and it may be, that for this very reason in the three
verses next before my text, these three words are used; Spirit, in verse. 4.
Lord, in verse. 5. and God, in verse. 6. to give us intimation, that Ne gratia
and donum diuisum sit per personas Patri, and Filij, et Sp. Sancti: sed
indiscretae vnitatis and naturae trium vnum opus intell^gatur. Ambros in 1.
Cor. 7. ca. 61.
these spiritual gifts proceed equally and vndiuidedly from the whole three
Persons; from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and
from the eternal Spirit of them both the Holy Ghost, as from one entire,
indivisible, and coessentiall Agent.

. 7. but by way of appropriation.
But for that we are gross of understanding, and unable to conceive the
distinct Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, otherwise than by
apprehending some distinction of their operations and offices to-vs-ward: it
has pleased the wisdom of God in the holy Scriptures, (which, being written
for our sakes, were to be fitted to our capacities) so far to condescend to
our weakness and dullness, as to attribute some of those great and common
works to one person, and some to another, after a more special manner than
unto the rest; although indeed and in truth none of the three persons had more
or less to do than other in any of those great and common-workes. This manner
of speaking Divines use to call V. Aquin. 1. qu. 39 7.
Appropriation. By which appropriation, as Power is ascribed to the Father, and
Wisdom to the Son; so is Goodness to the Holy Ghost. And therefore, as the
Work of Creation, wherein is specially seen the mighty power of God, is
appropriated to the Father; and the work of Redemption, wherein is specially
seen the wisdom of God, to the Son: so the works of sanctification, and
the infusion of habitual graces, whereby the good things of God are
communicated unto us, is appropriated unto the Holy Ghost. And for this cause,
the gifts thus communicated unto us from God, are called (...) spiritual
gifts, and (...), the manifestation of the Spirit.

We see now, why spirit! but then;. 8. What is meant by Manifestation.
why manifestation? The word, as most other verballs of that form, may be
understood either in the active, or passive signification. And it is not
material, whether of the two ways we take it in this place: both being true;
and neither improper. For these spiritual Gifts are the manifestation of the
spirit Actiuely: because by these, the spirit manifests the will of God unto
the Church; these being the instruments and means of conueighing the knowledge
of salvation unto the people of God. And they are the manifestation of the
spirit Passiuely too: because where any of these gifts, especially in any
eminent sort, appeared in any person, it was a manifest evidence, that the
Spirit of God wrought in him. As we read in Act. 10. that they of the
Circumcision were astonished, Act. 10.45, 46.
When they saw, that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost. If it be demanded, But how did that appear* it follows in the next
verse, [ for they heard them speak with tongues, etc.] The spiritual Gift
then is a Id est, Donum spiritus; quo dono spiritus suam in homine praesentiam
declarat. Metonymia effecti.

Piscat. in schol. hic.


manifestation of the spirit as every other sensible effect is a manifestation
of its proper cause.

. 9. By spiritual gifts.
We are now yet farther to know, that the Gifts and graces wrought in us by the
holy spirit of God, are of two sorts. The Scriptures sometimes distinguish them
by the different terms of (...) and (...): although those words are sometimes
again used indifferently and promiscuously, either for other. They are
commonly known in the Schools, and differenced by the names of V. Aquin. 1.2.
qu. 111.1.
Gratiae gratum facientes, and Gratiae gratis datae. Which terms though they
be not very proper, (for one of them may be affirmed of the other; whereas the
members of every good distinction ought to be opposite:) yet because they have
been long received, (and change of terms, though happily for the better, has
by experience been found for the most part unhappy in the event, in
multiplying unnecessary booke-quarrels;) we may retain them profitably, and
without prejudice. Those former, which they call Gratum facientes, are the
Graces of sanctification; whereby the person that has them, is enabled to do
acceptable service to God, in the duties of his general Calling: these later,
which, they call Gratis datas, are the Graces of edification; whereby the
person that has them is enabled, to do profitable service to the Church of
God in the duties of his particular Calling. Those are given Nobis, and Nobis;
both to us, and for us, that is Duplex est operatio sancti spiritus: operatur
enim in nobis aliud propter nos, aliud propter proximos. Bernard. in paruis.
Sermon. 53.
chiefly for our own good: these Nobis, sed Nostris; to us indeed, but for
others, that is chiefly for the good of our brethren. Those are given us --
geminae operationis experimentum. Vnius, qua nos primo i^tus virtutibus solidat
ad salutem: alterius, qua foris quoque muneribus ornat ad lucrum. Illas nobis,
haec nostris accepimus. Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 18.
ad salutem, for the saving of our own souls: these ad lucrum, for the
winning of other men's souls. Those proceed from the special love of God to
the Person; and may therefore be called Personal, or special: these proceed
from the general love of God to his Church, (or yet more general to humane
societies;) and may therefore be rather called Ecclesiastical or General
Gifts or Graces.

Of that first sort are Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, Patience, Humility;
and all those other holy graces and Gal. 5.22.
fruits of the spirit,. 10. What is here not meant;
which accompany salvation: Wrought by the blessed and powerful operation of
the holy Spirit of God, after a most effectual, but inconceivable manner,
regenerating, and renewing, and seasoning, and sanctifying the hearts of his
Chosen. But yet these are not the Gifts so much spoken of in this Chapter; and
namely in my Text: Every branch whereof excludes them. Of those graces of
sanctification first, we may have indeed probable inducements, hypocrisy may
make such a semblance, that we may think we see spirit in a man, in whom yet
there is nothing but flesh, and infirmities may cast such a fogge, that we can
discern nothing but flesh in a man, in whom yet there is spirit. But the gifts
here spoken of do incur into the senses, and give us evident and infallible
assurance of the spirit that wrought them: here is a manifestation of the
spirit. Again, secondly, those Graces of sanctification are not communicated
by distribution, ( 1 Cor. 7.7.
Alius sic, alius vero sic;) Faith to one, Charity to another, Repentance to
another: but where they are given, they are given all at once and together, as
it were strung upon one thread, and linked into one chain. But the Gifts here
spoken of are distributed as it were by doale, and divided severally as it
pleased God, shared out into several portions, and given to every man some, to
none all; for Verse. 8.
to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of
those Graces of sanctification, though they may and ought to be exercised to
the benefit of others, who by the Math. 5.16,
shining of our light, and the sight of our good works, may be provoked to
glorify God by walking in the same paths: yet that is but vtilitas emergens,
and not finis proprius; a good use made of them upon the bye, but not the
maine, proper and direct end of them, for which they were chiefly given. But
the Gifts here spoken of, were given directly for this end, and so intended by
the giver, to be employed for the benifite of others, and for the edifying of
the Church; they were given to profit withal.

It then remains,. 11. and what is.
to understand this Text and Chapter of that other and later kind of
spiritual Gifts: those Graces of Edification, (or Gratiae gratis datae,)
whereby men are enabled in their several Callings, according to the quality
and measure of the graces they have received, to be profitable members of the
public body, either in Church or Commonwealth. Under which appellation, (the
very first natural powers and faculties of the soul only excepted, which
flowing a principijs speciei, are in all men the same and alike;) I comprehend
all other secondary endowments, and abilities whatsoever of the reasonable
soul, which are capable of the degrees of more and less, and of better and
worse; together with all subsidiary helps any way conducing to the exercise of
any of them. Whether they be first, supernatural graces, tongues, and of
miracles, and of healings, and of prophecy properly so called, and many other
like; which were frequent in the infancy of the Church, and when this Epistle
was written, according as, the necessity of those primitive times considered,
God saw it expedient for his Church. Or whether they be secondly, such as
Philosophers call Natural dispositions: Wit, quickness of Conceit, fastness
of Memory, clearenesse of Understanding, soundness of Judgment, readiness of
Speech, and other like; which flow immediately a Principijs indiuidui, from the
individual condition, constitution, and temperature of particular thirdly,
such as Philosophers call Intellectual Habits: which is, when those natural
dispositions are so improued, and perfected by Education, Art, Industry,
Observation, or Experience; that men become thereby skillful Linguists, subtle
Disputers, copious Orators, profound Divines, powerful Preachers, expert
Lawyers, Physicians, Historians, Statesmen, Commanders, Artisans, or excellent
in any Science, fourth place, all outward subseruient helps whatsoever, which
may any way further or facilitate the exercise of any of the former graces,
dispositions, or habits: such as are health, strength, beauty, and all those
other Bonae Corporis; as also Bona fortunae, Honor, Wealth, Nobility,
Reputation, and the rest. All of these, even those among them, which seem most
of all to have their foundation in Nature, or perfection from Art, may in some
sort be called (...), spiritual gifts: in as much as the spirit of God is the
first and principal worker of them. Nature, Art, Industry, and all other
subsidiary furtherances, being but second Agents under him; and as means
ordained, or as instruments used by him, for the accomplishing of those ends he
has appointed.

. 12. Inferences hence: The first;
And now have we found out the just latitude of the spiritual gifts spoken of
in this Chapter, and of the manifestation of the spirit in my Text. From whence
not to pass without some obseruable inferences for our Edification: We may
here first behold, and admire, and magnify the singular love, and care, and
providence of God for and over his Church. For the building up whereof, he
has not only furnished it with fit materials, men endowed with the faculties
of understanding, reason, will, memory, affections; nor only lent them tools
out of his own rich storehouse, his holy Word, and sacred Ordinances: but, as
sometimes he filled Exodus 35.30, etc.
Bezaleel and Aholiab with skill and wisdom for the building of the material
Tabernacle; so he has also from time to time raised up serviceable men, and
enabled them with a large measure of all needful gifts and graces, to set
forward the building, and to give it both strength and beauty. A Body, if it
had not difference and variety of members, were rather a lump, than a body; or
if having such members, there were yet no vital spirits within to enable them
to their proper offices, it were rather a Corpse than a Body: but the vigor
that is in every part to do its office, is a certaing evidence and
manifestation of a spirit of life within, and that makes it a living
Organicall body. So those active gifts, and graces, and abilities, which are to
be found in the members of the mystical body of Christ, (I know not whether of
greater variety, or use,) are a strong manifestation, that there is a powerful
Spirit of God within, that knitteth the the whole body together, and works
all in all, and all in every part of the body.

. 13. The second;
Secondly; though we have just cause to lay it to heart, when men of eminent
gifts and place in the Church are taken from us, and to lament in theirs, our
own, and the Churches loss: yet we should possess our souls in patience,
and sustain our selves with this comfort; that it is the same God, that still
has care over his Church; and it is the same Head Jesus Christ, that still
has influence into his members; and it is the same blessed Spirit of God and
of Christ, that still actuateth and animateth this great mystical Body. And
therefore we may not doubt, but this Spirit, as he has hitherto done from the
beginning, so will still manifest himself from time to time, unto the end of
the world; in raising up instruments for the service of his Church, and
furnishing them with gifts in some good measure meet for the same, more or
less, according as he shall see it expedient for her, in her several
different estates and conditions: giving Ephesians. 4.11, 13
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all meet in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. He has promised long since,
who was never yet touched with breach of promise, that he would Matthew. 28.20
be with his Apostles (and their successors) always unto the end of the world.

. 14. The third;
Thirdly, where the Spirit of God has manifested it self to any man by the
distribution of gifts, it is but reason, that man should manifest the Spirit
that is in him, by exercising those gifts in some lawful Calling. And so this
manifestation of the Spirit in my text, imposes upon every man the Necessity
of a Calling. Our Apostle, in the seventh of this Epistle, joins these two
together, a Gift and a Calling; as things that may not be severed: 1. Cor. 7.17.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one.
Where the end of a thing is the use; there the difference cannot be great,
whether we abuse it, or but conceal it. The Math. 25.30
unprofitable servant, that wrapped up his Masters talent in a napkin, could
not have received a much heavier doom had he misspent it. O then up and be
doing: Math. 20.6.
why stand you all the day idle? Do not say, because you heard no voice, that
therefore no man has called you: those very gifts you have received, are a
Real Call, pursuing you with continual restless importunity, till you have
disposed your selves in some honest course of life or other, wherein you may be
profitable to humane society, by the exercising of some or other of those
gifts. All the members of the Body have their proper and distinct offices,
according as they have their proper and distinct faculties; and from those
offices they have also their proper and distinct names. As then in the Body,
that is indeed no member, which cannot call it self by any other name, than by
the common name of a member: so in the Church, he that cannot style himself by
any other name than a Christian, does indeed but vsurp that too. If thou
say, thou art of the body: I demand then, What is thy office in the body? If
thou have no office in the body: then thou art at the best, but Tumor praeter
naturam (as Physicians call them) a scab, or botch, or wenne, or some other
monstrous and unnatural exerescency upon the body; but certainly thou art no
true part and member of the body. And if thou art no part of the body, how
dare thou make challenge to the head, by mis-calling thy self Christian? If
thou have a Gift, get a Calling.

. 15. The fourth.
Fourthly, we of the Clergy, though we may not ingrosse the Spirit unto our
selves, as if none were spiritual persons but oue selves: yet the voice of the
World has long given us the Name of the Spirituality after a peculiar sort; as
if we were spiritual persons in some different singular respect from other
men. And that not altogether without ground, both for the name, and thing. The
very name seems to be thus used by Saint Paul in the 14. Chapter following,
where at verse 37 he makes a Prophet and a Spiritual man all one, (and by
prophesying, in that whole Chapter he means Preaching: 1. Cor. 14.37
If any man think himself to be a Prophet, either spiritual, let him
acknowledge, etc. But howsoever it be for the title; the thing it self has
very sufficient ground from that form of speech, which was used by our blessed
Savior, when he conferred the Ministerial power upon his Disciples, and is
still used in our Church at the collation of Holy Orders, Ioh. 20.22.
Accipite spiritum sanctum, Receive the holy Ghost. Since then at our admission
into holy Orders we receive a spiritual power by the imposition of hands,
which others have not; we may thenceforth be justly styled spiritual persons.
The thing for which I note it, is, that we should therefore endeavor our
selves 2. Tim. 1.6.
(...), so to stir up those spiritual gifts that are in us; as that by the
eminency thereof above that which is in ordinary temporal men, we may show
our selves to be indeed, what we are in name, spiritual persons. If we be of
the Spirituality, there would be in us another gates manifestation of the
Spirit, than is ordinarily to be found in the Temporaltie. God forbid I should
censure all them for intruders into the Ministry, that are not gifted for the
Pulpit. The seuerest censurers of Non-preaching Ministers, if they had lived in
the beginning of the Reformation, must have been content, as the times then
stood, to have admitted of some thousands of non-preaching Ministers, or else
have denied many Parishes and Congregations in England the benefit of so much
as bare reading. And I take this to be a safe Rule: Whatsoever thing the help
of any circumstances can make lawful at any time, that thing may not be
condemned as universally, and de toto genere unlawful. I judge no man's
conscience then, or calling, who is in the Ministry; be his gifts never so
slender: I dare not deny him the benefit of his Clergy, if he can but read:
if his own heart condemn him not, neither do I. But yet this I say; As the
Times now are, wherein learning abounds even unto wantonness; and wherein
the world is full of questions, and controversies, and novelties, and niceties
in Religion; and wherein most of our Gentry, very women and all (by the
advantage of long Peace, and the custom of modern education, together with
the help of a multitude of English books and translations) are able to look
through the ignorance of a Clergyman, and censure it, if he be tripping in
any point of History, Cosmography, Moral or Natural Philosophy, Divinity, or
the Arts; yea, and to chastise his very method and phrase, if he speak
loosely, or impertinently, or but improperly, and if every thing be not
point-vise: I say as these times are, I would not have a Clergie-man content
himself with every mediocritie of gifts; but by his prayers, care, and
industry improve those he has, so as he may be able upon good occasion, to
Romans 1.11.
import a spiritual gift to the people of God, whereby they may be
established, and to speak with such understanding, and sufficiency, and
pertinencie (especially when he has just warning, and a convenient time to
prepare himself,) in some good measure of proportion to the quickness and
ripeness of these present times, as that they that love not his coat may yet
approve his labors, and not find any thing therein whereat justly to quarrel:
Tit. 2.7, 8.
Showing in his doctrine (as our Apostle writes to Titus) vncorruptnesse,
gravity, severity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of
the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of him. They
that are called spiritual persons, should strive to answer that name by a more
than ordinary manifestation of spiritual gifts. And thus much shall suffice us
to have spoken concerning the name and nature of these spiritual gifts, by
occasion of the title here given them, The manifestation of the Spirit.

Consider we next, and in the second place, the conueyance of these gifts over
unto us;. 16. The conueyance of these spiritual graces unto us,
how we come to have property in them, and by what right we can call them
ours. The Conueyance is by deed of gift; the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man. Understand it not to be so much intended here, that every
particular man has the manifestation of the Spirit, (though that may also be
true in some sense;) as that every man, that has the manifestation of the
Spirit, has it given him, and given him withal to this end, that he may do
good with it. Like as when we say, Every man learneth to read before he learn
to write; it is no part of our meaning to signify each particular person so to
do, (for there be many, that learn neither of both;) but we only entend to
show the received order of the things to be such, as that every man that
learneth both, learneth that first. As we conceive his meaning, who directing
us the way to such or such a place, should tell us, Every man rides this way;
and as we conceive of that speech of the Ruler of the Feast in the Gospel,
Ioh. 2.10.
Every man at the beginning sets forth good Wine, and then after that which
is worse; though there be many thousand men in the world that never rode that
way, or had occasion to set forth any Wine at all, either better or worse: very
so ought we to conceive the meaning of the universal particle Every man both
in this, and in many other like speeches in the Scriptures; with (...)
restringendum est ad praesentem hypothesin. Piscat. schol in Luc. 20.38.
Instances, see Ioh. 1.7. Romans 5.18 etc.
due limitations, according to the tenor and purpose of the thing spoken of. It
mattereth not then, as to the intent of this present speech (be it true, be it
false otherwise,) whether every man have received a spiritual gift, or no: only
thus much is directly intended, that Vnicuique datur] intellige, Vnicuique cum
datur. Piscat. in Schol. hic.
every man who has received such a gift, has received it by way of gift. All
spiritual graces, all those dispositions, habits, and abilities of the
understanding part, from which the Church of God may receive edification in any
kind, together with all the secondary and inferior helps that any way conduce
thereunto, they are all the good gifts of God. [ The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man.]

. 17. is by way of gift;
The variety, both of the gifts meet for several offices, and of the offices
wherein to employ those gifts, is wonderful: and no less wonderful the
distribution of both gifts, and offices. But all that (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor.
hom. 29
variety is derived from one and the same fountain, the holy Spirit of God:
and all those distributions pass unto us by one and the same way, of most free
and liberal donation. Have all the Word of Wisdom? Have all the Word of
Knowledge? Have all Faith? Have all Prophecy? or any other spiritual grace?
No; they have not: but 1. Cor. 12.8. etc.
to one the Word of Wisdom, the Word of Knowledge to another, and to others
other gifts. There is both variety you see, and distribution of these graces.
But yet there is the same Author of them, and the same manner of communicating
them: For to one Ibid.
is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom; to another the Word of Knowledge
by the same Spirit, and to others, other graces; but they are all from the same
Spirit, and they are all given. And as the gifts, so the offices too. To that
question in verse. 29. Verse. 29.
Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Answer may be made, as
before, negatiuely, No; they are not: but some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Teachers. There is the like variety, and distribution, as before: but
withal, the same Doner, and the same donation, as before. For Ephesians. 4.11.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers:
Ephesians. 4. And 1. Cor. 12.28
God has set some in the Church; first, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets;
thirdly, Teachers, etc. beneath at verse. 28. Both gifts and offices, as they
are a Deo, for the Author; so they are ex dono, for the manner: from God, and
by way of gift. If we had no other, the very names they carry, like the
superscription upon Caesar's penny, were a sufficient proof, from whom we first
had them. When we call them (...), Gratias gratis datas, Gifts, and Graces,
and Manifestations of the Spirit; do we not by the use of those very names
confess the receipt? For what more free than gift? and what less of debt or
desert, than grace? Heathen men indeed called the best of their perfections,
(...), Habits: but Saint James has taught Christians a fitter name for ours,
Iam. 1.17.
(...), Gifts. They saw they had them, and looked no farther: but we must know,
as that we have them, so as well how we came by them. And therefore this
Apostle above at Chap. 4. joins the having and the receipt together; as if he
would have us behold them vno intuitu, and at once. [ 1 Cor. 4.7.
Quid habes, quod non accepisti? what have thou, that thou have not received?

. 18. not from Nature, or Desert.
Possibly, thou will allege thy excellent natural parts; these were not given
thee, but thou broughtest them into the world with thee: or thou will vouch
what thou have attained to by art and industry; and these were not given thee,
but thou have won them proprio Mart, and therefore well deseruest to wear
them. Deceive not thy self: it is neither so, nor so. Our Apostle in the place
now last mentioned, cutteth off all such Challenges. [ 1 Cor. 4.7.
Quis te discreuit? Who made thee to differ from another?] Say there were, (as
there is not) such a difference in and from Nature as thou conceiuest; yet
still in the last resolution there must be a receipt acknowledged: for even --
cum illius fit gratiae, quod creatus es.

Hieron. Epist. 139. Attendamus gratiam Dei, non solum qua fecit nos --
Auggustin. in Psalm. 144.


Nature it self in the last resolution is of Grace; for God gave thee that.
Or, say there were (as there is not) such a difference of desert, as thou
pretendest; yet still that were to be acknowledged as a gift too: for God gave
thee that Deuteronomy. 8.18. (...). dictum Agamemnonis ad Achillem apud Hom^r. Illad.
^.
power whatsoever it was, whereby thou have attained to whatsoever thou have.
But the truth is; the difference that is in men in regard of these gifts and
abilities, arises neither from the power of nature, nor from the merit of
labor; otherwise than as God is pleased to use these as second causes under
him: but it comes merely from the good will and pleasure of that free
spirit, which blows where, and when, and how he lists; 1 Cor. 12.11
dividing his graces to every man severally as he will, (at the eleventh) and
Ibid. 18.
as it has pleased him, (at verse 18. of this Chapter.) Nature is a necessary
agent, and, if not either hindered by some inferior impediment, or ouer-ruled
by some higher power, works always alike, and produces the same effects in
all indiuiduals of the same kind: and how is it possible she should make a
difference, that knows none? And as for Desert; there is indeed no such
thing: and therefore it can work nothing. For can God be a debtor to any man.
or has any man Romans 11.35.
given to him first, that it might be recompensed him again? As a lump of
Esaias 64.8.
Clay lies before the Potter; so is all mankind in the hand of God. The
Potter at his pleasure, out of that Romans 9.21.
lump frames vessels of all sorts, of different shape, proportion, strength,
finenesse, capacity; as he thinks good, unto the several uses, for which
he intends them. So God after the good pleasure of his own will, out of
mankind, as out of an untoward lump of clay, (all of the same price, equal
in nature and desert,) makes up vessels for the use of his Sanctuary; by
fitting several men with several gifts, more or less, greater or meaner,
better or worse, according to the difference of those offices and employments,
for which he intends them. It is not the Clay, but the Potter, that makes
the difference there: neither is it any thing in man, but the Spirit of God,
that makes the difference here. Whatsoever spiritual abilities we have, we
have them of gift, and by grace. The manifestation of the spirit is given to
eueryman.

. 19. General Inferences. 1. Of thankfulness for those we have;
A point of very fruitful consideration for men of all form; whether they be
of greater, or of meaner gifts. And first, all of us generally may hence take
two profitable directions: the one, if we have any useful gifts, whom to
thanks for them; the other, if we want any needful gifts, where to seek for
them. Whatsoever manifestation of the spirit thou have, it is given thee: and
to whom can thy thanks for it be due, but to the Giver? Sacrifice not to thine
own Haba^. ^.16.
nets, either of Nature, of Endeavor, as if these Abilities were the
manifestations of thine own spirit: but enlarge thy heart to magnify the
goodness and bounty of him, who is Heb. 12.9.
Pater spirituum, the Father of the spirits of all flesh, and has wrought
those graces in thee by communicating his spirit unto thee. If thou shinest as
a star in the firmament of the Church, whether of a greater or lesser
magnitude, (as 1 Cor. 15.41.
one star differs from another in glory;) remember thou shinest but by a
borrowed light from him, who is Iam. 1.17.
Pater luminum, the Father and fountain of all lights, as the Sun in the
firmament, from whom descends every good gift, and every perfect giving.
Whatsoever Grace thou have, it is given thee: therefore be thankful to the
Giver.

But if thou want any grace,. 20. 2. of Prayer, for those we want:
or measure of grace, which seems needful for thee in that station and
calling wherein God has set thee: here is a second direction for thee, where
to seek it. even from his hands, who alone can give it. Iam. 1.5.
If any man lack wisdom (says S. James) let him ask of God, that gives to
all men liberally; and it shall be given him. A large, and liberal promise;
but yet a promise most certain, and full of comfortable assurance, provided,
it be understood aright, viz. with these two necessary Limitations: if God
shall see it expedient; and if he pray for it as he ought. Thou may pray
with an humble and upright affection, and put to thy best endeauours withal;
and yet not obtain the gift thou prayest for: because, being a common Grace,
and not of absolute necessity for salvation, it may be in the wisdom of God
(who best knows what is best, and when) not expedient for thee, or not for
his Church, at that time, and in that manner, or measure. Necessary Graces,
such as are those of sanctification, pray for them absolutely, and thou shall
absolutely receive them: there needs no conditional clause of Expediencie in
thy prayers for them; because they can never be inexpedient. But these may:
and therefore as thou ought not to pray for them, but with all subjection of
thy desires to his most holy and most wise appointments; so thou ought to
take a denial from him, not only contentedly, but even thankfully, as a
gracious fruit of his love unto thee, and a certain sign of the inexpediency
of the thing desired.

. 21. joining ever thereunto
But if it be expedient; it will not yet come for asking, unless it be asked
aright. Iam. 1.6.7.
But let him pray in faith, says S. James: Who so does not, let not that man
think to receive any thing of the Lord. Now that man only prays in Faith,
who looks to receive the thing he prays for, upon such terms, as God has
promised to give it: for Faith ever looks to the Promise. And God has not
made us any Promise of the End other than conditional; viz. upon our
conscionable use of the appointed means. And the means which he has
ordained both for the obtaining, and the improuing of spiritual Gifts, are
study, and industry, and diligent meditation. We must not now look, as in the
infancy of the Church, to have the teats put into our mouths, and to receive
spiritual graces by immediate infusion: That Manna, as Hoskins Sermon. on Luke
12.48.
one says, was for the Wilderness. But now the Church is possessed of the
Land, and grown to years of better strength; we must plow, and sow, and
eat of the fruit of the Land, in the sweat of our faces: and now he that 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
will not labor, he may thank himself if he have not to eat. He prays
but with an ouerly desire, and not from the deep of his heart, that will not
bend his endeauours withal to obtain what he desires: of rather indeed he
prays not at all. You may call it wishing and woulding, (and we have Proverbs
against wishers and woulders;) rather than Praying. Solomon accounts the idle
man's prayer no better; and it thriueth accordingly with him: Prou. 13.4.
The saul of the sluggard lusts, and has nothing; Prou. 13.

To make all sure then, here is your course.. 22. Our own faithful Endeauours.
Wrestle with God by your seruent prayers; and wrestle with him too by your
faithful endeavors: and he will not for his Goodness sake, and for his
Promise sake he cannot, dismiss you without a blessing. But omit either; and
the other is lost labor. Prayer without study, is Presumption; and study
without Prayer, Atheism: the one bootlesse; the other fruitless. You take
your books in vain into your hands, if you turn them over, and never look
higher: and you take Gods name in vain within your lips, if you cry Da Domine,
and never stir farther. The Ship is then like to be steered with best
certainty and success; when there is Oculus ad coelum, manus ad olauum: when
the Pilot is careful of both, to have his eye upon the Compass, and his hand
at the Stern. Remember these abilities you pray or study for, are the Gifts of
God: and as not to be had ordinarily without labor, (for God is a God of
order, and works not ordinarily, but by ordinary means;) so not to be had
merely for the labor, for then should it not be so much a Gift, as a
Purchase. It was Simon Magus his error, to think that Act. 8.20.
the gift of God might be purchased with money and it has a spice of his
sin, and so may go for a kind of simony, for a man to think these
spiritual gifts of God may be purchased with labor. You may rise up early,
and go to bed late, and study hard, and read much, and devour the fat and
the marrow of the best Authors; and when you have all done, unless God give a
blessing unto your endeavors, be as thin and meagre in regard of true and
useful learning, as Pharaohs Genesis 41.21
leave kine were after they had eaten the fat ones. It is God 2 Cor. 9.10.
that both ministers seed to the sower, and multiplyeth the seed sown: the
Principal, and the Increase, are both his. If then we expect any gift, or the
increase of any gift from him, neither of which we can have without him: let us
not be behind, either with our best endeavors to use the means he has
appointed, or with our faithful prayers to crave his blessing upon those
means. These Instructions are general; and concern us all, whatsoever our
Gifts be.

. 23. Special Inferences to those of more eminent Gifts. 1. Not to be proud of
them;
I must now turn my speech more particularly to you, to whom God has
vouchsafed the manifestation of his Spirit in a larger proportion than unto
many of your brethren: giving unto you, as unto his first borne, a Deuteronomy. 21.17.
double portion of his Spirit, as 4 King. 2.9.
Elisha had of Eliah's; or perhaps dealing with you yet more liberally, as
Joseph did with Benjamin, whose mess (though he were the youngest) he
appointed to be Genesis 43.34.
five times as much, as any of his brethrens. It is needful that you of all
others, should be eftsoons put in remembrance, that those eminent
manifestations of the Spirit you have, were given you. First, it will be a
good help to take down that Scientia inflat. 1 Cor. 8.1.
swelling, which, as an Apostume in the body through rancknesse of blood, so is
apt to engender in the soul through abundance of Knowledge; and to let out
some of the corruption. It is Magna and rara virtus profecto est, vt magna
licet operantem, magnum te nescias. Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 13.
a very hard thing Multum sapere, and not altum sapere; to know much, and not
to know it too much; to excel others in gifts, and not perke above them in
selfeconceipt. S. Paul, who Phil. 4.12.
in all other things was sufficiently instructed, as well to abound, as to
suffer need, was yet put very hard to it, when he was to try the mastery with
this temptation, which arose from the 2 Cor. 12.7.
abundance of revelations. If you find an aptness then in your selves, (and
there is in your selves as of your selves such an aptness, as to no one thing
more,) to be exalted above measure in your own conceits, boastingly to make
ostentation of your own sufficiencies, with a kind of vnbecomming compassion
to cast scorn upon your meaner brethren, and upon every light provocation to
fly out into those terms of defiance [ Hic, verse. 21.
I have no need of thee; and, I have no need of thee] to dispell this windy
humor I know not a more sovereign remedy, than to chew upon this meditation;
that all the Abilities and perfections you have were given you, by one who was
no way so bound to you, but he might have given them as well to the meanest of
your brethren as to you, and that without any wrong to you, if it had so
pleased him. You may take the Receipt from him, who himself had had some
experience of the Infirmity; even S. Paul in the fourth of this Epistle. [ 1
Cor. 4.7.
What have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast as if thou had not received it?]

. 24. 2. to make them Rules unto themselves;
Secondly; Every wise and conscionable man should advisedly weigh his own
Gifts, and make them his Rule to work by: not thinking he does enough, if he
do what Law compels him to do, or if he do as much as other neighbors
do. Indeed, where Laws bound us by Negative Precepts, [ Hitherto thou may
go, but farther thou shall not,] we must obey, and we may not exceed those
bounds. But where the Laws do barely enjoyne us to do somewhat, left having
no Law to compel us, we should do just nothing; it can be no transgression
of the Law, to do more. Whosoever therefore of you have received more or
greater Gifts than many others have; you must know your selves bound to do so
much more good with them, and to stand chargeable with so much the deeper
account for them. Gregor.
Crescunt dona, crescunt rations. When you shall come to make up your
accounts, your receipts will be looked into: and if you have received ten
talents, or five, for your meaner brothers one; when but one shall be required
from him, you shall be answerable for ten, or five. For it is an equitable
course, that Luke 12.48.
to whom much is given, of him much should be required. And at that great day,
if you cannot make your accounts straight with your receipts, you shall
certainly find that most true in this sense, which Solomon spoke in another,
Eccl. 1.18.
Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem: the more and greater your Gifts are,
unless your thankfulness for them, and your diligence with them rise to some
good like proportion thereunto; the greater shall be your condemnation, the
more your stripes.

But thirdly;. 25. 3. but not unto others.
though your Graces must be so to your selves, yet beware you do not make
them Rules to others. A thing I the rather note, because the fault is so
frequent in practice, and yet very rarely observed, and more rarely
reprehended. God has endowed a man with good abilities and parts in some kind
or other; I instance but in one gift only for examples sake, viz. an Ability to
enlarge himself in prayer readily, and with fit expressions upon any present
occasion. Being in the Ministry, or other Calling, he is careful to
exercise his gift by praying with his family, praying with the sick, praying
with other company upon such other occasions as may fall out: he thinks, and
he thinks well, that if he should do otherwise or less than he does, he
should not be able to discharge himself from the guilt of unfaithfulness, in
not employing the talent he has received to the best advantage, when the
exercise of it might redound to the glory of the Giver. Hitherto he is in the
right: so long as he makes his Gift a Rule but to himself. But now if this
man shall stretch out this Rule unto all his brethren in the same Calling, by
imposing upon them a necessity of doing the like; if he shall expect or exact
from them, that they should also be able to commend unto God the necessities
of their families, or the state of a sick person, or the like, by extemporary
Prayer; but especially if he shall judge or censure them, that dare not
adventure so to do, of intrusion into, or of unfaithfulness in their
Callings: he commits a great fault, and well deserving a sharp
reprehension. For what is this else, but to lay heavier burdens upon men's
shoulders, than they can stand under, to make our selves judges of other men's
consciences, and our Abilities Rules of their actions, yea, and even to lay an
imputation upon our Master, with that ungracious servant in the Gospel, as if
he were Math. 25.24.
an hard man, reaping where he has not sown, and gathering where he has not
strewed, and requiring much where he has given little, and like Pharaohs
taske-masters, exacting the Exodus 5.18.
full tale of brickes without sufficient allowance of materials? Shall he that
has a thousand a year, count him that has but an hundred, a Churl if he do
not spend as much in his house weekly, keep as plentiful a table, and bear
as much in every common charge, as himself? No less unreasonable is he, that
would bind his brother of inferior Gifts to the same frequencie and method in
Preaching, to the same readiness and copiousnesse in Praying, to the same
necessity and measure in the performance of other duties; whereunto, according
to those Gifts he finds in himself, he finds himself bound. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man: let no man be so severe to
his brother, as to look he should manifest more of the Spirit, than he has
received.

Now as for you,. 26. Special inferences to those of meaner gifts.
to whom God has dealt these spiritual gifts, with a more sparing hand; the
freedom of Gods distribution may be a fruitful meditation for you also.
First, thou have no reason, whosoever thou art, to grudge at the scantnesse of
thy gifts, or to repine at the giver. How little soever God has given thee, it
is more than he (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 29.
owed thee. If the distribution of the Spirit were a matter of justice, or of
debt; God we know is Acts 10.34.
no accepter of persons, and he would have given to thee, as to another. But
being, as it is, a matter of gift, not of debt, nor of justice, but of grace:
take that is thine thankfully, and be content withal; Mat. 20.13.15.
He has done thee no wrong: may he not do as he will, with his own?
Secondly, since the manifestation of the Spirit is a matter of free gift: thou
have no cause to envy thy Brother, whose portion is greater. Why should Mat.
20.15.
thy eye be therefore evil against him, because God has been so good unto
him? Shall the foot envy the hand, or the ear the eye; because the foot
cannot work, nor the ear see? If the Hic verse. 17 -- 19.
whole body were hand, where were the going? and if the whole were eye, where
were the hearing? or if the whole were any one member, where were the body? If
the hand can work, which the foot cannot; yet the foot can go, which the
hand cannot: and if the eye can see, which the ear cannot; yet the ear can
hearken, which the eye cannot. And, if thy brother have some abilities, which
thou have not; thou art not so bare, but thou have other some again, which he
has not. Say, thine be meaner: yet the meanest member, as it has his Hic
verse. ^1, 23.
necessary office, so it is not destitute of his proper comeliness in the
Body. Thirdly, if thy gifts be mean, thou have this comfort withal, that thy
accounts will be so much the easier. Merchants, that have the greatest
dealings, are not ever the safest men. And how happy a thing had it been for
many men in the world, if they had had less of other men's goods in their
hands? The less thou have received, the less thou have to answer for. If God
have given thee but one single talent, he will not require five: nor if five,
ten. Fourthly, in the meandness of thy gifts thou may read thy self a
daily lecture of humility: and humility alone, is a thing of more value, than
all the perfections that are in the world besides, without it. This think,
that God, who disposes Romans 8.28.
all things for the best to those that are his, would have given thee other and
greater gifts, if he had seen it so expedient for thee. That therefore he
has holden his hand, and withheld those things from thee: conceive it done,
either for thy former unworthiness, and that should make thee humble; or for
thy future good, and that should make thee also thankful. Lastly, remember
what the Preacher says in Ecclos. 10. [ Eccl. 10.10. Maximum mediocris ingenij
subsidium, diligentia. Sen. in controu.
If the iron be blunt, then he must put to the more strength.] Many men, that
are well left by their friends, and full of money, because they think they
shall never see the bottom of it, take no care by any employment to increase
it, but spend on upon the stock, without either fear or wit, they care not
what, nor how, till they be sunk to nothing before they be aware: whereas on
the contrary, industrious men that have but little to begin withal, yet by
their care and providence, and pains taking, get up wonderfully. It is almost
incredible, what industry, and diligence, and exercise, and holy (...). verse.
31. hic.
emulation (which our Apostle commends in the last verse of this Chapter,)
are able to effect, for the bettering and increasing of our spiritual gifts:
Provided ever we join with these, hearty prayers unto, and faithful
dependence upon God, for his blessing thereupon. I know no so lawful (...).
Matthew. 25.27.
Usury, as of these spiritual talents; nor do I know any so profitable Usury,
or that multiplyeth so fast at this does your use upon use, that doubleth the
principal in seven years, is nothing to it. Oh then, Luk* 19.23.
cast in thy talent into the bank; make thy returns as speedy, and as many as
thou can; loose not a market, or a tide, if it be possible; 2. Tim. 4.2.
be instant in season, and out of season; omit no opportunity to take in, and
put off all thou can get: so, though thy beginnings be but small, thy later
end shall wonderfully increase. By this means, thou shall not only profit thy
self, in the increase of thy gifts unto thy self: but (which no other Usury
does besides) thou shall also profit others, by communicating of thy gifts unto
them. Which is the proper end, for which they were bestowed; and of which we
are next to speak. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.

To profit whom? it may be, Himself. It is true; Prou. 9.12.
If thou art wise,. 27. The end of spiritual gifts, not only our own,
thou shall be wise for thy self, said Solomon; and Solomon knew what belonged
to wisdom as well as another. For, Syrac. 14.5.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? He that is not good to himself, it is but a
chance that he is good to any body else. When we seem to pity a man by
saying, He is no man's foe but his own, or he is worst to himself; we do
indeed but flout him, and in effect call him a fool, and a prodigal. Such a
fool is every one, that guiding the feet of others into the way of peace,
himself treads the paths that leads unto destruction; and that 1. Cor.
9.27.
preaching repentance unto others, himself becomes a Castaway. He that has
a gift then, he should do well to look to his own, as well as to the profit
of others; and as unto doctrine, so as well and first to 1. Tim. 4.16.
take heed unto himself: that so doing he may save himself, as well as those
that hear him.

. 28. but rather the profit of others.
This then is to be done; but this is not all that is to be done. In Sunt qui
scire volunt, vt aedificent, et Charitas est: sunt qui scire volunt vt
aedificentur, and Prudentia est. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 36.
Wisdom we cannot do less, but in Charity we are bound to do more than
thus, with our gifts. If our own profit only had been intended, (...) would
have served the turn as well: but the word here is (...), which imports such a
kind of profit as redoundeth to Vtilitatem: sc. Ecclesiae. Pisc. in Schol. hic.
community, such as before in the 10. Chapter he professes himself to have
sought after, [ 1. Cor. 10.33
Not seeking mine own profit, (he means, not only his own,) but the profit
of many, that they may be saved.] We noted it already, as the maine and
essential difference between those Graces of sanctification, and these Graces
of edification: that those, though they would be made profitable unto others
also, yet were principally intended for the proper good of the owner; but
these, though they would be used for the owners good also, yet were principally
intended for the profit of others. You see then, what a strong obligation lies
upon every man that has received the Spirit, confer aliquid in publicum, to
cast his gift into the common treasury of the Church, to employ his good parts
and spiritual graces so, as they may some-way or other be profitable to his
brethren and fellow-seruants in Church and Commonwealth. It is an old received
Canon, Beneficium propter officium. No man sets a Steward over his house,
only to receive his rents, and then to keep the moneys in his hand, and make
no provision out of it for his Hines and Servants: but it is the Luke 12.42.
office of a good and wise Steward to give to every one of the household his
appointed portion at the appointed seasons. And who so receives a spiritual
gift, ipso facto takes upon him the office, and is bound to the duties of a
Steward; [ 1. Pet. 4.10.
As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one unto
another, as good stewards of the manifold graces of God, 1. Pet. 4.] It was not
only for orders sake, and for the beautifying of his Church, (though that
also) that God Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers: but also, and especially, for more necessary and profitable
uses; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. The members of the body, are
not every one for it self, but every one for other, and all for the whole. The
stomach eats, not to fill it self, but to nourish the body; the eye sees,
not to please it self, but to epsy for the body; the foot moves, not to
exercise it self, but to carry the body; the hand works, not to help it
self, but to maintain the body: every Ephesians. 4.16.
joint supplieth something, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, for the fit joining together, and compacting, and increasing of
the body to the edifying it self in love. Hic verse. 27
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

. 29. in respect 1. of the Giver;
Now this necessity of employing spiritual gifts to the good and profit of
others, arises first from the will and intent of the Giver: my Text shows
plainly what that intent was; The manifestation of the Spirit was therefore
given to every man, that he might profit withal. Certainly, as Deus and
natura nihil faciunt frustrae.
nature does not, so much less does the God of Nature, make any thing to no
purpose, or barely for show; but for use: and the use, for which all these
things were made and given, is 1. Cor. 14.26
edification. He that has an estate made over to him in trust and for uses;
has in equity therein no estate at all, if he turn the commodities of the
thing some other way, and not to those special uses for which he was so
estated in it. So he that employeth not his spiritual gift to the use for
which it was given, to the in Communem vtilitatem collatum est. Erasm. in
paraphr. hic.
profit of the Church; he has de iure forfeited it to the Giver. And we have
sometimes known him de facto to take the forfeiture; as from the unprofitable
servant in the Gospel, [ Mat. 25.28. See Hieron. in Agg. 2.9.
Take the talent from him.] We have sometimes seen the experiment of it. Men
of excellent parts, by slackning their zeal, to have lost their very gifts;
and by neglecting the use, to have lost the Principal; finding a sensible
decay in those powers, which they were slothful to bring into act. It is a
just thing with the Iam. 1.17.
Father of Lights, when he has lighted any man a candle, by bestowing
spiritual gifts upon him; and lent him a candlestick too whereon to set it, by
providing him a slay in the Church: if that man shall then Matthew. 5.15.
hide his candle under a bushel, and envy the light and comfort of it to them
that are in the house; either to remove his candlestick, or to put out his
candle in obscurity.

As the intent of the Giver, so secondly,. 30. 2. of the Gift;
the nature and quality of the gift calls upon us for emploiment. It is not
with these spiritual gifts, as with most other things, which when they are
emparted, are impaired, and lessened by communicating. Here is no place for
that allegation of the Virgins, Matthew. 25.9.
Ne non sufficiat -- Lest there be not enough for you and for us. These graces
are of the number of those things, that communicate themselves by
Multiplication, not Division, and by diffusion, without waste. As the seal
makes impression in the wax, and as fire conueigheth heat into Iron, and as
one candle tindeth a thousand: all without loss of figure, heat, or light.
Had ever any man less knowledge, or wit, or learning; by teaching others? had
he not rather more? Ec^les. 12.9.
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, says
Solomon, Eccles. 12. and certainly, the more he taught them knowledge, the
more his own wisdom increased. As the 4. King. 4.4.
Widows oil increased, not in the vessel, but by pouring out; and as the
Ioh. 6.11.
barley bread in the Gospel multiplied, not in the whole loaf, but by
breaking and distributing; and as the 2. Cor. 9.10.
grain brings increase, not when it lies on a heap in the garner, but by
scattering upon the land: so are these spiritual graces best improued, not by
Absconsione minuitur, and communicatione multiplicatur. Cassiod. in Epist.
keeping them together, but by distributing them abroad. Tutius incredito, quam
in sudario: the talent gathers nothing in the napkin, unless it be rust and
canker; but traveling in the bank, besides the good it does as it passes to
and fro, it ever Quo in plures diffunditur, ^o redundantior manet, [forte leg.
manat,] and in suum fontem recurrit. In se enim refluit vbertas prudentiae: and
quo pluribus fluxerit, eo exercitius fit omne quod remanet. Ambros. 2.. Offic.
15.
returns home with increase.

. 31. 3. Of the Receiver.
Thirdly, our own insufficiency to all offices, and the need we have of other
men's gifts, must enforce us to lend them the help and comfort of ours. God
has so distributed the variety of his gifts with singular wisdom, that
there is no man so mean, but his service may be useful to the greatest; nor
any man so eminent, but he may sometimes stand need to the meanest of his
brethren: of purpose, that whilst each has need of other, each should help,
none should despise other. As in a Societas nostra lapidum fornicationi
simillima est: quae casura, nisi inuicem obstarent, hoc vno sustinetur. Senec.
epist. 95.
building, the stones help one another, every lower stone supporting the
higher from falling to the ground, and every higher stone saving the lower from
taking wet; and as in the body, every member Ephesians. 4.16.
lends some supply to the rest, and again receives supply from them: so in
the spiritual building, and mystical body of the Church, God has so tempered
the parts, each having his use, and each his defects; Hic Verse. 24.25.
that there should be no schism in the body, but that the members should have
the same care one for another. Such a consent there should be in the parts, as
was between the Anthol. 1.4.
blind and lame man in the Epigram: mutually couenanting, the Blind to carry
the Lame, and the Lame to direct the Blind; that so the Blind might find his
way by the others eyes, and the Lame walk therein upon the others legs. When
a man is once come to that all sufficiency in himself, as he may truly say to
the rest of his brethren, Hic verse. 21.
I stand no need of you; let him then keep his gifts to himself: but let him
in the mean time remember, he must employ them to the advantage of his
master, and to the benefit of his brother. [The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal.]

Surely then those men, first of all,. 32. The first inference;
run a course strangely exorbitant; who instead of employing them to the
profit, bend those gifts they have received, (whether spiritual or temporal)
to the ruin and destruction of their brethren. Instead of winning souls to
heaven; with busy and cursed diligence Mat. 23.15.
compassing Sea and Land, to draw Proselytes to the Devil: and instead of
raising up seed to their elder brother Christ, seeking to make their brethren
(if it were possible) ten times more the children of hell than themselves.
Abusing their Power to oppression, their wealth to luxury, their strength to
drunkenness, their wit to Scoffing, Atheism, Profaneness; their learning to
the maintenance of Heresy, Idolatry, Schism, Novelty. If there be a
fearful woe due to those that Matthew. 25.30 intelligatur poena interuersoris ex
poena pigri. August. in Psalm. 99.
use not their gifts profitably; what woes may we think shall overtake them,
that so ungraciously abuse them?

. 33. the second;
But to leave these wretches: be persuaded in the second place, all you, whom
God has made Stewards over his household, and blessed your basket and your
store, to Matthew. 13.52.
bring forth of your treasures things both new and old; manifest the Spirit God
has given you, so as may be most for the profit of your brethren. The Spirit
of God, when he gave you wisdom, and knowledge, intended not so much the
wisdom and the knowledge themselves, as the manifestation of them, or (as it
is in the next verse) Hic verse. 8.
the Word of Wisdom, and the Word of knowledge: as Christ also promised his
Apostles, to give them Luke 21.15.
Os and sapientiam; A Mouth, and Wisdom. Alas, what is Wisdom without a
Mouth? but as a pot of treasure hid in the ground, which no man is the better
for. Syrae. 20.30
Wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them
both? O then do not knit up your Masters talent in a Luke 19.20.
Napkin; smother not his light under a Matthew. 5.15.
bushel; pinch not his servants of their due Luke 12.42, 45.
provision; pott not up the Exodus 16.20*
Manna you have gathered till it stink, and the worms consume it: but above
all, squander not away your rich portions by riotous living. Let not either
sloth, or envy, or pride, or pretended modesty, or any other thing hinder
you, from laboring to discharge faithfully that trust and duty, which God
expects, which the necessity of the Church challenges, which the measure of
your gifts promises, which the condition of your calling exacteth from you.
Remember the manifestation of the Spirit was given you to profit withal.

Thirdly,. 24. the third.
since the end of all gifts is to profit: aim most at those gifts, that will
profit most; and endeavor so to frame those you have in the exercise of them,
as they may be likeliest to bring profit to those that shall partake them. Hic
verse. 31.
Covet earnestly the best gifts, says my Apostle at the last verse of this
Chapter: and you have his Comment upon that Text in the first verse of the
fourteenth Chapter, 1* Cor. 14.1.
Covet spiritual gifts, (...), but rather that ye may prophecy. And by
prophesying, he means the Prophetas interpretes dicit scripturarum. Ambros.
in 1. Cor. c. 63. Prophetia. i.e. donum interpretandi scripturas. Piscat.
schol. in 1. Cor. 14.22. Mysticum^sensum ad salutem a^ditorum explan^nte E^asm.
in paraphr ad: 1. Cor. 14.
instruction of the Church, and people of God in the needful doctrines of
Faith toward God, Repentance from dead works, and new and holy Obedience. It
is one stratageme of the Arch-enemie of mankind, (and when we know his wiles,
we may the better be able to defeat him,) by busying men of great and
useful parts* in bymatters, and things of lesser consequence; to divert them
from following that vnum necessarium, that which should be the maine of all
our endeauours, the beating down of sin, the planting of Faith, and the
reformation of Manners. Controversies, I confess, are necessary, the Tongues
necessary, Histories necessary, Philosophy and the Arts necessary, other
knowledge of all sorts necessary in the Church: for truth must be maintained,
Scripture-phrases opened, Heresy confuted, the mouths of Adversaries stopped,
Schisms and Novelties suppressed. But when all is done, Positive and Practique
Divinity is it, must bring us to heaven: that is it, must paise our judgments,
settle our consciences, direct our lives, mortify our corruptions, increase
our graces, strengthen our comforts, save our souls. Hoc opus, hoc studium:
there is no study to this, none so well worth the labor as this; none that can
bring so much profit to others, nor therefore so much glory to God, nor
therefore so much comfort to our own hearts, as this. Tit. 3.8.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly (says Saint Paul to Titus) that they which have believed in God,
might be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and profitable
unto men. You cannot do more good unto the Church of God, you cannot more
profit the people of God, by your gifts; than by pressing effectually these two
great points, Faith, and Good works: these are good and profitable unto men.

. 35. The Conclusion.
I might here add other inferences from this point, as namely, since the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one of us chiefly for this end,
that we may profit the people with it, that therefore fourthly, in our
preaching we should rather seek to profit our hearers, though perhaps with
sharp and unwelcome reproves, than to please them by flattering them in
evil: and that fifthly, we should more desire to bring profit unto them, than
to gain applause unto our selves: and sundry other more besides these. But I
will neither add any more, nor prosecute these any farther at this time, but
give place to other business. God the Father of Lights, and of Spirits, endow
every one of us in our Places and Callings, with a competent measure of such
Graces, as in his wisdom and goodness he shall see needful and expedient
for us: and so direct our hearts, and tongues, and endeauours in the exercise
and manifestation thereof, that by his good blessing upon our labors we may
be enabled to advance his glory, propagate his truth, benefit his Church,
discharge a good conscience in the mean time, and at the last make our account
with comfort, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
THREE SERMONS, Ad Magistratum. BY ROBERT SAVNDERSON Batchellor in Divinity,
and sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford.

PSALM. 2.10. Et nunc, Reges, intelligite: erudimini qui judicatis terram.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for R. Dawlman, at the Sign of the Bible near the
great Conduit in Fleetstreete. 1627.

To the Right Worshipful my much honored Patron, Sir NICHOLAS SAVNDERSON of
Filingham, Linc. Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
Having first, upon slow deliberation, resolved to publish these three Sermons:
my next resolution came on more readily, to present them to you. For which
there was no need I should deliberate long: the consideration both of the
Author and Argument prompting me thereunto. For my self first; As you have
abundantly witnessed unto the world your good affection to me, both by sundry
other courtesies, and especially in being the chiefest means, (under the good
Providence of God) by your free collation of a Benefice upon me, of drawing me
from the University into these parts, where I am now settled: so I have been
ever covetous of some fair opportunity, to witness unto the world my
thankful acknowledgement of your kind favors; whereof* for want of better
means I desire this Dedication maybe some expression. And then for the
Argument; I knew none more fit to Patronage a Theme of Justice, than your
self: whom God has endowed with strong abilities* many ways, of
Understanding, Affections, Courage, Elocution, Indu^trie together with outward
Means and Power, in a gracious measure, and above many of your fellows in the
same office; to do Him, and his Anointed, and their People, good service, in
advancing the course of public Justice, in the Country where you live. In
both which regards, as I presume these my meditations concerning Justice will
not come altogether unwelcome: so I am confident, that the manner of handling
used therein, in taxing the Abuses with such Freedom, as (it may be) some will
not relish, will yet be by so much more acceptable to you, by how much more
freely your own heart, when you read of them, shall witness your own
freedom from them. In which confidence, with all due respect. I commend these
Sermons into your hands; and with my faithfullest devotions, your self, and
your Religious Lady, and whole family into the hands of God: who alone is able
has to continue and multiply his blessings upon you in the mean time, and in
the end to crown his own graces in you with glory.

Yours in the Lord, ROB. SAVNDERSON.
Booth by Paynell Line, 1. Mar. 1626.
THE FIRST SERMON. At a public Sessions at Grantham Linc. 11. Iun 1623.

JOB. 29. VERSE. 14, 15, 16, 17. 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed
me: my judgment was as a robe and diadem.

15. I was eyes to the blind; and feet was I to the lame.

16. I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I searched out.

17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked; and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth.


WHere silence against foul and false imputations may be interpreted a Si, cum
mihi furta, largitiones -- obijciuntur, ego respendere soleo meis -- non tam
s^m existimandus ^e rebus gestis gloriari quam de obiectis non confiteri. Cic.
pro domo sua.
Confession;. 1. The Occasion.
there the protestation of a man's own innocence is ever just, and sometimes
Mihi de memetipso tam multa dicendi necessitas quaedam imposita est ob illo
Cl^. pro Syll.
necessary. When others do us open wrong; it is not now Vanity, but Charity,
to do our selves open right: and whatsoever appearance of folly or vain
boasting there is in so doing; they are chargeable with all that compel us
thereunto, and not we. (I am become a fool in glorying; but ye have
compelled me, 2 Cor. 12.11.) It was neither pride, nor passion in Job, but
such a compulsion as this, that made him so often in this book proclaim his
own righteousness. Amongst whose many and grievous afflictions, as it is hard
to say which was the greatest; so we are sure this was not the least, that he
was to wrestle with the unjust and bitter vpbraidings of unreasonable and
incompassionate men. They came to visit him as friends; and as friends they
should have comforted him. But sorry friends they were, and Job 16.2.
miserable comforters: indeed not comforters, but tormentours; and Accusers
rather than Friends. Seeing Gods hand heavy upon him; for want of better or
other proof, they charge him with Hypocrisy. And because they would not seem
to deal all in generalities (for against this general accusation of
hypocrisy, it was sufficient for him as generally to plead the truth and
uprightness of his heart;) they therefore go on more particularly, (but as
falsely) and as it were by way of instance, to charge him with Oppression. Thus
Eliphaz by name taxes him: Chap. 22.6, etc. Thou have taken a pledge from thy
brother for naught; and have stripped the naked of their clothing. Thou have
not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have with holden bread from
the hungry. But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honorable
man dwelt in it. Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the
fatherless have thou broken.

Being thus shamefully, indeed shamelesly,. 2. Scope,
vpbraided to his face, without any desert of his, by those men, Etsi ego
dignus hac contumelia, At tu indignus qui faceres tamen. Terent.
who (if he had deserved it) should least of all have done it, his Psalm. 55.12.
-- 14.
neighbors and familiar friends: can you blame the good man, if to remove such
false aspersions, he do with more than ordinary freedom insist upon his own
integrity in this behalf? And that he does in this Chapter something
largely; wherein he declares how he demeaned himself in the time of his
prosperity in the administration of his Magistracy, far otherwise than was
laid to his charge. [ When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when
the eye saw me, it gave witness to me. Because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of
him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to
sing for ioy] in the next immediate verses before these. And then he goes on
in the words of my Text, I put on righteousness, and etc.

It seems Job was a good man, as well as a great: and being good, he was by
so much the better,. 3. Sum,
by how much he was the greater. Nor was he only Bonus vir, a good man; and yet
if but so, his friends had done him much wrong to make him an Hypocrite: but
he was Bonus Ciuis too, a good Common-wealths-man; and therefore his friends
did him yet more wrong to make him an Oppressor. Indeed he was neither one,
nor other. But it is not so useful for us to know what manner of man Job was;
as to learn from him what manner of men we should be. The grieved spirit of
Job indeed at first uttered these words for his own justification: but the
blessed Spirit of God has since written them for our instruction; to teach us
from Jobs example how to use that measure of greatness and power which he
has given us, be it more be it less, to his glory and the common good. So
that in these words we have to consider, as laid down unto us under the
person, and from the example of Job, some of the maine and principal duties
which concern all those that live in any degree of Eminency or Authority
either in Church or Commonwealth; and more specially those, that are in the
Magistracy, or in any office appertaining to Justice.

. 4. and Division of the Text.
And those Duties are four. One, and the first, as a more transcendent and
fundamental duty: the other three, as accessorie helps thereto, or
subordinate thereof. That first is, a Care and Love, and Zeal of Justice. A
good Magistrate should so make account of the administration of Justice, as of
his chiefest business; making it his greatest glory and delight, Verse. 14. [ I
put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was a robe, ] The
second is a forwardness unto the works of Mercy, and Charity, and Compassion.
A good Magistrate should have compassion of those that stand need of his help,
and be helpful unto them, verse. 15. and part of 16. [ I was eyes to the
blind, and feet was I to the lame, I was a father to the poor.] The Third is
Diligence in Examination. examine, and scan, and sift matters as narrowly as
may be for the finding out of the truth, in the remainder of verse 16. [ And
the cause which I knew not I searched out.] The Fourth is, Courage and
Resolution A good Magistrate, when he goes upon sure grounds, should not
fear the faces of men, be they never so mighty or many, but without respect
of persons execute that which is equal and right even upon the greatest
offender, Verse. 17. [ And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the
spoil out of his teeth.] Of these four in their order: of the first, first,
in these words, I put on righteousness, etc.

This Metaphore of clothing is much used in the Scriptures in this notion;. 5.
The Opening of
as it is applied to the soul, and things appertaining to the soul. In Psalm
109. David uses this imprecation against his enemies; [ Psalm. 109.29.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a cloak.] And the Prophet Esaias, speaking of
Christ and his kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, chap. 11. thus
describes it, [ Esaias 11.5.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reins.] Likewise in the New Testament, St. Paul in one place
bids us Romans 13.14.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ: in an other exhorts women to 1 Timothy 2.9, c.
adorn themselves instead of broydered hair and gould and pearls and costly
array, with shamefastness and sobriety, and (as becomes women professing
godliness) with good works: in a third furnishes the spiritual soldier
with Ephesians. 6.14. etc.
shoes, girdle, brestplate, helmet, and all necessary accontrements from top to
toe. In all which and other places, where the like Metaphore is used; it is
ever to be understood with allusion to one of the three special ends or uses
of first, for necessity and common decency, to cover our nakedness; secondly,
for security and defense against thirdly, for state and solemnity, and for
distinction of offices and degrees. Our cloakes, and coats, and ordinary
suites, we all wear to cover our nakedness: and these are Indumenta, known
by no other but by the general name of Clothing or Apparel. Soldiers in the
wars wear Morions, and Cuiraces, and Targets, and other habiliments for
defense: and these are called Arma, Arms or Armor. Kings and Princes wear
Crowns and Diadems; inferior Nobles, and Judges, and Magistrates, and
Officers, their Robes, and Furs, and Hoods, and other ornaments fitting to
their several degrees and offices, for solemnity of state, and as ensigns or
marks of those places and stations wherein God has set them: and these are
Infulae, Ornaments or Roabes. It is true; Justice, and Judgment, and every
other good virtue and grace is all this unto the soul; serving her both for
covert, and for protection, and for ornament: and so stand both for the
garments, and for the armor, and for the roabes of the soul. But here I take
it, Job alludeth especially to the third use. The propriety of the very words
themselves give it so: for he says he put righteousness and judgment upon
him as a Robe and a Diadem; and such things as these are worn, not for
necessity, but state. Job was certainly a Magistrate, a Judge at the least;
it is evident from the seventh verse: and to me it seems not improbable that
he was a Non dubito, quin Job fuerit Rex. Didac. Stun. in Job 1.3
King; though not likely such as the Kings of the earth now are (whose
dominions are wider, and power more absolute,) yet possibly such as in those
ancient times, and in those Eastern parts of the world were called Kings, viz.
a kind of petty Monarch, and supreme governor, within his own territories,
though perhaps but of one single City with the Suburbs, and some few
neighboring Villages. In the first Chapter it is said that he was Job 1.3.
the greatest man of all the East: and in this Chapter he says of himself,
that Job 29.9.
when he came in presence, the Princes and the Nobles held their tongues; and,
that Ibid. ver. 25.
he sat as chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army; and in this verse he
speaks as one that wore a Diadem, an ornament (...). Suid. in (...).
proper to Kings. Now Kings, we know, and other Magistrates place much of
their outward glory and state in their Diadems, and Robes, and peculiar
Vestments: these things striking a kind of Cultus magnificus addit hominibus
authoritatem.

Quintil. 8. Iustit. (...). Homer. (...). Odyss. 29.

Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis more dabat populis. Virgil. Aen. 7.
See Franc. Pollet. 3. hist. fori. Romans 6.


reverence into the subject toward their Superior; and adding in the
estimation of the people, both glory and honor, and Majesty to the person,
and withal pomp and state, and solemnity to the actions of the wearer. By
this speech then of putting on Justice and Judgment as a Robe and a Diadem,
Job shows, that the glory and pride which Kings and Potentates are wont to
take in their Crowns, and Scepters, and royal Vestments is not more, than the
glory and honor which he placed in doing justice and judgment: he thought
that was true honor, not which reflected from these empty marks and ensigns
of Dignity, but which sprang from those virtues, whereof these are but dumb
remembrancers. If we desire yet more light into the Metaphore; we may borrow
some from David, Psalm. 109.16.17.
Psalm 109. where speaking of the wicked, he says Verse. 17. that he clothed
himself with cursing like a garment: and by that he means no other than
what he had spoken in the next verse before, plainly and without a Metaphore,
His delight was in cursing. By the Analogy of which place we may not unfitly
understand these words of Job, as intimating the great love he had unto
Justice, and the great pleasure and It is joy to the just to do judgment.
Prou. 21.15.
delight he took therein. Join this to the former; and they give us a full
meaning. Never ambitious usurper took more pride in his new gotten Crown or
Scepter, never proud Minion took more pleasure in her new and gorgeous
apparel: than Job did true juris and aequitatis, quae virum principem ornant,
studiocissimus eram. Vatabl. hic.
glory and delight in doing justice and judgment. He put on righteousness,
and it clothed him; and judgment was to him, what to others a Robe and a
Diadem is: honorable and delightful.

Here then the Magistrate and every officer of Justice may learn his first
and principal,. 6. the Magistrates first duty; Zeal to Justice.
and (if I may so speak) his Master-duty, (and let that be the first
observation:) namely, to do justice and judgment with delight, and zeal, and
cheerfulness. I call it his Master-duty; because where this is once rightly
and soundly rooted in the conscience, the rest will come on easily, and of
themselves. This must be his primum, and his vltimum; the foremost of his
desires, and the utmost of his endeauours, to do justice and judgment. He
must make it his chiefest business; and yet count it his lightsomest
recreation: make it the first and lowest step of his care; and yet withal
count it the last and highest rise of his honor. The first thing we do in the
morning before we either eat or drink, or buckle about any worldly business,
is to put our clothes about us: we say, we are not ready, till we have done
that. Even thus should every good Magistrate do: before his private, he
should think of the public affairs; and not count himself ready to go about
his own profits, his shop, his ship, his lands, his reckonings, much less
about his vain pleasures, his iades, his curres, his kites, his any thing
else, till first with Job, he had put on righteousness as a garment, and
clothed himself with judgment as with a Robe and a Diadem.

. 7. with some examples,
Nor let any man think this affection to justice to have been singular in Job:
much less impute it to simplicity in him. For behold another like
affectioned; and he a greater, and I may say too a wiser than Job: for God
himself has witnessed of him, that for 3. King. 3.12
wisdom there was never his like before him, nor should come after him,
Solomon the King. Who so much manifested his love and affection to justice and
judgment, that when God put him to his choice to ask what he would, and he
should have it, he asked 3. Kings 3.5 -- 11.
not long life, or riches, or victory, or any other thing, but only wisdom;
and that in this kind, Prudentiam regitiuam, wisdom Ibid verse. 9. to Discern
judgment, verse. 11.
to discern between good and bad, that he might go in and out before the
people with skill, and rule them prudently with all his might in righteousness
and equity. And the Text says, Ibid. verse. 10.
The speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. Magistrates
should subscribe to Salomons judgment, who is wiser than the wisest of them:
and yet for farther conviction, behold a wiser than Solomon is here; even Jesus
Christ the righteous, the God of Solomon, and the Savior of Solomon, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Of whom David
having said in Psalm. 45. that the scepter of his kingdom is a righteous
scepter, he proceeds immediately to show wherein especially consisted the
righteousness of the Scepter of his Kingdom: Not so much in doing
righteousness and punishing iniquity, (though that also;) as in loving
righteousness, and hating iniquity. Psalm. 45.6, 7.
The Scepter of thy kingdom is a righteous Scepter: Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, etc. And you heard already
out of the eleventh of Esaias, that Esaias 11.5.
righteousness was the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
his reins. Magistrates from the examples of Job, of Solomon, of Jesus Christ
himself, should learn to make justice and judgment their greatest both glory
and delight.

To bad things examples will draw us on fast enough; without, yea, many times
against reason:. 8. and reasons thereof.
but in good things, it is well if examples and reasons together can any thing
at all prevail with us. And here if reason may rule us; surely good reason
there is, we should be thus affectioned to justice, as has been said: whether
we respect the thing it self, or God, or our selves, or others. The thing it
Justice, both in the common consideration of it, as it is a virtue, is, as
every other virtue is, honorable and lovely, and to be desired for its own
sake: and in the special nature of it, as it is justice, is a virtue so
necessary and profitable to humane, society, and withal so (...). Aristot.
5. eth. Nicom. 3. ex Theog.
comprehensiue of all other virtues, as that those men who labor to pervert it,
do yet honor it; and even those men (...). Philop. in 1. Pri.
who themselves will not use it, cannot yet but love it, at leastwise commend
it in others. Judgment, Mercy, and Faithfulness our Savior Christ, reckons
as the Matthew. 23.23
weightiest matters of the Law, Matthew. 23. And Prou. 24.26.
every man (says Solomon, Prou. 24.) will kiss his lips, that gives a right
answer: that is; Every man will love and honor him, that loves and honors
Justice. Ought you to delight in any thing more than virtue; or in any virtue
more than the best? and such is Justice. Again, by due administration of
justice and judgment God is much glorified. Glorified in the encouragement of
his servants, when for well-doing they are rewarded: glorified in the
destruction of the wicked, when for offending they are punished: glorified in
the increase, and in the peace and prosperity of his Kingdom, which hereby is
both preserved and enlarged: glorified in expression and imitation of his
infinite perfections, when they who are his ministers and deputies for this
very thing, for the execution of justice, do labor to resemble him whose
ministers and deputies they are, in this very thing, in being just, even as he
is just. Ought you not to count it your greatest glory to seek his? and can
you do that more readily or effectually, than by doing justice our selves;
What Quid est suauius, quam been rem gerere bono publico? Plaut. in capt. 3.2.
comfort will it be to our souls, when they can witness with us, that we
have even set our selves to do good, in those callings wherein God has set
us? Every man that has a Calling, must Romans 12.7.
wait thereon, and do the duties belonging thereto, at his peril: and it
will be much for his ease to be lightsome and cheerful therein. So shall he
make of a Faxis vt sibeat, quod est necesse. Auson. in sent. Periand.
necessity a virtue; and do that with pleasure, which he must do howsoever,
or answer for the neglect: whereas otherwise, his Calling will be a continual
burden and weariness unto him, and make his whole life no better nor other
than a long and lasting affliction. And besides, we much deceive our selves, if
we think our own private good to be severed from the public; and so
neglect the public employments to follow our own private affairs. For the
private is not distinguished from the public; but (...) Xenoph. de venatione;
apud Stobeum*
included in it: and no man knows what mischiefs unawares he prepares for
his private estate in the end; whilst thinking to provide well enough for
himself, he cherishes in the mean time, or suffers abuses in the public.
Ought we not by making justice and judgment our glory and delight, to reap
the comfort of it in our consciences, to Quapropter edulcare conuenit vitam. C.
Matius in Mimiambis, apud A. Gell. 15.25.
sweeten the miseries and travails of our lives and callings, and to secure
our private in the common safety: rather than by, or not doing justice, or
doing it heavily and heartlesly, wound our own consciences, make the
afflictions of this life yet more afflictiue, and in the decay of the public
insensibly promote the ruin of our private state and prosperity? And lastly,
if we respect others; what can be more glorious for us, than by our zeal and
forwardness first to shame, and then to quicken up the backwardness of
others; that with joint hearts and hands they and we together may aim at the
peace and prosperity, and good of the Common wealth? It is not easy to say
what manifold benefits redound to the Commonwealth from the due execution of
justice: or from the slacking thereof, what a world of mischiefs. How
honorable are we and glorious, if by our zeal we have been the happy
instruments of those so many, so great benefits? How inglorious and vile, if by
our negligence we have made our selves guilty of these so many, so great
mischiefs! If we neglect Justice, we countenance disorders, which by justice
are repressed; we disarme innocence, which by justice is protected; we banish
peace, which by justice is maintained; we are traitors to the King and his
Throne, which by justice are Prou. 16.12.
established; we pull upon us Gods plagues and judgments, which by justice
are auerted. Ought we not much rather by our forwardness in doing justice to
repress disorders, protect innocence, maintain peace, secure the King and
State, and turn away Gods judgments from our selves and others? See now if
we have not reason to love justice and judgment, and to make it our delight;
to put righteousness upon us, and to cloth us with Judgment as with a Roabe
and a Diadem: being a thing in it self so excellent; and being from it there
redoundeth so much glory to God, to our selves so much comfort, and so much
benefit unto others. The inferences of use from this first Duty, as also from
the rest, I omit for the present; reserving them all to the later end: partly,
because I would handle them all together; partly also, and especially, for that
I desire to leave them fresh in your memory when you depart the Congregation.
And therefore without farther ado I proceed forthwith to the next Duty,
contained in these words, [ I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the
lame; I was a father to the poor.]

Wherein Job declares his own readiness in his place and calling to be
helpefull to those that were any way distressed,. 9. The Magistrates second
duty; Compassion to the distressed.
or stood need of him, by affording them such supply to his power as their
several necessities required. And like him should every Magistrate be in this
also; which I propose as the second Duty of the good Magistrate: he must be
forward to (...). Sophocl.
succor those that are distressed and oppressed; and to help and relieve them
to his power. Men's necessities are many, and of great variety: but most of
them spring from one of these two defects, ignorance, or want of skill; and
impotence, or want of power: here signified by Blindness, and Lamenesse. The
blind man perhaps has his limbs, and strength to walk in the way, if he
could see it: but because he wants his eyes, he can neither find the right
way, nor spy the rubbes that are in it; and therefore he must either sit
still, or put himself upon the necessity of a double hazard, of stumbling,
and of going wrong. The lame man perhaps has his eyes and sight perfect, and
knows which way he should go, and sees it well enough: but because he
wants his limbs, he is not able to stir a foot forward; and therefore he
must have patience perforce, and be content to fit still, because he cannot
do withal. Both the one, and the other may perish, unless some good body
help them: and become a guide to the blind, a staff to the lame; leading the
one, and supporting the other. Abroad in the world there are many, in every
Society, Corporation, and Congregation there are some, of both sorts: some
Blind, some Lame. Some that stand need of Counsel, and Advice, and Direction;
as the Blind: others that stand need of Help, and Assistance, and supports;
as the Lame. If there be any other besides these, whose case deserves pity,
in what kind soever it be; the word Poor comprehends him, and makes him a
fit object for the care and compassion of the Magistrate. To each of these the
Magistrate must be a succourer to his power. He must be, as here Job was, an
eye to the blind, Lyra hic.
ignorantem dirigendo; by giving sound and honest counsel the best he can to
them that are simple, or might without his help be easily ouerseene. And he
must be, as here Job was, feet to the Lame, impotentem adiuvando; by giving
countenance and assistance in just and honest causes the best he can to them
that are of meaner ability, or might without his help be easily ouerborne. If
there be either of these, or any other defect, which stands need of a supply
in any other man, he must be, as here Job was, a See Sirac. 4.10.
father to the poor, indigentem subleuando; by giving convenient safety and
protection the best he can to them that are destitute of help, and fly unto
him as to a sanctuary for shelter and for refuge in any misery, grieuance, or
distress. Upon these he must both have compassion inwardly; and he must show
it too outwardly: Affectu, and Effectu; pitying them in his heart, and helping
them with his hand. It is not enough for him to see the Blind, and the Lame,
and the Poor; and to be sorry for them: but his compassion must be real. He
must lend his eyes to the blind, to direct them; and he must lend his feet to
the lame, to support them; and he must pity the Poor as a father does his
children, so pity them, that he do something for them.

Princes, and Judges, and Magistrates were not Non mihi, sed populo, Ae l.
Adrianus Imp. -- (...). Aristot. in Epist. ad Alexandr.
ordained altogether,. 10. with the Reasons
nor yet so much for their own sakes, that they might have over whom to bear
rule and to Ita Magnae, vires gloriae, decorique sunt, si illis salutaris
potentia est. Nam pestifera vis est, valere ad nocendum. Senec. 1. de clem. 3.
dominiere at pleasure; as for the Peoples sakes, that the people might have to
whom to resort, and upon whom to depend for help and succor, and relief in
their necessities: and they ought to remember, that for this end God has
endued them with that Power which others want; that they might by their power
help them to right, who have not power to right themselves. Senec. in Medea.
2.2.
Hoc reges habent Magnificum, and ingens etc. Prodesse miseris, supplices fido
lare Protegere, etc. This is the very thing, wherein the preeminence of
Princes, and Magistrates, and great ones above the ordinary sort ^ingularly
Psalm. 82.6. Hoc tecum commune Deis, quod otrique rogati supplicibus vestris
far soletis opem. Ovid. 2. de Ponto. 9.
consists, and wherein specially they have the advantage, and whereby they
hold the title of Gods, that they are able to do good, and to help the
distressed, more than others are. For which ability how they have used it, they
stand accountable to him from whom they have received it: and woe unto them, if
the accounts they bring in, be not in some reasonable proportion answerable to
the receipts. Wisd. 6.6.
Potentes potenter: into whose hands Luke 12.48.
much has been given, from their hands much will be required; and the mighty
ones, if they have not done a mighty deal of good withal, shall be mightily
tormented. power from God; so they do receive honors, and services, and
tributes from their people for the maintenance of that power: and these as
wages by Gods righteous ordinance for their care and pains for the peoples
good. God has imprinted in the natural conscience of every man notions of
fear, and honor, and reverence, and obedience, and subjection, and
contribution, and other duties to be performed toward Kings, and Magistrates,
and other superiors, Romans 13.5.
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: and all this for the
maintenance of that power in them, by the right use whereof themselves are
again maintained. Now the same Conscience which binds us who are under
authority, to the performance; binds you who are in authority to the
requital, of these duties. I say, the same Conscience; though not the same
wrath: for here is the difference. Both Wrath and Conscience bind us to our
duties; so that if we withdraw our subjection, we both wound our own
Consciences, and incur your just wrath: but only Conscience binds you to
yours, and not Wrath; so that if ye withdraw your pelpe, we may not use wrath,
but must suffer it with patience, and permit all to the judgment of your own
consciences, and of God the judge of all men's Consciences. But yet still in
Conscience the obligation lies equally upon you and us. As we are bound to
give you honor, so are you to give us safety; as we to fear you, so you to
help us; as we to fight for you, so you to care for us; as we to pay you
tribute, so you to do us right. For, Romans 13.6.
for this cause pay we tribute and other duties, unto you who are Gods
ministers; even because you ought to be attending continually upon this very
thing, to approve your selves as Romans 13.4. (...). Luke 22.25.
the ministers of God to us for good. Oh that we could all, superiors and
inferiors, both one and other, remember what we owed each to other, and by
mutually striving to pay it to the utmost, so endeavor our selves to Romans 13.8.
fulfill the Law of God! But in the mean time, we are still injurious, if
either we withdraw our subjection, or you your help; if either we cast off
the duty of children, or you the care of Fathers. Time was, when Judges, and
Nobles, and Princes delighted to be called by the name of Fathers. The
Philistims called their Kings by a peculiar appellatiue, Genesis 20.2; and 26.1.
and Psalm. 34. in titulo.
Abimeleob; as who say* the King my Father. In Rome the Senators were of old
time called Patres, Fathers: and it was afterward accounted among the Romans
the greatest title of honor that could be bestowed upon their Consuls,
Generals, Emperors, or whosoever had deserved best of the Commonwealth, to
have this addition to the rest of his style -- sed Roma parentem, Roma patrem
patriae Ciceronem libera dixit. Iuvenal. Satyr. 8. -- patrem patriae
appellauimus, vt sciret datam sibi potestatem patriam; quae est,
temperatissima, liberis consulens, suaque post illos ponens. Senec. 1. de Clem.
14.
Pater patriae, a Father to his Country. Naamans servants in 4 Kings 5. call
him Father, 4 King. 5.13.
My Father if the Prophet had commanded thee, etc. And on the other side David
the King speaks unto his Subjects, as a father to his children in Psalm 34.
Psalm. 34.11
Come ye children, etc. and Solomon in the Proverbs every where, My son:
even as Job here accounts himself a father to the poor. Certainly to show
that some of these had, and that all good Kings and Governors should have a Vt
eos quasi filios cernaret per amorem, quibus pater praeerat per protectionem.
Gloss. interl. hic. (...), etc. Philo de creat. Principis.
fatherly care over, and bear a fatherly affection unto those that are under
them.

. 11. and extent thereof.
All which yet, seeing it is intended to be done in honum vniuersitutis, must
be so understood as that it may stand cum bono vniuersitatis, stand with
equity and justice, and with the common good. For Prou. 3.3. Math. 23.23. Non
auferat veritas misericordiam, nec misericordia impediat veritatem. Augustine.
sent. 110. apud Prosperum.
Mercy and Justice must go together, and help to temper the one the other.
The Magistrate and Governor must be a father to the poor: to protect him
from injuries, and to relieve his necessities; but not to maintain him in
idleness. All that the Father owes to the child is not love and maintenance:
he owes too Education; and he owes him correction. A Father may love his
child too fondly, and make him a wanton; he may maintain him too highly, and
make him a Prodigal: But he must give him Nurture too, as well as Maintenance,
lest he be better fed than taught; and correct him too, as well as love him,
lest he bring him most grief when he should reap most comfort from him.
Such a fatherly care ought the civil Magistrate to have over the poor. He
must carefully defend them from wrongs and oppressions; he must prouidently
take order for their convenient relief and maintenance: But that is not all,
he must as well make provision to set them on work, and see that they follow
it; and he must give them sharp correction, when they grow idle, stubborn,
dissolute, or any way out of order. This he should do, and not leave the other
undone. There is not any speech more frequent in the mouths of beggars and
wanderers, wherewith the Country now swarmeth, than that men would be good to
the poor: and yet scarce any thing so much mistaken as that speech in both the
terms of it; most men neither understanding aright who are the poor, nor yet
what it is to be good to them. Not he only is good to the poor, that delivers
him when he is oppressed; nor is he only good to the poor, that relieueth
him when he is distressed: but he also is good to the poor, that punishes
him when he is idle. He is good to the poor that helps him, when he
wants: and he is no less good to the poor, that whippeth him, when he
deserves. This is indeed to be good to the poor; to give him that alms
first, which he wants most: if he be hungry, it is alms to feed him; but if
he be idle and untoward, it is Non solum qui dat esurienti cibum, sitienti
potum -- verumetiam and qui emendat verbere in que^ potestas datur, vel coercet
aliqua disciplina -- in co quod corripit, and aliqua emendatoria poena plectit,
eleemosynam dat, quia misericordiam praestat. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 72.
alms to whip him. This is to be good to the poor: But who then are the
poor, we should be good too, as they interpret goodness? St. Paul would have
1. Tim. 5.3*
widows honored; but yet those that are widows indeed: so it is meet the
poor should be relieved, but yet those that are poor indeed. Not every one
that begs is poor; not every one that wants is poor, not every one that is
poor, is poor indeed. They are the poor, whom we private men in Charity,
and you that are Magistrates in Justice stand bound to relieve, who are old, or
impotent, and unable to work; or in these hard and depopulating times are
willing, but cannot be set on work; or have a greater charge upon them than
can be maintained by their work. These, and such as these, are the poor
indeed: let us all be good to such as these. Be we that are private men as
Brethren to these poor ones, and show them Mercy: be you that are Magistrates
as Fathers to these poor ones, and do them Justice. But as for those idle
stubborn professed wanderers, that can and may and will not work, and under
the name and habit of poverty rob the poor indeed of our alms and their
maintenance: let us harden our hearts against them, and not give them; do you
execute the severity of the Law upon them, and not spare them. It is St. Paul's
Order, nay it is the Ordinance of the Holy Ghost, and we should all put to our
helping hands to see it kept, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10
He that will not labor, let him not eat. These ulcers and drones of the
Commonwealth are ill worthy of any honest man's alms, of any good Magistrates
protection. Hitherto of the Magistrates second Duty, with the Reasons and
extent thereof, I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the Lame: I was a
Father to the poor. Follows next the third Duty, in these words, The cause
which I knew not I searched out.

. 12. The opening of*
Of which words some frame the Coherence with the former, as if Job had meant to
clear his Mercy to the poor from suspicion of Partiality and injustice: and
as if he had said; I was a father indeed to the poor; pitiful and merciful
to him, and ready to show him any lawful favor: but yet not so, as Ne
crederetur quod faueret eis nimis in preiudicium iustitiae; subditur [and
^ausam.] Lyran. hic.
in pity to him, to forget or pervert Justice. I was ever careful before I
would either speak or do for him, to be first assured his cause was right
and good: and for that purpose, if it were doubtful, Ne forte motupietatis in
discretae condescenderem ei in praeiudicium iustitiae. Lyran. hic.
I searched it out, and examined it, before I would countenance either him or
it. Certainly thus to do is agreeable to the rule of Justice; yea and of Mercy
too: for it is one Rule in showing Mercy, that it be ever done salvis pietate
and iustitia, without prejudice done to piety and justice. And as to this
particular, the Commandment of God is express for it in Exodus 23. Exodus 23.3.
Thou shall not countenance no not a poor man in his cause. Now if we should
thus understand the coherence of the words; the special duty which Magistrates
should hence learn, would be Indifferency: in the administration of Justice
not to make difference of rich or poor, far or near, friend or foe, one or
other; but to consider only and barely the equity and right of the cause,
without any respect of persons, or partial inclination this way or that way.

This is a very necessary duty indeed in a Magistrate of justice;. 13. The
Magistrates third Duty; Diligence to search out the truth.
and I deny not but it may be gathered without any violence from these very
words of my Text: though to my apprehension not so much by way of immediate
observation from the necessity of any such coherence; as by way of consequence
from the words themselves otherwise. For what need all that care and pains and
diligence in searching out the cause, if the condition of the person might
ouerrule the cause after all that search, and were not the judgment to be
given merely according to the goodness or badnesse of the cause, without
respect had to the person? But the special duty, which these words seem most
naturally and immediately to impose upon the Magistrate, (and let that be the
third observation) is diligence, and patience; and care to hear, and examine,
and enquire into the truth of things, and into the equity of men's causes. As
the Physician before he prescribe receipt or diet to his patient, will first
feel the pulse, and view the urine, and observe the temper and changes in the
body, and be inquisitiue how the disease began, and when, and what fits it
has, and where and in what manner it holds him, and inform himself every
other way as fully as he can in the true state of the body, that so he may
proportion the remedies accordingly without error: so ought every Magistrate
in causes of Justice before he pronounce sentence or give his determination,
whether in matters Omnia iudicia aut distrabendarum controuersiarum, aut
puniendorum male ficiorum causa reperta sunt. Cic. pro Cecinna.
judicial or criminal; to hear both parties with equal patience, to examine
witnesses and other evidences advisedly and thoroughly, to consider and wisely
lay together all allegations and circumstances, to put in quaeres and doubts
upon the by, and use all possible expedient means for the boulting out of the
truth; that so he may do that which is equal and right without error.

. 14. with some instances,
A duty not without both Precept and President in holy Scripture. Moses
prescribes it in Deuteronomy. 17. in the case of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17.2. etc. See also
Deuteronomy. 13.14.
If there be found among you one that has done thus or thus, etc. and it be
told thee, and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold it
be true, and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel,
Then thou shall bring forth that man, etc. The offender must be stoned to
death, and no eye pity him: but it must be done orderly, and in a legal
course; not upon a bare hearesay, but upon diligent examination and
inquisition, and upon such full evidence given in, as may render the fact
certain, so far as such cases ordinarily are capable of -- (...). Arist. 1.
ethic. 1.
certainty. And the like is again ordered in Deuteronomy* 19. in the case of false
witness, Deuteronomy. 19.17. etc.
Both the men between whom the controversy is shall stand before the Judges,
and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, etc. And in Judge. 19. in the
wronged Levites case, whose Concubine was abused unto death at Gibeah, the
Tribes of Israel stirred up one another to do justice upon the Inhabitants
thereof; and the method they proposed was this, first to Judge. 19.30.
consider and consult of it, and then to give their opinions. But the most
famous example in this kind is that of King Solomon in 3. King. 3. in the
difficult case of the 3. King. 3.16. -- 28.
two Mothers. Either of them challenged the living child with a like
eagerness; either of them accused other of the same wrong, and with the same
allegations; neither was there witness or other evidence on either part to
give light into the matter: yet Solomon by that wisdom which he had obtained
from God found a means to search out the truth in this difficulty, by making
as if he would cut the child into halfes, and give either of them one half; at
the mentioning whereof the compassion of the right mother betrayed the falsehood
of her clamorous competitor. And we read in the Apocryphal Story of
Susanna, how Daniel by Dan. 13.61.
examining the two Elders severally and apart, found them to differ in one
circumstance of their relation, and thereby discovered the whole accusation to
be false. Judges for this reason were anciently called Cognitores, and in
approved Authors Si iudicas, cognosce. Sen. in Med. 2.2
Cognoscere is as much as to do the office of a Judge: to teach Judges, that
one chief point of their care should be to know the truth. For if of private
men, and in things of ordinary discourse, that of Solomon be true, Prou.
18.13. See Sirac. 11.7, 8.
He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame unto
him; certainly much more is it true of public Magistrates, and in matters of
justice and judgment: by how much the men are of better note, and the things
of greater moment. But in difficult and intricate businesses, covered with
darkness and obscurity, and perplexed with many windings and turnings, and
cunning and crafty conueiances, to find a fair issue out, and to spy light
at a narrow hole, and by wisdom and diligence to rip up a foul matter, and
search a cause to the bottom, and make a discovery of all: is a thing worthy
the labor, and a thing that will add to the honor, I say not only of
inferior Governors, but even of the supreme Magistrate, the King. Prou. 25.2.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honor of Kings is to
search out a matter.

. 15. and reasons thereof.
To understand the necessity of this duty; consider. First, that as sometimes
Democritus said, the truth lies Cic. 1. Acad. quaest. in fine. Inuoluta
veritas in alto latet. Sen. 7. de benefic. 1.
in profundo, and in abdito, dark and deep as in the bottom of a pit; and it
will ask some time, yea and cunning too, to find it out and bring it to light.
Secondly, that through favor, faction, envy, greediness, ambition, and
otherwise, innocence it self is often laden with false accusations. You may
observe in the Scriptures how 3. King. 21.13
Naboth, Ierem. 37.13.
Jeremy, Act. 24.5. and 25.7.
Saint Paul, and others; and you may see by too much experience in these
wretched times, how many men of fair and honest conversation have been accused
and troubled without cause: which if the Magistrate by diligent inquisition do
not either prevent or help to the utmost of his endeavor, he may soon
unawares wrap himself in the guilt of innocent blood. Thirdly, that
informations are for the most part partial, every man making the best of his
own tale: and he cannot but often (...). Menand. apud Stob. sermon. 44.
err in judgment, that is easily carried away with the first tale, and does
not suspend till he have heard both parties alike. Herein 2. Sam. 16.3.4
David failed, when upon Ziba's false information he passed a hasty and
injurious decree against Mephibosheth. Solomon says, Prove. 18.17.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous; but then his neighbor
comes, and searches him out. Prou. 18. as we say commonly, One tale is
good, till another be told. Fourthly, that if in all other things hastiness
and precipitancy be hurtful, then especially matters of justice would not be
hudled up hand ouerhead, but handled with mature Take heed what you do. 2.
Chron. 19.6,
deliberation, and just and diligent disquisition. Senec. l. 2. de Ira c. 23.
Cunctari iudicantem decet; imo oportet, says Seneca: he that is to judge, it
is fit he should, nay it is necessary he should proceed with convenient
leisure. Who judges otherwise, and without this due search, he does not
Judge, but guess. The good Magistrate had need of patience to hear, and of
diligence to search, and of prudence to search out whatsoever may make for the
discovery of the truth in an intricate and difficult cause. The cause which I
knew not I searched out. That is the Magistrates third Duty; there yet
remains a fourth in these words, I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of his teeth.

. 16. The opening of
Wherein Job alludeth to ravenous and saluage beasts; beasts of prey, that lie
in wait for the smaler Cattle, and when they once catch them in their paws,
fasten their teeth upon them, and tear them in pieces and devour them. Such
Lions, and Wolfes, and Bears, and Tigers, are the greedy Qui pote plus, vrget:
pisces vt saepe minutos Magnu come; vt aues enecat accipiter. Varro in
Margopoli. -- factus praeda maiori minor. Sen. in Hippol. act. 2.
great ones of this world, who are ever ravening after the estates and the
liuelihoods of their meaner neighbors, snatching, and biting, and devouring,
and at length eating them up and consuming them. Job here speaks of Dentes
and Molares; Teeth and Jaws: and he means the same thing by both, Power
abused to oppression. But if any will be so curiously subtle, as to distinguish
them; thus he may do it. Dentes, they are the long (...) a cuert.
sharp teeth, the foreteeth; Psalm. 57.4.
Dentes eorum arma and sagittae, says David, Their teeth are spears and
arrows: Molares, a molendo, so called from grinding; they are the great double
teeth, the iaw-teeth. Those are the Biters; these the Grinders: these and those
together, Oppressors of all sorts. Usurers, and prouling officers, and sly
Merchants, and arrant Informers, and such kind of extortioners as sell time
and trucke for expedition, and snatch and catch at petty advantages; these use
their teeth most, these are Biters. The first, and I know not whether or no the
worst sort of them, in the holy Hebrew tongue has his name from biting. (...)
Naschak, that is to bite; and (...) Neschek, that is Usury. Besides these
Biters, there are Grinders too; men whose teeth are Lapides Molares, as the
over and the nether millstone: Depopulators, and racking Landlords, and such
great ones, as by heavy pressures and burdens and sore bargains break the
backs of those they deal withal. These first by little and little Esaias 3*15.
grind the faces of the poor, as small as dust and powder; and when they have
done, at length Psalm 14.4.
eat them up one after another, as it were bread: as the Holy Ghost has
painted them out under those very phrases. Now how the Magistrate should deal
with these grinders and biters, Job here teaches him: he should break their
jaws, and pluck the spoil out of their teeth; that is, quell and crush the
mighty Oppressor, and Eripite nos ex faucibus eo^u^, quorum crudelitas --
Crass. apud Cic. 1. d^ Oratore.
deliver the Oppressed from his injuries. For to break the iaw, or the cheek
bone, or the teeth, is in Scripture phrase as much as to abate the pride, and
suppress the power, and curb the insolency of those, that use their might to
ouerbeare right. So David says in the third Psalm, that God had saved him by
Psalm. 3.7.
smiting his enemies upon the cheek bone, and breaking the teeth of the
ungodly. And in Psalm 58. he desires God to Psalm 58.6. See also Prou. 30.14.
Joel 1.6.
break the teeth of the wicked in their mouths, and to break out the great
teeth of those young Lions. In which place it is obseruable, that, as Job here,
he speaks both of Dentes and Molares, teeth and great teeth: and those wicked
great ones, according as Job also here alludeth, he expressly compares unto
young Lions; lusty and strong, and greedy after the prey.

. 17. The Magistrates fourth Duty; Courage in executing Justice
Now to the doing of this, to the breaking of the jaws of the wicked, and
plucking the spoil out of his teeth; there is required a stout heart, and an
undaunted See Syrac. 4.9.
Courage, not fearing the faces of men, should their faces be as the faces of
Lions, and their visages never so terrible. And this is the good Magistrates
last Duty in my Text; without fear to execute justice boldly upon the stoutest
offender, and so to curb the power of great and wicked men, that the poor may
live in peace and keep their own by them. It was one part of Iethro's
Character of a good Magistrate in Exodus 18. that he should be Exodus 18.21.
a man of courage. And it was not for nothing that every 3. Kin. 10.20.
step up Salomons Throne for judgment was supported with Lions: to teach Kings
and all Magistrates, that a Lyon-like courage and resolution is necessary for
all those set upon the Throne or Bench for justice and for judgment. When 1.
Sam. 17.34. etc.
David kept his Fathers sheep, and there came a Lion, and a Bear, and took a
Lamb out of the flock; he went out after the Lion and smote him, and took
the Lamb out of his Mouth, and when the Lion rose against him he took him by
the beard, and smote him again, and slew him: and so he did with the Bear
also. Every Magistrate is a kind of Esa. 44.28. (...), saepe apud Homer.
shepherd: and the people they are his flock. He must do that then in the
behalf of his flock, that David did. Those that begin to make a spoil
though but of the poorest Lamb of the flock, be they as terrible as the Lion
and the Bear, he must after them, and smite them, and pluck the spoil out of
their teeth: and though they show their spleen, and turn again at it, yet he
must not shrink for that; but rather take fresh courage, and to them again,
and take them by the beard, and shake them, and never leave them till he have
brought them under, and broken their jaws, and in spite of their teeth made
them past biting or grinding again in have. He is a base Ioh. 10.12.
hireling, and not worthy the name of a shepherd, who when he sees the Wolf
coming thrusts his head in a bush, and leaves the poor Cattle to the
spoil. The good Magistrate must put on this resolution: to go on in his
course, and without fear of one or other to do justice, upon whosoever dares
do injustice, and to suppress oppression even in the greatest.

A resolution necessary;. 18. with reasons thereof, 1. in respect of the Laws;
whether we consider the Law, the Magistrate, or the Offender. Necessary,
First, in respect of the Laws: which, as all experience shows, are far
better unmade, than unkept. Horat. 3. Od. 24.
Quid vanae sine moribus Leges proficiunt? The life of the Law is the
Execution; without which the Law is but a dead letter: of less use and regard
than scar-crowes are in the corn fields; whereof the birds are a little
afraid at the first, but anon after a little use they grow so bold with them,
as to sit upon their heads and defile them. We see the experience hereof but
too much, in the too much suffered insolency of two sorts of people, (than
against whom never were laws either better made, or worse executed;) Rogues,
and Recusants. Now we know the Laws are general in their intents, and include
as well the great as the small. The Magistrate therefore who is (...). Arist.
5. Ethic. 7.
Lex loquens, and whose duty it is to see the Laws executed, must proceed as
generally, and punish transgressors of the Laws, the great as well as the
small. It is an old complaint, yet grows out of date but slowly; that Laws
are like Anacharsis, apud Plutarch. in Solone: nonnulli Zaleuco tribuunt.
Cobwebbes, wherein the smaller flies are caught, but great ones break
through. Surely Laws should not be such, good Laws are not such, of
themselves; they do or should intend an Inde latae leges, ne fortior omnia
posset. Ovid. 3. Fast.
universal reformation: it is the abuse of bad men, together with the
baseness or cowardice of sordide or sluggish Magistrates, that makes them
such. And I verily persuade my self, there is no one thing, that makes good
laws so much contemned, even by mean ones too at the last; as the not
executing them upon the great ones in the mean time. Let a Magistrate but take
to himself that courage which he should do, and now and then make a great man
an example of Justice: he shall find that a few such examples will breathe more
life into the Laws, and strike more awe into the people, than the punishment
of an hundred underlings and inferior persons.

. 19. 2. of the Magistrate himself;
Again, in respect of the Magistrate himself this courage and resolution is
necessary; for the maintenance of that dignity and respect which is due to him
in his place and calling. Which he cannot more shamefully betray, than by
fearing the faces of men. Imagine you saw a goodly tall fellow, trick't up with
feathers and ribands, and a glittering sword in his hand, enter the lists like
a Champion, and challenge all comers: by and by steppeth in another man
perhaps much of his own size, but without either sword or staff, and does but
show his teeth and stare upon him; whereat my gay champion first trembles, and
anon for very fear lets his sword fall, and shrinketh himself into the
crowd. Think what a ridiculous sight this would be: and just such another
thing as this, is a fearful Magistrate. He is adorned with Considera qualia
de te praestes, qui tanta authoritate subueheris. Cassiod. 6. Epist. 15.
roabes, the marks and ensigns of his power. God has armed him with a Romans
13.4.
sword; indeed as well to put courage into his heart, as awe into the peoples.
And thus adorned and armed, he stands in the eye of the world, and as it
were upon the stage; and rayseth an expectation of himself as if sure this man
would do something: his very appearance threateneth destruction to whosoever
dares come within his reach. Now if after all this brauing, he should be
outdared with the big looks and bug-words of those that could do him no
harm: how justly should he draw upon himself scorn and contempt, Horat. de
art. Poet.
Parturiunt montes? Prou. 17.10.
Wherefore is there a price, says Solomon of the sluggard, in the hands of a
fool to buy wisdom, and he has no heart? So, wherefore is there a sword,
may we say of the fearful Magistrate, in the hands of a Coward to do
justice; and he has no heart? You that are Magistrates, remember the promise
God has made you, and the Title he has given you. You have an honorable
Promise; [ 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
God will be with you in the cause and in the judgment, 2. Chron. 19.] If God
be with you, what need you fear, who shall be against you? You have an
honorable Title too [ Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.] If you be Gods, why should you fear
the faces of men? This is Gods fashion: he 1 Pet. 5.5.
gives grace to the humble, but he resists the proud; he Luke 1.52.
exalts the meek and lowly, but he puts the mighty out of their seats.
If you will deal answerably to that high name he has put upon you, and be
indeed as Gods; follow the example of God: lift up the poor oppressed out of
the mire, and tumble down the confidence of the mighty and proud oppressor;
when you Psalm. 75.2.4.
receive the Congregation, judge uprightly, and fear not to say to the wicked,
be they never so great, Lift not up your horn. So shall you vindicate your
selves from contempt: so shall you preserve your persons and places from being
baffelled and blurted by every lewd companion.

. 20. 3. of the Offenders.
Courage in the Magistrate, against these great ones especially, is thirdly
necessary in respect of the offenders. These wicked ones of whom Job speaks,
the longer teeth they have, the deeper they bite; and the stronger jaws they
have, the sorer they grind; and the greater power they have, the more
mischief they do. And therefore these great ones of all other would be well
hampered; and have their teeth filed, their jaws broken, their power curbed. I
say not the poor and the small should be spared when they offend: good reason
they should be punished with severity. But you must remember I now speak of
Courage; and a little courage will serve to bring under those that are under
already. So that, if mean men escape unpunished when they transgress, it is
oftener for want of care or conscience in the Magistrate, than of courage. But
here is the true trial of your Courage, when you are to deal with these great
ones; men not much inferior to your selves, perhaps your equals, yea, and it
may be too, your Magistracy set aside, men much greater than your selves: men
great in place, great in wealth, in great favor, that have great friends; but
withal that do great harm. Let it be your honor, that you dare be just,
when these dare be unjust, and when they dare smite others Esaias 58.4.
with the fist of violence, that you dare smite them with Romans 13.4.
the sword of justice; and that you dare use your power, when they dare abuse
theirs. All transgressors should be looked unto; but more, the greater, and
the greatest most: as a shepherd should watch his sheep even from Flies and
Maukes; but much more from Foxes, most of all from Wolves. Sure, he is a sorry
shepherd, that is busy to kill Flies and Maukes in his sheep, but lets
the Wolf worry at pleasure: Why, one Wolf will do more mischief in a night,
than a thousand of them in a twelue-moneth. And as sure, he is a sorry
Magistrate, that stocketh, and whippeth, and hangs poor snakes when they
offend (though that is to be done too) but lets the great thieves do what
they list, and dares not meddle with them: like Saul, who, when God commanded
him to destroy all the Amalekites both man and beast, slew indeed the rascality
of both, but spared the 1 Samuel 15.3. -- 9.
greatest of the men, and the fattest of the cattle, and slew them not. The
good Magistrate should rather, with Job here, break the jaws of the wicked,
and in spite of his heart, pluck the spoil out of his teeth.

. 21. The Inferences of all.
Thus have you heard the four duties or properties of a good Magistrate
contained in this Scripture, with the grounds and reasons of most of them,
opened. They are 1. a love and zeal to justice; 2. Compassion to the poor and
distressed; 3. Pains. and Patience in examination of causes; 4. Stoutnesse and
Courage in execution of justice. The uses and inferences of all these yet
remain to be handled now in the last place; and together. All which for order
and breuities sake, we will reduce unto three heads: accordingly as from each
of the four mentioned Duties, or Properties, or Rules (call them which you
will) there arise Inferences of three sorts. First, of Direction; for the
choice and appointment of Magistrates according to these four properties.
Secondly, of Reproof, for a just rebuke of such Magistrates as fail in any of
these four Duties. Thirdly, of Exhortation; to those that are, or shall be
Magistrates, to carry themselves therein according to these four Rules. Wherein
what I shall speak of Magistrates, ought also to be extended and applied (the
due proportion ever observed) to all kinds of Officers whatsoever, any way
appertaining unto justice. And first for Direction.

S. Paul says, Romans 13.1.
The powers that are, are ordained of God:. 22. The First; of Direction for the
choice of Magistrates,
and yet S. Peter calls the Magistracy an 1 Pet. 2.13.
humane ordinance. Certainly the holy Spirit of God, which speaks in these
two great Apostles, is not contrary to it self. The truth is; the substance of
the power of every Magistrate is the ordinance of God; and that is S. Paul's
meaning: but the Specification of the Circumstances thereto belonging, as in
regard of places, persons, titles, continuance, jurisdiction, subordination,
and the rest, is (as S. Peter terms it) an humane ordinance, introduced by
Custom, or positive Law. And therefore some kinds of Magistracy are higher,
some lower; some annual or for a set time, some during life; some after one
manner, some after another: according to the several Laws or Customs whereon
they are grounded. As in other circumstances, so in this concerning the
deputation of the Magistrates person, there is great difference: some having
their Power by Succession, others by Nomination, and other some by Election. As
amongst us, the supreme Magistrate, the King, has his Power by succession:
some inferior Magistrates theirs, by Nomination, or special appointment,
either immediately, or mediately from the King; as most of our Judges, and
Justices: some again by the elections and voices of the multitude; as most
Officers and Governors in our Cities, Corporations, or Colleges. The
Directions which I would infer from my Text, cannot reach the first kind;
because such Magistrates are borne to us, not chosen by us. They do concern
in some sort, the second; but most nearly the third kind, viz. those that are
chosen by suffrages and voices: and therefore unto this third kind only I will
apply them. We may not think, because our voices are our own, that therefore
we may bestow them as we list: neither must we suffer our selves in a matter
of this nature to be carried by favor, faction, spite, hope, fear,
importunity, or any other corrupt and partial respect, from those Rules, which
ought to level our choice. But we must confer our voices, and our best
furtherance otherwise, upon those, whom, all things duly considered, we
conceive to be the fittest: and the greater the place is, and the more the
power is we give unto them and from our selves; the greater ought our care in
voycing to be. It is true indeed, when we have used all our best care, and
proceeded with the greatest caution we can; we may be deceived, and make an
unworthy choice. For we cannot judge of men's fitness by any demonstratiue
certainty: all we can do is to go upon probabilities, which can yield at the
most but a coniecturall certainty, full of uncertainty. Men fere maxima pars
morem hunc homines habe^t: quod sibi volunt Dum id impetrant, boni sunt; sed id
vbi iam penes sese habent, Ex bonis pessimi, and fraudulentissimi sunt. Plaut.
in Capt. 2.1. Omnes candidatos, bonos viros dicimus. Senec. Epist. 3.
ambitious and in appetite, till they have obtained their desires, use to
dissemble those vices which might make a stop in their preferments; which,
having once gotten what they fished for, they bewray with greater freedom: and
they use likewise to make a show of that zeal and forwardness in them to do
good, which afterward comes to just nothing. Absolon to steal away the
hearts of the people, (though he were even then most unnaturally unjust in his
purposes, against a father, and such a father; yet he) made show of much
compassion to the injured, and of a great desire to do justice. 2 Samuel 15.4.
O, says he, that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man that has
any suite or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice. And yet I
doubt not, but if things had so come to pass, he would have been as bad, as
the worst. When the Roman Soldiers had in a tumult proclaimed Galba Emperor,
they thought they had done a good days work; every man promised himself so
much good of the new Emperor: But when he was in, he proved no better than
those that had been before him. One gives this censure of him, Tacit. lib. 1.
histor.
Omnium consensu capax imperij, nisi imperasset: he had been a man in every
man's judgment worthy to have been Emperor, if he had not been Emperor, and
so showed himself unworthy. (...). dictum Biantis apud Aristot. 5. Ethic. 3.
Magistratus indicat virum, is a common saying, and a true. We may guess upon
likelihoods what they will be, when we choose them: but the thing it self
after they are chosen (...). Plutarch. in Cicerone.
shows the certainty what they are. But this uncertainty should be so far
from making us careless in our choice; that it should rather add so much the
more to our care, to put things so hazzardous as near as we can out of hazard.

Now those very Rules,. 23. according to the said four Properties
that must direct them to govern, must direct us, also to choose. And namely
an eye would be had to the four Properties specified First, a Zeal of
Justice, and a Delight therein. See thou a man careless of the common good;
one that palpably prefers his own before the public weal; one that
loves his -- nec vulgi cura tyranni, Dum sua sit modo tuta salus. Valor.
Flace. 5. Argonant.
ease so well, that he cares not which way things go, backward or forward,
so he may sit still, and not be troubled; one that would divide honorem ab
onere, be proud of the honor and title, and yet loath to undergo the envy
and burden that attends them? set him aside. Never think that man's roabes
will do well upon him. A Iusticeship, or other office would sit upon such a
man's back as handsomely as 1 Samuel 17.39.
Saul's armor did upon David's: unweildy, and sagging about his shoulders; so as
he could not tell how to stir and turn himself under it. He is a fit man
to make a Magistrate of; that will put on righteousness as a garment, and
cloth himself with judgment as with The second Property is Compassion on the
poor. See thou a man destitute of counsel and understanding; a man of
forlorn hopes or estate, and in whom there is no help; or one that having
either counsel or help in him, is yet a churl of either; but especially one
that is sore in his bargains, cruel in his dealings, hard to his Tenants, or
an Oppressor in any kind? Take none of him. Sooner commit a flock of sheep
to a O praeclarum custodem, ouium, vt aiunt, lupum! custosue vrbis, an direptor
and vexator esset Antonius. Cic. Philipp. 3.
Wolf; than a Magistracy or office of justice to an (...). Iamblich. apud
Stob. Sermon. 41.
Oppressor* Such a man is more likely to put out the eyes of him that sees,
than to be eyes to the blind; and to break the bones of the strong, than to
be legs to the lame; and to turn the fatherless a begging, than to be a
father to the poor. The third Property is Diligence to search out the truth.
See thou a man hasty, and rash, and heady impatient of delay or pains; one
that cannot Prou. 29, 11.
conceal what is meet, till it be seasonable to utter it, but pours out all
his heart at once, and before the time; one that is easily possessed with what is
first told him, or being once possessed will not with any reason be persuaded to
the contrary; one that lends ear so much to some particular friend or
follower, as to believe any information from him, not any but from him; one
that, to be counted a man of dispatch, loves to make an end of a business
before it be ripe? suspect him. He will scarce have the Conscience: or if
that, yet not the wit, or not the patience, to search out the cause which he
knows not. The last Property is, Courage to execute. See first; of a --
degeneres animos timor arguit. Virgil. 4. Aeneid.
timorous nature, and cowardly disposition? or secondly, of a wavering and
fickle mind: as we say of children; won with an apple, and lost with a nut?
or thirdly, that is apt to be wrought upon, or molded into any form, with
fair words, friendly inuitations, or complementall gloses? or fourthly; that
depends upon some great man, whose vassal or creature he is? or fifthly; a
taker, and one that may be dealt withal? (for that is now the periphrasis of
bribery) or sixthly; guilty of the same transgressions he should punish, or of
other as foul? Never a man of these is for the turn: not one of these will
venture to break the jaws or tuskes of an oppressing Tygar or Boar, and to
pluck the spoil out of his teeth. The timorous man is afraid of every
shadow, and if he do but hear of teeth, he thinks it is good sleeping in
a whole skin, and so keeps aloof off for fear of biting. Iam. 1.8.
The double minded man, as S. James says, is unstable in all his ways: he
begins to do something in a sudden heat, when the fit takes him; but
before one iawe can be half broken, he is not the man he was, he is sorry
for what is done, and instead of breaking the rest, falls a binding up that
which he has broken, and so seeks to salve up the matter as well as he can,
and no hurt done. The vain man, that will be flattered, so he get fair words
himself, he cares not who gets foul blows; and so the beast will but now
and then give him a lick with the tongue; he lets him use his teeth upon
others at his pleasure. The depending creature is charmed with a letter or a
message from his Lord, or his honorable friend; which to him is as good as a
Supersedeas, or Prohibition. The taker has his fingers so oyled, that his hand
slippeth off when he should pluck away the spoil, and so he leaves it
undone. The guilty man by no means likes this breaking of jaws: he thinks
it may be his own case another day.

. 24. in some mediocrity.
You see, when you are to choose Magistrates, here is refuse enough, to be cast
by. But by that all these be discarded, and thrown out of the bunch; possibly
the whole lump will be near spent, and there will be little or no choice
left. Indeed if we should look for absolute perfection, there would be
absolutely no choice at all: Psalm. 14.3.
there is none that does good, no not one. We must not be so dainty in our
choice then, as to find one in every respect such as has been charactered.
We live not -- dicit enim tanquam in Platonis (...), non tan quam in Romuli
faece, sententia^. de Catone Cic. 2. ad Attic. 1.
in Republica Platonis, but in faece saeculi; and it is well, if we can find
one in some good mediocritie so qualified. Amid the common corruptions of
mankind, he is to be accounted a tolerably good man, that is not intolerably
bad: and among so many infirmities and defects, as I have now reckoned, we may
well voice him for a Magistrate; not that is free from them all, but that has
the -- vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille est, Qui minimis vrgetur. Hor.
1. sermon. Sat. 3.
fewest and least. And we make a happy choice, if from among those we have to
choose of, we take such a one as is likely to prove in some reasonable
mediocritie zealous of justice, sensible of the wrongs of poor men, careful
to search out the truth of causes, and resolute to execute what he knows is
just.

That for Direction. I am next to infer from the four Duties in my Text, a
just reproof,. 25. The second Inference, of Reproof.
and withal a complaint of the common iniquity of these times; wherein men in
the Magistracy and in offices of Justice are generally so faulty and
delinquent in some, or all of these duties. And first, as for zeal to
justice: alas that there were not too much cause to complain. It is grief to
speak it (and yet we all see it and know it) there is grown among us of this
land, within the space of not many years, a general and sensible declination
in our Zeal both to Religion and Justice; the two maine pillars and supporters
of Church and State. And it seems to be with us in these regards, as with
decaying Merchants almost become desperate; who when Creditours call fast upon
them, being hopeless of paying all grow careless of all and pay none: so
abuses and disorders increase so fast among us; that hopeless to reform all,
our Magistrates begin to neglect all, and in a manner reform nothing. How few
are there of them that sit in the seat of justice, whose consciences can
prompt them a comfortable answer to that Question of David, Psalm. 58. Psalm.
58.1.
Are your minds set upon righteousness, o ye congregation? Rather are they not
almost all of Gallio's temper, Act. 18. who, though there were a foul outrage
committed even under his nose, and in the sight of the Bench, yet the Text
says Acts 18.17.
he cared for none of those things? as if they had their names given them by an
Antiphrasis: like Diogenes his man; Manes a manendo, because he would be now
and then running away; so these Justices a iustitia, because they neither do
nor care to do justice. Peradventure here and there one or two in a whole side
of a country to be found, that make a conscience of their duty more than the
rest, and are forward to do the best good they can: Gods blessing rest upon
their heads for it. But what comes of it? The rest, glad of their
forwardness, make only this use of it to themselves; even to slip their own
necks out of the yoke, and leave all the burden upon them: and so at length
even tire out them too, by making common packhorses of them. A little it may be
is done by the rest, for fashion, but to little purpose; sometimes more to show
their Iusticeship, than to do justice: and a little more it may be is wrung
from them by importunity; as the poor Luke 18.4.5.
widow in the parable by her clamarousnesse wrung a piece of justice with much
ado from the Judge that neither feared God nor regarded man. Alas, Beloved, if
all were right within, if there were generally that zeal that should be in
Magistrates: good Laws would not thus languish as they do for want of
execution; there would not be that insolency of Popish Recusants, that license
of Rogues and wanderers, that prouling of Officers, that enhaunsing of fees,
that delay of suits, that countenancing of abuses, those carkases of
depopulated towns, infinite other mischiefs; which are the sins shall I say
or the plagues? it is hard to say whether more, they are indeed both, the
sins and the plagues of this land. And as for Compassion to the distressed;
is there not now just cause, if ever, to complain? If in these poverty and
sin; when the great ones of the earth should most of all enlarge their
bowels, and reach out the hand to relieve the extreme necessity of thousands
that are ready to sterue: if (I say) in these times great men, yea and men of
Justice, are as throng as ever in pulling down houses, and setting up hedges;
in vnpeopling towns, and creating beggars; in racking the backs, and grinding
the faces of the poor; how dwells the love of God, how dwells the spirit
of compassion in these men? Are these eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and
fathers to the poor, as Job was? I know your hearts cannot but rise in
detestation of these things, at the very mentioning of them. But what would
you say, if as it was said to Ezechiel, so I should bid you Ezech. 8.6.13.15.
turn again, and behold yet greater and yet greater abominations; of the
lamentable oppressions of the poor by them and their instruments, who stand
bound in all conscience, and in regard of their places, to protect them from
the injuries and oppressions of others? But I forbear to do that; and choose
rather out of one passage in the Prophet Amos, to give you some short
intimation both of the faults, and of the reason of my forbearance. It is in
Amos 5.12, 13. I know your manifold transgressions, and your Amos 5.12, 13.
mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside
the poor in the gate from their right: Therefore the prudent shall keep
silence in that time; fortia peccata. vulg. ibi.
for it is an evil time. And as for searching out the truth in men's causes,
which is the third Duty: first, those Sycophants deserve a rebuke, who by
false accusations and cunningly devised tales ( Pindar. Olymp. ^.
(...)) of purpose inuolue the truth of things to set a fair color upon a bad
matter, or to take away the righteousness of the innocent from him. And yet
how many are there such as these in most of our Courts of justice? Informing,
and promoting, and pettifogging make-bates. Now it were a lamentable thing if
these men should be known, and yet suffered: but what if countenanced, and
encouraged, and underhand maintained by the Magistrates of those Courts, of
purpose to bring Moulter to their own Mills? Secondly, since Magistrates must
be content (for they are but men, and cannot be every where at once) in many
things to see with other men's eyes, and to hear with other men's ears, and to
proceed upon information: those men deserve a rebuke, who being by their office
to ripen causes for judgment, and to facilitate the Magistrates care and
pains for inquisition; do yet either for fear, or favor, or negligence, or
a fee, keep back true and necessary informations, or else for spite or
gain clogge the Courts with false or trifling ones. But most of all the
Magistrates themselves deserve a rebuke, if either they be hasty to acquit a
man upon his own bare denial or protestation (for si inficiari sufficient,
ecquis erit nocens? as the Delphidius Orator contra Numerium; apud Ammian.
Marcell. l. 18.
Orator pleaded before Julian the Emperor; if a denial may serve the turn,
none shall be guilty,) or if hasty to condemn a man upon another bare
accusation (for si accusasse sufficient, ecquis erit innocens? as the Emperor
excellently replied upon that Orator; if an accusation may serve the turn,
none shall be innocent,) or if they suffer themselves to be possessed with
prejudice, and not keep one ear open (as they write of Alexander the Great)
for the contrary party, that they may stand indifferent till the truth be
thoroughly canvassed; or if to keep causes long in their hands, they either
delay to search the truth out, that they may know it, or to decide the cause
according to the truth, when they have found it. And as for Courage to execute
justice, which is the last Duty: what need we trouble our selves to seek out
the causes, when we see the effect so daily and plainly before our eyes?
whether it be through his own cowardice or inconstancy, that he keeps off;
or that a fair word whistleth him off; or that a great man's letter staveth him
off; or that his own guilty conscience doggeth him off; or that his hands are
manacled with a bribe, that he cannot fasten; or whatsoever other matter there
is in it: sure we are, the Magistrate too often lets the wicked carry away
the spoil, without, breaking a law of him, or so much as offering to pick his
teeth. It was not well in David's time, (and yet David a Godly King); when
complainingly he asked the Question, Psalm 94.16.
who will stand up with me against the evil doers? It was not well in Salomons
time, (and yet Solomon a peaceable King) when Eccl. 4.1.
considering the Oppressions that were done under the Sun, he saw that on
the side of the oppressors there was power; but as for the oppressed, they had
no comforter. We live under the happy government of a godly and peaceable
King, Gods holy Name be blessed for it: and yet God knows, and we all know,
it is not much better now; nay God grant, it be not generally even much worse!

. 26. The third Inference, for Exhortation.
Receive now in the last place, and as the third and last inference, a word of
Exhortation; and it shall be but a word. You whom God has called to any honor
or office appertaining to justice; as you tender the glory of God and the good
of the Commonwealth, as you tender the honor of the King and the prosperity of
the Kingdom, as you tender the peace and tranquillity of your selves and
neighbors, as you tender the comfort of your own consciences, and the
salvation of your own souls: set your selves thoroughly and cheerfully and
constantly and conscionably, to discharge with faithfulness all those duties
which belong unto you in your several stations and callings, and to advance to
the utmost of your power the due administration and execution of Justice. Do
not decline those burdens, which cleave to the honors you sustain. Do not
poast off those businesses from your selves to others, which you should rather
do than they, or at least may as well do as they. Stand up with the Zeal of
Psalm. 106.30.
Phinees, and by executing judgment, help to turn away those heavy plagues,
which God has already begun to bring upon us; and to prevent those yet heavier
ones, which having so rightly deserved, we have all just cause to fear.
Breathe flesh life into the languishing laws, by mature, and severe, and
discreet execution. Put on righteousness as a garment; and cloathe your
selves with judgment as with a robe and diadem. Among so many Oppressions, as
in these evil days fatherless, and the widow, and the wronged complain but
to you, whence seek for relief but from you? Be not you wanting to their
necessities. Let your eyes be open unto their miseries, and your ears open
unto their cries, and your hands open unto their wants. Give friendly Counsel
to those that stand need of your Direction: afford convenient help to those,
that stand need of your Assistance: carry a fatherly affection to all those
that stand need of any comfort, protection, or relief from you. Be eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame: and be you instead of fathers to the poor. But
yet do not countenance, no not Exodus 23.3.
a poor man, in his cause; farther than he has equity on his side. Remember
one point of (...). Neruus est sapientiae, non cito credere. dictum Epicharmi,
apud Cic. 1. ad Attic. 16. (...). Eurip. in Helena. The simple believe every
word. Prou. 14.15.
Wisdom, not to be too credulous of every suggestion and information. But do
your best to spy out the chinkes, and starting holes, and secret conueyances
and packings of cunning and crafty companions: and when you have found them
out, bring them to light, and do exemplary justice upon them. Sell not your
ears to your servants: nor tie your selves to the informations of some one, or
a few, or of him that comes first; but let every party have a fair and an
equal hearing. Examine proofs: consider circumstances: be content to hear
simple men (...) Arist. 27. elench. 10.
tell their tales in such language as they have: think no pains, no patience
too much to sift out the truth. Neither by inconsiderate have prejudice any
man's right: nor weary him out of it by torturing delays. The Cause which you
know not, use all diligence, and convenient both care and speed, to search it
out. But ever withal remember your standing is slippery; and you shall have
many and sore assaults, and very shreud temptations: so that unless you arm
your selves with invincible resolution, you are gone. The wicked ones of this
world will conjure you by your old friendship and acquaintance, and by all the
bonds of neighborhood and kindness; bribe your wives and children and
servants to corrupt you; procure great men's letters or favorites as engines to
move you; convey a bribe into your own bosoms, but under a handsomer name, and
in some other shape, so cunningly and secretly sometimes, that your selves
shall not know it to be a bribe when you receive it. Harden your faces, and
strengthen your resolutions with a holy obstinacy, against these and all other
like temptations. Count him an enemy, that will allege friendship to pervert
justice. When you sit in the place of Justice, think you are not now Qui
induit personam iudicis, exuit amici. Cicero.
husbands, or parents, or neighbors; but Judges. Contemn the frowns, and the
favors, and the letters of great ones: in comparison of that trust, which
greater ones than they, the King and State, and a yet greater than they, the
great God of heaven and earth, has reposed in you, and expects from you.
Chastise him with severe Reiecit alto dona nocentiu^ vultu. Horat. 4. Od. 9.
indignation, if he begin; and if he continue, spit defiance in his face, who
ere he be, that shall think you so base as to sell your Liberate arguendi
amittit, qui ab eo accipit, qui ideo dat ne corrigatur. Ambros. in 1. Cor. cap.
19.
freedom for a bribe. Gird your sword upon your thigh; and (keeping your
selves ever within the compass of your Commissions and Callings, as the Sun
in the Zodiake) go thorough stitch right on in the course of Justice, as the
Sun in the firmament with unresisted violence; and as a giant that rejoices
to run his race, and who can stop him* Bear not the Romans 13.4.
sword in vain* but let your right hand teach you terrible things. Defend the
poor, and fatherless, and deliver the oppressed from them that are mightier
than he: Smite through the loins of those that rise up to do wrong, that
they rise not again: Break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out
of his teeth. Thus if you do, the wicked shall fear you, the good shall
bless you, the poor shall pray for you, posterity shall praise you, your own
hearts shall cheer you, and the great God of Heaven shall reward you. This
that you may do in some good measure, the same God of Heaven enable you: and
give you and every of us grace in our several places and callings to seek his
glory, and to endeavor the discharge of a good conscience. To which God
blessed for ever, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one eternal
invisible and only wise God, be ascribed all the Kingdom, Power, and Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON. At the Assizes at Lincoln 7. Mar. 1624.

Exodus 23. Ver. 1, -- 3. 1. Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine
hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou speak
in a cause, to decline after many to wrest judgment.

3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.


THere is no one thing,. 1. The necessity of this Argument,
Religion ever excepted, that more secureth and adorneth the State, than
Justice does. It is both Columna, and Corona Reipubl. as a Prop, to make it
subsist firm in it self; and as a Crown, to render it glorious in the eyes
of others. As the Cement in a building, that Ius and aequitas vincula
civitatum. Cic. parad. 4.
holds all together, so is Justice to the public Body: as whereunto it
owes a great part both of its strength, (for by it Prou. 16.12.
the throne is established, in the 16th.) and of its height too, for it Prou.
14.34.
exalts a Nation, in the 14th. of the Proverbs. As then in a Building, when
for want of good looking to, the Mortar getting wet dissolueth, and the walls
Ventrosi parietes, Petr. Bles^ns. Epi. 85
belly out; the house cannot but settle apace, and without speedy repaires fall
to the ground: so there is not a more certain symptom of a declyning, and
decaying, and tottering State, than is the general (...). Soph in Aiace, vbi
non est pudor, nec cura iuris, Sanctitas. Pietas, Fides; Instabile regnum est.
Sen. in Thyest. act. 2.
dissolution of manners for want of the due execution and administration of
Justice.

. 2. both in respect of the Magistrate.
The more cause have we, that are Gods Ministers, by frequent exhortations,
admonitions, obsecrations, expostulations, even out of season sometimes, but
especially upon such seasonable opportunities as this, to be instant with all
them that have any thing to do in matter of Justice, but especially with you,
who are Romans 13.4.
Gods Ministers too (though in another kind) you who are in Commission to sit
upon the bench of Judicature, either for Sentence or Assistance: to do your
God and King service, to do your Country and Calling honor, to do your
selves and others right, by advancing to the utmost of your powers the due
course of Justice. Wherein as I verily think none dare but the guilty, so I am
well assured none can justly mislike in us the choice either of our Argument
that we beat upon these things, or of our Method, that we begin first with you.
For, as we cannot be persuaded on the one side, but that we are bound for the
discharge of our duties to put you in mind of yours: so we cannot be persuaded
on the other side, but that if there were generally in the Frequenter culpa
populi redundat in Principem, quasi de maiorum negligentia obueniant errata
minorum. Pet Blesens. Ep. 95.
greater ones that care and conscience and zeal there ought to be of the
common good, a thousand corruptions rife among inferiors would be, if not
wholly reformed, at least wise practisd with less conniuence from you,
confidence in them, grieuance to others.

But right and reason will, that Gal. 6.5.
every man bear his own burden.. 3. and others.
And therefore as we may not make you innocent, if you be faulty, by
transferring your faults upon others: so far be it from us to impute their
faults to you, otherwise than as by not doing your best to Qui non vetat
peccare, cum potest; iubet. Senec. in Tro. ad. In cuius mann est vt prohibeat,
iubet agi, si non prohibet admitti. Salvian. 7. de prouid.
hinder them, you make them yours. For Justice we know is an Engine, that
turns upon many hinges. And to the exercise of Judicature, besides the
Sentence, which is properly yours, there are diverse other things required;
Informations, and Testimonies, and Arguings, and Inquests, and sundry
Formalities, which I am neither able to name, nor yet covetous to learn:
wherein you are to rest much upon the Faithfulness of other men. In any of
whom if there be, as sometimes there will be, foul and unfaithful dealing,
such as you either cannot spy, or cannot help; wrong sentence may proceed
from out your lips, (...). Arist. 8. Top. 11.1
without your fault. As in a curious Watch or Clock that moves upon many
wheels, he finger may point a wrong hour, though the wheel that next moves
it be most exactly true; if but some little pin, or notch, or spring be out
of order in or about any of the baser and inferior wheels. What he said of
old, (...). apud. Stobae. Ser. 44.
Non fiere potest, quin Principes etiam valde boni iniqua faciant; was then and
ever since, and yet is, and ever will be most true. For say a Judge be never so
honestly minded, never so zealous of the truth, never so careful to do right:
yet if there be a spiteful Accuser that will suggest any thing, or an
audacious witness that will swear any thing, or a crafty Pleader that will
maintain any thing, or a tame Jury that will swallow any thing, or a craving
Clerk or Officer that for a bribe will foyst in any thing; the Judge who is
tied (as it is meet he should) to proceed secundum allegata and probata, cannot
Ipsos Iustitiarios, quos vulgariter Err^ntes, vel Itinerantes dicimus, dum
errata hominum diligenter explorant, frequenter errare contingit. Excessus
namque hominum absconduntur, etc. Pet. Blesens. Epist. 95.
with his best care and wisdom prevent it, but that sometimes Justice shall
be perverted, innocence oppressed, and guilty ones justified.

. 4. The Fitness,
Out of which consideration, I the rather desired for this Assise-Assembly, to
choose a Text as near as I could of equal latitude with the Assise-Businesse.
For which purpose I could not readily think of any other portion of Scripture,
so proper and full to meet with all sorts of persons and all sorts of abuses;
as these three verses are. Is there either Calumny in the Accuser, or Perjury
in the Witness, or Supinity in the Iurer, or Sophistry in the Pleader, or
Partiality in any Officer; or any close corruption any where lurking amid those
many passages and conueyances that belong to a judicial proceeding? my Text
searches it out, and enditeth the offender at the tribunal of that impartial
Judge that keeps a privy Sessions in each man's breast.

. 5. Division,
The words are so laid down distinctly in five Rules, or Precepts, or rather
(being all negative) in so many Prohitions, that I may spare the labor of
making other division of them. All that I shall need to do about them, will be
to set out the several portions in such sort, as that every man who has any
part or fellowship in this business may have his due share in them. Art thou
first an Accuser judicial controversy; or bound over to prosecute for the
King in a criminal cause, or as a voluntary informer upon some penal Statute?
here is something for thee, Thou shall not raise a false report. Art Witness:
either fetched in by Process to give public testimony upon oath; or come of
good or ill will, privately to speak a good word for, or to cast out a shrewd
word against any person? here is something for thee too; Put not thine band
with the wicked to be an unrighteous Witness. Art thou thirdly returned to
sworn man, in a matter of graund or petty inquest? here is something for thee
too; Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Come thou hither
fourthly to advocate the cause of thy Clyent, who flies to thy learning,
experience, Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment. Art thou lastly in any Office of trust, or place of service in or
about the Thou shall not countenance (no not) a poor man in his cause. The two
first in the first, the two next in the second, this last in the third verse.

. 6. and Extent of the Text.
In which distribution of the offices of Justice in my Text, let none imagine,
because I have shared out all among them, that are below the bench, that
therefore there is nothing left for them, that sit upon it. Rather, as in
dividing the land of Canaan, Leui, who had Number. 18.20.21.

Deuteronomy. 18.1. etc.


no distinct plot by himself, having yet (by reason of the Deu^. 33.10.
universal use of his office) in every Tribe something, had in the whole, all
things considered, a See Numb. 35.2 -- 8; and Ios. 21.1. etc.
far greater proportion, than any other Tribe had: So in this Scripture, the
Judge has by so much a larger portion than any of the rest, by how much it is
more diffused; Not concluded within the narrow bounds of any one, but, as the
blood in the body, temperately spread throughout all the parts and members
thereof. Which comes to pass not so much from the immediate construction of
the words (though there have not wanted Lyran. hic.
Expositors to fit the words to such construction:) as from that general
inspection, and (if I may so speak) superintendency, which the Judge or
Magistrate ought to have over the carryage of all those other inferior ones. A
great part of whose duty it is, to observe how the rest do theirs: and to
find them out, and check and punish them as they deserve, when they
transgress. So that with your patience (Honorable, Worshipful, and dearly
Beloved) I have allowance from my Text (if the time would as well allow it) to
speak unto you of five things. Whereof the first concerns the Accuser; the
second, the Witness; the third, the Iurer; the fourth, the Lawyer; and the
fifth, the Officer: and every one of them the Magistrate, Judge, and Iusticer.
But having no purpose to exceed the hour, (as I must needs do if I should
speak to all these to any purpose;) whilst I speak to the first only, I
shall desire the rest to make application to themselves, so far as it may
concern them, of every material passage: which they may easily do, and with
very little change for the most part; only if they be willing.

To our first Rule then, which concerns the Accuser and the Judge;. 7. The
Accusers duty; not to raise a false report.
in the first words of the Text, Thou shall not raise a false report. The
Original (...)
verb signifies to take up; as if we should read it, H. A. hic.
Thou shall not take up a false report. And it is a word of larger
comprehension, than most Translatours have expressed it. The full meaning is,
Old English translation, hic. Consentiendo vel loquendo. Gloss. Interlin. hic.
Ne falsi rumoris author, vela ad iutor esto. Iun. in annot.
Thou shall not have to do with any false report: neither by d raising it, as
the Author, nor by spreading it, as the Reporter, nor by receiving as an
Approuer. But the first fault is in the Raiser: and therefore our translations
have done well to retain that rather in the Text; yet allowing the Receiver a
place in the Margent. Now false reports may be raised of our brethren, by
unjust slanders, detractions, bachbitings, whisperings, as well out of the
course of judgments, as in it. And the Equity of this Rule reaches even to
those extraiudiciall Calumnies also. But, for that I am not now to speak of
extraiudiciall Calumny so much, as of that quae versatur in for^ and in
iudiciis, those false suggestions and informations which are given into the
Courts, as more proper both to the scope of my Text, and the occasion of this
present meeting: Conceive the words for the present as spoken especially, or at
least wise as not improperly applyable to the Accuser. But the Accuser taken
Accusatorem pro omni act^re and petitore appello. Cic. in partit. Orat.
at large, for any person that impleadeth another in iure publico vel priuato,
in causes either civil or criminal, and these again either capital or
penal. No not the Accusee or Defendant excepted: who although he cannot be
called in strict propriety of speech an Accuser; yet if when he is justly
accused, he seek to defend himself by false, unjust, or impertinent
allegations, he is in our present intendment to be taken as an Accuser, and as
the Raiser or Taker up of a false Report.

. 8. which may be done 1. by Fiction;
But when is a Report false? or what is it to raise such a report? and how is it
done? As we may conceive of Falsehood in a threefold notion; namely, as it is
opposed, not only unto Truth first, but secondly also unto Ingenuitie, and
thirdly unto Equity also: accordingly false reports may be raised three
ways. The first and grossed way is, when we -- Struunt de pro^rio calumnias
innocentiae. Bern. lib. 1. de Consid. prope finem.
feign and devise something of our own heads to lay against our brother,
without any foundation at all, or ground of truth: creating (as it were) a tale
ex nihilo. As it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 35.11.
They laid to my charge things that I never did: and as Nehemiah sent word to
Sanballat, Nehem, 6.8.
There are no such things as thou say, but thou faignest them of thine own
heart. Cis. act 2. in Ver^. lib. 3.
Crimen domesticum and vernaculum; a mere deucie: such as was that of Iezabels
instruments against 3 King 21.10
Naboth, which cost him his life; and that of Zibah against 2 Samuel 1^.3.
Mephibosheth, which had almost cost him all he had. This first kind of
Report is false, as deuoyd of Truth.

The second way, (which was so frequently used among the Roman Accusers,. 9.
2. by Aggrauation;
that Non vtar ista acculatoria consue^udine, etc. Cic. Act. 2. in Verr. lib. 5.
custom had made it not only excusable, but quae quoniam accusatorio more and
iure sunt facta reprehendere non puslumus. Cic. pro Flac^o.
allowable; and is at this day of too frequent use both in private and public
calumniations) is, when upon some small ground of truth, we run descant at
pleasure in our informations, interweaving many untruths among; or perverting
the speeches and actions of our adversaries, to make their matters ill, when
they are not; or otherwise aggravating them, to make them seem worse than they
are. As tidings came to David, when Amnon only was slain, that 2. Sam. 13.30
Absolon had killed all the Kings sons. It is an easy, and a common thing,
by misconstruction to They dai^y wrest my words Psalm 56.5. Nihil est, Quin mele
narrando possit deprauarior. Terent. in Pho^mi.
deprave whatsoever is most innocently done or spoken. The Ammonistish
Courtiers dealt so with David: when he sent 3 Sam. 10.2.
Ambassadors to Hanun in kindness, they informed the King as if he had
indeed sent Spies to discover the strength of the City and Land. And the Nehe.
6.6.7. and Ezr. 4.12
Jews enemies dealt so with those that of devotion repaired the Temple and the
wall of Jerusalem: aduertising the State, as if their purpose had been to
fortify themselves for a Rebellion. Yea and the malicious Jews dealt so with
Christ himself; taking hold of some words of his, about the destroying and
building of the Temple, which he understood of the Ioh. 2.19-21.
Temple of his body, and so Matthew. 26.61
wresting them to the fabric of the Material Temple, as to make them serve
to give color to one of the strongest accusations they had against them. This
second kind of Report is false, as deuoid of Ingenuity.

. 10. 3. by pressing the letter of the Law with rigor.
The third way is, when taking advantage of the Law, we prosecute the
extremity thereof against our brother, who perhaps has done something
contrary to the letter of the Law, but not violated the intent of the Lawgiuer,
or offended either against common Equity, which ought to be the (...).
Epictet. apud Stob. sermon. 143. nos lege^ bonam a mola, nulla a^ia nisi naturali
norma diuidere possumus. Cic. lib. 1. de legib. Quod fit iniusie, nec iure
sieri potest.

Non enim iura dicenda sunt, vel putanda iniqua hominum constituta. Aug. l. 9.
de Ciuit 21.


measure of just Laws, or against the common good, which is in some sort the
Atque ipsa vtilitas prope iusti matter, and aequi Horat. 1. sermon. 3. -- ex ae
quo and bono ius consta^, quod ad veritatem and vtili tatem communom videtur
pertinere. Cic. ad Herem. lib. 2.
measure of Equity. In that multitude of Laws, which for the repressing of
disorders, and for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity among men, must
needs be in every well governed Commonwealth, it cannot be avoided, but that
honest men, especially if they have much dealings in the world, may have
sometimes just and necessary cause to do that, which in regard of the thing
done may bring them within the compass of some Statute or branch of a statute;
yet such, as, circumstances duly considered, no wise and indifferent man, but
would well approve of. Now, if in such cases always rigor should be used;
Laws intended for the benefit, should by such hard construction become the
bane of humane society. As Solomon says, Pro. 30.33.
Quitorquet nasum, elicit sanguinem; He that wringeth the nose too hard,
forces blood. Guilty this way are not only those contentious spirits, whereof
there are too many in the world; with whom there is no more ado, but a Word
and an Action, a Trespass and a Process: But most of our common Informers
withal, Sycophants you may call them (for that was their old name) like Verres
his Canes venatici. Cic. in Verrinis saepe.
bloud-hounds in Tully, that lie in the wind for gain, and if they can but
trip any man upon any breach of a penal Statute, there they fasten their
teeth, and tugge him into the Courts without help; unless he will dare offam
Cerbero, (for that is it they look for) give them a sop, and then they are
charmed for that time. Zacheus, besides that he was a Publicane, was it seems
such a kind of Informer, Luke 19.8. Si quid cuiper calumniam eripui. apud Tert.
4 cont. Marc. 37.
(...) is the word Luke 19. if I have played the sycophant with any man, if I
have wronged any man by forged cauillation, or wrung any thing from him by
false accusation. A report of this third kind is false, as deuoid of equity.

But it may be thought I iniure these men, in making them raisers of false
reports;. 11. A Cavil removed.
and am my self a false accuser of them, whilst I seek to make them false
accusers of others: when as they dare appeal to the world, they report not
any thing but what is most true, and what they shall be well able to prove so
to be. At once to answer them, and clear my self, know that in Gods
estimation, and to common intendment in the language of Scripture, it is all
one to speak an untruth, and to speak a truth in undue time, and place, and
manner, and with undue circumstances. One instance shall make all this most
clear. Doeg the Edomite, one of the 1. Sam. 21.7.
servants of the house of Saul, saw when David went into the house of Ahimelech
the Priest, and how Ahimelech there entertained him, and what kindness he did
for him: of all which he 1. Sam. 22.9. etc.
afterward gave Saul particular information, in every point according to what
he had seen. Wherein, though he spoke no more than what was true, and what he
had seen with his own eyes: yet because he did it with an intent to bring
mischief upon Ahimelech, who had done nothing but what well became an honest
man to do, David charge him with telling of lies, and tells him he had a
false tongue of his own for it, Psalm. 52. [ Psalm. 52.2. -- 4
Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
rasour: Thou have loved unrighteousness more than goodness, and to talk of
lies more than righteousness: thou have loved all words that may do hurt; O
thou false tongue.] Conclude hence; he that tells the truth where it may do
hurt, but especially if he tell it with that purpose and to that end that it
may do hurt, he has a false tongue, and he tells a false lie, and he must
pardon us if we take him for no better than the raiser of a false report.

. 12. Reasons of the Prohibition; taken
We see what it is to raise a false report: let us now see what a fault it is.
The first Accuser that ever was in the world, was a false Accuser: and that was
the Devil. Who as he began betimes, for he was a Ioh 8.44.
liar from the beginning: so he began aloft; for the first false report he
raised, was of the most Highest. Unjustly accusing God himself unto our mother
Eve in a Genesis 3.1.4.5
few words of no fewer than three great crimes at once, Falsehood, Tyranny, and
Envy. He was then a slanderous accuser of his Maker; and he has continued
ever since a malicious accuser of his Apoc. 12.9, 10.
Brethren: Satan, (...) etc. he has his name from it in most languages.
Slanderers, and Backbiters, and false Accusers may herehence learn to take
knowledge of the rock whence they were hewn: here they may behold the top of
their pedigree. We may not deny them the ancientie of their descent; though
they have small cause to boast it: semen serpentis, the spawne of the old
Serpent; Ioh. 8.44.
children of their father the Devil. And they do not shame the store they
come of; for the works of their Father they readily do. That Hellish
Aphorism they so faithfully practice, is one of his Principles: it was he
first instilled it into them, Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit. Ier.
18.18.
Smite with the tongue, and be sure to smite home, and then be sure, either the
grief, or the blemish of the stroke will stick by it.

A Devilish practice,. 13. 1. from the Sin;
hateful both to God and Man. And that most justly; whether we consider the
sin, or the injury, or the mischief of it: the Sin in the Doer, the
Injury to the Sufferer, the Mischief to the Commonwealth. Every false
report raised in judgment, besides that it is a lie; and every lie is a sin
against the truth, Wisd. 1.11.
slaying the soul of him that makes it, and Apoc 22.15.
excluding him from heaven, and binding him over unto Apoc. 21.8.
the second death: it is also a pernicious lie, and that is the worst sort of
lies; and so a sin both against Charity and Justice. Which who so
commits, let him never look to Psalm. 15.1.3
dwell in the Tabernacle of God, or to rest upon his holy Mountain: God having
threatened, Psalm. 50. to take special knowledge of this sin; and though he
seem for a time to dissemble it, yet at last to reprove the bold offender to
his face. [ Psalm. 50.19. -- 21.
Thou fatest and spakest against thy brother: yea and have slandered thine own
mothers son. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest wickedly that I was even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove
thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.]

. 14. 2. from the Wrong;
And as for the Injury done hereby to the grieved party, it is incomparable.
If a man have his house broken, or his purse taken from him by the high way, or
sustain any wrong or loss in his person, goods, or state otherwise, by
fraud, or violence, or casualtie: he may possibly either by good fortune hear
of his own again and recover it, or he may have restitution and satisfaction
made him by those that wronged him, or by his good industry and providence he
may live to see that loss repaired, and be in as good state as before. But he
that has his Name, and Credit, and Reputation causlesly called into question,
sustaineth a loss by so much greater than any theft, by how much Pro. 21.1.
a good name is better than great riches. A man may out-weare other injuries,
or out-liue them: but a defamed person no acquittall from the Judge, no
satisfaction from the Accuser, no following endeavors in himself can so
restore in integrum, but that when the wound is healed, he shall yet carry
the marks and the scarres of it to his dying day.

. 15. 3. from the mischiefs.
Great also are the mischiefs that hence redound to the Commonwealth. When no
innocence can protect an honest quiet man, but every busy base fellow that
owes him a spite shall be able to fetch him into the Courts, draw him from the
necessary charge of his family and duties of his calling, to an unnecessary
expense of money and time, torture him with endless delays, and expose him to
the pillage of every hungry officer. It is one of the grieuances God had
against Jerusalem, and as he calls them abominations, for which he
threatens to judge her Ezekiel. 22. Viri detractores inte. Ezekiel. 22.9.
In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.

Beware then all you whose business or lot it is at this Assizes, or hereafter
may be, to be Plaintiffs,. 16. An exhortation to avoid the fault;
Accusers, Informers, or any way Parties in any Court of Justice, this or
other, Civil or Ecclesiastical: that you suffer not the guilt of this
prohibition to cleave unto your consciences. If you shall hereafter be raisers
of false reports, the words you have heard this day shall make you inexcusable
another. You are, by what has been presently spoken, disabled everlastingly
from pleading any Ignorance either Facti or Iuris; as having been instructed
both what it is, and how great a fault it is, to raise a false report. Resolve
therefore, if you be free, never to enter into any action or suite, wherein
you cannot proceed with comfort, nor come off without injustice: or if
already engaged, to make as good and speedy an end as you can of a bad
matter, and to desist from farther prosecution. Let that golden rule, commended
by the wisest (...). apud Stob. sermon. 2. Idque per praeconem, cum aliquem
emendavet, dici iubebat, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. Quam
sententiam vsqueadeo dilexit, vt and in Palatio, and in publicis operibus
praescribi iuberet. de Alex. severo Lamprid. in Alex.
Heathens as a fundamental Principle of moral and civil Justice; yea and
proposed by our blessed Savior himself as a full abridgement of the Matt.
7.12.
Law and Prophets, be ever in your eye, and ever before your thoughts, to
measure out all your actions, and accusations, and proceedings thereby: even to
do so to other men, and no otherwise, than as you could be content, or in
right reason should be content, they should do to you and yours, if their case
were yours. Could any of you take it well at your neighbors hand, should he
seek your life or liuelyhood by suggesting against you things which you never
had so much as the thought to do? or bring you into a pecke of troubles, by
wresting your words and actions wherein you meant nothing but well, to a
dangerous construction? or follow the Law upon you, as if he would not leave
you worth a groate for every petty trespass, scarce worth half the money?
or fetch you over the hip upon a branch of some blind, uncouth, and
pretermitted Statute? He that should deal thus with you and yours, I know what
would be said and thought: Griper, Knave, Villain, Devil incarnate; all this
and much more would be too little for him. Well, I say no more but this, Quod
tibi fieri non vis, etc. Do as you would be done too. There is your general
Rule.

. 17. and the Causes thereof:
But for more particular direction, if any man desire it, since in every evil
one good step to soundness is, to have discovered the right cause thereof: I
know not what better course to prescribe for the preventing of this sin of
sycophancy and false accusation, than for every man carefully to avoid the
inducing causes thereof, and the occasions of those causes. There are God
knows in this present wicked world, to every kind of evil, inducements but
too too many. To this of false accusation therefore it is not unlikely, but
there may be more: yet we may observe that there are four things, which are
the most ordinary and frequent causes thereof; viz. Malice, Obsequiousness,
Couerture, and Covetousness.

The first is Malice.. 18. which are, 1. Malice.
Which in some men (if I may be allowed to call them men, being indeed rather
Monsters) is universal. They love no body: glad when they can do any man any
mischief in any matter: never at so good quiet, as when they are most unquiet.
It seems David met with some such; men that were Psalm. 120.6.7
enemies to peace: when he spoke to them of peace; they made themselves ready
to battle. Take one of these men, it is meat and drink to him, which to a
well-minded Christian is as gall and wormwood, to be in continual suits. Virg.
Eclog. 3.
Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset: he could not have kept himself in
breath, but by keeping Terms; nor have lived to this hour, if he had not bin
in Law. Such cankered dispositions as these, without the more than ordinary
mercy of God, there is little hope to reclaim: unless very want, when they
have spent and undone themselves with wrangling (for that is commonly their
end, and the reward of all their toil) make them hold off, and give over. But
there are besides these others also; in whom although this malice reigns not
so universally, yet are they so far carried with private spleen and hatred
against some particular men for some personal respect or other, as to seek
their undoing by all means they can. Out of which hatred and envy they raise
false reports of them: that being in their judgments, as it is indeed, the
most speedy and the most speeding way to Quare solent inimici mentiri? vt
potentiam cuiusque minuant de quo mentiuntur. Aug. in Psalm. 65
do mischief with safety. This made the Presidents and Princes of Persia to
Dan. 6.3.4.
seek an accusation against Daniel; whom they envied because the King had
preferred him above them. And in all ages of the world wicked and profane men
have been busy to suggest the worst they could, against those that have been
faithful in their callings; especially in the callings of the Magistracy or
Ministry: that very faithfulness of theirs being to the other a sufficient
ground of malice. To remedy this, take the Apostles rule, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.15.
Look diligently lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled. Submit your selves to the word and will of God in the
Ministry; submit your selves to the power and ordinance of God in the
Magistracy; submit your selves to the good pleasure and providence of God in
disposing of yours and other men's estates: and you shall have no cause by the
grace of God, out of malice or envy to any of your brethren, to raise false
reports of them.

. 19. 2 Obsequiousness;
The second Inducement is Obsequiousness. When either out of a base fear of
displeasing some that have power to do us a displeasure, or out of a baser
Ambition to scrue our selves into the service or favor of those that my
advance us; we are content, though we owe them no private grudge otherwise,
yet to become officious accusers of those they hate, but would not be seen so
to do: so making our selves as it were baudes unto their lust, and open
instruments of their secret malice. Out of that base fear, the 3 King. 21.11
Elders of Iesrael, upon the Queens letter, whom they durst not displease,
caused an accusation to be framed against innocent Naboth. And out of this base
Ambition, 2 Samuel 22.9.
Doeg to pick a thank with his Master, and to endeere himself farther into
his good opinion, told tales of David and Ahimelech. To remedy this, remember
the services and offices you owe to the greatest Masters upon earth, have their
bounds set them which they may not pass. (...) Pericles apud Agell. 1. Noct. 3.
Vsque ad aras: the Altar-stone that is the Meere-stone; and Justice has her
Altars too, as well as Religion hers. Go as far then as you can in offices
of love and service to your friends and betters, saluis pietate and iustitia:
but not a step farther for a world. If you seek to Gal. 1.10.
please men beyond this, you cannot be the servants of God.

Couerture is the third Inducement.. 20. 3 Couerture;
And that is, when either to make our own cause the better, we seek to bring
envy and prejudice upon our aduersarie's, by making his seem worse: or when
being our selves guilty, we think to Scelere velandum est scelus. Sen. in
Hippol. Act. 2.
cover our own crimes, and to prevent the accusations of others by getting the
start of them, and accusing them first. As Genesis 39.17.
Potiphars wife accused Joseph, and the Dan. 13.
Elders Susannah, of such crimes, as they were innocent of, and themselves
guilty. An old trick, by which C. Verres like a cunning Coult often help
himself at a pinch, when he was Praetor of Sicily; as Cic. in Verrinis passim.
Cicero declares against him by many instances, and at large. For sithence the
Laws in most cases rather favor the Plaintiff; because it is presumed men
should not complain without grieuance: we may think perhaps to get this
advantage to our selves, and so rather choose to be Plaintiffes than Defendants,
because (as Solomon says) Pro. 18.17:
he that is first in his own tale seems righteous. To remedy this; Do
nothing but what is just, and justifiable: be sure your matters be good and
right: they will then bear out themselves well enough, without standing need to
such damned shifts for support.

. 21. 4 Covetousness
But the fourth thing is that, which causes more mischief in this kind, than
all the rest. That which the Apostle calls 1. Tim. 6.10. -- scelerum
mamatrem. Claudian. 2. de laud. Stillic. Inde fere sceleru^ causae -- Iuuenal.
Satyr. 11.
the root of all evil; and which were it not, there would not be the hundredth
part of those suites and troubles and wrongs, which now there are, done under
the Sun: Even the greedy worm of Covetousness, and the thirst after filthy
lucre. For though men be wicked enough, and prone to mischief of themselves
but too much: yet are there even in corrupt nature such impressions of. the
common principles of justice and equity, that men would not often do great
wrongs Maximam partem ad iniuriam faciendam aggrediuntur nonnulli, vt
adipiscantur ea quae co^cupiuerunt: In quo vitio latissime patet auaritia. Cic.
l. 1. de offic.

Sic vita hominum est, vt ad maleficium nemo conetur, sine spe atque emolumento
accedere. Cic. pro Sex. Roscio. -- pars vlcisima rerum, Certamen mouistis opes.
Lucan. lib. 3. (...). Diphilus apud Stob. sermon. 8.


gratis, and for nothing. If Zibah slander his Master falsely and
treacherously; it is in a hope of getting the living from him. And it was
Naboths Vineyard, not blasphemy, that made him guilty. Those sinners that
conspired against the innocent, Prou. 1. [ Prou. 1.11. -- 13.
Come let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without
a cause: Let us swallow them up, etc. they had their end in it: and what that
was, the next following words discover, We shall find all precious substance,
we shall fill our houses with spoil. And most of our prouling Informers, like
those old Sycophants in Athens, or the Quadruplatores in Rome; do they aim
think you so much at the execution of good Laws, the punishment of offenders,
and the reformation of abuses, as at the prey, and the booty, and to get a
piece of money to themselves? For let the offense be what it will, deal but
with them: and then no more speech of Laws or Abuses, but all is huisht up in
a calm silence, and no harm done. To remedy this; as John Baptist said to the
soldiers in Luke 3. Luke 3.14*
Accuse no man falsely ((...) is the word there too) and be content with your
wages: so if you would be sure not to accuse your neighbor falsely, content
your selves with your own estates, and covet not Exodus 20.17.
his ox or his ass, his land or his money, or any thing that is his. Reckon
nothing your own, that is not yours by fair and just means: nor think that
can prosper with you and yours, that was wrung from another by Cavil or
Calumny.

I have now done with you that are Accusers:. 22. The Judges duty; Not to
receive a false Report.
whose care must be, according to the Text-reading, not to raise a false
report. But the Margent remembers me, there are others whom this prohibition
concerns besides you, or rather above you; whose care it must be not to
receive a false report. A thing so weighty, and withal so pertinent to the
general argument of this Scripture; that some (...). Septuag.

Non suscipies vo^em mendacii. Vulg. edit. Thou shall not receive a false
report. Geneu. -- hunc sensum sequitur Chaldaeus, Vatabl.


Translations have passed it in the Text. And the Original word comprehends
it. For albeit the Raiser indeed be the first taker up; yet the Receiver takes
it up too, at the second hand. As it is commonly said of stolen goods, There
would be no thieves, if there were no receivers; and therefore some Laws have
made the (...). Phoc.
Receiver equal thief with the Stealer, (...): so certainly there would be
fewer false reports raised in judgment, if they were more sparingly received.
And therefore in this case also the Receiver must go pari passu with the
Raiser: who, if he give way or countenance to a false report when he may refuse
or hinder it, by being an Accessarie makes himself a Party; and becomes
Non solum ille reus est, qui falsum de aliquo profert; sed and is, qui cito
aurem criminibus praebet. Isid. lib. 3. de summo bono.
guilty of the same sins, the same wrongs, the same mischiefs with the
first offender, the false Accuser. David, as he inueigheth against Doeg in the
Psalm 52.
Psalm for telling: so he 1. Sam. 24.9.
elsewhere expostulateth with Saul for hearing unjust reports of him. The
Raiser and Receiver are both possessed with the same evil spirit; they have
the same (...). Thucid. apud Stob. sermon. 40.
Devil, the same Familiar: Only here is the difference, The Raiser has this
Familiar in his tongue, the Receiver in his ear. Whosoever then sits in the
place of Magistracy and public Judicature in foro externo, or is by virtue of
his calling otherwise invested with any jurisdiction or power to hear and
examine the accusations of others: I know not how he shall be able to
discharge himself in foro interno from a kind of Champertie (if my ignorance
make me not abuse the word) or at leastwise from misprision of Calumny and
unjust accusations; if he be not reasonably careful of three things.

First, let him beware how he takes private informations. Men are partial;.
23. Whereunto a threefold care is requisite: 1. in receiving informations;
and will not tell their own tales but with favor, and unto advantage. And it
is so with most men; the Pro. 18.17. Est vitium, cuius si te i^munem sentis,
inter omnes quos noui, ex his qui Cathedras ascendunt, sedebis me iudice
solitarius. Facilitas credulitatis haec est: cuius callidissimae vulpeculae
Magnorum neminem comperi satis cavisse versutias. Bern. 2. de consid. in fine.
first tale possesses them so, as they hear the next with prejudice: than
which there is not a -- inde eis ipsis pro nihilo irae multae, inde innocentium
frequens addictio, in de praeindiria in absentes. Bern. ib.
sorer enemy to right and indifferent judgment. A point so material, that
some Expositors make it the thing principally intended in this first branch of
my Text, Lyran. hic.
vt non audiatur vna pars sine alia, says Lyra. Suitors will be impudent, to
forestall the public hearing by private informations: even to the Judge
himself, if the access be easy; or at leastwise (which indeed makes less
noise, but is nothing less pernicious) to his servant or favorite that has
his ear, if he have any such noted servant or favorite. He therefore that
would resolve not to receive a false report, and be sure to hold his
resolution, let him resolve (so far as he can avoid it) to receive no report
in private; (for a thousand to one that is a false one) or, where he cannot
well avoid it, to be ready to receive the information of the adverse part
withal; either (...). Demost. de cor.
both or neither, but indeed rather neither: to keep himself by all means
equal and entire for a public hearing. Thus much he may assure himself;
there is no man offers to possess him with a cause beforehand, be it right,
be it wrong; who does not either think him unjust, or would have him so.

. 24. 2. in examining causes;
Secondly, let him have the conscience first, and then the patience too (and
yet if he have the The righteous considers the cause of the poor: but the
wicked regards not to know it. Prou. 29.7.
conscience, certainly he will have the patience) to make search into the truth
of things: and not be dainty of his pains herein, though matters be
intricate, and the labor like to be long and irksome, to find out if it be
possible the bottom of a business, and where indeed the fault lies first or
most. It was a great oversight in a good King, for 2. Sam. 16.4.
David to give away Mephib^sheths living from him to his Accuser, and that upon
the bare credit of his accusation. It had been more for his honor, to have
done as Job. 29.16.
Job did before him, to have searched out the cause he knew not; and as his
son 3. Kin. 3.23.
Solomon did after him in the cause of the two Mothers. Solomon well knew, what
he has also taught us, Prou. 25. that it was Prou. 25.2.
the honor of Kings to search out a matter. God as he has vouchsafed Princes
and Magistrates his own Psalm. 82.6.
name: so he has vouchsafed them his own example in this point. An example in
the story of the Law, Genesis 18. where he did not presently give judgment
against Genesis 18.20, 21. quo exemplo moniti, ne ad proferendam sententiam -- aut
temere indiligente^ que in discussa quaeque quoquo modo iudicemus: sed exemp^o
Domini descendamus, videamus, and iusto examine criminoso^ diligenter
perscrutemur. Council. Trib. e. 22.
Sodom upon the cry of their sins, that was come up before him: but he would
go down first and see whether they had done altogether according to that cry;
and if not, that he might know it. An Example also in the Gospell-story, Luke
16. under the parable of the rich man: whose first work, when his Steward was
accused to him for embezzeling his goods, was not to turn him out of doors,
but to Luke 16.2.
examine his accounts. What through Malice, Obsequiousness, Couerture, and
Covetousness, counterfeit reports are daily raised: and there is much cunning
used by those that raise them, much odd shuffling and packing and combining to
give them the color and face of perfect truth. As then a plain Countrie-man,
that would not willingly be cousened in his pay, to take a slip for a current
piece, and brass for silver, leisurely turns over every piece he receives;
and if he suspect any one more than the rest, vieweth it, and ringeth it, and
smells to it, and bends it, and rubbeth it, so making up of all his senses
as it were one natural touchstone, whereby to try it: such jealousy should
the Magistrate use, and such industry, especially where there appears cause
of suspicion, by all means to sift and to boult out the truth, if he would
not be cheated with a false report instead of a true.

Thirdly, let him take heed he do not give countenance or encouragement,. 25.
3. in repressing contentious persons and suites.
more than right and reason requires, to contentious persons, known
Sycophants, and common Informers. If there should be no Accusers to make
complaints: Offenders would be no offenders, for want of due Correction; and
Laws, would be no Laws, for want of due execution. Informers then are
Accusatores multos esse in ciuitate v^ile est, vt metu contineatur audacia:
veruntamen hoc ita est vtile, vt non plane illudamur ab accusatoribus. Ibid.
necessary in a Commonwealth as Dogs are about your houses and yardes. If any
man mislike the comparison, let him know it is Nihil mali est, canes ibi
quamplurim ^s esse, vbi permulti obs^ruandi, multaque seruanda sunt. Cic. pro
Sex. Roscio.
Cicero's simily, and not mine. It is not amiss, says that great and wise
Orator, there should be some store of Dogs about the house, where many goods
are laid up to be safe kept, and many false knaves haunt to do mischief; to
guard those, and to watch these the better. But if those Canes aluntur in
Capitolio, vt significent, si fures venerint- Quod si luce quoque canes
latrent, cum Deos salutatum aliqui venerint: opinor jis crura suffringantur,
etc. Ibid.
Dogs should make at the throat of every man that comes near the house, at
honest men's hours, and upon honest men's business: it is but needful they of
the house should sometimes rate them off, and if that will not serve the turn,
welfauouredly beat them off, yea, and (if after all that they still continue
mankeene) knock out their teeth, or break their legs, to prevent a worse
mischief. Magistrates are petty Gods, God has lent them his name, Psalm. 82.6.
Dixi Dij, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. and false Accusers are petty
Devils; the Devil has borrowed their name, Apoc. 12.9.10. de ipso etiam
nomine Diaboli delatorem. Tertullian de anima. c. 35.
Satan (...), the accuser of his brethren. For a Ruler then or Magistrate to
countenance a Sycophant, what is it else, but as it were to pervert the course
of nature, and to make God take the Devils part? And then besides, where such
things are done; what is the common cry? People, as they are suspicious, will
be talking parlously and after their manner: Sure, say they, the Magistrates
are sharers with these fellows in the adventure; these are but their setters,
to bring them in gain, their instruments and Emissaries to toll gri^t to their
milles for the increasing of their moulter. Heethen that in the place of
Magistracy would decline both the fault and suspicion of such unworthy
Collusion: it stands him upon with all his best endeauours by chaining and
muzling these beasts to prevent them from biting where they should not; and, if
they have fastened already, then by delivering the oppressed with Job Job 29.17.
to pluck the prey from between their teeth, and by exercising just severity
upon them to break their jaws for doing farther harm.

I am not able to prescribe (nor is it meet I should to my betters) by what
means all this might best be done.. 26. Whereunto some likely good helps are
For I know not how far the subordinate Magistrates power, which must be
bounded by his Commission and by the Laws, may extend this way. Yet some few
things there are, which I cannot but propose, as likely good helps in all
reason and in themselves, for the discountenancing of false Accusers, and the
lessening both of their number and insolency. Let every good Magistrate take it
into his proper consideration; whether his Commission and the Laws give him
power to use them all, or no, and how far.

And First; for the avoiding of malicious suites,. 27. 1. to respect
informations tendered without Oath;
and that men should not be brought into trouble upon slight informations: I
find that among the Cael. ad Cicer. 8. fam. Epist. 8. vide l. 7. and l. 13. *
qui damni. ff. de damno infect. In omnibus causis, sieve est, san^imus non.
liter, etc. Nisi prius qui eas exposcunt, iuramentum de calumnia praestiterint,
quod non etc. ^. Vinc. Cod de iureiurando propter calumn.
Romans the Accuser in most cases might not be admitted to put in his libell,
until he had first taken his corporal oath before the Praetor, that he was
free from all malicious and Calumnious intent. Certain it is, as daily
experience shows, that many men who make no conscience of a Lie, do yet take
some Nam sacramenti timore contentiosa litigantium instantia compescitur. Ibid.
(...). Sopho^l.
bogge at an Oath. And it cannot but open a wide gap to the raising and
receiving of false reports, and to many other abuses of very noisome
consequence in the Commonweal; if the Magistrate when he may help it, to
enrich himself or his officers, or for any other indirect end, shall suffer
men to be impleaded and brought into trouble upon Bills and Presentiments
tendered without oath.

. 28. 2. to temper Justice with Equity;
Secondly, since Laws cannot be so conceived, but that through the infinite
variety of humane occurrences, they may sometimes fall heavy upon particular
men; and yet for the preventing of more general inconveniences it is
necessary there should be Laws (for better a mischief sometimes, than
always an Inconvenience): there has been left, for any thing I find to the
contrary, in all well governed policies, a kind of latitude more or less,
and power in the Magistrates, even in those Courts, that were strictissimi
iuris, upon fit occasion to qualify and to Soleo audire in potestate esse
iudicis mollire sententiam, and mitius vindicare quam iubeant leges. Augustine.
Epist. 158.
mitigate something the rigor of the Laws by the Rules of Equity. For I know
not any extremity of Summum ius, summa iniuria. Ibid. (...). Aristot. 5. Ethic.
10.
Wrong beyond the extremity of Right: when laws intended for Fences are made
Snares, and are calumniously wrested to oppress that innocence which they
should protect. And this is most properly Existunt etiam saepe iniuriae
calumnia quadam, and nimis callida, sed malitiosa iuris interpretatione. Cic.
lib. 1. de Offic. Scriptum sequi, calumniatoris esse; boni iudicis, voluntatem
scriptoris, authoritatemque defendere. Id pro A. Cecinna.
Calumny in the prime notion of the word; for a man upon a mere trick or
quillet from the Aucupia verborum, and literarum t^ndiculae. Cic pro A. Cecinna.
letters and syllables of the Law, or other writing, or evidence, pressed with
advantage, to bring his action or lay his accusation against another man; who
yet bona fide, and in Equity and Conscience, has done nothing worthy to bring
him into such trouble. Now if the Magistrate of Justice shall use his full
power, by interpreting the Law in rigor where he should not, to second the
boldness of a calumnious Accuser: or if he shall not use his full power, by
affoording his lawful favor in due time and place, to succor the innocence
of the so accused: he shall thereby but give encouragement to the Raysers, and
he must look to answer for it one day, as the Receiver of a false Report.

Thirdly, since that Justice which especially supporteth the Commonweal,. 29.
3. to punish partiality and Collusion in the Informer;
consists in nothing more, than in the right distribution of rewards and
punishments: many Law-giuers have been careful, by proposing rewards, to
encourage men to give in true and needful informations, and on the contrary to
suppress those that are false or idle by proposing punishments. For the
informers office, though it be (as we heard) a necessary, yet it is in truth
a very thanklesse office: and men would be loath, without special grieuance,
to undergo the hatred and e^uy, which commonly attends such as are officious
that way; unless there were some profit mixed withal to sweeten that hatred,
and to counteruaile that envy. For which cause in most Penal Statutes, a
moi^y, or a third, or Quartam accusatoribus secundum necessitudinem legis.
Tacit. lib. 4. Annal.
fourth (which was the usual proportion in Rome, whence the name of
Quadruplatores, accusatores seu delatores criminum Publicorum, sub poena
quadrupli: sieve quod ipsi ex damnatorum bonis quos accusauerant, quartam partem
consequebantur. Ascon. in Verr. See Fest. in Quadruplatore, Turneb. 3. Aduers.
9. Lips. in lib. 4. Ann. Taciti. Bisciol. 14. subces. 13.
quadruplatores came) or some other greater or lesser part of the fi^e,
penalty, or forfeiture expressed in the Law, is by the said Law allowed to the
Informer, by way of recompense for the service he has done the State by his
information. And if he be faithful and conscionable in his office, good
reason he should have it. For he that has an Office in any Lawful calling
(and the Informers calling is such; howsoever through the iniquity of those
that have usually exercised it, it has long labored of an Quadruplator, vt
breuiter describam, capitalis est. Est enim improbus and pestifer ciuis. Cic.
lib. 2. ad Her.
ill name:) but he that has such an office; as it is meet he should attend
it, so it is meet it should maintain him: for 1 Cor. 9.7.
who goes to warrefare at any time of his own cost? But if such an Informer
shall endite one man for an offense, pretending it to be done to the great
hurt of the Commonweal, and yet for favor, fear, or a fee b^lke aequitas in
paribus causis paria iura desiderat. Cic. in Top. Quis hoc statuit, quod aequum
sit in Quintium, id iniquum esse in p^tuit* Id pro. Quiq.
another man whom he knows to have committed the same offense, or a greater;
or if having entered his complaint in the open Court, he shall afterward let
the suite fall, and take up the matter in a private chamber: this is Praeuaris
(...) satoris corruptela ab reo. Cic. in partit. orat. -- Praeuaricatorem ^um
^sse ostendimus, (...) colludit cum reo, and translatitie munere accusand
desungitur. Mar, in l. 1. ff ad Senatus. Turpil.
Collusion; and so far forth a false report, as every thing may be called
false when it is partial, and should be entire. And the Magistrate, if he
have power to chastise such an Informer some semblance whereof there was in
that V. Pli^* Epist. ^* l ^. ff. (...) Rosin. 9. Antiqu. Romans 25.
Iudicium* Praeuari^^tionis in Rome, he shall do the Commonwealth good
service, and himself much honor, now and then to use it.

Fourthly, since nothing is so powerful to repress audacious Accusers, as
severe Punishment is;. 30. 4. to allow the wronged party large satisfaction;
it is obseruable what care and caution was used among the Romans whilst that
State flourished, to deter men from unjust Calumniations. In private and
civil Controversies, for trial of right between party and party, they had
their v. Ascon. in Verrin. 3.
sponsiones: which was a sum of money in some proportionable rate to the
value of the thing in Question; which the Plaintiff entered bond to pay to the
Defendant in case he should not be able to prove his Action; the Defendant
also making the like sponsion and entering the like bond, in case he should be
cast. But in public and criminal matters, whether Capital or Penal, if for
want of due proof on the Accusers part, the party accused were quit in
judgment; there went a trial upon the Accuser, at the suite of the Accusee,
which they called v. l. 1.. 2. etc. ff. ad senatusc. Turpil; Rosin. 9. Antiqu.
Romans 25.
Iudicium Calumniae: wherein they examined the original ground and foundation
of the Accusation. Which if it appeared to have proceeded from some just error
or mistake bona fide, it excused him: but if it should appear the accusation
to have proceeded from some left handed respect, as Malice, Envy, Gain, etc.
he was then condemned of Calumny. And his ordinary punishment then was,
whereunto he had virtually bound himself by subscribing his libell, Poena
talionis, the same kind of punishment whatsoever it was, which by the Laws
had been due to the party accused, if the libell had bin proved against him.
Yea and for his farther shame it was provided by lege Remmia. v. l. 1.. 2. ff.
ad senatusc. Turpil; and Gothifred. in annot. ibi; Rosin. 8. Antiqu. Romans part.
2. cap. 22.
one Law, that he should be burnt in the forehead with the Letter K. to
proclaim him a Calumniator to the world; that, in old Orthography, being the
first letter of the word Kalumnia. The same letter would serve, the turn very
well with us also, though we use it to signifi^ another thing; and yet not so
much another thing, as a thing more general, but comprehending this as one
species of it. But as I said, I may not prescribe; especially beyond Law. The
thing for which I mention all this, is this: If all that care and severity in
them, could not prevent it, but that still unjust actions would be brought,
and false acc^sations raised: what a world of unconscionable suites and
wrongful informations may we think there would be; if contentious Plaintiffes
and calumnious Sycophants when they have failed their proof, should yet get
off easily; and escape out of the Courts without Censure or Punishment, or at
the most but with some light check? and the poor injured innocent the while
be held-in as in a prison, till he have paid the utmost farthing, I say not
of what is due, but of what shall be demanded by every man that has but a
piece of an office about the Courts. It is a strong hartening to Accusers, and
multiplieth false report, beyond belief; when they that are wrongfully
accused, though the cause go with them, shall yet have the worst of the day:
and shall have cause to answer the congratulations of their friends, as (...).
Plutarch in Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus did his after he had gotten two famous victories over the Romans,
that if they should get a few more such victories, it would be to their utter
undoing. If the Magistrate had power to make the wronged party full
restitution, allowing him all costs and damages to a half penny; nay if he had
power to allow him double or treble out of his unjust adversaries estate: it
were all little enough, and but too little. Zacheus took himself bound to do
more: when for this very sin of false accusation he imposed upon himself,
as a kind of satisfactory penance, Luke 19.8.
a fourefold restitution, Luke 19. Here was a right Quadruplator indeed; and in
the best sense: you shall not lightly read of such another.

Lastly, men have not Lucian in Hermot.
fenestrata pectora,. 31. 5. to look well to his own servants and officers.
that we can see them thoroughly and within: yet there want not means of
probable discovery. Of ordinary private men we make conjecture, by their
gestures, by their speeches, by their companions. But Magistrates and great
ones, who live more in the eye of the world, and are ever as it were upon the
stage, and so do personati incedere, walk under a continual disguise in
respect of their outward deportment; are not so well discouerable by those
means. They are best known by their Sirac. 10.2.
servants and retinue, by their favorites and officers, by those they keep
about them, or employ under them. If these be plain and downeright, if these
be just and upright, if these be free and conscionable: Sycophants will
pluck in their horns, and be out of heart and hope to find the Masters of
such servants facill to give way to their false calumniations. But if these be
insolent and hungry companions, if these be impudent and shameless exactors:
it is presently (...). Isoc. apud Stob. sermon. 44.

Si innocents existimari velumus, no^ solum nos abstinentes, sedetiam nostros
comites praestare debemus. Cic. 2. in Verr. 2.


thought they are then but brokers for the Master; and there is no question
then made, but that false reports will be received as fast as they can be
raised, and entertained with both arms. We have learned from Pro. 29.12.
Solomon, Prou. 29. that if a ruler hearken to lies, then all his servants are
wicked: They durst not be so openly wicked, if they were not first sure of him.
It was but a Nemo vnqua^ tam reus, tam nocens adducetur, qui ista defensione
non possit vti. Cic. 2 in Verr. 2.
sorry one, when it was at best, but is now withal grown a stale excuse; for
great ones to impute their own wilful ouersights to the fault or negligence
of their servants. Caius Verres, (whom I cannot but now and then mention,
because there is scarce to be found such another complete Exemplar of a wicked
Magistrate;) would usually aiunt eum queri solere nonnunquam, se miserum, quod
non suis, sed suorum comitum peccatis and criminibus praematur. Cic. ibid.
complain, that he was unjustly oppressed, not with his own, but with the
crimes of his followers. But why then did he keep such a kennell of sharkes
about him? why did he not either speedily reform them or utterly discard them?
It were indeed an unrighteous thing to condemn the Master for the servants
fault; and an uncharitable inference, because the servant is naught, to
conclude straight the Master is little better. For a just Master may have an
unconscionable servant; and if he have a in tanta felicitate nemo potest esse
in magna familia, qui neminem neque servum neque libertum improbum habeat. Cic.
pr^ Sec. Roscio.
numerous Family, and keep many, it is a rare thing if he have not some bad:
as in a great heard there will be some rascal Deene. But then it is but one or
a few; and they play their prises closely, without their Masters priuitie; and
they are not a little sollicitous to carry matters so fairly outward, that
their Master shall be the Dedecus ille domus sciet vltimus. Iuuenal. Satyr. 10.
last man shall hear of their false dealing, and when he hears of it shall
scarce believe it for the good opinion he has of them. But when in the
generality they are such, when they are openly and impudently such, when every
body sees and says the Master cannot choose but know they are such: it cannot
be thought, but the Master is well enough content they should be such. Nehem.
5.15.
Even their servants bare rule over the people, says good Nehemiah of the
Governors that were before him: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.
Nehem. 5. What? did not Nehemiah bear rule over the people? Yes that he did:
there is nothing surer. His meaning then must be; so did not I; that is, I did
not suffer my servants so to do as they did theirs: implying, that, when the
servants of the former governors oppressed the people, it was their Masters
doing, at leastwise their Masters suffering; [Euen their servants bare rule
over the People: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.] The Magistrate
therefore that would speedily smoke away these g^ats that swarm about the
Courts of Justice, and will be offering at his ear, to buzze false reports
therinto: he shall do well to begin his reformation at home; and if he have a
servant that hears not well deservedly, to pack him away out of hand, and to
get an honester in his room. Say he be of never so serviceable qualities, and
useful abilities otherwise, so as the Master might almost as well spare his
right eye or his right hand, as forgo his service: yet in this case he must
not spare him. Our Saviors speech is peremptory Mat. 5.29, 30
Erue, Abscinde, Projice; if either eye or hand cause or tempt thee to offend,
pull out that eye, cut off that hand, cast them both from thee with
indignation? rather want both, than suffer corruption in either. David's
resolution was excellent in Psalm 101. and worthy thy imitation. Psalm. 101.5.
etc.
Who so privily slaundereth his neighbor, him will I destroy: who so has a
proud look, and high stomach, I will not suffer him. Mine eyes look to such
as be faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me: who so leads a
godly life he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in
my house: he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. He that will thus
resolve, and thus do, it may be presumed he will not knowingly give either
way to a false report, or countenance to the reporter. And so much for our
first Rule; Thou shall not raise a false Report.

. 32. The sum and Conclusion of all.
My first purpose I confess was to have spoken also to the Witness, and to the
Iurer, and to the Pleader, and to the Officer from the other four Rules in my
Text, as punctually and particularly as to the Accuser from this first; for I
therefore made choice of a Text that takes them all in, that I might speak to
them all alike. But if I should enlarge my self upon the rest, as I have done
in this; my meditations would swell to the proportion rather of a Treatise,
than a Sermon: and what patience were able to sit them out? Therefore I must
not do it. And indeed, if what I have spoken to this first point were duly
considered, and conscionably practiced; I should the less need to do it. For
it is the Accuser that lays the first stone: the rest do but build upon his
foundation. And if there were no false reports raised or received: there would
be the less use of, and the less work for, false and suborned Witnesses;
ignorant, or packt Iuries; crafty and sly Pleaders; cogging and extorting
Officers. But unto these I have no more to say at this time; but only to desire
each of them to lay that portion of my Text to their hearts, which in the first
division was allotted them as their proper share: and withal to make
application ( mutatis mutandis) unto themselves, of whatsoever has been
presently spoken to the Accuser, and to the Magistrate from this first rule.
Whereof, (for the better furtherance of their Application, and relief of all
our Memories) the sum in brief, is thus. First concerning the Accuser, (and
that is every party in a cause or trial,) he must take heed he do not raise
a false report: which is done, first, by forging a mere untruth; and secondly,
by perverting or aggravating a truth; and thirdly, by taking advantage of
strict Law against Equity. Any of which who ever does; he first commits a
heinous sin himself, and secondly grievously wrongeth his neighbor, and
thirdly brings a great deal of mischief to the Commonweal. All which
evils are best avoided: first, by considering how we would others should deal
with us, and resolving so to deal with them, and secondly by avoiding, as all
other inducements and occasions, so especially those four things, which
ordinarily engage men in unjust quarrels; Malice, Obsequiousness, Couerture,
and Greediness. Next, concerning the Judge, or Magistrate; he must take heed
he do not receive a false report. Which he shall hardly avoid, unless he
beware, first, of taking private informations; secondly, of passing over causes
slightly without mature disquisition; and thirdly of countenancing Accusers
more than is meet. For whose discountenancing and deterring, he may consider,
whether or no these five may not be good helps: so far as it lies in his
power, and the Laws will permit, first, to reject informations tendered without
Oath; secondly, to give such interpretations, as may stand with Equity as well
as Law; thirdly, to chastise Informers that use partiality or collusion;
fourthly, to allow the wronged party a liberal satisfaction from his
adversary; fifthly, to carry a sharp eye, and a strait hand, over his own
servants, followers, and officers. Now what remains, but that the several
premises earnestly recommended to the godly consideration, and conscionable
practice of every one of you whom they may concern; and all your persons and
affairs both in the present weighty businesses, and ever hereafter, to the
good guidance and providence of Almighty God: we should humbly beseech him of
his gracious goodness to give a blessing to that which has been spoken
agreeably to his word, that it may bring forth in us the fruits of Godliness,
Charity, and Justice; to the glory of his grace, the good of our brethren, and
the comfort of our own souls; even for his blessed Sons sake, our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with, etc.

At the Assizes at Lincoln. 4. Aug. 1625.
THE THIRD SERMON.
PSALM 106.30. Then stood up Phinehaez, and executed judgment: and the plague
was stayed.


. 1. The Argument;
THe abridgement is short, which some have made of the whole book of Psalms,
but into two words, Boys Expos. of proper Psalms in init. out of Gueuara.
Hosannah, and Hallelujah: most of the Psalms spending themselves, as in their
proper arguments, either in Supplication, praying unto God for his blessings,
and that is Hosannah; or in Thanksgiving, blessing God for his goodness, and
that is Hallelujah. This Psalm is of the later sort. The word Hallelujah, both
prefixed in the title, and repeated in the close of it, sufficiently gives it
to be a Psalm of Thanksgiving: as are also the three next before it, and the
next after it. All which five Psalms together, as they agree in the same
general argument, the magnifying of Gods holy name: so they differ every one
from other in the choice of those special and topicall arguments, whereby the
praises of God are set forth therein. In the rest the Psalmist draws his
argument from other considerations: in this from the consideration of Gods
merciful remouall of those judgments, he had in his just wrath brought upon
his own people Israel for their sins, upon their repentance.

For this purpose there are sundry instances given in the Psalm,. 2. and
matter of this Psalm.
taken out of the Histories of former times: out of which there is framed as it
were a Catalogue, though not of all, yet of sundry the most famous rebellions
of that people against their God, and of Gods both justice and mercy abundantly
manifested in his proceedings with them thereupon. In all which we may observe
the passages betwixt God and them, in the ordinary course of things, ever to
have stood in this order. First, he preuenteth them with undeserved favors:
they unmindful of his benefits, provoke him by their rebellions: he in his
just wrath chasticeth them with heavy plagues: they humbled under the rod,
seek to him for ease: he upon their submission withdraws his judgments
from them. The Psalmist has wrapped all these five together in Verse. 43.44.
Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their counsels,
and were brought low for their iniquity: the three first. Nevertheless he
regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry: the other two.

The particular rebellions of the people in this Psalm instanced in,. 3. The
Coherence, scepe,
are many; some before, and some after the verse of my Text. For brevity sake,
those that are in the following verses I wholly omit: infidelity and cowardice
upon the first approach of danger at the Red sea, verse 7. Their tempting of
God in the desert, when loathing Manna verse 13. Their seditious conspiracy
under Corah and his confederates against Moses, verse 16. Their gross
Idolatry at Horeb in making and worshipping the golden calfe, verse 19. Their
distrustful murmuring at their portion, in thinking scorn of the promised
pleasant land, verse. 24. Their fornicating both bodily with the daughters, and
spiritually with the Idols ver. 28. To the prosecution of which last mentioned
story, the words of my Text do appertain. The origin story it self, whereto
this part of the Psalm refers, is written at full by Moses in Numb. 25. and
here by David but Breuiter totum dixit: quia non hic nescientes docet, sed
commemorat scientes. Augustine. hic.
briefly touched, as the present purpose and occasion led him. Yet so, as that
the most obseruable passages of the History are here remembered: in three verses
three special things, The Sin, the Plague, the Deliverance. The Sin, with
the Aggrauation thereof, verse. 28. [ They joined themselves also unto
Baal-Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.] The Plague, with the Efficient
cause thereof, both Impulsive and Principal, verse. 29. [ Thus they provoked
him to anger with their Inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them.] The
Deliverance, with the special means and Instrument thereof, in this 30.
verse. [ Then stood up Phinehaz, and executed judgment, and the plague was
stayed.]

In which words are three things especially considerable. The Person; the
Action of that Person;. 4. and Division of the Text.
and the Success of that Action. The Person, Phinehaz. His Action twofold: the
one preparatory, he stood up; the other completory, he executed judgment.
The Success and issue of both; the plague was stayed. The person holy, the
action zealous, the success happy. Of each of these I shall endeavor to
speak something; appliably to the present condition of these heavy times, and
the present occasion of this frequent assembly. But because the argument of the
whole verse is a Deliverance, and that Deliverance supposes a Plague, and
every Plague supposes a Sin: I must take leave before I enter upon the
Particulars now proposed from the Text, first a little to unfold the original
story; that so we may have some more distinct knowledge both what Isreal's sin
was, and how they were plagued, and upon what occasion and by what means
Phinehaz wrought their deliverance.

When Israel, travailing from the land of Bondage to the land of Promise
through the Wilderness,. 5. Balacs plotte;
were now come as far as Number. 22.1.
the plains of Moab, and there encamped: Balac the then King of Moab, not
Ibid. 2.3.
daring to encounter with that people, before whom Sihon, K. of the Amorites;
and Og. K. of Basan. Numb. 21.
two of his greatest neighbor Princes had lately fallen; Ascitos seniores
Madiani, qui proximi regno eius erant, and amici, consuluit, quid facto opus
esset. Hist Scholast. i^ Number. c. ^2.
consulted with the Midianites, his neighbors and allies, and after some
advice resolved upon this conclusion, to hire Number. 22.5 -- 7.
Balaam, a famous Sorcerer in those times and quarters, to lend them his
assistance: plotting with all their might, and his art, by all possible means
to withdraw Gods protection from them; wherein they thought (and they thought
right) the strength and safety of that people lay. But there is no Counsel
against the Lord; nor Number. 23.23.
enchantment against his people. Where he will bless, (and he will bless
where he is faithfully obeyed and depended upon;) neither power nor policy can
prevail for a Curse. Balaam the wicked wretch, though he 2 Pet. 2.15.
loved the ways of unrighteousness with his heart; yet, God not suffering
him, he could not pronounce a Curse with his lips against Israel, but instead
of cursing them, Number. 2^.11. and 24.10.
blessed them altogether.

. 6. and Balaams policy, against Israel:
But angry at Israel, whom, when feign he would, he could not curse; yea and
angry at God himself, who by restraining his tongue had voyded his hopes, and
Number. 24.11.
with held him from pay, and honor: the wretched covetous Hypocrite, as if he
would at once be avenged both of him and them, imagines a mischievous device
against them, full of cursed villainy. He gives the Moabites and the
Midianites Number. 31.16. Revel. 2.14. See also Joseph. 4. Antiquit. Iud. 5.
counsel to smother their hatred with pretensions of peace, and by sending the
fairest of their daughters among them, to enu^igle them with their beauty, and
to entice them first to corporal, and after, by that, to spiritual whoredom:
That so Israel, shrinking from the Love and Fear and Obedience of their God*
might forfeit the interest they had in his Protection; and by sin bring
themselves under that wrath and curse of God, which neither those great Princes
by their Power, nor their wisest Counselors by their Policy, nor Balaam
himself by his Sorcery, could bring upon them.

This damned counsel was followed but too soon, and prospered but too well..
with the success thereof; both in their Sin,
The daughters of Moab come into the Tents of Israel; and by their
blandishments put out the eyes, and steal away the hearts of Gods people:
whom, besotted once with lust, it was then no hard matter to lead whither they
listed, and by wanton insinuations to draw them to sit with them in the
Temples, and to accompany them at the Number. 25.2.
feasts, and to eat with them of the sacrifices, yea and to bow the knees with
them to the honor of their Idols. Insomuch as Israel Psalm. 106.28.
joined themselves to Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of that dead and
abominable Idol at the least (for all Idols are such) if not, as most have
thought, a quem Graecia Priapum dixit. Hist. Scolast. in Number. c. 34. and alij
secuti Hieronymum in c 9. Osee; and 1. cont. Io. 12. See Vatabl. in Number. 25.3.
Seldem. Synt. 1. de DIs Sir. c. 5. Lael. Biscio^. 3. hor. subces. 20.
beastly and obscene Idol withal. That was their sin.

And now may Balak save his money,. 8. and Punishment.
and Balaam spare his pains: there is no need of hiring, or being hired to
curse Whoremongers and Idolaters. These are two plaguey sins: and such as will
bring a curse upon a people without the help of a Coniurer. When that God, who
is a Exodus 20 5.
jealous God, and jealous of nothing more than his Esa. 42.8.
honor, shall see that people, whom he had made Deuteronomy. 7.6.
choice of from among all the nations of the earth to be his own peculiar
people, and betrothed to himself by an everlasting Ezekiel. 16.8.
Covenant, to Ibid. 38.
break the Covenant of Wedlock with him, and to strumpet it with the
daughters and Idols of Moab: what can be expected other, than that his
jealousy should be turned into fury; and that his fierce wrath should Psalm.
106.29.
breake-in upon them as a deluge, and ouerwhelme them with a sudden
destruction? His patience so far tempted, and with such an unworthy
provocation, can suffer no longer: But at his command Number. 25.4.5
Moses strikes the Rulers; and at Moses his command, the vnder-Rulers must
strike each in their several regiments, those that had offended; and he
himself also strikes with his own hand, by a plague destroying of them in
one day 1 Cor. 10.8. the other thousand (Number. 25.9.) it seems were those,
that were hanged up by Moses, and slain by the Rulers.
three and twenty thousand.

. 9. Zimri's provocation;
If that plague had lasted many days, Israel had not lasted many days. But
the people by their plague made sensible of their sin, humbled themselves (as
it should seem, the very first day of the plague) in a solemn and Number. 25.6.
general assembly, weeping and mourning both for Sin and Plague, before the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And they were now in the heat of
their holy sorrow and devotions, when lo Ibid. 14.
Zimri, a Prince of a chief house in one of their Tribes, in the heat of his
pride and lust, comes openly in the Ibid. 6.
face of Moses and all the Congregation, and brings his Minion with him,
Cosbi the daughter of one of the Compare Number. 25.15. with Number. 31.8.
five Kings of Midian into his Tent, there to commit filthiness with her.

. 10. and his execution.
Doubtless Moses the Captain, and Ele^zar the Priest, and all Israel that saw
this shameless pranke of that lewd couple, saw it with grief enough. But
Phinehes enraged with a pious indignation to see such foul affront given to
God; and the Magistrate, and the Congregation, at such a heavy time, and in
such open manner, and for that very sin for which they then lay under Gods
hand; thought there was something more to be done than bare weeping: and
therefore his blood warmed with an holy zeal, he Number. 25.7.8
starteth up forthwith, makes to the Tent where these two great personages
were, and as they were in the act of their filthiness, speedeth them both at
once; and nay^eth them to the place with his Iaueline. And the next thing we
hear, is; God well pleased with the ibid. 11.
zeal of his servant, and the execution of those malefactors, is appeased
toward his people, and withdraws his hand and his plague from them. And of
that deliverance my Text speaks; [ Then stood up Phinehes, and executed
judgment, and so the Plague was stayed.]

The Person, the instrument to work this deliverance for Israel, was
Phinehes.. 11. The Person of Phinebes considered.
He was the son of Eleazar, who was then High Priest in immediate succession
to his father Aaron not long before deceased: and did himself afterward
succeed in the High Priesthood unto Eleazar his Father. A wise, a godly, and a
zealous man: employed afterward by the State of Israel in the greatest
affairs both of Number. 31.6.
War and Ios. 22.13.31.32.
Ambassy. But it was this Heroical act of his, in doing execution upon those
two great audacious offenders, which got him the first, and the greatest, and
the lastingst renown. Of which Act more anon, when we come to it. In his
Person, we will consider only what his calling and condition was; and what
congruitie there might be between what he was, and what he did. He was of the
Tribe of Leui: and that whole Tribe was set apart for the Number. 1.^9. etc.
service of the Tabernacle. And he was of the sons of Aaron, and so (...), of
the Family and Lineage of the High Priests: and the Priests office was to offer
sacrifices and to burn incense, and to pray and make atonement for the
People. Neither Leuite nor Priest had to intermeddle with matters of
Judicature, unless in some few causes, and those for the most part concerning
matters either merely, or mixtly Ecclesiastical: but neither to give
sentence, nor to do execution, in matters and causes merely Civil, as by any
right or virtue of his Leuiticall or Priestly office.

. 12. The Spiritual Power does not include the Temporal;
The more unreasonable is the High Priest of Rome, to challenge to himself any
temporal or civil jurisdiction, as virtually annexed to his spiritual Power,
or necessarily derived thence. Templu^ and Praetorium, the Chair and the
Throne, the Altar and the Bench, the Sheepehooke and the Scepter, the Keys and
the Sword; though they may sometimes concur upon the same person, yet the
Powers remain perpetually distinct and independent, and such as do not of
necessity infer the one the other. Our Saviors Luke 22.26.
Vos autem non sic has fully decided the Controversy; and for ever cut off
all claim of temporal jurisdiction, as by any virtue annexed to the keys. If
the Bishops of Rome could have contented themselves to have enjoyed those
Temporalties, wherewith the bounty of Christian Emperors had endowed that Sea
(whether well, or ill, whether too much, or no, I now inquire not) but if they
could have bin content to have holden them upon the same terms they first had
them, without seeking to change the old tenure; and to have acknowledged them,
as many of their fellow-Bishops do, to have issued not at all by necessary
deriuation from their spiritual Power, but merely and altogether from the Nec
in que^qua^ Presbyterum, Episcopum, sieve Papam, conuenit conctiuam in ^oc
saeculo iurisdictionem sibi habeve; nisi eadem sibi per humanu^ legislatorem
concessa fuerit, in cuius potestate est hanc ab ipsis semper reuocare. Marsil.
Patau. 2. defens pacis. 5.
free and voluntary indult of Temporal Princes: the Christian Church had not
had so just cause of complaint against the insufferable tyrannies and
usurpations of the Papacy; nor had the Christian world been embroyled in so
many unchristian and bloody quarrels, as these and former ages have brought
forth. Yet the Canonists, and they of the Congregation of the Oratory, like
downright flatterers, give the Pope the Temporal Monarchy of the world,
absolutely and Papa iure diuino est direct dominus Orbis. Pesant. de immunit.
Eccles. page 45.

idem desendunt Baronius, Bosii duo, Zecchus, Care^ius, alii.


directly, as adhering inseparable to his Sea, and as a branch of that Charter,
which Christ gave to Peter, when he made him Head of the Church, for himself
and his successors for ever. The Jesuits more subtle than they, not daring to
deny the Pope any part of that Power, which any other profession of men have
dared to give him, and yet unable to assert such a vast power from these
inconveniences which follow upon the Canonists opinion; have found out a means
to put into the Popes hands the exercise of as much temporal Power, as they
bluntly and grossly give him, and that to all effects and purposes as full and
in as ample manner as they: yet by a more learned and refined flattery, as
resulting from his spiritual Power, not directly and per se, but See Bellarm.
5. de Romans Pontif. 6.
obliquely and indirectly and in ordine ad spiritualia, The Man himself, though
he pretend to be supreme infallible judge of all Controversies; yet hears
both parties, and takes advantage of what either give him, as best sorteth
with his present occasions, and suffers them to fall foul each upon other,
these accounting them gross flatterers, and they again these aduersus impios
politicos. Carer. de potest. in titulo libri.
wicked Politicians: but dares not for his life determine whether side is in
the right; lest, if he should be put to make good his determination by
sufficient proof, both should appear to be in the wrong, and he lose all;
which, whilst they quarrel, he still holds. It is a certain thing; The
spiritual Power conferred in Holy Orders does not include the Power of
Temporal jurisdiction. If Phinehes here execute judgment upon a Prince of
Israel; it is indeed a good fruit of his zeal, but no proper act of his
Priesthood.

. 13. nor yet exclude it.
Let it go for a non sequitur then, as it is no better; because Phinehes, a
Priest, or Priests son, executed judgment, that therefore the Priestly
includes Iudicatory Power. Yet from such an Act, done by such a Person, at
least thus much will follow, that the Priesthood does not exclude the exercise
of Judicature; and that there is no such repugnancy and inconsistency between
the Temporal and Spiritual Power, but that they may without incongruitie
concur and reside both together in the same Person. When I find anciently,
that not only among the ac Regis quidem haec munia esset iussit, primum, vt
sacrorum, and sacrificiorum principatum baberet -- Dyonis. Halicar. lib. 2.

See also Cic. 1. de divine.

(...). de Aegyptiis Plutarch lib. de Is. and Osir.


Heathens, but even among Gods own people, the same man might be a King and a
Priest, Virgil. 3. Aeneid
Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos, as Melchisedec was both a Genesis 14.18.
Priest of the most High God, and King of Salem: when I see it consented by
all, that so long as the Church was Patriarchall, the Priestly and the
Iudicatorie Power were both settled upon one and the same person, the Person of
the Sacerdotium fuit annexum primogeniturae vsque ad legem datam per Mosen.
Lyran. in Gen 14.18. See also Lyran. in Numb. 3.12. and 8.16. etc.
firstborn: when I read of Elie the Priest of the sons of Aaron 1. Sam.
4.18.
judging Israel 40. years; and of Samuel, certainly a Leuite (though not, as
Aug. 17. de ciuit. 4. and in Psalm. 98. Sulpit Sever. lib. 1. Hist. sacrae.
some have thought, Leuita Samuel, non Sacerdos, non Pontifex fuit. Hieron.
lib. 1. contra Iouin v. Drus. not. ad Sulpit. Hist. p. 154
a Priest) both going circuit, as a 1. Sam. 7.16.
Judge itinerant in Israel, and doing execution too with his own hands upon 1.
Sam. 15.33.
Agag; and of 1. Chro. 26.29 -- 32.
Chenaniah and his sons, Izharites, and Hashabiah and his brethren
Hebronites, and others of the families of Leui, appointed by King David to be
Judges and Officers, not only in all the business of the Lord, but also for In
omni negotio diuino, and humano. Vatab. in 1. Parab. 26.
outward business over Israel, and in things that concerned the service of the
King: when I observe in the Church-stories of all ages, ever since the world
had Christian Princes; how Ecclesiastical persons have been employed by their
sovereigns in their waightiest consultations and affairs of State; I cannot
but wonder at the inconsiderate rashness of some forward ones in these days,
who yet think themselves (and would be thought by others) to be of the wisest
men, that suffer their tongues to run riot against the Prelacy of our Church,
and have studied to approve themselves eloquent in no other argument so much,
as in inueighing against the Courts, and the Power, and the Jurisdiction, and
the Temporalties of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons. I speak it not
to justify the abuses of men, but to maintain the lawfulness of the thing.
If therefore any Ecclesiastical person seek any Temporal office or Power by
indirect, ambitious, and preposterous courses: if he exercise it otherwise
than well; insolently, cruelly, corruptly, partially: if he claim it by any
other than the right title, the free bounty and grace of the supreme
Magistrate: let him bear his own burden; I know not any honest Minister that
will plead for him. But since there is no incapacitie in a Clergyman, by
reason of his spiritual Calling, but he may exercise temporal Power, if he
be called to it by his Prince, as well as he may enjoy temporal Land if he be
heir to it from his Father: I see not but it behooves us all, if we be good
Subjects and sober Christians, to pray that such, as have the power of
Judicature more or less in any kind or degree committed unto them, may
exercise that power wherewith they are entrusted, with zeal and prudence and
equity, rather than out of envy at the preferment of a Churchman take upon us
little less than to quarrel the discretion of our Sovereigns. Phinehes,
though he could not challenge to execute judgment by virtue of his Priesthood;
yet his Priesthood disabled him not from executing judgment.

. 14. Phinehes his fact examined,
That for the Person. Follows his Action: and that twofold; He stood up, He
executed judgment. Of the former first; which, though I call it an Action, yet
is indeed a Gesture properly, and not an Action. But, being no necessity to
bind me to strict propriety of speech, be it Action, or Gesture, or what else
you will call it, the circumstance and phrase, since it seems to import some
material thing, may not be passed over without some consideration. Then stood
up Phinehes. Which clause may denote unto us, either that extraordinary spirit
whereby Phinehes was moved to do judgment upon those shameless offenders; or
that forwardness of zeal, in the heat whereof he did it; or both. Phinehes
was indeed the High Priests son, as we heard; but yet a private man, and no
ordinary Magistrate: and what had any private man to do to draw the sword of
justice, or but to sentence a malefactor to dye? Or, say he had been a
Magistrate; he ought yet to have proceeded in a legal and judicial course, to
have conuented the parties, and when they had been convicted in a fair trial
and by sufficient witness, then to have adjudged them according to the Law;
and not to have come suddenly upon them (...), as they were acting their
villainy, and thrust them through uncondemned. I have Sermon. 2. ad Cler. 30.
elsewhere delivered it as a collection not altogether improbable from the
circumstances of the original story, that Phinehes had warrant for this
execution from the express command of Moses the supreme Magistrate, and namely
by virtue of that Proclamation, whereby he authorized the Number. 25.5.
vnder-Rulers to slay every one his men that were joined unto Baal-Peor, Number.
25.5. And I since find that conjecture confirmed by the judgment of some
learned men: insomuch as an eminent Writer in our Church says, that Hall. 7.
Contempl. 4.
by virtue of that Commission every Israelite was made a Magistrate for this
execution. But looking more nearly into the Text, and considering that the
Commission Moses there gave, was first only to the Rulers, and so could be no
warrant for Phinehes, unless he were such a Ruler, which appears not; and
secondly, concerned only those men that were under their several governments,
and so was too short to reach Zimri, who being himself a Prince, and that of
another Tribe too, the Tribe of Number. 25.14.
Simeon, could not be under the government of Phinehes, who was of the Tribe
of Leui: how probable soever that other collection may be, yet I hold it the
safer resolution which is commonly given by Divines for the justification of
this fact of Phinehes, that he had an extraordinary notion and a peculiar
secret instinct of the Spirit of God, powerfully working in him, and prompting
him to this Heroical Act.

. 15. and justified:
Certainly, God will not approve that work, which himself has not wrought.
But to this Action of Phinehes God has given large approbation, both by
staying the plague thereupon, and by rewarding Phinehes with an Number. 2^.12.13.
everlasting Priesthood therefore, and by giving express testimony of his
zeal and righteousness therein: as it is said in the next verse after my
Text, [ Psalm. 106.31.
And it was accounted to him for righteousness.] Which words in the judgment
of learned Expositours, are not to be understood barely of the righteousness
of Faith, as it is said of Abraham, that Genesis 15.6. applied by Saint Paul. Romans
4.3.
he believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness (as if the zeal
of Phinehes in this act had been a good evidence of that faith in Gods
promises, whereby he was justified, and his Person accepted with God;) though
that also: but they do withal import the justification of the Action, at
least thus far, that how soever measured by the common rules of life it might
seem an unjust action, and a rash attempt at the least, if not an heinous
murder, as being done by a private man without the warrant of authority; yet
was it indeed, not only in regard of the intent a zealous action, as done for
the honor of God, but also for the ground and warrant of it, as done by the
special secret direction of Gods holy Spirit, a just and a righteous action.
Possibly this very word of standing up imports that extraordinary spirit. For
of those Worthies, whom God at several times endowed with Heroical spirits to
attempt some special work for the delivery of his Church, the Scriptures use
to speak in words and phrases much like this. It is often said in the book of
Judges, that God Iud. 3.9.15, etc. and 2.16.18.
raised up such and such to judge Israel, and that Deborah and Iair and others
Iud. 5.7; and 10.1.3. etc.
rose up to defend Israel: that is, Iud. 3.10.
the Spirit of God came upon them, as is said of Othoniel Judge. 3. and by a
secret, but powerful instinct, put them upon those brave and noble attempts,
they undertook and effected for the good of his Church. Raised by the
impulsion of that powerful spirit, which Nescit tarda molimina spiritus Sancti
gratia. Ambros. 2. in Luc. 3.
admits no slow debatements, Phinehes stands up: and feeling himself
called not to deliberate, but act, without casting of scruples, or fore-casting
of dangers, or expecting commission from men when he had his warrant sealed
within, he takes his weapon, dispatcheth his errant, and leaves the event to
the providence of God.

. 16. yet not to be imitated,
Let no man now, unless he be able to demonstrate Phinehes spirit, presume to
imitate his fact. Those Opera liberi spiritus, as Divines call them, as they
proceeded from an extraordinary spirit, so they were done for special
purposes: but were never intended, either by God that inspired them, or by
those Worthies that did them, for ordinary or general examples. The error is
dangerous, from the privileged examples of some few exempted ones to take
liberty to transgress the common rules of Life and of Laws. It is most true
indeed, the Spirit of God is a free Spirit, and not tied to strictness of
rule, nor limited by any bounds of Laws. But yet that free spirit has
astricted thee to a regular course of life, and bounded thee with Laws: which
if thou transgress, no pretension of the Spirit can either excuse thee from
sin, or exempt thee from punishment. It is not now every way, as it was
before the coming of Christ, and the sealing up of the Scripture Canon: God
having now settled a perpetual form of government in his Church; and given us
a perfect and constant rule, whereby to walk, even his holy word. And we are
not therefore now vainly to expect, nor boastingly to pretend a private spirit,
to lead us against, or beyond, or but beside the common rule: nay we are
commanded to try all preten^ions of private spirits by that common rule. Esaias
8.20.
Ad legem and ad testimonium, to the Law, and to the Testimony: at this Test
examine and 1 Ioh. 4.1.
try the spirits, whether they are of God, or no. If any thing within us, if
any thing without us exalt it self against the obedience of this rule; it is
no sweet impulsion of the holy spirit of God, but a strong delusion of the
lying spirit of Satan.

But is not all that is written,. 17. but with limitation
written for our Example? or why else is Phinehes act recorded and commended,
if it may not be followed? First, indeed S. Paul says, Romans 15.4.
All that is written is but Learning is one thing, and Example is another; and
we learn something from that which we may not follow. Besides, there Examples
for 1 Cor. 10.11.
Admonition, as well as for Imitation. Malefactors at the place of execution,
when they wish the bystanders to take Example by them, bequeath them not
Imitation of their courses, what to do; but Admonition from their punishments,
what to shun: Yea thirdly, even substance of the Action it self; but in some
virtuous and gracious affections, that give life and luster thereunto. And so
this act of Phinehes is imitable: Not that either any private man should dare
by his example to usurp the Magistrates office, and to do justice upon
Malefactors without a Calling; or that any Magistrate should dare by his
Example, to cut off graceless offenders without a due judicial course: but
that every man, who is by virtue of his Calling endewed with lawful authority
to execute justice upon transgressors, should set himself to it with that
stoutnesse and courage and zeal, which was in Phinehes.

. 18. unto this zeal;
If you will needs then imitate Phinehes, imitate him in that, for which he is
commended and rewarded by God, and for which he is renowned amongst men: and
that is not barely the Action, the thing done; but the Affection, the zeal
wherewith it was done. For that zeal God commends him, Number. 25. verse. 11. [
Number. 25.11.
Phinehes the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away
my wrath from the children of Israel, whilst he was zealous for my sake among
them.] And for that zeal God rewards him, Ibid. verse. 13. [ Ibid. 13.
He shall have and his seed after him the Covenant of an everlasting
Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God.] And for that zeal, did
posterity praise him: the wise Sirac. 45.23.
son of Sirac, Eccl. 45. and good old 1 Maccab. 2.54.
Mattathias upon his deathbed, 1 Macc. 2. And may not this phrase of speech,
He stood up and executed judgment, very well imply that forwardness and heat
of zeal? To my seeming it may. For whereas Moses and all the Congregation sat
weeping (a As. Neh. 1.4. Job. 2.13. Psalm. 137.1. Esaias. 47.1.8.
gesture often accompanying sorrow,) or perhaps, yet more to express their
sorrow, lay graueling upon the Earth, mourning and sorrowing for their sin,
and for the Plague: it could not be, but the bold lewdness of Zimri in
bringing his strumpet with such impudence before their noses, must needs add
much to the grief, and bring fresh vexation to the souls of all that were
righteous among them. But the rest continued, though with double grief, yet in
the same course of humiliation, and in the same posture of body, as before.
Only Phinehes, burning with an holy indignation, thought it was now no time to
sit still, and weep: but rowzing up himself, and his spirits with zeal as
hot as fire, Solida mente. Cassiodorus; Constanter. Lyranus; Constantia mentis,
and audacia operis. Ludolfus hic. He had zeal in the fear of the Lord, and
stood up with good courage of heart. Sitac. 45.23.
he stood up from the place where he was, and made have to execute judgment.

Here is a rich example for all you to imitate,. 19. Manifested by executing
Judgment
whom it does concern: I speak not only, nor indeed so much, to you the
Honorable and reverend Judge of this Circuit; of whose zeal to do justice
and judgment I am by so much the better persuaded, by how much the eminency of
your place, and the weight of your charge, and the expectation of the people
does with greater importunity Maiora populus semper a summo exigit. Senec. in
Octau. Act. 2.
exact it at your hands: But I speak withal, and most especially to all you,
that are in commission of the Peace, and whose daily and continual care it
should be, to see the wholesome laws of the Realm duly and seasonably
executed. Yea, and to all you also, that have any office appertaining to
justice, or any business about these Courts, so as it may lie in you to give
any kind of furtherance to the speeding either of Justice in Civil, or of
judgment in Criminal causes. Look upon the zeal of Phinehes: observe what
approbation it had from God; what a blessing it procured to his seed after him,
what glorious renown it has won him with all after-ages; what ease it did,
and what good it wrought for the present state: and think if it be not worthy
your imitation. Gal. 4.18.
It is good, says the Apostle, to be zealously affected always in a good
thing. And is it not a good thing to do justice, and to execute judgment?
nay, Religion excepted (and the care of that is a branch of justice too) do
you know any better thing? any thing you can do, more acceptable to God, more
serviceable to the State, more comfortable to your own souls? If you be
called to the Magistracy; it is 3. King. 10.9.
your own business, as the proper work of your calling: and men account him
no wiser than he should be, that sluggeth in his own business, or goes
heartlesly about it. It is the Kings business, who has entrusted you with it*
and he is scarce a good subject, that slacketh the Kings business, or does it to
the halues. Nay it is the Lords business; for 2 Chro. 19.6
ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the cause and in
the judgment: and Ierem. 48.10
Cursed is he that does the Lords business negligently. That you may
therefore do (all under one) your own business, and the Kings business, and
the Lords business, with that zeal and forwardness, which becomes you in
so weighty an affair: lay this pattern before your eyes and hearts? See what
Phinehes did: and thereby both examine what hitherto you have done, and learn
what henceforth you should do.

. 20. 1 Personally;
First; Phinehes does not poast off the matter to others: the feruency of his
zeal made him willing to be himself the Actor. He harbored no such cool
thoughts; as too many Magistrates do: [Here is a shameful crime committed, by
a shameless person, and in a shameless manner: pity such an audacious
offender should go unpunished. My heart rises against him; and much ado I
have to refrain, from being my self his executioner, rather than he should
carry it away thus. But why should I derive the envy of the fact upon my self,
and but gain the imputation of a busy officious fellow, in being more forward
than others? A thousand more saw it, as well as I; whom it concerns as
nearly as it does me: and if none of them will stir in it, why should I?
Doubtless my uncle Moses, and my father Eleazar, and they that are in place of
authority will not let it pass so; but will call him to account for it, and
give him condign punishment. If I should do it, it would be thought but the
attempt of a rash young fellow. It will be better discretion therefore to
forbear, and to give my betters leave to go before me.] Such pretensions as
these would have kept off Phinehes from this noble exploit, if he had been of
the temper of some of ours: who owe it to nothing so much as their
lukewarmnesse, that they have at least some reputation of being moderate and
discreet men. But true zeal is more forward, than manerly: and will not lose
the opportunity of doing what it ought, for waiting till others begin. Alas, if
every man should be so squeamish, as many are; nothing at all would be done.
And therefore the good Magistrate must consider, not what others do; but what
both he and they are in conscience bound to do: and though there should be
many more joined with him in the same common care, and with equal power, yet
he must resolve to take that common affair no otherwise into his special
care, than if he were left alone therein, and the whole burden lay upon his
shoulders: As when sundry persons are so bound in one common bond for the
payment of one entire sum coniunctim and diuisim, every one per se in toto
and infolidum, that every particular person by himself is as well liable to
the payment of the whole, as they all together are. Admit loose or idle people
(for who can hold their tongues?) shall for thy diligence say, thou art an hard
and austere man, or busiest thy self more, than thou have First, that man
never cared to do well, that is afraid to hear ill, Eccles. 11.4.
He that observes the wind, says Solomon, shall not sow; and the words
(especially of idle people) are no Secondly, He makes an ill purchase, that
forgoeth the least part of his duty, to gain a little popularity: the breath
of the people being but a sorry plaster for a wounded conscience. Thirdly,
breadth, he commonly gains it all and more in the weight, and in the length
of his Credit. A kind quiet man; that carries it for the present and in the
voice of the multitude: but it is the more solid and the more lasting praise
to be reputed in the opinion of the better and the wiser sort a Just man, and a
good Patriot, or Common-wealths-man. Fourthly, if all should condemn thee for
that, wherein thou have done but Regium est, cum recte feceris, audire male.
well: thy comfort is, thine own conscience shall bestead thee more than a
thousand witnesses, and stand for thee against ten thousand tongues, at that
last great day, when 1 Cor. 4.5.
the hearts of all men shall be made manifest, and every man that has deserved
well shall have praise of God, and not of man.

. 21. 2 Speedily;
Secondly, Phinehes as he did not poast off this execution to other men, so
he did not put it off to another day. Phinehes might have thought thus [Wee
are now in a religious work, humbling our selves in a public solemn and
frequent assembly before the face of God to appease his just wrath against us
for our sins: Virgil. Eclog. 9.
Et quod nunc instat agamus. It would be unseasonable leaving this work now:
another time may serve as well to inflict deserved punishment upon that wicked
miscreant.] But zeal will admit no Qui tarde fecit, diu. noluit. Senec. 1. de
benef. 1.
put-offs; it is all upon the spur, till it be doing what it conceiueth fit
to be done. There are no passions of the mind so impetuous, and so impatient
of delay as Odit verus amor, nec patitur moras. Senec. in Here. sur. act. 2.
Love and Dum poenas ^di: per vim festinat inulto. Horat 1. Epist. 2.
Anger: and Nunc ira, amorque causam junxere: quid sequetur? Senec. in med.
act. 4.
these two are the prime ingredients of true zeal. If any man should have
interposed for Zimri, and taken upon him to have mediated with Phinehes for his
repriuall: I verily think, in that heat he might sooner have provoked his
own, than have prorogued Zimries execution. Delays in any thing that is good,
are ill: and in the best things, worst. As Wax when it is chafed, and Iron
when it is hot, will take impressions: but if the seal or stamp be not
speedily put to, the heat abateth, and they return to their former hardness:
so the best affections of the best men, if they be not taken in the heat,
abate, and lessen, and dye. In the administration then of Justice, and the
execution of Judgment, where there is Zeal, there will be Expedition: and the
best way to preserve Zeal where it is, is to use Expedition. I am not able to
say where the want is, or where specially; but certainly a great want there is
generally in this Kingdom of Zeal to Justice in some that should have it, if
that complaint be as just, as it is common among men that have had suites in
the Courts, that they have been Saepe causas tantum differunt, quod
litigantibus plus quam totum au^erunt: quia mayor est expensarum sumptus, quam
sententiae fructus. Innocent.
wronged with far less damage than they have been righted: there have been
so many Bernard. lib. 1. de consid.
frustratoriae and venatoriae dilationes (as S. Bernard in his times called
them) so many lingering and costly delays used. And for Executing Judgment
upon Malefactors; if Phinehes had suffered Zimri to have lived but a day
longer, for any thing we know the plague might have lasted also a day longer:
and why might not to morrow have been as yesterday with them, and lessened the
peoples number 23. thousand more: especially their former crying sins having
received a new accession of a double guilt, the guilt of Zimries fact, and the
guilt of their conniuence. No rack should make me confess, that man to be
truly zealous of Judgment, who when he has power to cut him short, shall
but so much as repriue a foul and notorious Malefactor; or grant him any
respite or liberty to make his friends, and to sue a pardon. Solomon has told
us, and we find it but too true; Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Thirdly;. 22. 3. Resolutely.
Phinehes was nothing retarded in his resolution by forecasting what ill will
he might purchase, or into what dangers he might cast himself by executing
judgment upon two such great personages. The times were such, as wherein sin
had gotten head, and was countenanced both with might and multitude: Zimri was
a mighty man, a Number. 25.14.
Prince of a chief house; and he that should dare to touch him should be like
to pull upon himself the enmity of the whole Tribe of Simeon. It seems he
was confident that his might, and popularity in his own Tribe, would
privilege him from the enquiry of the Magistrate; how durst he else have so
braued Moses, and the whole Congregation? And the Woman also was the daughter
of one of the Number. 25.15. compared with Number. 31.8.
five Kings of Midian: and could Phinehes think that the death of two such
great persons could go unrevenged? All this Phinehes either forecasteth not,
or regards not. His eye was so fixed upon the glory of God, that it did not
so much as reflect upon his own safety: and his thoughts strongly possessed
with zeal of the common good, had not any leisure to think of private
dangers. Zeal is ever Amor timere neminem verus potest. Senec. in Med. act. 3.
courageous; and therefore Iethro thought none worthy to be Magistrates, but
such as were (...), viros virtutis. Exodus 18.21. Iuscum esse facile est, cui
vacat pectus metu. Senec. in Oct. act. 2.
men of courage: And he has neither Courage nor Zeal in him befitting a
Magistrate, that is afraid to do justice upon a great offender Prou. 22.13.
and 26.13.
The sluggard says there is a Lion in the way: and then he steppeth backward
and keeps aloof off. But the worthy Magistrate would meet with such a Lion to
choose; that he might win awe to Gods Ordinance, and make the way passable for
others, by tearing such a beast in pieces: and would no more fear to make a
Worshipful thief, or a Right worshipful murderer (if such a one should come
in his Circuit) an example of Justice, than to twitch up a poor
sheepestealer. Great ones will soon presume of impunity, and mean ones too by
their example in time learn to kick at authority; if Magistrates be not
forward to maintain the dignity of their places, by executing Gods Laws
without favor or fear. Hitherto of the spirit and zeal of Phinehes; by
occasion of this his former Action or gesture of standing up: There yet remain
to be considered the other action, and the success of it; He executed
judgment, and the plague was stayed. Both which, because I would not be long,
I will ioyn together in the handling; when "I shall have first a little cleared
the translation.

. 23. Executing of Judgment
The Hebrew (...) here used is a word, that has three different
significations: to Judge, to Pray, to Appease. And Interpreters have taken
liberty to make choice of any of the three in translating this place. The
Greek rendereth it [(...),] and the vulgar Latin, which for the most part
follows the Septuagint, [ Placauit:] as if we should read it thus, Then
stood up Phinehes, and made an atonement, or appeased God. And the thing is
true, God himself testifying of Phinehes, Numb. 25. that Number. 25.11.
by being zealous for God he had turned away his wrath, and Ibid. 13.
made atonement for the children of Israel. The Chaldee interprets it by
Vetsalle; and the ordinary English translation of the Psalms usually read in
our Churches accordingly, [ Then stood up Phinehes, and prayed.] But Hierome
and Vatablus and the best translatours render it according to the most proper
signification of the word, and most fully to the story it self, [ Dijudicauit,
He executed Judgment.] Verily Prayer is a special means to appease Gods
wrath, and to remove his Plagues; and Prayer is as the salt of the Sacrifice,
sanctifying and seasoning every Action we undertake: and I doubt not but
Phinehes, when he lift up his hand to execute judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi,
did withal lift up his heart to God to bless that action, and to turn it to
good. In which respects, (especially if the word withal will bear it, as it
seems it will,) some men should have done well not to have shown so much
willingness to quarrel at the Church-translations in our Seruice-booke, by
being clamorous against this very place as a gross corruption, and sufficient
to justify their refusal of subscription to the Book. But I will not now
trouble either you or my self, with farther curiosity in examining
translations: because howsoever other translations, that render it praying, or
appeasing, may be allowed either as tolerably good, or at least excusably ill;
yet this that rendereth it by Executing Judgment is certainly the best,
whether we consider the course of the Story it self, or the propriety of the
word in the Original, or the intent of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture. And
this Action of Phinehes in doing judgment upon such a pair of great and bold
offenders was so well pleasing unto God, that his wrath was turned away from
Israel, and the plague which had broken-in upon them in a sudden and fearful
manner, was immediately stayed thereupon.

. 24. appeased the wrath of God;
Oh how acceptable a sacrifice to God, above the blood of Bulls and of Goats,
is the death of a Malefactor slaughtered by the hand of Justice! When the
Magistrate, who is Romans 13.4.
(...), the Minister and Priest of God for this very thing, puts his knife
to the throat of the Beast, and with the fire of an holy zeal for God against
sin offers him up in Holocaustum for a whole burnt offering, and for a
peace offering unto the Lord. Samuel ^aith, that 1 Samuel 15.22
to obey is better than sacrifice: and Solomon, that Prou. 21.3.
to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord, than sacrifice.
Obedience, that is the prime, and the best sacrifice: and the second best is
the punishment of Disobedience. There is no readier way to appease Gods wrath
against sin, than is the rooting out of sinners: nor can his deputies by any
other course turn away his just judgments so effectually, as by faithfully
executing of Justice and Judgment themselves.

. 25. and stayed the Plague.
When Phinehes did this act, the public body of Israel was in a weak state,
and stood need of a present and sharp remedy. In some former distempers of the
state, it may be they had found some ease by diet, in Psalm. 35.13.
humbling their souls by fasting; or by an issue in the tongue or eye, in an
humble confession of their sins, and in weeping and mourning for them with
tears of repentance. And they did well now to make trial of those remedies
again, wherein they had found so much help in former times: especially the
remedies being proper for the malady, and such as often may do good, but never
can do harm. But alas, fasting, and weeping and mourning before the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation had not strength enough against those more
preualent corruptions, wherewith the State of Israel was then pestered. This
Phinehes saw: who well perceived, that (as in a dangerous pleurisy the party
cannot live unless he bleed; so) if there were any good to be done upon
Israel in this their little less than desperate estate, a vein must be
opened, and some of the rank blood let-out for the preservation of the rest of
the body. This course therefore he tryes: and languishing Israel finds
present ease in it. As soon as the blood ran, instantly the grief ceased:
He executed judgment, and the plague was stayed.

As God brought upon that people for their sins a fearful destruction:. 26.
Englands Plague.
so he has in his just wrath sent his destroying Angel against us for ours.
The sins that brought that plague upon them were Whoredom and Idolatry. I
cannot say the very same sins have caused ours. For although the execution of
good Laws against both incontinent and idolatrous persons, has been of late
years, and yet is (we all know) to say no more slack enough: yet, (Gods holy
name be blessed for it) neither Idolatry nor Whoredom are at that height of
shameless impudency and impunity among us, that they dare brave our Moseses,
and outface whole Congregations, as it was in Israel. But still this is sure,
No plague, but for sin: nor national Plagues, but for National sins. So
that albeit none of us may dare to take upon us to be so far off Gods
counsel, as to say for what very sins most this plague is sent among us: yet
none of us can be ignorant, but that besides those secret personal corruptions
which are in every one of us, and whereunto every man's own heart is privy,
there are many public and national sins, whereof the people of this Land
are generally guilty, abundantly sufficient to justify God in his dealings
toward us, and to Psalm. 51.4.
clear him when he is judged. Our wretched unthankfulness unto God for the
long continuance of his Gospel, and our Peace: our carnal confidence and
security in the strength of our wooden and watery walls: our riot and excess
(the noted proper sin of this Nation) and much intemperate abuse of the good
creatures of God in our meats and drinks and disports and other provisions
and comforts of this life: our Incompassion to our brethren miserably wasted
with War and Famine in other parts of the world: our heavy Oppression of our
brethren at home, in racking the rents, and cracking the backs, and Esaias 3.15.
grinding the faces of the poor: our cheap and irreuerent regard unto Gods
holy ordinances of his Word, and Sacraments, and Sabbaths, and Ministers: our
Wantonness and Toyishnesse of understanding, in corrupting the simplicity of
our Christian Faith, and troubling the peace of the Church with a thousand
niceties and novelties and unnecessary wranglings in matters of Religion: and
(to reckon no more) that universal Corruption which is in those which (because
they should be such) we call the Courts of Justice, by sale of offices,
enhauncing of fees, devising new subtilties both for delay and evasion,
trucking for expedition, making trappes of petty penal statutes, and but
Cobwebs of the most weighty and material Laws. I doubt not but by the mercy
of God many of his servants in this Land are free from some, and some from all
of these common crimes in some good measure: but I fear me, not the best of
us all, not a man of us all, but are guilty of all or some of them at least
thus far, that we have not mourned for the corruptions of the times so
feelingly, nor endeavored the reformation of them to our power so faithfully,
as we ought and might to have done.

By these and other sins we have provoked Gods heavy judgment against us,.
27. to be stayed, by adding to our humiliations
and the Plague is grievously broken in upon us: and now it would be good for
us to know, by what means we might best appease his wrath, and stay this
Plague. Public Humiliations have ever been thought, and so they are, proper
Remedies against Public Judgments: Joel 2.12.1^. etc. 8. Numb. 25.6.
To turn unto the Lord our God with all our heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning; to sanctify a fast, and call a solemn assembly,
and gather the people and elders together; and weep before the door of the
tabernacle of the Congregation; and to let the Priests the Ministers of the
Lord weep between the porch and the altar, and to pray the Lord to spare his
people, and be not angry with them for ever. Never did people thus humble
themselves with true lowly penitent and obedient hearts, who found not comfort
by it in the mean time, and in the end benefit. And blessed be God who has
put it into the heart of our Moses, with the consent of the Elders of our
Israel, by his royal example first, and then by his royal Proclamation for a
weekly fast, with a form of divine Service, and other directions; published
1625.
command, to lay upon us a double necessity of this so religious and
profitable a course.

. 28. the Execution of judgment.
But, as our Savior told the young man in the Gospel, who said he had kept
the whole Law, Mark. 10.21.
Vnum tibi deest, One thing is wanting: so when we have done our best and
utmost, fasted and wept and prayed as constantly and frequently as fervently as
we can; unless you the Magistrates and Officers of Justice be good unto us,
one thing will be wanting still; One maine ingredient of singular virtue,
without which the whole receipt besides, as precious and sovereign as it is,
may be taken, and yet fail the cure. And that is, the severe and fearlesse
and impartial Execution of Judgment. Till we see a care in the Gods on earth
faithfully to execute theirs; our hopes can be but faint, that the God of
heaven will in mercy remove his judgments. If God send a 2 Samuel 21.1. etc.
Famine into the land; let holy David do what he can otherwise, it will
continue year after year: so long as judgment is not done upon the bloody
house of Saul, for his cruelty in slaying the Gibeonites, God will not be
Ibid. ver. 14.
entreated for the land. One known Achan, that has got a wedge of gold by
sacrilege or injustice, if suffered, is able to Ios. 7.25.26.
trouble a whole Israel: and the Lord will I will not be with you anymore,
except you destroy the accursed from among you. verse. 12.
not turn from the fierceness of his anger, till he have deserved judgment
done upon him. If Number. 25.3.4
Israel have joined himself unto Baal-Peor so as the anger of the Lord be
kindled against them; he will not be appeased by any means until Moses take
the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun. If
the Land be defiled with blood, it is in vain to think of any other course,
when God himself has pronounced it impossible that the Land should be Number.
35.33.
purged from the blood that is shed in it, otherwise than by the blood of him
that shed it.

Up then with the zeal of Phinehes,. 29. A general Exhortation thereunto.
up for the love of God and of his people, all you that are in place of
authority. Gird your swords upon your thigh, and with your jauelins in your
hand pursue the Idolater, and the Adulterer, and the Murderer, and the
Oppressor, and every known offender into his tent, and nail him to the
earth, that he never rise again to do more mischief. Let it appear what
(...). Lysias apud. Stob. Sermon. 44.
love you bear to the State, by your hatred to them: and show your pity to us,
by showing none to them. The destroying Angel of God attends upon you for his
dispatch: if you would but set in stoutly, he would soon be gone. Why should
either sloth, or fear, or any partial or corrupt respect whatsoever make you
(...). Lysias apud. Stob. Sermon. 44.
cruel to the good, in sparing the bad? or why should you suffer your selves,
for want of courage and zeal to execute judgment, to lose either the
opportunity or the glory of being the instruments to appease Gods wrath, and to
stay his plagues?

. 30. With particular applications to
But, for that matters appertaining to Justice and Judgment must pass through
many hands before they come to yours; and there may be so much iuggling used
in conueighing them from hand to hand, that they may be represented unto you
many times in much different forms from what they were in truth and at the
first: that your care and zeal to execute Justice and Judgment faithfully
according to your knowledge, may not through the fault and miscarriage of other
men, fail the blessed end and success that Phinehes found; I desire that
every of them also as well as you would receive the word of Exhortation, each
in his place and office to set himself uprightly and impartially as in the
sight of God to advance to the utmost of his power the due course and
administration of Justice. And for this purpose, by occasion of this Scripture,
which points us to the End of these assemblies; I shall crave leave to
reflect upon another, which gives us sundry particular directions conducing to
that End. And it is that Scripture, whereinto we made some entrance the last
Assizes, and would have now proceeded farther, had not the heavy hand of God
upon us in this his grievous visitation led me to make choice rather of this
Text, as the more seasonable. That other is written in Exodus 23. the three
first verses. Exodus 23.1 -- 3.
[ Thou shall not raise a false report: Put not thine hand with the wicked to
be an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil:
neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment.
Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.] Wherein were noted
five special Rules, shared out among five sorts of persons; the Accuser, the
Witness, the Iurer, the Pleader, the Officer. I will but give each of them
some brief intimation of their duty, from their several proper rules; and
conclude.

If thou come hither then as a Plaintiff,. 31. the Accuser;
or other Party in a civil cause, or to give voluntary Information upon a
Statute, or to prosecute against a Malefactor, or any way in the nature of an
Accuser: Let neither the hope of gain or of any other advantage to thy self,
nor secret malice or envy against thine adversary, nor thy desire to give
satisfaction to any third party, sway thee beyond the bounds of truth and
equity no not a little; either to devise an untruth against thy neighbor of
thine own head, or by an hard construction to deprave the harmless actions
or speeches of others, or to make them worse than they are by unjust
aggrauations; or to take advantage of letters and syllables to entrap innocence
without a fault. When thou art to open thy mouth against thy brother, set the
first Rule of that Text as a watch before the door of thy lips, Thou shall not
raise a false report.

If thou come hither secondly,. 32. the Witness;
to be used as a Witness; perhaps See Cic. pro Flacco: although Turneb. 13.
aduers. 14. interpret the proverb otherwise; Graeca fide, ^d est, optima.
Graeca fide, like a downright knight of the post, that makes of an --
quibus iusiurandum jocus est, testimonium ludus: laus, merces, gratia,
gratulatio proposita est -- Cic. pro Flacc.
oath a jest, and a pastime of a deposition; or dealt withal by a bribe, or
suborned by thy landlord or great neighbor, or egged on with thine own
spleen or malice, to swear and forswear as these shall prompt thee; or to
(...). dictum solemn Graecorum.
enterchange a deposition with thy friend as they used to do in Greece, Hodie
mihi, cras tibi, swear thou for me to day, I Will swear for thee tomorrow; or
tempted with any corrupt respect whatsoever, by thy word or oath to strengthen
a false and unrighteous report: When thou come to lay thy hand upon the
book, lay the second Rule in that Text to thy heart, Put not thy hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Though hand join in hand Prou. 19.5.
and 9.
the false Witness shall not be unpunished.

. 33. the Iurer;
If thou come hither thirdly, to serve for the King upon Graund Inquest, or
between party and party, in any cause whatsoever (like those -- deinde
praetores vrbani, qui jura^i debent optimum quemque in selectos judices
refer. Cic. pro Cluent. Vnum ex selectis judicibus obijciebat. Horat. 1.
Sermon. sat. 4.
selecti judices among the Romans, whom the Praetor for the year being was to
nominate, and that upon oath, out of the most able and serviceable men in his
judgment, both for estate, understanding, and integrity;) or to serve upon the
Tales, perhaps at thine own suite to get something toward bearing charges for
thy journey; or yoaked with a crafty or a wilful foreman that is made
beforehand, and a mess of tame after-men withal, that dare not think of
being wiser than their leader; or unwilling to stickle against a mayor part,
whether they go right or wrong; or resolved already upon the Verdict, no
matter what the Evidence be: Consider what is the weight and religion of an
Oath. Remember that he sins not less, that sins with company. Whatsoever
the rest do, resolve thou to do no otherwise, than as God shall put into thy
heart, and as the evidence shall lead the. The third Rule in that Text must be
thy rule, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. They are silly, that
in point either of Religion or Justice, would teach us to measure either Truth,
or Right, by multitudes.

If thou come hither fourthly as to thine harvest,. 34 the Pleader;
to reap some fruit of thy long and expencefull study in the Laws, and to
assist thy Client and his Cause with thy Counsel, Learning, and Eloquence:
think not, because thou speak for thy Fee, that therefore thy tongue is not
thine own, but thou must speak what thy Client will have thee speak, be it
true, or false; neither think, because thou have the liberty of the Court, and
perhaps the favor of the Judge, that therefore thy tongue is thine own, and
thou may speak thy pleasure to the prejudice of the Adversaries person or
cause. Seek not preposterously to win the name of a good Lawyer, by wresting
and perverting good Laws: or the opinion of the best Counselor, by giving
the worst and the shrewdest counsel. Count it not, as Protagoras did, the
glory of thy profession, by subtilty of wit and volubility of tongue to (...).
A. Gell. 5. Noct. At. 3.
make the worse cause the better: but like a Vir bonus dicendi peritut. Cicero.
good man, as well as good Orator, use the power of thy tongue and wit to
shame impudence and protect innocence, to crush oppressors, and succor the
afflicted, to advance Justice and Equity, and to help them to right that
suffer wrong. Let it be as a ruled case to thee in all thy pleadings, Not to
speak in any cause to wrest judgment.

. 35. the Officer;
If lastly, thou art in any place or office of service, or trust, or command, or
attendance about the Courts: rejoice not as if it were now in thy power, to do
a friend a courtesy, or a foe a spite. Do not show a cast of thy office, for
the promise or hope of a reward in helping a great offender out of the Briars.
Compel not men that have been long weather-beaten in the Maine, and are now
arrived at the haven of their business, to wither for their pasports, until
they have offered some sacrifice to that great Diana Expedition. Let no fear,
or hope, or bribe, or letter, or envy, or favor, no not charity it self and
compassion to the poverty or distressednesse of any, make you partial for the
Person to disregard the Cause. If you would be charitable to the poor, give
them from your own, but do not carue them from another trencher. To relieve
a poor man in his wants, is the proper office of Charity: but Justice must
have no eyes to see, nor bowels to yearne, at the wants of any man. Be he rich
or poor, that brings his cause hither; Currat lex, Let him find such as he
brings; let him have, as his cause deserves. The last of those Rules must be
thine, Thou shall not countenance, no not a poor man in his Cause.

. 36. and the Judge.
If any of these to whom I have now spoken, Accusers, Witnesses, Iurers,
Pleaders, Officers, shall transgress these rules to the perverting of Justice:
our refuge must be next under God to you that are the Magistrates of Justice,
and sit upon the Bench of Judicature. At your gravity and authority we must
take sanctuary, against them that pursue us wrongfully, as at the horns of the
Altar. It is your Duty, (or if it be, as to most men it is, a more pleasing
thing, to be remembered of their Power, than of their Duty) it is in your power,
if not to reform all the abuses and corruptions of these persons; yet to curb
their open insolences, and to contain them at least within modest bounds.
Nay, since I have begun to magnify your power: let me speak it with all due
reverence to God and the King, there is no power so great, over which (in a
qualified sense) you have not a greater power. It is in your power; to Psalm.
75.2.3.
bear up the pillars of the State, when the land is even dissolved, and the
pillars thereof grown weak: for that is done by iudgeing the Congregation
according to right, Psalm. 75. In yours; to make this yet flourishing Country
and Kingdom glorious or despicable: for Prou. 14.34.
righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prou.
14. In yours; to settle the throne upon the King, and to entaile it by a kind
of perpetuity unto the right heir for many succeeding generations: for Prou.
16.11.
the Throne is established by Justice, Prou. 16. In yours; to discharge Gods
punishing Angel, who now destroys us with a grievous destruction, and by
unsheathing your sword to make him sheathe his: as here in my Text, Phinehes
stood up, and executed judgment, and the plague ceased. In yours; though you
be but Gods on earth, and in these Courts, mortal and petty gods, yet to send
Prohibitions into the Court of Heaven, and there to stop the judgments of the
great and Eternal God before they come forth, yea and when the decree is gone
forth, to stay execution. In a word, as it was said to Jeremy, but in another
sense, You are Ierem. 1.10.
set over Nations and over Kingdoms to root out, and to destroy, to build,
and to plant. Only then be entreated, to use that power God has given you,
unto edification, and not unto destruction. And now have I done my message. God
grant unto all of us, that by our hearty sorrow and repentance for our sins
past, by our steadfast resolutions of future amendment, and by setting our
selves faithfully and uprightly in our several places and callings to do God
and the King and our Country service, in beating down sin, and rooting out
sinners; we may by his good grace and mercy obtain pardon of our sins, and
deliverance from his wrath, and be preserved by his power through faith unto
salvation. Now to God the Father, the Son, etc.

THREE SERMONS AD POPVLVM. PREACHED IN THE PARISH CHVRCH of Grantham in the
Diocese and County of Lincoln, BY ROBERT SAVNDERSON Bachellor in Divinity,
and sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford.

PSALM. 25.10. Viae Domini Misericordia and Veritas.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for R. Dawlman, at the Sign of the Bible near the
great Conduit in Fleetstreete. 1627.

To the Right Worshipful and my much honored Lady, the Lady MILDRED
SAVNDERSON, Wife to Sir NICHOLAS SAVNDERSON, Knight and Baronet.
GOod Madame; It is not so much the kind respect, which you have for many
years past continually manifested toward me, (although that might justly
challenge from me a far more ample acknowledgement;) that has induced me
to present you with these three Sermons: as your unfeigned love to Gods truth
and Gospel, together with your religious care, by a holy and virtuous
conversation, both to strengthen your own assurances for the hopes of the life
to come; and to provoke those that are sprung from you, or live under you, by
the strength of your example, to press so much the harder toward the same
glorious mark, by the same gracious courses. To the increasing of which Love
and Care, either in you, or yours, or in any other into whose hands they may
chance to come, if these poor Meditations shall add any furtherance: I shall
have the less cause, either to blame the importunity of those that have long
urged, or to regard the censures of those that shall now mislike, the
publishing of them. The God of power, and of peace, make them profitable to his
Church; and preserve your spirit, and soul, and body, blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in the Lord, ROBERT SAVNDERSON.
Boothby Paynell Linc. 9. April 1627.
THE FIRST SERMON. At Grantham Linc. 3. October. 1620.

3 KINGS 21.29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.


THe History of this whole Chapter affoordeth matter of much Variety and Use:.
1. The Coherence,
but no passage in it so much either of Wonder or Comfort, as this in the close
of the whole both Story and Chapter. That there should be Mightie-ones sick
with longing after their meaner neighbors vineyeards; That there should be
crafty heads to contriue for greedy Great-ones what they unjustly desire; That
there should be officious Instruments to do a piece of legal injustice, upon
a Great man's letter; That there should be Knights of the poast to depose any
thing though never so false, in any cause though never so bad, against any man
though never so innocent; That an honest man cannot be secure of his life, so
long as he has any thing else Sic reus ille fere est, de quo victoria lucre
Esse potest. Ovid. de nuc^.
worth the losing: here is instance in the f^re-part of the Chapter of all this
in verse. 4. hic.
Ahab sickening, and verse. 7.
Iesabell plotting, and the verse. 11.
Elders obeying, and the verse. 13.
Witnesses accusing, and poor verse. 13.
Naboth suffering. But what is there in all this, singularly either Strange or
Comfortable? All is but Oppression: Active, in the rest; Passive, in Naboth.
And what wonder in either of these? Iuven. Satyr. 13.
-- stupet haec, qui iam post terga reliquit Sexaginta annos? himself may
pass for a wonder, if he be of any standing, or experience in the world, that
takes either of these for a wonder. And as for matter of Comfort: there is
matter indeed, but of Detestation in the one, of Pity in the other; in neither
of Comfort.

. 2. Argument,
To pass by other Occurrents also in the later part of the Chapter, as, That a
great Oppressor should hug himself in the cleanly carriage and fortunate
success of his damned plots and witty villainies; That a weak Prophet should
have heart and face enough to proclaim judgment against an Oppressing King in
the prime of his Iollitie; That a bloody Tyrant should tremble at the voice of
a poor Prophet; and the rest, (some of which we shall have occasion to
take-in incidentally in our passage along:) mark we well but this close of the
Chapter in the words of my Text; and it will be hard to say, whether it
contain matter more Strange, or more Comfortable. Comfortable: in that Gods
mercy is so exceedingly magnified; and such strong assurance given to the
truly penitent of finding gracious acceptance at the hands of their God, when
they find him so apprehensiue of but an outward enforced semblance of
Contrition from the hands of an Hypocrite. Strange: in that Gods Mercy is here
magnified, even to the hazard of other his divine perfections; his Holiness,
his Truth, his Justice. For each of these is made in some sort questionable,
that so his mercy might stand clear and unquestioned. A rotten-hearted
Hypocrite himself outwardly, but repents not truly: and God accepts him,
and rewards him. Here is Gods Mercy; in giving respect to one that ill
deserved it: but where is his Holiness the while, (being Hab. 1.13.
a God of pure eyes, that requires Psalm. 51.6.
truth in the inward parts, and will not behold iniquity;) thus to grace Sin,
and countenance Hypocrisy? A fearful judgment is denounced Ahabs house for
his Oppression: but upon his humiliation, the sentence, (at least part of it,)
is reuersed. Here is Mercy still; in reuoking a sentence of destruction: and if
somewhat may be said for his Holiness too, because it was but a temporal and
temporary favor, yet where is his Truth the while, (being a Tit. 1.2.
God that cannot lie; and James 1.17.
with whom is no variableness, neither so much as the bare shadow of turning;)
thus to say and unsay, and to alter the thing that is gone out of his lips? A
Judgment is deserved by the Father: upon his suspended during his life, and
lights upon the Son. Here is yet more Mercy; in not striking the Guilty:
and if somewhat may be said for Gods Truth too, because what was threatened,
(though not presently,) is yet 4. Kin. 10.10.
at last performed; yet where is his Justice the while, (being a 1. Pet. 1.17.
God that without respect of persons rendereth to every man according to his
own works, and will Exodus 34.7.
not acquit the guilty, neither condemn the innocent;) thus to sever the
Guilt and the Punishment, and to lay the Judgment which he spares from the
Father upon the Son, from the more wicked Father upon the less wicked Son?

. 3 and Division of the Text.
Thus God, to magnify the riches of his Mercy, is content to put his Holiness,
and his Truth, and his Justice to a kind of venture. That so his afflicted
ones might know, on what object especially to fasten the eyes of their souls:
not on his Holiness, not on his Truth, not on his Justice; not only, nor
chiefly on these, but on his Mercy. He seeks more general glory in, and
would have us take more special knowledge of, and affoordeth us more singular
comfort from his Mercy, than any of the rest: as if he desired we should
esteem him unholy, or untrue, or unjust, or any thing, rather than
unmerciful. Yet is he neither unholy, nor untrue, nor unjust, in any of his
proceedings with the sons of men: but Psalm* 145.17.
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and true in all his
words. And in this particular of his proceedings with King Ahab at this time, I
hope by his blessed assistance so to acquit his Holiness and Truth and
Justice from all sinister imputations; as that he may be not only magnified
in his mercy, but justified also in the rest, and Psalm, 51.4.
clear when he is judged: as we shall be thereunto occasioned now and
hereafter in the handling of this Scripture. Wherein are three maine things
considerable. First, the Ground, or rather the Occasion of Gods dealing so
favorably with Ahab: namely, Ahabs humiliation; [Seest thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me? because he humbles himself before me, I will not etc.]
Secondly, the great Favor showed to Ahab thereupon: namely, the suspension of
a Judgment denounced; [ I will not bring the evil in his days.] Thirdly, the
Limitation of that favor: it is but a suspension for a time, no utter
remoueall of the judgment; [ But in his sons days will I bring the evil
upon his house.] Wherein we shall be occasioned to enquire; how the first of
these may stand with Gods Holiness; the second with his Truth; the third with
his Justice. And first of Ahabs humiliation: See thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me?

This Ahab was King of Israel,. 4. Ahabs person considered;
that is, King over those ten Tribes, which revolted from Rehoboam the son of
Solomon, and claue to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. Search the whole sacred
story in the books of Kings and Chronicles; and (unless we will be so very
charitable as, notwithstanding many strong presumptions of his Hypocrisy, to
exempt Iehu the son of Nimshi, and that is but one of twenty;) we shall not
find in the whole List and Catalogue of the Kings of Israel, one good one,
that claue unto the Lord with an upright heart. Twenty Kings of Israel; and
not one, (or but one,) good: and yet than this Ahab, of the twenty, not one
worse. It is said in the sixteenth Chapter of this book, that 3. King. 16.30
Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were
before him, at verse 30; and at verse 33. that Ibid. 33.
he did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger, than all the Kings of
Israel that were before him: and at verse 25. of this Chapter, that verse. 25.
hic.
there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord. An Oppressor he was, and a Murderer, and an Idolater,
and a Persecuter of that holy Truth, which God had plentifully revealed by his
Prophets, and powerfully confirmed by Miracles, and mercifully declared by many
gracious deliverances (even to him) in such manner as that he could not but
know it to be the Truth; and therefore an Hypocrite: and in all likelihoood, an
obstinate sinner against the holy Ghost, and a Castaway.

. 5. and his carriage; with the Observations thence.
This is Ahab: this the man. But what is his carriage? what does he? he
humbles himself before the Lord. [ See thou how Ahab humbles himself
before me?] The manner and occasion of his humbling, is set down a little
before; at verse 27. And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words (the
words of verse. 20. -- 24. hic.
Eliah the Prophet, dealing plainly and roundly with him for his hateful
Oppression and Murder) that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. And that is the
humbling here spoken and allowed of: and for which God here promises, that he
will not bring the evil in his days. Lay all all this together; the man, and
his ill conditions, and his present carriage, with the occasion and success of
it: and it offers three notable things to our consideration. See first; how
Hypocrite, a Castaway may go in the outward performance of holy duties, and
particularly in the practice of Repentance: here is Ahab humbled; such a man,
and yet so penitent. See again secondly; how deep Gods word, though in the
pierces into the consciences of obstinate sinners, and brings the proudest
of them upon their knees, in despite of their hearts: here is Ahab quelled by
Eliah; such a great one, by such a weak one. See yet again thirdly; how prone
God is to mercy, and how ready Ahab humbled, and his judgment adiourned; such
a real substantial favor, and yet upon such an empty shadow of repentance.
Of these three at this time in their order: and of the first, first.

An Hypocrite may go very far in the outward performances of holy duties..
6. Obseru. 1. How far an Hypocrite may go in the performance of holy duties.
For the right conceiving of which assertion; Note first, that I speak not now
of the common graces of Illumination, and Edification, and good dexterity for
the practicing of some particular Calling; which gifts, with sundry other
like, are oftentimes found even in such apparently wicked and profane men, as
2 Mim. 3.5.
the form (much less the power) of godliness: but I speak even of those
Graces, which de tota specie (if they be true and sincere) are the undoubted
blessed fruits of Gods holy renewing Spirit of sanctification, such as are
Repentance, Faith, Hope, Joy, Humility, Patience, Temperance, Meekness,
Zeal, Reformation, etc. in such as these Hypocrites may go very far, as to
the outward semblance, and performance. secondly, that I speak not, of the
inward power and reality of these graces; for Castawayes and Hypocrites, not
having union with God by a lively faith in his Son, nor communion with him by
the effectual working of his spirit, have no part nor fellowship in these
things, which are proper to the chosen and called of God, and peculiar to those
that are his 2 Tit. 2.14.
peculiar people: but I speak only of the outward performances, and exercises
of such actions, as may seem to flow from such spiritual graces habitually
rooted in the heart; when as yet they may spring also (and, when they are found
in unregenerate men, do so spring) from Nature, perhaps moralized, or
otherwise restrained, but yet unrenewed by saving and sanctifying thirdly, that
when I say an Hypocrite may go very far in such outward performances; by the
Hypocrite is meant not only the gross or formal Hypocrite, but every natural
and unregenerate man, (including also the Elect of God before their effectual
calling and conversion,) as also Reprobates and Castawayes for the whole time
of their lives: all of which may have such fair semblances of the forenamed
Graces, and of other like them; as not only others (who are to judge the best
by the Law of Charity,) but themselves also, through the wretched
deceitfulness of their own wicked and corrupt hearts, may mistake for those
very Graces they resemble.

The Parable of the seed sown in the stony ground,. 7. with the application,
may serve for a full both declaration and proof hereof: which seed is said to
have sprouted forth immediately, Matthew. 13.5.
springing up forthwith after it was sown; but yet never came to good, but
speedily withered away, because for want of deepnesse of earth it had not Luke
8.6.
moisture enough to feed it to any perfection of growth and ripeness. And that
branch of the Parable our blessed Savior himself in his exposition applies
to such hearers; as Math. 13.20. Mark. 4.16.
when they hear the word immediately received it with gladness, and who so
forward as they to repent, and believe, and reform their lives? but yet all
that forwardness comes to nothing, they endure but for a short time, Math.
13.21. and Mark. 4.17.
because they have no root in themselves, but want the sap and moisture of
Grace to give life and lasting to those beginnings and imperfect offers and
essays of goodness, they made show of. Here are good affections (to see to)
unto the good word of God, they receive it with joy; it works not only upon
their judgments, but it seems also to rejoice, yea after a sort to ravish
their hearts, so as they feel a kind of tickling pleasure and delight in it;
which the Apostle calls Heb. 6.4.5.
tasting of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, Heb. 6. And as they receive the seed joyfully, so it appears
quickly; it springs up anon in the likeness of Repentance and Faith and
Obedience and newness of life. They may be touched with a deep feeling of
their sins; and with heavy hearts and many tears confess and bewail them;
and not only promise, but also purpose amendment. They may be superficially
affected with, and find some ouerly comfort and refreshing from, the
contemplation of those gracious promises of mercy and reconciliation and
salvation which are contained in the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and have some degrees of persuasion that those promises are true, and some
flashes of confidence withal of their own personal interest therein. They may
reform themselves in the general course of their lives in sundry particulars:
refraining from some gross disorders, and avoiding the occasions of them,
wherein they have formerly lived and delighted, and practicing many outward
duties of Piety and Charity, conformably to the letter of the Laws of both
Tables: and misliking and opposing against the common errors or corruptions of
the times and places wherein they live; and all this to their own and others
thinking, with as great zeal unto godliness, and as thorough indignation
against sin, as any others. All this they may do: and yet all the while be
rotten at the heart; wholly carnal and vn-renewed; quite empty of sound Faith,
and Repentance, and Obedience, and every good grace; full of damnable Pride and
Hypocrisy; and in the present state of damnation, and in the purpose of God
Reprobates and Castawayes.

. 8. and proof thereof.
Examples hereof we have, in 1 Samuel 28.9.
Saul's care for the destroying of Witches; in Iehu's zeal in killing Baals
Priests; 4. King. 10.16.28.
in Mark. 6.20.
Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly, and doing many things thereafter; and,
to omit others, in this wicked King Ahabs present fit of Repentance and
Humiliation. At all which and sundry other like effects, we shall the less
need to marvel; if we shall seriously consider the Causes and Reasons
thereof. I will name but a few of many: and but name them neither. First; great
is the force of Natural Conscience, hand of God in any heavy affliction, or by
the voice of God threatening it with vengeance: it pursues the guilty soul
with continual and restless clamours, and he sees that something he must
needs do, if he knew what, to stop the mouth of Conscience, and so he
falls a repenting, and reforming, and resolving of a new course; which though
it be not sincere, and so cannot work a perfect cure upon a wounded
conscience, but that still it ranckleth inward, yet it gives some present
ease, and allayeth the anguish of it for the time. Secondly; Power of his own
Ordinance sometimes manifested even upon those that hate it, as he got
himself Exodus 14.4.
honor upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians: that his own faithful ones may see
and admire the power of that holy seed, whereby they are begotten again from
the dead; not doubting but that the Gospel will prove Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation to all that believe, when they behold in it
the power of conviction upon many that believe not. Thirdly; God in his most
wise and unsearchable providence so orders and disposes not only outward
things, but even the hearts and wills and thoughts and actions of men,
permitting his children to fall backwards into sins, and bringing on his
enemies toward goodness, so far as he thinks good; as for other
purposes, so for this end also among the rest, that man might not be able See
Eccle. 9.1
from those things he sees happen unto other men, or done by them, to judge
infallibly of the state of his brothers soul; God reserving this Royalty unto
himself, to be the only Iere. 11.20. and 17.10.
searcher of the hearts and reins of others. For these and sundry other
Reasons it comes to pass, that Hypocrites and Castawayes, do oftentimes go
so far as they do, in the outward performances of Holy duties.

. 9. Inferences thence; 1. of terror against profaneness.
Now if men may go thus far, and yet be in the state of damnation: what hope
then (First) of heaven, for such profane ungodly wretches, as are so far
from having 2 Timothy 3.5.
the power, as that they have not so much as the least show of godliness? What
will become of those, that Psalm. 1.1.
sit them down in the chair of scorners, and despise the good word of God,
and make a scoff of those men that desire to square their lives by that rule;
when some of them, that Mark. 6.20.
hear it gladly, and Math. 13.20.
receive it with joy, and are content to be ordered by it in many things,
shall yet go to hell? Certainly Ahab and Herod, and such cursed miscreants
shall rise up in judgment against these men and condemn them: and they shall
have Math. 24.51.
their portion with Hypocrites shall I say? Alas, woeful is their case, if
their portion fall but there: but let them take heed lest their portion be not
so good as the Hypocrites; and that it be not ten times easier for Ahab and
Herod, and the whole crew of such Hypocrites, at the day of judgment, than for
them.

Secondly; what a stark shame would it be for us,. 10. 2. of exhortation to
abound in the fruits of godliness;
who have received the Romans 8.23.
first fruits of the Spirit, not to bring forth Gal. 5.22.
the fruits of that spirit in some good abundance, in the frequent and
comfortable and actual exercises of those habitual graces that are in us, of
Faith, Repentance, Love, Reformation, Zeal, and the rest: seeing the
counterfeits of these graces are oftentimes so eminent, even in Hypocrites and
Castawayes? Shall a piece of rotten wood, or a glow-worme shine so bright in
the dark; and our holy lamps, fed with oil from heaven, burn so dim? Nay,
Math, 5.16.
let our lights also, as well as theirs, shine before men; yea and outshine
theirs too: that men may see our truly good works, as well as their seeming
ones, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Although all be not gold that
glistereth: yet pity it is, that true gold should gather rust, and lose the
luster for want of using; when Brass and Copper and baser metals are kept
bright with scowring. Let not bleare-eyed Leah have cause to rejoice against
beautiful Rachel, or to insult over her barrenness: neither let us who
profess^ our selves to be Math. 11.19.
Wisdoms children, suffer our selves to be out-stript by Natures brats, in
justifying our Mother. Rather let their splendida peccata provoke us to a godly
jealousy and emulation, and spur us up to the quickening of those Graces God
has given us: that the power of Godliness in us, may be at least as
fruitful in all outward performances, as the show of it is in them.

. 11. 3. of Admonition, to forbear judging.
Thirdly, this should teach us caution in our judging of other men's estates.
We are apt to offend both ways. If we see a man overtaken with some gross
scandalous sin; as Drunkenness, Adultery, Oppression, or Perjury; but
especially if he live long therein: by and by he is a Reprobate with us; or at
least he is not yet in the state of Grace. Thus we speak, thus we judge: but
we consider not the whilst, how far and how long God in his holy wisdom
may suffer foul temptations to prevail against his Chosen ones. On the other
side, if we see a man forward in the duties of Religion, charitably affected to
the poor, just and upright in his dealings with men, stoutly opposing against
common corruptions, suffering for the profession of the truth: by and by he is
a Saint with us; and we stick not sometimes in our folly to wish that our
souls might speed as that man's soul at a venture. But we consider not the
whilst, how far the force of Natural Conscience, and common Moral Grace
(if you will allow me to speak so improperly) may lead a man onward unto all
outward performances, who was yet never effectually called, nor truly
sanctified. And yet, busy fools that we are, we cannot keep our selves in
our own bounds; but we must be meddling with Gods prerogative, and thrusting
our selves into his chair; and be judging of our brethren, whose hearts we are
so far from knowing, as that we are scarce well acquainted with our own.
But what have we to do either with one or other? what lawful commission have
we at all to judge? or what certain evidence have we, whereby to judge?
Infallible signs we cannot have from any outward things, either of the want,
or of the having of grace, in other men: yet of the two, far more pregnant
probabilities of the want than of the having of grace. Because there may be
such an open course held in evil things, as we may justly doubt whether such
a course can stand with grace, or no: whereas there cannot be any course held
in good things outwardly, but such as may stand with Hypocrisy. What are we
then to do? Even this: to use the judgment of Probability, hoping with
cheerfulness that there is Grace, where we see comfortable signs of it; and
to use the judgment of Charity, still 1. Cor. 13.7.
hoping the best (though not without some Jude 23.
fear,) that there may be Grace, where we see fearful signs of the want of
it. But for the judgment of Infallibility either pro or con, what sinful man
dares challenge that unto himself; unless it be that 2. These. 2.3.
man of sin, who has nestled himself higher than into Peter's Chair, into
the Throne of God, sitting in the Temple of God, and there determining as God,
and with his breath damning and sainting whom he lists? But let him go: and
let this be our direction in this point. Think we comfortably, where we see
no reason to the contrary: Hope we charitably, even where we do see some
reason to the contrary. But judge we neither way peremptorily and
definitiuely, whatsoever probabilities we see either way: since we know not how
far a sanctified believer may fall into the snares of sin; nor how far a
graceless Hypocrite may go in the show of Godliness. That is the third Use.

. 12 4. of direction; for the trial of sincerity:
The last and maine Inference, is for selfe-tryall. For if a man may go thus
far, and yet be an Hypocrite, be a Castaway: it will concern every one of
us, as we desire to have comfortable, both assurance of present Grace, that we
are not Hypocrites, and hope of future Glory, that we are not Castawaies; so to
be district in making Trial, whether those Graces that seem to be in us be
true, or but counterfeit, and whether the acts thereof be fruits of sincerity,
or but of hypocrisy. Let us not therefore flatter our selves, or be too jolly
upon it, if we find in our selves some shows of Godliness; but let us rather
labor to find out, whether there be in us the power and life of Godliness
or no. For there is a kind of righteousness such as it is, an outward formal
righteousness in Scribes, and Pharisees, and Hypocrites: but that will not
serve the turn; Mat. 5.20.
unless our righteousness exceed theirs, we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Beloved, Hypocrisy is spunne of a fine thread; and is not
easily discerneable, without very diligent Examination. And things are not to
be measured by the outward show, or by the lump and bulk; but by an exacter
rule, whether they be true, or no. Do thou hear the word of God with Joy,
do thou bewail thy sins with tears, do thou avoid gross sins with
care, do thou oppose against common corruptions with zeal? These are
indeed comfortable signs, but no infallible evidences of Grace: for what is
there in all this, which Ahab, and Saul, and Herod, and Judas, and other
Hypocrites, either have not, or might not have done? But, if not by these
fruits; by what other means then may a man come to know the sanctification of
his heart, and the sincerity of these affections? Divines in their Treatises
and Writings have set down sundry notes and marks, whereby to make this
trial: but I would especially commend to your observation, two only out of all
that variety, which two are indeed as good as a thousand; namely, Integrity and
Constancy: for these two are never in the Hypocrite.

First, for Integrity.. 13. by the marks; 1. of Integrity.
The Hypocrite (we heard) might go far in hearing, in believing, in
sorrowing, in reforming, in suffering: but his affections herein, (for so much
as they spring not from true Faith, and the conscience of that Obedience he
owes to God, but from other respects,) are partial in all those Duties; and
carry him so far only, as those false grounds, which first gave motion to
those affections, lead him, and no farther. He receives the word with joy,
so far as it tickleth the ear with choycenesse of phrase, and variety of
elocution; so far as it fitteth with his humor, and keeps fair and far
off from meddling with his bosome-sinne: but he is not equally delighted with
every part, and with every point of Gods word and truth. If the right string be
touched, if his sweet darling-sinne be stirred; that is harsh to him, he
finds no music in that: rub him where he is galled, and he kicketh at it.
Mar. 6.20.17.27.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things willingly: but when his
incestuous marriage was meddled withal; then the Luke 13.32.
Fox was uncased, and the Hypocrite appeared in his own colors, and the
Baptist lost first his liberty, and then after his head for his labor. And
the young man, when Christ told him, what he must do to inherit eternal
life, in the general, [ Mat. 19.17.20.
Keep the Commandments, etc.] was no doubt, a jolly iocund man, [ All these
have I kept from my youth up:] but when Christ hitteth him home, and presses
upon his particular corruption [ Ibid. verse. 21.
One thing is wanting, etc.] this nipped him in the head, and struck cold to
his heart, and (the Text says) Ibid. 22.
he went away sorrowful. And ever mark it, in something or other the
Hypocrite bewraieth himself what he is; if not to the observation of others,
yet at least sufficiently for the conviction of his own heart, if he would not
be wanting to himself in the due search and trial of his heart. A man's blood
rises, when he hears a stranger swear an Oath: but if the same man can
hear his prentice lie, and equivocate, and cosen, and never move at it; let
him not be too brag of his zeal: his coldness here discovers the other
to have been but a false fire, and a fruit, not of true zeal, but of
Hypocrisy. A Jesuit makes scruple of disclosing an intented treason,
revealed to him in confession; but he makes no bones of laying a powder plot,
or contriuing the Murder of an anointed King: a Pharisee is very precise in
Mat. 23.23.
tithing Mint and Cummin; but balketh justice and mercy: One straineth at a
Ibid. 24.
gnat and swalloweth a cammell; makes conscience of some petty sins,
neglecting greater: Another casts out a beam, but feels not a moate;
makes conscience of some greater sins, neglects smaller. Shame of the
world, and the cry of the people, makes him forbear some sins; an eye to
his own private and secret ends, other some; fear of temporal punishment, or
(it may be) eternal, other some; hope of some advantage another way, as in
his credit, profit, etc. other some; the terrors of an affrighted conscience,
other some: but if in the mean time there be no care, nor scruple, nor
forbearance of other sins, where there appears no hinderance from these or
the like respects; all is naught, all is but counterfeit and damnable
hypocrisy. The rule never fails, Op. imperfect. in Mat. hom. 45.
Quicquid propter Deumfit, aequaliter fit. True obedience, as it disputes not
the command, but obeys cheerfully; so neither does it divide the command,
but obeys equally. David had wanted one maine assurance of the uprightness
of his heart, if he had not had an equal and universal Psalm. 119.6.
respect to all Gods Commandments. That is the first note of Sincerity;
Integrity.

The other is Constancy;. 14. 2. of Constancy.
continuance, or lasting. The seeming Graces of Hypocrites may be as forward,
and impetuous for the time, as the true Graces of the sincere believer; nay
more forward oftentimes: as in the Mat. 13.5.6.
stony ground, the seed sprang up so much the sooner, by how much it had the
less depth of earth. But the very same cause, that made it put up so soon,
made it wither again as soon; even because it wanted deepenesse of earth. So
the Hypocrite, when the fit takes him, he is all on the spur; there is no
way with him, but a new man he will become out of hand, yea that he will;
Persius.
Momento turbinis. But he sets on too violently, to hold out long: this
reformation ripeneth too fast, to be right spiritual fruit: as an horse that
is good at hand, but naught at length, so is the Hypocrite; free and fiery for
a spurt, but he iadeth and tyreth in a journey. But true Grace all to the
contrary; as it ripeneth for the most part by leisure, so it ever Qualitatis
verae tenor permanet: falsa non durant. Senec. Epist. 120.
lasts longer: as Philosophers say of Habits, that as they are gotten hardly,
so they are not lost easily. We heard but now, that the Faith, Repentance,
Reformation, Obedience, Joy, Sorrow, Zeal, and other the graces and affections
of Hypocrites, had their first motion and issue from false and erroneous
grounds; as Shame, Fear, Hope, and such respects. And it thence comes to
pass, that where these respects cease, which gave them motion; the graces
themselves can no more stand, than a House can stand, when the foundation is
taken from under it. The boy that goes to his book, no longer than his Master
holds the rod over him; the Masters back once turned, away goes the book,
and he to play: and right so is it with the Hypocrite. Tak away the rod from
Pharaoh; and he will be old Pharaoh still. And Ahab, here in this Chapter thus
humbled before God at the voice of his Prophet; this fit once past, we see in
the next Chapter, regards neither God nor Prophet, but through unbelief 3
King. 22*27.
disobeyeth God, and imprisoneth the Prophet. Now then, here is a wide
difference between the Hypocrite* and the Godly man. The one does all by fits,
and by starts, and by sudden motions and flashes: whereas the other goes on
fairly and soberly in a settled constant regular course of Humiliation and
Obedience. In Categ. cap. de qualit.
Aristotle has excellently taught us, to distinguish between colors that
arise from passion, and from complexion. The one, he says, is scarce worth
the name of a Quality or Color; because it scare gives denomination to the
subject wherein it is. If Socrates be of a pale, or an high-colored
complexion, to the question [ Qualis est Socrates? What a like man is
Socrates?] it may be fitly answered (says Aristotle) that he is a pale man,
or that he is an high-colored man. But when a man of another complexion, is
yet pale for fear, or anger, or red with blushing; we do not use to say,
neither can we say properly, that he is a pale man, or a high-colored man.
Accordingly we are to pronounce of those good things that sometimes appear in
Hypocrites. We call them indeed Graces, and we do well, (because they seem
to be such, and because we in Charity are to hope that they be such, as they
seem:) but they are in true judgment nothing less than true graces, neither
should they indeed (if we were able to discern the falsenesse of them) give
denomination to those hypocrites in whom they are found. For why should a man
from a sudden and short fit of Repentance, or Zeal, or Charity, or Religion,
be called a Penitent, or a Zealous, or a Charitable, or a Religious man; more
than a man for once or twice blushing an high-colored man? Then are Graces
true, when they are habitual, and constant, and equal to themselves. That is
the second Note; Constancy.

. 15. both joined together for Trial.
I will not trouble you with other Notes, besides these. Do but lay these two
together; and they will make a perfect good Rule for us to judge our own hearts
by, and to make trial of the sincerity of those good things, that seem to be
in us. Measure them not by the present heat, (for that may be as much, perhaps
more, in an Hypocrite, than in a true believer;) but by their Integrity, and
Constancy. A man of a cold complexion has as much heat, in a sharp fit of an
Ague, as he that is of a hot constitution, and in health; and more too: his
blood is more enflamed, and he burns more. But whether do you think is the
more kindly heat; that which comes from the violence of a Fever, or that
which arises from the condition of a man's Temper? No man makes doubt of it,
but this is the more kindly, though that may be more sensible and intense.
Well then; a man finds himself hot in his body, and feign he would know,
whether it be Calor praeter naturam, or no; whether a kindly and natural
heat, or else the forerunner or symtome of some disease. There is no better
way to come to that knowledge, than by these two Notes; Universality, and
Constancy. First for Universality; Physicians say of heat, and sweat, and such
like things, Vniuersalia salutaria, partialia ex morbo. If a man be hot in one
part, and cold in another; as if the palms of his hands burn, and the soles
of his feet be cold; then all is not right: but if he be of an indifferent
equal heat all over, that is held a good sign of health. Then for Constancy
and Lasting; If the heat come by fits and starts, and paroxysmes, leaping
eftsoons and suddenly out of one extreme into another, so as the party one
while gloweth as hot as fire, another-while is chill and cold as ice, and
keeps not at any certain stay; that is an ill sign too, and it is to be
feared there is an Ague either bred, or in breeding: but if he continue at
some reasonable certainty, and within a good mediocrity of heat and cold; it
is thought a good sign of health. As men judge of the state of their bodies;
by the like rule judge thou of the state of thy soul. First, for integrity and
universality. Is thy Repentance, thy Obedience, thy Zeal, thy Hatred of sin,
other graces in thee Universal? equally bent upon all good, equally set
against all evil things? it is a good sign of Grace and Sanctification in the
heart. But if thou repentest of one sin, and persistest in another; if thou
obeyest one commandment, and breakest another; if thou art zealous in one
point, and cool in another; if thou hate one vice, and love another:
flatter not thy self too much; thou have reason to suspect all is not found
within. Then for Continuance and Lasting. I deny not, but in case of prevailing
temptations, the godly may have sometimes uncomfortable and fearful
intermissions in the practice of godliness; which yet make him not altogether
Graceless: as a man may have sometimes little distempers in his body, through
misdyet or otherwise, and yet not be heart-sicke; or greater distempers too
sometimes to make him sick, and yet be heart whole. But yet if for the most
part, and in the ordinary constant course of thy life, thou have the practice
of Repentance, and Obedience, and other fruits of grace in some good
comfortable measure; it is a good sign of Grace, and Sanctification in the
heart. But if thou have these things only by fits and starts and sudden moodes;
and art sometimes violently hot upon them, other some times again, and
oftener, key-cold: presume not too much upon shows, but suspect thy self
still of Hypocrisy, and Insincerity; and never cease by repentance and prayer
and the constant exercise of other good graces to Physic and Diet thy soul,
till thou have by Gods goodness put thy self into some reasonable assurance,
that thou art the true child of God, a sincere believer, and not an Hypocrite;
as Ahab here, notwithstanding all this his solemn humiliation, was. Here is
Ahab, an Hypocrite; and yet humbled before the Lord.

. 16. The opening of the second Observation,
But yet now, this Humiliation such as it was, what should work it in him? That
we find declared at verse 27. [ And it came to pass, that when Ahab heard
these words, etc.] There came to him a message from God, by the hand of Eliah;
and that was it that humbled him. Alas, what was Eliah to Ahab? a silly plain
Prophet to a mighty King? that he durst thus presume to rush boldly and
vnsent-for into the presence of such a potent Monarch, who had no less power,
and withal more color, to take away his life, than Naboths; and that when he
was in the top of his iollity, solacing himself in the new-taken possession of
his new-gotten Vineyard; and there to his face charge him plainly with, and
shake him up roundly for, and denounce Gods judgments powerfully against, his
bloody abominable oppressions? We would think, a Monarch nusled up in
Idolatry, and accustomed to blood, and hardened in Sin and Obstinacy, should
not have brooked that insolency from such a one as Eliah was, but have made his
life a ransom for his sauciness. And yet behold, the words of this underling
in comparison, how they fall like thunder upon the great guilty offender, and
strike palsy into his knees, and trembling into his joints, and tumble him
from the height of his iollity, and roll him in sackcloth, and ashes, and cast
him into a strong fit of legal Humiliation. See thou how Ahab is humbled
before me?

And here now comes in our second observation: even, the Power of Gods word
over the Consciences of obstinate sinners;. 17. Obseru. 2. the Power of Gods
word.
powerful to 2 Cor. 10.4* 5.
cast down strong holds, and every high thought that exalts it self against
God. That which in Heb. 4. (if I mistake not the true understanding of that
place) is spoken of the Essential Word of God, the second Person in the
euer-blessed Trinity; is also in some analogy true of the revealed Word of
God, the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; that it Heb. 4.12.
is quick and powerful, and (...).
more cutting than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder
of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow. Ier. 23.29.
Is not my word, like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer, that
breaks the rock in pieces? Ierem. 23. Like a soft fire; to dissolve and melt
the hearts of relenting sinners and true conuerts: but like a strong hammer to
batter and break in pieces the rockie and flintie consciences of obstinate and
hardened offenders. Examples hereof if you require: behold in the stories of
the kings, 1. Sam. 15.24.
Saul whining when Samuel reproves him; in the books of the Prophets, the
Ion. 3.5.
Nineuites drooping when Jonas threatens them; in the Acts of the Apostles,
Act. 24.25.
Felix trembling when Paul discourses before him; in the Martyrologies of the
Church, Tyrants and bloody Persecuters maskered at the bold confessions of the
poor suffering Christians; in this Chapter, proud Ahab mourning when Eliah
tells him his sin, and foretells him his punishment.

. 18. with the Causes thereof. ^. in the Instrument;
Effects, which might justly seem strange to us; if the Causes were not
apparent. One Cause, and the Principal, is in the Instrument, the Word: not
from any such strength in it self, for so it is but a dead letter; but because
of Gods ordinance in it. For in his hands are the hearts and the tongues and
the ears both of Kings and Prophets: and he can easily, when he sees it
good, put the spirit of zeal and of power into the heart of the poorest
Prophet, and as easily the spirit of fear and of terror into the heart of the
greatest King. He chooses weak Instruments, (as here Eliah) and yet
furnishes them with power, to effect great matters: that so the glory might
not rest upon the instrument, but redound wholly to him, as to the chief agent
that imployeth it. 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, says S. Paul, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. We say, Words are but
wind; and indeed the words of the best Minister are no better, as they are
breathed out, and uttered by sinful mortal man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: but yet this wind, as it is breathed in, and inspired by the
powerful eternal spirit of God, is strong enough (by his effectual working
with it) not only to shake the top branches, but to rend up the very
bottome-roote of the tallest Cedar in Libanon. Psalm. 29.4.5.
Vox Domini confringens Cedros, Psalm. 29. [ The voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation; the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice: The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars; yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon.

Another Cause is in the Object;. 19. 2. in the Object;
and that is the force of Natural Conscience: which the most presumptuous
sinner can never so stifle, though he endeavor all he can to do it, but
that it will be sometimes snubbing, and stinging, and lashing, and vexing him
with ougly representations of his past sins, and terrible suggestions of
future vengeance. And then of all other times is the force of it most lively;
when the voice of God in his word awakeneth it after a long dead sleep. Then
it rises and Sampson-like rouseth up it self, and bestirreth it self lustily
as a Giant refreshed with wine: and it puts the disquieted patient to such
insufferable pain, that he runs up and down like a distracted man, and
does he knows not what, and seeks for ease he knows not where. Then he
would give all Dives his wealth for Luke 16.24.
a drop of water to cool the heat he feels; and with Genesis 25.30.31.
Esau part with his birthright, for any thing though it were never so little
or mean, that would give him but the least present refreshing, and preserve
him from fainting. Then sackcloth, and ashes, and fasting, and weeping, and
mourning, and renting the garments, and tearing the hair, and knocking the
breast, and outcries to heaven, and all those other things, which he could not
abide to hear of in the time of his former security, whilst his conscience
lay fast asleep and at rest, are now in all haste, and greedily entertained,
and all too little: if by any means they can possibly give any ease or
asswagement to the present torment he feels in his soul.

. 20. 3. in the fit application of the one to the other.
A third Cause is oftentimes in the Application of the Instrument to the Object.
For although Gods word in the general be Powerful; and the Conscience of it
self be of a stirring Nature: yet then ordinarily does the word of God work
most powerfully upon the Consciences of obstinate sinners, when it is thoroughly
and closely applied to some special corruption, whereunto the party cannot
plead Not-guilty; when the sin and the judgment are both so driven home,
that the guilty offender can neither avoid the evidence of the one, nor the
fear of the other. A plain instance whereof we have in this present history
of King Ahab. When Eliah first came to him in the Vineyard, he was pert enough,
[ Verse. 20. hi^.
have thou found me, O mine enemy?] But by that the Prophet had done with him;
told him of the sin, which was notorious, [ Verse. 19.
have thou killed, and taken possession?] foretold him of the judgment, which
was heavy, [ Verse. 21, etc.
I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy Posterity, etc.] the man
was not the man. Eliah left him in a far other tune, than he found him in.
The Prophets words wrought fore upon him, and his Conscience wrought sore
within him; both together wrought him to the humiliation we now speak of: [ It
came to pass, when he heard these words, that he rent his clothes, etc.] If
you desire another instance, turn to Act. 24.25. where there is a right good
one, and full to this purpose. There we read, that Felix the Roman Deputy in
Jury Act. 24.25.
trembled, when Paul reasoned of Justice, and of Temperance, and of the
Judgment to come. What was that thing, may we think, in S. Paul's reasoning,
which especially made Felix to tremble? It is commonly taken to be the Doctrine
of the last Judgment: which is indeed a terrible doctrine, and able (if it be
thoroughly apprehended) to make the stoutest of the sons of men to tremble.
But I take it, that is not all. The very thing that made Felix tremble, seems
rather to be; that Paul's discourse fell upon those special vices, wherein he
was notably faulty, and then clapt-in close with Judgment upon them. For Felix
was noted of much cruelty and injustice in the administration of the affairs
of Jury, (howsoever Tertullus like a smooth Orator, to curry favor with him,
and to do Paul a displeasure, did flatteringly Act. 24.2. etc.
commend his government): and he was noted also of incontinency, both
otherwise, and especially in marrying Drusilla who was another man's wife.
Tacitus speaking of him in the fifth of his history, painteth him out thus;
Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
Per omnem savitiam et libidinem ius regium seruili ingenio exercuit. And for
such a man, as governed with cruelty and rapine, and lived in unchaste wedlock,
to hear one reason powerfully of Justice, and of Chastity, (for so much the
word (...) there used property imports,) and of Judgment; it is no wonder if
it make him tremble.

. 21. An inference against those thus despise the Word.
Do thou consider this and tremble, whosoever thou art, that in thy thoughts
despisest the holy word of God; accounting of it but as of some humane
invention, to keep fools in awe withal: and thou also, whosoever thou art,
that vnderualuest this precious treasure, for the meanenes or other infirmities
of the 2. Cor. 4.7.
earthen vessel wherein it is conveied. Tell me, do thou not herein struggle
against the testimony and evidence of thine own heart? Does not thine own
Conscience and Experience tell thee, that this Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of the spirit has a keen edge, and biteth and pierces where it goes?
Has it not sometimes galled, and rubbed, and lanced, and cut thee to the very
bone; and entered even to the dividing asunder of the joints and of the marrow?
Has it not sometimes (as it were) by subtle and serpentine insinuations
strangely wound it self through those many crooked and Labyrinthean turnings
that are in thine heart, into the very inmost corner and center thereof; and
there ripped up thy bowels and thy reins, and raked out the filth and
corruption that lurked within thee, and set the secretest thoughts in order
before thy face, in such sort as that thou have bin stricken with astonishment
and horror at the discovery? Though perhaps it have not yet softened and
melted thy stony and obdurate heart: yet did thou never perceive it hammering
about it, with sore strokes and knockes, as if it would break and shiuer it
into a thousand pieces? Doubtless thou have; and if thou would deny it, thy
conscience is able to give thy tongue the lie, and to convince thee to thy
face. And if thou have: why then do thou not readily acknowledge the voice of
God in it, having felt in it that lively power and efficacy, which it is not
possible any device of the wit of man should have? Take heed then how thou
do traduce, or despise, or but under ualue that, upon any seeming pretense
whatsoever; for which thou have such a strong witness in thine own heart,
from the experience of the unresisted power of it, that it is indeed the word
of God, and not the breath of sinful man. Felix trembled at it, Ahab was
humbled by it; the one an Atheist, the other an Hypocrite: thou art worse than
either Atheist or Hypocrite, if it work not at least as much upon thee. See
thou how Ahab humbles himself at the voice of the Prophet?

. 22. The success of Ahabs humiliation;
From Ahabs Humiliation, and the Occasion thereof; pass we now to consider in
the last place the Success of it. Ahab is humbled at the Prophets denouncing
of judgment against him; and God hence takes occasion to be so gracious to
Ahab, as (though not wholly to remove, yet) to suspend and adjourne the
judgment for a time [ See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days etc.] And
here must Gods Holiness be brought unto a trial; before the bar of carnal
reason, if by any means it can justify it self. God hates the works of
Hypocrites; he loatheth even Osee. 6.6.
sacrifices without mercy; his Esaias 1.9. -- 15.
soul cannot away with the oblations and new-Moones and solemn feasts of men
that have their hands full of blood, no not though they make many prayers, and
tender them with behavior of greatest devotion, stretching out their hands
toward heaven, and Psalm. 35.13.
afflicting their souls with fasting, and hanging down their Esaias. 58.5.
heads as Bulrushes with pensiveness: but even their best sacrifices, and
confessions, and prayers, and humiliations are an Pro. 15.8.
abomination unto him; so far from appearing his wrath against other sins,
as that they provoke his yet farther displeasure against themselves. Such is
the Holiness of our God, and such the purity of his nature: with which
holiness and purity how can it stand, to accep^ and reward (as here he seems
to do) the counterfeit humiliation of such a wretched Hypocrite, as we now
suppose Ahab to be?

For the clearing of this difficulty;. 23. and how it may consist with the
holiness of God.
first let it be granted; (which I take to be a certain truth, and for any
thing I know never yet gain said by any,) that Ahab, not only before, and
after, but even in the act and at the instant of this humiliation, was an
Hypocrite. Let it be granted secondly, (which is humiliation hypocrisy, was
not acceptable to God, as a good work; but abominable before him, as a foul
sin. But yet withal it must be granted thirdly, that, although Ahab did
spiritual goodness, yet some outward moral goodness in Ahabs humiliation;
at least so far forth, as a thing less evil may in comparison of a worser
thing be termed good. And then are we to know fourthly, that it may stand with
Gods holiness, as it does with his goodness and justice, to reward outward
good things with outward good things; and moral and temporary graces with
worldly and temporal blessings: as here he rewards Ahabs temporary and
external humiliation, with an outward temporal favor, viz. the adiourning of
an outward temporal judgment.

That which hence we would observe, is,. 24 Obseru. 3. concerning the reward of
common graces.
That God rewards sometimes common graces with common favors, temporary
obedience with temporal beneficence. This is proved unto us first, from the
general course of Gods justice; and his promise, grounded upon that justice,
to reward every man according to his works. To which justice of his, and to
which promise of his it is agreeable, as to recompense Spiritual good things
with eternal, so to recompense Quibus non erat Deus daturas vita naeternam, --
si neque hanc eis terrenam gloriam concederet, non redderetur merces bonis ar
tibus little, id est, virtutibus, quibus -- Augustine. 5. de Ciuit. 15.
Moral good things with temporal rewards, Secondly, from special express
warrant of Scripture. In Matthew. 6. Christ says of Hypocrites more than once,
that Math. 6.25.16.
they have their reward. As in the doing of their seeming good works, they
aim especially at the vain praise and commendation of men: so they have the
full reward of those works in the vain praise and commendation of men. Though
they have no right unto, nor reason to look for, a reward hereafter in heaven:
yet they have their reward such as it is, and all they are like to have) here
upon earth. Thirdly, from particular examples of such, as have bin temporally
rewarded for temporal graces. To omit intelligimus -- etiam Ethnicos, si quid
boni fecerint, non absque mercede, Dei judici^ praeterriri.

Hieron. in Ezekiel. 29. God even among the Hea^hen, ha^h often rewarded moral
honesty with outward happiness.

W. Ral. hist of World, lib. 2. cap. 8.. 3.


Heathens, as viz. Aristides, Cyrus, etc. for Justice; Bias, Diogenes etc. for
contempt of the world; Codrus, Regulus etc. for love of their country, and
zeal to the common good; and sundry others, for other good things: whose
moral virtues are herein amply rewarded, (if there were nothing else but
this,) that their names and memories have bin preserved in histories, and
renowned throughout the world in all succeeding generations. I say, to omit
these Heathens: we have examples in Scripture; of Ahab here, of 4 Kin. 10.30.
Iehu, of the Ion. 3.10.
Nineuites, of others elsewhere: who for their temporary obedience, zeal,
repentance, and the like, were rewarded; partly by temporal blessings upon
themselves and their posterity, partly by the remoueal or adiournall of
temporal punishments, which otherwise had speedily overtaken them. Fourthly,
from the greater to the less. God sometimes temporally rewards the services
of such men, as are but bruta instrumenta, brute instruments of his will and
providence; such as are employed by him for the bringing about of his most holy
and secret purposes, Citra rationem finis, aut eorum quae ad finem, in the
doing of such things; as they do without the least mixture (in their own
purpose and intent) of any respect at all to God or his ends, but merely for
the satisfying of their own corrupt lusts, and the atchieuing of their own
private ends. A notable example whereof we have in Gods dealing with
Nabuchadnezzar in Ezekiel. 29. where the word of the Lord comes to Ezekiel,
saying, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19.20*
Son of man, Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great
service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled:
yet had he no wages, nor his army for Tyrus, for the service that he had served
against it: Therefore thus says the Lord God; behold I will give the land of
Egypt to Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon: and he shall take her multitude, and
it shall be wages for his army. I have given him the land of Egypt for his
labor, wherewith he served against Tyrus; because they wrought for me, says
the Lord God. In which place we see Egypt is given to Nabuchadnezzar, as a
reward for the service he did against Tyrus; because therein (though he neither
intended any such thing, nor so much as knew it,) he yet was the instrument to
work Gods purpose upon and against Tyrus. And then how much more will God
reward temporally the services and obedience of such, as purposely and
knowingly endeavor an outward conformity unto the holy will and pleasure of
God, though with strong and predominant mixture of their own corrupt appetites
and ends therwithall?

. 25. with sundry Reasons thereof;
Now the Reasons, why God should thus outwardly reward the outward works of
Hypocrites; are: First, the manifestation of his own Goodness: that we might
know how willing he is to cherish the least spark of any goodness in any
man, be it natural, or moral, or what ever other goodness it be; that he
might thereby encourage us, so to labor the improuement of those good things
in us, as to make our selves capable Secondly; his Justice and equity, in
measuring unto sinners and Hypocrites exactly according to the measure they
mete unto him. They serve him with graces, which are not true graces indeed:
he rewards them with blessings, which are indeed not true blessings.
Somewhat they must do to God; and therefore they afford him a little
temporary obedience, and there is all the service he shall have from them:
Somewhat God will do for them, and in requital allows them a little
temporary favor, and there is all the reward they must look for from him.
Here is Quid pro Quo: They give God the outward work, but without any hearty
affection to him: God gives them the outward benefit, but without any hearty
affection to them. For want of which hearty affection on both sides, it comes
to pass, that neither is the outward work truly acceptable to him, nor the
outward benefit truly profitable to them. A third reason of Gods thus
graciously Children and chosen; for whose good especially (next under his own
glory) all the passages of his divine providence both upon them and others are
disposed in such sort as they are: as for whose comfort, this manner of
proceeding makes very much and sundry ways; as I shall by and by touch in the
Inferences from this Observation:. 26. And inferences thence;
whereunto I now come, because it is time I should draw toward a Conclusion.

And first; by what has bin already said a way is opened for the clearing of
Gods Holiness in these own; or for their works sake, as if he either
accepted their Persons, or approved their Obedience. No: it is but Lex
Talionis; he deals with them, as they deal with him. They do him but
eye-seruice; and he gives them but eye-wages. Indeed God can neither be
deceived, nor deceive: yet as they would deceive God in their service, with
such obedience as falls short of true obedience; so they are deceived in
their pay from him, with such blessings as fall short of true blessings. And
all this may well stand with Gods both Justice and Holiness. Secondly; it
appears from the premises, that men, in thus rewarding their outward good
things, gives no warrant nor strength at all, either to that Popish corrupt
doctrine of Meritum congrui, in deserving the first grace by the right use of
Naturalls; or to that rotten principle and foundation of the whole frame of
Arminianisme, [ Facienti quod in se est, Deus non potest, non debet denegare
gratiam.] We know, God rewards his own true and spiritual graces in us, with
increase of those graces here, and with glory hereafter: we see, God rewards
even false and outward and seeming graces, natural and moral good things,
with outward and temporal favors. And all this is most agreeable to his
infinite both Justice and Mercy; and may stand with the infinite Purity and
Holiness of his nature. But this were rather to make God an unjust and unholy
God; to bind him to reward the outward and sinful works of Hypocrites, (for
the best natural or moral works without Grace are but such,) with true
saving Grace and inward sanctification. Other Inferences and uses more might
be added: as viz. thirdly, for our Imitation; by Gods example to take
knowledge of, and to commend, and to cherish even in wicked men, those natural
or moral parts that are eminent in them, and whatsoever good thing they do in
outward actual conformity to the revealed will and law of God. And fourthly,
for Exhortation to such, as do not yet find any comfortable assurance that
their obedience and good works are true and sincere; yet to go on, and not to
grow weary of well-doing: knowing that their labor is not altogether in
vain; in as much as their works (though perhaps done in Hypocrisy) shall
procure them temporal blessings here, and some abatement withal (I add that
by the way) of stripes and everlasting punishment hereafter.

But I pass by all these and the like Uses; and commend but one more unto you:
and that is it which I named before as one Reason of the point observed, viz.
the Comfort of Gods dear children and servants; and that sundry ways.. 27.
especially for Comfort to the Godly. 1. against the prosperity of the wicked;
First, here is comfort for them, against a Temptation which often assaulteth
them, and that with much violence and danger: arising from the sense and
observation of the prosperity and flourishing estate of the wicked in this
world. We may see in the Psalms, and elsewhere; how frequently and strongly
Psalm. 37. and 73
David, and Job 21.7. etc.
Job, and Ier. 12.1. etc.
Jeremy, and other godly ones were assailed with this temptation. For thy
instruction then, and to arm thee against this so common and universal a
temptation: if thou shall see fools on horseback; ungodly ones laden with
wealth, with honor, with ease; Hypocrites blessed with the fat of the earth,
and the dew of heaven, and abundance of all the comforts of this life: yet be
not thou discomforted at it, or disquieted with it; Psalm. 37.1.
do not fre^ thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious at
evil doers. Thou expectest for thine inward Obedience an unproportionable
reward in the life to come: do not therefore grudge their outward Obedience a
proportionable reward in this life. Some good things or other thou may
think there are in them, for which God bestows those outward blessings upon
them. But consider withal, that as they have their reward here, so they have
all their reward here: and whatsoever their present prosperity be, yet the
time will come, and that ere long be, when Job 8.13.
the hope of the Hypocrite shall wither, and Psalm. 37.38.
the end of the wicked shall be cut off.

. 28. 2. against temporal afflictions;
Again, here is a second Comfort for the godly against temporal afflictions:
and it arises thus. As Gods love and favor goes not always with those
temporal benefits he bestows: so on the other side, Gods wrath and
displeasure goes not always with those temporal afflictions he inflicteth.
For as he rewards those few good things that are in evil men, with these
temporal benefits; for whom yet (in his Justice) he reserueth eternal
damnation, as the due wages (by that Justice) of their grace-lesse impenitency:
so he punishes those remnants of sin that are in Godly men, with these
temporal afflictions; for whom yet (in his mercy) he reserueth Eternal
salvation, as the due wages (yet by that mercy only) of their Faith, and
Repentance, and holy Obedience. As Abraham said to the rich glutton in the
Parable Luke 16. Luke 16.25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
As if he had said; If thou had any thing good in thee, remember thou have thy
reward in earth already; and now there remains for thee nothing, but the full
punishment of thine ungodliness there in Hell: but as for Lazarus he has had
the chasticement of his infirmities on earth already; and now remains for him
nothing, but the full reward of his godliness here in Heaven. Thus the
meditation of this Doctrine yields good Comfort against temporal afflictions.

Here is yet a third Comfort, and that of the three the greatest, unto the
Godly; in the firm assurance of their Eternal reward.. 29. 3. against
doubtings of their eternal reward.
It is one of the Reasons, why God temporally rewards the unsound obedience
of natural, carnal and unregenerate men; even to give his faithful servants
undoubted assurance, that he will in no wise forget their true and sound and
sincere obedience. Does God reward Ahabs temporary Humiliation? and will he not
much more reward thy hearty and unfeigned repentance? Have the Hypocrites Quid
dabit eis quos praedistinauit ad vitam, qui haec dedit etiam eis, quos
praedestinauit ad mortem? Aug. 22. de Ciuit. 24.
their reward? and can thou doubt of thine? This was the very ground of all
that comfort, wherewith the Prodigal son sustained his heart and hope; when
he thus discoursed to his own soul: Luke 15.17.
If all the hired servants which are in my Fathers house have bread enough and
to spare; surely my Father will never be so unmindful of men, who am his
Son, though too too unworthy of that name, as to let me perish for hunger.
Every temporal blessing bestowed upon the wicked, ought to be of the child
of God entertained as a fresh assurance given him of his everlasting reward
hereafter. Genesis 25.5.6.
Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his Concubines; and sent them away: but
his only son Isaac he kept with him, and gave him all that he had. Right so,
God gives temporal gifts to Hypocrites and Castawaies, who are bastards, and
not sons; (not sons of the Gal. 4.28-3^*
freewoman, not sons of promise, not borne after the spirit:) and that is their
portion; when they have gotten that, they have gotten all they are like to
have, there is no more to be looked for at his hands. But as for the
inheritance; he reserueth that for his dear Children, the Godly, who are Gal.
4.29.
borne after the spirit, and Gal. 3.29.
heirs according unto promise: on these he bestows all that ever he has,
( 1. Cor. 3.21.
all things are theirs;) for on them he bestows Heb. 1.2.
his Son the heir of all things, in whom are hid all the treasures of all
good things, and together Romans 8.32.
with whom all other things are conveyed and made over unto them, as
accessories and appurtenances of him; and on them he bestows himself, who is
1. Cor. 15.28.
all in all, Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. To which joy unspeakable and glorious, O thou the
Father of mercies, who have promised it unto us, bring us in the end, for thy
dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, who has purchased it for us, and given into
our hearts the earnest of his and thy holy Spirit to seal it unto us. To which
blessed Son, and holy Spirit, together with thee O Father, thee persons and
one only wise, gracious, glorious, almighty and eternal Lord God; be
ascribed by us, and all thy faithful people throughout the world, the whole
kingdom, power and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON. Grantham Linc. 27. Febr. 1620.

3 KINGS 21.29. -- because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring
the evil in his days: --


I Will not so far either distrust your memories,. 1. A repetition of three
former Observations.
or straiten my self of time for the delivery of what I am now purposed to
speak; as to make any repetition of the particulars which were observed the
last time from the consideration of Ahabs person and condition, (who was but an
Hypocrite,) taken jointly with his present carriage, together with the occasion
and success thereof. He was humbled: it was the voice of God by his Prophet
that humbled him: upon his humbling God adiourneth his punishment. From all
which was noted, 1. that there might be even in Hypocrites an outward formal
humiliation; 2. the power and efficacy of the word of God, able to humble an
oppressing Ahab; 3. the boundless mercy of God, in not suffering the outward
formal Humiliation of an ungodly Hypocrite to pass altogether unrewarded. All
this the last time; by occasion of those first clauses in the verse, [ See
thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he humbles himself before
me, I will not -- ]. We are now next to consider of the great Favor, which
it pleased God to show to Ahab upon his humiliation; what it was, and wherein
it consisted. It was the Remoueall, at least for a time; that is, the
suspension of an heavy Judgment denounced against Ahab and his house most
deservedly for his bloody and execrable oppression; [ Because he humbles
himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days.]

2. The opening of.
The Evil which God now promises he will not bring, [ I will not bring the
evil in his days;] is that which in verse 21. he had threatened, he would
bring upon Ahab and upon his house, [ Verse. 21. etc. hic.
Behold I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and
will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, and like the house of Be^sha the son of Ahijah, for the
provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made Israel to
sin.] A great Judgment, and an hea^y: but the greater the judgment is, when
it is deserved, and threatened; the greater the mercy is, if it be afterward
forborne: as some of this was. But whatsoever becomes of the judgment; here
we see is mercy good store. God who is Ephesians. 2.4.
rich in mercy, and delights to be styled Deus miserationum. Nebem 9.31.
the God of mercies, and the 2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of mercies, abundantly manifests his mercy in dealing thus graciously
with one that deserved it so little. Here is mercy, in but threatening the
punishment, when he might have inflicted it; and more mercy, in not inflicting
the punishment, when he had threatened it. Here is mercy first, in suspending
the Punishment, [ I will not bring the Evil:] and mercy again, in suspending
it for so long a time, [ I will not bring the evil in his days.] Of these two
points we shall entreat at this time: and first and principally, of the
former.

I will not bring the evil.] It is no new thing to them,. 3. Obseru. 4.
Concerning Gods forbearing of threatened judgments,
that have read the sacred stories with observation, to see God, when men are
humbled at his threatenings, to revoke them. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. and ahbi
saepe.
(...), says Chrysostom more than once: this is ever Gods manner; when men
change their deeds, to change his doom; when they renounce their sinners, to
recall his sentence; when they repent of the evil they have done against him,
to Ion. 3.10.
repent of the evil he had said he would do against them. Search the
Scriptures; and say if things run not thus, as in the most ordinary course:
God commands, and man disobeyeth; Man disobeyeth, and God threatens; God
threatens, and Man repents; Man repents, and God forbeareth. Genesis 20.3.7.
Abimelech, thou art but a dead man, because of the woman which thou have
taken! but Abimelech restores the Prophet his wife untouched; and God spares
him, and he dies not. Hezekiah, make thy will, and Esaias. 38.1-5.
put thine house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live! but Hezekiah
turns to the wall, and prays, and weepeth; and God adds to his days
fifteen years. Nineueh, prepare for desolation; for now but Ion. 3.4 -- 10.
forty days, and Nineueh shall be destroyed! But Nineueh fasted, and prayed,
and repented; and Nineueh stood after that more than forty years twice told.
Generally, God never yet threatened any punishment upon person or place: but if
they repented, he either withheld it, or deferred it, or abated it, or
sweetened it to them; for the most part proportionably to the truth and measure
of their repentance, but howsoever always so far forth as in his infinite
wisdom he has thought good: some way or other, he ever remitted somewhat of
that severity and rigor, wherein he threatened it.

. 4. with the proof;
A course, which God has in some sort bound himself unto, and which he often
and openly professes he will hold. Two remarkable testimonies (among sundry
other) shall suffice us to have proposed at this time, for the clear and full
euidencing hereof. The one in Ierem. 18.7.8. [ At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy; If that nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.] The other
in Ezekiel. 33.13.14 [ When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely dye; if he
turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right, If the wicked
restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in the statutes of
life without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not dye.] And
every where in the Prophets, after Denunciations of judgment follow
exhortations to Repentance: which were bootelesse, if Repentance should not
either prevent them, or adiourne them, or lessen them.

You see God both practices and professes this course: neither of which can
seem strange to us,. 5. and Reasons thereof: 1. from Gods pronenesse to mercy;
if we duly consider, either his readiness to show mercy, or the true End of
his threatenings. We have partly already touched at the greatness of his
mercy. To show compassion, and to forgive, that is the thing wherein he most
of all delights; and therefore he does arripere ansam, take all advantages as
it were, and lay hold on every occasion to do that: but to punish, and take
vengeance is Esaias 28.21.
opus alienum, as some expound that in Esaias 28. his strange work, his strange
act, a thing he takes no pleasure in. Ezekiel. 33.11.
Vivo, nolo-in Ezekiel. 33. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, etc. As the Be labors busily all the day long, and
seeks to every flower and to every weed for Honey* but stingeth not once,
unless she be ill provoked: so God bestirreth himself, and his bowels
yearne within him, to show compassion, [ Osee. 6.4.
O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Indah, how shall I entreat thee?
Ezekiel. 18.31. and 33.11.
Why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? Ierem. 5.1.
Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek if you can find
a man, but a man, that I may pardon it.] But vengeance comes on heavily and
unwillingly, and draws a sigh from him Esaias. 1.24.
[ Heu consolabor! Ah I must, I see there is no remedy, I must ease me of mine
adversaries, and be avenged of mine enemies; Math. 23.37.
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets -- how often would I etc.
Osee. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? -- my heart is turned within me; my
repentings are kindled together.] So is our God Psalm. 103.8.
slow to anger, and loath to strike Ovid, 1. de Pont. 3.
Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox: but plenteous in mercy, as David
describes him in Psalm. 103. Never was man truly and inwardly humbled, but God
in the riches of his special mercy, truly pardoned him: never was man so much
as but outwardly humbled, as Ahab here, but God in his common and general
mercy, more or less forbear him.

. 6. 2. from the end of his threatenings.
Secondly, the end of Gods threatenings also confirms this point. For does he
threaten evil think ye, because he is resolved to inflict it? Nothing less:
rather to the contrary, he therefore threateneth it, that we by our repentance
may prevent it, and so he may not inflict it. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25.
(...), says Saint Chrysostom: he foretells what he will bring upon us, for
this very purpose, that he may not bring it upon us; and warns before he
strikes, to make us careful to avoid the stroke. In the ancient Roman state
and discipline, the manner was, before they made war upon any people, first
to send See Dionys. Halicarn. lib. 2. Antiquit. Liu. 1. Decad. 1. Cic. 1 de
offic.
Heralds to proclaim it, ( Bellum indicere, no inferrent,) to the end that if
they would make their peace by submission, they might prevent the war; nor so
only, but be written also in al^o amicorum, enrolled as their friends and
confederates. So God sends his Heralds the Prophets, to threaten vengeance
against sinners: not thereby to drive them from hope of mercy, but to draw them
to repentance and humiliation; whereby they may not only turn away the
vengeance threatened, but also (if they perform them unfeignedly and with
upright hearts) interest themselves farther in his favor and love. Nor is it
to be accounted among the least of Gods mercies, when he might in his just
displeasure ouerwhelme us in the very act of our sins, as Numb. 2^.8.
Zimri and Cosbi were run thorough in the very act of filthiness; and as 2 Samuel 6.7.
Vzzah, and Act. 5.5.10.
Ananias and Sapphira, and some few others whom God picked out to show
exemplary judgment upon, were stricken dead upon the sudden for their
transgressions: When God might in justice deal with the same rigor against us
all; I say it is not the least of his mercies, that he forbeareth and
forewarneth and foretells and threatens us before he punish; that (...).
Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25.
if we will take any warning, he may do better to us than he has said, and not
bring upon us what he has threatened.

A point very Useful, and Comfortable: if it be not derogatory to Gods truth..
17. How all this may stand with Gods truth.
Let us therefore first clear that; and then proceed to the uses. If God thus
revoke his threatenings, it seems he either before meant not what he spoke,
when he threatened; or else after when he reuoketh, repents of what he meant:
either of which to imagine, far be it from every Christian heart; since the one
makes God a dissembler, the other a changeling, the one charge him with
falsehood, the other with lightness. And yet the Scriptures sometimes speak of
God, as if he Genesis 6.6. Psalm. 95.10.
grieved for what he did, or Genesis 6.6. 1. Sam. 15.11. Ierem. 18.8. Amos. 7.3.6.
Ion 3.10.
repented of what he spoke, or altered what he had purposed: and for the most
part, such like affections are given him in such places, as endeavor to set
forth to the most life his great mercy and kindness to sinful mankind. We all
know, we cannot indeed give God any greater glory than the glory of his mercy:
yet must know withal, that God is not so needy of means to work out his own
glory, as that he should be forced to redeem the glory of his mercy, with the
forfeiture either of his Truth or Steadfastness. We are therefore to lay this
as a firm ground and infallible, that our God is both truly Unchangeable, and
unchangeably True. Number. 2^.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.
The strength of Israel is not as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of
man, that he should repent: his words are not 2 Cor. 1.19.20.
Yea and Nay, neither does he use lightness. But his words are Yea and Amen;
and himself Heb. 13.8.
yesterday and to day and the same for ever: Matthew. 24.35.
Heaven and Earth may pass away, yea shall pass away; but not the least
(...). Math. 5.18.
tittle of Gods words shall pass away unfulfilled: Psalm. 102.26.27.
They may wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall he change them, and
they shall be changed; but he is the same, and his years fail not: neither
do his purposes fail, nor his promises fail, nor his threatenings fail, nor
any of his words fail. Let Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and Angel, and Man,
and Devil, and all change: still still Mal. 3.6.
Ego Deus et non mutor, God he is the Lord of all, and he changes not.

As for those Phrases then of Repenting,. 8. how God is said to repent, etc.
Grieuing, etc. which are spoken of God in the Scriptures: that (...).
Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 3. So also ibid. hom. 15. and 26. and 60. and in Psalm.
6. and passim.
(...), whereof S. Chrysostom so often speaks, salueth them. God speaks to
us, and therefore speaks as we use to speak, and frames his language to
our Pro captu nostro, non pro suo statu. Bernard. lib, 5. de Consid. ad Eugen.
dullness, and teaches us by (...) Chrysostom. in Psalm. 8.
our own phrases what he would have us learn; as Nurses talk half
syllables, and (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 6.
lispe out broken language to young children. But what is so spoken (...), of
God, after the manner of men; must yet be understood (...), so as befitteth the
Majesty and perfection of his divine nature. When he repents then, we are
not so to conceive it, as if God Nunquam primi consilij Deos poenitet. Seneo.
6. de benef. 23.
changed his mind, or altered any thing of his everlasting purpose and
counsel, either in substance or circumstances: it only Quod dicit
(Poenilentiam agam) intelligigitur metaphorice dictum: nam homines, quando non
implent quod comminati sunt, poenitere videntur. Aquin. 1. qu. 19.7. ad. 2.
imports, that he now does not that; which, so far as we could reasonably
conjecture by his words, or works, or our deserts, or otherwise, seemed to us
to have been his purpose to have done.

This for the Phrases: but yet the maine doubt for the thing it self stands
vncleared.. 9. the doubt resolved,
Abimelech and Hezekiah shall dye, and yet Abimelech and Hezekiah shall not
dye; Nineueh shall be destroyed, and yet Nineueh shall not be destroyed; I will
bring evil upon Ahabs house, and yet I will not bring it: is not this Yea and
Nay? is not this a plain contradiction? How is there not here a plain change
of Gods will? If not for substance; because the things were at length
performed: yet at least in circumstance; because they were not performed at
those times, and in that manner, as they were threatened and foretold. That
wretched miscreant Vorstius, instead of untying this knot, cutteth it: who, to
maintain Arminian conclusions from blasphemous Principles, trembles not to
affirm, Vorst. de Deo.
In part aliqua diuini decreti fieri aliquam mutationem; that there may be
some change made in some part of Gods decree. An assertion unbeseeming an
ingenuous Pagane, and to be for ever abhorred and held accursed by every soul
that professes it self Christian. Admit this once: and let Man, yea and the
Devil too, be true; and only God a liar. Leave we him therefore to the
judgment of that great God, whom he has blasphemed; and seek we better
satisfaction. That of Aquinas, and the Schoolmen, is true, but subtle: that
God does sometimes Aquin. 1. qu. 19.7.
Velle mutationem, though he does never mutare voluntatem; that though he
never changes his will, yet he sometimes wills a change. That of Cum
exterius mutari videtur sententia, consilium non mutatur quia de vnaquaque re
immutabiliter intus constituitur, quicquid foris mutabiliter agitur. Gregor. in
Moral.
Gregory is plainer, and no less true; Mutat Deus sententiam, non consilium:
God sometimes changes the sentence which he has denounced, but never the
Counsel which he has decreed. Others, otherwise: diverse men conceiving the
same answer for substance, in diverse and different terms.

That which is plainest, and gives fullest satisfaction, and whereinto the
answers of Gregory,. 10. by understanding ever a clause of exception,
and Aquinas, and the rest, (as many as have spoken with any truth and
pertinency to the point,) in the last resolution fall; is briefly this. In the
whole course of Scripture, Gods threatenings, and so his promises too,) have
ever a condition annexed unto them in Gods purpose: which though it be not
ever, indeed but seldom expressed; yet is it ever included, and so to be
understood. All Gods promises, (how absolutely so ever expressed,) are made sub
condition Obedientiae: and all his threatenings (how absolutely so ever
expressed,) sub condition Impoenitentiae. And these Conditions, viz. of
continuing in Obedience, in all Promises; and of continuing in Impenitency, in
all Threatenings, are to be understood of course; whether they be expressed, or
not. This is plain from those two famous places before cited, Ier. 18. and
Ezekiel. 33. Ier. 18.7.8. See Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch. fuse and pulchre.
When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely dye; if the wicked turn from his
sin, etc. he shall surely live, he shall not dye. Where Almighty God
plainly teaches us, that we ought so to conceive of all his threatenings, be
they never so peremptorily set down, (as what more peremptory than this, Thou
shall surely dye?) as that he may reserve to him a power of reuocation, in case
the parties threatened repent. The examples make it plain. Abimelech shall dye
for taking Sarah: understand it; unless he restore her. Forty days, and
Nineueh shall be destroyed: understand it with this reservation; Unless they
repent. And so of all the rest.

But why is not that clause expressed then?. 11. though sometimes not
expressed: because it is needless*
may some demand, I answer: first, it needs not; secondly, it booteth not.
First, it needs not. For God having in Ierem. 18. and Ezekiel. 33. and elsewhere
instructed us in the general, that all his Threatenings are to be understood
with such clauses and conditions and reseruations* it is needless to repeat
them in every particular: As amongst Christian men, who acknowledge Gods
providence to rule in all things, and to dispose of all actions and events; it
is needless in every speech de futuro contingente to express this clause [ if
God will;] we will go to such or such a place, or do such or such a thing,
if God will: because we readily conceive it, as a clause, which either is, or
should be understood in every such speech, as Iam^s 4.15.
St. James requires. And so in many promises amongst men, this clause, though
not expressed, is yet allowed of course, and to common intendement understood,
[ Rebus sic stantibus; things standing and continuing as now they are:] so as
if a man make a promise absolutely, without expressing that or any other like
clause of Limitation or Exception, if in the interim some such unexpected
accident befall, as makes that either he cannot or may not do what he
promised; we may not in right reason charge such a man with breach of promise,
if he perform not all he promised: because the foresaid clause, though not
expressed, is yet presumed to have been intended by the Promiser. And that Gods
Threatenings, as deiure they ought to be by us when we hear them, so de facto
they were understood by him when he made them, with a secret clause of
reservation and exception in case of Repentance; appears by the usual
practice of many upon such threatenings, and the use they made of them. The
Nineuites when Jonah preached destruction within forty days, without any
express clause of repentance; yet understood it so: else had it been in vain
for them to have repented at all, out of an hope of preventing the judgment by
their repentance; as their speeches show they did. Ion. 3.9.
For who can tell, say they, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from
his fierce anger, that we perish not? The like may be said of Abimelech,
Hezekiah, and others: and of Ahab in this place.

Again, as it is sometimes needless, so it is always bootlesse,. 12. 2.
bootlesse.
to express this clause of repentance in the threatenings of God. The
expressing of it can do little good; secure ones will repent never the sooner
for it: but it may do much harm; secure ones may thereby put themselves in
fairer hope of forbearance, and so linger their repentance till it be too late.
Beloved, it is admirable to observe (...), Gods gracious courses, which he
uses for the calling of men to repentance. In this particularity whereof we
now speak, see how his Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and Truth are met together, and do most lovingly embrace each other.
Where he spares in the end, it is most certain he ever meant to spare Deus
perseuerauit in proposito suo, misereri volens ab initio. Hieronym. in Ion. 3.
from the beginning: but that his everlasting purpose is part of his secret
counsel, and unrevealed will; which as we cannot learn, so we may not seek
to know, till the event declare it. Now to bring this his secret purpose about,
he must work those men to repentance, whom he has thus everlastingly purposed
to spare: else his justice should become questionable, in finally sparing the
impenitent. Amongst other means to work men to repentance, this is one, to
(...). Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch.
threaten them with such judgments, as their sins have deserved: which
threatening the more terrible it is, the more likely it is to be effectual; and
the more peremptory it is, the more terrible it is. So then God, to bring those
men to repentance whom he means to spare, in his word and by his messengers
denounces against them such judgments, as their sins have deserved, and as
his justice without their repentance would bring upon them; denounces them I
say absolutely, and in a peremptory form, without any express clause of
reservation or exception, the more to terrify and affright them, and to cast
them down to the deeper acknowledgement of his justice and their own
unworthiness: which yet are to be understood conditionally, and interpreted
with reservation and exception of Repentance.

. 13. The Inferences.
You have heard evidence enough to acquit Gods Truth; and do by this time, I
doubt not, perceive how, as in all other things, so in the reuoking of his
threatenings, Gods Mercy and his Truth go hand in hand together. Let us now
see, what profitable Inferences may be raised hence for our use. The sum of
all we have said, is but this. Gods threatenings are terrible; but yet
conditional: and if he spare to execute them, when we are humbled by them, it
is a glorious illustration of his Mercy, but without the least impeachment of
his truth. Here is something for the Distressed, something for the Secure,
something for All, to learn.

First; for the Distressed.. 14. 1. of Comfort, to the distressed;
Consider this, and take comfort; all you that Esaias. 61.3.
mourn in Sion, and groan under the weight of Gods heavy displeasure, and the
fearful expectation of those bitter curses and judgments, which he has
threatened against sin. Why do you spend your strength and spirit, in gazing
with broad eyes altogether on Gods Justice, or Truth: take them off a little,
and refresh them, by fastening them another while upon his mercy. Consider not
only what he threateneth: but consider withal why he threatens, it is, that
you may repent; and withal how he threatens, it is, unless you repent. He
threatens to cast down indeed: but unto humiliation, not into despair. He
shoots out his arrows, even bitter words: but as 1 Samuel 20.20.21.
Ionathans arrows, for warning, not for destruction. Think not, he aymeth so
much at thy punishment, when he threatens: alas, if that were the thing he
sought, he could lay on load enough (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. Nemo
punire desiderans, quod facturus est comminatur. Hieronym. in Ion. 3.
without words: No, it is thy amendment he aims at, and seeks therein: and
he therefore holds not his tongue, that if thou will take it for a warning,
he may hold his hand. If the Father do but threaten the child, when the rod
lies by him; it is very likely he means not to correct him for that time,
but only to make him the more careful to obey, and the more fearful to
offend, for the time to come. Can thou thus gather hope from the chiding of
thy earthly father; and will thou find no comfort in the chidings and
threatenings of thy heavenly Father? whose bowels of tender compassion to
usward are so much larger, than any earthly Parents can be; by how much
himself the Heb. 12.9.
Father of spirits is greater than those fathers of our flesh. Yea, but who am
I, will some disconsolate soul say, that I should make Gods threatenings void?
or what my repentance, that it should cancel the Oracles of Truth, or reuerse
the sentence of the eternal Judge? Poor distressed soul, that thus disputest
against thine own peace; but see not the while the vnfathomed depth of Gods
mercy, and the wonderful dispensations of his Truth. Know, that his
threatenings are not made void, or of none effect, when thou by thy repentance
stayest the execution of them; yea rather then are they of all other times most
effectual: for then do they most of all accomplish their proper end, and the
thing for which they were intended, in thy amendment. Neither let his truth
make thee despair; but remember, that the tenor of all his most peremptory
threatenings runs with an implicit reservation and conditional exception of
Repentance: which condition if thou on thy part faithfully perform; the
judgment shall be turned away, and yet Gods Truth no whit impaired. This for
the Distressed.

. 15. 2. of Terror, to the secure.
Now for the Secure. Moses in Deuteronomy. 29. speaks of a certain Deuteronomy. 29.18.19.
root, that bears gall and wormwood; that blesses it self when God
curses, and stands unmoved when God threatens. Here is an Axe for that
root, to hew it in pieces; and, unless it Math. 7.19.
bring forth better fruit, to clean it out for the fire. If there be any
spriggs or spurns of that root here; let them also consider what has been
said, and tremble. Consider this I say and tremble, all you that make a mock
at God, and at his word, and imagine that all his threatenings are but Bruta
fulmina, empty cracks, and Powder without shot; because sundry of them have
fallen to the ground, and not done the hurt they made show of. But know, who so
ever thou art, that thus abusest the Mercy, and despisest the Truth of God;
that as his Mercy never did, so his Truth shall never fail. Thou say, some
of his threatenings have done no harm: I say as much too; and his mercy be
blessed for it: but what is that, to secure thee? If any where Gods threatenings
did no harm, and wrought no destruction; it was there only, where they did
good, and wrought repentance. If they have turned thee from thy sins, as they
have done some others: there is hope thou may turn them away from thee, as
some others have done. But if they have done no good upon thee, in working thy
repentance; certainly they hang over thee to do thee harm, and to work thy
destruction. Gods threatenings are in this respect, as all other his words are,
sure and steadfast; and such as Esaias. 55.11.
shall never return void, but accomplish that for which they were sent: if
not the one way, then without all doubt the other. If they do not humble thee,
they must ouerwhelme thee: if they work not thy conversion, they will thy
ruin. As some strong Physic, that either mendeth, or ends the Patient; so
are these. And therefore when judgments are denounced; resolve quickly, off or
on: Here is all the choice that is left thee; either Repent, or Suffer. There
is a generation of men, that (as Moses complains) Deuteronomy. 29.19.
when they hear the words of Gods curse, bless themselves in their hearts,
and say they shall have peace, though they walk in the imagination of their
own hearts; that (as S. Paul complains) Romans 2.4.
despise the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, not
taking knowledge that the goodness of God would lead them to repentance; that
(as S. Peter complains) 2 Pet. 3.3.4.
walk after their own lusts, and scoffingly jest at Gods judgments, saying,
where is the promise of his coming? But let such secure and carnal scoffers
be assured, that howsoever others speed, they shall never go unpunished:
Whatsoever becomes of Gods threatenings against others; certainly they shall
fall heavy upon them. They that have taught us their conditions, Moses and
Paul, and Peter; have taught us also their punishments. Moses tells such a
one, how ever others are dealt with, that yet Deuteronomy. 29.20.
the Lord will not spare him; but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in Gods book
shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.
S. Paul tells such men, that by despising the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, they do but Romans 2.5.
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the great day of wrath, and of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. S. Peter tells them, howsoever
they not only sleep, but even snort in deep security; that yet 2 Pet. 2.3.
their judgment of long time sleeps not, and their damnation (...), not so
much as slumbereth. Do thou then take heed, whosoever thou art, and whatsoever
thou do, that thou abuse not the Mercy of God: and to divorce it from his
Truth, is to abuse it. If when God threatens, thou layest aside his Truth, and
presumest on his bare Mercy: when he punishes, take heed he do not cry
quittance with thee, by laying aside his Mercy, and manifesting his bare Truth.
God is Psalm. 145.8.
patient and merciful: Patience will bear much, Mercy forbear much: but
being scorned, and provoked, and dared, Furor sit laese saepius patientia.
Patience it self turns furious, and Mercy it self cruel. It is Mercy,
that threatens; it is Justice, that punishes. Mercy has the first turn; and
if by Faith and Repentance we lay timely hold of it, we may keep it for ever,
and (revenging) Justice shall have nothing to do with us. But if careless and
secure we slip the opportunity, and neglect the time of Mercy; the next turn
belongs to Justice: which will render judgment without Mercy, to them that
forgot God, and despised his Mercy. That for the Secure.

Now thirdly, and generally for All.. 16. 3. of instruction, to All.
What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. God has purposely in
his threats joined and tempered Mercy and Truth together; that we might take
them together, and profit by them together. Auson. Epigr. 10.
Diuidat haec siquis, faciunt discreta venenum; Antidotum sumet, qui sociata
bibet: as he spoke of the two poisons. Either of these single, though not
through any malignant quality in themselves, (God forbid we should think so;)
yet through the corrupt temperature of our souls, becomes rank and deadly
poison to us. Take Mercy without Truth; as a cold Poison it benummeth us, and
makes us stupid with careless security. Take Truth without Mercy; as an hot
poison it scaldeth us, and scortcheth us in the flames of restless Despair.
Take both together, and mix them well: as hot and cold poisons, fitly tempered
by the skill of the Apothecarie, become medicinable; so are Gods Mercy and
Truth restoratiue to the soul. The consideration of his Truth humbles us;
without it we would be fearelesse: the consideration of his Mercy supporteth
us; without it we would be hopeless. Truth begets Fear and Repentance;
Mercy, Faith and Hope: and these two Faith and Repentance keep the soul even,
and upright and steady, as the ballast and sail do the ship; that for all the
rough waves and weather that encountereth her in the troublesome sea of this
World, she miscarryeth not, but arriueth safe and joyful in the haven where
she would be. Faith without Repentance, is not Faith, but Presumption; like a
Ship all sail, and no ballast, that tippeth over with every blast: and
Repentance without Faith, is not Repentance but Despair; like a Ship all
ballast, and no sail, which sinketh with her own weight. What is it then,
that we are to do; to turn away Gods wrath from us, and to escape the
judgments, he threatens against us? Even this: As in his Comminations, he
joins Mercy and Truth together; so are we in our Humiliations to join Faith
and Repentance together. His threatenings are true: let us not presume of
forbearance; but fear, since he has threatened, that unless we repent, he
will strike us. Yet his threatenings are but conditional: let us not despair
of forbearance; but hope, although he has threatened, that yet if we repent,
he will spare us. That is the course, which the godly, guided by the direction
of his holy Spirit, have ever truly and sincerely held; and found it ever
comfortable to assure them of sound peace, and reconciliation with God. That is
the course, which the very Hypocrites, from the suggestion of natural
conscience, have sometimes offered at, as far as Nature (enlightened, but
unrenewed) could lead them; and found it effectual, to procure them at the
least some forbearance of threatened judgments, or abatement of temporal
evils from God.

Thus have you heard three Uses made,. 17. The Promises of God how to be
understood;
of Gods Mercy in reuoking, joined with his Truth in performing, what he
threatens. One, to cheer up the distressed; that he despair not, when God
threatens: another, to shake up the secure; that he despise not, when God
threatens: a third, to quicken up all; that they believe and repent, when God
threatens. There is yet another general Use to be made hereof; which, though
it be not proper to the present argument, yet I cannot willingly pass without
a little touching at it: and that is, to instruct us for the understanding of
Gods promises. For contraries, (as Promises and Threatenings are,) being of the
like kind and reason either with other, do mutually give and take light
either to and from other. Gods threatenings are true and steadfast: his Promises
are so too [ Tit. 1.2.
promisit qui non mentitur Deus, which God that cannot lie has promised] says
the Apostle in one place; and in another. [ 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the promises of God are Yea and Amen:] and where in a third place he
speaks of Heb. 6.18.
two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, his Promise
one of those two. The Promises then of God are true; as his Threatenings are.
Now look on those Threatenings again; which we have already found to be true,
but withal Conditional, and such as must be ever understood with a clause of
reservation or exception. It is so also in the Promises of God: they are true,
but yet conditional, and so they must ever be understood with a conditional
clause. The exception there to be understood, is Repentance: and the Condition
here, Obedience. What God threatens to do unto us, absolutely in words; the
meaning is, he will do it, unless we repent and amend: and what he
promises to do for us, absolutely in words; the meaning is, he will do it,
if we believe and obey. And for so much as this clause is to be understood of
course, in all Gods promises: we may not charge him with breach of Promise,
though after he do not really perform that to us, which the letter of his
promise did import, if we break the condition, and obey not.

. 18. and entertained.
Would thou know then, how thou art to entertain Gods promises, and with
what assurance to expect them? I answer, with a confident, and obedient heart.
Confident, because he is true, that has promised; Obedient, because that is
the condition, under which he has promised: Here is a curb then for those
men's presumption; who living in sin, and continuing in disobedience, dare yet
lay claim to the good Promises of God. If such men ever had any seeming
interest in Gods Promises; the interest they had, they had but by contract and
covenant: and that covenant, whether either of the two it was, Law or Gospel,
it was conditional. The covenant of the Law wholly, and a Priori conditional;
Luke 10.28.
Hoc fac and viues, Do this and Live: and the Covenant of the Gospel too,
after a sort, and a Posteriori Conditional; Creed and Vines, Believe and Live.
If then they have broken the conditions of both covenants, and do neither
Believe, nor Do what is required: they have by their Unbelief and
Disobedience forfeited all that seeming interest they had in those Promises.
Gods Promises then, though they be the very maine supporters of our Christian
Faith and Hope, to as many of us, as whose consciences can witness unto us a
sincere desire and endeavor of performing that Obedience we have couenanted;
yet are they to be embraced even by such of us, with a reverend fear and
trembling, at our own unworthiness. But as for the unclean, and filthy, and
polluted; those Math. 6.6.
Swine and Dogs, that delight in sin and disobedience, and every abomination:
they may set their hearts at rest for these matters; they have neither part nor
fellowship in any of the sweet promises of God. Let dirty 2. Pet. 2.22.
Swine wallow in their own filth; these rich Math. 6.6.
pearls are not for them, they are too precious: let hungry 2 Pet. 2.2.
Dogs glut themselves with their own vomit; the Math. 15.26.
Childrens bread is not for them, it is too delicious: Let him that will be
filthy, Reu. 22.11.
be filthy still; the promises of God are holy things, and belong to none but
those that are holy, and desire to be holy still. For our selves in a word; let
us hope that a promise being left us, if with faith and obedience and patience
we wait for it, we shall in due time receive it: but withal Heb. 4.1.
let us fear, (as the Apostle exhorts Heb. 4.) lest a promise being left us,
through disobedience or unbelief, any of us should seem to come short of it.

. 19. The opening of the
Thus much of the former thing proposed; the mignifying of Gods Mercy, and the
clearing of his Truth in the reuocation and suspension of of threatened
judgments; by occasion of these words [ I will not bring the Evil.] There is
yet a Circumstance remaining, of this general part of my Text, which would not
be forgotten: it is the extent of time, for the suspending of the judge- [ I
will not bring the Evil in his days.] Something I would speak of it too by
your patience: it shall not be much, because the season is sharp, I have not
much sand to spend. I will not bring the evil in his days. The judgment
denounced against Ahabs house, was in the end executed upon it; as appears in
the sequel of the story, and especially from those words of Iehu (who was
himself the instrument raised up by the Lord, and used for that execution,) in
4. King. 10. 4 King, 10.10.
[ know that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which
the Lord spoke concerning the house of Ahab; for the Lord has done that which
he spoke by his servant Eliah.] Which were enough, (if there were nothing else
to be said) to justify Gods Truth in this one particular. That which Ahab
gained by his humiliation, was only the deferring of it for his time; I will
not bring the evil in his days. As if God had said, This wretched king has
provoked me, and pulled down a curse from me upon his house, which it were but
just to bring upon him and it without farther delay: yet because he made not a
scoff at my Prophet, but took my words something to heart, and was humbled by
them; he shall not say, but I will deal mercifully with him, and beyond his
merit: as ill as he deserves it, I will do him this favor, I will not bring
the evil that is determined against his house, in his days.

The thing I would observe hence, is; That, 20. 5. Observation: that though it
be some grief to foresee the evils to come;
when God has determined a judgment upon any people, family, or place; it is
his great mercy to us, if he do not let us live to see it. It cannot but be a
great grief, I say not now to a religious, but even) to any soul, that has
not quite cast off all natural affection; to forethinke and foreknow the
future calamities of his country and kindred. Herodot in Polyh; Valor. Max.
9.13,
Xerxes could not forbear weeping, beholding his huge army that followed him;
only to think, that within some few scores of years so many thousands of
proper men would be all dead and rotten: and yet that a thing that must needs
have happened by the necessity of nature, if no sad accident or common
calamity should hasten the accomplishment of it. The declination of a
Commonwealth, and the funeral of a Kingdom, foreseen in the general
corruption of manners and decay of discipline, (the most certain symptoms of
a tottering State;) have fetched tears from the eyes, and blood from the
hearts, of heathen men zealously affected to their Country. How much more
grief then must it needs be, to them that acknowledge the true God, not only
to foreknow the extraordinary plagues and miseries and calamities which shall
befall their posterity: but also to fore-read in them Gods fierce wrath and
heavy displeasure and bitter vengeance, against their own sins, and the
sins of their posterity? Our blessed Savior, though himself without sin,
and so no way accessory to the procuring of the evils that should ensue, could
not yet but Luke 19.41.
weep over the City of Jerusalem, when he beheld the present security, and
the future ruin thereof.

. 21. yet it is some happiness, to be taken away before they come.
A grief it is then to know these things shall happen: but some happiness
withal, and to be acknowledged as a great favor from God, to be assured that
we shall never see them. It is no small Mercy in him, it is no small Comfort to
us: if either he take us away, before his judgments come; or keep his
judgments away, till we be gone. When God had told Abraham in Genesis 15. that
his Genesis 15.13. -- 15.
seed should be a stranger in a land that was not theirs, meaning Egypt, where
they should be kept under, and afflicted 400. years: lest the good Patriarch
should have been swallowed up with grief at it; he comfort him, as with a
promise of their glorious deliverance at the last, so with a promise also of
prosperity to his own person, and for his own time, [ But thou shall go to
thy fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age, verse. 15.]. In
Esaias 39. when Hezekiah heard from the mouth of the Prophet Esaiah, that all the
Esaias. 39.6.-8
treasures in the Lords house and in the Kings house should be carried into
Babylon, and that his sons whom he should beget should be taken away, and
made Eunuchs in the palace of the King of Babylon: he submitted himself (as it
became him to do,) to the sentence of God; and comforted himself with this,
that yet there should be peace and truth in his days, verse. 8. In 4. King. 22.
when Huldah had prophesied of the 4. King. 2.16 -- 20.
evil that God would bring upon the City of Jerusalem, and the whole land of
Judah; in the name of the Lord she pronounces this as a courtesy from the
Lord unto good King Josiah, [Because thy heart was tender, and thou have
humbled thy self -- Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and
thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see
all the evil, which I will bring upon this place.] verse. last.

Indeed every man should have,. 22. with the Reason;
and every good man has, an honest care of posterity; would rejoice to see
things settled well for them, would grieve to see things likely to go ill with
them. That common speech which was so frequent with Dio. lib. 57.
Liberius, was monstrous, and not Illa vox scelerata atque in humana -- Cic. 3.
de finib. Vox magna et detestabilis. Senec. 2. de Clement. 2.
sauouring of common humanity Everso juvat orb mori.

Dictum R^ffini apud Claudian.


(...), When I am gone, let heaven and earth be jumbled again into their old
Chaos: but he that mended it, with Nero. apud Sueton. in Nerone, cap. 38.
(...), yea (says he,) whilst I live; seems to have renounced all that was
man in him. Aristotle has taught us better, what reason taught him, that
Arist. 1. Ethic. 11.
Res posterorum pertinent ad defunctos; the good or evil of those that come
after us, does more than nothing concern us, when we are dead and gone. This
is true: but yet Terent. Andr. 4.1.
Proximus egomet mi, though it were the speech of a Sharke in the Comedy, will
bear a good construction; Every man is (...).
nearest to himself: and that Charity, which looks abroad, and seeks not
only her own, yet begins at home, and seeks first her own. Whence it
is, that a godly man, as he has just cause to grieve for posterities sake, if
they must feel Gods judgments; so he has good cause to rejoice for his own
sake, if he shall escape them: and he is no less to take knowledge of Gods
Mercy, in sparing him; than of his Justice, in striking them.

. 23. and uses thereof: the first;
This point is useful many ways: I will touch but some of them, and that very
briefly. First, here is one Comfort, amongst many other, against the
bitterness of temporal death. If God cut thee off in the midst of thy
days, and best of thy strength; if death turn thee pale, before age have
turned thee gray; if the flower be plucked off before it begin to wither:
grudge not at thy lot therein; but meet Gods Messenger cheerfully, and embrace
him thankfully. It may be, God has some great work in hand, from which he
means to save thee. It may be, he sends death to thee, as he sent his Genesis
19.16.17.
Angel to Lot; to pluck thee out of the midst of a froward and crooked
generation, and to snatch thee away, lest a worse thing than death should
happen unto thee. Cast not therefore a longing eye back upon Sodom, neither
desire to linger in the plain; (it is but a vallie of tears and misery:) but
up to the mountain from whence comes thy salvation, lest some evil overtake
thee. Possibly that which thou think an untimely death, may be to thee a
double advantage: a great advantage, in vshering thee so early into Gods
glorious presence; and some advantage too, in plucking thee so seasonably from
Gods imminent judgments. It is a favor to be non mehercule quenquam audio hoc
anno ereptum, qui mibi non a l^iis immort. ereptus ex his miseriis, and ex
iniquissima condition vitae videretur. Cic. 5. epist. 16. Fuit hoc luctuosum
suis, acerbum patriae, grave bonis omnibus: sed ii tamen Remp. casus secuti
sunt, vt mihi non erepta L. Crasso a Diis Imm. vita, sed donata mors esse
videretur. Non vidit flagrantem etc. Id. 3. de Orat. Fortunatus illius
[Hortensii] exitus, qui ea non vidit cum fierent, quae praeuidit futura -- sed
illum videtur felicitas ipsius, qua semper est vsus, ab eis miserijs quae
consecutae sunt, morte vindicasse. Id in Bruto.
taken away betimes, when evil is determined upon those that are left.

Secondly, here is a Warning for us,. 24. the second;
to take consideration of the loss of good or useful men; and to fear, when
they are going from us, that some evil is coming toward us. The Prophet
complains of the too great and general neglect hereof in his times; [ Esaias
57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come. Esaias 57.] When God sends his Genesis 19.16.
Angel to pluck out his righteous Lots, what may Sodom expect but fire and
brimstone to be rained down upon them? When he plucketh up the fairest and
choysest flowers in his garden, and croppeth off the tops of the goodliest
poppies: who can think other, than that he means to lay his garden wast, and
to turn it into a wild wilderness? When he undermines the maine pillars of
the house, takes away the very props and buttresses of Church and Co^monweale;
sweepeth away religious Princes, wise Senators, zealous Magistrates, painful
Ministers, men of eminent rank, gifts, or example: who can be secure, that
either Church, or Common weal shall Periturae vrbis, aut malorum imminentium,
vel futurae labis, hoc primum indicium est; si decida^t viri consultores --
Ambros de Cain. and Abel c. 3.
stand up long; and not totter at least, if not fall? God in Mercy, takes such
away from the evil to come: we in wisdom should look for evil to come, when
God takes such away.

. 25. the third.
Thirdly; here is instruction for Worldlings, to make much of those few godly
ones that live among them: for they are the very pawnes of their peace, and the
pledges of their security. Think not, ye filthy Sodomites, it is for your
own sakes, that ye have been spared so long; know to whom you are beholden:
This Genesis 19 9.
fellow that came into soiourne among you, this stranger, this Lot, whom you
so hate, and malign, and disquiet; he it is that has bayled you hitherto,
and given you protection. Despise not Gods patience, and long-suffering, ye
profane ones; neither bless your selves in your ungodly ways: neither say,
We prosper, though we walk in the lusts of our hearts. This and thus we
have done, and nothing has been done to us, God holds his hand, and he
holds his tongue at us; surely Psalm. 50.21.
he is such a one as our selves. Learn, O ye despisers, that if God thus
forbear you, it is not at all for your own sakes, or because he cares not to
punish euill-doers: no; he has a little remnant, a Luke 12.13.
little flock, a little handful of his own among you; a Reu. 3.4.
few names that have given themselves unto him, and call upon him daily for
mercy upon the land, and that Ezekiel 9.4.
weep and mourn in secret and upon their beds for your abominations; whom you
hate, and despise, and persecute, and defame, and account as the very scumme of
the people, and the refuse and offscouring of all things; to whom yet you owe
your preservation. Surely, if it were not for some godly Iehoshaphat or other,
whose 4. King. 3.14.
presence God regards among you; if it were not for some zealous Moses or
other that Psalm. 106.23.
stands in the gap for you: Gods wrath had entered in upon you long ere this,
as a mighty breach of water; and as an ouerflowing deluge overwhelmed you; and
you had been swept away as with the Esaias 14.23.
besome of destruction, and devoured as stubble before the fire. It is Job
22.30.
the innocent that delivers the land, and repriueth it from destruction, when
the sentence of desolation is pronounced against it; and it is delivered by the
pureness of his hands. O the goodness of our God! that would have spared the
five Cities of the salt sea, if among so many thousands of beastly and filthy
persons there had been found but Genesis 18.32.
ten righteous ones; and that was for each city, but two persons: nay, that
would have pardoned Jerusalem, if in all the Ier. 5.1.
streets and broad places thereof, replenished with a world of Idolaters, and
Swearers, and Adulterers, and Oppressors, there had bin found but one single
man, that executed judgment, and sought the truth from his heart. But on the
madness of the men of this foolish world withal! who seek to do them most
mischief of all others, who of all others do them most good; thirsting most
after their destruction, who are the chiefest instruments of their
preservation. Oh foolish and mad world! if thou had but wit enough, yet, yet
to hug and to make much of that little flock, the hostages of thy peace, and
the earnest of thy tranquillity! if thou would but Luke 19.42
know, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
peace! Thou art yet happy, that God has a remnant in thee: and if thou knew
how to make use of this happiness, at least in this thy day, by honoring
their persons, by procuring their safety and welfare, by following their
examples, by praying for their continuance; thou might be still, and more,
and ever happy. But if these things, that belong unto thy peace, be now hidden
from thine eyes; if these men, that prolong thy peace, and prorogue thy
destruction, be now despised in thy heart, in this day of thy peace: God is
just; Thou know not how soon they may be taken from thee: and though he do
not bring the evil upon thee in their days; when they are gone, thou know
not how soon vengeance may overtake thee, and Psalm. 50.22.
then shall he tear thee in pieces, and there shall be none left to deliver
thee.

I have now done.. 26. the Conclusion,
Beseech we God the Father of mercies, for his dear son Jesus Christ his
sake, to shed his Holy Spirit into our hearts; that by his good blessing upon
us, that which has been presently delivered agreeably to his holy truth and
word, may take root downwards in our hearts, and bring forth fruit upwards
in our lives and conuersations: and so to assist us ever with his grace, that
we may with humble confidence lay hold on his mercies, with cheerful
reverence tremble at his judgments, by unfeigned repentance turn from us what
he has threatened, and by unwearied Obedience assure unto us what he has
promised. To which Holy Father, Son, and Spirit, three persons, and etc.

At Grantham Linc. 19. Iun. 1621.
THE THIRD SERMON.
3 KINGS 21.29. -- I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his sons
days will I bring the evil upon his house.


. 1. The doubts proposed.
I Come now this third time to entreat of this Scripture, and (by Gods help)
to finish it. Of the three parts whereof, heretofore propounded, viz. 1. Ahabs
Humiliation; 2. the Suspension of his judgment for life; 3. and the Deuolution
of it upon Iehoram; the two former having been already handled: the last only
now remains to be considered of. In the prosecution whereof; as heretofore
we have cleared Gods Holiness, and Truth: so we shall be now occasioned to
clear his Justice, from such imputations, as might seem to lie upon it from
this Act. And that in three respects; accordingly as Iehoram, who stands here
punishable for Ahabs sin, may be considered in a threefold reference to Ahab:
that is to say, either relate, as the son of Ahab; or disparate, as another
man from Ahab; or comparate, as a man 4 King. 3.2.
not altogether so bad as Ahab. Now what Quisquam est hominum, qui fuisse illum
[Iouem] Deum credat, tam iniustu^, tam impium, nec mortulium saltem constituta
seruantem; apud quos nefas haberetur magnum, alterum pro altero plect^ and
aliena delicta aliorum ceruicibus vindicari? Arnob. contr. Gent. lib. 7.
Justice first to punish the son for the father? or indeed secondly, any one
man for another? but most of all thirdly, the lesser offender for the greater?

It is not a matter of so much difficulty,. 2. for resolution whereof
as at the first appearance it seems, to clear these doubts; if all things
thereto appertaining be duly and distinctly considered. The greatest trouble
will be, (the things being of more variety than hardness,) to sort them in
such manner, as that we may therein proceed orderly and without confusion.
Evermore, we know, Certainties must rule Uncertainties; and clear truths,
doubtful: it will be therefore expedient for us, for the better guiding of
our judgments, first to lay down some Certainties; and then afterward by
them to measure out fit resolutions to the doubts; and then lastly from the
premises to raise some few instructions for our use.

The first Certainty then,. 3. the first Certainty.
and a maine one, is this. Howsoever things appear to us, yet God neither is,
nor can be unjust; as not in any other thing, so neither in his punishments.
Romans 3.5.6.
Is God unrighteous, that takes vengeance? God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the world? Genesis 18.25.
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Indeed the reasons of his
Justice oftentimes may be, oftentimes are unknown to us: but they never are,
they never can be unrighteous in him. If in a deep point of Law, a learned
discreet Judge should upon sufficient grounds give sentence, flat contrary to
what an ordinary by-slander would think reason, (as many times it falls
out;) it is not for the grieved party to complain of injustice done him: he
should rather impute what is done, to want of skill in himself, than of
Conscience in the Judge. Right so, if in many things Gods proceedings hold not
proportion with those characters of Justice and Equity, which our weak and
carnal reason would express; we must thence infer our own ignorance, not
his injustice. And that so much the rather; because those matters of Law are
such as fall within the comprehension of ordinary reason, whereas the ways of
God, are far removed out of our sight, and advanced above our reach: and
besides an earthly Judge is subject to misprision, misinformation, partiality,
corruption, and sundry infirmities that may vitiate his proceedings; whereas
no such thing can possibly fall upon the divine Nature. David has taught us in
the Psalm, that Psalm. 36.6.
the righteousness of God is as the great mountains, and his judgments as
the great deep. A great mountain is eath to be seen; a man that will but
open his eyes cannot ouerlooke it: but who can see into the bottom of the Sea,
or find out what is done in the depths thereof?Whatsoever we do then; let us
beware we measure not Esaias. 55.8.9.
his ways by our ways, nor his works by our works: howsoever they seem to
swerue from the rules of our ways and works; yet still Psalm. 145.17.
the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Though we
cannot fathom the deepes of his judgments, (for Ioh. 4.11.
the Well is deep, and we have not wherewithal to draw;) yet let the
assurance of the righteousness of all his proceedings stand firm and manifest
as the mountains, which can neither be removed nor hid, but stand fast rooted
for evermore. This we must rest upon as a certain Truth; howsoever,
whomsoever, whenever, God punishes, he is never unjust.

The second Certainty.. 4. The second Certainty; concerning temporal,
To speak of Punishments properly; no temporal evil is simply, and de toto
genere a punishment. By temporal evils I understand all the penal evils of
this life, that do or may befall us from our bodily conception to our bodily
deaths inclusive; hunger, cold, nakedness, sicknesses, infirmities,
discontents, reproaches, poverty, imprisonments, losses, crosses, distresses,
death, and the rest: in a word, all that Eccles. 1.13.
sore travel, which God has given to the sons of man, to be exercised
therewith, and that Sirac. 40.1.
heavy yoke which is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their mothers womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all
things. I say none of all these are properly and de toto genere to be
accounted punishments. For to make a thing simply and properly and formally a
Punishment, there are required these three conditions: 1. that it be
painful, and grievous to suffer; 2. that it be inflicted for some fault; 3.
that it be inuoluntary, and against the sufferers will. That which has but
the first of these three conditions, may be called after a sort (and truly
too) Malum Poenae, a kind of Punishment. But (...) and properly, that Evil
only is a Punishment, wherein the whole three conditions concur. Now these
temporal Evils, though they have the two first conditions; all of them being
grievous to suffer, all of them being inflicted for sin: yet in the third
condition they fail, because they are not inuoluntary simply, and perpetually,
and de suo genere inuoluntary: (to omit also a kind of failing in the second
condition; not but that they are ever inflicted for some sin deserving them;
but for that, there are withal other ends, and reasons for which they are
inflicted, and whereunto they are intended, besides and above the punishment of
the offense.) It may not be gainesaid indeed, but these things are inuoluntary
sometimes in the particular, and especially to some men, even the least of
them: but simply and universally such they are not; since by other-some men,
the greatest of them are willingly and cheerfully, not only suffered, but
desired. Not but that they are grievous to the best. (It must needs be some
grief, as to the Merchant, to see his rich lading cast ouer-board, and to the
Patient to have an old festered sore searched and sindged; so to the Christian,
to have Gods correcting hand lie heavy upon him in some temporal affliction:
The Apostle tells us plainly, Heb. 12.11.
No affliction for the present is joyous, but grievous. But inuoluntary it is
no more in him, than those other things are in them. As therefore the Merchant,
though it pity his heart to see so much wealth irrecouerably lost, yet
gets the best help and uses the best speed he can to empty the vessel of
them, for the saving of his life; and as the Patient, though est plane quasi
saeuitia, medicina de scalp^ll^ -- Non tamen secari ideirco malum: quia dolores
vtiles affert -- vlulans ille, and gemens and mugiens inter manus medici,
postmodum easdem mercede cumulabit. Tertullian in Scorp. cap. 5.
he smart when the wound is dressed, yet thanketh and sees the Surgion for
his pains, in hope of future ease: so the Christian, though these temporal
evils somewhat trouble him, yet he is willing to them, and he is cheerful
under them, and he acknowledges Gods goodness in them, and returns him
thanks for them; because he knows they are sent for his future good, and
that they will at the last Heb 12.11.
yield them the peaceable fruit of righteousness when they shall have been
sufficiently exercised thereby. See Act. 5.41.
Peter and John rejoicing, when they suffered for the name of Jesus, and St
Paul so far from fearing, that Phil. 1.23.
he longed after his disolution; and the blessed Martyrs running to a faggot,
as to a feast. Verily, Gods children see great good in these things, which
others account evils: and therefore they take them not as bare punishments
sent to afflict them; but as glorious trials to exercise them, as gracious
corrections to humble them, as precious receipts to purge, and recover, and
restore, and strengthen them.

So that it is not any of the temporal evils of this life;. 5. and Eternal
punishments.
but much rather the everlasting pains of hell, wherein the just reward and
punishment of sin properly and especially consists. Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is Death: the proper wages of sin eternal death. For so
the Antithesis in that place gives it to be understood, viz. of such a death
as is opposed to Eternal life, and that is Eternal Death; [The wages of sin
is death: but the gift of God is Eternal life.] Romans 6. By the distribution of
those Eternal punishments then, we are rather to judge of Gods righteousness
in recompencing sinners; than by the dispensation of these temporal evils. It
was a stumbling block to the (...). Marmoreo tumulo Licinus jacet; at Cato
paruo: Pompeius nullo. Credimus esse Deos? Vario. See Plat. de leg. Cic. 3. de
Not. deor. Senec. de prouid. Aug. 3. de lib. arb. 2. Menand. apud Stob. Sermon.
104.
heathen to see good men oppressed and vice prosper: it made them doubt; some
whether there were a God, or no; others nothing better, whether a providence,
or no. But what marvel, if they stumbled, who had no right knowledge either of
God, or of his providence; when Job, and David, and other the dear children of
God have been much puzzled with it? David confesses in Psalm. 73. that Psalm.
73.23.
his feet had welnigh slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked: and
certainty down he had been, had he not happily stepped Ibid. 17.
into the Sanctuary of God, and there understood the end of these men.
Temporal evils, though they be sometimes punishments of sin: yet they are
not ever sent as punishments, (because sometimes they have other ends and uses,
and are ordinabilia in melius;) and secondly, they are never the only
punishments of sin; because there are greater and more lasting punishments
reserved for sinners after this life, of which there is no other use or end,
but to punish; since they are not ordinabilie in melius. If we will make these
temporal evils the measure, whereby to judge of the Justice of God, we
cannot secure our selves from erring dangerously: Gods purposes in the
dispensation of these unto particular men being unsearchable. But those
everlasting punishments are they, wherein Gods Justice shall be manifested to
every eye, in due time; at that last day, which is therefore called by St Paul
Romans 2. Rom 2.5.
the day of wrath, and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Implying, that howsoever God is just in all his judgments and acts of
providence, even upon earth; yet the Counsels and Purposes of God in these
things are often secret, and past our finding out: but at the last great day,
when Ibid. 6.
he shall render to every man according to his works his everlasting
recompense; then his vengeance shall manifest his wrath, and the righteousness
of his judgment shall be revealed to every eye in the condign punishment of
unreconciled sinners. That is the second Certainety; Temporal evils are not
always, nor simply, nor properly, the punishments for sin.

If any man shall be yet unsatisfied,. 6. the third certainety; that all Evils
of Pain
and desire to have Gods Justice somewhat farther cleared, even in the
disposing of these temporal things: although it be neither safe, nor possible
for us, to search far into particulars, yet some general satisfaction we may
have from a third Certainety: and that is this. Every evil of Pain,
whatsoever it be, or howsoever considered, which is brought upon any man, is
brought upon him evermore for sin, yea and that also for his own personal
sin. Every branch of this assertion would be well marked. I say first, [
Every Evil of Pain, whatsoever it be,] whether natural defects and
infirmities in soul or body, or outward afflictions in goods, friends, or good
name; whether inward distresses of an afflicted, or terrors of an affrighted
conscience; whether temporal or eternal Death; whether evils of this life,
or after it: or whatsoever other evil it be, that is any way greiuous to any
man; every such evil is for sin.

. 7. ^owsoeuer considered,
I Say secondly, every evil of pain, howsoever considered: whether formally,
and sub ratione poenae, as the proper effect of Gods vengeance and wrath
against sin; or as a fatherly correction and chasticement, to nurture us for
some past sin, or as a medicinal preservative, to strengthen us against some
future sin; or as a clogging chain to keep under and disable us from some
outward work of sin; or as a fit matter and object whereon to exercise our
Christian graces of faith, charity, patience, humility, and the rest; or as an
occasion given and taken by Almighty God, for the greater manifestation of the
glory of his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, in the remoueal of it; or as
an act of Exemplary justice, for the admonition and terror of others; or for
whatsoever other end, purpose, or respect it be inflicted.

. 8. are for the si^ne
I say thirdly, Every such evil of pain, is brought upon us for sin. There
may be other ends, there may be other occasions, there may be other uses of
such Evils: but still the original Cause of them all, is sin. [ Psalm. 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin.] It was not for any Ioh.
9.2.3.
extraordinary notorious sins, either of the blind man himself, or of his
parents, above other men, that he was borne blind. Our Savior Christ
acquitteth them of that, Ioh. 9. in answer to his Disciples, who were but too
forward (as God knows most men are,) to judge the worst. Our Saviors answer
there, never intended other, but that still the true cause deserving that
blindness was his, and his parents sin: but his purpose was to instruct his
Disciples, that that infirmity was not laid upon him rather than upon another
man, merely for that reason because he (or his parents) had deserved it more
than other men; but for some farther ends which God had in it in his secret and
everlasting purpose, and namely this among the rest, that the works of God
might be manifest in him, and the Godhead of the son made glorious in his
miraculous cure. As in Nature, the intention of the sea Arist. 2. Phys.
End does not overthrow, but rather suppose the necessity of the Matter: so is
it in the works of God, and the dispensations of his wonderful providence. It
is from Gods Mercy, ordering them to those Ends he has purposed; that his
punishments are good; but it is withal from our sins, deserving them as the
Cause, that they are just; even as the rain that falls upon the earth,
whether it moisten it kindly, and make it fruitful, or whether it choke and
slocken and drown it; yet still had its beginning from the vapors, which the
earth it self sent up. All those Evils, which fall so daily and thick upon
us from heaven, (whether to warn us, or to plague us,) are but arrows which
our selves first shot up against heaven, and now drop down again with doubled
force upon our heads. Omnis poena propter culpam: all Evils of pain, are for
the evils of sin.

. 9. of the sufferer.
I say fourthly; All such Evils are for our own sins. The Scriptures are
plain. 1 Pet. 1.17.
God judges every man according to his own works. Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden, etc. God has enjoined it as a Law for
Magistrates, (wherein they have also his example to lead them;) that Deuteronomy.
24.16.
not the fathers for the children, nor the children for the fathers, but every
man should be put to death for his own sin. Deuteronomy. 24 If Israel take up a
Proverb of their own heads, [ Ezekiel 18.2. etc. Ier. 31.29.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge;]
they do it without cause, and they are checked for it. The soul that sins,
it shall dye: and if any man eat sour grapes, his own teeth, (and not
another for him) shall be set on edge thereby. For indeed, how can it be
otherwise? or who can reasonably think, that our most gracious God, who is so
ready to take from us the guilt of our own, should yet lay upon us the guilt
of other men's sins? The only exception to be made in this kind, is that
alone satisfactory punishment of our blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ:
not at all for his own sins, (far be the impiety from us, so to imagine;
for 1. Pet. 2.22.
he did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth:) but for
ours. He Psalm. 69.4. Non rapui, and exsolvebam: non peccaui, and poenas dabam.
Aug. ibi.
paid that which he never took; it was Esaias 53.5.
for our transgressions that he was wounded, and the chasticement of our peace
was laid upon him. Yet even those meritorious sufferings of his, may be said
(in a qualified sense) to have been for his own sins: (although in my
judgment, it be far better to abstain from such like speeches, as are of
ill and suspicious sound, though they may be in some sort defended.) But how
for his own sins? His own by Commission? By no means: (God forbid any man
should teach, any man should conceive so; the least thought of this were
blasphemy:) but his own by Imputation. Not that he had sinned, and so
deserved punishment: but that he had delictorum susceptor, non commissor. Aug.
in Psalm. ^8.
taken upon him our sins, which deserved that punishment. As he that
undertakes for another man's debt, makes it his own, and stands chargeable
with it, as if it were his own personal debt: so Christ becoming surety for
our sins, made them delicta nostra sua delicta secit, vt iustitiam suam
nostram iustitiam faceret. Aug. exp. 2. in Psalm. 21.
his own, and so was punishable for them, as if they had been his own
personal sins; 1. Pet. 2.24.
who his own self bare our sins in his own body upon the tree, 1. Pet. 2.
That he was punished for us, who himself deserved no punishment; it was,
because 2. Cor. 5.21.
he was made sin for us, who himself knew no sin. So that I say, in some
sense the assertion may be defended universally, and without exception: but
yet I desire rather it might be thus; Christ's only excepted, all the Pains
and Evils of men are brought upon them for their own sins.

These three points then are certain: and it is needful they should be well
understood and remembered;. 10. The fathers sins punished in their children:
because nothing can be objected against Gods Justice in the punishing of
sin, which may not be easily removed, if we have recourse to some one or
other of these three Certainties, and rightly apply them. All the three doubts
proposed in the beginning, have one and the same resolution: answer one; and
answer all. Ahab here sins by Oppression: and yet the evil must light,
though not all of it, (for some part of it fell, and was performed upon Ahab
himself,) yet the main of it upon his son Iehoram. [I will not bring the
Evil in his days, but in his sons days will I bring the Evil upon his
house.] It is not Iehorams case alone: it is a thing that often has, and daily
does befall many others. In Genesis 9. when Noah's ungracious son Ham had
discovered his Fathers nakedness: the old man (no doubt, by Gods special
inspiration) lays the curse not upon Ham himself, but upon his son Canaan,
[ Genesis 9.25.
Cursed be Canaan etc.] And God ratified the curse, by rooting out the
posterity of Canaan, first out of the pleasant Land, wherein they were seated;
and then afterward from the face of the whole earth. Ieroboams 3. King.
15.19.30.
Idolatry cut off his posterity from the Kingdom; and the 1. Sam. 2.33 -- 35.
wickedness of Ely his sons, theirs from the Priesthood, of Israel. Gehasi
with the bribe he took, purchased a 4. King. 5.27.
leprosy in fee-simple to him and his heirs for ever. The Jews, for stoning
the Prophets of God, but most of all for crucifying the Son of God, brought
bloud-guiltinesse not only upon themselves, but upon their children also, [
Mat. 27.25.
His blood be upon us, and upon our children.] The wrath of God therefore
coming upon them 1. These. 2.16.
to the utmost, and the curse of God abiding upon their posterity even unto
this day: wherein they still remain, (and God knows how long they shall) a
base and despised people; scattered almost every where, and every where hated.
Instances might be endless, both in private persons and families, and in
whole Kingdoms and Countries. But it is a needless labor to multiply
instances in so confessed a point: especially God Almighty having thus far
declared himself and his pleasure herein in the second commandment of the
Law; that he will not spare in his Exodus 20.5.
jealousy sometimes to visit the sins of fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation.

There is no question then de facto, but so it is; 11. and how this may stand
with the Justice of God.
the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children: but de jure, with
what right and equity it is so, it is (as S. Chrysostom speaks) Chrysostom. in
Gen hom. 28.
(...), a question famous, and much debated. The considerations, which I find
giuen-in for the resolution of this question, Augustine. qu. 42. in Deuter.
Theophylact in Ioh. 9. Peter. 14. in Gen disp. 4. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 87.8 Sasb.
quodlib. 3.
by those that have purposely handled it, are very many. But multitude breeds
confusion: and therefore I purpose no more but two only, unto which so many of
the rest as are material may be reduced; and those two grounded upon the
certainties already declared. The former concerns the Nature of those
Punishments, which are inflicted upon the children for the fathers sins; the
later, the condition of those children, upon whom such punishments are
inflicted.

As to the first. The punishments which God brings usually upon the children
for the fathers sins, are only temporal and outward punishments.. 12.
Consid. 1. such punishments are only temporal, not spiritual.
Some have been plagued with infectious diseases: as 4 King. 5.27.
Gehazies posterity; and 2 Samuel 3.29
Ioabs also, if that curse which David pronounced against him took effect, as
it is like it did. Some have come to untimely and uncomfortable ends: and
David's children 2 Samuel 13.29
Ammon and 2 Samuel 18.15
Absalon; and the Number. 16.37.33.
little ones of Dathan and Abiram, and others. Some have had losses, and
reproaches, and manifold other distresses and afflictions in sundry kinds, too
long to rehearse. And all these, temporal judgments their fathers sins
might bring upon them: even as the faith, and virtues, and other graces of the
fathers do sometimes conueigh temporal blessings to their posterity. So
Jerusalem was saved in the siege by Sonacherib, for Esaias. 37.35.
David's sake many years after his death; Esaias 37.35. And the succession of the
Crown of Israel continued in the line of 4 King. 10.30.
Iehu for four descents; for the zeal that he showed against the worshippers
of Baal, and the house of Ahab. So then, men may fare the better; and so they
may fare the worse too, for the virtues, or vices of their Ancestors.
Outwardly, and temporally they may: but spiritually, and eternally they cannot.
For as never yet any man went to heaven for his fathers goodness; so neither
to hell for his fathers wickedness.

. 13. An Objection; with the first,
If it be objected; that for any people or person to suffer a Amos 8.11.
famine of the word of God, to be deprived of the use and benefit of the
sacred and saving ordinances of God, to be left in utter darkness without the
least glimpse of the glorious light of the Gospel of God, without which
(ordinarily) there can be no knowledge of Christ, nor means of Faith, nor
possibility of Salvation; to be thus visited, is more than a temporal
punishment: and yet this kind of spiritual judgment does sometimes light
upon a Nation or people, for the unbelief, and unthankfulness, and
impenitencie, and contempt of their Progenitors whilst they had the light: and
that therefore the Children for the Parents, and Posterity for their Ancestrie
are punished not only with temporal, but even with spiritual judgments also.
If any shall thus object, one of these two answers may satisfy them. First, if
it should be granted, the want of the Gospel to be properly a spiritual
judgment; yet it would not follow that one man were punished spiritually for
the fault of another. For betwixt private persons, and public societies there
is this difference: that in private persons, every succession makes a change,
so that when the father dies, and the son comes after him, there is not
now the same person that was before, but another; but in Cities, and Countries,
and Kingdoms, and all public societies, succession makes no change; so that
when Eccles. 1.4.
one generation passes, and another comes after it, there is not another
City, or Nation, or People than there was before, but the same. If then the
people of the same land should in this generation be visited with any such
spiritual judgment, as is the remoueall of their Candlestick, and the want
of the Gospel, for the sins and impieties of their Ancestors in some former
generations: yet this ought no more to be accounted the punishment of one for
another; than it ought to be accounted the punishing of one for another, to
punish a man in his old age for the sins of his youth. For as the body of a
man, though the primitive moisture be continually spending and wasting
therein, and that decay be still repaired by a daily supply of new and
alimentall moisture, is yet truly the same Body; and as a River fed with a
living spring, though the water that is in the channel be continually running
out, and other water freshly succeeding in the place and room thereof, is
truly the same River: so a Nation or People, though one generation is ever
passing away, and another coming on, is yet truly the same Nation or People
after an hundred, or a thousand years, which it was before.

. 14. and second answer thereunto.
Again secondly; the want of the Gospel, is not properly a spiritual, but
rather a temporal punishment. We call it indeed sometimes a spiritual
Judgment, as we do the free use of it a spiritual Blessing: because the
Gospel was written for, and revealed unto the Church, by the spirit of God;
and also because it is the holy ordinance of God, and the proper instrument
whereby (ordinarily) the spiritual life of Faith and of Grace is conueighed
into our souls. But yet properly and primarily, those only are Epli. 1.3.
spiritual blessings, which are immediately wrought in the soul by the spirit
of God, and can never be lost where they are once placed, and are proper and
peculiar to those that are borne again of the spirit: and all those on the
contrary, which may be subject to decay, or are common to the reprobate with
the elect, or may turn to the hurt of the receiver, are to be esteemed
temporal blessings, and not spiritual. And such a blessing, is the outward
partaking of the word and ordinances of God: the want thereof therefore
consequently, is to be esteemed a temporal judgment, rather than spiritual.
So that, notwithstanding this instance, still the former consideration holds
good: that God sometimes visits the sins of the fathers upon the children
with outward and temporal; but never with spiritual and eternal punishments.

Now, if there could no more be said to this doubt, but only this; it were
sufficient to clear Gods Justice: since we have been already instructed,
that these temporal judgments are not always properly and formally the
punishments of sin.. 15. Temporal evils of children though not properly;
For as outward blessings are indeed no true blessings properly; because Wicked
men have their portion in them as well as the Godly, and they may turn (and
often do) to the greater hurt of the soul, and so become rather Punishments,
than Blessings: so to the contrary, outward punishments are no true punishments
properly; because the Godly have their share in them as deep as the Wicked,
and they may turn (and often do) to the greater good of the soul, and so
become rather Blessings, than Punishments.

If it be yet said; But why then does God threaten them as Punishments,. 16.
are yet after a sort punishments to the Fathers: and how.
if they be not so? I answer. First; because they seem to be punishments, and
are by most men so accounted for their grieuousnesse, though they be not
properly such in themselves. Secondly; from the common event; because vt
plurimum and for the most part they prove punishments to the sufferer, in case
he be not bettered, as well as grieved, by them. Thirdly, because they are
indeed a kind of punishment, though not then deserved, but formerly. Fourthly,
and most to the present purpose; because not seldom the (...).

Chrysostom. in Genesis hom 29. Filij bona valetudo, felicitas, patrimonium perti^et ad
patrem. Felicior futurus, si saluum habuerit filium; infelicio^, si amiserit.

Senec. 5. de benes. 19. Nihil interest, in se quis veritus fuerit, an in
liberis: cum pro affectu parents magis in liberis terreantur. l. 8. S. haec
quae. ff. 4.2. Quod metus causa.


father himself is punishment in them, who through tenderness of affection
takes very much to heart the evils that happen to his child; sometimes more,
than if they had happened to himself. See David 2 Samuel 18.33.
weeping and puling for his traiterous son Absalon, when he was gone; more 2 Samuel 19.5.6.
affectionately, than we find he did for the hazzards, of his own person and
of the whole State of Israel, whiles he lived. For if it be a punishment to a
man to sustain losses in his cattle, or goods, or lands, or friends, or any
other thing he has: how much more then in his children, of whom he makes
more account than of all the rest, (as being not only an image but even a
Natura pater and filius eadem esse persona pene intelligitur. l. vlt. Cod.
6.26. de impub. -- pars quodammodo corporis eius. l. 22. Cod. 11.47. de agric.
and cens.
part of himself;) and for whose sakes especially it is, that he makes so
much account of the rest? The Egyptians were plagued not only in the blasting
of their corn, the murraine of their cattle, the vnwholsomenesse of their
waters, the annoiance of vermin, and such like; but also and much more in the
death of their Exodus 11.5.6.
firstborn: that was their last, and greatest plague. The news of his
children slain with the fall of an house, did put Job (though not quite out of
patience, yet) more Then Job arose, etc. Job 1.20.
to the trial of his patience, than the loss of all his substance besides;
though of many thousands of Oxen, and Asses, and Sheep, and Camels. Now if no
man charge God with injustice, if when a man sins he punish him in his body,
or goods, or good name, or in other things: why should it be suspected of
injustice, when he sins, to punish him in his children? at least there,
where the evil of the children seen or foreseen, redoundeth to the grief
and affliction of the father? And so was David's murder and adultery justly
punished in the loss of his incestuous son Amnon, and of his murtherous son
Absalon. Upon which ground, some think that clause [ Exodus 10.5.
unto the third and fourth generation] to have been added in the second
Commandment, respectively to the ordinary ages of men; who oftentimes live to
see their children to the third, and sometimes to the fourth generation, but
very seldom farther: Implying, as they think, that God usually punishes the
sins of the fathers upon the children, within such a compass of time, as
they may in likelihood see it, and grieve at it; and then what ever evil it
be, it is rather inflicted as a punishment to them, than to their children.
This in part satisfies the doubt: that the punishments which God lays upon
the children for the fathers sins, are only temporal punishments, and
consequently by our second ground not properly punishments.

But yet for so much as these temporal evils,. 17. Consid. 2. The children
that ar^ punished for their fathers sins
(be it properly, be it improperly,) are still a kind of Punishment; and we
have been already taught from the third ground, that all evils of punishment,
whether proper or improper, are brought upon men evermore and only for their
own personal sins: the doubt is not yet wholly removed, unless we admit of
a second Consideration; and that concerns the condition of those children,
upon whom such punishments are inflicted for their fathers sins.

And first;. 18. either first, by 1. Nature,
it is considerable, that children most times tread in their fathers steps,
and continue in their sins: and so draw upon themselves their punishments.
And this they do especially, by a threefold conueiance of sin from their
Parents; viz. Nature, Example, and Education. First, Nature: and this is seen
especially in those sins, that are more sensual than other, and do after a
sort symbolize with the predominant humor in the body. It is plain from
experience, that some sins (especially the pronenesse, and inclination unto
them) do follow some complexions and constitutions of body, more than others;
and arise from them: As Ambition, Rage, Rashness, and turbulent entermedling
in other men's affairs, from Choler; Wantonness, and Licentious Mirth from
Blood; Drunkenness, and Laziness from Fleagme; Envy, and Sullenness, and
implacable thirst of Revenge from Melencholy. And these kind of sins (to note
that by the way) do oftentimes prove our master-sinnes; such as Divines
usually call our bosom, and darling, and beloved sins, ( Peccatum in
delicijs) because naturally we have a stronger pronenesse and inclination to
these, than to other sins. And therefore we ought to pray against, and to
strive against, and to fight against these sins, and to avoid the occasions
of them, especially and above all other sins. And if it shall please God so to
strengthen us with his grace, and enable us by his spirit, as to have in some
good measure subdued these sins in us, and denied our selves in them: it is
to be comfortably hoped, that we have wrought the maine and the masterpiece of
our Mortification. But to return where I was; as color and favor and
proportion, of hair and face and lineament: and as diseases and infirmities of
the Body; so commonly the abilities, and dispositions, and tempers of the mind
and affections became hereditary, and (as we say) (...). Euripid. apud Stob.
Sermon. 88.
run in a blood. Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. An evil bird hatcheth
an evil egg; and one (...). Egdor. ibid.
viper will breed a generation of vipers.

Secondly, We are (God knows) but too apish:. 19. 2 Example;
apt to be led much by examples, more by the worst, most by the nearest. --
Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
Velocius and citius nos Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica. Young ones will
do, as they see the old ones do before them: and they will on; non qua
eundum, sed qua itur; not as their father bids them, but as he leads them.
Iuuenal. ibid.
Si nociua senem inuat alea -- If the -- probum patrem esse oportet, Qui gnatum
suum probiorem, quam ipsus fuerit, postulet. Plat. in Pseud.
father be given to swearing, or gaming, or scoffing, or whoring, or riot, or
contention, or excess in drink, or any thing else that naught is: let him
counsel and advise his son as often and as earnestly as he can; he shall
find one cursed example, (without the singular mercy and grace of God) to do
more hurt upon him, than a thousand wholesome admonitions will do good.
Iuuenal. vbi Supra.
-- fugienda patrum vestigia ducunt, Et monstrata diu veteris trahit orbita
culpae.

. 20. 3. or education,
A third means of conueying vices from parents to children is Education: when
parents train and bring up their children in those sinful courses, wherein
themselves have lived and delighted. So covetous worldlings are ever distilling
into the ears of their children precepts of parsimony and good husbandry,
reading them lectures of thrift, and inculcating principles of getting and
saving. Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
Sunt quaedam vitiorum elementa: his protinus illos imbuet, and coget vitiorum
ediscere sordes. Idle wandering Beggars train up their children in a trade of
begging and lying, and cursing, and filching, and all idleness and abominable
filthiness. And idolatrous parents how careful they are to nuzzle up their
Posterity in Superstition and Idolatry; I would our protest Popelings, and
halfe-baked Protestants, did not let us see but too often. Wretched and
accursed is our supine carelessenesse; if these men's wicked diligence, (whose
first care for the fruit of their bodies, is to poison their souls, by
sacrificing their sons and daughters to Idols;) shall rise up in judgment
against us, and condemn our foul neglect, in not seasoning the tender years
of our children with such religious, godly and virtuous Ephesians. 6.4.
informations, as they are ca^^ble of.

. 21. tread in their fathers steps;
How ever it be, whether by Nature, Example, or Education, one, or more, or all
of these: certain it is, that most times sins -- re^lit ad authors genus,
Stirp^mque primam degener sanguis refert. Senec. in Hippol. act. 3.
pass a long from the father to the son, and so downward, by a kind of
lineall descent from predecessors to posterity; and that for the most part
with (...)* Homer. Odyst. b.
advantage and increase: whole families being tainted with the special vices
of their stock. John Baptist speaks of Math. 3.7.
a generation of vipers: and if we should but observe the conditions of some
families in a long line of succession; might we not epsy here and there, even
whole generations of Drunkards, and generations of Sweareres, and generations
of Idolaters, and generations of Wordlings, and generations of seditious, and
of envious, and of riotous, and of haughty, and of unclean persons, and of
sins in other kinds? This ungodly king Ahab; see how all that come of him,
taste of him, and have some spice and relish of his evil manners. Of his son
Ahaziah, that next succeeded him in the kingdom of Israel, the Text says in
the next Chapter, that 3. King. 22.52.
he walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother. And another
Ahaziah king of Judah, the grandchild of Iehosaphat by the fathers side, and
of Ahab by the mothers; drew infection from the mother, and so trod in the
steps rather of this his wicked grandfather Ahab, than of his good grandfather
Iehosophat: and of him therefore the Scripture says remarkeably in 4. King. 8.
4 King. 8*27.
He walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the
Lord, as did the house of Ahab, for he was the son in Law of the house of
Ahab. Little does any man think, what hurt he may do unto, and what plague he
may bring upon, his posterity, by joining himself or them in too strict a bond
of nearenesse with an ill or an idolatrous house or stock. Here, we see, is
Ahabs house taxed, and not his person only: even the whole family, and
brood, and kin of them, branch and root. And that Iehoram also who is the son
here spoken of and meant in my Text, did 4 King. 3.2.
Patrisare too as well as the rest of the kindred, and take after the father,
(though not in that height of impiety, and idolatry, as his father) is plain
from the sequel of the Story. And so doing, and partaking of the Evils of sin
with his father; why might he not also in justice partake of the Evils of
punishment with his father?

. 22. or secondly are possessors of something from their fathers with Gods
curse cleaving thereunto.
Secondly, the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children sometimes,
as possessours of something which their fathers left them, with Gods curse
cleaving unto it. As in the Law, not only he, that had an See Leuit. 15.2 --
11.
issue of uncleanness, made them unclean that touched him; but even the
saddle or stool he sat upon, the clothes he wore, the bed whereon he lay,
any vessel of earth or of wood that he did but touch, was enough to bring
legal pollution and uncleanness upon any other person, that should but touch
them: So, not only our fathers sins, if we touch them by imitation; but
even their (...). Euripid.
lands and goods and houses and other things that were theirs, are sufficient
to derive Gods curse upon us, if we do but hold them in possession. What is
gotten by any evil and unjust and unwarrantable means, is in Gods sight and
estimation no better than stolen. Now stolen goods, we know, though they have
passed through never so many hands before, that man is answereable for, in
whose hands they are found, and in whose custody and possession they are. God
hates not sin only; but the very monuments of sin too: and his curse
fasteneth, not only upon the agent; but upon the brute and dead materials
too: and where theft, or oppression, or perjury, or sacrilege have laid the
foundation, and reared the house; there the Zach. 5.4.
Curse of God creeps in between the walls and seelings, and lurketh close
within the stones and the timber, and as a fretting moath or canker, insensibly
gnaweth asunder the pins and the joints of the building, till it have vnframed
it, and resolved it into a ruinous heap: for which mischief there is no
remedy, no preservation from it, but one; and that is, free and speedy
Restitution. For any thing we know, what Ahab the father got without justice,
Iehoram the son held without scruple. We do not find, that ever he made
restitution of Naboths vineyard to the right heir; and it is like enough he
did not: and then between him and his father there was but this difference;
the father was the thief, and he the receiver; which two the Law seuereth not
either in guilt or punishment, but wrappeth them equally in the same guilt, and
in the same punishment -- (...). Phocyl.
(...). And who knows, whether the very holding of that vineyard might not
bring upon him the curse of his fathers oppression? it is plain that 4 King.
9.25.26.
vineyard was the place, where the heauiest part of that curse ouertooke him.

But that which is the vpshot of all, and vntieth all the knots both of this
and of all other doubts,. 23.
that can be made against Gods justice, in punishing one for another,. 23.
Consid. 3. from the distinction of impulsive Causes.
arises from a third consideration; which is this. That the children are
punished for the fathers sins, or indefinitely any one man for the sins of any
other man; it ought to be imputed to those sins of the fathers or others, not
as to the causes properly deserving them, but only as occasioning those
punishments. It pleases God to take occasion from the sins of the fathers or
of some others, to bring upon their children, or those that otherwise belong
unto them in some kind of relation, those evils which by their own
corruptions and sins they have justly deserved. This distinction of the Cause
and Occasion, if well heeded, both fully acquiteth Gods Justice; and abundantly
reconcileth the seeming Contradictions of Scripture, in this Argument: and
therefore it will be worth the while, a little to open it.

. 24. The Impulsive Cause what it is.
There is a kind of Cause de numero efficientium, which the learned for
distinctions sake call the Impulsive Cause: and it is such a cause, as quae
principalem efficientem impellit ad efficiendum. Keckerm. 1. Syst. Log. 10.
moves and induces the principal Agent, to do that which it does. For
Example: A Schoolmaster corrects a boy with a rod for neglecting his book.
Of this correction here are three distinct causes, all in the rank of
efficients; viz. the Master, the Rod, and the boys neglect: but each has its
proper causality in a different kind and manner from other. The Master is the
Cause, as the principal Agent, that does it; the Rod is the Cause, as the
Instrument wherewith he does it; and the boys neglect the impulsive cause, for
which he does it. Semblably, in this judgment which befell Iehoram; the
principal efficient cause and Agent, was God, (as he is in all other
punishments and judgments; Amos 3.6.
shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.) and
here he takes it to himself, [ I will bring the evil upon his house.] The
Instrumental Cause under God, was 4. King. 9.
Iehu; whom God raised up, and endued with zeal and power for the execution of
that vengeance, which he had determined against Ahab and against his house; as
appears in 4. Kings 9. and 10. But now, what the true proper Impulsive cause
should be, for which he was so punished, and which moved God at that time and
in that sort to punish him; that is the point wherein consists the chiefest
difficulty in this matter, and into which therefore we are now to enquire:
viz. whether that were rather his own sin, or his father Ahabs sin?

Whether we answer for this, or for that: we say but the truth in both: for
both sayings are true;. 25. Two sorts of impulsive Causes;
[God punished him for his own,] and [God punished him for his Fathers sin.]
The difference only this. His own sins were the impulsive cause that
deserved the punishment; his fathers sin the impulsive cause that occasioned
it: and so indeed upon the point, and respectively to the justice of God,
rather his own sins were the cause of it, than his fathers; both because
justice does especially look at the desert, and also because that which
deserves a punishment is more effectually, and primarily, and properly the
impulsive cause of punishing, than that which onley occasioneth it. The terms
whereby Artists express these two different kinds of impulsive causes
(borrowed from Galen, and the Physicians,) of See Keckerm. 1. Syst. Log. 10.
called by Brulif Causa Dispositiua. and Excitatiua, apud Altenst. in dict.
Causa.
(...), and (...), would be excellent, and full of satisfaction; if they were
of easy understanding. But for that they are not so, especially to such as are
not acquainted with the terms and learning of the Schools; I forbear to use
them: and rather than to take the shortest cut over hedge and ditch, choose to
lead you an easier and plainer way, though it is something about; and that by a
familiar example.

. 26. explained by a familiar example;
A man has lived for some good space in reasonable state of health; yet by
gross feeding, and through continuance of time, his body the whilst has
contracted many vicious, noisome, and malignant humors. It happens he has
occasion to ride abroad in bad weather; takes wet on his feet or neck,
gets cold with it, comes home, finds himself not well, falls a
shaking first, and anon after into a dangerous and lasting fever. Here is a
fever; and here are two different causes of it: an antecedent cause within, the
abundance of noisome and crude humors, (that is interiores dispositiones, quae
irritantur ab externis causis. Melancthon. causa dispositiua Brulifer.
causa (...)); and the evident cause ab extra, his riding in the wet, and
taking cold upon it, (and that is Galens Causa externa irritatrix. Melancthon.
causa excitatiua. Brulifer.
causa (...)). Let us go on a little, and compare these causes. The Physician
is sent for, the sick man's friends they stand about him, and in comes the
Physician among them, and enquireth of him and them how he got his fever. They
presently give him such information as they can, (and the information is both
true, and sufficient, so far as it reaches:) they tell him the one cause,
the occasional cause, the outward evident cause: [Alas, Sir, he rode such a
journey, such a time, got wet on his feet, and took cold upon it; and that
has brought him to all this.] That is all they are able to say to it: for
other cause they know none. But by and by after some suruiew of the state of
the Body, he is able to inform them in the other cause, the inward and
original cause; whereof they were as ignorant before, as he was of that other
outward one: and he tells them the cause of the malady is superfluity of
crude and noisome humors, rankenesse of blood, abundance of melancholy, tough
fleame, or some other like thing within. Now if it be demanded, which of these
two is rather the cause of his sickness? The truth is, that inward antecedent
cause within, is the very cause thereof; although perhaps it had not bred a
fever at that time, if that other outward occasion had not been. For by that
inward hidden cause the body was prepared for an ague: only there wanted some
outward fit accident, to stir and provoke the humors within, and to set them
on working. And the parties body being so prepared, might have fallen into the
same sickness, by some other accident as well as that; as over heating
himself with exercise, immoderate watching, some distemper or surfeit in diet,
or the like: But neither that, nor any of these, nor any other such accident
could have cast him into such a Fit, if the humors had not bin ripe, and the
body thereby prepared to entertain such a disease. So as the bad humors
within may rather be said to be the true cause, and that cold-taking but the
occasion of the Ague: the disease it self issuing from the hidden cause
within; and the outward accident being the cause, not so much of the disease it
self, why the Ague should take him, as why it should take him at that time,
rather than at another, and hold him in that part or in that manner rather than
in another.

. 27. and applied to the present Argument.
From this Example we may see in some proportion, how our own sins, and other
men's, concur as joint impulsive causes of those punishments, which God
brings upon us. Our own sins they are the true Causa (...), interna,
antecedens, dispositiua.
hidden antecedent causes, which deserve the punishments: our fathers sins,
or our governors sins, or our neighbors sins, or whatsoever other man's
sins, that are visited upon us, are only the Causa (...), exterterna,
irritatrix, excitatiua.
outward evident causes (or rather occasions,) why we should be punished at
this time, and in this thing, and in this manner, and in this measure, and with
these circumstances. And as in the former Example, the Patients friends
considered one cause, and the Physician another; they the evident and outward,
he the inward and antecedent cause: so respectively to Gods Justice, our own
sins only are the causes of our punishments; but in respect of his
Providence and Wisdom, our fathers sins also, or other men's. For Justice
looks upon the desert only; and so the punishments are ever and only from
our own personal sins, as we learned from our third Certainty: but it is
Providence, that orders the occasions, and the seasons, and the other
circumstances of GODS punishments.

Hence may we learn to reconcile those places of Scripture,. 28. The seeming
Contradictions of Scripture
which seem to cross one another in this Argument. In Ezekiel and Jeremy it
is said, that Ier. 31.30. and Ezekiel. 18.20
every man shall be punished for his own sins, and that the children shall
not bear the iniquity of the fathers: and yet the same Jeremy complains as
if it were otherwise, ( Lam. 5.) Lam 5.7.
Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their iniquities. Yea
God himself proclaims otherwise, I am Exodus 20.5.
a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children -- Nor
only does he visit the sins of the fathers upon the children: but he visits
also the sons of Princes upon their Subjects; as 2. Sam. 24.17.
David's people were wasted for his sin in numbering them: yea and he visits
sometimes the sins even of ordinary private men upon public societies; Ios.
22.20.
Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and
wrath sell upon all the Congregation of Israel, and that man perished not alone
in his iniquity? Now how can all this stand together?

Yes very well: even as well, as in the act of punishing,. 29. how to be
reconciled:
Gods Justice and his Wisdom can stand together. Mark then, wheresoever the
Scripture ascribes one man's punishment to another man's sin; it points us
to Gods Wisdom and Providence: who for good and just ends makes choice of
these occasions, rather than other sometimes, to inflict those punishments upon
men, which their own sins have otherwise abundantly deserved. On the
contrary, wheresoever the Scripture gives all punishments unto the personal
sins of the sufferer, it points us to Gods Iusti^e: which looks still to
the desert, and does not upon any occasion whatsoever inflict punishments, but
where there are personal sins to deserve them: so that every man that is
punished in any kind, or upon any occasion, may join with David in that
confession of his, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: that thou might be
justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou iudgest.

. 30. with an exemplary instance thereof.
Say then, an unconscionable great one by cruel oppression, wring, as Ahab did
here, his poorer neighbors vineyard from him; or by countenanced sacrilege
geld a Bishopric of a fair Lordship or Manor; and when he has done, his
prodigal heir run one end of it away in matches, drown another end of it
in Tauernes and Taphouses, melt away the rest in lust, and beastly sensuality:
who does not here see, both Gods Justice, in turning him out of that, which was
so foulely abused by his own sins; and his Providence withal, in fastening
the Curse upon that portion, which was so unjustly gotten by his fathers
sins? Every man is ready to say, It was never like to prosper, it was so ill
gotten; and so acknowledge the Covetous fathers sin, as occasioning it: and
yet every man can say withal, It was never likely to continue long, it was so
vainly lauished out; and so acknowledge the Prodigal sons sin, as
sufficiently deserving it.

Thus have we heard the maine doubt solued.. 31. The resolution of the ^aine
doubt;
The sum of all is this. God punishes the son for the fathers sin: but
with temporal punishments, not eternal; and with those, perhaps so as to
redound to the fathers punishment in the son. Perhaps, because the son
treads in his fathers steps; perhaps, because he possesses that from his
father, to which Gods curse adhereth; perhaps for other reasons best known to
God himself, wherewith he has not thought meet to acquaint us: but what ever
the occasion be, or the ends; evermore for the sons own personal sins,
abundantly deserving them.

And the same resolution is to be given to the other two doubts proposed in
the beginning:. 32. applied also to the rest.
to that, Why God should punish any one man for another? and to the third, Why
God should punish the lesser offender for the greater? In which, and all other
doubts of like kind, it is enough, for the clearing of Gods Justice, to
consider: that when God does so, they are first only temporal punishments
which he so inflicteth; and those secondly no more, than what the sufferer by
his own sins has most rightfully deserved. All those other considerations,
as that the Prince and People are but one body, and so each may feel the smart
of others sins and stripes: that oftentimes we have given way to other men's
sins, when we might have stopped them; or consent, when we should have
withstood them; or silent allowance, when we should have checked them; or
perhaps furtherance, when we should rather have hindered them: that the
punishments brought upon us for our fathers or other men's sins, may turn to
our great spiritual advantage, in the humbling of our souls, the subduing of
our corruptions, the increasing of our care, the exercising of our graces: that
where all have deserved the punishment, it is left to the discretion of the
Judge, whom he will pick out, the Father or the Son, the Governor or the
Subject, the Ringleader or the Follower, the Greater or the Lesser offender,
to show exemplary justice upon, as he shall see expedient. I say, all these,
and other like considerations many, though they are to be admitted as true, and
observed as useful; yet they are such, as belong rather to Gods Providence and
his Wisdom, than to his Justice. If therefore thou know not the very
particular reason, why God should punish thee in this or that manner, or upon
this or that occasion; let it suffice thee that the Counsels and purposes of
God are secret: and thou art not to enquire with scrupulous curiosity into the
dispensation and courses of his Providence, farther than it has pleased him
either to reveal it in his word, or by his manifest works to discover it unto
thee. But whatsoever thou do, never make question of his Justice. Begin
first to make inquiry into thine own self: and if after impartial search,
thou there find not corruption enough to deserve all out as much as God has
laid upon thee, then complain of injustice, but not before. And so much for
the doubts.

. 33. The first inference.
Let us now from the premises raise some instructions for our use. First;
Parents we think have reason to be careful, (and so they have) for their
children; and to desire and labor, as much as in them lies, their well doing.
Here is a fair course then for you that are parents, and have children to care
for. Do you that which is good, and honest, and right: and they are like to
fare the better for it. Would thou then, Brother, leave thy lands, and thy
estate to thy child, entire and free from encombrances? It is an honest care:
but here is the way. Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
Abstineas igitur damnandis: Leave them free from the (...). Isocrat^s.
guilt of thy sins; which are able to comber them beyond any statute, or
morgage. If not the bond of Gods Law, if not the care of thine own soul, if
not the fear of hell, if not the inward checkes of thine own conscience:
Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
At peccaturo obstet tibi filius infans, at the least let the good of thy poor
sweet infants restrain thee from doing that sin, which might pull down from
heaven a plague upon them and theirs. Go to then, do not applaud thy self in
thy witty villainies, when thou have circumuented and prospered; when Ahab-like
thou have Verse. 19. hic.
killed, and taken possession; when thou have larded thy leaner revenues with
fat collops sacrilegiously cut out of the sides or flanks of the Church; and
have nailed all these with all the appurtenances, by sines, and vowchers, and
entayles, as firm as Law can make them, to thy child, and his child, and his
childs child for ever. After all this stir, cast up thy bills, and see what
a goodly bargain thou have made: thou have damned thy self, to undo thy
child; thou have brought a curse upon thine own soul, to purchase that for
thy child, which shall bring a curse both upon it and him. When thy indentures
were drawn, and thy learned Counsel feed to peruse the Instrument, and with
exact severity to ponder with thee every clause and syllable therein; could
none of you spy a flaw in that clause [ with all and singular the
appurtenances,] neither observe, that thereby thou did settle upon thy
posterity, together with thy estate, the wrath and vengeance and curse of God,
which is one of those appurtenances? Had thou not a faithful Counselor
within thine own breast, if thou would but have conferred and advised with
him plainly and vndissemblingly, that could have told thee, thou had by thy
oppression and injustice ipso facto cut off the entaile from the issue, even
long before thou had made it? But if thou would leave thy posterity a
firm, and secure and durable estate: do this rather. Purchase for them by thy
charitable works, the prayers and blessings of the poor; settle upon them the
fruits of a religious, sober, and honest education; bequeath them the legacy
of thy good example, in all virtuous and godly living: and that portion thou
leauest them besides, of earthly things, be it much or little, be sure it be
(...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 2.
well gotten; otherwise never look it (...) -- (...) Pausan. in Corinthiacis.
should prosper with them. 1 Cor. 5.6.
A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, and sowreth it: and a little ill
gotten, like a gangrene spreads through the whole estate; and worse than aqua
fortis, or the poisoned -- ardeo; Quantum nec atro delibutus Hercules Nessi
cruorc. Horat. Epod. 17. see Sophocl. in Trachin.
shirt that Dejanira gave Hercules, cleaves unto it, and feeds upon it, and
by little and little gnaweth, and fretteth, and consumes it to nothing. And
surely, Gods Justice has wonderfully manifested it self unto the world in
this kind, sometimes even to the public astonishment and admiration of all
men: that men of ancient families, and great estates; well left by their
Ancestors, and free from debts, legacies, or other encombrances; not notedly
guilty of any expencefull sin or vanity, but wary and husbandly and careful
to thrive in the world; not kept under with any great burden of needy friends,
or charge of children; not much hindered by any extraordinary losses, or
casualties of fire, thieves, suretiship, or suites: that such men, I say,
should yet sink and decay, and run behind hand in the world; and their
estates crumble and milder away, and come to nothing, and no man knows how.
No question, but they have sins enough of their own, to deserve all this,
and ten times more than all this: but yet withal, who knows but that it
might, nay who knows not that sometimes it does, (so legible now and then are
Gods judgments) come upon them for the greediness, and avarice, and
oppression, and sacrilege, and injustice of their not long foregoing
Ancestors? You that are parents, take heed of these sins. It may be, for some
other reasons known best to himself, God suffers you to go on your own
time; and suspendeth the judgments, your sins have deserved, for a space, as
here he did Ahabs upon his humiliation: but be assured, sooner or later,
vengeance will overtake you or yours for it. You have Hab. 2.9.
coueted an evil covetousness to your house: and there hangs a judgment
over your house for it, as rain in the clouds; which, perhaps in your sons,
perhaps in your grand-childs days, some time or other, will come dashing down
upon it, and ouerwhelme it. Think not the vision is for many descents to come
-- de male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres: seldom does the Exodus 20.5.
third, scarce ever the fourth generation pass, before God visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children; if he do not in the very next generation. In
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.

. 34. The second.
Secondly; if not only our own, but our fathers sins too may be, shall be
visited upon us: how concerns it us, as to repent for our own, so to lament
also the sins of our forefathers; and in our confessions and supplications to
God, sometimes to remember them, that he may forget them, and to set them
before his face, that he may cast them behind his back? We have a good
precedent for it in our public Letany; Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the
offenses of our forefathers! A good, and a profitable, and a needful prayer
it is: and those men have not done well, nor justly, that have cauilled at it.
(O that men would be wise according to sobriety, and allow but just
interpretations to things advisedly established; rather than busy themselves
nodum in scirpo, to pick needelesse quarrels where they should not. What unity
would it bring to brethren, what peace to the Church, what joy to all good and
wise men!) As to this particular, God requires of the Israelites in Leuit. 26.
that they should Leuit. 26.39.40.
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers. Psalm. 106.6.
David did so, and Ierem. 3.15.
Jeremy did so, and Dan. 9.5.
Daniel did so: in Psalm. 106. in Ierem. 3. in Dan. 9. And if David thought it a
fit curse, to pronounce against Judas, and such as he was, in Psalm. 109. [
Psalm. 109.14.
Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of the
Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away:] why may we not, nay how
ought we not, to pray for the remoueall of this very curse from us, as well as
of any other curses? The present age is ri^e of many enormous crying sins,
which call loud for a judgment upon the land: and if God should bring upon us
a right heavy one, whereat all ears should tingle; could we say other, but
that it were most just, even for the sins of this present generation? But if
unto our own, so many, so great, God should also add the sins of our
forefathers; the bloodshed, and tyranny, and grievous unnatural butcheries in
the long times of the civil wars, and the universal idolatries and
superstitions covering the whole land, in the longer and darker times of
Popery: and if, as he sometimes threatened to bring upon the Jews of Math.
23.35.36.
that one generation all the righteous blood that ever was shed upon the earth,
from the blood of the righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of
Barachias; so he should bring the sins of our Ancestors for many generations
past, upon this generation of ours: who could be able to abide it? Now, when
the security of the times give us but too much cause to fear it, and the
regions begin to look white toward the harvest: is it not time for us with
all humiliation of Soul and Body to cast down our selves; and with all
contention of voice and spirit to lift up our prayers? and to say; Remember not
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers: neither take thou
vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord, spare the people, whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. Spare
us good Lord.

. 35. the third inference.
Thirdly. Since not only our fathers sins, and our own; but our Neighbors
sins too, ( aliquid malum propter vicinum malum,) but especially the sins
of Princes and Governors, ( -- Morat. 1. Epis^ 2.
delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui,) may bring judgments upon us, and enwrap
us in their punishments: it should teach every one of us, to seek his own
private in the common and public good; and to endeavor, if but for our own
security from punishment, to awaken other from their security in sin. How
should we send up ^ Tim. 2.1, 2.
supplications and prayers and intercessions for Kings and for all that are in
authority; that God would incline their hearts unto righteous courses, and open
their ears to wholesome counsels, and strengthen their hands to just actions?
when but a sinful oversight in one of them, may prove the overthrow of many
thousands of us: as David but by once numbering his people in the pride of his
heart, lessened their number at one clap 2 Samuel 24.15
threescore and ten thousand. If Ios. ^8, 10.25
Israel turn their backs upon their enemies; up Iosuah, and make search for
the troubler of Israel, firret out the thief, and do execution upon him: one
Achan, if but suffered, is able to undo the whole host of Israel; what
mischief might he do, if countenanced, if allowed? The hour I see has
overtaken me, and I must end. To wrappe up all in a word then, and conclude:
Thou that have power over others; suffer no sin in them by base conniuence, but
punish it: thou that have charge of others, suffer no sin in them by dull
silence, but rebuke it: thou that have any interest in, or dealing with others;
suffer no sin upon them, by easy allowance, but distaste it: thou that have
nothing else; yet by thy charitable prayers for them, and by constant example
to them, stop the course of sin in others, further the growth of grace in
others, labor by all means (as much as in thee lies) to draw others unto
God; lest their sins draw Gods judgments upon themselves and thee. This that
thou may do, and that I may do, and that every one of us, that fears God,
and wishes well to the Israel of God, may do, faithfully and discreetely in
our several stations and callings: let us all humbly beseech the Lord, the God
of all grace and wisdom, for his Son Jesus sake, by his holy spirit to
enable us. To which blessed Trinity, one only wise, immortal, invisible,
almighty, most gracious and most glorious Lord and God, be ascribed by every
one of us, the kingdom, the power, and the glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

THE FOVRTH SERMON. In S. Paul's Church London, 4. Nov. 1621.

1. COR. 7.24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with
God.


IF flesh and blood be suffered to make the Gloss,. 1. The Occasion, and scope
of the Text.
it is able to corrupt a right good Text. It easily turns the doctrine of
Gods grace into Jude 4.
wantonness: and as easily the doctrine of Christian liberty into
licenciousnesse. These Corinthians, being yet but 1. Cor. 3.1.3.4.
Carnal; for the point of Liberty consulted (it seems) but too much with
this cursed gloss. Which taught them to interpret their Calling to the
Christian faith, as an Exemption from the duties of all other Callings: as if
their spiritual freedom in Christ had cancelled ipso facto all former
obligations, whether of Nature or Ciuility. The Husband would put away his
wife, the servant dis-respect his master, every other man break the bonds of
relation to every other man: and all under this pretense, and upon this ground,
that Christ has made them free. In this passage of the Chapter, the Apostle
occasionally corrects this error: principally indeed as the present Argument
led him, in the particular of Marriage; but with a farther and more universal
extent to all outward states and conditions of life. The sum of his Doctrine,
this. He that is yoaked with a wife, must not put her away, but count her
worthy of all love; he that is bound to a master, must not despise him, but
count him worthy of all honor; every other man that is tied in any relation to
any other man, must not neglect him, but count him worthy of all good offices
and civil respects suitable to his place and person: though She or He, or that
other, be Infidels and Unbelievers. The Christian Calling does not at all
prejudice, much less overthrow; it rather establishes and strengthens,
those interests, that arise from natural relations, or from voluntary
contracts (either domestical or civil) betwixt Man and Man. The general rule
to this effect he conceiueth in the form of an Exhortation; that every man
(notwithstanding his calling unto liberty in Christ) abide in that station
wherein God has placed him, contain himself within the bounds thereof, and
cheerfully and contentedly undergo the duties that belong thereto: verse. 17. [
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so let
him walk.] And lest this Exhortation (as it fares with most other, especially
such as come in but upon Ex incidenti dat documentum generale. Lyran. ad verse.
17.
the by, as this does) should be slenderly regarded: the more fully to Quod, vt
plene commendet reiterat. Ambros. in 1. Cor. cap. 37.
commend it to their consideration and practice, he repeateth it once again,
verse. 20. [ Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called.]
And now again once more; in the words of this verse; concluding therewith the
whole discourse into which he had digressed, [ Brethren, let every man, wherein
he is called, therein abide with God.]

From which words,. 2. The Pertinency;
I desire it may be no prejudice to my present discourse, if I take occasion to
entreat at this time of a very needful argument; viz. concerning the
Necessity, Choice, and Use of particular Callings. Which whilst I do, if any
shall blame me for shaking hands with my Text: let such know, First, that it
will not be very charitably done, to pass a hard censure upon another labor;
no nor yet very prouidently for their own good, to slight a profitable truth
for some little seeming impertinency. Secondly, that the points proposed are
indeed not impertinent: the last of them (which supposes also the other two)
being the very substance of this Exhortation; and all of them such as may
without much violence be drawn from the very words themselves, at leastwise if
we may be allowed the liberty (which is but reasonable) to take-in also the
other two verses the 17. and the 20. in sense, and for substance, all one with
this: as anon in the several handling of them will in parr appear. But
howsoever, Thirdly, (which S. Bernard deemed a sufficient Apology for himself
in a case of like nature, Nouerint -- me n^n ^am in^endisse exponere
Euangelium, quam ex Euangelio sumere occasionem loquendi, quod loqui
delectabat. Bernard, super Messus est.
Nouerint me non tam intendisse etc.) let them know, that in my choice of this
Scripture my purpose was not so much to bind my self to the strict exposition
of the Apostolical Text, as to take occasion therefrom to deliver what I
desired to speak, and judged expedient for you to hear; concerning 1. the
Necessity, 2. the Choice, and 3. the Use of particular Callings.

. 3. and Needfulnesse of the Points.
Points, if ever needful to be taught and known; certainly, in these days
most. Wherein some habituated in idleness, will not betake themselves to any
Calling; like a heavy jade, that is spurred up, and whipped on end. Othersome,
through weakness, do not make a good choice of a fit Calling: like a young
unbroken thing that has metal, and is free, but is ever wrying the wrong
way. These would be fairly checked, turned into the right way, and guided with
a steady third sort (and I think the greatest) through vnsettlednesse, or
discontentednesse, or other untoward humor, walk not soberly, and uprightly,
and orderly in their Calling; like an unruly Coult, that will over hedge and
ditch; no ground will hold him, no fence turn him. These would be well,
fettered and side-hanckled for leaping. The first sort, are to be taught the
Necessity of a Calling: the second, to be directed for the Choice of their
Calling: the third, to be bounded and limited in the Exercise of their
Calling. Of which three in their order: and of the First, first; the Necessity
of a Calling.

. 4. The General and the Particular Calling.
The Scriptures speak of two kinds of Vocations or Callings: the one, ad
Foedus; the other, ad Munus. The usual known terms are; the General and the
Particular Calling. Vocatio ad Foedus, or the General Calling; is that
wherewith God calls us, either outwardly in the ministry of his Word, or
inwardly by the efficacy of his Spirit, or jointly by both, to the faith and
obedience of the Gospel, and to the embracing of the Covenant of grace and of
mercy and salvation by Jesus Christ. Which is therefore termed the General
Calling, (not for that it is of larger extent than the other, but) because the
thing whereunto we are thus called, is one and the same, and common to all that
are called. The same duties, and the same promises, and every way the same
conditions. Here is no difference in regard of Persons: but Ephesians. 4.4.5.
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one body, and one spirit; even as we are
all called in one hope of our Calling: That's the General Calling. Vocatio ad
Munus, or our Particular Calling; is that wherewith God enableth us and
directs us and puts us on to some special course and condition of life,
wherein to employ our selves, and to exercise the gifts he has bestowed upon
us, to his glory, and the benefit of our selves, and others. And it is
therefore termed a Particular Calling, (not as if it concerned not all in
general; for we shall prove the contrary anon;) but because the thing
whereunto men are thus called is not one and the same to all, but differenced
with much variety according to the quality of particular persons. Verse. 7. hic.
Alius sic, alius vero sic: [Euery man has his proper gift of God; one man on
this manner, another on that.] Here is Ibid.
(...), some called to be Magistrates, some Ministers, some Merchants, some
Artificers; some one thing, some another, as to their particular Callings. But
as to the General Calling, there is Jude. 3.
(...), the common Salvation: all called to the same State of being the
servants and children of God; all called to the performance of the same duties
of servants, and to the expectation of the same inheritance of children; all
called to be Christians. Of both which Callings, the General and Particular,
there is not (I take it) any where in Scripture mention made so expressly and
together, as in this passage of our Apostle; especially at the 20. verse [ Let
every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called.] Where, besides the
matter, the Apostles elegancy is obserueable in using the same word in (...).
Piscat. hic.
both significations: the Nowne signifying the Particular, and the Verb the
General Calling. Let every one abide in the same calling wherein he was
called; bearing sense, as if the Apostle had said, Let every man abide in the
same Particular Calling, wherein he stood at the time of his General Calling.
And the same, and no other, is the meaning of the words of my Text.

. 5. A Particular Calling
Whence it appears, that the Calling my Text implies, and wherein every man
is here exhorted to abide; is to be understood of the Particular, and not of
the General Calling. And of this Particular Calling it is we now intend to
speak. And that in the more Proper and restrained significatition of it; as it
imports some settled course of life with reference to business, office, and
employment: accordingly as we say a man is called to be a Minister, called to
be a Lawyer, called to be a Tradesman, and the like. Although I cannot be
ignorant, that our Apostle (as the stream of his Argument carried him) here
takes the word in a much wider extent; as including not only such special
courses of life as refer to employment, but even all outward parsonall states
and conditions of men whatsoever, whether they have such referencce, or no: as
we may say, a man is called to Marriage or to single life, called to riches or
poverty, and the like.

But omitting this larger signification,. 6. Necessary for all men:
we will hold our selves either only or principally, to the former: and by
Calling understand a special settled course of life, wherein mainly to employ a
man's gifts and time for his own and the common good. The Necessity whereof
whilst we mention, you are to imagine not an absolute and positive, but a
conditional and suppositiue necessity. Not as if no man could be without one
de facto, (daily experience in these dissolute times manifests the contrary:)
but because de jure no man should be without one. This kind of Calling is
indeed necessary for all men: But how? Not as a necessary thing ratione
termini, so as the want thereof would be an absolute impossibility: but virtute
praecepti, as a necessary duty, the neglect whereof would be a grievous and
sinful enormitie. He that will do that which he ought, and is in conscience
bound to do; must of necessity live in some Calling or other. That is it we
mean by the Necessity of a Calling. And this Necessity we are now to prove.

And that First, from the Obedience we owe to every of Gods Ordinances;. 7. in
respect 1. of the Ordinance,
and the Account we must render for every of Gods Gifts. Amongst those
ordinances this is one, and one of the first; that Genesis 3.19.
in the sweat of our faces every man of us should eat our bread, Genesis 3. The
force of which Precept, let none think to avoid by a quirke: that forsooth it
was laid upon Adam after his transgression, rather as a Curse, which he must
endure; than as a Duty, which he should perform. For first; as some of Gods
Curses (such is his goodness) are Promises as well as Curses; as is that of
the Genesis 3.15.
Enmity between the Woman's seed and the Serpents: so some of Gods Curses
(such is his Justice) are Precepts as well as Curses; as is that of the Genesis
3.16: Ephesians. 5.22. Col. 3.18. 1. Tim. 2.11. etc.
Woman's subjection to the Man. This of eating our bread in the sweat of our
face, is all the three: it is a Curse; it is a Promise; it is a Precept. It is
a Curse; in that God will not suffer the Earth, to afford us bread, without
our sweat. It is a Promise; in that God assures us, we shall have bread for
our sweat. And it is a Precept too; in that God enioyneth us, if we will have
bread, to sweat for it. Secondly; although it may not be gainsayed, but that
that injunction to Adam was given as a Curse; yet the substance of the
injunction was not the thing wherein the Curse did formally consist. Herein was
the Curse: that whereas before the fall, the task which God appointed man was
with Non erat laboris afflictio, sed exhilaratio voluntatis.

Augustine. 8. de Genesis ad lit. 8. -- non labor seruili, sed honesta animi
voluptate. Ibid. c. 9.


pleasure of body and content of mind, without sweat of brow or brain; now
after the fall he was to toil and forecast for his living, with Sore travel.
Eccl. 1.13. Great travel, and a heavy yoke, Sirac. 40.1.
care of mind and travel of body, with Eccl 12.12.
weariness of flesh and Eccl. 1.14.17.
vexation of spirit. But as for the substance of the injunction, which is, that
every man should have somewhat to do, wherein to bestow himself and his time
and his gifts, and whereby to earne his bread: in this it appears not to have
bin a Curse, but a Precept of divine institution; that Adam, in the time and
state of Innocence, before he had deserved a Curse, was yet enjoined his task,
Genesis 2.15.
to dress and to keep the garden. And as Adam lived himself, so he bred up
his children. His two first borne, though heirs apparent of all the world, had
yet their peculiar employments; the one in Genesis 4.2.
tillage, the other in pasturage. And as many since, as have walked orderly,
have observed Gods Ordinance herein; Ephesians. 4.28.
working with their hands the thing that is good in some kind or other: those
that have set themselves in no such good way, our Apostle elsewhere justly
blaming as (...) 2 These. 3.6.11.
inordinate, or disorderly walkers. And how can such disorderly ones hope to
find approueance in the sight of our God, who is a God of order? He commands
us to live in a Calling: and woe to us, if we neglect it.

But say there where no such express Command for it: the very distribution of
Gods gifts were enough to lay upon us this necessity.. 8. and Gifts of God;
Where God bestows, he binds: and to whom any thing is Luke 12.48.
given, of him something shall be required. The inference is stronger, than
most are aware of; from the Ability to the Duty, from the Gift to the Work,
from the Fitting to the Calling. Observe how this Apostle knitteth them
together at the 17. verse, [ Verse. 17. hic.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called eueryone, so let
him walk.] God has distributed to every man some proper gift, or other: and
therefore every man must glorify God in some peculiar Calling, or other. And
in Ephesians. 4. having alleged that of the Psalm, Psalm. 68.18.
He gave gifts unto men; immediately he infers, Ephesians. 48. etc.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets etc. as giving us to understand, that for
no other end God did bestow upon some Apostolical, upon others Prophetical,
upon others gifts in other kinds, but that men should employ them some in the
Apostolical, some in the Prophetical, some in Deus and Natura nihil faci^^t
f^usta.
Offices and Callings of other kinds. And if we confess, that Nature does not,
we may not think the God of Nature does bestow abilities, whereof he
intends not use: for that were to bestow them Frustra est potentia, quae non
perducitur in actum.
in vain. Since then he bestows gifts and graces upon every man some or
other, and none in vain; let every man take heed that he receive them not in
vain: let every man beware of Luke 19.20.
napkining up the talent, which was delivered him to trade withal: Let all, 1
Pet. 4.10.
as every one has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good stewards of the manifold graces of God. The manifestation of the spirit
being given to every man 1 Cor. 12.7.
to profit withal; he that lives unprofitably with it, and without a Calling,
abuses the intent of the giver, and must answer for his abuse.

. 9. 2. of every man's self;
Secondly, the Necessity of a Calling is great, in regard of a man's self: and
that more ways than one. For man being by nature active, so as he cannot be
long, but he must be doing: he that has no honest vocation to busy himself
in, that has nothing of his own to do, must needs from doing nothing
proceed to doing naught. That saying of Cato was subscribed by the wiser
Heathens as an Catonis oraecul um, quo nihil verius. Colum. 11. de re just 1.
Oracle, Nihil agendo male agere disces. Syrac. 33.28.
Idleness teaches much evil, says the wise son of Syrac: nay all kind of
evil, as some copies have it. It has an ear open to every extrauagant motion;
it gives entertainment to a thousand sinful fancies; it exposes the soul to
all the assaults of her Ghostly (...). Ex Soph. Stob. Sermon. 28.
enemies: and whereas the Devils grea^est business is, to tempt othermen; the
idle man's only business is to tempt the Devil. Experience of all histories and
times shows us, what advantages the Devil has won upon Godly and industrious
men otherwise, (as upon David in the matter of Vriah, and many others) only by
watching the opportunity of their idle hours, and plying them with suggestions
of noisome lusts, at such times, as they had given themselves but some little
intermission more than ordinary, from their ordinary employments. How will he
not then lead captive at his pleasure those, whose whole lives are nothing else
but a long Vacation, and their whole care nothing but to make up a Nos numerus
sumus, and fruges consumere nati. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
number, and to wast the good creatures of God? There is no readier sanctuary
for thee then, good Christian, when the Devil pursues thee, than to betake
thy self at once to prayer, and to the res age, tutus cris. Ovid. de remed.
works of thy Calling: fly thither, and thou art safe, as in a Castle. Non
licet is a very good, and proper, and direct answer, when the Devil would
tempt thee to sin; it is evil, and I may not do it: but yet Non vacat is
the stronger answer and surer; I am busy, and I cannot do it. That gives him
scope to reply; and it is not safe to hold argument with the Devil upon any
terms: he is a cunning Sophister, and thou may be circumuented by a subtilty
before thou art aware. But this stubborn and blunt answer cutteth off all
reply; and dishearteneth the Tempter for that time. Hieron. ad. Rusticum. Tom.
1. Epist. 4
It was S. Hieromes advice to his friend; Semper boni aliquid operis facito, vt
Diabolus te semper inueneat occupatum: Be always doing something, that the
Devil may never find thee at leisure. There is no cross, no holy water, no
Exorcisme so powerful to drive away, and to conjure down the Fiend; as
employment is, and faithful labor in some honest Calling.

. 10. 3. of Justice; the Idle person being a thief
Thirdly, Life must be preserved, Families maintained, the poor relieved: this
connot be done without Bread, for that is the Levit. 26.26.
staff of life: and Bread cannot be gotten, or not honestly, but in a Lawful
vocation or Calling. Which who ever neglects, is in very deed no better,
than a very (...). Phocylides. (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 2.
theife: the Bread he eats he cannot call his own. 2 These. 3.11.12.
We hear, says S. Paul writing to the Thessalonians, that there are some
among you that walk inordinately, and work not at all, but are busy bodies:
Them therefore that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread. As if it were not
their own bread, if not gotten with the work of their own hands, and in the
sweat of their own faces. And again writing to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him, that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor etc. If he will
not steal, he must labor; and if he do not labor, he does steal: steal
from himself, steal from his Family, steal from the Poor.

He steals from himself,. 11. to himself,
and so is a kind of Pelo de se. Spend he must: and if there be no gettings to
repair what is spent, the stock will shrink and wast, and (...). Hesiod. in
(...).
beggary will be the end. God has ordained Labor as the Proper means whereby
to obtain the good things of this life: without which, as there is no promise,
so ordinarily there is no performance of those blessings of Plenty and
Sufficiency. God has a bountiful hand; Psalm. 145.16.
he opens it, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse: but unless
we have a diligent hand, wherewith to receive it, we may starve. Qui vitat
molam, vitat farinam. Adag.
No mill, we say, no meal. And he that by the sloth of his hands
disfurnisheth himself of the means of getting, he is as near of kin to a
waster as may be; (they may call Prou. 18.9.
Brothers:) and it is but just, if Gods curse light upon him, and that he has,
and bring him to want, it to nothing.

He steals also from his Family,. 12. to his family,
which should eat the fruit of his labors. The painful housewife; see, in
what a happy case her husband is, and her children, and her servants, and all
that belong to her. They Prou. 31. verse. 15 21.27.28.
are not afraid of hunger, or cold, or any such thing: they are well fed, and
well clad, and carefully looked unto. Her husband praises her, and her
servants: and her children, when they have kneeled down, and asked her
blessing, arise up, and call her blessed. Prou. 31. But the idle man, that for
want of a course to live in, empouerisheth himself, and his family, whom he
is bound to maintain; is a burden to his friends, an eyesore to his kindred,
the shame of his name, the ruin of his house, and the bane of his posterity.
He bequeatheth misery to his offspring instead of plenty: they that should
fare the better for him, are undone by him: and he that should give his
children Gods blessing and his, pulls upon himself Gods curse and theirs. 1 Timothy 5.8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house,
he has denied the faith, and is in that respect even worse than an Infidel.
1. Tim. 5.8. The very Infidels take themselves bound to this care: Let not him
that professes the faith of Christ, by his supine carelesenesse this way,
justify the Infidel, and deny the Faith.

. 13. and to the Poor;
He steals also, (which is the basest theft of all) from the poor: in robbing
them of that relief, which he should minister unto them out of his honest
gettings; the overplus whereof is their proper reuenew. The good houswife, of
whom we heard something already out of the 31. of the Proverbs, Prou. 31. verse.
13.
seeks wool and flax, verse. 19.
lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaffe. But cui
bono, and to what end, and for whose sake, all this? Not only for her self,
verse. 22.
to make her couerings of tapestry, t^ough that also, nor yet only for his
household verse. 21.
to cloth them in Scarlet, though that also: but withal that she might have
somewhat in her hands verse. 20.
to reach out to the poor and needy; like another Dorcas, to make Act. 9.39.
coats and garments for them, that Job. 31.20.
their loins might bless her: so every man should be painful and careful,
to get some of the things of this earth by his faithful labor; not as a
foolish worldling, to make a Mammon of it; but as a wise Steward, to Luke 16.9.
make him friends with it. So Romans 12.13.
distributing it to the necessities of the poor Saints, that it may redound
also upon the by to his own advantage: whilst sowing to them temporal
things, the comfort of his Alms, he reapeth in recompense of it their
spiritual things, the benefit of their Prayers. S. Paul exhorts the
Ephesians by word of mouth, (and it was the very close of his solemn farewell,
when he took his last leave of them, and should see their face no more;) that
Act. 20.34.35.
by their labor they ought to support the weak, and minister to the
necessities of others; remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give than to receive. And after his departure, he thought it
needful for him to put them in mind of the same duty once again by letter;
Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor working with his
hands the thing, that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
Lay all this, that I have now last said, together; and say if you know a verier
thief than the Idle person? that steals from himself, and so is a foolish
thief; steals from his family and friends, and so is an unnatural thief;
steals from the poor, and so is a base thief.

Fourthly, and lastly:. 14. 4. of the Commonwealth.
a Calling is necessary in regard of the Public. God has made us (...).
Arist. 1. Polit. 2.
sociable creatures; contrived us into policies, and societies and
commonwealths; made us Membra sumus corporis magni. Senec. Epist. 93.
fellow members of one body, and Romans 12.5.
every one another members. As therefore we are not Non nobis solum
natisimus: sed partem atria, partem parents etc. Cic. ex Platonis Epist. 9.

In commune nati sumus. Senec. Epist. 9^.


borne, so neither must we live, to and for our selves alone: but our parents,
and friends, and acquaintance, nay every man of us has a kind of right and
interest in every other man of us; and our (...) Arist 8. Polit. 1.
Country and the Commonwealth in us all. And as in the artificial body of a
Clock, one wheel moves another, and each part gives and receives help to
and from other; and as in the natural body of a Man, consisting of many
members, all the members Romans 12.4.
have not the same office, (for that would make a confusion,) yet there is no
member in the body so mean or small, but has its proper faculty, function and
use, whereby it becomes useful to the whole body, and helpefull to its
fellow members in the body: so should it be in the Civil body of the State,
and in the Mystical body of the Church. Every man should confer aliquid in
publicum, put-to his helping hand to advance the common good, employ himself
some way or other, in such sort, as he may be (...). Arist. 8. Pol^t. 3.
serviceable to the whole body, and profitable to his fellow members in the
body. For which reason, the ancient renowned Commonwealths were so careful to
ordain, that no man should live but in some profession; and to take district
examination who did otherwise; and to punish them, some with fasting, some with
infamy, some with banishment, yea and some with death. The care of the Indians,
Egyptians, Athenians, and others herein; See Valor. Max. 2.6. Patric. 1. de
Rep. 8. Cassan. 11. Catal. glor. consid. 1.
Historians relate, and I omit. It were to be wished that Christian
Commonwealths would take some greater care, if but from their example, to rid
themselves of such unnecessary burdens, as are good for nothing but to devour
the fruits of the land; and either force these -- (...). Hesiod. in -- (...).
Plat. Polit 8.
droanes to take pains for their living, or else thrust them out of the hiues
for their Idleness.

Which course if it were taken;. 15. A just reproof of idle
what would become of many thousands in the world, quibus anima pro sale, who
like Swine live in such sensual and unprofitable sort, as we might well doubt
whether they had any living souls in their bodies at all or no, were it not
barely for this one argument, that their bodies are a degree sweeter than
carrion? I mean all such, of what rank and condition soever they be, as for
want of a Calling mispend their precious time, bury their masters talent, waste
Gods good creatures, and wear away themselves in idleness, without doing good
to themselves, to their friends, to humane society. Infinite is the number of
such -- (...) Homer. Iliad. 6. -- (...). Plat. in Theat.
unprofitable burdens of the earth: but there are amongst other, three sorts of
them especially, whereof the world ringeth, and such as a man that has to
speak of this argument can scare balke without some guilt of unfaithfulness.
It is no matter how you rank them, for there is never a better of the three.
And therefore take them hand over head as they come: they are Monks, Gallants,
and Roagues.

First, those (...), Tit. 1.^^.
Evil beasts, slow bellyes; stall-fed Monks and priers*. 16. 1. Monks with
the limitation.
who (...) m^ed up in their Cell: and Cloystere, like Bears in a fr^n^e,
pining themselue: into La^d, and beating down their bodies till their girdles
crack^. I quarrel not the first institution and Original of these kind of
men: which was then e^cusably good, the condition of those (...) considered;
and might yet be tolerably followed even in these times, if those gross
superstition: and foul abuses which in process of time have adhered, and are
by long and universal custom grown almost essential thereunto, could be
fairly removed. But Monkery was not then that thing, which it is now. There
was not then that opinion of sanctity and perfection, in the choice; that
imposition of vnl^wfull, unnatural, and to some men impossible vows, in the
Entrance; that clogge of ridiculous habits and ceremonies and regular irregular
obseruances, in the use; that heavy not of Apostasy upon such as altered their
course, in the loose: all which now there are. Those by their fastings, and
watchings, and devotions, and charity, and learning, and industry, and
temporance, and unaffected austeritie, and strictness of life, won from many
of the ancient Fathers (as appears in their writings) ample and large
testimonies of their virtue and piety. And that most deservedly: although
their willingness, (out of a zealous desire to excite others to the imitation
of their virtues,) to set forth their praises in the highest Panegyric
strains, they could, drew from their pens now and then such hyperbolicall
^xcesses in ma^s loq^ena^, as ga^^ occasion to those (...) in after ages, which
they then never dreamed of. (...) those Man^e^ of old^ so good, so god^y.
Whereas these (...)
of (...), by their affected (...) habits, and gestures, and rule^; by ^^eir
gross and dull ignorance; by their in (...), though pretending humility, and
their more ^^an Pharisa^call ouerlooking of others; by t^eir insa^iable
a^arice, and palpable art: of getting i^to their hands the farrest of the
earth, and the under color of Religion, and pretenses of poverty; by their
sensual wallowing in all ease and idlene^^e and fullness of bread, and (the
fruits of these in abominable and prodigeous filthiness and luxury: became as
Proverbs and as by-words in the mo^ths and pens of men of all sorts. No sober
writer almost of any note, even in those darker times, but noted and bewailed
the corrupt est^^e of the Church and Clergy in that behalf: for by this time,
you must know, these droanes had thr^st themselves, against all reason and
common sense, into the rank of Churchmen, and shrouded themselves under the
title of the Clergy. Di^ers godly and learned men (...)
wrote against the abuse^, desired a reformation, labored to have mon^ery
reduced, if not to their first institution there seemed to be little hope of
that, things were so far out of course;) yet at leastwise to some tolerable
expression of it. The Poet: wanted no sport the while; who made themselves
bitterly merry with descanting upon the lean (...), and the O Monachi, vestri
stomachi, sunt amphora Bacchi, etc.
fat paunches of these lasie gullings: there was flesh-hould enough for the
riming Satyrists, and the wits of those times, whereon to fasten the sorest and
the strongest teeth they had.

. 17. and explication.
Not to insist upon other differences; that which concerns the point we have
in hand, argues a manifest and wide declination in these kind of men from
their primitive purity. The ancient Monks lived upon the labor of their
hands: and thereby not only maintained themselves, (which they might do with a
very little in that course of abstinence and austeritie wherein they lived)
but relieved many others, and did many pious and charitable works, out of
that they had earned with their fingers. And when about S. Augustines and S.
Hieroms times, Monks began to relish ease, and under pretense of reading and
prayer to leave off working, and to live upon the sweat of other men's brows;
both those good Fathers misliked it: S. Hierome to Aegyptiorum monasteria hunc
ordinem teneat, vt nullum absque operis labor suscipiant. Hieron. Tom. 1.
Epist. 4
Rusticus alleging the laudable custom of the Monasteries in Egypt, which
admitted none to be Monks but with express condition of labor; and S.
Augustine in a just Tom. 3. libro de opere Monachorum.
Treatise opposing it not without some bitterness, rebuking them as
contumacious and peeuishly Qui autem se dicunt vacare lectioni, nonne illic
inueniunt quod praecipit Apostolus? Quae est ista ergo peruersitas, lectioni
nolle obtemperare, dum vult ei vacare; and, vt quod bonum est diutius legatur,
ideo facere nolle quod legitur. c. 17. ibi.
perverse, who reading in the Scriptures, that he that will not labor should
not eat, do yet resist the Apostles admonition, and under pretense that they
may have leisure to read, refuse to obey what they do read. But ease is
(...). Eurip. in Hipp. coron.
pleasing to flesh and blood; and will not be easily wrung from those that
have any while given themselves to it; especially when it can pretend the face
and color of Religion. So that for all this the humor still increased, and
spread; till at the length there grew whole Orders of disorderly Mendicants,
begging runnagate Friars: who by their affected poverty diuerting the Charity
of well-minded people from those that were truly poor, enriched themselves
with the spoils of the poor; and under color of long prayers, made a prey;
not now (as those craving Pharisees of old, whose simplicity they pity) of
Mat. 23.14.
widows houses, but of goodly Lordships, and whole countries before them. It
is well known in this our Land, how both Church and Commonwealth groaned
under the burden of these heavy lubbers: the Commonwealth, whilst they
became Lords of very little less (by their computation who have traueised in
the search) than the one half of the Temporalties of the Kingdom; and the
Church, whilst they engrossed into their hands the fruits of most of the best
Benefices in the Realm; allowing scarce so much as the chafe toward the
maintenance of those that 1. Cor. 9.9.
trod out the corn. Their profession is (God be thanked) now long since
suppressed, and their habitations demolished, by the violent and Iehu-like
reformation of a mighty King: and the Land by that means well purged of these
ouer-spreading Locusts. There is nothing of them now remains, but the rubbish
of their nests, and the stink of their memory: unless it be the sting of
their devilish sacrilege in robbing the Church by damnable Impropriations.

. 18. 2. Gallants; with the limitation,
But let them go. The next we meet withal are those, with whose either birth,
or breeding, or estate it sorteth not (as they think) to be tied to labor in
any vocation. It is the sin of many of the Gentry, whom God has furnished
with means and abilities to do much good; to (...). Epitaph. Timocreontis,
apud Athen. dipnos. 5.
spend their whole days and lives, in an unprofitable course of doing either
nothing, or as good as nothing, or worse than nothing. I cannot be so either
stupid, as not to apprehend; or rigorous, as not to allow, a difference in the
manner of employment, and in other circumstances thereto belonging, between
those that are nobly or generously borne and bred, and those of the meaner and
ordinary rank. Manual and servile and mechanicke trades, and arts, are for
men of a lower condition. But yet no man is borne, no man should be bred unto
idleness. There are generous and ingenuous and liberal employments, sortable
to the greatest births and educations. For some man, whom God has blessed with
power and authority in his country; with fair livings and large revenues;
with a numerous family of servants, retainers and tenants, and the like: it may
be a sufficient Calling, and enough to take up his whole time, even to keep
hospitality, and to order and ouerlooke his family, and to dispose of his lands
and rents, and to make peace and preserve love and neighborhood among them
that live near or under him. He that does but this, as he ought to do, or is
otherwise non ociose vivit, qui qualitercunque vtiliter Aquin. 22.2 ae. qu.
187.5. ad 2.
industrious for the common good; must be acknowledged a worthy member of the
Commonwealth: and his course of life, a Calling (though perhaps not so
toilsome, yet) in suo genere as necessary and profitable, as that of the
Husbandman, Merchant, Lawyer, Minister, or any other.

But for our ( mere or parcel) Gallants, who live in no settled course of
life,. 19. Explication,
but spend half the day in sleeping, half the night in gaming, and the rest
of their time in other pleasures and vanities, to as little purpose as they can
devise; as if they were born for nothing else but to eat and drink and snort
and sport; who are spruce and trim as the Lillies ( Mat. 6.29.
Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed like one of these) yet they
neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into the barn, they neither labor nor spin
nor do any thing else for the good of humane society: let them know, there
is not the poorest contemptible creature, that cries Oysters and
Kitchen-stuffe in the streets, but deserves his bread better, than they; and
his course of life is of better esteem with God and every sober wise man,
than theirs. A horse, that is neither good for the way, nor the cart, nor the
race, nor the wars, nor any other service; let him be of never so good a --
nempe volucrem Sic laudamus equam -- Nobilis hic, quocunque venit de gramine --
Sed venale pecus Corythae, posteritas and Hirpini, si rara ^i^go victoria
sedit; Nil ibi maiorum respectus, gratia nulla Vmbrarum: dominos pr^ciis mutare
iubentur exiguis. Iuuenal. Satyr. 8.
breed, never so well marked and shaped; yet he is but a jade; his Master
sets no store by him, thinks his meat ill bestowed on him; every man
will say better knock him in the head than keep him; his skin, though not much
worth, is yet better worth than the whole beast besides.

. 20. and exhortation.
Consider this, you that are of noble or generous birth. Look unto the rock,
whence you were hewn; and to the pit, whence you were dug. Search your
Pedigrees; collect the scattered Monuments and Histories of your Ancestors: and
observe by what steps your worthy Progenitors raised their houses to the height
of Gentry, or Nobility. Scarce shall you find a man of them, that gave any
accession, or brought any noted eminency to his house; but either serving in
the Camp, or sweating at the Bar, or waiting at the Court, or aduenturing on
the Seas, or trucking in his Shop, or some other way (...). Euripid.
industriously bestirring himself in some settled Calling, and Course of life.
You usurp their Arms, if you inherit not their virtues: and those --
effigies quo Tot bellatorum, si luditur alea pernox ante Numantinos? Iuuen.
Sat. 8.
ensigns of Honor and Gentry which they by industry achieved, sit no
otherwise upon your shoulders, than as rich trappings upon Asses backs; which
serve but to render the poor beast more ridiculous. If you by brutish
sensuality, and spending your time in swinish luxury, stain the colors, and
embase the mettalls of those badges of your Gentry and Nobility, which you
claim by descent: think, when we worship or honor you, we do but -- Nanum
cujusdam, Atlanta vocamus; Aethiopen^, Cygnum. Iuuen. ibid.
flout you; and know, the -- honores, Quos illis damus, and dedimus, quibus
omnia debes. Iuuen ibid.
titles we in courtesy give you, we bestow upon their memories whose
degenerate offspring you are, and whose Arms you unworthily bear; and they
do -- quis enim generosum dixerit hunc, qui Indignus genere? Ibid,
no more belong to you, than the reverence the good man did to Isis, belonged
to the Ass that carried her image.

The third sort of those that live unprofitably and without a Calling, are our
idle sturdy Roagues, and vagrant townes-end Beggars:. 21. 3. Beggars: with the
limitation,
the very scabs, and filth, and vermin of the commonwealth. I mean such as
have health, and strength, and lims, and are in some measureable to work, and
take pains for their living; yet rather choose to wander abroad the country,
and to spend their days in a most base and ungodly course of life: and, which
is yet more lamentable, by I know not what conuinence, contrary to all
Conscience, Equity, and Law, are suffered. All Christian Commonwealths should
be the Gal. 6.16.
Isreal's of God: and in his Israel, God as he promised there should be Math.
26.11.
always some poor, on whom to exercise charity; so he ordained there should
be as some understand that in Deuteronomy. 15.4.
no beggar, to make a trade and profession of begging. Plato, than whom never
any laid down a more exact Idea of an happy Commonwealth, allows not any
(...). Plat. de legib. 11.
beggar therein: alleging, that where such were tolerated, it was impossible
but the State must abound with (...). Id. de Rep. lib. 8.
pilfering and whoring, and all kind of base villainy. The Civil Laws have
flat constitutions against them, in the titles Cod. Justin. lib. 11. Tit. 25.
and Cod Theo. 14. Tit. 18.
de mendicantibus non inualidis. But I think never kingdom had more wholesome
laws in both kinds, I mean both for the competent relief of the orderly
poor, and for sharp restraint of disorderly vagabonds; than those provisions
which in many of our own memories have bin made in this land. But Horat. lib.
3. Carm. 24.
Quid leges sine moribus --? Those Laws are now no Laws, for want of due
execution: but Beggars are Beggars still, for want of due correction. Tacit.
lib. 1. Histor.
Et vetabitur semper, and retinebitur; the saying is truer of Roagues and
Gypsies in England, than ever it was of Mathematicions in Rome. You to whose
care the preservation of the Justice, and thereby also of the Peace of the Land
is committed; as you tender the Peace and Justice of the Land, as you tender
your own quiet and the safety of your neighbors, as you tender the weal of
your Country and the honor of God: breath fresh life into the languishing
Laws by severe execution; be rather cruel to these Vipers, than to the State.
So shall you free us from the Plague, and yourselues from the guilt, and them
from the opportunities of infinite sinful abominations.

. 22. and Remedy.
But we are unreasonable to press you thus far, or to seek to you or any
others for Justice in this matter; having power enough in our own hands to do
ourselves Justice upon these men, if we would but use it. Even by making a
strait Covenant with our Ears, not to heed them; and with our Eyes, not to
pity them; and with our Hands, not to relieve them. Say I this altogether of
my self? or says not the Apostle even the same? 2 These. 3.10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat: relieve him not. But has not
Christ required of us to feed the hungry, and to cloth the naked, and to be
free and charitable to the poor? Nothing surer: God forbid any man should
preach against Charity and Almesdeedes. But remember, that as God approves not
1 Cor. 13.3.
Alms or any other work, if without Charity; so nor Charity it self, if
without Discretion. 1 Timothy 5.3.
Honor widows, says S. Paul, but those that are widows indeed: so relieve
the poor, but relieve those that are poor indeed. Not every one that asks,
not every one that wants, nay more, not every one that is poor, is poor
indeed: and he that in his indiscreete and mis-guided charity should give to
every one that asks or wants or is poor, meat or clothing or Alms; would
soon make himself more hungry and naked and poor, than he that is most
hungry or naked or poor. The poor, whom Christ commends to thee as a fit
object for thy charity, the poor indeed; are those that want not only the
things they ask, but want also means to get without asking. A man that is
blind or aged and past his work; a man that is sick or weak or lame and
cannot work; a man that desires it, and seeks it, and cannot get work; a
man that has a greater charge upon him than his honest pains can maintain;
such a man as one of these he is poor indeed. Let thine Ears be open, and
thine Eyes open, and thy Bowels open, and thy Hands open to such a one; it is
a charitable deed, and a Phil. 4.18.
sacrifice of sweet smelling, Heb. 13.16.
with such sacrifices God is well pleased: Forget not thou to offer such
sacrifices upon every good opportunity, and be well assured God will not forget
in due time to reward thee. But for a lusty able upright man (as they style him
in their own dialect) that had rather beg, or steal, or both, than dig: he
is no more to be relieved as a poor man, than a woman that has poisoned her
husband is to be honored as a widow. Such a woman is a widow, for she has no
more an husband than any other widow has: but such a woman is not 1. Tim. 5.
Compare verse. 3. with verse. 5. and 16.
a widow indeed, as S. Paul would be understood; not such a widow as he would
have honored: it is alms to hang up such a widow, rather than to honor her.
And I dare say, he that helps one of these sturdy Beggars to the stocks,
and the whip, and the house of correction, not only deserves better of the
Commonwealth; but does a work of greater Charity in the sight of God, than
he that helps him with meat and money and lodging. For he that does this,
corrupts his Charity by a double error. First, he maintains, and so
encourages the other in idleness; who, if none would relieve him, would be
glad to do any work, rather than sterue. And secondly, he disableth his
Charity, by mis-placing it; and unawares robs the poor, whilst he
thinks he relieueth them. As he that gives any honor to an Idol, robs
the true God, to whom alone all religious honor is due: so he that gives any
Alms to an idle Beggar, Pars sacrilegij est, rem pauperum dare non pauperibus.
Hieron.
robs the truly poor, to whom properly all the fruits of our Alms are
due. And so it comes to pass oftentimes (as S. Ambrose sometimes complained)
that the Neque transcribatur vita pauperum inspolia fraudulentorum. Ambros. 2.
Offic. 16.
maintenance of the poor is made the spoil of the loyterer.

23. The conclusion of the first Point.
But I forget my self, and you, and the time; whilst I give way to my just
indignation against these base excrements of the Commonwealth. You have seen
the Necessity of a Calling: without it, we despise Gods ordinance, and smother
his gifts; we expose our selves to sinful temptations; we deprive our selves,
our families and the poor of due maintenance; we withdraw our bounden service
from the Commonwealth. It is not the pretense of Devotion, that can exempt the
lazy Monk; nor of Birth, the riotous Gallant; nor of Want, the able Beggar;
nor of any other thing, any other man, from this common Necessity. And that
is the sum of our first point, viz. the Necessity of a Calling. Proceed we
now to the second, the choice of a Calling.

A Point indeed (I must confess) not directly intended in the words of my
Text:. 24. The choice of a Calling.
yet being after a sort employed therein (for the Apostles wish that every
particular man would abide in his own proper station and particular Calling,
cannot but imply that there is a difference and choice of such Callings;) and
being withal a matter of such great consequence to be taught and known; I
thought it would be more expedient for the present discharge of my duty in
this place, to take it in, (though with some hazard of the imputation of
impertenency to my self) than by passing it over to defraud them (and it is
likely there are many such here present) whom it may concern in point of
conscience, of such instructions as may give them profitable directions in a
business so material. Concerning which, it behooves every man the rather to
have an especial care, because much of a man's comfort and content in this life
depends thereupon: it being scarce possible, that that man's life should be
(...). Socratis dictum apud Stob. sermon. 1.
comfortable to him, or he go on with any cheerfulness in his course, that
lives in a Calling for which neither he is fit, nor the Calling fit for him.
Neither will the consideration hereof be useful only for such, as are yet
free to choose; but even for those also, who have already made their choice.
For, since the very same rules* which are to direct us in the choice of our
Calling, are to help us also for the trial of our Callings; it can be no
loss to the best of us all to give heed to those Rules: thereby either to
rectify our choice; or to quicken our alacrity in what we have chosen, by
warranting our courses to our own souls, and silencing many unnecessary
scruples, which are wont frequently to arise concerning this matter, in the
Consciences of Men.

25. That is our proper Calling, whereunto God calls us:
And first, we are to lay this as a firm ground, that that is every man's
Proper and right Calling, whereunto God calls him. For he is the Author, as
of our general, so of our particular Callings too: [ As the Lord has called
every one, verse. 20.] When therefore we speak of the choice of a Calling, you
are not so to understand it, as if it were left free for us ever, to make our
choice where, and as we list. The choice that is left to us, is no other but a
conscionable enquiry which way God calls us, and a conscionable care to take
that way. So that if it shall once appear, that God calls us this way or
that way, there is -- mortalia quarunt Consilium; certus ^ussa capesse Dei.
Auson. Theodosio.
no more place for choice; all that we have to do, is to obey. -- Auson. ibid.
Obsequium sufficit esse meum. The enquiries we are to make ordinarily, are (as
you shall hear anon) what lawfulness there is in the thing, what abilities
there are in us, what warrant we have from without. But all* these must cease,
when God once expresses himself, and calls us with an audible voice. No
more inquiry then into the thing, how lawful it is. If God bid Peter Act.
10.13. etc.
kill and eat, and send him to preach unto the Gentiles; there is no answering
(...) not so Lord, nor alleging the uncleanness of the meat, or the
unlawfulness of going into the way of the Gentiles: Iniusta iusta habenda-
what God will have clean, he Ib. verse. 28.
must not account common. His very call to any thing, makes it lawful. No
more inquiry into our selves how able we are. If God call Exodus 4.10. etc.
Moses, one of a slow speech and not eloquent, from the sheepefold, to plead
for his people before a Tyrant; or Judge. 6.14.15
Gideon, a mean stripling of a small family and tribe, from the threshing
floor, to deliver Israel out of the hands of their oppressors; or Ierem. 1.6.
etc.
Jeremy, a very child and one that could not speak, from his cottage in
Anathoth, to set him over nations and kingdoms to root out and to plant; or
Amos 7.13, 14, 15.
Amos, a plain country fruit-gatherer, from the Heard in Tekoa, to prophecy
at Bethel, and in the Kings Court: it is a fruitless and unseasonable modesty
to allege insufficiency or unworthiness. Auson. vbi supra.
Iuvat idem Qui iubet. Where he sets on work, he gives strength to go
through with it. His very calling of any man makes him able. No more
inquiry into outward means, what warrant we have. If God Romans 1.1.
call Paul to be an Apostle, and Act. 9.15.
to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel;
it is needless to Gal. 1.16.17
confer with flesh and blood, or to seek confirmation at Jerusalem from them
which were Apostles before him, by the imposition of their hands. Gods work in
him supplyeth abundantly the want of those solemnities; and Paul is as good an
Apostle as the best of them, although he be Ibid. verse. 1.
an Apostle not of men, neither by man. Gods calling any man to any office,
seals his warrant Auson. vbi supra.
Non tutum renuisse Deo -- Away with all excuses, and pretenses, and delays:
when God calls; submit thy will, subdue thy reason, answer his Call, as
Samuel was taught to do, 1 Samuel 3.9.10
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

. 26. and by what Enquiries that may be known.
If it were expedient for us, that God should still deal with us, as he did
long with the Jewish, and a while with the infant Christian Church, by
immediate inspirations; and call us either by secret Enthusiasmes, or sensible
insinuations (as he did many of them) into the way wherein he would have us
walk: the Rule for our Choice would be easy; or rather there would need no
Rule at all, (because indeed there would be left no Choice at all;) but this
only, even to get up and be doing, to put our selves speedily into that way
whereunto he did point us. But since the wisdom of God has thought it better
for us, to take counsel from his written word, which he has left us for our
ordinary direction in this and all other difficulties; rather than to depend
upon immediate and extraordinary inspirations: it will be very profitable for
us to draw thence some few Rules, whereby to make reasonable judgment
concerning any course of life, whether that it be, whereunto God has called
us, or no. The Rules, as I have partly intimated already, may be reduced to
three heads: according as the Enquiries we are to make in this business are
of three sorts. For they either concern the Course it self; or else our
selves, that should use it; or else thirdly those that have right and power
over us in it. If there be a fail in any of these; as if either the Course it
self be not lawful, or we not competently fit for it, or our superiors will
not allow of us, or it: we may well think, God has not called us thither. God
is just; and will not call all-sufficient; and will not call any man to
wonderful in his Providence; and will not

And first, of the Course we intend.. 27. Three Conditions requisite in every
lawful calling: 1. as considered in it self;
Wherein let these be our Enquiries: First, whether the thing be simply and in
it self lawful, or no; Secondly, whether it be lawful so as to be made a
Calling, or no; Thirdly, whether it will be profitable, or rather hurtful to
the Commonwealth. Now observe the Rules. The first Rule this, Adventure not on
any course, without good assurance that it be in it self lawful. The ground
of this Rule is plain and evident. For it cannot be that God, who hates and
forbids and punishes every sin in every man, should call any man to the
practice of any sin. Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, says S. Paul; but rather let him labor
with his hands the thing that is good. Ephesians 4. If it be not something that is
good; it is good for him to hold his hands off: let him be sure God never
called him to labor in that: and he were as good hold to his old trade, and
steal still, as labor with his hands the thing that is not good. If Act.
19.25. -- 27.
Diana of Ephesus be an Idol, Demetrius his occupation must down: he must
make no more silver shrines for Diana, though by that craft he have his
wealth. Tertullian excellently enlarges himself in this argument in his
praesertim cap. 5 -- 8.
book de Idololatriae; strongly disapprouing their practice, who being
Christians, yet got their living by making Statues and Images and other
ornaments to sell to heathen Idolaters. Offenders against this Rule are not
only such as live by Stealing, and Robbing, and Piracy, and Persecuting, and
Witchcraft, and other such like ungodly practices as are made capital even by
the Laws of men, and punishable by death: but all such also, as maintain
themselves by, or get their living in any course, absolutely condemned by the
Law of God; howsoever they may find amongst men either express allowance, as
Whores and Baudes do in the holy Mother Church of Rome, or at least some kind
of toleration by conniuence; as Charmers, and Fortune Tellers, and Wisards do
amongst us. Which sort of people, it is scarce credible how generally and
miserably our common ignorants are besotted with the opinion of their skill,
and how pitifully they are gulled by their damnable impostures, through their
own foolish credulity. These superstitions helped to root out the Deuteronomy.
18.10. -- 12.
Amorites out of the land of Canaan: and it may pass among Saul's best Acts,
that he rooted out these 1. Sam. 28.9.
superstitions out of the land of Israel: And great pity it is, that such as
make a trade of these superstitions are not by some severe provisions rooted
out of this, and every other Christian Land. Let this first Rule be remembered
of us in every choice and trial of our Callings; No unlawful thing can be a
lawful Calling.

No, nor yet every lawful thing neither. For many things may be lawful in the
private use, which yet may not lawfully be made a Calling,. 28. 2. Considered
as a Calling.
or trade of life. Who can reasonably deny the lawfulness of many disports and
recreations, as bowling, or shooting, or even Cards and Dice? and yet who can
(...). Arist. 8. Polit. 3.
reasonably think it should be a commendable Calling for any man to be a
professed Bowler, or Archer, or Gamster, and nothing else? Therefore take a
second Rule; Make not a Calling of that, which was not made to be a Calling. If
you shall ask, how you shall know a thing to be such. I answer, generally all
such things are of this nature, as are indifferent for men of all sorts and
callings to use with due caution and circumstances; and more especially matters
of delight, and recreations are such. And the reasons are good. The hic verse.
17.
ground of particular Calling is some (...). verse. 7.
peculiar gift of God, according to the differences that are to be found in
particular men in regard either of the soul, or of the body, or of outward
things: whereas such things as these, whereof we now speak, become of Lawful
and commendable use, not so much from any special ability received from God,
which should be exercised therein, as from the common necessity of our weak
nature, which is to be refreshed thereby. And the End also, for which God
permits us these things, is not to employ our strength and time in them; but
to give us some V^i quidem illis licet: sed sicut somno, and quietibus
coeteris, tum cum grauibus serijsque rebus satisfecerimus. Cic. 1. Offic.
refreshing, when we are wearied with former labor, and so to fit us for fresh
and future employment. The works of our Callings, they are as our Meats and
Drinks: these of Delight, as Sauces, or as (...). Arist. 8. Polit. 3
Physic; and as sauces or Physic they are to be used, and not otherwise. As
absurd then as it would be for a man to accustom himself to no other diet but
slabber-sauces, and Druggs: so absurd a thing is it for a man to have no other
Calling but Dicing, and Carding, and Gaming. Amongst offenders against this
Rule, that I reckon not Iuglers, and Fiddlers, and Tumblers, and Bearewards, and
Rope-dancers, and Rymers, and the rest of that rabble; they may thank the
baseness of their condition, rather than the Lawfulness of their Course. I
strike rather, at those that are more both eminent and pernicious; especially
those Bawdes of unthriftiness, and almost every other Vice; (for where
unthriftiness is, there is almost every other Vice,) I mean those
parcell-Gallants that have nothing to live on but their wits, and no other use
of their wits, but to distill a kind of maintenance from juicie heirs and
flush nouices by play. I would our Pantomimes also and Stage Players would
examine themselves and their Callings by this Rule. If they should have been
tried by the bench of Fathers and Counsels of old, or would have put it to
most voices among later Divines both Popish and Reformed; they had been
utterly cast and condemned by the first Rule, and not have been repriued till
now: most holding, not the Calling only, but the very Practice and Thing it
self unlawful and damnable. For my own part, I dare not at all say the
Practice is, neither will I now say the Calling is unlawful: only let them
that make a Calling of it, consider themselves and their Calling well, and
examine whether God has not bestowed upon them some gifts, which they might
have employed a better way, and what inducements they have, and of what weight
those inducements are, to give their consciences security, that they have done
well, in embracing this as their Calling. And when they have thus done, freely
and faithfully as in the sight of God; if their own hearts condemn them not,
neither do I: in the mean time, I would but be their remembrancer of thus
much only, that there are some things lawful to do, which are not lawful to
live by; something lawful as Delights, which are not lawful as Callings. And
so much for that second Rule.

There is yet a third Rule behind, and that is this.. 29. 3. considered, with
respect to common vtility.
Resolve not upon that course for thy Calling, what pretenses soever, or what
reasons thou may have for the lawfulness of it otherwise, which is rather
hurtful, than profitable for the commonwealth. The Sea before,. 14.
Public good is one of those maine respects which enforce the Necessity of a
Calling: the same respect then must of necessity enforce such a Calling, as
may at leastwise stand with the Public good. 1 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man (says our Apostle after
at the twelfth Chapter) to profit withal; yea perhaps, to profit himself
withal. If it were but so, yet that were enough to infer more; since the
(...). Xenop. de Venatione.
private good is included in the public tanquam trigonum in tetragono. But the
Apostle meant to speak home; and therefore he made choice of a word that will
not admit that gloss of private profit (...). That very word impliedly
prefers the Sanis hominibus publica priuatis potiora sunt. Senec. 1. de
Clem. 4.
public good before the private; and scarce allows the private otherwise
than as it is enterwouen in the public. Now things in themselves lawful, and
at sometimes useful, may, in regard of the End, or of the Matter, or by some
accident, otherwise happen at some other times to be hurtful to the
Commonwealth: and hereof such due consideration would be had in the choice and
exercise of our Callings, as ever to have one eye upon the common good, and not
wholly to look after our own private gain. Offenders against this Rule are
most of our Engrossers, and Forestallers, and sundry kinds of Hucksters and
Regraters: as also those that export money, corn, or other needful
commodities out of the Land in times of want or scarceness, or bring in
unnecessary commoditities when there is plenty at home: and all those that
project new devices, and unjust Monopolies, to fill their own Coffers, perhaps
not without pretension of some small benefit to the Commonwealth, but
certainly not without sensible and grievous pressures of those that are a great
part of the Commonwealth.

Thus have we delivered three Rules,. 30. The Usurers Calling examined by these
Rules.
concerning the Quality of a right Calling: and pointed out some special
offenders against each of them. And now me thinks I see the Usurer hugging
himself, and clapping his sides, that he has come off so fairly: surely his
Calling is absolute good, whereon none of these Rules could fasten. But it is
indeed with the Usurer in this case, as with the Drunkard. If the Drunkard
should ask me against which of the ten Commandments he offended; I confess
I could not readily give him a direct punctual answer: Not that he sins not
against any; but because he sins against so many of them, that it is hard
to say against which most. He sins against the sixth Commandment, by
distempering his body; he sins against the seventh, by enflaming his lust;
he sins against the eighth by making waste of the good creatures of God.
Right so is it with our Usurer in this Case: He would pose me, that should
ask me the Question, which of these three Rules fetcheth-in the Usurer, and
his Calling. Verily, I cannot well tell which most; I think every one of the
three may: howsoever, among the three, I am sure I have him. If Usury be
unlawful (as most of the learned have concluded,) then the first Rule has
him. I should be very tender to condemn any thing as simply unlawful, which
any even imaginary conjuncture of circumstances would render lawful; and would
choose rather by an ouer-liberall charity to 1. Pet. 4.8.
cover a multitude of sins, (if I may abuse the Apostles phrase to that
sense) than by a too superstitious restraint make one. Yet the Texts of
Scripture are so express, and the grounds of Reason so strong against all
Usury: that when I weigh these on the one side, and on the other side, how
nothing all that is, which I ever yet saw or heard alleged to the contrary; I
cannot find in my self charity enough to absolve any kind of Usury, with
what cautions or circumstances soever qualified, from being a sin. But I will
suspect mine own and the common judgment herein, and admit for this once
(dato, non concesso,) that Usury be in some case lawful, and so our Usurer
escape the first Rule; which yet cannot be, till his teeth be brains too,
before he escape our second Rule. I dare say, the most learned Usurer that
lives (and they say some learned ones are Usurers) will never be able to
prove, that Usury, if it be at all lawful, is so lawful, as Artem nequitiae
delegerunt, vnde vitam transigant: and inde se volunt pascere, vnde offendant
eum, a quo omnes pascuntur. August in psalm. 129.
to be made a Calling. Here all his Doctors, and his Proctors, and his
Advocates leave him. For can it possibly enter into any reasonable man's head to
think, that a man should be borne for nothing else, but to tell out money, and
take in paper? which if a man had many millions of gold and silver, could take
up but a small portion of that precious time which God would have spent in some
honest and fruitful emploiment. But what do I speak of the judgment of
reasonable men in so plain a matter; wherein I dare appeal to the conscience,
even of the Usurer himself; and it had need be a very plain matter, that a
man would refer to the conscience of an Usurer. No honest man need be
Pernagatissimus ille versus, qui vetat Artem pudere proloqui, quam f^ctites.
Cic. in Orator.
ashamed of an honest Calling: if then the Usurers Calling be such, what need
he care who knows it, or why should he shame with it? If that be his trade,
why does he not in his Bills, and Bonds, and Nouerints, make it known to all
men by those presents that he is an Usurer, rather than write himself
Gentleman or Yeoman, or by some other style? But say yet our Usurer should
Rules, as from the sword of Iehu and Hazael: there is yet a third Rule, like
the sword of Elisha, to strike him stond dead; and he shall never be able to
escape that. Let him show wherein his Calling is profitable to humane society.
He keeps no hospitality: if he have but a barred chest, and a strong lock
to keep his god and his scriptures (his Mammon and his Parchments in,) he
has house-roome enough. He fleeceth many; but cloatheth none. He biteth and
deuoureth; but eats all his morsels alone: He gives not so much as a crumme,
no not to his dearest Broker or Scriuener; only, where he biteth, he allows
them to scratch what they can for themselves. The King, the Church, the Poor,
are all wronged by him, and so are all that live near him: in every common
charge he slippeth the collar, and leaves the burden upon those that are
less able. It were not possible Usurers should be so bitterly inueighed
against by sober heathen Writers; so severely censured by the Civil and Canon
Laws; so uniformly condemned by godly Fathers and Counsels; so universally
Ier. 15.10.
hated by all men of all sorts and in all ages and countries, as Histories and
experience manifest they ever have been, and are: if their Practice and Calling
had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way hurtful and incommodious
both to private men and public societies. If any thing can make a Calling
unlawful; certainly the Usurers Calling cannot be lawful.

. 32. Enquiries concerning our selves:
Our first care past, which concerns the Calling it self; our next care in
our choice must be, to enquire into Our selves, what Calling is most fit for
us, and we for it. Wherein our Inquiry must rest especially upon three
things; our Inclination, our Gifts, and our Education. Concerning which, let
this be the first Rule: Where these three concur upon one and the same
Calling, our consciences may rest assured that that Calling is fit for us; and
we ought, so far as it lies in our power, to resolve to follow that. This
Rule, if well observed, is of singular use, for the settling of their
consciences, who are scrupulous and doubtful concerning their inward Calling
to any office or employment. Divines teach it commonly, and that truly, that
every man should have an inward Calling from God for his particular course of
life: and this in the calling of the Ministry is by so much more requisite,
than in most other callings, by how much the business of it is more weighty
than theirs, as of things more immediately belonging unto God. Whence it is,
that in our Church none are admitted into holy Orders, until they have
personally and expressly made profession before the Bishop, that they find
themselves Book of ordering, etc.
inwardly called and moved thereunto. But because what that inward calling is,
and how it should be discerned, is a thing not so distinctly declared and
understood, generally as it should be: it often falls out, that men are
distressed in conscience with doubts and scruples in this case, whilst they
desire to be assured of their inward calling, and know not how. We are to
know therefore, that to this inward calling there is not of necessity required
any inward secret sensible testimony of Gods blessed sanctifying Spirit to a
man's soul, (for then an unsanctified man could not be rightly called;) neither
yet any strong working of the Spirit of Illumination, (for then a mere heathen
man could not be rightly called): both which consequents are false. For 1.
Sam. 10.24.
Saul and Ioh. 6.70.
Judas were called; the one to the Kingdom, the other to the Apostleship; of
whom it is certain the one was not, and it is not likely the other was, endued
with the holy Spirit of Sanctification. And many heathen men have been called
to several emploiments, wherein they have also labored with much profit to
their own, and succeeding times; who in all probability never had any other
inward motion, than what might arise from some or all of these three things now
specified: viz. the Inclination of their nature, their personal Abilities, and
the care of Education. If it shall please God to afford any of us, any farther
gracious assurance than these can give us, by some extraordinary work of his
Spirit within us; we are to embrace it with joy and thankfulness, as a
special favor: but we are not to suspend our resolutions for the choice of a
course, in expectation of that extraordinary assurance; since we may receive
comfortable satisfaction to our souls without it, by these ordinary means,
now mentioned. For who need be scrupulous, where destinated thee to some
special course, (admit the Ministry) and been at the care and charge to breed
thee up in learning, to make thee desire to be doing some thing that way in
thy private study by way of trial; and withal some measure of knowledge, and
utterance, (though perhaps not in such an eminent degree as thou could wish,
yet) in such a competency, as thou may reasonably persuade thy self thou
might thereby be able (with his blessing) to do some good to Gods people,
and not be altogether unprofitable in the Ministry. In this so happy
concurrence of Propension, Abilities, and Education; make no farther enquiry,
doubt not of thine inward Calling: Tender thy self to those, that have the
power of Admission for thy outward Calling; which once obtained, thou are
certainly in thine own proper Course. Up and be doing: for the Lord has
called thee, and (no doubt) the Lord will be with thee.

But say, these three do not concur; as oftentimes they do not.. 33. with
some more special directions, in doubtful cases; in respect
A man may be destinated by his friends, and accordingly bred, out of some
covetous or ambitious or other corrupt respect, to some Calling; wherefrom he
may be altogether averse, and whereto altogether unfit: as we see some
parents, that have the donations or aduocations of Church livings in their
hands, must needs have some of their children (and for the most part they set
by the most untoward and misshapen chip of the whole block to make timber for
the Pulpit;) but some of their children they will have thrust into the
Ministry, though they have neither a head, nor a heart for it. Again, a man
may have good sufficency in him for a Calling, and yet out of a sloathfull
desire of ease and liberty, if it seem painful or austere; or an ambitious
desire of eminency and reputation, if it seem base and contemptible, or some
other secret corruption, cannot set his mind that way; as Solomon says, there
may be Prou. 17.16.
a price in the hand of a fool, to buy wisdom, and yet the fool have no
heart to it. And diverse other occurrents there may be, and are, to hinder this
happy conjuncture of Nature, skill, and Education. Now in such Cases as these,
where our Education bends us one way, our Inclination swayeth us another way,
and it may be our Gifts and Abilities lead us a third: in this distraction,
what are we to do? which way to take? what calling to pitch upon? In point of
Conscience, there can no more be given general Rules, to meet with all Cases,
and regulate all difficulties; than in point of Law, there can be general
Resolutions given, to set an end to all suites, or provisions made to prevent
all inconveniences. Particulars are infinite, and various: but Rules are not,
must not, cannot be so. He whose Case it is, if he be not able to direct
himself, should do well to take advice of his learned Counsel: this we can
readily do in matters of Law, for the quieting of our Estates; why should we
not do it at least as readily in matter of Conscience, for the quieting of our
souls? But yet for some light, at least in the generality; what if thou
should proceed thus?

. 34. 1. of our Education;
First, have an eye to thy Education: and if it be possible to bring the rest
that way, do so rather, than forsake it. For besides that it would be some
grief to thy parents, (to whom thou should be a comfort) to have cast away
so much charge as they have been at for thy education; and some dishonor to
them withal, (whom thou art bound by the law of God and Nature to Exodus 20.12.
honor,) to have their judgments so much slighted, and their choice so little
regarded by their child: the very consideration of so much precious time, as
has been spent in fitting thee to that course, which would be almost Hand
aequum facit, qui, quod didicit, id dedicit Plaut. in Amphitr.
all lost upon thy Change, should prevail with thee to try all possible
means, rather than forgo it. It were a thing indeed much to be wished, that
Parents and Friends and Guardians and all those other whosoever, that have the
Education of young ones committed unto them; (all greedy desires to make their
children great, all base penurious nigardesse in saving their own purses, all
fond cherishing of their children in their humors, all doting opinion of their
forwardness and wit and towardliness, all other corrupt partial affections
whatsoever, laid aside;) would inque eo vel maxim probaui -- Apollonium, --
qui cum mercede doceret, tamen non patiebatur cos, quos judicabat non posse
orat^res euadere, operam apud sese perdere, dimittel atque: and ad quamcunque
artem putabat esse aptum, ad eam impellere, atque hortari solebat. Cic. 1. de
Orat.
out of the observation of their natural prope^sions and inclinations, and of
their particular abilities and defects, frame them from the beginning to such
courses, as wherein they were likeliest to go on with cheerfulness and
profit. This indeed were to be wished: but this is not always done. If it have
not been so done to thee; the fault is theirs, that should have done it, and
not thine: and thou art not able now to remedy that which is past and gone. But
as for thee, and for the future; if thy Parents have not done their part, yet
do not thou forget thy duty: if they have done one fault, in making a bad
choice; do not thou add another, in making a worse change: disparage not their
Judgments by misliking, neither gainsay their Wills by forsaking their
choice, upon every small incongruity with thine own Judgment or Will. If
thine Inclination draw thee another way; labor thoroughly to subdue thy nature
therein: Suspect thine own corruption; Think this backwardness proceeds
not from true judgment in thee, but issues rather from the root of some
carnal affection: Consider thy years are green, Iuuenile vitium est, regere
non posse impetum. Senec. in Troad.
affections strong, judgment unsettled: Hope that this backwardness will grow
off, as years and stayednesse grow on: Pray and endeavor that thou may
daily more and more waine thy affections from thine own bent, and take liking
to that course; whereunto thou have been so long in framing. Thus possibly
thou may in time make that cheerful and delightful unto thee, which now is
grievous and irksome. And as for thy insufficiency, if that dishearten thee,
(which is indeed a maine rubb,) do thus. Impute thy former non-proficiency to
thine own sloth and negligence: Think, if after so long time spent in this
course, thou have attained to no greater perfection in it; how long it would be
ere thou should come to a tolerable mediocrity in another: Resolve, not to
lose all that precious time forepast, by beginning the world a new; but rather
save as much of it, as is redeemeable, by adding to thy diligence: Suspect that
it comes from thy pride, that thou can not content thy self with a
Calling, wherein thou may not be excellent; and imagine that God, of purpose
to humble thee, might divert thy education to another, for which thou art less
apt: Observe what Nihil est quod non expugnet pertinax opera, and intenta ac
diligens cura Senec.

-- Labor omnia vincit Improbus. Virgil. 1. Georg.

Praeliatus est contrarerum naturam, and quidem victor abijt; malignitatem ejus
pertinacissimo robore superando. de Demosthene, Valor. Max. 8.7. (...).
Heliodor. lib. 3. Aethiop. hist.


strange things past belief, and such as have seemed insuperable, have been
conquered and subdued by the obstinacy and improbity of vnwearyed labor, and
of assiduity: Doubt not, but by Gods blessing upon thy faithful industry, to
attain in time, (if not to such perfection as thou desire, and might
perhaps have attained in some other course if thou had been bred up to it;
yet) to such a competent sufficiency, as may render thy endeauours acceptable
to God, comfortable to thy self, and serviceable to community. If by these and
the like considerations, and the use of other good means, thou can bring thy
affections to some indifferent liking of, and thy abilities to some indifferent
mediocrity for, that course which Education has opened unto thee: thou have no
more to do; There Is thy course, that is thy Calling, that is the Work whereunto
God has appointed thee.

But if after long striving, and pains, and trial,. 35. 2. of our Abilities,
thou can neither bring thy mind to it, nor do any good upon it, having
faithfully desired and endeavored it, so that thou must needs leave the
course of thy Education; or (which is another case) if thy Education have left
thee free; (as many Parents, God knows, are but too careless that way:) then
Secondly thou art in the next place to consider of thy Gifts and Abilities; and
to take direction from them, rather than from thine Inclination. And this Rule
I take to be very sound: not only from the Apostles intimation, verse. 17. (
Verse. 17. hi^c.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one,)
where he seems to make the choice of men's Callings, to depend much upon the
distribution of Gods Gifts: but withal for two good Reasons. One is, because
our Gifts and Abilities, whether Brain or Hand, are at a better certainty;
than our Propensions and Inclinations are, which are seated in the Heart. The
heart is Ierem. 17.9.
deceitful above all things: and there are so many rotten corruptions in it,
that it is a very hard thing for a man to discern his own Inclinations and
Propensions, whether they spring from a sound, or from a corrupt root. Whereas
in the discerning of our Gifts and Abilities, we are less subject to gross
Errors and mistakings: I mean for the truth and reality of them; howsoever
we are apt to ouerualue them for the fere plus nobis videmur posse quam
possumus. Senec. de tranquil. c. 4.
measure and degree. Now it is meet in the choice of our Callings, we should
follow the surer guide: and therefore rather be led by our Metirise quemque suo
modulo ac pede verum est. Horat. 1. Epist. 7.
Gifts, than by our Inclinations. The other Reason is; because our Inclinations
cannot so well produce Abilities, as these can draw on them. We say indeed,
there is nothing hard to a willing mind: and in some sense, it willing mind
could make us do more than we are able. A man can do no more, than he can
do, be he never so willing: but because a willing mind will make us exerere
vires, stir up our selves to do as much as we are able, which we use not to
do in those things we go unwillingly about. Willingness then may quicken the
strength we have: but it does not put any new strength into us. But Abilities
can produce Inclinations de nouo; and make them, where they find them not. As
we see, every other natural thing is inclinable to the exercise of those
natural faculties, that are in it: so certainly would every man have strongest
inclination to those things, whereto he has strongest abilities, if wicked and
untoward affections did not often corrupt our inclinations, and hinder them
from moving their own proper and natural way. It is best then, to begin the
choice of our Callings from our Abilities, which will fetch on Inclinations;
and not from our Inclinations, which without Abilities will not serve the turn.

Concerning which gifts or abilities;. 36. With sundry considerations
concerning them;
what they are, and how to make true judgment of them, and how to frame the
choice of our Callings from them: to speak punctually and fully, would require
a large discourse. I can but touch at some few points therein, such as are of
daily use; and proceed. First, by gifts and abilities we are to understand
Mind; Judgment, Wit, Invention, Memory, Fancy, Eloquence, etc. and those of
the Body; Health, Strength, Beauty, Actiuity, etc. but also those which are
without; Birth, Wealth, Honor, Authority, Reputation, Kindred, Alliance, etc.
generally any thing, that may be of use or advantage unto us for any
emploiment. Secondly, as our abilities wants and defects, which might disable
us more or less for any emploiment, are to be duly weighed and considered
of: and the one laid against the other; that we may know how to make as near
as we can a just estimate of our strength and sufficiency. Thirdly, it is the
safer way to undervalue, than to ouerprize our selves: lest ignorantly
confident, we affect a Calling above our strength; which were to fly with
waxen wings, and to owe the world a laughter. Be we sure of this: if God have
not gifted us for it, he has not called us to it. Fourthly, in the judging of
our Abilities, we should have a regard to the outward circumstances of times
and places, and the rest. Those gifts, which would have made a sufficient
Priest, in the beginning of the Reformation, in that dearth of learning, and
penury of the Gospel; now the times are full of knowledge and learning, would
be all little enough for a Parish-Clarke. some thing would be yielded to the
judgments of other men concerning our Abilities. It is either secret pride, or
base faintness of heart, or dull sloth, or some other thing, and not true
modesty in us: if being excellently gifted for some weighty emploiment in every
other man's judgment, we yet withdraw our selves Sixthly, and lastly; let us
resolve on that course, ( caeteris paribus;) not only for which we are
competently fit, but for which we are absolutely fittest. A good Actor it may
be could very sufficiently act any part in the play; represent the majesty of
a King, or the humor of a Swaggerer, or the prankes of a Bedlam, or any thing:
but yet if he be notedly excellent at some part rather than another, he would
not willingly be put from that, to act another. Ergo histrio hoc videbit in
scena, quod non videbit sapiens in vita? Shame we to let these men be wiser in
their generations, than we in ours. And thus much for abilities.

. 37. 3. of our Inclinations. concerning which, the first Rule,
There is yet a doubt remains concerning a man's Inclination. In case we have
examined our gifts, and find them in a good measure of competency for such or
such a course, and yet remain still averse from it, and cannot by any possible
means work over our affections to any tolerable liking of it: in such a case,
what is to be done, or how shall we judge what Calling is fittest for us to
take? whether that whereto our Abilities lead us, or that whereto our
Inclinations draw us. As I conceive it; in such a case, we are to hold this
order. First, if our Inclinations cannot be won over to that course, for
which our Abilities lie fittest; we are to take a second surview of our
Abilities, to see if they be competently fit for that, whereto our Inclination
swaieth us: and if upon due impartial examination we find they are, we may
then -- Recte facit, animo quando obsequitur suo; Quod om^es homines sacere
oporcet, dum id modo fiat bono. Plaut. in Amphitr.
follow the sway of our Inclinations. The reason this. A man's inclination
cannot be forced. If it can be fairly won over, well and good: but violence
it cannot endure at any hand. And therefore if we cannot make it yield to us in
reason, there is no remedy, we must in wisdom yield to it, (provided ever it
be honest:) or else all is lost. What ever our sufficiencies be; things will
not fadge that are undertaken (...) ale respondent coacta ingenia: reluctante
natura, irritus labor est. Senee. de tranquil. c. 6.
without an heart: there is no good to be done against the hair.

But then secondly,. 38. the second,
if upon search we find our selves altogether insufficient and unfit for that
Calling, whereunto our inclination is strongly and violently carried: we are to
oppose that inclination with a greater violence; and to set upon some other
Calling, for which we are in some mediocrity gifted, speedily and resoluedly,
and leave the success to Almighty God. The reason this. It being certain,
that God never calls any man but to that, for which he has in some
competent measure enabled him: we are to hold that for a pernicious and
unnatural inclination at the least, if not rather for a wicked and Diabolical
suggestion, which so stiffely exciteth us to a function, whereto we may be
assured God never called us.

. 39. the third.
But yet thirdly, (and I would commend it unto you, as a principal good Rule,
and the fairest outlet of all other from amid these difficulties;) we should
do well to deal with these mutinous and distracting thoughts within us, as
wife Statists do when they have to deal with men divided in opinions, and
factions, and ends. How is that? They use to bethink themselves of a middle
course, to reduce all the several opinions to a kind of temper; so as no side
be satisfied fully in the proposals they have tendered, and yet every side in
part: as we commonly hold those to be the Apud arbitrum neque nihil, neque
tantum quantum postulauimus, consequemur. -- Quis vnquam ad arbitros, quantum
petit, tantum abstulit? Cic. pro Rosc. Com.
iustest arbitrators, and to make the best and the fairest end of differences
between the parties for whom they arbitrate, that by pleasing neither, please
both. So here, if our Educations, Abilities, and Inclinations look several
ways; and the Inclination be peremptory and stiff, and will not condescend to
either of the other two: it will be a point of good wisdom in us, if we can
bethink our selves of some such meet temper, as may in part give satisfaction
to our Inclinations; and yet not leave our gifts and educations wholly
unsatisfied. And that is easily done by proposing the full latitude of our
Educations and Abilities, as the utmost bounds of our choice; and then leaving
it to our Inclinations to determine our particular choice within those bounds.
For no man's education or gifts run so Mathematically, and by the Line, to
that point whereto they direct him, but that there is a kind of latitude in
them; and that for the most part (by reason of the great variety and Nulla ars
non alterius artis, aut matter, aut propinqua est. Tert. de Idol. cap. 8.
affinity of offices and emploiments) very large and spacious. One instance
shall serve both to exemplify, and illustrate this Rule. A man designed by his
parents to the Ministry, and for that end brought up in the University,
studieth there Philosophy, and History, and the Arts, and the Tongues, and
furnishes himself with general knowledge, which may enable him as for the
work of the Ministry so for the exercise of any other profession, that has to
do with learning: so as not only the Calling of the Ministry, but that of
the Lawyer too, and of the Physician, and of the Tutor, and Schoolmaster, and
sundry other besides these, do come with in the latitude of his Education and
Abilities. Certainly if his mind would stand thereunto, no course would be so
proper for such a man, as that which he was intended for, of the Ministry. But
he proves obstinately auerse from it, and cannot be drawn by any persuasion
of friends or reason to embrace it. It is not meet to force his Inclination
quite against the bent of it: and yet it is pity his Abilities and Education
should be cast away. This middle course therefore is to be held; even to
leave it free for him to make his choice of Law or Physique, or teaching, or
any other profession that belongs to a Scholar, and comes within his
latitude, which of them soever he shall find himself to have the strongest
Inclination and Propension unto. And the like course we are to hold in other
cases of like nature: by which means our Inclinations, which cannot be driven
to the Center, may yet be drawn within the Circumference of our Educations
and Abilities. He that observes these Rules I have hitherto delivered, with
due respect to his Education, Abilities, and Inclination; and deals therein
faithfully and impartially and in the fear of God: may rest secure in his
conscience of his Inward Calling.

. 40. The necessity of an outward Calling;
But there must be an Outward Calling too: else yet all is not right. The
general Rule, 1. Cor. 14.40.
[(...)] Let all things be done honestly, and in order, enforces it. There are
some Callings, which conscionably discharged, require great pains and care;
but yet the profits will come in, whether the duties be conscionably
performed, or no. Our Calling of the Ministry is such; and such are all those
offices, as have annexed unto them a certain standing revenue, or annual see.
Now into such Callings as these, every unworthy fellow that wants maintenance
and loves ease, would be intruding; (as we of the Clergy find it but too
true:) and there would be no order kept herein, if there were not left in some
others a power to keep back insufficient men. There are again diverse
Callings, necessary for the public, which yet bring in either no profits at
all, (if not rather a charge,) or at least profits improportionable to the
pains and dangers men must undergo in them: such as are the Callings of a
Justice of peace, the high Sheriff of a County, a Constable, Churchwarden,
Soldier, etc. Now from these Callings men of sufficiency to avoid trouble and
charge would withdraw themselves; and so the King and Country should be served
either not at all, or by unworthy ones. Here likewise would be no order, if
there were not left in some others a power to impose those offices upon
sufficient men. It may be, those in whom either power resideth, may sometimes,
yea often abuse it; (for they are but men:) keeping back sufficient men, and
admitting insufficient, into callings of the former; sparing sufficient men,
and imposing upon insufficient, offices of the latter kind. This is not well:
but yet what wise man knows not, that there could not be avoided a necessity
of general inconueniencies, if there should not be left a possibility of
particular mischiefs? And therefore it is needful, there should be this power
of admitting and refusing, of sparing and imposing, in Church and
Commonwealth, though it may happen to be thus mischieuously abused; rather
than for want of this power, a multitude of insufferable inconveniences (as
needs there must) should ensue. And from this power must every man have his
warrant for his outward Calling to any office or emploiment in Church or
Commonwealth.

Now then to frame a case to either of these. 41. Exemplified in two cases: the
first;
two sorts of Calling. A man desires a lawful Calling, suppose the Ministry;
not only his Inclination bends him, but his Education also leads him, and
his Gifts encourage him that way: hitherto all things concur to seal unto
his conscience Gods calling him to this function. But for so much as he has
not, (as it is not fit any man should have,) power to give himself either See
Heb. 5.4.
Orders to be a Priest, or Institution into a Pastoral charge; he must, for
his admission into holy function, depend upon those, to whom the power of
admitting or refusing in either kind is committed. He may tender himself, and
his gifts to examination; and modestly craue-admission: which once obtained, he
has no more to do, his Calling is warranted, and his choice at an end. But if
that be peremptorily denied him, (whether reasonably, or no, it now mattereth
not;) he is to rest himself content awhile, to employ himself at his study
or in some other good course for the time, and to wait Gods leisure and a
farther opportunity. And if after some reasonable expectation, upon further
tender with modest importunity, he cannot yet hope to prevail: he must begin
to resolve of another course, submit himself to Authority and Order,
acknowledge Gods providence in it, possess his soul in patience, and think,
that for some secret corruption in himself, or for some other just cause, God
is pleased that he should not, or not yet, enter into that Calling.

. 42. the second,
On the other side, a Gentleman lives in his Country in good credit and
account; known to be a sufficient man both for estate and understanding;
thought every way fit to do the King and his Country service in the
Commission of the Peace: yet himself, either out of a desire to live at ease
and avoid trouble, or because he thinks he has as much business of his
own as he can well turn him to, without charging himself with the cares of
the public, or possibly out of a privy Consciousnesse to himself of some
defect, (as, it may be, an irresolution in judgment, or in See Syrac. 7.6.
courage, or too great a propension to foolish pity,) or for some other reason
which appears to him just, thinks not that a fit Calling for him, and
rather desires to be spared. But for so much as it is not fit a man should be
altogether his own judge (especially in things that concerue the Public;) he
must herein depend upon those to whom the power of sparing or imposing in this
kind is committed. He may excuse himself by his other many occasions, allege
his own wants and insufficiencies, and what he can else for himself; and
modestly crave to be spared. But if he cannot by fair and honest suite get
off; he must submit himself to Authority and Order, yield somewhat to the
judgment of others, think that God has his secret work in it, and rest upon
the warrant of this Outward Calling.

The Outward Calling then,. 43. with the importance hereof.
is not a thing of small moment, or to be lightly regarded. Sometimes (as in
the Case last proposed,) it may have the chief and the Casting voice: but
where it has least, it has always a Negative; in every regular choice of any
Calling or course of life. And it is this Outward Calling, which (I say not
principally, but) even alone must rule every ordinary Christian in the judging
of other men's Callings. We cannot see their hearts; we know not how God might
move them; we are not able to judge of their inward Callings. If we see them
too neglectfull of the duties of their Calling; if we find their Gifts hold
very short and unequal proportion with the weight of their Calling; or the
like: we have but little comfortable assurance, to make us confident that all
is right within. But yet (unless it be such as are in place of Authority and
Office, to examine men's sufficiencies, and accordingly to allow or disallow
them,) what has any of us to do to judge the heart, or the Conscience, or the
inward Calling of our brother? So long as he has the warrant of an orderly
outward Calling, we must take him for such as he goes for: and leave the
trial of his heart to God, and to his own heart. And of this second general
point, the choice of a Calling, thus far.

. 44. The abiding in our Callings
Remains now the third and last point proposed; The Use of a man's Calling. Let
him verse. 17. hic.
walk in it, verse. 17. Let him verse. 20.
abide in it, verse. 20. Let him abide therein with God, here in my Text. At
this I aimed most, in my choice of this Text; and yet of this I must say least.
Preachers often times do with their proposalls, as Parents sometimes do with
their Children: though they love the later as well, yet the first go away with
the largest portions. But I do not well, to trifle out that little sand I have
left, in Apologies: Let us rather on to the matter; and see what Duties our
Apostle here requires of us, under these phrases of Abiding in our Callings,
and abiding therein with God.

It may seem, he would have us stick to a course; and when we are in a
Calling, not to forsake it, nor change it,. 45. disalloweth not a change,
no not for a better, no not upon any terms. Perhaps some have taken it so:
but certainly the Apostle never meant it so. For taking the word [ Calling] in
that extent wherein he treats of it in this Chapter; if that were his
meaning, he should consequently teach that no single man might marry, nor any
servant become free: which are apparently contrary, both unto common Reason,
and unto the very purpose of the Chapter. But taking the word as we have
hitherto specially intended it, and spoken of it, for some settled Station and
Course of Life whereby a man is to maintain himself, or wherein to do
profitable service to humane society, or both: is it yet lawful for a man to
change it, or is he bound to abide in it perpetually without any possibility
or liberty to alter his course upon any terms? I answer: it it Lawful; so it
be done with due caution. It is Lawful: first, in subordinate Callings.
higher, but by the steps of an inferior Calling; there must needs be supposed
a lawfulness of relinquishing the inferior. How should we do for Generals
for the wars, if Coronells and Lieutenants and Captains and Common Soldiers
might not relinquish their charges? and how for Bishops in the Church, if
beneficed men and Colledge-Gouernours were clench't and riuetted to their
Cures, like a nail in a sure place, not to be removed? Nay, we should have no
Priests in the Church of England, (since a Priest must be a Deacon first,) if a
Deacon might not leave his station, and become a Priest. But S. Paul says, 1.
Tim. 3.13.
they that have used the office of Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree: and so in lower Callings it is, that men should give proof of their
worthiness higher. It is lawful secondly, yea necessary; when the very
Calling it self, though in it self good and useful, does yet by some
accident become unlawful or unuseful. As when some Manufacture is prohibited
by the State; or when some more exact device of later invention, has made
thirdly, when a man by some accident becomes unable for the duties of his
Calling: as by age, blindness, maime, decay of estate, and sundry other
impediments which daily occur. It is lawful fourthly, want of sufficient
men, or not a sufficient number of them in some Callings, for the necessities
of the State and Country: in such cases, Authority may interpose, and cull out
men from other Callings, such as are fit, and may be sp^red, to serve in
those. Not to branch out too generally; where either absolute Necessity
enforces it, or lawful Authority enioyneth it, or a concurrence of weighty
circumstances faithfully, and soberly, and discreetly laid together, seems to
require it.

But then it must be done with due cautions.. 46. So it be done with due
cautions:
As first, not out of a desultory lightness: some men are ever Nullam mentem
animi habeo: vbi sum, ibi non sum; vbi non sum, ibi est animus. Plaut. in
Cistel.
restless, as if they had Wind-mills in their heads: every new crotchet
puts them into a new course. But these rolling stones carry their curse with
them; they seldom gather moss: and who prove many Conclusions, it is a
wonder, if their last Conclusion prove not Beggary. If thou art well, (...)
apud Stob. sermon. 1.
keep thy self well: lest thinking to meet with better, thou find worse. Nor
secondly, out of the greediness of a covetous or ambitious lust. Profit and
Credit, are things respectively amongst other things, to be considered both in
the choice and change: but not principally, and above all other things;
certainly not wholly, and without, or against all other things. Thirdly, nor
out of sullenness, or a discontentednesse at thy present condition. Content
grows from the mind, not from the condition: and therefore change of the
Calling, the mind unchanged, will either not afford content, or not long. Thy
new broom, that now sweepeth clean all discontents from thee, will soon grow
stubbed; and leave as much filth behind to annoy thee, as the old one thou
flungest away. Either learn with S. Paul, in whatsoever state Phil. 4.11.
thou art, to be there withal content: or never hope to find content in
whatsoever state thou shall be. Much less fourthly, out of an evil eye
against thy neighbor that lives by thee. There is not a baser sin than
envy: nor a fouler mark of envy, than to forsake thine own trading, to iustle
fifthly, out of degenerous false-heartednesse. That man would soon dare to be
evil, that dares not long be good. And he that flincheth from his Calling,
at the first frown; who can say he will not flinch from his conscience, at the
next? In an upright course, fear not the face of man: neither 1 Eccl. 10.4.
leave thy place, though the spirit of a Ruler rise up against thee. Patience
will conjure down again that spirit in time; only, if thou keep thy self
within thy circle. But sixthly, be sure thou change not, if thy Calling be of
that nature, that it may not be changed. Some degrees of Magistracy seem to be
of that nature: and therefore some have noted it, rather as an act of impotency
in Charles the fifth, than a fruit either of Humility, or Wisdom, or
Devotion, that he resigned his Crown, to betake himself to a Cloister. But
our Calling of the Ministry is certainly such. There may be a change of the
station, or degree, in the Ministry upon good cause, and with due
circumstances: but yet still so, as that the maine Calling it self remain
unchanged. This Calling has in it something that is sacred, and singular, and
different from other Callings. As therefore things once dedicated and hallowed
to religious services, were no more to return to common uses; (for that were
to profane them ipso facto, and to make them unclean:) so persons once set
apart for the holy work of the Ministry, ( Act. 13.2. whence (...). Romans 1.1.
separate me Paul and Barnabas,) and invested into their Calling with solemn
collation of Ioh. 20.22.
the holy Ghost in a special manner; if any more they return to be of that
lump from which they are separated, they do as it were puff the blessed
breath of Christ back into his own face, and renounce their part in the holy
Ghost. Bethink thy self well therefore beforehand, and consider what thou
art in doing, when thou beginnest to reach forth thine hand toward this
spiritual Plow: know, when it is once there, it may not be pulled back
again, no not for a Dictatorship. That man can be no less than disorderly at
the least, that forsakes his Orders. You see I do but point at things as I
go, which would require further enlarging: because I desire to have done.

This then,. 47. but imports. 1. Contentedness;
that we should persevere in our Callings until death, and not leave or change
them upon any consideration whatsoever; is not the thing our Apostle means by
abiding in our Callings. The word imports diverse other Christian duties,
concerning the use of our Callings. I will but touch at them, and conclude. The
first is contentednes: that we neither repine at the meannes of our own, nor
envy at the eminence of another Calling. Verse. 21. hic
Art thou called being a servant? care not for it, says this Apostle, but a
little before my Text. All men cannot have rich, or easy, or honorable
Callings: the necessity of the whole, requires that some should drudge in
baser and meaner offices. 1. Cor. 12.17.
If all the body were Eye, where were the Hearing? And if there were none to
grind at the Mill, there would soon be none to sit upon the Throne. Salomons
Temple had not been reared to this hour, if there had not been 3. Kin. 5.15.
burden-bearers and laborers, as well as canibus workers in stone, and brass,
and gold. There should be no shame in that, whereof there can be no want: nay 1
Cor. 12.22.
much more; those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary. Grudge not then at thine own lot; for not the meanest Calling, but
has a promise of Gods blessing: neither envy an others lot; for not the
greatest Calling, but is attended with worldly vexations. Whatsoever thy
Calling is, therein abide: be Content with it.

The second is Faithfulness,. 48. 2. Faithfulness;
and Industry, and Diligence. What is here called Abiding in it, is at verse.
17. called ves. 17. hic.
Walking in it; and in Romans 12. Waiting on it, ( Rom 12.7.
Let him that has an office, wait on his office.) 1 Cor. 4.2.
It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful: and every man in his
Calling, is 1 Pet. 4.10.
a Steward. He that professes a Calling, and does nothing in it; does no more
abide in it, than he that leaves it, or he that never had it. Spartam quam
nactus es, orna. Whatsoever Calling thou have undertaken, therein abide: be
painful in it.

. 49. 3. Sobriety.
The third is sobriety, that we keep our selves within the proper bounds and
limits of our Callings. For how does he abide in his Calling, that is ever and
anon flying out of it, or starting beyond it? like an extrauagant soldier,
that is always breaking rank. 2 Samuel 6.6.
Vzza had better have ventured the falling, than the fingering of the Arc,
though it tottered. It is never well, when the Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. v.
Plin. 35. Not. hist. 10.
Cobbler looks above the Ankle; nor when Laymen teach us what, and how, we
should teach them. The Pope should have done well, to have thrown away his
keys, (as they say one of them once did,) before he had taken the sword into
his hands: and Midwiues well, to Math. 28.19.
go teach all nations, before they baptize them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Let it be the singular absurdity of the
Church of Rome, to allow Vicars to dispose of Crowns, and Woman of Sacraments.
As for thee, whatsoever thy Calling be, therein abide: keep within the bounds
of it.

But yet abide with God.. 50. The abiding therein with God, requires 1. a
Conscience of the duties of the General Calling;
That clause was not added for nothing: it teaches thee also some duties.
First; so to demean thy self in thy particular Calling, as that thou do
nothing but what may stand with thy general Calling. Magistrate, or Minister,
or Lawyer, or Merchant, or Artificer, or whatsoever other thou art; remember
thou art withal a Christian. Pretend not the jam illa obijci solita vox, Non
habeo aliud quo viuam -- Tertull. de Idolol. cap. 5. v. ibid. cap. 12. pulchre.
necessities of thy particular Calling to any breach of the lea^t of those
Laws of God, which must rule thy general Calling. God is the author of both
Callings: of thy General Calling, and of thy Particular Calling too. Do not
think he has called thee to service, in the one, and to liberty in the other;
to Justice in the one, and to Cousenage in the other; to Simplicity in the one,
and to Dissimulation in the other; to Holiness in the one, and to
Profaneness in the other; in a word, to an entire and universal Obedience in
the one, and to any kind or degree of Disobedience in the other.

It teaches thee secondly;. 51. 2. a Care of the exercises of Religion;
not to ingulfe thy self ^o wholly into the businesses of thy particular
Calling, as to abridge thy self of convenient opportunities for the exercise
of those religious duties, which thou art bound to perform by virtue of thy
general Calling; as Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Meditation, etc. God
allows thee to serve thy self; but he Commands thee, to serve him too. Be
not thou so all for thy self, as to forget him: but as thou art ready to
embrace that liberty, which he has given thee, to serve thy self; so make a
conscience to perform those duties which he has required of thee for his
service. Work, and spare not: but yet pray too, or else work not. Prayer is
the means, to procure a blessing upon thy labors, from his hands; who never
fails to serve them, that never fail to serve him. Did ever any man Job. 1.9.
serve God for naught? A man cannot have so comfortable assurance, that he
shall prosper in the affairs he takes in hand, by any other means, as by
making God the Alpha and Omega of his endeauours; by beginning them in his
name, and derecting them to his glory. Neither is this a point of Duty only, in
regard of Gods command; or a point of Wisecome only, to make our labors
successful: but it is a point of Justice too, as due by way of Restitution.
We make bold with his day, dispense with some of that time which he has
sanctified unto his service, for our own necessities. It is equal, we should
allow him at least as much of ours, as we borrow of his; though it be for our
necessities, or lawful comforts. But if we rob him of some of his time, (as
too often we do,) employing it in our own businesses, without the warrant of
a just necessity: we are to know that it is theft, yea theft in the highest
degree, sacrilege; and that therefore we are bound, at least as far as
petty thieves were in the Law, to a Exodus 22 1. 2. Sam. 12.6.
fourefould restitution. Abide in thy Calling, by doing thine own part, and
laboring faithfully; but yet so, as Gods part be not forgotten, in serving him
daily.

It teaches thee thirdly; to watch over the special sins of thy particular
Calling.. 52. 3. Watchfulness against the special sins of the Calling.
Sins I mean, not that cleave necessarily to the Calling; for then the very
Calling it self should be unlawful: but sins, unto the temptations whereof
the condition of thy Calling lays thee open, more than it does unto other
sins, or more than some other Callings would do unto the same sins; and
wherewith, whilst thou art stirring about the businesses of thy Calling, thou
may be soonest overtaken, if thou do not heedefully watch over thy self
and them. The Magistrates sins, Partiality and Injustice; the Ministers
sins, Sloth and Flattery; the Lawyers sins, Maintenance and Collusion; the
Merchants sins, Lying and Deceiptfulnesse; the Courtiers sins, Ambition and
Dissimulation; the Great Man's sins, Pride and Oppression; the Gentleman's
sins, Riot and Prodigality; the Officers sins, Bribery and Extortion; the
Country man's sins, Envy and Discontentednesse; the Servants sins,
Tale-bearing and Purloyning. In every State and condition of life, there is a
kind of oppertunity to some special sin: wherein in if our watchfulness be
not the greater, mainly to oppose it, and keep it out; we cannot abide therein
with God.

. 53. The conclusion.
All that I have done all this while, in my passage over this Scripture, is but
this. I have proved the Necessity of having a Calling; laid down directions
for the Choice and trial of our Callings; and showed what is required of us in
the use of our Callings for the abiding therein with God. And having thus
dispatched my Message, it is now time I should spare both your ears, and my
own sides. God grant that every one of us may remember so much of what has
been taught, as is needful for each of us; and faithfully apply it unto our
own souls and consciences; and make a profitable and seasonable use of it in
the whole course of our lives: even for Jesus Christ's sake, his blessed son,
and our alone Savior. To whom etc.

FINIS.

