THE ROCK OF THE CHVRCHE Wherein the Primacy of S. Peter and of his
Successors the Bishops of Rome is proved out of Gods Word.

By Nicolas Sander D. of divinity.

The eternal Rock of the universal Church.

Christ was the rock, an other foundation no man is hable is put. 1. Cor. 3.
and 10. The temporal Rock of the militant Church.

Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. Matthew. 16. The
continuance of this temporal Rock.

In the Church of Rome the primacy of the Apostolic chaier has always
flourished. August. in Epist. 162. Reckon even from the very seat of Peter: and
in that rue of Fathers, consider, who succeeded the other. That is the rock
which the proud gates of hell do not overcome. In Psalm. co^t. part. Don. Tom.
7. LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum. Anno D. 1567.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio concessum est Nicolao Sandro Sacrae Theologiae
Professori, vt librum inscriptum, The Rock of the Church, per Typographum
aliquem iuratum imprimere, ac impune distrahere liceat.

Datum Bruxellis 27. Febr. 1566. Subsig. Prats.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. Doctor Parker bearing the name of the Archbisshop
of Canterbury, and to al other protestants in the realm of England, Nicolas
Sander wissheth perfect faith and charity in our Lord, declaring in this
Preface, that the Catholics (whom they call Papists) do pass the Protestants
in all manner of Signs or Marks of Christ's true Church.
I Beseech your worship not to mislike with me for omitting any part of your
accustomed title in this my letter, sithe^s I do it not of any contempt, but
only of conscience grounded upon Gods word: as who am persuaded the religion
presently authorized in the realm, and consequently your ministry therein, to
be so far of from Christ's true religion, as it is far from Christ, to have his
Church (which after the publication of the Gospel ought, Genes. 22.26.28.
Psalm. 2.44 75.88.144 Philip. 2.
according to the prophecies, to be openly spread through out the world, and
her Citizens ought to shine in the midst of the perverse nation, Isai. 54.60
Math. 28.
of infideles, like stars, and to remayn gloriouse for ever in many nations
together) now first (after nine hundred years oppression as your own brethern
do confess) to show it self abroad, and openly to be professed.

So that although it could be showed that your faith had been always in the
world (as it was not) yet in that (if at all it were) it lay hydden, Math. 5.
it could not be the faith of Christ's true Church, which never ceased to be a
City built upon a hill which can not be hidden. And he did set his candel upon
a candelstick, not only to give light for a few hundred years: but to give
light to all, Luc. 8.
that either should come into his house or, tarry in his house.

And seeing at al momentes men in diverse countries came into Gods house by
faith and baptism, Isai. 2. and 62. Math. 28.
and seeing likewise he is with his disciples al days until the end of the
world, and not only lives, but reigns for ever, Luc. 1. regnabit.
that is to say, abides gloriously and roially in the house of Jacob, which is
the Church, doutlesse his Church is for ever built upon a hill, and therefore it
can not be hidden any one moment, and his light never can cease to shine, to
thend it may ever be true which Malachias the Prophet said: Malac. 1.
From the rising of the son to his going down, my name is great among the
gentiles.

And yet seeing Christ's name is not great by them who believe falselie, (for
they must needs also have naughty works, and so the name of God, Heb. 11.
Isai. 52. Romans 2.
as Saint Paul says, is rather blasphemed among the Gentiles, then glorified
by evil men) it remains, that Christ's name must be great among the Gentills
through a good faith, openly giving light by the good works of true
Christians, who may thereby cause Gods name to be glorified, Math. 5.
and by their good conversation may cause the Infidels to be converted unto
Christ. 1. Cor. 7. 2. Pet. 3.


Now for as much as your faith was not openly always professed in many nations
together, but was altogether hidden before these fifty years, and so hidden, A
Church under a bushel.
that no history or Chronicle does make mention of any congregation at all
professing your faith from time to time in any Cities, Towns, Villages, or
private houses of diverse provinces and countries at once: nothing can be
justly said or alleged, why you should not renounce this obscure religion of
yours, which is so slaunderouse to Gods gloriouse name, and return again to
that our Church, A Church upon a hill.
which stood for ever upon the hill, and whose light was never so dimmed, or
darkened, but that the very Jews, Turks, Sarace^s, Moors, and Tartaria^s,
knew where we dwelt, and what we professed.

I chose at this time to entreat with all sober Protestants the rather by your
person (M. D. Parker) because I have heard of so much good nature in your
worship, that it was not unlike, but he would voutesafe to hear what so
ever should be reasonably said, specially touching Gods word, and the practice
of the primative Church, of which points my chief talk shall be at this time.

Many men have labored to give diverse Signs and Marks of the true Church,
to thinte^t it being ones known, al other controversies may give place to the
pillor and sure stay of truth. 1. Tim. 3.
But that it may appear to them, who do not willingly stop their ears against
the truth, what notable advantage the Catholics have over and above the
Protestants in this behalf: I will show the truth of our Church to be so safe
and clear, that hitherto it was not possible for the Protestants themselves to
devise any such mark or sign of a true Church, the which does not much
rather make for us, then for them.

Gods word is not a sufficient mark of the true Church.
They teach Gods word to be the chief mark, whereby the true Church may be
known, which yet can not well be so, because the mark whereby an other thing
is known, ought it self to be most exactly known, whereas we are not agreed,
what Gods word is. For some call only the written letter and the meaning
thereof, Gods word: others thinck many things to be Gods word, which are
not expressly written, but are revealed from God to the Church by the tradition
of the Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 2 Heb. 8. and 10. 2. Cor. 3.
and by the holy ghost, who has written Gods laws in our hearts, and there has
impri^ted them.

Also we are not agreed upon the written word of God, because the
Protestants do not admit so many books of the old Testament, as the
Catholics do. Thirdly the meaning of those books which we are agreed upon,
is altogether in question between us. How then can that be a mark sufficient to
show an other thing to us, which it self is not sufficiently known of us? All
which reasons notwithstanding, the confidence of our cause is such, that I may
grant the word of God (what soever it be) to be a sufficient mark, whereby
Gods Church may be known. And then I say, that every way Gods word stands
more on our side, then against us.

For if you mean by God word, Gods word first with us.
the written letter of the old and of the new Testament, we are before you in
that behalf: because you have no assured Copies thereof, which were not
preserved by the former Christians, whom ye call Papists, of the^ you took as
your baptism so your Bible. By them not only the old and the new testament, but
also the works of the ancient Fathers were copied out, printed, and laid up
in libraries, and in other places whence they came to your hands.

If then the having of Gods word prove a true Church, that is the more true
Church, which had it first, specially seeing we came not by it privily, or
violently, but received it eue^ at the Apostles hands. For after that day
wherein S. Peter and S. Paul delivered Gods word to the faithful Romans, the
Church of Rome has always kept it safe without either leesing, or corrupting
it.

More of Gods word with us.
by the books of Toby, of Judith, of Wisdom, of Ecclesiasticus, and of the
Machabees. All which we account for Gods own word, according to the consent of
many auucient Aug. de doct. Christia. lib. 2. c. 8. Gelasius in Synod 70.
episco. Council. Flore^t. in fine-Trident. Session. 3.
Fathers and councels: whereas you call them Apocrypha, and so make them unable
to decide any controversy about religion.

Thirdly we do not only grant the Hebrew text of the old testament (such as
may appear uncorrupted) and the Greek text of the new testament, to be Gods
word but we also acknowledge with the au^cie^t Fathers, the Justin. in Apol. 2.
Ireneus li. 3. c. 25. Eusebius. de praeparat. Euang. li. 8. c. 1. Aug. ep..8
Greek translation More copies of Gods word.
and with the Sessio. 3.
Tridentine Council the common Latin translation (which so many hundred years
has been diligently expounded and preserved in the Latin Church) to be of
full authority: Where as you give small credit to either of these translations,
except (by your judgment) they agree with the first Hebrew and Greek copies.
We then have Gods word in more authentik tungs and copies, then you have.

Fourthly we preach, expound, interpret, and translate Gods word in all manner
of tungs, Better use of Gods word.
better then you, because we do these things, not only by internal, but also
by such external vocation and commission, as may be showed to have sprung from
the Apostles, by the lineal and ordinary succession of our bishops and priests.
Whereas you can fetch no higher commission, then from the common weal, which
never received authority of Christ to make priests, or to send preachers: and
yet how shall they preach, Romans 10.
if they be not sent?

Of Gods word in vulgar tungs.
it is no perfection at all on your side. For ye lack thereby the use of the
better tungs, as of the Greek and Latin: which were sanctified on Christ's
cross, Luc. 23. Joan. 19.
as for all other holy uses, so most specially for to serve God withal at the
time of Sacrifice, wherein he requires the very best in every kind to be
offered unto Malac. 1.
him, as to our dreadful Lord, and loving father. And who douteth, but that a
learned, a holy, and a common tung, is more honorable, then a barbarouse, a
profane, and a private tung?

In so much, that in respect of the whole body of the Catholic Church
(wherewith we specially communicate in our service and prayers) the vulgar
tungs are much more to be accounted strange or unknown (which strange tungs
only S. Paul does least regard) then the common tungs, 1. Cor. 14.
which were alone delivered to the very first Christian Church, by the
Apostles themselves, in the East and west: not regarding the infinite multitude
of vulgar tungs which were in particular provinces of the same countries. the
Greek and Latin Church.
For of the Greek tung used in the East Churches, and of the Latin used in the
west Churches, it came to pass, that it is al one to say, the Greek or the
east Church, the Latin or the west Church.

And surely seeing Christ being upon the Cross (whence the pattern of al^
prayer and oblations is to be taken, since the Sacrifice which we offer^
(says Cyprian) is the passion of our Lord) whereas he knew right well, Li. 2.
epi. 3
that the common people of the Jews (the pure Hebrew tongue being either lost,
or much decayed in common speech, every day more and more after the
captivity of Babylon) could not understand him, Math. 27. Psalm. 21.
did yet recite the beginning of the Psalm (My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me) in Hebrew, and did not either by and by, or at al interpret the
same in the vulgar tongue: need we to doubt, but that after his example, we may
do the like in those tongues at our service, which Priests and Clerks do
understand, though the common people do not understand the same?

We use also vulgar tungs in our service.
But lest there should be any one jot wherein to pass Gods Catholic Church, we
also have in certain countries, the use of vulgar tongues in the Church
service, as in Dalmatia it is to be seen at this day, and the like is said to
be in Assyria, and in Aethiopia, the Christians of which Countries do
acknowledge the Supreamacie of the Bisshoppe of Rome.

And although by this very means, Vulgar tungs cause barbarousnes.
those Countries are become the more barbaous (for thereby the Priests and
Preachers can not read either the Greek or the Latin Doctors) yet this good
arises to the whole Church of their loss, that it both has all degrees of
tungs (to wit, both, learned and vulgar) in her prayers, and by the example of
those barbarouse countries, she warns the other more civil parts to avoid
that mischief, whereby those other men fell into that reproach of barbarousnes.

Moreover, those Countries (some of which never knew any better then their own
native tung) have their service in the vulgar tungs by mere force and
necessity, Necessity forces those countries to use vulgar tu^gs.
and that allowed by the good dispensation and toleration of the Sea
Apostolic, without breach of unity: whereas the Protestants having once had
the Latin service, are fallen from Latin to English, that is to say, from the
better to the worse, and that also by making a schism, Joan. 19
and by dividing the coat of Christ (which was without any seame) into many
parts, which thing the very unfaithful soldiers were afeard to do. Thus
touching the written word and the use thereof, there are many causes, why we
should be in better case then the Protestants, but none at all, why we should
be in worse.

The meaning of Gods word. Math. 26.
we read it literally and plainly spoken, this is my body, and as the words
do sound, so do we understand them. Why then is (this) which Christ points
unto, denied to be his body? Jacob. 2.
A man is justified of works, and not of faith only. Why then are good works
don in a right faith, denied to justify? or why is only faith taught to
justify? Romans 2.
The doers of the law shall be justified. Why is the law then taught not to be
able to be don, or kept? Romans 5.
By the obedience of one (which is Christ) many shall be made just, that is to
say, Constituentur.
justice shall be wrought or settled in many. Why the^ is it denied that we are
made really just? Or why is it taught, that righteousness is only imputed to
us, whereas S. Paul says also, Romans 5.
the charity (or love) of God is spread in our hearts by the holy ghost which is
given us. This spreading and stablishing of charity in our hearts, is more then
a bare imputing of charity to us.

Whose sins soever ye forgive, they shall be forgeuen them. Joan. 20.
Why are then the bishops and priests (who succeed the Apostles) denied to
forgive sins? Luc. 22.
He that is greater among you, let him be made as the younger. Why then deny
you, that one was greater among the Apostles, or, that one still is greater
among the bishops, their successors?

Math. 16.
Thou art Peter or a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. Why then
is the militant Church denied to be built upon Saint Peter, and upon his
successors in that chair and office? 2. These. 2.
Keep the traditions which ye have learned either by word, or by our
epistle.

Chrysostom. Hom. 69. ad Pop. Ant.
Why then are traditions, yea though they be Apostolic (as the use of praying
for the dead is) so despised, that the very name of tradition used in the
better part, can not be suffered to be in the English Bible, though it be both
in the Greek and in the Latin? He that joins his virgin in marriage, does
well, 1. Cor. 7.
and he that does not join her, does better.

Why then is marriage made with you as good as the state of virginity whereas S.
Paul makes the state of virginity better?

Vow ye, Psalm. 75.
and render your vows unto God. If thou wilt be perfitte, Math. 10.
go and sell all things which thou have, and give them to the poor, and follow
me. There are eunuchs, who have gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven.
Obeie your rulers, Heb. 13.
and be subjects unto them. Why then are the vows of poverty, of chastity,
and of obedience (to all which the word of God exhorts us) accounted
unlawful? Or why are men exhorted, yea constrained not to perfoorm them?

Do ye the worthy fruits of penance, says Saint John. Luc. 3.
Why then is satisfaction and penance despised with you? The husbands and the
wives being two in one flesh, Ephesians. 5.
is a great Sacrament (or mystery, or a holy and secret sign) in Christ and in
the Church. Why then is the marriage of faithful persons denied to be a
Sacrament?

Philip. 2.
Work your salvation (says S. Paul) with fear and trembling. Why then are
your so presumptuouse, as even by faith, to assure your selves of your
salvation? Or how can he fear, who is assured to be saved? Romans 11.
Or how can the deep secrets of Gods predestination be ordinarily known in
this life? Or is not faith an ordinary gift in the Church?

Thus might I go through all the articles in controversy, and in every one I
should find your side to be the farther The circunsta^ce and conference.


If not only the plain understanding of any one sentence, but also the
circunstance of the place, and the conference of Gods word be necessary, have
we not used it in every question which has been hitherto handeled? Here I must
needs refer the reader to my treatise of the Supper of our Lord, In the x.
and xii. chapters.
namely in the fourth book, and to my book of Images in the v. and the xi.
chapters. Item in this book, to the second and fourth chapters. For in this
preface, it were over tedious to handle so long a matter.

If you say, The best use of Gods word suffiseth not alone
I do not confer the places so as I ought to do, thereof rises a new
question, wherein we must have a new judge. For we believe and use the
scriptures as well as you, and better to, as I have declared. Item we allege
^lain words: we show the circumstance to be for us: we confer one place with
an other. If now all this will not and the controversy, it is clear, that the
only word of God, be it never so well handled, is no sufficient mark to show the
truth. For this is all that can be d^ about the word it self.

Judges. Aug. cont. Iulianum lib. 2.
the Councels, the bishops, and the ancient Fathers must be the Judges,
whether we do well apply the holy scriptures, or no. For example: Math. 16.
M. Jewel says, S. Peter is not this rock whereupon Christ said he would build
his Church. (...) say on the other side, In the 4. chap.
that S. Peter is this rock. And I show it by the circumstance of the place,
and by the conference of other holy scriptures. M. Iewe^ must needs say, that
I do not well co^fe^ the holy scriptures. I take then for my Judges, above
sixte^ of the best doctors who expreslie stand on mie side, as (...) will show
in this present book. In the 4. chap.
So the this mark of the true Church also m^keth clearly for us. And surely
althoug^ the protestants in words pretend to ha^^ the consent of the au^cie^t
fathers: yet th^^ in truth it is not so, this one thing m^ sufficieie^tly
declare, because whe^soeue^ ^anie occasion never so far set may serve, they do
what they can to reject the Fathers partly by imputing errors to the^, In his
Reply P. 3. 49. and P. 10.
as M Jewel orders S Hilarie partly by denying the work to be theirs as he
says of Dionysi the Ariopagite and of S. Chrisosto^^ Liturgy, et^aet. Another
shift is, ^o allege the private opinion of some one agai^t the consent of the
rest, or to say that the fathers lived, when the time began to be corrupted:
and when al other things fail their plain doctrine and assertio^s of the faith,
are illuded with a like figurative speech. If in deed the fathers made for
the^, they would not thus shift their hands of the fathers, but the more they
could have, and the better they agreed and the plainer they spoke, the better
they should be welcome. Well sei^g the Prostesta^ts (although falslly) yet
commonly do allege the old fathers, The allegation of Fathers suffiseth not.
and we also do allege them most plentifully, hereof it will follow that
neither the only allegatio^ of the^ is so able to end a co^trouersy, that the
simple and unlearned may be sure of the truth.

Tradition, and practice.
the tradition and practice of Gods Church, which being in every man's eyes and
ears, ca^ never deceive him. We thinck (says Chrysostom) the tradition of
the Church to be worthy of belefe. In 7. Thessalon. Hom. 4.
Is it a tradion? Ask no farther.

This mark so evidently makes for us, that the Protestants are constrained
utterly to deny all credit unto it: for by this rule they are inexcusable who
deny either the popes supremacy, which ever was so universally practiced, or
the Sacrifice of the mass, or any like matter, which was and is generally
received in the Church.

But because many questions arise in the Church, Tradition does not suffice in
cases.
rather depending of subtle points in divinity, then of evident custom and
practice: if suddenly some learned men deny such An article of the faith, which
before was not commonly preached of (as that the holy ghost proceeds from the
Son or any like) seeing here tradition fails, and the preachers General
Councels. Math. 18. Act. 15.
the Church has used the mean of General Counsels, wherein the bishops of
many countries meeting together, after sufficient debating, do publish the one
part to be reputed heretical. Whereby all men do clerly know, what to follow,
and what to avoid. Such a Council gathered together of late at Tre^t,
published that to be the true faith, which we defend, and the contaary to be
heretical. So that this marck is wholly ours.

But for as much as it is very hurtful, Councels do not suffice.
for so many bishops to leave their cures so often as any such question is moved,
and also because their meeting is many times stayed by the occasion of battle,
or of pestilence, or else for lack of their safeconduct out of whose countries,
or by whose countries, or into whose country they should pass, and specially
because when they are come together force and violence may be used as it was
do^ at the second Ephesine counsel, Leo epist. 24.25.26
and at Ariminu^: it is necessary, to have some other more spedy, certain, and
profitable way in the Church, whereby heresies may be sooner stayed, and Gods
people more quickly instructed in the truth.

One high judge.
that one chief pastor and high bishop S. Peter should be set by himself over
the whole flock in earth to confirm his brethern, Joan. 21.
Luc. 22.
and to feed them Of whose faith by praying for it, he has assured us. In S.
Peter's chair the bishop of Rome sits, who is well known to have given
public sentence against the Protestants for our faith and Church, neither can
the Protestants deny us the assurance of this mark. The which mark because it
is of most weighty importance, as being the easiest way of al to find out the
truth, and which serves in all cases without any exception: I have made this
treatise, to declare, that it is no less true, even according to Gods word,
then it is profitable and needful in all wise men's understanding.

Here I might make an end, but that the Protestants affirm the lawful
preaching of Gods word, and the lawful administration of the Sacraments to
be the thing whereby they will be tried, as though we need not a new judge to
know what these terms do mean.

For what call you lawful preaching, Preachi^g and Sacraments.
That (say you) which is according to Gods word. Very well. Are we not now
come again to the first beginning of our talk? what call ye Gods word? have
I not proved (whatsoever it be) that it is much more with us, then with you?

Add hereunto, seeing those are most lawful preachers who are most like unto
the Apostles, Psalm. 18. Romans 10.
(whose sound went into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the
world) we are more like unto the^, who within these nine hundred years by our
preaching have converted Bohem, Saxony, Friseland, Prussia, Liuonia, Denmark
and diverse other countries, then you, who in the same time lived so under a
bushel, that noman alive could hear you once pepe. Again our Sacraments being
more in number by five, then yours, were administered in the face of the world,
even as the Apostles did administer them in Jerusalem, Corinth, Rome, and in
such other cities and places: whereas you had not one Church or known house
of prayer in the whole earth.

Persecution.
The persecution (say you) of the Romish Antichrist oppressed us, which mark
also you allege for the truth of your congregation. What masters? Antichrists
persecution shall dure but three years and a half. Dan. 7. Apoc. 13.
And is the Pope Antichrist, whose persecution (as you say) has dured these
nine hundred years? Math. 16.
Hell gates shall not prevail against the true Church. And yet is your
congregation the true Church, against which you confess Antichrist so to have
prevailed, that for many hundred years, no man could tell, whether any such
Church were in the earth, or no?

Surely hell gates prevailed not against Not to fail in persecution.
although our Church has been assalted with all kinds of trouble: therefore this
mark (that is to say, to stand safe and sound against hell gates) is a token,
that ours is the true Church. For it is not persecution, but the conquering
and prevailing against persecution, which is the true mark of Gods Church.

But seeing I promised to prove our Church the more true, We are persecuted.
even by your own Marks, let us grant, that Church to be true, which is
persecuted, yet I say that you rather have persecuted us, the^ we have
persecuted you. For, I pray you Sir, when the child who lived in one house with
his loving mother (as you did once in the same Catholic Church with us) goes
afterward out of the house, and says, his mother is a strong hoore (as you say
by the Catholic church whence you are departed) if then the mother not being
able by fair means to reconcile the child to her again, after long and often
warnings, do pronounce him a bastard member, and a renegate child does the
mother in this case persecute her child, or does not the child rather persecute
his mother?

Note well.
The child began the defection, the mother defends her possession and
inheritance: and yet did we first persecute you? Remember what S. Augustine
writes in this matter, and that not of himself, but as taken out of S. Paul.
Sara with her son Isaac does signify the Church, Galat. 4.
Agar with her son Ismael does signify carnal men, as heretics ^re. Now
whereas we read, that Agar ^he handmaiden and Ismael suffered grievous things at
the hands of Sara, Genes. 2^.
yet S. Paul consydering, that Agar was not persecuted of Sara, before that
she had through pride contemned her maistres, doubted not to say, that Isaac
suffered persecution of Ismael. Galat. 4.
As then (says S. Paul) he that was according to the flesh (Ismael) did
persecute him who was according to the spirit (Isaac) so is it now also, vt qui
possunt intelligant, Aug. epis. 48.
to then they who are able may understand (says S. Augustine) that the
Catholic Church suffers persecution by the pride and wickedness of carnal me^
whom she goes about to amend by temporal trobles and terrors. And much more
follows in S. Augustine writing against the Danatists, who being departed
from the Church then, as you are now, said then, as you do now, that the
Catholics did persecute the^, and therefore that they were the true Church.

And surely if you can show, that we through pride departed from the obedience,
which we once had oughed to you, then in deed we might be said to persecute
you. But seeing certainly you were al once under the obedience of our Pastors
(as Agar the handmaiden was under her masters Sara) and you through pride
withdrew your selves from us, Gene. 21.
and made a new congregation of your own erecting: doutlesse you are the
Agarens and the Ismaelits but we being the childern of Sara, are altogether
persecuted of you, and so that mark shows us (whom ye call papists) to be the
true Church.

Antiquity.
Yeas, says the Protestant. For Antiquity is ours altogether. Now you seem to
say sumwhat. But if the Church of Christ be in all but one, seeing Antiquity is
but the beginning or the ancient state of Christ's Church, if the end of the
same Church make for us (as your selves can not deny, but that these nine
hundred years, we were more like to be that Church of Christ which must be
spread through all nations, then you) it is not possible, that the begi^ning
should make for you. For Christ's Church is ever like it self.

If you appeal to particular examples, I say, the Christians in the primative
Church communicated under one kind both at Emaus, Luc. 24. August. de consen.
Euangel. li. 3. cap. 25. Theophil. in 24. luce Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 14. Math. 9.
and at Jerusalem, as the words of the holy scripture (which the ancient
Fathers testify to appertein to the Sacrament of Christ's supper) do import.
Item the Christians did then make and set up Images in the honor of Christ,
as the most famous history of the Woman cured of her bloody issue, does most
evidently witness.

An. D. 50.
Dionysius (whom M. Jewel confesses to be an ancient writer, as it may, says
he, many ways well appear) makes mention of De Eccl. Hiera. c. 2
insufflation, of holy oil, of Cap. 3
altars, ince^se, healthful sacrifice, of Cap. 4.
holy Chrism and of holy Cap. 5.
orders of priesthood, of the prosession of Cap. 6.
Munkes blessed with the sign of the cross, shoren, and receiving a new
garment, of Cap. 7.
praying for the faithful sowles, of In epist. ad Demophilum.
confessing sins to a priest. All these things we have, but the Protestants
know them not.

An. D. 70. Ad Smyrnenses.
Ignatius speaking of such a Sacrifice, as ought not to be offered without the
Bisshoppe, must needs mean a public and external Sacrifice, for the making
whereof a special minister was ordered. He would have the Emperor to obey
the bishop, he speaks of Virgins, Ad Phila.
which had consecrated them selves to God. Ad Antiochum.
And commends a certain appointed number of fasting days, to wit, forty,
which fast we call the Lent.

Justinius witnesses, An. Dom. 150. In Apologia 2. De coena.
water to have been mingled with the wine, and, the Deaco^s to have carried the
consecrated mysteries (as we also do) to them which were absent, which thing
Calvin reputeth an abuse.

Pius the first, De cons. distinct. 3. Nosse vos. Eusebius li. 5. c. 23. et 24
Epiphan. Haer. 50. Aug. 29.
decreed Easter day to be kept vnifoormlie of all men: whereupon Pope Victor
excommunicated the bisshoppes of Asia for not obeying. And those who continued
in their stubburnesse, were taken for heretics both of the Greeks and Latins.

All doctrine is false and lying (says Tertullian) which agrees not with some
Apostolic Church. An. D. 200
Our doctrine agrees with the chief Apostolic Church of Rome: yours with
none at all that is now in the earth.

De Corona ad vxore^.
It was the custom in those days, to make oblations for the dead the twelve
months day: to go unto the Stations, Eusebius lib. 6. c. 7. Paula. ad Marcel. to
1. Hierom.
to visit holy places, and specially those of Jerusalem, which custom dured
from Christ's ascension until S. Hieroms time, through all Christendom, and yet
is called Pilgrimage of us.

An. Dom. 250. De coena Do.
Saint Cyprian confesses the bread which our Lord gave to his disciples, being
changed not in shape, but in nature, to have been made flesh. Confession to the
priest. Sermon 5. de lapsis.
Item that even the consent in heart to commit a great sin was to be confessed
apud Sacerdotes Dei before the priests of God. And that, forgeuenes made by the
priests is acceptable unto God. 2. Reg. 12. 2. Cor 2. Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 2.
Item, that the temporal penance (which is due to Gods justice after the fault
is forgeuen) might for just causes be forgeuen by the bishop, Nicen. co^. c. 11.
which the Nicen council does also decree. And that is it, which we now call a
pardon.

What should I here rehearse the reverence given in old time to Eusebius. li. 7 c.
15.
S. James chaier and to other Relics, the solemn dedicating of Lib. 9. cap.
10.
Churches, the straight life of Ruffinus lib. 11. c. 4.
Eremits, the Theodor. lib. 5. c. 21.
driving away of devils by holy water, the authority of Basil. de Spi. sancto c.
27.
unwritten traditions, the use of Hom. in 40. Mart.
praying to Saints, the Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1. c. 7.
Sacrament of penance the Epist. 33.
name, sacrifice, and de Sacra. lib. 4. c. 5. and 6.
Canon of the Mass, the forgeuing of sins by the priests when they Chryso.
lib. 3. de Sacerd.
oynt the sick with oil in our Lords name, the Hieron. contra Vigilantium.
lights burning whiles the Gospel was readen, that a bishop can not Lib. 1.
contra Iouin.
begette childern in his bishoply vocation, that a fix or a certain, Ad Furiam.
number of prayers is prayers is prescribed, which serves to co^firm the use
of our beads: that he can not be a priest, who has had Ad Gerontiam.
two wives, that the Ibidem.
bishop of Rome used to answer the consultations or relations directed to him
from the Councels both of the East and of the West, that the Augusti. in Psalm.
37
fire of purgatory is more greuouse, then whatsoever a man may suffer in this
life?

All these things were in the ancient Church: the same are in our Church:
the same are not in the Protestants Church: How then can it be, that Antiquity
should either help the Protestants, or hi^der us? As therefore we are assured of
the mark of Antiquity: so let us go forward with certain other marks, which
are no less peculiar to us.

The name of a Catholic. Cont. epis. fundae. c. 4
because no heresy could obtein the name of the Catholic Church, although
every heresy did much desire to obtein it. The reason is, for that heresies be
but parts and peculiar sects of some one country, August de unit. eccles. c. 1.
or the doctrine of a small time, whereas the word Catholic does betoken a
certain universal profession during from the beginni^g to the ending, and
spread throughout. Those therefore who began their doctrine after the Apostles
time, Heretics
were either named of their master, as the Arria^s of Arrius, the Pelagia^s of
Pelagius the Lutherans of Luther, the Caluinists of Calvin, or of some place
where they lived (as the heresy of the Phrygians) or of the falsehod which they
taught (as Quartadecimani, Anabaptists, Aquarij) or of some like particular
circumstance.

But they were only called Catholics, who kept the universal faith, which the
Apostles had first taught, Catholic
and which was continued always in the whole Church. To our purpose, I say
the Protestants never had the name of Catholics, nor never shall have it,
because they began after the Apostles time, to wit within these fifty years.
But we so had once the name of Catholics, that we shall never leese it.

I do not only report me to al kind of histories and writers, who accounted
for ever the flock and society of the Roman church for Catholics ( De obitu
fratris.
as S. Ambrose, In Apol. cont. Ruffinum.
S. Hierome and all manner of other Fathers do witness) but also I say our
ennemies confess this Mark to have be^ ours. Read the very title of M.
Jewels Reply, read it, I say, and see what God to his everlasting damnation
(if he repent not) caused him to write there.

The Title of M. Jewels Reply.
A Reply (says he) unto M. Hardings answer, by perusing whereof the discrete
and diligent reader may easily see, the weak, and unstable grounds of the
Roman religion, which of late has been accounted Catholic. By I. Iewelbishop of
Sarisburie.

Hear you not what he says? The Romain religion of late has been accounted
Catholic. As men account a thing to be, so do they name it: those therefore
who accounted the Romain Religion to be Catholic, named it also the Catholic
Religion. But S. Augustine says: Cont. epis. Manichai cap. 4.
Tenet me in ecclesia Catholicae nomen, quod no^ sine causa inter tam multas
haereses sic ista Ecclesia sola obtinuit, and cet. The very name of the
Catholic Church holds me in the Church, the which name this Church alone
has not without a cause so obtained, among so many heresies: that whereas all
heretics covet to be called Catholics, yet if any stranger ask, where the
Catholic communion is kept, no heretic dare show his own Church (or palace)
or house.

Behold, the true Church alone has obtained the name of the Catholic Church,
and no heresy could obtein the same. But we that are now called Papists, by
Master Jewels confession: were of late accounted Catholics, therefore we are
the true Church, and we are not heretics at all. This Mark then stands also
on our side.

Succession or universality. Ibidem.
ab ipsa sede Petri (as S. Augustine speaks) vsque ad praesentem Episcopatum,
even from the very See of Peter, to the bisshoply office which now is. Such a
continual succession we show from S. Peter himself until Pius the fifth, who
presently fitteth at Rome in Saint Peter's chair. The same Mark (as being one
of the most evident of all others) is approved by S. li. 3. c. 3
Ireneus, by de praescript.
Tertullia^, by Lib. 2. de schism.
Optatus, and Contra Luciferia.
by S. Hierome. The Protestants on the other side neither have continual
succession of bishops, nor yet of any preachers, nor of any people that are
known to have professed their faith. So that either no such ^ongregation was,
Math. 10. Romans 1. and 10. 1. Pet. 3.
or they were al dam^ed, because they were ashamed to confess the Gospel of
Christ by their word and conversation before men. Mark well this point: I can
not see, what ca^ be reasonably answered unto it.

Consider now (good Reader) the riches and preeminence of our cause above the
Protestants 1. Al these Marks Thevv our Church to be true.
We have Gods word before them, 2. We have and believe more of it, then they
3. We have more authentike copies, even of those books, which they together
with us do receive for Gods word, 4. We have a more certain commission to
use it in preaching, or otherwise, 5. We read it in more holy and profitable
tungs, 6. We use it also in vulgar tungs without breach of unity, 7. The plain
meaning thereof makes for us, 8. The circumstance and conference thereof
shows our faith to be the truer, 9. The ancient Fathers verait agrees with
our doctrine. 10 The tradition and practice a^ only with us. 11. General
Councels are only with us. 12. the unity of one chief^ judge is only with us.
13. The lawful^ preaching of Gods word and the lawful administration of the
Sacraments is that, which we use. 14. Victory in persecution is ours. 15. Yea
we are persecuted of the Protestants our childern as of whom they were
baptized, and in whose universities they were brought up, and now they turn the
weapons which we gave the^, against us. 16. Antiquity and the practice of the
primative Church is agreeable to that of our time. 17. The name of Catholics by
their confession is ours. 18. The continual succession a bishops we do show,
and they can no^ so much as pretend it.

Romans 3.
Generally what have they which w^ lack? have they a faith iustifiyng? so have
we but not iustifiyng alone, Galat. 5. Jacob. 2.
but justifying with charity, which is as it were ^he life of faith. Ergo their
justification ^f faith alone, is a dead righteousness: ^urs is it which
quickens to life e^erlasting. Have they two Sacraments? We have seven. 1.
Pet. 2.
Have they an inward ^riesthod whereby Christ is offered in their hearts? we
have an inward, and ^n Isai. 61. and 66. 1. Tim. 4. Heb. 10
outward, whereby he is offered ^oth in our hearts, and in our hands. Do ^hey
believe that Christ with one Sa^rifice paid our rau^som for ever? Luc. 22. 1.
Cor. 10. and 11.
We be^eue it, and show to the eye (under the foorm of bread) the self body
sacrificed, and by offering and eating it sacramen^ally with our mouth, we are
made partakers of the redemption which is in it.

Is Christ with them the head and ^astour of his Church? Joan. 10. Ephesians. 1.
We do not only believe so, but we show it to be so by the real figure of one
chief head and Pastor of his particular flock in earth, Heb. 10.
whereby the eternal things are lively represented.

Do lay men with them receive the communion under both kinds? even so do they
with us by dispensation of the Sea Apostolic, in Austria, and in diverse other
parts of Germany, both without schism, and also without injury of an other
truth, which must confess one kind to contain as much as both, and therefore
to suffice alone. And both kinds were instituted of Christ, Math. 26.
rather to show by an unbloody sacrifice the nature of Christ's bloody
sacrifice (where his soul and blood was a part from his body and flesh) then
that any more is either contained or distributed by both, Joan. 19.
then by one alone.

Heb. 13.
Have you Marriage in great price? Not in so great as we, who teach it to be a
Sacrament, which by the outward and visible sign of mutual consent in
faithful persons signifies the gracious unity of Christ and of his Church
and whiles it signifies such a singular grace, Ephesians. 5.
it partaketh of the grace whereof it is the sign.

Yea but you allow Marriage in all kind of men? what? Even in those, Math. 19.
who have gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven? For they only who make
the vow of chastity, can justly be said to geld them selves for the kingdom of
heaven. Who geld themselves for the Kingdom of heaven.
For he that absteineth from Marriage without any vow, he is not yet gelded,
since he may lawfully marie.

But whosoever has gelded himself for the kingdom of heaven, is meant to be no
more hable to marie by the right of Gods law, and in very conscience, the^ he
is able by the course of nature to have a child, who either is borne, or by
force is made an Eunuche. For these three kinds of Eunuchs Christ does compare
together, Math. 19.
expressly giving us to understand, that it is both praise worthy to vow
chastity, and when it is once vowed, that by Gods own law there is no more
possibility to return to the use of marriage, then it is possible for a gelded
man to be restored again to that which he lacks.

By these few examples it may appear, that you have no manner of thing praise
worthy, which we lack, whereas we have a great number of things both good and
laudable, What things the protestants lack.
and (many of them) very necessary, all which you lack. You have no
insufflations, no exorcism, no holy oil in baptism, no holy Chrism in
bishopping, no external priesthood, no publik sacrifice, no altars, no
censing, no lights at your service, no Images in your Churches, no adoration,
no reservation of Christ's body, no Eremits, no Mu^k^ no virgins vealed and
consecrated, no unwritten traditions, no communion with Saints, or with
faithful sowles, by praying to the one, or for the other, no Stations, no
pilgrimages, no confession of sins to the priest, no forgeuenes by the
priest, no temporal satisfaction enjoined, nor the same remitted by pardon, no
holy water, no holy vestments, no Relics of Martyrs, no extreme unction, no
place of purgatory where their sins may be released after this life, who died
in charity, but yet not without the det of temporal purgation.

You say falsely) that all these things are naught: Galat. 1. praeterqua^ quod
accepistis.
but once we received the^ of our ancestors, and we justify the^ by Gods
word, and by the books of the ancient Fathers.

If we our selves had once had other things, and so had cast away those other
and taken these (as you have taken, Note.
upon your own heads) naked tables instead of adorned altars, praying toward
the south instead of praying toward the East marriage of priests in stead of
chastity, vulgar tungs instead of holy and learned, the sacrifice of praising
God by bare words, instead of Mass which praised him by the consecration of
Christ's own body with other like matters) then in deed there had been cause,
why we might have feared our own deeds and inventions.

But seeing we made no new religion, but keep the old: Philip 2.
humility, obedience, and the keeping of unity is our fault, if we have any.
Of such faults I believe noman shall give account but rather of pride, Romans 1.
2. Cor 3. Galat. 5.
of disobedience, of breaki^g unity, of maki^g schisms, and of troubling the
Church.

Neither can it be justly replied of you that you do toward us in changing
our religion, Dissimile.
as Christ and the Apostles did toward the Jewish synagoge. For Christ changed
his own Religion (whereof himself was Lord) and not only theirs. But Luther
is not that toward Christ, which Christ was toward Moses, neither has Calvin
that power to alter the state of Christ's Church, which Christ had to alter
the Law.

It must be understood that in all Religions there is a law, which
prescri^eth in what manner God shall be served. The chief point of Gods service
consists ^n public Sacrifice. The Sacrifice de^endeth of the Priesthod: for
of what^oeuer order the priest is, there after he makes his sacrifice,
whereupon S. Paul said: Heb. 7.
The priesthod being transfer^ed (or changed) it must needs be, that the law be
transferred or changed also. Now from Adam til Christ, ^here was in deed an
increase of outward Sacraments and Ceremonies in diverse ages. But there was no
change ^t all of the solemn and public Sa^rifice. Genes. 14.
For albeit Melchisedech ^rought forth his unbloody oblation, and blessed
Abraham, yet it was don ^o show before hand, after what sort Christ should make
sacrifice in his supper, and not to abrogate the order and kind of bloody
Sacrifices, Gene. 4.8 and 17.
for they continued still, as Abel had begun with them. Likewise the Altars
remained in use, as Noe had erected the^. Circuncision was kept with the law.
And the law with the Temple of Solomon So that from the beginning of the world
til Christ there was increasing of Ceremonies, but no taking away, no changing,
no new making or altering of the public sacrifice.

For the change thereof is of such importance, that God would his own Son to
take flesh for the working of such a weighty matter, to the^d al me^ should
understand, that God reserueth to his own self the appointment of the Religion
wherewith he will be served. And the Religion (as I showed before) consists
chiefly in the public sacrifice and priesthood. Heb. 7.


Psalm. 109.
Christ therefore being a priest after the order of Melchisedech, when he had
proved his commission from God the Father by diverse notable miracles, Math. 26.
in his last supper took bread and wine accordingly as Melchisedech had
foreshewe^ in a figure. He blessed brake, Genes. 14.
and gave saying, take, eat, this is my body which is given for you, Luc. 22.
do (or make) this thing for the remembrance of me. Facite.
By which words the Apostles (and their successors in priesthod) have
commission to make of bread and wine the body and blood of Christ even till
the worlds end. Hiero. ad Heliodoru^ 1. Cor. 11.


This then is the public and external sacrifice of the new testament, Ireneus
li. 4. c. 32. August. in Psalm. 33. Con. 1. De ciuit. Dei li. 17. c. 20 Cont.
aduers. legis lib. 1. c. 18.
the which Sacrifice (says S. Augustine) is now spread in the whole circuit of
the earth, and, it is come in place (says he) of all the sacrifices of the old
testament, and is the Sacrifice of the Church.

And all the world does know, that both the Greek and Latin Church has ever
used this blessed mystery, as the Sacrifice prophesied of by Malachy and
belonging peculiarly to the Christian people gathered out of all nations. Malac.
1.


Now to thinck, that Luter and Calvin have power to alter and abrogate this
public sacrifice (called now the Mass) it is to thinck, that Luther and
Calvin are the same toward Christ, which Christ was toward Moses. For that is
it which Christ means saying: False Christ's. Math. 24
False Prophets, and false Christ's shall arise. Verily, because some shall
come, who will arrogate that to them selves, which no creature ca^ do beside
Christ the Son of God, whose proper office and honor it is, to be of power to
change the state and order of the public priesthood and sacrifice in Gods
Church. Idolatries.
They then are Idolatours, who supposing Luther and Calvin to be able to
abrogate the former sacrifice and manner of service, and to set up a new foorm
of public prayer, do therein make them to be fellows with Christ himself.
But certainly they are false brethern and false Christ's.

And whereas the Protestants pretend, that Lu^^er and ^aluin do all things
according to Gods Word (to omit now, that the one of them techeth clean
contrary doctrine to the other) they are so much the more to be abhorred: for
as Christ in very truth in changing the Law fulfilled the old figures and
the old prophecies eue^ so they (taking Christ's power upon them) pretend
falsely by changing Religion, Math. 5.
to have their doings figured and prophesied of in the Gospel.

But if there can be but one Christ, and he can be but once borne, and died but
once: be ye assured, these men have no power to abrogate the Mass, or to take
away the keye of our ancient Religion.

If any man say that our Mass is not that in deed, which we say it is: I
answer, that as we never read the Jewish Priests to have erred, concerning
the substance of their public Sacrifice (because all the people Exodus 23.
were bound to frequent it by Gods own commandment) so it is much less
possible that the universal Church of Christ should err in that public act,
wherein Christ himself (says S. Cyprian) is the Sacrifice. Li. 2. epi. 3 in
Sacrificio quod Christus est. Math. 28.
No no masters, Antichrists ye may be, Christ ye can not be. He is with his
Apostles (and their successors the bishops) al days until the worlds end.

This being so, reason would that all novelties laid a side, men should return
to the old faith, and Church again. Whereunto if I am so bold as to exhort
you, M. D. Parker, before al other, I trust you will not take it in evil part.
For as my exhortation comes of my well wishing to your worship, so I consider
no Ecclesiastical person in all our Country is able to do more good in that
behalf then you.

Consider then for Gods love in whose chair you sit, consider whence the
first Bishop came who satte there, yea ^^rther consider what all your
prede^ssours taught, only one excepted, of whom all good and zealons men must
^eedes be ashamed, Cranmer
as who at the en^ing into his bishoprike was wilfully ^orsworn to the Pope of
Rome. It appears so by his Catechism.
And af^erward changed his religion from Lu^heranisme, to the Sacramentary
here^ie: And a little before his death, for a ^ew hours of temporal life sold
his ^oore faith twice a day.

Neither was he otherwise a wit^esse of your doctrine, then that despe^ation
made him pretend to suffer that for religion, which he must needs suffer
though he had changed his religion. That one desperate man then excepted who
seems to have been of no religion) ^l your predecessors were of our faith.
What speak I of your predecessors? Al ^he bishops of the realm, yea al of
the whole world were of the same belefe with us, as it may right well appear,
for that all the Catholics in the world communicated with S. Gregory as wit^
the best man, the greatest Doctor, the highest Bishop that lived in those
days. Beda in histor. eccle. Gentis An glorum.
Now S. Gregory sent S. Augustine to our Ancestors, from whos^ time till the
change which began a late all Christian men are known to hau^ believed and
professed that, which we do presently defend.

If this holy fellowship be not that Catholic and Apostolik Church which i^ al
times and countries professed Christ's Gospel then go into the desert after
Wiclef and Hus go into the corners and privy inmoste places of the house
after the poor men of Lions. In deserto
In penetralibus.
And then for the space of certain hundred yers together, ye can not name,
what preachers or pastors your Church had. But thus to flee into priui
places, and to lack open preachers, Math. 24
is directly against the word of God, Prouer. 8.
and expressly against the co^ma^me^t of our Savior, Isai. 62.
whose wisdom cries in the tops of the ways and in the gates of the cities,
whose whatchme^ ^ease not to speak both day and ^ight upon the walls of
Jerusalem, in whose house the ca^dle stands upon the candlestick to give
light to al me^, Math. 5.
whose faith must be confessed with the mouth, Rom 10. and 1. Philip. 2. Psalm.
44.
whose gospel must not be blushed at, whose servants shine like stars, whose
spouse being most beawtiful through internal faith and charity, Circumamicta
varietatibus
is yet garnished about with variety of diverse tu^gs which are daily heard to
preach, and ceremonies, which are daily seen in Gods service among the
Catholics. Memor ero nominis. Populi co^fitebuntur in aeternu^.
Which spouse also has promised to be mindful of the name of Christ from
generation to generation, in so much that, many people shall confess and give
praise to God for ever age after age.

If such a gloriouse, a manifest and a beautiful Church must be believed, then
must Wiclef, Hus, and their fellows be avoided, and our known, manifest, and
in all generations most gloriouse Church must be embrace which never lacked a
chief bishop i^ S. Peter's chair with a number of bishops, and faithful
nations obeying h^ doctrine and government. The truth (...) which Catholic Church
and chair the I might the more effectally persuade, The cause of this treatise.
(...) have taken in hand to prove the S^premacy of the bishop of Rome
according to the reason and meaning o^ Gods word. The which point alone if i^
be granted, al other controversies ar^ superfluous. For all is concluded under
one, if one be appointed the chief shepherd by God over al since every man
must hear and obey the shepherds voice. Joan. 10.


I request most humbly of your patience to read, or to hear the whole
treatise readen (which is not long) and not to condemn the matter before it be
well understood. If my discourse be doutfull, I am ready to make it plain. If
it seem to fail in proof, a charitable ^^swere made unto it shall show by the
^ply how strong the Arguments ge^erally be, concerning the chief points.

Thus taking my leave I wish as well (...) your worship as I do to my self,
bese^hing you not to miscontrue my doings, ^ut to take them so charitably, as
they ^re meant. For God is my witness, the thing I seek, is as well the
reducing of them to their Mother Church who are ^on a stray, as the staying of
them who through man's frailty begin to dout of their faith. Which effects God
grant through Jesus Christ our Lord to his own glory. Amen.

The Chapiters of the Treatise following.
1 The state of the question. fol. 1. 2 That there is a primacy of spiritual
government in the Church, and how it differreth from secular government. 16. 3
Of the diverse senses of these words, upon this rock I will build my Church.
and which is most literal. 93. 4 These words (thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my Church) have this literal meaning, upon the, o Peter,
being made a rock, to thend thou should stoutly confess the faith, I will
build my Church. 108. 5 The Fathers teach, that S. Peter is this rock. 136. 6
The reasons which the Fathers bring to declare why S. Peter was this rock. 155
7 The authorities alleged by M. Jewel to prove, that S. Peter was not this
rock, prove against himself. 171. 8 The conclusion of the former discourse and
the order of the other which follows. 189. 9 That S. Peter passes far the
other Apostles in some kind of Ecclesiastical dignity. 194. 10 That the
Apostles beside the perogatiue of their Apostleship, had also authority to be
particular bishops. 204. ^^ How far S. Peter did either excel, or ^s equal with
the Apostles, in their A^stolike office. 2^0. ^^ That S. Peter's prerogative
above the ^her Apostles is most manifestly seen by ^s chief bishoply power.
232. ^^ That the Pastoral authority of S. Pe^r was ordinary. 267. ^^ That his
ordinary authority belon^th to one bishop alone 279 ^^ That the bishop of Rome
is that one ^dinary pastor who succedeth in S. ^e^rs chair. 305. ^^ That the
good Emperors and prin^s, did never think themselves supreme ^eads of the
Church in spiritual causes. 378. ^^ That the bishop of Rome is not An^christ
himself. 421. ^8 That the bishop of Rome is not any ^ember of Antichrist,
concerning his ^octrine. 464.
THE STATE OF THE QVESTION CONCERning the Supremacy of S. Peter, and of the
Bishops of Rome after him.
The First Chapter.
IN writing to and fro, concerning the Supremacy of S. Peter and of the
Bishops of Rome after him, great controversies are fallen out, the which to
the end they may be the better opened, I thought good to propose in order, the
chief points of the said question.

The Catholics believe, that the Bishop of Rome, sitting in S. Peter's Chaier
is, by the appointment of Christ himself, the chief Pastor of the whole
militant Church, whose voice every sheep ought to hearken unto.

The Protestants on the other side deny, not only the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome, nor only the Supremacy of S. Peter: but also they affirm, that
there is no Primacie, nor any one chief government in the Church at al.





Concerning S. Peter, we fall again into diverse new questions, as it shall now
appear.

When Simon the son of Iona was first brought unto Christ by his brother
Andrew, Jesus loking upon him, said: Thou art Simon the son of Iona, Joan. 1.
thou shall be called Cephas, the which by interpretation is Peter, that is to
say, a stone or a rock. Here is the promise made, that Simon shall be called
Peter, which name is derived of a rock or stone. Verelie, because he shall
occupy that place in upholding the frame of Christ's militant Church, the
which a stone occupies in holding up the house which is built upon it. And
when it pleased Christ to chose unto him his twelve Apostles, then he gave the
said name unto Simo^, surnaming him, Peter. Thirdly, Mar. 3. Luc. 6.
when Simon having the Godhead of Christ revealed to him from heaven, had
confessed the same, saying: Math. 16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: then Jesus answering, said unto him
(alluding to his new name, Joan. 21.
and showing the reason thereof) And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and
upon this rock vvil I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And to thee I will give the Keys of the kingdom of heaven. And
whatsoever thou shall bind upon the earth, it shall be bound also in the heavens:
And whatsoever thou shall loose upon the earth, it shals be loosed also in the
heavens.

By these words both the promise of Christ was fufilled, and the reason of the
promise was also declared, concerning the new name, which was before spoken of.
Neither do our adversaries deny these points, as I suppose. But the
Catholics reason farther upon this place, in this wise: The name of Peter,
which is derived of a rock or of a stone, was no sooner given to Simon, but also
a new promise was made, Math. 16.
that upon this Rock Christ would build his Church. Now the Catholics do
say, that Peter himself is here called this rock, and that Christ promised to
build his Church upon him. And because the building of Christ's church varieth
not after his Gospel once planted, but is always like it self, the Catholics
believe and teach, that when S. Peter died, a^ other did succeed in his place,
upon whom Christ's militant Church might be still so builded, as it had been
once builded upon S. Peter. And for as much as the Bishop of Rome succedeth S.
Peter, the Catholics most constantly affirm, that the Bishop of Rome, who
lives for the time, is the rock which confesses evermore Christ's true
faith, upon which confession of the Sea of Rome, as upon a most sure Rock
Christ's Church is built. The Protestants being at a point to deny this later
assertion, must needs affirm, that Peter himself is not called this Rock, but
rather that either Christ alone, or the faith which Peter confesses, is only
called this rock. This sense is imperfit, but not false.
So that they will have these words (upon this rock I will build my Church) to
be only thus meant, upon this faith and confession of thine, wherein thou have
said to me (thou art Christ the son of the living God) upon this Rock,
which I am, or upon this strong faith, which is confessed of me, I will build my
Church: and whersoeuer this faith is, there (say they) is the rock, upon which
Christ builds his Church.

The Catholics reply, that although the faith and confession of Christ's
Godhead be in deed a most strong rock, whereupon the Church is built, yet
that is not al which Christ means at this time. For these words (Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock, I will build my Church) have a respect unto three
diverse times: to the time past (because they are spoken to him, who was
promised to be called Peter) to the present time (because they are spoken to
him, who now confesses Christ's Godhead) to the time to come (because they are
spoken to him, to whom Christ says, he will give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and upon whom he will hereafter build his Church) which thing he
performed, when he said: Peter love thou me more the^ these? Joan. 21.
^eede my sheep. For Christ's sheep ^re Christ's Church: And to be made ^he
shepherd of them, is to have Christ's Church built upon him. And ^o be Peter,
is to be this Rock.

Solemus videre pastores sedere ^upra petram, and inde commissa ^ibi pecora
custodire. We are wo^t (says S. Augustine) to see shepherds sit upon a rock,
August in Io. tract. 46.
and thence to keep the sheep committed to their charge. Thus we see, how well
the Metaphore of the Rock does agree with the Metaphore of feeding sheep.

Therefore these words, upon this rock I vvil build my Church, are perfectly
fulfilled, when it is said to Peter who is this Roke, feed my sheep.

Now whereas this Proposition, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my Church, is thus qualified with the person to whom it is spoken, and with the
diversity of three several times, The sense of the protestants lacks three
conditions of four.
to take one part of these four away from all the other conditions, whereunto
it belongs, and to say, that the confession of Peter alone is the rock
whereupon Christ will build his church, and thereby to deny Peter him self who
makes that confession, to be this rock, and to divide the confession from the
promise going before, (which first of all wrought the effect thereof) and from
the last fulfilling which ensued after: it is in deed a truth (for so much
as is affirmed therein) but in respect of that which is denied, it is a maine
falsehood.

The whole sense.
But the Catholics (giving the whole sense of Christ's words, as they ought,
and not diminisshing any part thereof) do teach, that, this Rock where
upon Christ built his Church, is S. Peter, not barely and nakedly considered,
but with ^spect of the promise past, of the pre^nt confession, and of the
authority ^f feeding Christ's sheep which then ^as to come.

And so, no man (be he never so faith^ul) is this rock whereupon Christ ^ath
built his Church, except he be ^awfully called to succeed in the autho^itie and
pastoral office of S. Peter.

This thing then remains to be pro^ed in his due place.

The Catholics teach also, Joan. 2^
that ^t was said to Peter alone, feed my sheep. And seeing no particular
^locke was named, it must needs be meant, that the whole flock, which for the
time lived on the earth, was committed to Peter, even above all other,
according as he loved Christ more then other.

And for as much as the order of governing Christ's Church, which himself
appoi^ted, may not afterward be changed by man's invention, it insueth, that
always one chief shepherd must be made, who may feed the whole militant
flock of Christ's sheep in earth above al other pastors, as Peter on^^ did
feed them above al, concerning the principal power which he received of Christ.

Hereunto the Protestants reply, that Peter alone was not made the shephead
of Christ's flock above al^ others: but that in him Christ spoke to all the
Apostles.

The Catholics demand why the^ Peter alone is spoken unto, and willed to
feed Christ's sheep, in the presence of certain other Apostles, to none of
whom Christ speaks any thing thereof at this time?

The Protestants answer, that every Apostle was made a pastor no less the^
Peter. Calvin and Beza in Joan. cap. 21.
But that he was namely spoken unto at this time, as one who had lost his
office of Apostleship by denying his Master, and therefore as he denied thrice,
so he was commanded thrice to ^^d Christ's sheep, to the end he should ^ow
that his fault is now forgeuen, and ^^t he is restored to his Apostleship
^aine, so that he may feed Christ's ^^eep as well as Andrew or John, and ^^th
no greater power then they.

This answer is utterly false for three Lib. 7. de schis.
Petrus ter so^s negauit, and tamen bono vnita^s de numero Apostolorum sepa^ri
non meruit. Peter alone denied thrice, and yet for the bene^ of unity he
deserved not to be s^perated from the number of t^^ Apostles. Moreover if S.
Peter b^ once lost his Apostleship, yet before the time he had been restored
again the^^ unto. For Christ after his resurrecti^^ entered into the place
where his disc^ples were (the doors being shut) a^ stood in the midst, and
said, Pea^^ unto you, As my father has se^ me, Joan. 20.
and I send you. When he had s^ these things, he breathed, and said the^: take
ye the holy Ghost, who sins soever ye shall forgive, the are forgeuen them:
and whose (...) ever ye shall retain, they are retained. Now seeing it can not
be d^nied, but that S. Peter was the^ present (for only Thomas is noted to have
be^^ absent from the disciples at that time^ surely though Peter had lost once
h^ Apostleship, he had been restored before this time, and had been sent with
Chr^ste^ ^anctoritie, no less then any other ^^^stle. So that it was not
nedeful for (...) restoring of him to his Apostleship, ^t Christ should now say
to him alone, ^^d my lambs, feed my sheep. But ra^^^r he being before equal
with any ^^er of the Apostles by the co^missio^ of ^^ding and loosing syns, of
praeching, or any like authority given before, was (...) alone pri^cipally
willed to feed Chri^^s sheep, and Christ's lambs, in such ^t, as no other
Apostle was. Last of al, ^^mit, Peter had not ben restored to (...) Apostleship
before this time: yet he ^^d ben now restored to a greater au^^oritie, than any
other Apostle had re^iued at any time. So that every way ^eter in the end
remains with the ^^eatest power. Against this my assertion ^^e Protestants
cry, that al the Apostles ^^ere equal, and that John was the same thing which
Peter was, Cyprian. de unit. Ecclesia.
which thing S. Hiero^, and S. Cypria^ (say they) do witness and the very
practice of the Apostles, in so much that Paul, who was (...) of the twelve,
yet with stood S. Pet^^ and reproved him.

Our answer to this matter is, that Peter was not only an Apostle (...) which
office of Apostleship during ^ly for their lives, all the other were (...)
equalles) but also both chief of the A^^stles, and also an ordinary chief
sh^^heard, or high bishop, wherein t^^ were al inferiors to him, as being (...)
Apostles and Bishops under S. Pe^^^ their chief Apostle and chief Bish^^ their
Primate and their head. T^^ which my destinction shall be exac^^ proved by Gods
grace hereafter. (...) thereto concerning S. Peter.

More over, some men are so w^ful, that although they are driven (...)
confess, that S. Peter him self w^ this rock, and chief pastor, upon who^^
assured faith the militant Church w^ once buylt, yet they will have no (...)
Bishop to be the same after him. Whe^fore I have to prove, that both one Bi^^op
for the time should have continu^ the same pastoral power which S. ^^ter once
had, and that the same is ^ne other beside the Bishop of Rome. (...) Which
point being once declared, it ^ill the better appear, what a blasphe^^ it is
unto Christ, to burden his Vi^^e in earth with the name and tyran^^cal power of
that foul beast Anti^^rist: Vho i^ near to antichrist
Whereas it shall be right well pro^^d, that the Protestants of our time ^ome much
nere to the nature and condition of Antichrist, then any Pope of Rome ever did
or can do.

That there is a certain Primacie of ^^^ritual government in the Church (...)
Christ (though not properly a lord^nes or heathenish dominion) An^ what sort
this Ecclesiastical Prim^^^ differs from the lordly gouern^^^^ of secular
Princes, and how it is pr^^sed by the Bishop of Rome. The.II. Chap.
NO man properly can be Lo^^ among the Christians, where^ are servants
indifferently v^der the obedience of one true Lord (...) Master Jesus Christ,
Math. 23. ^. Pet. 1.
who has crea^^ them of nothing, and has redem^ them with his own blood.
Whe^^ upon our Savior Christ said: Luce. 22.
T^^ Kings of the Nations have dom^nion over them, but you not so. Again he
says: Math. 20.
The Princes (...) the nations have dominion ou^ them. It shall not be so amon^
you. 1. Pet. 5.
And S. Peter did forbid (...) fellow Priests, to usurp any domini^^ over the
Clergy: but he co^maund^ them, to be an example and pattern of ^he flock.
Upon which places we ^ay conclude, that Lordly dominion (...) forbidden in the
Church of Christ, ^ut not likewise all Ecclesiastical Pri^acie.

For Dominion is properly the power ^f life and death upon slaves or bond^en,
Dominion
Math. 23.
whereas we (in this spiritual go^ernment and kingdom of Christ) are ^ot
servants one to the other, but ^rethre^. But a kind of primacie is found ^uen
among brethren. For whereas Ru^en had eleven brethren, Genesis 49.
yet notwithstanding, his Father said of him.

Ruben my first begotten, Thou ^rt my strength, and the begin^ing of my grief.
The more ex^ellent in gifts, and greater in ^ovver. For Ruben should have ^ad
received both the Priesthood and ^he Superiority over his brethren, if ^e had
not wickedly demeaned himself toward his own Father.

Neither only among brethren, but even among fellow servant there is found a
certain Superiority, which is nothing else but that power, which it pleases
the chief Lord to give to some one of his servant over all the rest. For the
Lord of the house (as the Scripture witnesses by a parable) appoints and
sets a wise and faithful servant over his family, Math. 24.
that he may give them meat in due time. To be appointed and set over a
family, is to be chief in the family. And to be chief in the family, is to
have the chiefdom, superiority and primacie in the family.

Wherefore seeing our Savior Christ (so farforth as concerns his visible
presence) taking a journey into a far Country which is heaven, has like a
wise Lord appointed and set one of his servants over his family, that is to
say, over his Church, Luc. 12.
saying to him: Feed my sheep, meaning that he should give every man his due
portion, Joan. 21.
and just measure of wheat or of other victuals in convenient time: that
servant so appointed and made ruler over this Militant Church, has a certain
primacie in consideration and respect of them, over whom he is made Primate
and chief governor: albeit when we consider the majesty of our Master
Christ, the very Primate still continues altogether a suppliant and an humble
seruitour to him.

As for other who under the chief ruler have the charge of particular parishes
and Churches committed unto them, they have also in the same degree and sort, a
certain Superiority, which S. Hierom calls Exortem quanda^ and eminentem
potestatem, In Dial. co^tra Luciferanos.
a certain perelesse and high power.

If he be a Parish Priest, he is above any other in that parish. If he be a
Bishop, he is above any other in that Diocese. Of such Rulers S. Paul says:
Obedite Prepositis vestris. Obey them who are set over you. Now it is to be
known, that in any one parish, or in any one diocese, there never was but one
ruler at once ordinarily.

For thence come heresies and schisms (says S. Cyprian) because one Priest in
the Church for the time, Ad Cornel. Ep. 3. Lib. 1.
and one judge in Christ's stead is not thought to be.

If then the whole militant Church be also one certain particular body of a
certain particular administration and condition (in respect of the triumphant
Church, which is otherwise guided in heaven) it must needs follow, that over
the whole militant house of God, one only master and governor is set, whom we
al ought to obey as our chief ruler in earth. And so by the superiority, which
experience shows to belong to one in every parish, we come by the force of
the same reason, to acknowledge one chief Postour in the great parish of this
world. of which kind S. Peter was, whiles he lived.

And that may well be perceived by the Gospel it self. For seeing the
Evangelist S. Matthew repeting the names of the twelve Apostles, says: Primus,
Cap. 10.
Simon qui dicitur Petrus, the first is Simo^, who is called Peter, and
afterward reckons none neither second, nor third, nor fourth, undoubtedly by
calling Peter (Primum) first, he means that he was the first in dignity, and
the chiefest among the Apostles, and that all the rest afterward were to be
equally esteemed.

For, to be first where none is put as Second or Third, is to be first not by
order of numbering, but only by dignity and preeminence, in so much that the
Ancient Fathers express the force of this word, Primus, First, by calling
S. Peter the Prince or chief of the Apostles. And certes, where there is any in
the Church of God, first in dignity, and chief in praeeminence, there must
needs be some primacie.

Besides, if the Bishop of the old law was called in those days, Exodus 22.
Princeps populi, The Prince of the people, and if S. Paul honored Ananias
with that name, even after the death of Christ, saying: Actor. 23.
It is written, Thou shall not curse (or revile) the Prince of thy people, how
much more ought he both to be called, and to be also believed to be the chief
governor and Prince of al Christian people, whom Christ has appointed, and
set over his family, Joan. 21.
saying: Feed my sheep? Only he must be circumspect, that he turn not his
primacie into a tyranny, as the Gentiles and Princes of the world do.

How be it, this also is to be considered, that neither the Prophets, nor the
Evangelists are wont to be so careful of words, as of the sense and things
^hemselues. Whereby it comes to pass sometimes, that they give the name of
God to such me^ as have by participation any divine or godly thing in them, as
to Judges, Exodus 22. Psalm. 81. Joan. 10.
and to whom God vouchsafes to speak. By like means it may be verified, that
some Ecclesiastical persons have a certain dominion, in that respect verily,
that by participation they receive a divine and heavenly thing that is to say,
that power which Christ their liege Lord and natural Sovereign endued them
withal, when he made them governors of his family. For among the holy orders
of Angels, in like manner there is rekened one, which is called of S. Paul
Dominationes, Dominations, Coloss. 1.
not because they have any dominion or soueraintie over other Angels (as
servants in subjection unto them) because they reciue that virtue and power of
God (the only true Lord) which it pleases his Majesty to have annexed to
that order, thereby to give forth some token and show of his infinite Lordship
and power.

Wherefore if some man not thinking peradventure of these controversies, nor
weighing rather the thing then the bare word, has at any time expressed the
primacy of the Church, Dominus Lord, stands sometime for Sir.
with this word Dominion, or if any man do call a Bishop by the name of Lord we
ought not for any such respect to make an hurly burly, as though any proper or
true dominion were challenged in the Church, of one toward an other. For as
touching that which is properly called Dominion, we defend it not. But that
there is a primacie in the Church that is the thing which we defend. The which
Ecclesiastical primacie although it may evidently appear by that which is
already said, yet it shall not be out of the way, to consider how one of those
places which are alleged of our Adversaries, as if it did utterly forbid (...)
Superiority among the disciples, Luc. 22.
^^th clearly stablish and confirm the ^^me.

For whereas often times there ^ll a strife between the Disciples, ^ho should
be the greater, once Marc. ^.
an other ^^me when the Mother of the sons Marc. 10.
Luc. 22.
after his last ^upper: albeit Christ always did dehort them from expectation
of that heathe^ish kind of dominion, which was used ^n the world, and always
invited them to humility, yet he never denied, ^ut that there should be one in
deed ^reater among them, and he often^imes signified, that the same should be
^. Peter, and that as well when he chose ^im to be the first Apostle, as when ^e
said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church and to thee I
vvil give the kei^ of heaven, Math. 16. and 17.
and pay for thee an^ me.

If then you demand, how it happened, that this notwitstanding, The Apostles
striued who should be greater, (...) that even after supper, when it had be^
already said, Upon this rock I vv^^ build my Church: I answer, that,
no^withstanding S. Peter was most like (...) be preferred, yet whiles Christ
lived i^ the earth, it was in his free choice t^ have appointed it otherwise.
An^ when the Apostles saw either S. Pete^ called Satanas, Math. 16. Origin. in
Math. tractat. 5. Ne mayor no^ esset Petrus. Math. 20. Luc. 22. Joan 13.
that is an adversary, (...) any special favor showed to any other man beside
S. Peter so often they doubte^ (as Origenes also witnesses) lest perhaps Peter
should not be the greater as namely, when they saw the mother of the sons of
Zebede entreating f^^ her Children, and likewise when the^ saw S. John at his
last supper to lea^^ upon his breast.

Moreover being not yet repleni^ed with the spirit of Christ, it may ^el be,
that although they believed S. ^eter should be the chief pastor, yet ^^ey might
look for an other to be made ^e chief governor in secular causes.

But when once Christ had said to ^^m a little before his ascension, Simo^ ^^e
son of Iona do thou love ^e more then these? Joan. 21.
Feed my ^^mbs, feed my sheep: after that ^^me al strife ceased, and Peter
had the ^^periority stablished to him by all their ^^nfession.

Yea the same question was in manner ^nded between Christ's last supper and ^is
death, though not so plainly and ^xpreslie as afterward. For after his ^ast
supper, Luc. 22.
when they striued who ^ight seem to be greater, Christ having ^hewed, that
some one of them was ^reater, ended his talk at the last with ^imon Peter,
showing him to be that one. The which words of Christ rehearsed by S. Luke,
that they m^^ be made the plainer, I will compa^^ them with the words of S.
M^thew and S. Mark, spoken at an other time.

And that I do, because all the places are hudled up by the Protesta^^ as if
they were one and the same, In centur. Magdeburg.
whe^^as they differ much.

Math. 20. Marc. 10.
S. Matthew and S. Mark rec^^ only that Christ said to the Apostle^ (when they
disdained at the son of Zebede) Whosoever among yo^ will be greater, let him be
your se^uitour. And who so ever amon^ you vvil be first, shall be your servant.
In which words we may conside^ two things: the first is, that if an^ man will be
greater, he is permitte^ to be so, if yet he will keep the condition which
follows, verily to be (...) servant to all the Disciples. For the lowlines of
spirit is the way to this tr^^ greatness, whereof Christ now speaks.

And this kind of greatness may (...) in those who are no Ecclesiastical
^^ficers at all. Because it consists (...) the inward mind rather, then in
^^e outward power.

But S. Luke witnesses Christ to ^^ue said moreover: Luc. 22.
Qui mayor est (...) vobis, fiat sicut minor, and qui ^^aecessor est, sicut
ministrator.

^^e that is the greater among you, let ^^m be made as the younger, and he ^^at
is the chief (or guide) as he that ^inistreth.

In which words it appears ^^idently, there was one certain ^an greater
then the other among ^^e Disciples. For whereas S. Ma^hew, and S. Mark speak
indefi^itely (...),

^ho so ever will be great, S. Luke ^aith not generally, who so ever wil^e
great, but (...), the ^reater among you. So that we find six differencies
between the woor^ in S. Luke, Six differencies.
and those in the other E^gelists.

any man whosoever he be. S. Luke of o^ certain man, who by the artickle, is,
as it were, pointed unto. For (...) said article does determinately she^ some
one a part from the rest.

Who (...) would, or coueteth to be great. (...) Luke speaks of the effect
already pr^sent, for the Participle (...), is to (...) supplied to these
words, (...) the which causes the sense to be, H^ that is the greater, and
not he the would be, or coueteth to be great.

great, and n^ of him that is greater. S. Luke of hi^ that is (...), greater
among the Apostles, and according to the Greek^ ^^ase (where the comparatiue
stan^^^h for the Superlatiue) it is meant, that is greatest among them all.

^al which differences, whereas in S. ^^thew and Mark, Christ only shows
^^militie to be the way to greatness in (...) sight: in S. Luke he teaches one
^^^tain man who is already greater, and ^^atest among them, to be made humble.
(...) For in S. Matthew and S. Mark, ^^e Nominative case to, sit, and, erit,
(...) him be, or, he shall be, is he only, ^ho would be great, and not he that
is ^eat. Let him who would be great, (...) a servant, that by serving he may be
^me great. But in S. Luke it is said: ^et him that is already the more great,
(...) made as it were a younger. Certain^^ this man who being already the
grea^^r, must be made as the younger, is not ^eant to be only great already by
the ^ertue of humility, or by inward righ^eousnes, but rather by power and
au^horitie.

For whereas the Apostles stri^^ who should be greatest in power, (...) not who
should be greatest in humi^^tie, Christ by pronouncing one amo^^ them to be
greatest, and by exhort^^ him to be made as though he were (...) least does
evidently show that he me^neth one of them to be already great (...) power, and
that if he will be in all poin^ the greatest, he must add humilit^^ of his mind
to the authority of (...) office, which he already has, eith^^ by the right
of promise, or else by e^presse gift. And so the man, who (...) spoken of in S.
Luke, is already great in office and dignity, and now he mo^^ afterward be
made humble in min^ and soul. He has his greatness^ by commission, and being
made hu^mbl^ he must receive a new kind of greatne^^ by grace.

Thus in the other twain there ar^ three degrees. A man first would be great,
secondly he must be humble ^^d thirdly he then only is great when (...) is
humble. In S. Luke the man (...) first great (without declaration made ^hether
he would be so or no) and se^ndly he must behave him self humbly. which if he
will not do, he loses not ^^s former greatness, but only he lee^^th that
greatness which is gotten by ^umilitie.

The fourth difference is, that wher^^ younger, or as the ^ast. By which name of
(...), ^inor, younger, it is given us to vnder^^and, that (...), mayor, is not
^nly meant the greater, but also the el^er. Nor yet only meant the elder in
^eares, but also the greater in power, and elder in office.

For whereas the contention was, (...), Quis eorum videretur esse mayor, which
of them should seem to be the greater, or the greatest, it is certain that
they striued not, who should be elder in years (for that was out of their
reach) but they striued who should be greater and elder in power and Authority.

And Christ not denying at al, that some one was greater, but only prescribing
him how he should use his greatness, bids him be made as the younger. That
is to say, as the underling, although in deed he be the elder. By which name of
younger, Christ alludeth to the custom of the childern of a Patriarch, or of a
high Priest, among the Jews: Genesis 49.
Where the elder brother was Prior in donis, and mayor in imperio for most in
gifts, and greatest in rule. And consequently the younger brother was less then
his elder brother.

Whereby we understand, that whereas the Disciples were all brethern, there was
among them, as it were, an elder brother, who was greater in rule and foremost
in gifts, who was S. Peter, Math, 10.
as we read in S. Matthew: Primus Simon, qui dicitur Petrus. The first is Simon,
who is called Peter.

To whom S. Ambrose says in this wise: Qui lapsus es antequam fleres, In
Lucae. Cap 22.
postquam fleuisti erectus es, vt alios regeres, quite ipsum ante non ^xeras.
Thou which did slide before thou did weep, after thou have wept, art set
upright, that thou should rule others, who before had not ruled thy self.
Lo, Peter did rule others: and how could he do that, except he were set over
them in such sort, as a ruler is over them whom he rules?

For although the end of the ruling were better then that which was used among
the nations, yet it was a true ruling and government.

The fifth difference is, that whereas said, let him be a minister and (...)
servant, in S. Luke it is said, with a great moderation, let him be made as
the younger, and as he that ministers. So that the greatness is absolute, but
the ministry is (...), as it were a ministry, being in deed more truly a
greatness (concerning the power) then a ministry. Because it is a greatness
by the power and nature of his office, but a ministry by the good and humble
use of the same. The which good use if it lack, the power of the office is not
the less, but the merit of the person is the less.

How were it possible for the use of a thing to be prescribed to him, who had
not the thing it self? How can he that is greater, be made as the younger, if in
deed he be not greater? It is utterly to deny the express word of God, if
any man say, that there was not one certain man greater among the Apostles, who
might be made as the younger. It is, I say, the plain contradictorie of that
which Christ speaks, and therefore the mainteiner of that opinion is ^n
Antichrist.

Last of al, the greater man whom Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you,
as it were wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And
thou beeng once converted, confirm thy brethren. What other thing is it for S.
Peter to confirm his brethren, but to practice and exercise his greatness over
them? For he that does confirm other, is the greater, and they who are
confirmed are thereby inferiors to him, who confirms them.

Thus we understand, that without al question S. Luke does witness Christ to
have described one certain man to be presently the greatest among the
Disciples, who is exhorted to be made as their minister, and in the end by name
is called Simon, which was the forename of S. Peter. And seeing the Bishops
of Rome do sit in his chair, they are likewise the greatest among all their
brethern and fellow Bishops, and ought to be made a^ ministers, or yongers,
for the perfitt use of their greatness, which is before committed to them at
their election to that office, whether they do afterward use it well or no.

For the power which God gives to man for the commodity of the whole Church,
never depends upon the good use of that man, lest while he as a private man
does misuse his dignity, the whole Church (which is of greater re^^ect) be
deprived of her profit and vti^^tie. Wherefore by all these reasons it ^ust
needs follow, that there is a Su^remacie among the Apostles them^elues (as it
shall be afterward more ^irectly proved) and consequently, ^uch more among
their Successors, who having less grace and humility, would sooner make
schisms, if one were ^ot set over them, whom they might al ^cknowlege and obei
as their chief pastor.

In so much that S. Ambrose wri^ing upon this place of S. Luke, In Cap. 22
Lucae.
generaly says: Caueamus, ne in perditione^ aliqua inter nos de praelatione
possit esse contentio. Si enim co^tendebant Apostoli, non excusationi
obtenditur, sed cautioni proponitur. Let us beware, lest any strife of
preferment may be among us to our destruction. For if the Apostles did strive,
it is not an excuse to be pretended for us, but it is set forth to make us
beware, et ideo vnadatur omnibus forma sententiae, v^ non de praelatione
iactantia sit, sed de humilitate contentio, eo quod se Dominus proponit
imitandum. And therefore one form of sentence is given to al, that they
should not boast of their preferment or prelateship, but that they should
strive to be humble. Because our Lord has set forth him self to be followed.

Here S. Ambrose denies not but that one is preferred before an other, yea
rather he confesses it, for he could not forbid any man to boast of his
prelateship, except he were a prelate. Only this is common to al, that even
the Prelates ought to strive with their inferiors, in lowlines, because Christ
who is Lord of al, did minister to his own disciples, ad became the lowest and
most humble of al other.

S. Bid upon this present place of S. Luke writes thus. In forma humilitatis
obtinenda Maiores and praecessores, id est, doctores Ecclesiae non minima
discretione opus habe^t, vt and bonis in nullo se praefe ^rant, and cum
prauorum culpa exigit, potestatem protinus sui prioratus agnoscant, ne enim
preside^tis animus ad elationem potestatis suae delectatione rapiatur, recte
per quendam sapientem dicitur: Ducem te constituerunt, noli ex^olli, sed esto
in illis quasi vnus ex ^llis. In keeping the form of lowlines the greater and
more chief, that is to say, the Doctors and the teachers of the Church, have
need of no small discreation, that they neither prefer them selves in any
thing before good men, and when the fault of evil men so requires, that by and
by they may acknowledge the power of their prelateshippe. The same words are
in S. Gregory. li. 1. ep. 24
For to the end the mind of the President might not be puffed up with pride
through the delight light of his own power, it is well said by a certain wise
man: They have made the a capitain, be not proud, but be among them as one of
them. All this talk of S. Bid presupposes a prelatship in the Church: and
requires also, that it be practiced when the faults of evil men provoke their
Superior, to use his authority.

The chief point of the whole disputation is, that the Ecclesiastical primacie
does in all points imitate and resemble (as much as it possibly may) the
Primacie of Christ, Luc. 22.
who sets forth him self as a perfect example of a true primacie even in
this place of S. Luke.

Therefore who so ever denies the Superiority of him, who is the greatest
among the Apostles, to be a true primacie in his kind, is blasphemouse against
Christ him self. For after that it was said: He that is greatest among you,
let him be as the younger, and he that is chief, as he that ministers, Christ
intending to show that the primacie of the Apostles, ^ould by no reason be
greater, then that ^f Christ was, but that it ought rather ^o follow and to be
like unto it: whether (...) says he) is greater, he that sits ^oun, or he
that ministers? Is not ^e that sits down? But I am in ^he midst of you as
he that mini^treth: as if he said, seeing none of you ^ay reasonably covet to
be otherwise ^he greatest, then I am, and yet I being ^ncomparably the
greatest, do behave my self like one that ministers, much less the greatest
among you, may desire ^o be great after any other sort.

Therefore in such sort the Apostles and their Successors ought (for their
degree) to be servants and ministers in their Primacie, as (for his degree)
Christ was in his own primacy, who after that he had washed their feet, said
unto them: Do ye know what I have done unto you? Joan. 13.
Ye call me Master and Lord, and therein you say well: for I am your Master
and Lord in deed. Wherefore seeing I, being your Lord and Master, have vvashed
your feet, ye ought to vvash one an others feet. For I have given you an
example, that you should do as I have don. Verily verily I say unto you, the
servant is not greater then his Master, nor the Apostle more worthy then he
that sent him. If ye know these things, ye shall be blessed if ye do them.

Christ therefore, whereas he was most truly Lord and Master, having the
Primacie in all points, Coloss. 1.
yet notwithstanding he was a minister among his disciples. And after the same
sort (as S. Gregory testifies) Petrus authore Deo sanctae Ecclesiae
principatum tenens, L. 1. ep. 24
etc. Peter having the Primacie of the holy Church ^y Gods commission, refuses
to ^e overmuch reuere^ced of Cor^elius who did well. Actor. 9.
Actor. 5.
But when ^e found out the fault of Ananias and Saphyra, Mox quanta poten^^a
super caeteros excreuisset oste^^it. He showed straight how far ^e was growe^
in power above the rest. Will any man deny Christ to be Prince and Lord of al?
No, I suppose. For Christ died and rose again, Romans 14.
to ^his end that he might be Lord ^oth of the quick and of the dead.

If then he that is Lord of al, could notwithstanding be as a minister without
loss of his lordship, how much more easily may he that is not properly a
Lord, but a chief ruler among his bre^hern, being set rather over their faults
then over the men, how much more may he be as a servant and minister in that
Primacie and Authority of his, without any hinderance to his superiorite?
Which being true, their error or rather malice is discovered, who think, that
none ca^ be chief among the faithful Christians, because it is written: that he
must be as a minister, that will be first or chief. See I pray you their wise
discourse. Thus they reason.

To be a ruler, and as a younger, a chief governor, An Objection.
and as a minister, are contrary and repugnant one to an other.

If that be true, how was Christ both a Lord and as one that ministered? The
answer.
A Master, and as it were a minister? A Lord by nature, a minister by
subjection. It is not said, he that is the greater, let him be a servant, but:
let him be as a minister. If it be so, that Christ being absolutely Lord of al,
was also notwithstanding as a minister: how much more may the Apostles and
their successors being not proprely Lords in deed, but only for the time
appointed rulers over Christ's family, be in that kind both governors, and as
servants? Governors over them, who for their faults ^eserue the rod (as S.
Paul speaks) and as servants in the midst of them who deserve praise. 1.
Cor. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Governors in ^eed, and servants by humility, Gouer^ours in office, and
servants in conside^ation of the good end and use of their ^ffice. But what
need many words? Does not every good shepherd both ^ule his flock, and serve
his flock? Does ^e not judge between the fat sheep and ^he lean? Yeas verily.
Ezec. 34
And Christ ^ould have Bishops, even after the ex^mple of shepherds, to be
both rulers ^uer men endued with reason, a^nd also ^o serve them with their
spiritual food. Now look by what reason one man (being as it were Aries Dux
gregis, a ^am who guides the flock, is chief ru^^r over many me^ being as it
were sheep who follow him: by the same reason, the ^ery self same guide may (as
it were a ^apitaine ram) be again in subjection to ^n other guide, as being his
shepherd.

Therefore as Bishops are gouernour^ over their particular flocks, and
seruitours unto them: so one superiou^ Bishop is both governor over many
Bishops (as his one flock) and also servant unto them al. How sententiouslie
was it said of Pope Leo? Qu^se quibusdam sit esse prepositum non moleste ferat
aliquem sibi essepraelatum. Ep. 82. ad Anastasiu^ Thessalon.
He that knows himse^^ to be set over some men, let him n^^ disdain to
have some man preferred before himself.

An Objection.
But some man will say: They the bear rule and dominion even among the
Gentiles, do serve their subjects, i^ that they provide to keep out their
ennemies, to co^serue peace, to make laws and to punnish malefactors.
Wherefore seeing they have such a dominion, as may be called a ministry and
service, not only that dominion, which practices a tyrannical power, and has
confidence in his own force, is inhibited to the Apostles and tHeir
successors, but also al kind of primacie. For ^he clergy must be altogether
unlike to ^he temporal governors.

To answer this objection, The answer.
in very deed I doubt not, but the end of that dominion which is practiced
among the gentiles ought to be such, that it should have a special eye to
thepreseruation of ^he common weal. Gene. 10. Ne^roth.
But because at the first beginning Kings and Princes of ^he earth had not that
end either only or specially before their eyes, but desired that dominion, and
practiced it also because it was a pleasant and lordlike pleasure to be a
prince, and because the most part of Princes are prone to the worst, therefore
our savior Christ considering that which was first, and which happens most
oftentimes, forbids his Apostles and bisshops such a dominion and
superiority as is used among the Princes of the earth, and not altogether such
as ought to be among them. Therefore it is not lawful for us to desire any
primacie for the primacies sake, but for the traiuaile, labor, and end for
which the primacie is ordained of Christ. 1. Tim. 3.
For he that desires the office of a bishop, desires a good worck, and not a
vain honor.

Again albeit it be true, that some wordly princes take the dominion and
soueraintie upon them for the profit of the common weal, yet it is more that
Christ requires of his Apostles and Bisshops, who are bound no^ only to see
unto the common weal, but to the Christian common weal, of which end no
wordly princes could think, when Christ spoke those words, because no Princes
of the earth had received the faith of Christ at that time.

Wherefore that commandment was specially given to the Apostles, that they
should direct their primacie and superiority to the public commodity of
faithful men, and to the salvation of their sowles, to edify withal, 2. Cor.
^.
and not to destroy.

Farthermore, albeit the King be faithful and also virtuous for his own
person, yet it is not the kingly, but the priestlie power, which God chose
from the beginning to rule his people withal. Romans 13.
For although by his almighty goodness he ordained the Royal power, and made
the state of Kings to serve both his eternal purpose, and also the common
weal, 1. Pet. 2.
and willed even the faithful to obey them, as being sent of God, yet we read
not, that the making of Kings over Gods own people at the first, came of God
by the way of his merciful grace and election, but by the way of his angry
permission, and just judgment, Genesis 10. Hieron. in quaest. Hebrai.
in suffering thereby the pains of their great sins to fall upon them.

So Ne^rod that strong hunter (the first King that we read of) either usurped
his kingdom by force, or was auaunced to it by evil men, without the graciouse
appointement of God. And when the people of Israel rejecting the government of
Samuel the priest, 1. Reg. 8.
would needs have a King over them, God accounted himself to be rejected of
them: doutlesse not because it was a synneful thing to have a King, but because
it was a great dishonor to God (who had appointed priests to govern) to have
his government changed. And it was less profit for their sowles to be ruled by
a King, then by a priest.

^. Reg. 8.
For albeit a priest may be also naught, (as the sons of Samuel were) yet he
can never be so hurtful and slaunderouse to eternal salvation, as the King may
be: partly because the state and (as the world has ever misiudged it) the
right and law of a King is to be secular and wordly, In 1. Reg. lib. 4. c. 2.
in so much that S. Gregory said: ea quae in iure regio continentur ^itanda
potius quam imita^da praedicuntur, the things which are con^eined in the law
that concerns the Kings, are foretold rather that they ^ay be avoided, then
followed (whereas ^he law and state of a priest is to be spiritual and godly,
and therefore it is ^lwaies a more perfect state and profession:) partly also
because the making ^f a King had his beginning from the fact and consent of
men, working only according to the law of nations (allowed in deed by God)
whereas the insti^uting of priests came directly from God him self. And who
douteth but that it may be sooner abused which men by good reason ordained, then
that which God above al course of reason, instituted by grace only? In so much
that the Jews being provided for by God himfelf of a spiritual government, did
sin grievously and were forsaken of God concerning their act of choosing
afterward a temporal King, who should be above their high priest, whereupon
Saint Gregory says: In 1. Reg. lib. 4. c. 1.
Merito se abiectum Dominus conqueritur, merito regiam dignitatem concedit
indignatus. Tanta quidem erat iniquitas postula^tium, vt cum illud peterent,
per quod a Deo recederent, ex Dei iudicio permitti posset, prohiberi non
posset. Our Lord did worthily lament himself to be abiected. He being offended,
did justly grant the Royal dignity* so great was the iniquity of the
desirers, that (when they desired that, whereby they should go from God) by
the judgment of God it might be permitted, but prohibited it could not be.

But on the other side the first institution of Priests came not to Gods people
by their own invention, but directly from God himself, Genes. 4.^.22.
to whom, Abel, Noe, Abraham, Aaron and his successors served in that office,
by ^^e gratiouse election of God, until christ, fulfilling the figure of
Melchi^^dech, instituted in his last supper ^^e order of priesthood, Lucae 22.
according to ^he state of the new testament, ge^ing power to his Apostles to
make, and by that mean to offer mystically ^is own body and blood, witnessing
^hereby how much more he gave them ^ll manner of necessary or profitable ^ower
over the Church his mystical ^odie.

For if his priests be so great, that ^hey have taken power to make his ^wne
body with their holy mowth (as Saint Hierom speaks) shall ^ow any man
disdain, Ad Euagrium.
to be under that order, which God has so excel^ently honored? This much may
be said for the whole order of priesthood.

But after that the Apostles were made Priests, he ordained Saint Peter the
general pastor an^ high bishop of his whole flock, and he did it with such
protestation of lo^^ and charity, that it must needs be confessed, even by
the despisers of Christ institution, that there was never lightly any act don
in this world by the s^^ of God, with showing of greater lo^^ toward mankind,
then at what time h^ himfelf in his own person appointed v^ a pastor and
shepherd.

Now this pastor being thus greater then the rest, is not only primate i^ a
far other sort then the Kings of the unfaithful nations, but also in a f^^
more excellent kind, then the Christian Kings are. For to what Christian King
did Christ ever say, Joan. 20.
As my father sent me I send thee, Math. 16.
or, upon this rock I will build mi^ Church, Joan. 21.
or, do thou love me more then these? feed my sheep* feed my lambs?

And yet is a King above priests* yea above the high pastor of Christ's flock?
he is so in deed with them, who make less account of Christ's heavenly
institution and Officer, then of him that was first made either by the
necessity of wordly calamities to keep away a greater evil from the common
weal, or else by the wanton and proud affection of earthly men, ambitiously
affecting tyrannical power.

Let no man thinck that I despise the authority of Kings (God forbid) but they
are a good thing brought in mercifully sumwhere to stay violent injuries and
robberies, and other where permitted of God for our just punishment, 2. Cor. 5.
and not any like thing to that divine order of pastors, which Christ ordained
purposely for our reconciliation to God the father, and for the avoiding of al
just punishment otherwise deserved.

It was a King (as Saint Gregory In 1. Reg. lib. 4. c. 1
notes) who divided the ten tribes from the Church of God, and made those by
the just punishment of God to be idolatours, who so greedely preferred his
government before the government of the priests. And are not we now in the same
case, who for greedines to reject the Vicar of Christ, are come to prefer the
secular and temporal power before the spiritual? the body before the soul,
and earth before heaven?

In 1. Reg. lib. 4. c. 1.
Nonnulli (says Saint Gregory) in tantum dementiae malum proficiunt, vt
commouere ipsum etia^ statum Ecclesiastici culminis non vereantur. There are
some who are come to so great madness, that they are not a feared to move (and
trouble) even the state it self of the Ecclesiastical (top, or) highest
dignity of the Church. And a little after. His autem qui viuebant sub
spiritali regimine, Ibidem.
Regem petere, quid aliud est, quam eandem spiritalem praelationem in secula^m
dominationem transfer ge^re?

For those that did live under the spi^^tual government, to require a King,
that other thing is it, then to go a^out to transfer the same spiritual
pre^teship (or government) into a tempo^al dominion?

If any man would deeply weigh with himself, that God chose such a ^ecret and
extraordinary way to ^^ue mankind, that no creature ^ould worck it beside his
own Almighty Son, and that he coming unto the world, was so far from
working his purpose by Kings and princes, that whereas it was most easy for
him to have made many Kings and Princes at the beginning to believe in him, 1.
Cor. 1.
he rather chose the weakest things of the world to confound the strong things,
and wrought the beginning and increase of his Church by the misbeliefe and
persec^tion of princes: if he would be thin^ himself, how far the poverty and
h^militie of the Kingdom of heaven (...) from the pomp and wordly distracti^^
of Kings (Yea though they be Christian and good also) he would much wond^^ what
sense in holy matters they have who dare make that princely state s^preme head
of the Church, which of (...) states came last to the faith, and the pomp
whereof is most contrary (of a^^ other degrees) to the profession of the same.

And yet what are they who persuade this matter? The inco^stancie of the
protestants.
verily those who having justly reproved some lewd and proud bishops for their
wordly pomp, afterward set up Kings in the bishops places, yea above them
also, as though any King had less wordly pomp then the bishops. Yea they also
do it, who, protesting they will believe nothing but the express word of God,
yet believe Kings to be the heads of the Church, which they not only can not
find in ^ods word, but they rather find there, 1. Reg. ^.
^at God was angry, when the ^ouernment of the high priest ^as rejected, and
a kingly government ^alled for.

Moreover if by this precept (the ^ings of the nations have domi^ion over them,
it shall not be so among you) not only all tyrannical or ^ordly power of life
and death, but also ^l spiritual primacie and superiority be forbidden to the
Apostles over the whole militant Church, it is forbidden ^ikewise, that there
should be any superior in any one part of the Church. For the parts (according
to their degree) are of the same nature whereof the whole is. Therefore if the
whole militant body may have no one head, much less any part thereof may have
a head.

If then no Apostle may be superior or primate in any part of the Church,
much less any other Christian, man w^^ is inferior to an Apostle, may be
s^preme governor in any one part of the same Church. But every King in the
behalf, as he is a Christian, is inferio^^ to the Apostles (for he is both
tawg^^ his faith of them, Matthew. 28
and baptized by them and in spiritual matters he must be guided by them)
therefore seeing the King may not be supreme governor of any part of Christ's
Church, in that respect as he is a Christian man, if yet he shall be supreme
head of his own Christian realm by any mean at all, it must be by that power,
which he either had before his Christianity, or beside it. For by his
christianity it is not possible, that he should have any greater power then the
Apostles had, Joan. 20
who were sent into the world with Christ's authority.

If then a King be supreme governor of the Church (where he is a King) besides
his christianity, he is no otherwise supreme governor thereof, then any
Ethnik prince might have be^. And so it (...) brought to pass by the doctrine
of the ^rotesta^ts, that an infidel King hah su^reme power to visit, to
reform, to ^orrect, and to depose any bishop ^ithin his own realm. The which
ar^ume^t when Antichrist, or the great Turk shall make unto the Protestants,
^hey must needs yield unto it, and grant ^i^ to be supreme head of their
Church. Be it so, of their Church, but the Ca^holikes shall still keep them
under the ^piritual government of the bisshops and ^astours which Christ has
instituted.

To enter one degree farther in this matter, let us grant, that some King were
so perfect, so poor in spirit, so chaste, so liberal, as ever any bishop or
priest was required to be in Gods law: What things a King ca^ not do.
ca^ he yet baptize, ca^ he consecrate Christ's body, can he forgive sins,
can he preach, can he excommunicate, can he bless the people, can he judge of
doctrine by his kingly authority? If he can not do these things, how can he be
above the^ (concerning these causes, who have received commission of God to do
all these things? The Suprem governor, may practice any thing properly
belonging to his government.
It is not possible for a man (...) have the supreme government in (...)
Ecclesiastical causes by lawful power a^^ right, but that he should thereby
ha^^ also power and right, to execute any (...) those things which belong to
such Ecclesiastical causes as are under his g^uernment. Marck the point.

I say not he is bound to execut^ every such matter as falls under h^^
government or that it is decent for hi^ to do it: but that he may do it, an^
has right and power to do it, if he b^ rightly the supreme governor in the
behalf. An example in civil Matters.
For example: the King who (...) supreme governor in the civil and temporal
causes, has under him Judges, shriues, majors, Capitains and constables. If
his majesty will play the iudg^ in Westminster hal, or the shriue in any
sessions, or the Capitain in war, he surely may do it concerning the right
^f his Kingdom. Yea he lacks no ^ight nor lawful power to play the
Sol^iour, the Tailour, the Mason, Car^enter, or Tanner, albeit he perhaps do
lack the cunning or experience ^o exercise or practice those Arts, so as they
ought to be practiced.

Likewise an Archbisshoppe or Private, who has Bisshoppes, An example in
Ecclesiastical matters.
Archedeacons, Officials, Priests, and Clerks under him, may by right of his
Su^eriorie baptize any child, bless or give benediction, bury the dead,
approve their last wills by his own fact, help a Priest to Mass, carry the
cross in procession, dig the grave, and to be short, he may do any thing
which any man may do, who is under his jurisdiction.

If then the king have the right and power of Supreme government in all
Ecclesiastical causes, The applying of the rule to our purpose.
seeing it belongs to the right and power of Ecclesiastical causes that a man
may preach, baptize, bless, or give benedictio^ to the people, and administer
the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and bind or loose sins: it must
needs be, that the King even by that his supreamicy should also have power and
right to preach, to baptize, to give benediction, to administer the sacrament
of Christ's supper, and to bind or loose sins.

A farther declaration.
I say not, that he by his supremacy has cunning either, to preach or to
baptize, or to give benediction, or to administer the sacrament of Christ's
supper, or to play the tailer or the mason: but that no law, right, and power
does, or can forbid him to do these things, if in these things he be the
supreme governor, so that if he otherwise had cunning, he might with praise no
less preach and baptize, and give benediction or administer the sacrament of
Christ's supper, then he might build a house with his own hands, or cut a
garment, if he were cunning ^herein.

But now if all the world confess, 2. Para. 20 non est tui officij (o Rex) sed
sacerdotu^ domini.
that a King by his kingly office does ^ot only lack knowledge, but also has
no ^ight or power at al to preach, to bap^^ze, to give benediction, or to
conse^rate the sacrament of Christ's supper, (...) a although otherwise he be
most cun^ing and excellently learned: (except ^e have the office of a priest
also given ^im, and be lawfully sent and authori^d by the imposition of the
hand of ^riesthood) doutlesse it ought to be con^essed, 1. Tim. 4.
that a King by his kingly office ^ath no right or supreme power at all in
^cclesiastical causes (unless it be com^itted to him from the bishop.) And
that, as well because he of him self can ^ot practice those causes, though he
would, (as even our adversaries confess) ^s also, because his power (be it
never (...) roial) reaches not so high, as the ^ower of spiritual government
appointed by Christ, does. And surely no man by the commission which he only
has to rest or to prison men, may also hang them or burn them. For the lesser
authority does not comprehend the greater.

Say now, M. Horn, whether to celebrate our Lords supper, and to preach Gods
word, and to absolve or bind sins, it be a lesser or a greater ministry, the^
the Kings authority? If it be lesser, you have reason on your side. For then a
greater, power may comprehend it, being the lesser. But if it be incomparably
greater to minister unto men the heavenly Sacraments, then to minister justice
in temporal things, if that be a higher power which touches the soul then
that which only touches the body, then by what means extend you the
commission of a King (which has to do with less matters) not only to the
commission of a Priest, In the book against M. Feen^^.
but also above it?

You bring many examples evil applied to make an appearance of somewhat.

But they al concern matters of fact, which are for many circumstances subject
to much wrangling. But either it was no good Prince, who meddled of his Feed my
sheep. Joan. 21.


Here I ask whether the King or Emperor, who is christened, be Peter's sheep
or no? If he be not, he is not only not above the Church, but he is not at all
of the Church. If he be his sheep, then I say boldly, that as it is against
the law of nature (which never can be wholly changed) for a sheep to rule his
shepherd (in any manner of such sort, wherein he is the shepherd) even so it
is utterly impossible for any King or Prince to be in any respect of
Ecclesiastical government, above his own pastor, who soever he be for the time.

And yet farther to make this matter more plain, be it that a Christian King
does take upon him the supreme government in Ecclesiastical matters. What if a
bishop being called before him, Epist. 32. and seque^t.
say boldly (as S. Ambrose in a like case did) may it please your majesty to
command my goods, my lands, my body, my life, it shall be at your commandment.
But as for the ordering and governing of my bishoprike, I will not yield it to
you, because Christ (and not your majesty) committed the same to me: what
could that Christian King do to that bishop more the^ Nero or Traian might
have done? Could he excommunicate him by his roial power? M. Horn will not say
so. What is it the^ which he could do? might he put him in prison? so might
Nero, and also the great Turk.

By this mean it appears, that the King be he never so much christened, has
yet no power over the Bisshops soul. And yet al spiritual and ecclesiastical
power towcheth the soul. Therefore the King has no spiritual power over the
bishop at all. Epist. 32.
Si vel scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera tempora retractemus, quis est
qui abnuat in causa, in causa, inquam, fidei Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus,
non Imperatores de Episcopis iudicare? If we call to mind, either the process
of holy scriptures, or the ancient times, who can deny, but that in a cause
of faith, in a cause, I say, of faith bishops are wo^t to judge of Christian
Emperors, and not Emperors of Bisshops.

If then the King have no Spiritual power over the Bishop, how shall he corect
or depose the Bishop, according to any spiritual or ecclesiastical process of
judgment? Shall he cause a Synod of Bisshops to be gathered, that therein he
may depose the said disobedient Bishop? Put case the Synod find him not worthy
to be deposed, or else will not depose the said Bishop? How ca^ the King come to
exercise yet any spiritual power upon the Bishop? You will say, he shall
constrain the Synod to depose him. Wherewith I pray you? By the spiritual
sword, or by the temporal? Not by the spiritual. for it was never committed to
the king, that whose sins he should retain, they should be retained.

If then he shall obtain his purpose by the temporal sword, who sees not, that
the last resolution of the kings power is upon his temporal and secular
jurisdiction, which he should have had, though he had not ben a Christian.

Therefore S. Augustine finding many ^imes great fault with the Donatists,
Homil. de pastor. and in Psalm. cont part. Donatist.
because they appealed from the judgment of Bishops to the Emperor, ^alleth
even Constantin, who was then (...) christian Prince, terraenu^ regem, an
earthly king. In epist. 48
Datos sibi Episcopos ^udices apud terrenu^ rege^ accusaueru^t. They accused
the Bisshops, who were assigned to be their judges before an earthly King. For
albeit he was a Christian, yet his Kingly power was earthly, in respect of
that heavenly power, which Christ brought with him, and gave to his Disciples.
What do I stand about the words of men?

A most plain demonstration of the dignity of high priests above the dignity
of faithful princes even in the sight of God, is to be seen in the old
Testament. Where God (who is no parcial Judge) assigns a sacrifice for the
syn of every degree of men according to their dignity even at his own altar.
high priest, Leuitici 4 Sacerdos.
saying: Si Sacerdos, qui vnctus est peccauerit, delinquere faciens populum,
offeret pro peccato suo vitulum. If the priest which is anointed shall sin,
causing the people to sin, he shall offer a calf for his sin.

Turba oi^s.
but the whole people. Quod si omnis turba filiorum Israel ignorauerint,
offeret pro peccato suo vitulum. If the multitude of the childern of Israel do
amiss by ignorance, it shall offer a calf for his sin.

After these two degrees comes in Princeps. Leuitic. 4
si peccauerit princeps, offeret hostiam coram Domino, hircum etc. If the
prince shall sin, he shall offer a he got in sacrifice before the Lord.
Behold the prince is not only in the third place, both behind the high priest,
and behind the whole multitude, but also his sacrifice is of less value, and
of a baser condition the^ theirs. For a he got was not so honorable a
sacrifice, as a young ox or a calfe.

The fourth degree is, Anima.
that if one of Philo writes thus: Decebat principem priuato homini praeferri
vel in sacrificio, De victimis.
sicut principi populu^, quandoquidem totum est sua part maius. Pontificem
vero aequiparari populo in expiatione impetrandaque peccatoru^ venia. Habetur
tn^ is honor pontifici, non propter ipsum, sed quia minister est populi,
public vota faciens soluenda totius gentis nomine. It became the prince to be
preferred before a private man even in the sacrifice, as also the people to be
preferred before the prince, because the whole is greater then the part. But it
became the bishop, to be made equal with the people, in purging and in
obteyning pardon of his sins. Howbeit that honor is given to the bishop not
for his own sake, but because he is the minister of the people, making his
prayers or vows publicly to be performed in the name of the whole nation.
Mark the comparison, the prince is a minister of the people, as well as the
bishop. But because the bishop is a minister in holy matters, he is preferred
before the prince.

In Leuit. quaest. 1.
Theodoretus also writes thereof: Docet quanta fit sacerdotij dignitas, quam
vniuerso populo parem facit. Principem autem qui praetergressus fuerit legem
aliquam, non vitulum, sed hircum, aut capru^ anniculum offerre iubet: tam
procul abest a sacerdotali dignitate is, cui corporeu^ imperiu^ co^missum est.
(God) does teach how great the dignity of priesthod is, which (dignity) he made
equal with the whole people. But he commands the prince that shall
transgress any law, not to offer a calf, but a he got of one years age. so
far is he, to whom corporal power is committed, behind the priestly dignity.

If then the whole people be above the Prince (as who are hable to chose and to
make a Prince, when one lacks) and yet the bishop be equal with the whole
people, and also be set before it in the order of the law (as being made by God
himself, and not hable to be made by the people, because they can not
consecrate a bishop or give him spiritual power) what impudency is this, to
teach, that a prince by his own right and power may visit, judge, correct and
depose a bishop, who is now well seen to be far greater in the sight of God,
then the King himself? Let this much suffice to show that the Bishoplie or
pastor all authority of the Church is not only distincted from the tyrannical
kingdom of the unfaithful nations, but also from the moderate reign of what
so ever Kings, though they be christened.

One thing now is briefly to be touched, that, notwithstanding many Bishops be
evil, and use not their Office well, yet they loose it not thereby, but still we
are bound by Christ's commandment to do the things, Math. 23
not which they do, but which they say and teach to be done. For as S.
Augustine teaches, they that sit in the chair of unity (which I will prove
hereafter to be the chair of S. Peter) are constrained to teach the doctrine
of verity.

And in deed whereas the office or power is one thing, and the use thereof an
other thing, seeing the office is given before it be used, the evil use of it
which insueth afterward, ca^ not make void the former power: And so without al
question, the substance of the ^rimacie remains safe and sure in ^he Apostles
and their successors, al^hough they practice not their Primacie ^n such sort
as they ought to do.

Whereupon it follows, that it is ^arke false and ungodly, that these me^
^each, saying, not only that al primacie (...) forbidden in the Church of
Christ, ^ut also that they leese their Primacie, who ceasing to preach, do
abuse their ^ffice. For they in deed leese the merit of their Primacie, but
not the self Primacie, so long as the Church does ^olerate and permit them in
their places. Otherwise Caiphas being so evil a man as he was, Joan, 1^
Pontifex anni illius
had not been the Bishop of that year, which yet the Gospel shows to have been otherwise.

As concerning (which some are wont to object) that the Bishop of Rome does
not govern as a Pastor, but does bear a soueraintie as Princes of the world,
it has no color of truth, whether they respect the manner of coming by this
primacy, or the order i^ practicing the jurisdiction of it.







Distinct. 62. and 63. Actor. 1.
Again, although the faithful people and the princes also may crave, desire
and require a pastoure or Bishop, and may give their consent to the choice of
him, yet the right to choose as well ^he bishop of Rome as al other pastors,
Act. 14. and 20. Tit. 1. 1. Pet. 5. Greg. lib. 1 ep 55. and 56. and 77. Council.
8. c. 28.
^pperteineth only to ecclesiastical persons, as whose duty it is by Gods law
to ^lace and make priests in the cities and Churches where need is, to feed, to
rule, ^o confirm, or to displace, or tra^sfer, and generally to provide for the
flock, as Paulus, Barnabas, Titus and other bishops have do^, whereas the right
of choosing (...) Prince (where he is made by election) may as well or much
more apperteine to the common people, being the body of the realm, then to the
clergy or to the nobility alone.

When the bishop of Rome is thus chosen (that I may omit his temporal
dominion, which is but an accessorie to his bishoprike) doutlesse in his
Ecclesiastical government he uses not that force and power which worldly
Princes do. Greg lib. 1 ep. 45. disti^ct. 45. c. De Iudaeis.
He compels no man by violence (no not so much as the Jews that live in
Rome) to baptism, or to embrace the catholic faith of Christ, whereas worldly
princes may justly enforce the people whom they have under them, both to obey
their laws, and to live after their custom and manner.

2. quaest. 1. multi.
then to a medicine. For albeit he both plainly affirms, that heretics are
worthy of all punishment, yea of violent death it self (and that according to
Gods word) yea although he permits, Deuteronomy. 13.
and also (where he has any temporal dominion) procures schismatikes and
heretics to be punished with death, (partly because they are themselves
unworthy to live for their own heinous fault, partly also because they should
not infect others with their words, 2. Tim. 2.
which creep and fret like a cancre) ^et notwithstanding he does it not by
himself, nor by others as a bishop and pastor of Christ's flock, but he does
it by the ministry of others, as a temporal prince and lord, Psalm. 98.
even as Moses being one of the Priests of our Lord, was also master of the
civil government, and a disposer of war and peace, Exodus 17. Deuteronomy. 31.
as who commanded Iosue to fight against Amalech, and to be his successor in
the civil government.

Now whereas the Protestants deny Moses to have been a priest, and that by
pretense of the Hebrew text, they spaek therein against the express word of
God, and against the most ancient and best learned Fathers.

The word of God says: Psalm. ^8.
Moses and Aaron in sacerdotibus eius. Moses and Aaron are among the priests
of the Lord the Hebrew word is cohani^, the Greek (...), the Latin,
sacerdotibus, which is to say, those who make sacrifice. In co^mentarijs psalm.
98.
S. Augustine reasons that he was Sacerdos, a Sacrificer, because whereas he
was in all authority and power the very greatest among the Jews, yet he could
not be Mayor sacerdote, greater then he that has power to sacrifice.

S. Hierom (being I am sure as good an Hebrician, as M. Nowel) in his book
against Iouinian, Lib. 1. aduersus Iouinian.
groundeth the Priesthood of Moses upon the same text of the Psalm, making a
difference between Samuel the Leuite, and Moses and Aaron, who were Bisshops or
high Priests.

In oratione de Moyse and Aar.
S. Gregory Nazianzene is of the same mind, yea Dionysius Areopagita
confesses Moses to have been Primum legalium sacerdotum mystem ac ducem, De
Eccles. Hierar. c. 5.
The first cunning master and guide of the Priest of the law, qui fratrem Aaron
ad sacerdotale munus inu^gens, sub Deo principe sacerdotalem consecrationem
po^^ificabiliter consummauit. Who ^nointing his brother Aaron to the Priestlie
office (under God the chief of al) finished the Priestly consecration, (...),
Bisshoplike, or as Bisshops are wont to do.

Philo Iudeus writing three books of Moses life, De vita Mosis.
and having spoken before of his authority in civil matters, speaks in the
third of his Priesthod, which he could not justly do, except he had been a
Priest. But what need many words? What thing does in all the world belong to
a Priests office, which Moses did not? Exodus 20.
He took the law of God, and taught it the people, he preached to them, he
consecrated the high Bishop with his own hands, Exodus 28. and 29.
he erected an altar, and offered public sacrifice, he did pour the blood
upon the Altar, and sprinkled the garment of Aaron with it. And yet did he al
these Priestlie offices, being himself no Priest?

I marvel thatneither the letter of Gods word, nor the reason, and as it
were, the soul thereof, nor the authority of wise and learned men can move the
Protestants to confess, that Moses was in deed a priest and a sacrificer. But
if it be clear, that he was both a priest and a civil governor, using the
priestlie office in his own person, and prescribing to others when they should
fight, or punish malefactors: much more in the time of the new Testament, Heb.
10.
which must needs be as perfect a state as the old law, it is lawful for a
bishop, to have the right of both offices in him, governing the Ecclesiastical
state by his own personal ministry and the outward cares by the help of wise
me^. Gregorius l. 1. epi. 24
Quisquis rege^dis fratribus praeest, vacare funditus a curis exterioribus non
potest, sed tamen curandum magnopere est, ne ab iis immoderate deprimatur. Who
soever is set to rule his brethern, he can not utterly be uoide of ^xternal
cares. But it is diligently to be ^rouided, that he be not over pressed with
them.

But concerning the Ecclesiastical state, whereof I speak at this time, the
bishop of Rome neither condemns any man for heresy or schism to corporal
death in his own person, nor teaches, that any malefactors may be so
condemned of any other ecclesiastical person. Which thing being not rightly
understood of the most part of me^, has made them affirm, that the bishop of
Rome in matters of faith persuadeth his religion with fire and sword. 23.
quaest. 8. c. Sepe cu^ seque^t.
Which to be far otherwise, both the whole body of the Canon law declares,
and also experience testifies.

To go forward with our matter, this is the greatest difference between the
primacie of the Church, and the dominion of wordlie princes, that the temporal
princes have power only over the bodies, whereas the rulers of the Church,
Math. 18. 1. Cor. 5.
have power upon men's souls. They give the bodies of wicked men to corporal
death, these have power to cleanse the souls, and so to bring them to
everlasting salvation.

De Sacerdot. lib. 3.
Whereupon Saint Chrysostom says: Habent etiam terreni Principes vinculi
potestatem, verum corporum solum. Id autem quod dico sacerdotum vinculum ipsam
etiam animam contingit, atque ad coelos vsque peruadit. The earthly princes
have power to bind also, but only of the bodies. But the ba^d of the priests
whereof I speak, does touch the very soul, and reaches even to the heavens.
And not without a cause. For our Lord said to Saint Peter: Math. 16.
To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou
bindest upon the earth, shall be bound in the heavens, and whatsoever thou
loosest upon the earth, shall be loosed ^n the heavens.

To these words of Christ (which ^re derived to the Bishop of Rome by ^eanes
of the chaier of Saint Peter) ^he said bishop refers all his power: and
exercises it upon the souls of me^ ^oth in his own person, and by others,
Leo. ep. 82.
who are called to sustain part of ^he Ecclesiastical care and charge that is
committed chiefelie unto him, whereas nothwithstanding, the Princes of the
world appeal not ^o the law of the Gospel, neither ^n getting, nor in
governing, nor ^n establishing their Dominion and power.

Last of al, this is to be inquired and considered, whether the Bishop of Rome
does rule with such piety, lenity, affection, and desire to help others, and
to bring them to Christ, that he may seem to minister and to serve, rather then
to rule. And in good sooth, if he does it not, as it is certain that he synneth
greuouslie, so (for any such respect) he leeseth not his primacie, because the
humility and mercy of the governor does not so much appertain to the
substance of his authority, Joan. 11. Caiphas Pontifex.
as to the true perfection and merit of the man.

For like as they that preached Christ through envy and emulatio^ (that they
might raise adversity to S. Paul, Philip. 1.
who was in Prison) were notwithstanding true preachers, albeit they preached
with an evil intent and mind: so albeit the bishop of Rome did rule like a
potentate, and did seek his own glory, and not the glory of God, yet thereof
it can not be brought to pass, that he is not a true ruler and governor of
the Church. But it would well follow that he were an evil ruler. Of which sort of
men our Lord has said: Do those things which they say, Matthew. 23.
but do not those things which they do.

But what arrogant presumption is ^his, to thinck that the Pope does good
^eedes with an evil mind? If he give ^^ntle answers to them that in mat^ers
of dout ask his counsel, if he send ^orth good decrees, if he reconcile such
^s are at variaunce, if he provide care^^llie for the necessary affairs of
the church, why do we judge evil of that which is well done? Or if he does
evil ^t any time, what malice is it to scorn ^t his nakedness, Genes. 9.
and with lawghter ^o discover his shame?

It is evident to all that will see, that ^he bishop of Rome does show that
humility and zeal, which Christ requi^eth in the ruler of his Church. He
calls us nor bondslaues, nor servant, nor subjects, but all Princes he
saluteth gently, as sons, and bishops, as brethern. And as for his own
person, ^he writes not himself, neither Lord, neither universal bishop, nor
head of the Church, but servant of the servant of God. That even by his name
he may give al men to understand, that he is that greatest and chief ruler,
Luc. 22.
who is, as it were, a minister and servant.

And seeing he does and says that, which becomes the primate of the Church
both to say, and to do, it is our part to judge his well doing, by that which
is well said, rather then to sin against the holy ghost, whiles we desire to
wrest that to an evil sense malitiouslie, which was spoken and meant by him
charitablie.

^f the diverse senses which are in the holy scripture and namely about these
words (upon this rock I will build my Church) and which is the most literal and
proper sense of them. The third Chap.
AMONG many other things, wherein Gods word passes all other sciences, one is
most nota^le, in that not only the syllables and words which are written there,
do ^xpresse the meaning of the holy Ghost, ^ut also the things, which are told
and ^eported by those words, do again signify and mean an other thing. We
^eade that Abraham had two sons, ^he one born of Sara the freewoman, ^he
other of Agar the handmaiden. Which history being true in very deed according
as the words do sound, does again signify unto us a more deep mystery.

The son of Sara does betoken the new testament, Galath. 4.
or the promise of God made to his true childern by adoption* and Agar does
betoken the old testament, no less, then if it had been so written in express
words. Likewise, whereas as David says that the sound of the heavens is gone
forth into all the earth, Psalm. 18.
meaning, that al men may by the very order and course of the heavens see the
glory of God: S. Paul doubted not by the heavens to understand the Apostles and
Preachers: Romans 10.
whose sound he teaches, to have gone over all the earth.

So that the new testament was given and printed in the old, not only according
to the Prophecies there, which are fulfilled here, but also according to the
figures there, 1. Cor. 10.
which are verified here. And so the justice of God is marueilouslie revealed
from faith to faith, Romans 1.
from Patriarchs and Prophets to the Apostles and their disciples, from the
law to the Gospel, Joan. 1.
from Moses to Christ, to the end they should be inex^^sable, who beholding
such a divine and of writing, wherein things and ^eeds were ordained to be, as
words and letters unto us, would yet remain (...) their incredulity.

If then out of one sentence diverse ^^ue meanings may be gathered, we ^ust
know farther, that both those me^ings be not a like principal, but one of them
is the foundation and ground of ^he other. And therefore although ^oth be
found, as it were, in one buil^ing, yet seeing the one is before the other (at
the least in the order of place) ^e must exactly know, which is the first
meaning of the twain. Else we can ^euer be sure of the second, as the which
^acketh a sufficient ground to stay upon.

The first meaning is that, Hieron. in Amos. c. 4.
which the holy Ghost utters according to the first sense of the words: the
which is now called Literal, because it arises of ^he written letter rightly
understood. The other sense, which is builded thereupon, is called spiritual
because it is known rather by the spirit of God, then by the sound of the
writer letter. Now it skilleth so much to know which is the literal and which
is the spiritual sense of holy scripture, that the Literal sense is only of
force to convince any adversary withal, Augu. ad Vincentiu^ epist. 48.
who believes Gods word, whereas the spiritual sense (except it be revealed by
the holy Ghost) is such, as may be easily denied, because it has no
sufficient ground appering outwardly to man. For there may be many spiritual
senses given of some one sentence, and it is ever uncertain, which specially
of them al is meant of God in that place.

The literal sense of holy scripture is that, The literal sense.
which is first meant by the holy Ghost, not always according to the
gra^matical sound, but according to the most plain meaning of the speaker. For
example, when Christ says unto Peter: To thee I will give the keys of ^he
kingdom of heaven, the literal ^eaning is not, that Peter should re^eaue any
material keys of iron or of ^rasse. Keys. Isai. 22. Apoca. ^. and 3.
But by the keys (according to the ^hrase of holy scripture) is meant the
^ower, authority and right which Christ will give Peter in his Church. For as
^hey, who have the keys of a house, may by right open or shut the doors of
that house: so Peter bath right and power, to open or shut the kingdom of
heaven to us.

And as the delivering of the keys of a city among men, does betoke^ the
giving of the possession of that City to ^he governed by him, who receives the
keys: even so Peter has the militant Church, as it were, committed to his
government in this life by Christ. So that the literal sense is, I will give
thee the power and authority to govern my Church for the salvation of souls.

Likewise when it is said, Math. 2^.
thou art Peter, I call not the literal sense, thou art a rock or a graet
stone, but thou art that toward my Church, which a stone is toward the house
that is built upon that stone.

It is farther to be considered, that the literal sense being once agreed upon,
there lies hidden in that sense many times an other more profou^d sense also,
the which is not directly and plainly uttered, but it is inferred and gathered
by the force of argument. God has been called of old time the God of Abraham,
Exodus 4.
of Isaac and of Jacob. Neither does any man dout of the first meaning of those
words, which is, that God acknowlegeth himself to have chosen those three men
to his servants, and does witness, that they did in deed serve him.

But that in these words there lies hidden a strong argument, to prove the
resurrection: by that, I say, depends of the literal sense also, but not such
as is seen straight ways, but only it is conceived by discourse. For God is
not the God of dead things. Math. 22.
But he is God of Abraham: therefore Abraham is not dead. Abraham is a man
consisting of body and soul. If Abraham then live and yet his body be dead,
his body must rise again, to the^d God may justly be called the God of whole
Abraham. ergo in that God is called the God of Abraham, it is showed (by
discourse) that the bodies of men shall be reised to life again.

After this sort the consubstantiality of Christ with God the Father may be
well proved out of the holy scriptures. Joan. 1.
Lucae 1. Math. 26.
Item the perpetual virginity of our Lady, transubstantiation, the sacrifice
of the mass, purgatory and diverse other matters, 1. Cor. 10. Math. 12.
which be not distinctly named there.

At the length to come to our purpose, there are found in the ancient fathers
at the lest four diverse senses of these words, upon this rock I will build my
Church: of the which those only are of force to prove any thing by, which are
literal.

upon Christ. Retract. lib, 1. c. 21
And that S. Augustine does follow, as a probable sense, but not as the only
sense. For that in deed, but more also is meant in this place.

Origenes in Math.
is only spiritual, and therefore of no great force to prove any thing by.

Chrysostom. in Math.
which is a true sense, but it is not all the whole sense of those words.

Joan 1. Math. 16. Joan. 21.
that is to say, through the promise of Christ which is past, and the faithful
confession of his godhead, which is presently made, and the power of feedi^g
his ^hepe, which then was to come, is this ^ock upon which the Church is built.

The first sense can not be all the whole sense, because then all the other
three senses were void. For if the Church be meant to be only built upon Christ
then is the Church built neither upon the faith of Peter nor upon Peter
himself, nor upon any disciple of Christ.

Again the word (thou) which goes before does not well agree with Christ, but
only with Peter: Neither does the word, I will build, aedificabo
which folweth after, well agree with Christ alone. For it were not properly
said at Cesarea where Christ then was, I will build my church upon Christ,
upon whom it had been already built from the time of his incarnation.

Concerning the second sense, no Disciple of Christ is there literallie either
spoken unto, or spoken of, beside Simon the Son of Iona.

Therefore the sense of Origin has no sufficient ground in the letter of Gods
word.

Thirdly the faith, which Peter has confessed, is not the only rock,
whereupon the Church shall be built. For the^ it had been built, upon the faith of
John Baptist before this time. Joan. 1.
Again seeing the said faith has been already confessed by Peter himself
saying: Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, to what purpose is the
building yet also differred? Why is it said, I will build my Church upon this
Rock, and not rather, I have built it, or I do build it upon this Rock?

For if two things only are necessary, the one, which may be the Rock or
foundation, which is now said to be faith, the other, which is the building of
the Church upon that Kocke: seeing the foundation is already laid, in that the
faith is confessed: And seeing the Church is present (for Christ even the^ had a
Church of his own) why is the building yet put of, until an other time, but
that there is an other thing beside faith requisite to the same building?

But if (as the very truth is) Peter himself, concerning his office, be
pronounced this Rock, and that not only in respect of his faith (although it be
a very principal point) but also in respect both of the promise past, wherein
it was said (thou shall be called Peter) and of the authority of feeding
Christ's sheep, which is to come: Joan. 1. and 21.
then all absurdities are avoided, and all the former truths are perfitlie
contained in this last sense.

For if Peter be this rock, then Christ

being in himself, is also co^curring (as a certain rock for his part) unto the
building

Seeing then this last sense is most perfect, and contains all the other
senses, not being it self fully contained in any of them, out of al
controversy none other is so literal, so full, so true, as this, to wit, that
Peter, confessing the true faith, with respect of such authority, as shall be
afterward given to him, is this Rock, whereupon the Church shall be built. I
wis^h in the sight of God that, malice being laid apart, any reasonable man
would now consider, In his Reply. 221.
what M. Jewel and his adhearents have done in this behalf.

He forsaking the most literal sense fall, and minglng three opinions (of ^hese
four) in one, not regarding to ^tte every thing in his proper place, ^oth
seek to confou^d the Reader with ^he multitude of words, and with the ^ame of
the Fathers, whom he most ^hamefully abuses.

But if there be truth in M. Jewel, or ^n his adhearents, let him or any of
them descend particularly to discuss ^he meaning of Christ, with
alcircumstances belonging thereunto as by Gods grace I will do to my poor
ability. And that the discourse, which follows, may be the more easily
perceived, this is the sum of it.

My intent is to prove, that not only Christ, nor only the faithful confession
of Peter, but Peter himself with respect of his confession, and of such other
authority as God gave him, was this Rock, whereupon Christ said he would
build his Church, meaning that part of his Church which wandereth in this
life.

Simon, that he should be called Peter, Joan. 1.
when he had not yet confessed, to thend he might confess the more strongly
as a rock.

Peter before he had confessed: Marci 3.
so that he was this far forward in being the rock before his confession.

Math. 16. Apoc. 21.
but also such a rock, wherevpo^ he would build his Church. For every Apostle
was a rock in his kind, but none beside Peter and the Successors in his office
was this kind of Rock, whereof Christ now speaks.

Lucae 22.
even so far that he was ^idde to strengthen his brethern after his
conversion from the denial of christ.

Last of all, to show what kind of

The promise of the name of Peter

The giving of the name was the

The confession of Christ's godhead

The promise to have the Church

The prayer of Christ for Peter's faith,

The power to feed Christ's sheep Joan. 21. Luc. 10.
as should stay up his Church by teaching and ruling the faithful, as whose
voice the sheep should be bound to hear under pain of damnation.

Al these things concurring together, cause Peter to be this rock whereupon the
milita^t Church is built. Whereof I will now entreat more at large.

The IIII. Chap. Diverse reasons are alleged to prove (cheefely by the
circumstance and conference of holy scripture) that these words (thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church) have this literal meaning,
upon the, o Peter, being first made a rock, to thend thou should stoutly
confess the faith, and so confessing it, I will build my Church.
WHen our Lord first saw Simon the son of Iona, beholding him, he said: thou
art Simon the son of Iona, Joan. 1.
thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation Peter, that is a great
stone or a rock. By these words a new name is before hand promised to Simon,
whereupon Saint Chrysostom says: in Joan. hom. 18.
Honorifice de eo praedicit. Certa ^utem praedictio futurorum, im^ortalis Dei
duntaxat opus est. Animaduertendum autem, quod ^on omnia quae euentura ei erant
^oc primo co^gressu praedixit. No^ ^enim appellauit eum Petrum, non dixit super
hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, sed dixit: Tu vo ^caberis Cephas. illud
enim maioris erat and potestatis, nec no^ etiam auctoritatis. Christ does
forespe^k honorably of him. For the certain foretelling of things to come, is
the worck only of the immortal God. It is to be noted, that Christ did not
foretell at this first meeting al things which should come to pass afterward to
hi^. The promise of the name goes before the name.
For he did not call hi^ Peter neither did he say, upon this rock I will build
my Church. But he said, Thou shall be called Cephas. For that was both of more
power, and also of more authority. Likewise S. Cyrillus: In Joan. lib. 2. c. 2
Nec Simo^ fore ia^ nome^ sibi, sed Petrus praedicit, vocabulo ipso commode
significans quod in eo, tanquam in petra lapideque firmissimo suam esset
aedificaturus Ecclesiam. And he tells a fore hand, that his name shall be
Peter, or a rock, and not now Simon, signifiyng, by the very word that he would
build his Church on him, as on a rock and a most sure stone. Theophilact and
Euthimius are of the same mind. In. 1. cap. Joan.


By these fathers we learn, that this prediction or promise of Peter's name, is
a thing which agrees with the building of the Church which is to come. These
words then, Thou shall be called Peter, are words of Prophecy or of promise. A
word of promise spoken by God is effectual to worck all those means, which are
necessary for the performance of it. For as when God had once said Sara vxor
tua pariet tibi filiu^, Genes. 17.
Sara thy wife shall bring thee forth a son, that self word (as S. Chry^^stom
notes) wrought both in Abra^am and in Sara the power and habi^itie to begette
and to conceive a child, In cap. 9. ad Romans Genes. 21.
^otwithsta^ding that naturally through ^ld age they were unapt thereunto,
^ight so, these words Thou shall be ^alled Peter, wrought in Simon the ^ffect
whereby he might believe, and in due time like a rock confess Christ to ^e the
Son of Cod, how far soever he bad naturally been otherwise from so high a
grace.

And as, though Abraham did accompany with his wife Sara for the begetting of
Isaac, yet the birth of the child is not imputed to their lying together, but
unto the word of promise, wherein it had be^ said. Genes. 17. Romans 9.
Sara shall bring thee forth a child: even so, albeit Simon be made Peter, to
the end he may confess, and therefore not without confessing Christ to be the
Son of God, yet his being Peter (concerning the efficie^t cause thereof) is no
less to be imputed to this former word of promise, Joan. 1.
tho^ shall be called Peter, then unto the faithful confession which he made
afterward of Christ's Godhead.

For the first cause was the promise, and it wrought the second cause of the
confession. This matter is put out of a^^ question, if we consider, that this
promise (^^ow shall be called Peter) was fulfilled before the confession wa^
made. For when Christ chose to hi^ twelve Apostles, then as S. Marc^ says,
Marc. 3. Luc. ^.
he gave to Simon the name of Peter, and S. Luke tells the same thing.
Whereupon Euthimius writes. Verefimile est (apud Ioanne^) Chrisstum dixisse
vocandum esse Petru^ nunc autem vocare eum Petrum. It is like to be true, that
in Saint John Christ said, he should be called Peter: and that he now calls
him Peter. neither does God use to give the name, without giving also the thing
which is meant by the name. For his ^alling not words always have their ^ffect
joined with them.

Therefore when Simon was reallie ^amed Peter, then was he in deed made the
rock. And seeing he had not as yet confessed, the confession which follows,
does not either only or first make him to be the rock. But he is already by
Christ's promise well entered to be made the rock, to thend he may confess
the more stedilie and surely.

And therefore his confession is a most sure rock, because it proceeds from
him who was before made the rock to thend ^he should confess most stedily.
Whereupon when Christ asked, whom the faithful said him to be, then the rock
did his duty. For (as Cyrillus says) Peter as being the Prince and head of
the rest, first cried out, In Joan. lib. 12. ca. 64. princeps and ca put.
saying: thou art Christ the Son of the living God, to whom Christ answered,
and I say to thee, thou art Peter, to wit, of the quality of a rock, and
upon this rock I will build my Church.

Lo, Peter cried out or confessed as being the head. He was then the head by
some means, even before his confession, that is to say, by promise and name.
This much being granted (the which is the very order and express drift of the
Gospel) it will farther follow that seeing these words, Math. 16
upon this rock I will build my Church, depend upon these other: Thou art Peter,
(for they are i^mediatly inferred upon the^, and joined to them with a
copulative coniunctio^ and, Et super hanc Petram.
and) it will follow I say, that these words, upon this rock I will build my
Church, are to be understood according to these, thou art Peter.

And seeing these words, thou art Peter, depend no less principally upon the
former prophecy and promise of Christ wherein it was said, thou shall be
called Peter, then upon the confession which Simon made afterward of Christ's
Godhead, it is certain, that the ^ther words also, upon this rock I will ^uild
my Church (concerning the nature and order of a certain cause effici^nt) depend
no less principally upon those former words (thou shall be called Peter) then
upon the confession of Christ's godhead: so that the first coef^cient cause,
why the Church is builded upon this rock, is not the present co^fes^io^ of
Simon, but the vocation and pro^ise of Christ, which was long before made unto
Simon. Which thing being ^rue, then Christ will build his Church upon this rock,
not in deed without the grace of confessing, but yet not any rather by the
force of the confession, then of the promise. Joan. 1.
For S. John Baptist confessed also but because he confessed, not as one that
was promised to be this rock, the Church was not built upon him: but to Peter
the promise was made before the confession, and it was the first cause of the
confession therefore the promise was the chief and first cause of buildi^g the
church upon this role.

If it were so, then the whole meaning of these words, The whole sense of
Christ's words.
upon this Rock I will build my Church, is this, upon him who therefore
strongly and firmly confesses my true faith, because he was before promised
to be called this Rock, or (which is more) upon him who in part is already
this rock, and promised to be called this rock, so confesses my Godhead like
a most sure Rock, upon him I will build mie Church.

The which most true and certain sense standing, the only confession of the
faith makes no man to be this Rock, whereupon Christ will build his Church,
except it be a confession, which is wrought by the force of a promise to be
called and made a rock going before it. The which promise (of being assured to
be called Peter) for as much as it belonged literally to no Prophet, to no
disciple, to no Apostle, but only to Simon the son of Iona, for that cause,
Joan. 1.
the whole militant Church is at this time promised to be built upon none other
man's faith or confession, beside only upon the confession of S. Peter himself,
and of those who succeed in Peter's chair. For (as God willing I shall prove
hereafter) every bishop of Rome is that for his time unto the militant Church
of Christ, which Peter once was.

Christ then intending to confirm and to make perfect his promise, wherein he
had said, thou shall be called Peter, asked his Apostles, whom they thought, or
rather said and confessed him to be. S. Peter having a revelation from God the
father, to thend Christ's former promise might be thoroughly and perfitly
verified, says: thou art Christ the Son of the living God, that is to say,
thou art not only a prophet, or a So^ by adoption, but thou art the natural Son
of the only true God.

Here it is principally to be noted, that when S. Peter confessed Christ to be
the Son of God, Peter confessed the rock.
that then he confessed the rock of rocks, which only Christ is. Neither does
any man deny but that these words (thou art the Son of the living God)
appertein only to Jesus Christ. But our question is not of these words, but
concerning the words which Christ spoke afterward unto Peter. For when Peter
had confessed the chief rock, then that chief rock showed, that Peter had
played also the rock saying to him after this sort: Hilarious de Trinit. lib. 6.
Simon the Son of Iona, thou art happy. as S. Peter said Christ to be the Son
of God, so Christ calls S. Peter the Son of Iona, thereby declari^g, that as
Peter was naturally the Son of John his father, so Christ is the natural son of
God his father and as Peter speaks only to Christ at this time and to none
other person: so does Christ only speak to Peter, and to none other person.
Christ after this meani^g is alone the son of God, and Simo^ alone after this
meani^g is Peter. Christ goes forward calli^g Peter happy, because flesh and
blud did not reveal Christ's godhead unto him, but Christ's father who is in
heaven. So that S. Peter only at this time had this high revelation, and to hi^
only Christ directs his words. And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter.
What? was S. John, or S. Matthew the son of Iona? no truly or had any other man
in the earth this revelation at this time beside Simo^ the son of Iona? no
verily: if we consider the first and most literal sense. Thou only art Peter,
Peter alone is this rock
because thou alone both had this name promised to the when Christ first saw
thee, thou alone had it given thee, when thou wast chosen an Apostle, and
thou alone have now confessed me to be God by nature, and to thee alone I say,
Thou art Peter.

It is otherwise most true that Christ is the rock, inco^parably above Peter,
Christ the rock.
and that the whole universal church is built upon Christ far more excelle^tly
then any part thereof is built upon any mortal man. For if we did not believe so
much of Christ, we could not now believe that he were able by his only word and
promise to make Peter also to be a Rock in his kind.

The confession is a rock.
It is also true, that the confession of S. Peter is a rock, and in respect also
of that confession, Simo^ is called Peter. And in respect of the same
confession, the Church is built upon Simon. But as upon one who confesses,
because he had before the promise to be called Peter made to him, and the name
it self given him. Al things which are true, are not every where principally
meant, or intended alone of the holy ghost.

We now seek the literal and first maening of these words, upon this rock I
will build my Church, and not of these, thou art Christ the son of the living
God. In his Reply fol. 221.
And yet M. Jewel professing to dispute of these words, upon this rock I will
build my Church, privily conueieth the disputation from them, unto those other,
Thou art Christ the Son of God. But I beseech the good Reader to mark the
point, and not to suffer him self to be deceived in so weighty a matter.

At the length to gather al my reasons together, I say, that the most literal
sense of these words, upon this rock, is to signify, that upon S. Peter, as
upon a man called by office to confess the true faith, Christ will build his
Church.

First, Vocaberis. 1.
because he alone is promised to be called Peter.

Secondly, Imposuit nomen. 2.
because he alone at the choice of the twelve, is named Peter.

Thirdly, because Christ speaks Tibi.
saying: Et ego dico tibi, and I say to thee. Thereby showing that the words
which follow, belong to S. Peter alone.

Fourthly, because Christ speaks Tu es Petrus, Thou art Peter. Tu es.
I suppose there is a difference between, I am Peter, and, thou art Peter. Most
true it is, that Christ is Peter, that is to say, a rock. And most true it is,
that Simon in confessing Christ to be the son of God, confessed the principal
and only natural rock. But now that truth is not first of al and chiefly
uttered by Christ, although it were before uttered by Simo^, but of Christ it
is now said most literally, thou art, thou Isai, art Peter.

Thou, and This, do answer one to the other. Super hanc.
Both are Pronounes, both show a thing reallie present to the understanding of
the hearer. As therefore, Thou, apperteineth most certainly to S. Peter, so
does also the Pronoun, this, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock (which thou
art) I will build my Churh.

Petrus and Petra, do most literallie agree, Petram
in so much that in Greek (...), by which name Simon Peter is called, does
signify a Rock. And in Latin Petrus is named of Petra, as if a man said in
English, thou art stony, or of the nature of a Rock, and upon this stone or
rock I will build my Church. Who can deny but Thou and This, stony, and stone*
be referred al to one person?

Hitherto I have considered, thou, Conference.
this, and rock, severally. Now let us join them altogether. It is first
said, thou art Peter, to the intent it might be known whereunto the word
(this rock) belongs. For the nature of the Pronoun is, The Pronoune.
most properly to declare a certainty, either presently pointed unto before the
eye, or next of al named and described. Thou art stony and upon this stone.
Which this, If not this, which was last named? For albeit Christ be above al
things the rock and corner stone, 1. Cor. 10. Ephesians. 2.
yet he was not at this time named so. This rock does refer it self to one
certain rock which is poi^ted unto one way or other. But no material rock is
pointed unto naturally and in deed (for no such was then present or minded)
therefore it is a Rock by a Metaphore which is described. He is a rock by a
similitude.


And seeing it is not only said, I will build upon a rock, but also upon this
rock, that rock must be understood to be such a one, as before was showed.
But none was before showed, except he were named (for at this time all that is
showed, is showed by words) so that for as much as it was said in words to S.
Peter only, Thou art Peter, or a rock, when it follows upon this rock, it
must needs be meant most literally, Upon thee.
upon thee will I build my Church. Yet not absolutely upon thee, as thou art a
bare man, but as thou art Peter: and thou art Peter, to the end thou should
confess me to be the son of God. And thou did confess me, because I
promised thee that thou should be called Peter, and because my father did
reveal it to thee, therefore upon this rock, which thou art made by Grace,
I will build my Church.

It is said in the time to come, Aedificabo. In Cant. conticoru^ expsello.
I will build, which declares a building as yet not perfitly made, but only
promised, as also Theodoretus has noted. But the Church was built upon Christ
the great rock, concerning his divine nature from the beginning, and
concerning his human nature from the first moment of his incarnation.
Wherefore that kind of building Gods Church upon Christ, was already past.
Likewise the confession of S. Peter, was already made and past.

But the building whereof Christ speaks, is to come. I will or shall build my
Church upon this Rock. Therefore this rock is meant chiefly at this time, S.
Peter, in such respect as he may no less hereafter confess the true faith,
then he had done already.

Ecclesia^ meam.
Mark these words, my Church. It was Christ's Church already. It was his, when
he spoke the words, and before also. He therefore does not now speak of
planting or founding it upon him self, but of making one to be the Rock and
Head thereof, who hitherto was not the Rock and head but only by promise and
hope.

For whiles Christ was visible upon the earth, he governed al things, not only
by his power, but also by his visible presence, by preaching and governing the
flock in his own person, being for the time the visible Rock and Head.

Joan. 21.
Pasce agnos meos, pasce oues meas, Feed my lambs, feed my sheep. At which
time that power of being the head stone of Gods Militant Church, Holy
scriptures are conferred.
next unto Christ, was most perfectlye given, which was before minded when
^t was said: upon this Rock I will ^uilo my Church.

For, to be the Pastor and Governor of Christ's flock, and by the open
confession of the faith to keep it from straying into false doctrines, and
heresies, that is to be the rock, whereupon Christ will build his Church. Who
sees not, that so long as the chief shepherd is acknowleged, and obeyed, Cyp.
ep. 3. lib. 1.
all Christendom must needs believe and say one thing? Now by believing and
woorshipping one truth, the Church is built up from the lowest to the high^est,
from earth to heaven.

To show that this Rock is meant of S. Peter, it follows: Et tibi dabo.
and to thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Behold, if this
Rock were not meant to be S. Peter, Christ should in his words run in, and
out, speaking now to S. Peter, and now to him self.

He begins with S. Peter, saying: thou art Peter, he ends with him,
saying: and to thee will I give the keys, between which two sayings, these
words (upon this rock) do stand. Which being so, reason would, that we draw
not the middle words from the first and the last, but that we say, S. Peter
concerning his office, whereby he bears the keys, to be this Rock, whereupon
Christ promises to build his Church.

The property of a rock is, to withstand al tempests of fluddes and winds,
Math. 7.
and so neither to fail it self, and to strengthen the house built upon it.
But Christ said in an other place to S. Peter: Luc. 22.
Ego rogaui pro te, vt non deficiat fides tua. et tu aliqua^do conuersus
confirma fratres tuos. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and
thou being once converted, strengthen thy brethern.

Behold, thou art Peter, because of my promise, Holy scriptures are co^ferred.
and thereby thou did receive the gift of the right faith, which thou have
confessed of me. I have prayed, that thy faith may not fail, yea it shall be
so far from failing, that I bid thee, when thou art converted, to stablish,
confirm, and strengthen thy brethern. For of all thy Brethern, thou art the
chief and the stro^gest Rock, through my prayer.

If then it be out of all question, that S. Peter's faith does not fail, and
that he has power to strengthen his brethern, seeing these are the properties
of a Rock, not to fail it self, Math. 7.
but to strengthen the whole house built upon it, against raines, fluddes, and
winds, it is evident by the order of Christ's words, by Grammar, by reason,
and by conference of holy scriptures, that S. Peter is called This Rock, when
it is said to him: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church.

And hell gates shall not prevail against it. Epiphan. in Anchoratu. Origenes in
Matthew.
That is to say, the power and strength of heresies shall prevail neither
against thee, who art the Rock, nor against my Church. Not against thee, being
the Rock, because I have prayed for Peter's faith: not against my Church,
because so long as the Rock whereupon it is built, is sure, the Church it self,
which stands upon the same Rock, is sure also. These words can not be well
referred to Christ only, the chief Rock. For it is Christ the chief Rock, who
warranteth the assurance of the under Rock. And so it is Peter, who is
assured, that hell gates shall not preuail against him, nor against the Militant
Church, which is built upon him.

S. Cyrillus, Theodoretus, Prosper, Theophilact, with a great number of the
Fathers of the fourth General Counsel, who teach, S. Peter to be this Rock as I
will show anon.

Neither do they only speak it, but

Join the practice of fiftene hundred

Join so many General Councels, as this Rock, Tripart. lib. 4. c. 9.
which S. Peter is, that they were all either aucthorised by his Successors,
or else for lack thereof disanulled as unlawful.

Add to the former reasons, that chiefllie upon the confession alone, it must
needs have been built upon the confession of S. John Baptist, before it was
built upon the confession of Peter. Joan. 1.
For John Baptist confessed Christ to be the Lamb of God who took away the
sins of the world, before S. Peter, and in more words then S. Peter did.
But the ground of Christ's building is the Rock, which Peter is, and S. John
Baptist is not that kind of Rock. And the Church is now promised to be builte
upon his confession, who is first made the Rock, and who being the Rock, does
strongly confess.

(upon this Rock I will build my Church) are perfitely contained in this one
sense, wherein the church is promised to be built upon Peter. For so it is
proved to be built upon Christ, because he is so universal a Rock of the
whole Church, that he makes Peter a particular Rock of the Militant Church.
In Peter is the faith which he confessed, in him are all faithful Disciples
comprehended. But in none other sense all the ancient Fathers interpretation
can be saved upright.

Moreover, seeing it is clear, that Matthew. 7.
Apocalip. 21.
and thereby they are also certain Rocks, upon which the Church is built:
how can Peter be denied to be a Rock and foundation of the Church for his part?

Now, that his part does pass all other men's parts, I prove it most
evidently, because the names of things are tokens of the things them selves,
and that most specially, when God himself gives the name, as now he has
done. For if the thing were not so before, as he names it, at the least his
naming it so, makes it to be that, which he names it.

Therefore seeing only Peter after Christ bears the name of a rock, it is
out of all question, that the said name is a sign of his being the rock in
some such sort, as none other Apostle is the rock. But the faithful are built
upon the foundation of all the Apostles and Prophets (as S. Paul says) and
they are the Church of Christ: Ephesians. 1.
therefore the Church of Christ is much more notably built upon S. Peter above
all others, because he is the rock and foundation above al others.

And whereas by the power Apostolic all the Apostles were equal, certainly S.
Peter is this rock, Leo sermon. 2. de anniuers. assumpt.
not only as an Apostle (wherein he had many fellows) but also as a chief
bishop, and as the primate of all Bisshops and Priests, wherein he was
perelesse, being the head and top of all others in that sense as I shall declare
hereafter. In the which high priesthod only Peter has a successor, who
sits in the Sea of Rome, to continue a Rock for ever: since Christ's militant
Church needs to be always built up by visible preaching and government.

This my interpretation is not a little (upon this rock I will build my Church)
ought to have. Ievvel in his Reply fol. ^21.
But sometime they make Christ to be this rock, sometime the confession of the
faith, sometime every disciple, not regarding what they grant or hold, so
that the truth be denied.

But it were reason they told us some one chief literal sense whereunto they
would stand. Which if they did, all the world should perceive their vanity. For
if all our reasons were not divided to answer diverse senses, as now they are,
but were driven al to one purpose: that opinion of theirs should have been much
more easily destroyed and utterly vanquished, which never the less is now
sufficiently disproued by the circumstance and conference of holy scripture.

It is proved out of the aunciene Fathers, that S. Peter is this rock,
whereupon the Church was promised to be built, otherwise then M. Jewel
affirms. The V. Chap.
THE chief ground of our disputation, are the words of Christ spoken to Simon
his Apostle, Matthew. 16
wherein he said. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build mie Church.
By the force of which words the Catholics believe and teach, that S. Peter was
made a rock, whereupon Christ would build his Church.

And because it appears afterward, that the building of Christ's Church upon
Saint Peter, was the making of him to be the chief shepherd of Christ's whole
flock, the Catholics teach, that who soever succedeth S. Peter in the office
of the chief shepherd (as the bishop of Rome does) that he is also the rock,
whereupon Christ's Church is builded for the time. Against which doctrine M.
Jewel writes after this sort.

Ievvel. In the 4. Article. Page 221.
For as much as they seem to make greatest account of those words of Christ,
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, therefore for answer
hereunto, understand thou, good Reader, that, the old Catholic Fathers have
written and pronounced, not any mortal man as Peter was, but Christ himself the
Son of God, to be this rock.

Sander. Note (good Reader) that we dispute not at this time, whether Christ be
absolutely the chiefest and most principal rock, 1. Cor. 10.
or no (for both sides confess that thing) but whether S. Peter for his part
also, be not this Rock, whereof Christ at this time says, upon this rock I
will build my Church. M. Jewel denies S. Peter to be this rock. I will prove
(God willing) directly against M. Jewels words, that the old Catholic fathers
have written and pronounced not only Christ the son of God, but also even such a
mortal man as S. Peter was, to be this rock, whereof Christ at that time

In Decre. epist. Tomo 1. Co^cilior.
First, omitting to speak of Anacletus of Pius, of Fabianus, and of other holy
bishops of Rome (whose testimonies are yet most unjustly rejected of ^he
Protestants, seeing they suffered death, and not only with their word, but also
with their blud bare witness to Christ's name) I will only bring forth such
^uthorities, as they themselves do not ^eiect.

Tertullian says: De praescriptioni aduersus haret.
Latuit aliquid Petrum aedificandae Ecclesiae Petram ^dictu^? was any thing
privy from Peter, being called the Rock of the Church, which was to be
builded? Here is Peter affirmed to have been called Petra, the rock. The rock
of the Church.
Yea the rock of the Church, and of the Church which Christ intended to build:
so that the building by Tertullians judgment was yet to come, verily because
it was perfitly built upon S. Peter, when Christ said unto him above al others,
Joan. 21. Plus his.
feed my sheep.

Now good Reader, confer this place of Tertullian with that which M. Jewel
affirmed, and see* what shall I call it? I say no more, but see that M. Jewel
w^^ ouerseen, and trust him no more.

De consummat. mundi.
Hippolitus the martyr says: Princeps Petrus, fidei petra, Peter is the chief,
the rock of faith.

Homil. 5. in Exodus
Origenes calls S. Peter Magnum illud Ecclesiae fundamentum, and petram
solidissimam, super quam Christus fundauit Ecclesiam, that great foundation and
most Massy and sound rock, whereupon Christ has builded the Church.

Lib. 1. epi. 3. and lib. 4 epist. 9.
S. Cyprian agrees with them, saying. Super Petrum aedificata a Domino fuerat
ecclesia, the Church was built of our Lord upon Peter. Christ our Lord said,
upon this rock will I build my Church. Saint Cyprian says, our Lord has
built his Church upon Peter. Therefore S. Cyprian understood Peter to be this
rock. And consequently some excellent old Catholic Fathers understood a
mortal man, as S. Peter was to be this Rock whereof Christ speaks.

S. Hilarie writes: Libr. 6. de Trinit.
Petrus aedi^cationi Ecclesiae subiacet. Peter ^eth under the building of the
Chur^he. To lie under the building, is to ^e the foundation, which foundation
^ither is a Rock, or in the steed of (...) Rock to the house which is built
vp^on it.

Likewise in an other place he cries: In cap. Math. 1^.
(...) in nuncupatione noui nomi^is soelix Ecclesiae fundamentum, dignaque
aedificatione illius pe^ra, quae infernas leges dissolue^et. O happy foundation
of the Church, in having the new name pronounced of thee, and o Rock worthy
of the building of that (Church) which should undo the laws of hell. The new
name is the name of Peter which was newly given to Simon, that he might be
thereby the happy foundation and worthy Rock whereupon the Church should be
built.

Sermon 68.
S. Ambrose reciting the authority of these words, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church, thereupon says: Si ergo Petrus petra est,
super quam aedificatur Ecclesia, recte prius pedes sanat, vt sicut in Ecclesia
fidei fundamentu^ continet, ita and in homine membroru^ fundamenta co^firmet.
Seeing then Peter is the rock wherevpo^ the Church is built, he does well to
heal first the feet, that even as he does contain the foundation of faith in
the Church, so likewise in the man he may confirm the foundacions of his
members.

In Concio. de poenit.
S. Basil speaking of this very confession of S. Peter, writes thus: Petrus
petra est propter Christum petra^. Largitur enim Jesus suas dignitates. petra
est, petram facit. Peter is a Rock through Christ the Rock. For Jesus gives
to Peter his own dignities. He is the Rock, and makes (an other) to be the
Rock. What can be said more plainly against M. Jewel? Not only Christ is the
Rock, but he makes Peter also a Rock.

S. Hierom shows by an example, Hieron. in Matt. 16. Joan. 1.
that as Christ being the light, gave to the Apostles, that they should be
called the light of the world, Matt. 5.
and as they had of our Lord other names: even so to Simon, who believed in
Christ the Rock, he gave the name of Peter, and consequently he says, that
(according to the Metaphore of a Rock) it is well said to him, Super te. Upon
thee
Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam super te. I will build my Church upon thee. Behold,
the Church was promised to be built upon a mortal man as Peter was.

S. Chrysostom writes thus: Ex Var. in Math. locis hom. 27.
Princeps Apostolorum Petrus, super quem Christus fundauit Ecclesia^, vere
immobilis petra, and firma co^fessio. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, upon
whom Christ has founded the Church, a very immouable Rock, and a strong
confession.

Note.
It is much to be noted, that S. Chrysostom calls S. Peter the confession:
whereby we may understand, when S. Chrysostom says in an other place, that
the Church is builte upon the faith of confession, he means upon the faith
of Peter confessing, or, making the confession. So that, not every man's, but
Peter's confession is this rock, whereupon the Church is promised to be built.

Epiphanius doubted not to write of S. Peter in this wise: In Anchoratu.
Ipse Dominus co^stituit eu^ primu^ Apostoloru^, petram firma^, super qua^
Ecclesia Del aedificata est, and portae inferoru^ non valebunt aduersus illa^:
portae aute^ inferoru^ sunt haereses and haeresiarchae. Iuxta oe^m enim modu^
in ipio firmata est fides qui accepit clauem coeloru^. Our Lord himself did
constitute him chief of the Apostles, a firm and sure Rock, upon which the
Church of God is builte, and the gates of hell shall not avail against it: for
the gates of hell, are heresies, and the fou^ders of heresies. For by all means
the faith is established in hi^, who has received the keys of heaven.

And in that I may go forewarde with the Grecia^s, in Cyrillus we read: In
Joan. lib. 2. c. 12.
Nec Simon fore iam nomen sibi sed Petrus praedicit, In eo. In him.
vocabulo ipso commode significans, quod in eo tanque in petra lapideque
firmissimo suam esset aedificaturus ecclesiam. Christ did foretell, that his
name should not now be Simon, but Peter, signifieng fitly by the very name, that
he would build his church in hi^, as in a most sure stone and rock. And yet M.
Jewel could see none of these testimonies.

Psellus is alleged of Theodoretus after this sort. Theodoret in Cant. Canticet.
In Petro Apostoloru^ pri^cipe Dominus in Eua^gelijs se ecclesia^ suam
aedificaturu^ promisit. Our Lord in the Gospels has promised that he will build
his Church in Peter the prince of the Apostles. In Peter.
Note that these words which do promise a building, can not properly belong
first of all to Christ: for upon him the Church was already built.

In Iosaphat. and Barl.
Damascene has also this saying. Princeps Apostolorum Petrus, fidei petra.
Peter the prince (or chief) of the Apostles, the rock of faith.

In Luc. 22
How plain are these words of Theophilact, which he speaks in Christ's name?
post me, Ecclesiae petra es and firmamentum. Thou art the rock and stay of the
Church after me.

In. Matt. 16.
Euthymius: fidei petra futurus es, sieve, te pona^ fundame^tu^ credentiu^:
aedificabo super te Ecclesia^ meam. Thou shall be the rock of faith, or, I will
make thee the foundation of the faithful: upon thee I will build my Church.
This much the Grecians.

Let us now return to the Latins. S. Augustine did ever account it probable,
In Joan. Tractat. 124.
to say, that the church was built upon Peter, but he doubted sometime, whether
it were not safer to teach, that it was built upon Christ. For whereas both
opinions are true, he knowing this later to be more true in it self (because
Christ is a surer Rock then Peter) did use commonly to apply that his most
sure doctrine unto this place of the Gospel, where yet S. Peter is more
literally called this Rock.

Therefore on the other side, when he considered that S. Ambrose made an Hymn,
wherein S. Peter was called the Rock of the Church, then, in those books of his
Retractations, which he wrote with most grave judgment, he allowed both senses
for good, and Catholic. Retract. lib. 1. c, 21. co^tra ep. Donati.
Such humility was in that pillor of the church. Dixi in quoda^ loco de
Apostolo Petro, quod in eo tanquam in petra fundata sit Ecclesia. Qui sensus
etia^ cantatur ore multoru^ in versibus beatissimi Ambrosii, vbi de gallo
gallinaceo ait, hoc, ipsa petra ecclesiae, cane^te, culpa^ diluit. I said in a
certain place of (his book written against the Epistle of Donatus) that, the
church is founded in Peter the Apostle, The Church founded in Peter.
as in a rock. The which sense is sung with the mouth of many men, in the
verses or Hymns of the most blessed S. Ambrose, where he says of the Cock:
the very rock of the Church, did wash away his fault, The rock of the Church.
when the Cock did crow.

Thus both S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, and the faithful who used to sing
those verses, allow it for a right good sense (which M. Jew. disalloweth) that
a mortal man, as S. Peter was, is this rock, upon which Christ built his
Church. And although S. Augustine had in many other places affirmed, that the
Church was meant in these words to have been built upon Christ, rather then upon
Peter (which, of it self is true, though not first meant in this place) yet he
concludes thus: Retract. lib. 1. c. 21.
Harum duarum sententiarum quae sit probabilior, eligat lector. Let the Reader
make his choice, whether of these two meanings is the more probable.

Behold, S. Augustine judges it a probable sense, that the Church is built
upon Peter, as also that it is built upon Christ: but which is the more
probable, thathe leaves to be judged of the Reader. Why does M. Jewel than
without the assente of any old Father at al, deny that sense, whicb teaches a
mortal man as Peter was, to be this Rock, since as all the other Fathers, so
S. Augustine does not only believe it to be probable, but he doubts whether
it be not more probable then the other?

And surely, In the former Chap.
as the circumstance of the words give, I have showed above twenty reasons
why it is more probable, that in those words, Peter is first and most literally
called this Rock, and Christ is not so called there, but only by discourse and
by the force of a necessary consequent.

Prosper Aquitanicus affirms boldly of S. Peter: De vocation. genesis lib. 2.
c. 28. in aeditione Louaniensi.
Haec fortissima petra ab illa principali petra communionem and virtutis
sumpfit and nominis. This most strong rock did take the common enjoying both
of virtue and of name from that principal rock.

In anniuers. Assump. sermon. 3.
Leo agrees with him, who entreating upon these words, thou art Peter, says:
Cum ego fim inuiolabilis petra, tame^, and tu quoque petra es, quia mea virtute
solidaris. Whereas I am the rock which ca^ not be i^iuried, yet never the less,
thou art also a rock, because thou art made firm by my strength.

S. Gregory could not disagree from so many blessed Saints. Epistol. li. 6.
epist. 37
Quis nesciat sanctam Ecclesiam in Apostoloru^ principis soliditate firmatam,
quia firmitatem mentis traxit in nomine, vt Petrus a petra vocaretur? Who does
not know, that the holy Church is established in the stedfastnes of the prince
of the Apostles, because he took stedfastnes of mind in his name, in that he
was called Peter of Petra, a rock of a rock?

When he says, the Church to have been stablished in the strength of the prince
of the Apostles, in that he declares him to be this rock whereupon the Church
is promised to be built. When he adds, that he was called Petrus of petra, a
rock of the rock, he shows the reason how he came to be the rock: verily,
because Christ the rock who gave him his name, gave him the strength also which
did belong to the name.

Let us conclude this matter at the last with the witness of six hundred
fathers at once, Council. Chalced. Act. 3.
who in the fourth general Council teach thus: Petrus Apostolus est Petra and
crepido ecclesiae Catholicae. Peter the Apostle is the Rock and top of the
Catholic Church.

What meant you then, M. Jewel, to say, that the old Catholic Fathers have
written and pronounced, not any mortal man, as Peter was, but Christ himself
the Son of God to be this Rock? The old Fathers affirm both Christ, and
Peter to be the, Rock. Christ by nature, Peter by vocation and election.
Christ to be both the Rock absolutely, and also by a consequent to be this
Rock, whereupon the militant Church shall be built: Peter to be this Rock, but
not absolutely the Rock.

But what? did not M. Jewel know all this? that surely is scant likely, since
these things are so riue in the old Fathers, and so often alleged by the new
writers. Unless perhaps M. Jewel reads not the old Fathers, and trusts not
the new writers, and so be ignorant of these authorities. For in deed id
appears by his doings, that either he never saw the originals, whence he
cites his testimonies (but only follows blind note books made and
collected by other his ancestors and masters in heresy) or else he is one of
the most manifest falsifiers, that ever was in the Church.

For willingly to belie so many Fathers at once as he now has done, it is a
malice not much less, then Simon Magus or any scholar of his had. I rather
thinck, he saw not the originals. Howsoever it be, he is an horrible instrument
of perdition to the childern of perdition. O sir, Are Tertullian, Origenes,
Cyprian, Hilarie, Basil, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Cyrillus, Damascenus, Psellus, Theodoretus, Theophilactus, Euthimius, Prosper,
Leo, Gregorius, no ancient Fathers?

Al they teach, a mortal man as Peter was (verily even Peter him self) by the
gift of Christ to be this Rock, whereof it is said, upon this rock I will build
my Church. What a liar now is he, who says they do not so? their books be
forth in print, let them be seen. If M. Jewel be an impudent lier, let him
either openly recant, or be avoided as a falsifier of Gods Gospel, and of true
religion: yea as one more worthy of a whetstone, then of a bishopric.

But now let us consider also the reason, why the fathers confess the Church
to have been built upon S. Peter. For every thing is made the plainer and surer,
when the reason of it is known.

The diverse reasons which the Fathers bring to declare, why S. Peter was this
rock, do evidently show, that he was most literally this Rock, whereupon
Christ would build his Church. The VI. Chap.
HE that gives a cause of a thing done or said, shows himself to be most
fully persuaded concerning the truth of the thing: otherwise he would never
endeavor, to find out the reasons, why that should be so do^ or said, which he
thought not to be don or said at all. Seeing then the ancient Fathers do show,
why and how S. Peter is this Rock, whereupon the Church is built, it is
impossible, that they should anything dout thereof, and much less can they
deny him to be this rock, whereupon Christ said he would build his Church.

And yet M. Jewel has said most falsely, that they do write and pronounce not
any mortal man as Peter was to be this Rock.

To begin with S. Basil, he says: Petrus Ecclesiae aedificationem in seipsum
suscepit. Aduersus Eunomiu^ lib. 2.
Peter received the building of the Church upon himself. But why? propter fidei
excellentiam,

Behold his faith alone was not properly the Rock, but Peter was the Rock,
and that not only for his faith (for then other faithful me^ might have been
the like rock) but for the excellency of his faith.

Two things then are necessary for being this Rock: that he be Peter, and
that he have an excellent faith: to wit, such as none other had, as the which
was promised most singularly, and for the continuance whereof Christ himself
has prayed.

Libr. 6. de Tainit.
Saint Hilarie teaches farther, that, Supereminentem gloriam beatae fidei suae
confessio^e promeruit. Peter by the confessing of his blessed faith, deserved a
passing glory. Peter's faith had not excelled, if any man had been like to him,
neither had Peter's glory passed for the confession of his faith, if any man
had been like to him in glory. His glory was, to receive the building of the
Church upon him for the excellency of his faith: therefore the Church was
more singularly built upon him, then upon any other manels.

S. Cyprian writes of S. Peter Ecclesia quae vna est, super vnum, Ad Iubaian.
qui claues eius accepit Domini The Church, which is one, is by the voice of
our Lord founded upon one who has received the keys of it.

This reason can bear but one such Rock at once, as Peter was, for else the
Church (as one) is not founded upon one, if there are more such rocks at once.
Otherwise what can be said, why if there be many such rocks, there should not
also be many Churches. But the Church being one, is built upon one:
therefore that one (who is Peter) has no fellow in that behalf, until after
him, an other do succeed in that one office.

Homil. de Pastor.
S. Augustine discoursing upon those words of Christ, spoken to S. Peter: Feed
my sheep, writes thus: Dominus in ipso Petro vnitatem co^mendauit, etc. Our
Lord has commended unity in S. Peter himself. Vni dicitur.
There were many Apostles, and it is said to one, feed my sheep. S. Augustine
calls the other Apostles also good shepherds, but S. Peter he calls the one
good shephearde, by whose one pastoral office, unity is commended and set
forth, verily because it is meant, that, as many Pastors and particular flocks
in this life, are under Peter one chief pastor, and in him ^hey al are one:
even so all the states and ages of the Church that ever have ^en, be, or
shall be, are under one chief ^astour Jesus Christ, and in him they ^al are one.

But as all the ages of faithful me^ are one Church in Christ the chief pastor,
because he in deed and in truth contains them al under his unity: right so
Peter should not be the chief one Pastor of all the particular flocks in respect
of the other Apostles, except in deed he had power given him to feed them all
within the compass of his one fold.

S. Hierome having called S. Peter, Lib. 1. aduers. Ioui^.
the Apostle of Christ, and the Rock, afterward confesses to Iouinian (who
reioysed to see a married man so honored) that, Super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia.
The Church is built upon Peter. Adding thereunto: Licet id ipsum in alio loco
super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni coelorum accipia^t, and ex
aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: tame^ propterea inter duodecim
vnus eligitur vt capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio. Albeit the self
same thing in an other place be done upon all the Apostles, and al do receive
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the Church be fastened
equally upon them: yet therefore one is chosen among twelve, that a head being
made, the occasion of schism may be taken away.

Three things are to be noted in this sentence. First, that the Church is so
built upon Peter the Rock, that in the same place, where it is built upon
Peter, the like is not done upon the other Apostles.

Secondly, the Church is equally founded upon all the Apostles in an other
place, Joan. 20.
to wit, when they are sent of Christ, as Christ was sent of his Father, to
bind or to loose, and so forth. Joan. 20.


Thirdly, one is chosen head of the twelve to the intent schism may be avoided.
A man may say: if al be equal, The objection and answer.
How is one head? This shall be more fully answered hereafter. I say for this
time. Al twelve as touching the office of the Apostlesship, were equal, and all
were Rocks and heads of the whole Church. But being considered as particular
Bisshops and Pastors, whereby they had particular authority to teach some here,
and some there (as now Bisshops do every man in his own diocese) so, one was
their head.

How can it else be, that S. Hierome should agree with himself? al be equal, and
one is the head. Can the head be equal with the other members? Or is it not
highest of al, and chief of al? We must the^ say, that alare equal in the
office of the^ apostleship, but Peter was otherwise appointed the chief Apostle
and head in the Bisshoplie power, which every Apostle had, beside the
Apostolic office, as it shall appear hereafter.

In the mean time it is certain, that S. Hierom writes: Hieron. aduersus
Iouin. li. 2
Propterea inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto schismatis
occasio tollatur. Therefore among the twelve, one is chosen, to the end a head
being appointed, the occasion of schism may be taken away. And that there S.
Hierome speaks not of the Apostles own choice, but of Christ's own choosing,
it appears evidently, when he says afterward, that the good man^er
(Christ) would not prefer S. John before S. Peter, Lib. 1. aduers. leui^.
least he should cause so young a man to be envied at.

Neither did it suffice, that during the Apostles time only, such a Rock and
head should be appointed, for so much as the Church of God, neither (without
al controversy) less assurance

So that Leo the great has most just cause to say of S. Peter: In Aniuers
assumpt. sermon. 3.
Super hoc Saxum, hanc soliditatem, and sortitudine^, aeternu^ construam
te^plu^, and Ecclesiae meae coelo inserenda sublimitas in huius firmitate
consurget. Upon this stone, this soundnes, and strength I will build an
everlasting temple, and the height of my Church, which is to be graffed in
heaven, shall rise in the strength of this Rock.

S. Augustine affirms in many places, that S. Peter did represent the whole
Church, according to which sense he writes thus: Epist. 165.
Petro totius Ecclesiae figuram gere^ti Dominus ait, super hanc petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Our Lord says unto Peter bearing the figure of the
whole Church, Upon this Rock I will build my Church. So that he gives this
cause, why this much is said to Peter, verily because Peter bears the
figure of the whole Church.

But how comes it to pass, that Peter does bear the figure of the whole
Church? Surely because he is the head and Rock of the whole. For every
prince does bear the figure and as it were the general person of his
subjects, and of them who are committed to his Charge. For that they all are,
as it were, gathered together and united in him alone. And this to be the true
meaning of S. Augustine, In Joan. tract. 124
it appears evidently by his own words: Ecclesiae Petrus Apostolus propter
Apostolatus sui primatum gerebat figurata generalitate persona^. Peter the
Apostle (by a generality which was figured) did hear the person of the Church
by reason of the primacy of his Apostleship.

Peter did bear the person of the Church, not as men carry burdens on their
backs, but by a figured generality, that is to say, as a general officer. For
he does bear their persons, not naturally, but figuratively. To wit, by
interpretation of the Law, and not by real extension of his body to be made so
big as to uphold al their bodies, Generalitas figurata.
S. Augustine calls that a figured generality, when it is not ordinarily
and naturally made, but when the law does impute and take it so to be.

For the Law interprets and expounds the chief officer of a common weal,
to bear the person of the self common weal. And thereupon the head being present
for the common weals behalf, the law works, as if the common weal it self
were present, when the head alone is present. What was the^ Peter's office? The
primacy of the Apostleship. He was first and chief, and propter Apostolatus
sui primatum, Propter.
and for the primacie of his Apostleship he signified all his flock in him self
alone. so that he took the keys for all, and was the general Rock for every
other particular Rock, and for that primacie of his he bare the figure of the
Church.

To show yet farther the force of this reason, the Reader must consider, that
first, Peter is said to be the Rock, and therein to bear the person of the
Church figurata generalitate, which is to say, as if he were in deed the
general, or the whole mystical body of the Church, which yet he is not, but is
only the officer thereof.

Secondarily a reason is given, why Peter should signify or bear the figure
of the whole Church more then any other. And the cause is, propter Apostolatus
sui primatum, for the primacie of his Apostleship, that is to say, because he
is chief. If this cause were not found in S. Augustine, the Protestants might
have some pretense to say (as they do) verelie, that Peter was not in deed
the rock, nor head, but only that he is called so, to signify, that the whole
Church is built upon Christ.

But now Peter does not signify the Church to be built upon Christ, as Peter
is a man, nor as he is a faithful man, nor as he is an Apostle, but as he is
the primate of the Apostles, propter Apostolatus sui primatum, for the primacie
of his Apostleship. If he be not Primate in deed, he does not signify that
which S. Augustine teaches.

For all mystical significatio^s in Gods word be built upon a real truth. Genesis
8.
Noe by offering clean beasts upon the altar, did signify the death of
Christ. Therefore in deed Noe did offer upon the altar. Let it be taught to
be a feined thing, that Noe did offer those beasts, and that deed of his can
not be a figure of Christ's death. For that which is not reallie true, is the
figure of nothing.

Therefore seeing the primacie of Peter is the cause why he bears the person
of the Church, and why he has the Church built upon him, it is not only true,
that Peter is the primate of the Apostles, and thereby of the whole Church, Note.
but also he is (at the least in the order of nature) first the primate, before
he does bear the figure of the Church.

For as if a man do bear the person of Gloucester in the Parleament because he
is Burges of that City, it is most necessarily true that he is first Burges,
before he do so bear that person: even so if Peter bear the figure of the
Church, because he is the primate, he is surely the primate before he bear
the general person of the Church. When I say he is primate before, I mean not
in time, but in course and order of nature. For first Peter is considered as
made primate, and then we afterward consider, that upon his primacy the person
of the Church is laid, although both things be done at once.

Seeing then Peter could not bear this general person but only for those, whose
officer and primate he was, it is evident, In Joan. Tract. 12^
that by this reason of S. Augustine, Peter was the general officer of the
whole militant Church, even of S. John, and of S. James also, in such respect,
as he took the keys for them. Not yet the keys of their Apostleshippe (which
they took for them selves) but the keys of the chief pastoral office, Ion.
21.
within which the Apostles also were contained, in that respect as they were
sheep, and of that one flock in earth, which was wholly committed to Peter.

Thus have we many reasons, why S. Peter above al others was the rock, 1. the
excellency of his faith, 2 the 3. the unity of 4. the signifying of Christ to
be the one 5. the eschuing of 6. the receiving of Ecclesiastical power for the
whole Church.

Which reasons if they be deepe^ Ephesians. 4.


For the building of the Church upon this rock (which S. Peter is) goes still
^^rward, as it once began, since all the ^uilding is not yet ended, but is
every ^ay a working. Endeavor once, M. Ie^el, to answer these reasons of the
Fathers, and the lack of reason in your side shall straight appear. Words you
can ^atch together, as other heretics have ^lon before you: but the examining
of ^n authority with the reason thereof does straight confound you.

The Authorities alleged by M. Jewel to prove that S. Peter was not this Rock,
prove against himself, that S. Peter was this rock, although they prove, that
there was an other kind of rock also beside him, which thing we deny not. The
VII. Chap.
Ievvel. The old Catholic Fathers have written and pronounced not any mortal
man as Peter was, but Christ himself the Son of God to be this Rock.


Sander. There are two parts of this proposition, the one, that Christ is this
Rock: Which we grant to be most true, and how it is true, we shall see
hereafter. The other part of M. Jewels assertion is, that, no mortal man (as
Peter was) is this rock. This part, I say, he neither proves, nor is able to
prove. For I showed before, that above twenty ancient Fathers have taught, and
have confirmed it by reason, that Peter was this rock. But let us hear M.
Jewel speak for him self.


Ievvel. In locis veteris Testam.
Gregorius Nyssenus says: Thou art Peter, And upon rhis Rock I will build my
Church. He means the confession of Christ. For he had said before, thou art
Christ the Son of the living God.


Sander. It is not here said, that Peter was not this Rock, which was the
chief thing that M. Jewel ought to have proved. Yea I say farther, it is not
here said, that Christ was this Rock: which was the other part of ^. Jewels
assertion. But only Nysse^us says, that Christ means to build ^is church
upon the confession which Peter ^ade of hi^. And verily I believe so to.

But Christ means not to build his Church upon the confession, without al
^espect of S. Peter, but upon the con^ession which Peter had, and always
should make, whiles in feeding Christ's flock, he should always teach the^
^he true faith of Jesus Christ. So that ^f the confession of S. Peter be this
rock, then S. Peter, who makes it, is much more this rock. For no man's act of
confessing can be greater then himself is, since it comes from his soul and
heart as from a certain spring or fountain, where God has planted the grace
thereof.

Such Arguments then M. Jewel brings to prove his fond assertion, as if he
should say: there comes Eloquence from the man, but the man is not eloquent.
For he would prove, that S. Peter, who makes the confession, is not the Rock,
because his confession, which comes from him, is the Rock. Whereas it is no
less true, the if Peter's confession be the Rock, Peter himself is also much
more the Rock, then it is true, that if a man's Orati^^ be eloquent, himself
also is eloquent. For the virtue which either the oration or the confession
has, was before in the man himself, and proceeded from him.


Ievvel. lib. 2. de Trinit.
So says S. Hilarie: Haec e^ vna foelix fidei petra, quam Petrus ore suo
confessus est. This is that only blessed Rock of faith, that Peter confessed
with his mouth.


Sander. When shall we have honest dealing in you M. Jewel? Did you not promise
to prove, that the Rock spoken of in these words, Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, was Christ and not Peter? But S. Hilarie speaks not of those words,
but expressly of the other words which went ^fore, when Peter said: False
conueiance.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. And that would have appeared
plain^, if you had not cut of the sentence.

For after S. Hilarie had said, this is ^e only happy Rock confessed by Peter's
^outh, it follows immediately: Tu ^s filius Dei viui, Thou art the Son ^f the
living God. And whereas the ^ronoune, Haec petra, this Rock, was ^eferred to
these words, False division.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, ^he falsifier of al good writers,
divided ^he Pronoune Demonstratiue (Haec) from the Proposition which it should
^oint unto, and did cut of the sentence ^n the midst, making the ignorante
^eleue, that S. Hilarie spoke of the rock whereupon Christ promised to build
his Church, whereas he speaks of the ^onely Rock, which is the Son of God.

To make the matter plain, Peter says to Christ: Thou art the Son of the
living God, Matthew. 16
this Rock wh^^^ the Son of God is, Peter out of al co^tr^uersie is not.
Neither did ever any Catholic say, that Peter was the nature Son of God, by
whom al things we^ made. But after that Peter had confessed this only blessed
rock, then Christ said unto Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church. Of this later sentence, o^ disputation is.

And surely, S. Hilarie denies not Peter to be this kind of Rock, which we
last spoke of but expressly confesses it in his Commentaries upon S. Matthew, as
I have showed already. In the V. chap.
But now S. Hilarie speaks only of that Rock which the Son of God is. So
whereas there are two rocks, Christ and Peter, M. Jewel would deceive us by
conueying the one instead of the other. But God has detected his dishonest
dealing.


Ievvel. Again he says, upon this Rock of Peter's confession is the building of
the Church.


Sander. This place is abused as the ^ormer was. De Trinitate. lib. 6
For S. Hilarie there in^reateth of these words: Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God. And shows, that Peter both believed and confessed Christ's
Godhead. The confession of which Godhead is in deed the foundation of the
Church, but that confession is one thing, and the answer to it is an other
thing. The confession touches the honor of Christ, saying: Thou art the Son
of God. The answer touches the honor of Peter, saying: Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church.

Christ is the Rock that Peter confesses, Two Rocks.
and Peter is the Rock which Christ makes. The confession, concerning the
thing confessed, is a greater Rock then Peter. But concerning the thing who
confessed, Peter is no less a rock, then his own act of confession was.

Now when Christ says: Upon this Rock I will build my Church, he means not
only, nor first of al literally, that he will hereafter build his Church upon
the thing confessed, to wit, upon the Godhead of Christ which Pet^^ ^onfessed
(for thereupon it was built already, Two buildings.
even from the beginning of the world) but he means, that he will build that
Church (which was for ever built upon his Godhead, and was built upon his
manhood ever since his incarnation) that Church, I say, he will hereafter build,
upon the inward faith and outward confession of S. Peter, whiles he by
confessing the truth shall uphold, stay and stablish al other faithful me^. So
that S. Hilarie includes S. Peter's person most necessarily under the
confession of S. Peter. And so M. Jewel tells the tale always against him
self, as liers do.


Ievvel. Dial. 4. de trinit.
S. Cyrillus: The Rock is nothing else but the strong and assured faith of the
Disciple.


Sander. This is that I would have, M. Jewel: for I said before, that Christ in
saying, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, did not now only or most
literallie mean, so much upon the thing confessed, as upon the faith of the
confessor, and now M. Jewel confirms my saying.

For the Rock is the faith of the Disciple. But the Disciple is S. Peter:
therefore the faith which is the Rock, is the faith of S. Peter.

Who hiered M. Jewel to bewraye his own cause? When, I say, that Saint Peter
is this Rock, I mean S. Peter believing, Saint Peter confessing, Saint Peter
feeding his sheep, S. Peter strengthening his brethern. But yet every way S.
Peter is the rock. And so it is true, Dial. 4. de trinit.
that Cyrillus says: the rock is nothing else but S. Peter's strong and assured
faith. But S. Peter's faith is not Christ: therefore Christ (who is somewhat
else beside the faith of the Disciple) is not now said to be that Rock,
whereupon he will build his Church. And yet M. Jewel says that and nothing else.

O trusty preacher to build a man's soul upon. Thus he reasons, not Peter,
but Christ is this rock, because the Rock is nothing else, but the faith of
the disciple: as though the faith were not in Peter who is the disciples?


Ievvel. So likewise Chrysostom: upon this Rock, that is to say, upon this
faith and this confession I will build mie Church.


Sander. But he that believed and confessed was Peter, and not Christ, and
Peter's faith and confession was in himself (as being revealed to him by God
the Father) ergo S. Peter is the rock, in that God gave him grace to confess
Christ to be the Son of God. You confound your self, M. Jewel, not caring,
how your words agree, so that a show of sumwhat be made. In the v. Chap.
I showed also before, that S. Chrysostom names S. Peter himself a strong
confession, so that the name of confession does ne^essarily include S. Peter
within the meaning thereof.


Ievvel. S. Augustine: De verbis Domini.
Christ was the ^ock, upon which foundation Peter himself was also built.


Sander. Did you never know, M. Jewel, that one Rock might be built upon an
other? 1. Pet. 2.
the lesser upon the greater? is not the house of God built of many stones?
Christ is the chief Rock, 1. Cor. 10.
the corner stone, upon him lies S. Peter a rock in comparison of Christ very
small, in comparison of us very great. Upon Saint Peter the rest of the Church
which lived under him, was built, which also is a Rock as well through Christ
the Rock of Rocks, as through Peter the second Rock, and through it self,
since every man is according to his degree a lively stone concurring to the
building up of the whole Church, which stones being joined together and
fastened by faith and charity make also a Rock of themselves, Ephesians. 2.
beside that they are built upon the foundations of the Prophets and of the
Apostles. One of these verities does not imbarre the other.


Ievvel. S. Augustine adds in Christ's person: I will not build my self upon
the, but I will build thee upon me.


Sander. It is but reason truly, that Peter be builded upon Christ, and that
we also believe. But for as much as we are in the metaphore of building, does not
reason teach us, that when we have laid in the foundation of a house a
mighty great stone, that the next which we lay upon it, should be also a
very great one, yea (after the lowest) the very greatest of all? Does any wise
man, having laid in the foundation a stone of twenty cubittes, place next upon
it a stone of one or two inches?

If not so, by all proportion, the second stone shall be the greatest that can be
gotten next unto the first. Dan. 7.
Christ is so great a stone, that he has filled the whole earth. I ask of M.
Jewel, who shall be next unto Christ? Mie verdit is, that (in respect of the
militant Church, which is daily a building on the earth) S. Peter is the next
stone. Because God (who gives his benefits most freely) voutsafed first of
all men to grant S. Peter this grace, Joan. 21.
to be the Pastor of his flock, Matthew. 10
and the porter of his kingdom, next unto himself.

Saint Peter being the next stone in building of the Church, unto Christ, is
therefore a Rock, because he is built immediately upon the Rock. For in a
body compacted together, every thing partaketh most intierlie the nature of
that, whereunto it is next joined.

Note (good Reader) that we speak (...) the whole Church, which has (...) the
beginning of the world but only of that portion which lives on the earth for
the time. For thereof only Peter and his successors are the Rocks, whereas
Christ is the Rock of Rocks, which vphouldeth the whole Church, and all the
rocks that ever have been or shall be in the Church from the beginning of the
world, to the end thereof.


Ievvel. Al these Fathers be plain.


Sander. Against you, for as none of them deny Peter to be this Rock (which
thing you have denied) so many affirm, that the confession of S. Peter, and
his faith, is the Rock whereof Christ spoke. And yet seeng the faith of S.
Peter is no greater then himself is, if his faith be the Rock, him self is
also the Rock.


Ievvel. In 16. Matthew.
None is so plain as Origin, he is the Rock, whosoever is the disciple of
Christ.


Sander. In the 3. Chap.
This kind of sense is not literal, as I showed before. But admit it were
literal, yet seeng S. Peter is the disciple, yea the chef disciple of Christ
(as S. Matthew says: Primus Simo^, qui dicitur Petrus. Simon is the first,
Matthew. 10
who is called Peter) surely M. Jewel by your confession, Peter (next unto
Christ) is the chief Rock. A man would think you were frantike, when you
denying a mortal man (as Peter was) to be this Rock, yet afterward proved that
every mortal man who is Christ's Disciple, is the Rock.


Ievvel. Upon such a Rock al Ecclesiastical learning is built as Origin says.


Sander. But S. Peter is such a rock: therefore upon S. Peter al
Ecclesiastical learning is built. Who could wissh such an adversary as M.
Jewel is, who proves altogether against himself?


Ievvel. If thou think that the whole Church is built only upon Peter, what
then vvilt thou say of John the son of the thunder, Metth. 1^
and of every of the Apostles, says origin?


Sander. Master Jewel left out in his English this word (illum) Petrum. A
word left out.
If thou think the whole Church to be only built upon that Peter, to
wit, that Rock of stone, what will thou say of John, and of every of the
Apostles? Origin says, Peter is a Rock: which thing Master Jewel denies.
But he is not only a Rock, and that we grant.

But Master Jewel says, no mortal man but Christ himself is this rock:
therefore I ask him, what he says of S. John and of all the Apostles? Was not
Saint John a mortal man? woe to this cause, M. Jewel, whereof you are become the
patron. God keep me from such an advocate, who shall need none other evidence
against him to lose my cause withal, besides his own words.

You say, the old Fathers have written, not any mortal man, but Christ
himself the Son of God to be this Rock. Ex ore tuo te iudico serve nequam.
But S. John and S. Peter and every one of the Apostles is called here this
rock (whereof being named in the sixtenth of S. Matthew, we dispute) and yet no
Apostle is Christ the Son of God, therefore some mortal man is this Rock
beside Christ the Son of God.


Ievvel. Shall we dare to say, that the gates of hell shall not prevail only
against Peter? or are the keys of the kingdom of heaven given only unto
Peter, says Origin.


Sander. It is inowgh, that the gates of hell shall least of all prevail
against Peter. And he has chefelie the keys of heaven.

For as S. Peter of all the Apostles first confessed in the name of the whole
Church, August. in Joan. tractat. 124.
so all that confess after him and by him (for all were in him, as in their
primate and chief pastor) enjoy both his confession, and his reward. That as
he was set over all the Church for ever, so others for their part were called
into part, of the care.

To conclude this matter, M. Jewel should have proved, that S. Peter is not the
Rock, whereupon Christ promised to build his Church. But he has not done it,
neither was he able to bring any one syllable out of the holy scriptures, nor
any one saying out of the Doctors, which denied Peter to be this Rock. But
he only has ministered matter to me for the prouf of the contrary assertion.


The conclusion of the former discourse, and the order of the other which
follows. The VIII. Chap.
HItherto it has been proved by most evident reasons of Gods

And because, look what kind of may afterward by Gods revelation still
confess the faith for the whole Church, when so ever he is demanded or
consulted, what is to be thought and believed in matters belonging to Christian
religion.



First because he above al others is confessed of al sides to have been the
first and chief in all assembles and meetings to whom (by M. Jewels confession)
the prerogative of the first place did belong to direct and order Bisshops in
their doings. In his Reply. 241. and 242.


Secondly, because he only sits in Saint Peter's chaier, and is his lawful
successor.

Thirdly, because the consent of the world has taken it so, and so has
practiced (in deed for ever) but even by our Adversaries confession, from the
time of Pope Zosimus and Leo, and so above a thousand years.

And although (if I had no farther

I have chosen to speak of that point specially, which is of all other the
most hard. For there is no greater objection against Saint Peter's Supremacy,
then to say, The objection.
that all the Apostles were the same thing which he was. The same Rock, the
same Pastor, the same Confirmour of their brethern. Whereby he may seem, to
have had no more, then they had, and consequently that all Bisshoppes are as
good, as the successor of S. Peter.

To which objection if I should only answer, The answer.
by demanding of the Protestants, in what Gospel or holy scripture it were
written, that every other Apostle was the same rock, which S. Matthew testifies
S. Peter to have been: seeing they have bound themselves to believe nothing
which is not expreslie written in the holy Scriptures, Matthew. 10 and 16.
they were not able so to reply, that their own conscience might justly be
quiet.

For if they brought me forth S. Cyprian, De unit. Eccles.
or S. Hierom: it were sufficient for me to say, that they were no Evangelists.
I show it written, thou shall be called Cephas, and, thou art Peter, that is to
say, a rock, or, of the quality of a rock. For as S. Hierom witnesses, Lib.
1. ad Gal. c. 2.
that which the Greeks and Latins call Petra, the Hebrews and Syrians call
Cephan. Let them show it written, where S. Matthew, or S. John is called such a
Rock, or is said to be of such a condition and quality that the Church shall be
built upon him.

How unhappy are men now a days,

And by the bare naming of Gods word (which they neither understand, nor
love) they have among pedlers won the spurs, and among the ignorant have
gotten the opinion of knouledge. But seeing there is an infinite treasure in Gods
word, to prove those things whereby the Catholic faith is fortified, I will
take upon me this one point,

It is certain, that S. Peter excelled the Apostles in some kind of honor and
dignity.

The Apostles had two kinds of dignity.











That S. Peter passes far the other Apostles in some kind of Ecclesiastical
dignity. The IX. Chap.
IF what soever authority any Apostle had, concerning the government of the
Church, S. Peter had the same: and yet if besides he had very many things of
greatest importance, promised and given to him alone, which no man else had: it
is out of all controversy, that S. Peter passed a great way the other Apostles
in some kind of Ecclesiastical dignity. Otherwise if he had no more
authority then they, or if his privileges had been only personal (as the love
was which our Savior bore toward S. John who lay upon his breast at his last
supper) certeinlie S. Peter should either have had nothing at all committed to
him above and beside the reast of the Apostles, Joan. 13.
or it should have been only some temporal privilege, and not any such
function, as had apperteined to the perpetual stablishment of Christ's Church.

But now, Matthew. 10
for so much as he is not first among the twelve, but also he had the promise
to be called Cephas or a, Rock, Joan 1.
before the twelve were chosen, and was really named Peter Marc. 3.
And for so much as although both S. John Baptist had confessed Christ's
godhead before, Joan. 1.
and Nathanael had said, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel,
yet only Peter's confession being made long after, was so highly rewarded, that
Christ said to him alone, thou Matthew 16.
and upon this Rock I For so much as the keys of the Kingdom of heaven are
namely promised to Peter Matthew. 16
And whereas the tribute of didrachma was due for the first begotten of every
family: Number. 3. Josephus antiquit. li. 13. c. 12 Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 59.
Matthew. 17
Yet Christ paid both for himself, and for S. Peter also, as being the
vnderhead and first begotten of his family the Church: And for so much as
Christ, although an other bote also were at hand, yet he taught the out of S.
Peter's bote, to show that in Peter's chair his doctrine should always be
stedily professed: Luc. 5. Ambro. in 5. ca. Luc.
And whereas Lucae 22.
yet the faith of Peter alone is prayed for, Leo sermon. 2. de ^at. Petri and
Pauli.
that he being once converted might strenhgten his brethern. And when word of
Christ's resurrection was sent to all the disciples, for so much as Peter both
entered first Luc. 24.
and was not comprehended with the rest, but was severally Marci 16.
whiles the Angel said, tell his disciples, and Peter, In 24. ca. Lucae.
that he will go before you into Galilee: and as S. Ambrose thincketh, of men
he was the first who saw Christ after his resurrection, (abeit some women had
seen him before). And whereas Joan. 21. Bernard. de consid. lib. 2.
yet S. Peter alone walked upon the whole Sea, without any particular bote,
betokenning, that the whole world (which is meant by the Sea) was ordinarily
subject unto his jurisdiction: Farthermore and he is alone commanded to feed
Christ's sheep, Joan. 21. August. ibidem.
and to rule his la^bs: yea for so much as it is said to Peter alone not ablie,
Extendes manus tuas, and again tu me sequere, Joan. 21.
thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and, follow thou me, so that his
particular kind of death by stretching forth his hands upon the cross, was
principally prophesied of, by Joan. 6. Matthew 16.
as being the Act 1. Chrysostom. in Acta. Hom. 3.
Peter alone gave sentence upon Judas, and pronounced him deposed from his
Bisshoprike, and that an other must be chosen in his place: seeing Act. 2.
taught Act. 2.
and the multitude being converted, said to Peter, and to the other Apostles,
what shall we do? Act. 2.
Seeing Peter made Act. 3.
seeing Peter did the first miracle after the coming of the holy Ghost, Ambros.
sermon. 68.
and first healed the feet of the lame, because he being the Rock, showed
mystically, that he stablissheth the feet of others: seeing Peter confessed
Act. 4.
not only before private men, but olso at the seat of Judgment: seeing Peter
saw the secrets of hearts, Act. 5.
yet Peter alone gave with fullness of power, sentence upon Ananias and
Saphyra, cutting of their life with a word, Gregor. lib. 1. ep. 24.
and thereby showing (as S. Gregory notes) Quanta potentia super caeteros
excreuisset, With how great power he had increased above the rest: Act. 5.
although all the Apostles did also miracles, yet Feter was so famous above the
reast, that men did put the sick and the weak in the streats to the end at
the least, the shadow of Peter might come over them (which was the greatest
miracle that ever is thought to have been done of Simon Magus Act. 8.
Seeing he was the first after Christ's Ascension who Act. 9.
Act. 10.
that the Gentiles also were called to believe in Christ, and God chose that the
hear the word of the Gospel by Peter's Actor. 15.
Seeing when Peter was in the prison, Act. 14.
prayer was made in the Church for him with out intermission (which thing we
read to have been so earnestly done for none other Apostle, albeit many were
also Act. 15. Theod. in ep. ad leonem.
in so much that Paul and Barnabas (not for their own learning, but to signify
what other Bishops should do afterward) came to the Apostles to Jerusalem (to
set a solutio^ from Peter, as Theodoretus notes, and told the controversy in
the Council, then Peter did not only speak first, but also Galat. 1. In
comment. c. 1. ad gal.
that the Gentiles should not be burdened with the law, and the whole multitude
held their peace for a time: Chrysostom. in acta. homil. 21.
Seeing S. Primus, first or chief ad Solitar. vit. agent. August. de Sanctis.
sermon. 27. Leo Sermon. 1. in Natt. Pet. and Pau.
to whom the Lord had committed the care of Churches: seeing Peter was either
alone, or first and chief in the greatest affairs as S. Chrysostom notes most
singularly: seeing he was sent to occupy with his chair, Rome the mother
Church of the Roman province, as Athanasius calls it, and the head City of
all the Council. Chalced. act. 3.
and there to conquer all heretics by va^quisshing Simon Magus the head of al
Heretics, whom with his prayer he destroyed: seeing his Chayer Bernard. epist.
190.
and has flourished there till this hour, without interruption of that faith,
which S. Peter confessed and taught as the very experience does bear
witness: so many things so singularly belonging to the government of the
whole Church, could never above all the other Apostles, have been so specially
done or spoken about Saint Peter alone, if he bare not some other more
excellent person then every of the other Apostles did.

For as Christ is proved by S. Paul, to excel the Angels because God never
said to any Angel as he said to Christ, Heb. 1.
Thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee: even so seeing Christ never
said to any other Apostle, as he said to Peter: Thou shall be called Peter,
or, upon this rock will I build my church or, Matthew. 16
to thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: or, pay for thee and
me: or, I have desiered for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luc. 22. Joan. 21.
or, seed my sheep, and, rule my lambs: doubtless we may boldly conclude
therevppon, that S. Peter in these praeeminences far excelled any other
Apostle.

For what so ever any other Apostle had, whether it were by vocation, Joan. 1.
Matthew 10 and 18. and 28 Joan. 20.
or election, or authority to preach, to bind, to loose, to baptize, to be a
Bisshoppe, to make a Bisshoppe, or to do any thing else, Sermon. 3. in aniuers
assumpt. multa solus accepit
Peter had all that as well as any of them, as also Leo the Great has noted.

Seeing then beside all that, he had many things which none other had, may they
not seem to have lost their common senses who will have S. Peter to be no
greater a prelate then any other Apostle was?

If any wra^gler not joining al these privileges together, but separating some
one or two of the^ from the rest, do scoff at these proufs, let hi^ know
aforeha^d, that albe it some few alone would not have made a perfect proof, yet
as they now are joined together, they prove exactly that S. Peter had some
greater dignity then any other Apostle had.

That the Apostles beside the prerogative of their Apostleship, had also the
authority to be particular bishops, which thing their name also did signify
in the old time. The X. Chap.
FOR the better opening of that which follows, I must declare the double
office which the first prelates had. Marci 3. Lucae 9.
Christ called twelve unto him, whom he made Apostles, and he sent them to
preach, and gave them power te heal diseases, Matthew. 18.
and to cast out devils. And he said to them: Whatsoever things ye shall bind
upon the earth, they shall be bound in heaven also. And whatsoever things ye
shall loose upon the earth, they shall be loosed in heaven also. And again after
his resurrection, he said: Joan. 20.
As my Father has sent me, and I send you* take ye the holy ghost. And, going
into the whole world, Marc. 16.
preach the Gospel to al creatures, teaching all nations, Matthew. 28
and baptizi^g them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost.

And after Christ's ascension S. Mathias, Actor. 1.
and after the coming of the holy Ghost S. Paul was taken into that holy
office and vocation. Galat. 1.
So that by their Commissions it is evident, that the Apostles were all sent
into the whole world with singular auctority.

Now that beside this Apostolic function, Eusebius hist. lib. 2. c. 1. and
lib. 3. c. 22. and 32.
they had also power to be resident upon some one particular cure and flock,
the example of S. James the Apostle does declare, who is confessed by all manner
of writers to have been Bishop of Jerusalem. Yea Simon also an other of the
Apostles is readen to have succeeded after S. James in the same Chair and
Church. S. Peter likewise having sitten at Antioche seven years, Hieron. in
Catalo.
afterward tra^sferred his seat unto Rome.

Eusebius. li. 3 c. 22.
More over S. Peter made Euodius Bishop of Antioche, after his departure thence,
and sent his disciple S. Marck to govern the Church at Alexandria. Greg, li. 6.
epist. 37. Tit. 1.
S. Paul appointed Titus Bishop in Ca^dia, and Timotheus Bishop of Ephesus, and
the like was don by other Apostles in other countries. 1. Tim. 4.
Therefore the Apostles had also the power to be and to make Bishops, Actor. 1.
in so much that when S. Peter deprived Judas of his Chair, he showed the
prophecy to be fulfilled, Psalm. 108. Ennodius in 2. Tom. Council.
Episcopatu^ eius accipiat alter. Let an other man take his Bishoprike, or his
office of a Bishop.

For although every Bishop be not an Apostle, yet every of Christ's Apostles
was or might be a Bishop. And because the bishoply power was most certainly
contained within the compass of the Apostolic office, the very name of an
Apostle came also to signify a bishop in the primative Church, as Theodoretus
has well declared. In cap. 3.1. ad Tim.
Eosde^ olim vocaba^t presbyteros and Episcopos. Eos au^t qui nu^c vocantur
Episcopi, nominaba^t Apostolos, procede^te aute^ te^pore, nomen quide^
Apostolatus reliqueru^t ijs qui vere era^t Apostoli, Episcopatus aute^
appellatione^ imposueru^t ijs, qui olim appellaba^tur Apostoli. Philip. ^.
Ita Philippe^siu^ Apostolus erat Epaphroditus. vestru^, inquit Apostolu^, and
adiutore^ necessitatis meae. Ita Crete^siu^ Titus, and Asianoru^ Timotheus.
Actor. 15
Ita ab Hierosolymis ijs q era^t Antiochiae scripseru^t Apost. and Presbyteri.
In the old time they called the same men both priests, and bishops. But those
which are now called bishops, they did call Apostoles. And in process of time
they left the name of Apostleship to those that were truly (and in deed)
Apostles, and called them Bisshops which (in the primitive Church) were called
Apostles: so was Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians. Philip. 2.
Your Apostle (says S. Paul) and the helper of my necessity. So was Titus
(the Apostle) of those of Candie, and Timotheus of those of Asia. Act. 15.
So did the Apostles and priests write from Jerusalem, to those that were at
Antioche.

Seeing then the name of an Apostle, did contain both properly that
extraordinary honor, which the true Apostles only had, and also that ordinary
power, which al Bisshops then had, and always should have, it is easy to
understand, that when S. Hierome writes concerning Bisshops: Ad Euagrium.
Omnes Apostolorum successores sunt: All are the successors of the Apostles,
and when. In Psalm. 44.
Augustine says, Pro Apostolis constituti sunt Episcopi, Bishops are made in
steed of the Apostles, that they both (and all the other Fathers saying the
like) do mean, that Bisshops do succeed the Apostles, not in the Apostleship,
but in their Bisshoplie authority, which also S. Ireneus calls: Lib. 3. c. 3.
suum ipsoru^ magisterij locum, their own place of teaching or of governing.

If any man ask, why the Bisshoplie authority is so namely distincted hy me
from the Apostleship, since it was contained therein (as the lesser dignity
within the greater) I answer, The putting away of an objection.
that it is nedeful so to do, because when the Apostleship ceased, the other
Bisshoply authority continued still. And yet if the Bisshoplie authority had
only depended upon the Apostolik function, it must needs have seized with it
also. For when the whole Apostleship is ended, no part thereof ca^ remain in his
force, except it have an other ground to stand in, beside thapostleship, as the
bishoply power had.

Cyril. lib. 12. c. 64.
This being so, when we read that Peter was head, prince, chief, first, and
capitain of the Apostles, it may according to the former distinction, either be
meant, that he was both their head according to their excellent Apostolic
dignity, and also according to their inferior authority of being particular
Bisshops, or else according to the only one consideration of the twain.

How far S. Peter did either excel or was equal with the Apostles in their
Apostolik office. Wherein diverse objections are answered, which seem to make
against S. Peter's Supremacy. The XI. Chap.
WERE it not, that the Adversaries of the Catholic faith, do force me to
entreat of this matter, I would think it a sin to enter into so curiouse a
question. For what have we to do now with the Apostles aequalitie or
inequality, whereas it should have suffised us, to follow the present state of
the universal church which we find practiced in our time, not searching out
other things which are perhaps above our capacity. But seeing the aequalitie of
the Apostles, why this question is treated of.
is now pretended against the universal faith which has always given the
primacie to Peter's Seat, it behooves to answer thereunto, trusting that God
will bear with the humble defenda^ts, how so ever the wantonness of the other
side stand in great danger to be punished for their schism, troublesomnesse,
and pride.

I take it for a thing agreed upon, that S. Peter was the first of the
Apostles, accordingly as S. Matthew reciting the name of the twelve Apostles,
says. Primus Simo^, qui dicitur Petrus. Matt. 10.
The first is Simo^, who is called Peter.

If then none other Apostle be first, beside Peter, and all that which is not
first, must needs be somewhat bebinde that which is first, doubtless none
other Apostle could be in all points, equal with Peter.

If you say, the word, Primus, first, serves only to keep the order of
nu^bring, and not any whit to prefer Peter before the rest, I answer, that
when Primus, the first, does only stand to keep the order of numbering, since
the number at this time is twelve, S. Matthew should have gone forward with the
second, the third, and the fourth, until he had come to twelve. But now seeing
he does not so, Primus is rather meant the first in dignity, then in order
only.

And surely it is worth the noting, that where as S. Andrewe came to Christ
before S. Peter, Joan. 1.
and brought afterward his brother Simon to Christ, yet S. Peter is set
always, not only before S. Andrew, but before all the reast. In so much that
whereas the other Apostles are never named orderly, but after diverse sorts,
yet S. Peter keeps always the first place.

After Peter sometime Andrewe is placed next, as in S. Matthew, Math. 10. Marc.
3. Act. 1.
sometime James, as in S. Mark, sometime John, as in the Acts of the Apostles.
And the Church as well in the Canon of the Mass, as in the Litanies and
processions, places S. Paul, next unto S. Peter.

But evermore in all these varieties, howsoever the order of the other Apostles
be changed, seeing S. Peter is without exception every where preferred before
them al: certainly that his primacie comes neither by chance, nor by the
choice of the writer, but by the very council and will of the holy Ghost, who
thereby shows S. Peter to have been absolutely the first, and chief even by
the appointment of Christ himself, which no Evangelist might alter or change.

Which to true the authority also of the ancient Fathers does evidently
convince. First because out of primus (the first) they have derived Primatus
(which signifies the chief authority, and not only the first place in
order) accordingly as S. Augustine teaches, In Joan. Tract. 124
S. Peter to have represented the whole Church, propter primatum Apostolatus,
for the primacie or chiefedom (that I may so speak) of the Apostleship.
Dionys. c. 5. de Eccles. Hierarc. Cyrill. lib. 12. in Joan. c. 64. Chrysostom. in
Joan. Hom. 87. Hierom. in lib. 1. ad Gal. ca. 2. Math. 10.


And consequently thereunto, they call S. Peter commonly Principem,
Corypheu^, caput, verticem, duce^, and os Apostolorum, the prince or chief of
the Apostles, the head, the top, the guide, and the mouth. By which words they
declare themselves to take primus the first, for princeps, the chief, and for
maximus the greatest (which word S. Hierom also uses) so that the meaning of
S. Matthew is: The chief is Simon who is called Peter. Thus it is evident by
the word of God, that Peter being chefest, all the Apostles be not equal with
him, except perhaps any man who is not chief, can be equal with him who is
chief.

If you ask, The question.
wherein Peter was chief, or what he could do more then his follows, I say,
that question also is curiouse. It becomes him, who will obey the Gospel, to
believe, that S. Peter is the first or chief as he reads in the Gospel,
without demanding why or how he should be chief. But if the question were
demanded humbly, thus I would think it might be answered.

In the nature and order of the Apostleship, The answer.
every Apostle was wholly equal with all the follows of his own order. The
which is not only true in the Apostles, but also in Bishops, in priests, in
Kings, in Dukes, in Knights, or in any other state of men. For there is a
certain reason why a man is either an Apostle, or a King, or a duke, the which
reason must needs be common to all that be of that degree and state.

But there may be an other thing coincident to some degree of men, the which
although it be not necessary for their being, yet it is necessary for their
well being. And so whereas of twelve Apostles every one is equal in that office
with the other, yet it was necessary for their good continuance in peace and
unity, Optatus lib. 2. de schis. Donatist.
that one should be chief among them, lest whiles every one should draw a
diverse way, the whole Church which ought to be but one body, should be torn
in pieces, and be divided into many companies or bodies.

Thus whereas all the Apostles were equal by the nature of their vocation, one
was set over the rest by the providence of God, Matthew. 10
and he was so set over the^, that he was even at the first choice (though that
were not thoroughly percaeued until Christ's resurrection) made first of al, and
appointed for most of all, that there might be no moment, in the which unity
should be missed in the Church.

This reason is allowed of S. Cyprian, who having said concerning the nature of
the Apostleship: De vnitat. Ecclesiae.
The rest of the Apostles were the same thing, which Peter also was, being all
endued with equal fellowship of honor and power: adds immediately, sed
exordiu^ ab vnitate proficiscitur, vt ecclesia vna mo^stretur. But the
beginning proceeds from unity, to the^d the Church may be showed one.

S. Hierom likewise having said, Aduersus Iouin. li. 1
albeit all the Apostles took the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the
strength of the Church be fastened equally upon the^ al, adds i^mediatly,
tamen propterea inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto schismatis
tollatur occasio. Yet therefore among the twelve one is chosen, that a head
being made, the occasion of schism may be taken away.

Lib. 2. de schism. Donatist.
Optatus is of the same judgment, affirming that there is one singular chair
wherein Peter did sit, that in it unity might be kept of al men, lest the
other Apostles might every man challenge a Chaier to himself.

Epi. 82. ad Anastasiu^
Leo the great confesses the same truth, saying: that whereas the choice of all the Apostles was like, yet is was given to one, that he might be above the rest.

If then all were equal in office, and yet one was set over them to keep unity,
he was not thereby an Apostle more then they, but he was greater then they. Not
greater in his office, or in his Apostolic power: but greater in his
prerogative of being head, and of making all the^ to be as one, whiles they
were all content to obey him alone, rather then to make a schism.

But now let us ad to their doctrine an other truth, which is, that all the
Apostles were so confirmed and stablished in grace, by taking the first fruits
of the holy Ghost, Romans 8.
that it was not possible for them to err in faith, or to seduce others. For
Christ said unto them: Ye know the spirit of truth, Joan. 14.
because he shall tarry with you, and he shall be in you.

Hereupon it will follow that the Apostles in their own persons needed no
head, but that S. Peter was set over them, to give thereby a form and a
pattern, that afterward when the personal privilege of the Apostles should
cease, yet the rest, who should be the successors of the Apostles, might al
obey one, who should succeed in Peter's place. Luc. 22.
By whose assured faith (because Christ prayed for it) al they might be sure
not to err in the faith.

By this means it is easy to answer the objections which are made against
the supremacy of S. Peter. For if S. Paul did as well preach to the Gentiles,
Galat. ^.
as S. Peter did to the Jews, he did it by the office and nature of his
Apostleship which was to go into the whole world, Matthew. 28
and to preach to every creature, 2. Cor. 11.
and to have the care of al Churches lying upon him. And therefore S. Peter did
also (as well before as afterward) preach unto the Gentiles with no less power
then S. Paul: Act. 15.
And S. Paul to the Jews, no less then S. Peter.

For the order, power and grace of their Apostleship was equal, as the degree
and line of brethern is equal. But as God preferred in old time the eldest
son to the priesthood, Genes. 49
and to a greater power in government, not by the force of the brotherhed, but
by his own ordinance: even so whereas Peter and Paul were equal Apostles, yet
Peter by the appointment of Christ was the head, not by force of the
Apostleship but by the will of God, to show, that his Church was one, by having
one pastor in it above the reast, as a Kingdom is one, by having one King in
it: or as a house is one, by having one master in it.

Again if S. Paul did reprove S. Peter concerning circumcision (as one that
walked not according to the truth of the Gospel in his behauior) S. Paul might
do it, Galat. 2.
both because they were fellows and brethern in the Apostolic office, and
also for that he had the same holy Ghost which Peter had. But we must consider
(as Tertullian in his book of prescriptions does witness) that no doctrine of
S. Peter's was then reproved as false, Conuersationis fuit vitium, no^
praedicationis.
but only his behavior concerning an outward fact of his, in that he having
freely eaten before with the Gentills without respect of keeping the Law of
Moses, (wherein his deed was right good, and did witness, that he believed
the obseruances of the old Law to bind noman) yet at the coming of Jews, he
did abstein and withdraw himself, as persuaded that he should do more good to
the Jews if he forbear certain meats to win his weak brethern.

Likewise S. Augustine writes: Neque enim negamus in hac sententia suisse ia^
Petrum, Epist. 19. ad Hieron
in qua and Paulus fuit. Non itaque tunc eu^, quid in ea re verum esset,
docebat, sed eius simulationem, qua gentes iudaizare cogebantur, arguebat.
Neither truly we do deny but that Peter was now in the same mind that Paul was.
Therefore he did not then teach Peter, what was true in that cause: but he
reproved his dissembling, whereby the Gentiles were compelled to play the Jews.

So that whereas S. Peter was no less persuaded then S. Paul, that Circumcision
and the ceremonies of the Law must cease (as S. Peter himself pronounced at
Jerusalem) And whereas S. Paul no less then he, Act. 15.
had tolerated the obserua^ces of the law for a time, in circu^ciding
Timotheus: the question is not, Act. 16.
whether Circumcision ought to be abrogated, nor yet, whether it might be at al
for a time permitted, but whether it might be now any more winked at, as
hitherto it had been.

For S. Paul believing the time to be now com that every man ought to profess
his faith openly, concerning the abrogation of the old ceremonies, did reprove
S. Peter's outward simulation, as by his fact, yelding longer time to the Jews,
then was profitable.

And herein surely, S. Peter proved himself to be in deed the head of all the
Apostles. For whereas Christ had said: he that is greater among you, Luc. 22.
let him be made as the younger, or lesser, he in deed accomplisshed that
precept, and yielded unto S. Paul's advise, as S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and S.
Gregory do testify.

Nam nec Petrus, Cyprian.
quem primum Dn^s elegit, in Epist ad Quintum
and supet que^ aedificauit Ecclesiam suam, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione
disceptaret, postmodum vendicauit sibi aliquid insolenter, aut arroganter
assumpsit, vt diceret se primatu^ tenere, and obtemperari a nouellis and
posteris sibi potius debere, nec de spexit Paulum, quod Ecclesiae prius
persecutor fuisset, sed consiliu^ veritatis admisit. For Peter, whom our Lord
chose to be first, and upon whom he did build his Church, did not when Paul
did strive with him about Circumcision, afterward challenge or attribute any
thing to him self insolently, or proudly, and say, that he had the primacy,
and that he ought rather to be obeyed of Nouices, and after comers: neither
did he despise Paul, for that he was before a persecuter of the church: but he
did admit the counsel of truth.

By which words we perceive that S. Cyprian did not judge this reproving of S.
Peter, to be any argument against his supremacy, but only to be a witness of
S. Peter's humility and meekness. But as it was in deed true, that S. Paul had
once persecuted the Church: so was it also true, that S. Peter held the
Primacie, although (as S. Cyprian has noted) he did not then allege it.

S. Augustine likewise confesses: De baptis. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 1.
In scripturis sanctis didicimus Apostolum Petru^, in quo primatus Apostolorum
tam excellenti gratia praeeminet, aliter quam veritas postulabat de
Circumcisione agere solitum, a posteriore Apostolo Paulo esse correctum. We
have learned in the holy scriptures, that the Apostle Peter (in whom the
Primacie of the Apostles appears above the rest by so excellent and gratiouse
favor) that he accustoming to do otherwise concerning Circumcision then the
truth did require, was corrected of Paul who was admitted after him to be an
Apostle.

S. Gregory stablisheth S. Peter's supremacy the more by the very same example
of his humility in bearing gently the correction of his fellow Apostle.
Quatenus qui primus erat in Apostolatus culmine, Gregorius in Ezech. Hom. 18.
esset primus and in humilitate. That he who was chief in the top of the
Apostleship, might also be chief in lowliness: Ecce a minore suo
reprehenditur, and reprehendi non dedignatur, non ad memoriam reuocat, quod
primus in Apostolatum vocatus sit. Behold, Peter is reproved of his inferior,
and he disdaineth not to be reproved. Neither does he call to mind, that he
first was called to the Apostleship.

Consider good Reader, how far these Fathers were from this mind of the
Protestants, to wit, that the reproving of S. Peter by S. Paul, did any
thing withstand his primacie, whereas thereby they (never doubting of his
supremacy in power) rather show him to have been chief every way, as well in
grace, as in authority.

S. Peter is reproved of S. Paul, and S. Peter praises the very same
Epistles of S. Paul, 2. Pet. 3.
in which he is reproved. Did ever Martin Luther, Zuinglius, or John Calvin,
show any such lowliness toward their Superior, as S. Peter showed to his
inferior?

Zuinglius reproved Luther, concerning his doctrine of the real presence. But
did Luther, trow you, praise Zuinglius for it? Except he praise a man, who does
excommunicate him, and pronounce him a Sacramentarie, and an heretic. And yet
they were both brethern, and both apostles of this new Gospel. But, o Lord,
how far of are they from the true Apostles?

Their primacie was liker to that of Diotrephes, Epistola Joan. 3.
then to S. Peter's humble government.

There is in these men no humility, but intolerable arrogancy, no yelding of
the one to the other, but extrem defending of every man's own fantasy. And yet
the Protestants bring this example of S. Peter and S. Paul, to defend their
heathenish and heretical debate.

Whereas the reproufe of S. Peter, neither consisted in any false doctrine of
his (as theirs does) nor was defended stubbornly by him, as these men defend
their errors even to death, and so they make them never able to be reconciled.

The dissensions of the Caholikes. Matthew. 5. In via.
On the other side, although dissentions happen oftentimes among the Catholics
(whiles they are in the way) yet they are like unto the Apostles in
prosecuting them. For that always they are ready to yield one to the other
even in this life, at the farthest, when the high Judge shall give sentence for
the one part. Deuteronomy. 17.
And they all confess, that there is a mean and power in earth able to
determine al controversies in Religion. But the dissentions of the Protestants
are like to the dissentions of the life to come, which are immortal, nor never
shall be reconciled, because there can be no Judge acknowleged in the way, to
bring them at one, since they are at their ways end: after which time there
is no place of reconciliation left, but the judge delivers either the one
party, Matthew. 5.
or both to be tormented for ever, if the greatness of the fault be such, as
between Luther and Zuinglius it is.

It is farther laid against the supremacy of S. Peter, that the Apostles sent
him to lay hands upon those whom Philippus the Deacon had Baptized: Act. 8.
for by sending they will conclude him to be only equal with the Apostles, as
though the Canons of a Cathedral Church may not choose their Deane or Bishop
to go about certain business of the Chapter, whom therein they send to do
those things, not as their inferior, but when the common good is to be
procured, and no fault is to be punisshed, every man ought to yield up his
superiority and to condescend to charity, Lib. 7. epist. 64.
as S. Peter did. For as Gregory most wisely says: when no fault requires
the contrary, all bishops according to the respect of humblenes, are equal.

Briefly, the Apostles were sent every of them equally into the whole world,
but Peter beside that, was made chief, to the end the unity of the Church
might appear in one chief Apostle, and schisms might be avoided, not so much
among the Apostles (where none could chance) as among others afterward, Leo
epist. ^2.
who should have less grace to keep unity, then the Apostles had. But in case
the Apostles had been so destitute of grace, that any one might have taught
false doctrine, and stubbornly have defended the same: doubtless S. Peter
might no less have deposed him, Actor. 1.
then he did separate Judas from the College of the Apostles, even after his
death.

And that had been always the true Catholic Church, which had followed S.
Peter's doctrine.

But now the privilege of the other Apostles, did nothing hinder S. Peter's
chief power, who had sufficient authority to have controlled them, if they
had lacked sufficient grace, to have taught only true doctrine. And although
they had grace not to err, yet his power was not in deed the less thereby, but
it had the less occasion to show it self upon the Apostles: 1. Tim. 1. Lex
iusto non est posita.
even as the Law is not therefore the weaker, because it can not be practiced
upon the just men.

That S. Peter's prerogative above the other Apostles is most manifestly seen by
his chief bishoplie power. The XII. Chap.






S. Peter passed the other Apostles in the state and degree of their bishoply
power. Herein, I say, that whereas we may consider in a prelate either his
order and office, or else the authority and Jurisdiction of the same, the order
and office of bishoply power was equally common, not only to all the Apostles,
but likewise to al other bishops.

For it is generally true which S. Hierom says: Ad Euagrium.
Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, eiusdem meriti, eiusdem
est and Sacerdotij. Whersoeuer a bishop be, whether at Rome (which is the head
city of the world) or at Eugubium (which is a small town) he is of the same
merit, and of the same priesthod. That is to say, every Bishop may as well
preach, and minister the sacrament of confirmation or of priesthod (and much
more all the other Sacraments) to his own Citisens, or do any like matter
belonging to his order, as the highest bishop in the world may. For the order
is equally common to them al.

And that is it which S. Cyprian says, De vnitate Eccles.
Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidu^ pars tenetur. The bishoplie
office is one, whereof every man holds a part for the whole, that is to say,
every man does partake the bishoplie office wholly, and without diminution. For
as every man has for his part the whole nature of a man in himself, so has
every Bishop for his part the whole nature of a bishop in himself.

This equality of bishoply order and office notwithstanding, the Apostles were
in their bishoply prelateshippe and Jurisdiction a great way behi^d S. Peter,
because he had a higher and larger power of governing given to him over
Christ's sheep, then any of the other had in that behalf. Touching then the
superiority of S. Peter's jurisdiction, for as much as all the power he had, was
either Apostolic, or bishoply, seeing he could not easily have more committed
to hi^ over the rest of the sheep by his Apostolic office, Math. 2^.
then the other Apostles had (for each of the^ had charge over the whole Church,
and (the government of their own persons excepted) what greater power could S.
Peter have) if this notwithstandig, I prove evidently that Christ committed to
S. Peter more Ecclesiastical power eue^ over his sheep then to any other: it
must needs be rather meant of more bishoply, then of more Apostolic power.
And so albeit the power and jurisdiction of the Apostles over the rest of the
sheep be equal, yet the power of bishops even over the same sheep is not equal.
How prove I the^, that S. Peter had more committed to his charge, the^ the
other Apostles? Verily because Christ in the presence of S. John, S. James, and
S. Thomas the Apostles, and of other three disciples said to Peter: Simo^
Ioa^nis diligis me plus his. Joan. 21.
Simon the son of John do thou love me more then these? And surely, seeing S.
John was among them, who was so tenderly beloved of Christ, that he was known
by the name of the Disciple whom Jesus loved, Ibidem.
when Peter is asked, whether he love more the^ they, he is in effect asked,
whether he love more, then any other Apostle or Disciple.

Neither does our Lord demand this question, as a thing whereof he doubted,
but to instruct us, that Peter loved him more then the other. Whereupon S.
Augustine concludes: In Joan. Tract. 24.
Sciebat igitur Dominus, no^ solu^ quod diligeret, verumetiam quod plus illis
diligeret eum Petrus. Therefore our Lord did know, that Peter did not only
love (him) but also that he loved (him) more then they.

And yet seeing Peter could not love Christ more then the other did, except
Christ had first loved Peter more then he loved the other (for Peter's excellent
love toward Christ must needs come of the former exceeding love of Christ
toward Peter as the scripture it self does teach us) it is out of all
controversy, that Christ first loved S. Peter, 1. Joan. 4. Prior dilexit nos.
more then he loved any other man in the whole world. What? The question.
more then he loved S. John? Or more then he loved his own Mother?

I answer, An example
that there are diverse considerations of love. Alexander the great had two
frindes, who loved him for diverse respects. The one called Craterus loved him
as king, and looked to his honor in matters belonging thereunto. The other
called Hephestion, loved his person, and diligently procured his health and
private well doing. Whereupon King Alexander was wont to say, that Craterus
loved the King, but Hephestion loved Alexander. Eue^ so Christ loved his
Morther above all creatures, in the respect of that love which it pleased him
(as her Son) to owe unto his Mother by the Law of nature. Exodus 20.
And therein he loved her almost inco^parablie above S. Peter. Likewise he
loved personally S. John the Evangelist, August. in Joan. Tractat. 124.
and S. John loved him more then other, in that he was a virgin by Christ's
gift, as who had dedicated his body and soul to Christ alone.

But in respect of Christ's flock which was to be fed and governed in the
earth, in that respect, Christ loved S. Peter, and S. Peter him, more the^
others. The which distinction being kept, we may well say, that our Lady loved
Christ (as the Son of God taking flesh of her own body) more then any other:
and that S. John loved Christ (as the cause of his virginity, and the Athour
of his chaste love) more then any other, and that S. Peter loved Christ (as the
prince of pastors) more then any other, 1. Pet. 5.
of which last kind of love Christ now speaks, as it may well appear by his
own words.

For when S. Peter had answered, yea Lord, thou know, that I love thee,
Jesus said to hi^, feed my la^bs. As who should say: for as much as thou in
respect of my pastoral power, love me more then these, take more power then
they to feed my lambs. For now since Peter's love is the cause why Christ gives
him power to feed his lambs: according to the measure of the love, the measure
of the feeding must be understood. De temp. sermon. 149.
Dominus Jesus (says S. Augustine) respondenti amore^, commendat agnos suos,
and dicit: pasce oues meas. tanquam diceret, quid retribues quia diliges me,
dilectionem ostende in omnibus. To Peter answering that he loves, our Lord
Jesus commends his lambs, and says: Feed my sheep, as if he should say:
what will thou render to me because thou love me? Show thy love toward the
sheep.

The same very sense S. Chrysostom gives: In Joan. Hom. 87.
Si amas me, fratru^ cura^ susci pias. If thou love me, or seeing thou love
me take the care of thy brethern. If then the authority of feeding, be the
reward of Peter's love, for as much as according to S. Augustines judgment
grounded upon the express word of God, Peter loved more the^ the other, Peter
is now bid to show more love in taking cure of his brethern, then any other.
Which thing because he can not do, except he receive more power and authority
to feed his brethern, Jacob. 1.
then other have (for Peter can do no more in that behalf, then is from
heaven committed to him) it does inuinciblie follow, that Christ at this time
gives to Peter alone more power and authority to feed his sheep, then any
other had, or can have.

For the literal meaning of Christ's whole discourse, is none other thing, then
to say, for as much as thou love me more then these, feed my sheep. In the
cumpasse or meaning of which words, it is not possible for any other Apostle
to be comprehended aequallie with S. Peter. Note this reason.
For if any other may feed aequallie with him, by the force of this commission,
the same cause of feeding must be in him, which is named in this commission.
That is to say, More the^ these.
he must love more then these. But if any other do so, then has Peter no
commission to feed Christ's sheep, because he then does not love more then
they, seeing they must love more then he, or else no co^missio^ of feeding is
given the^.

Who so ever has this commission to feed Christ's sheep, he must first love
Christ the prince of Pastors, more the^ these, as Peter now does. And by
(these) I showed before alth' Apostles and disciples to be meant. Therefore
they are al excluded from this authority whereof Christ speaks presently:
And yet seeing the sheep of the whole world are in other places committed to
all Io^ 7.20.
the Apostles the which power (concerning al other beside the Apostles them
selves) is so great, that this ca^ be no greater, if these things be well
conferred and weighed together, Note.
we are forced to confess that this commission which gives more authority
over the sheep to one then to the reast, is not proprely any Apostolic power
(for then all the Apostles should have it aequally) but it is an other kind of
power which being perhaps not much inferior to the Apostolic authority, must
still so remain in one above others (so long as the sheep of Christ do remain)
as it is now given to one more then to other, because he loves more then the
other.

This kind of power is now called the power of one chief Bishop or pastor:
whereupon S. Augustine says concerning this very text of scripture, and this
one pastor S. Peter: Dominus in ipso Petro vnitatem commendauit. Multi erant
Apostoli, In hom. de pastor. c. 13.
and vni dicitur, pasce oues meas. Absit vt desint modo boni pastores, sed
omnes boni pastores in vno sunt, vnum sunt. Our Lord has commended unity in
Peter himself. There were many Apostles, and it is said to one, feed my sheep.
God forbid, there should lack now good Pastors, but al they are in one, they
are one.

S. Augustine manifestly declares hereby, that Saint Peter alone was spoken
unto (among other causes) for this also, to signify (in him self, being one
Pastor) the unity, which al Pastors have in Christ, De sanctis sermon. 24
the Prince of Pastors. In vno Petro figurabatur vnitas omniu^ Pastoru^. The
unity of al pastors was signified in Peter alone or in Peter being one Pastor.

But whereas the unity of all good Pastors in Ghrist alone, is not literallie
expressed in this place of the holy scripture, but is only builded mystically
upon the literal story of Peter, being made one shepherd: that mystical and
allegorical sense is void, except this other literal sense be true. 1. Cor. 10.
Gal. 4. Heb. 9.
For all manner allegories are grounded upon some true and literal history.
Therefore S. Peter is indeed made Pastor alone, who may contain all the
Pastors of the earth in his unity, to the end he thereby may show that all the good Pastors which have been, be, or shall be, are one in Christ the prince
of Pastors.

So that by S. Augustines discourse it is clear two ways, that Peter has no
fellow in this pastoral office whereof Christ now speaks. Both because he
alone loves more then other, and he is one pastor in earth for the time, to
show that Christ is one everlasting pastor of his whole flock, both in earth
and in heaven.

From S. Augustine let us pass over to S. Chrysostom, who having taught,
that Christ asks, whether Peter loves him (not to teach us that S. Peter
loved him, but to inform us Quantae sibi curae sit gregis huius praefectura,
how great care he takes of the government of this flock) concludes in this
wise: lib. 2. de Sacerdoti^
Petru^ Christus authoritate praeditum esse voluit, acreliquos item Apostolos
long praecellere. Christ would have Peter to be endowed with authority, and
also to pass a great way the other Apostles.

Mark first, that it is praefectura gregis, the rule and government of the
flock which Christ intends.

Secondly, that Christ would have Peter to be endowed not only with grace,
and virtue, but with such authority, as did apperteine to the feeding of
Christ's sheep.

Thirdly, that he would him to pass the Apostles: and wherein, I pray you, but
in authority? For he passed them in that thing, wherewith he was endowed. But
Christ endowed him with authority: therefore Peter passed the other Apostles in
authority.

long, a great way.

He passed the Apostles in all other power after some certain sort, How S.
Peter passed the Apostles.
either because he had that power first, which was given them afterward, or else
because he had that power ordinarily, which was extraordinarily given them, or
else because, whereas they were heads of the sheep together with him (thorough
their Apostleshippe) he was also their head, as being the prince and chief of
the Apostles. But above all other respects, he passed them long, a great, way
in the power of feeding the sheep, as the chief bishop.

In epist. ad Episc. per Vienne^sem prouinc. constitut.
So that Leo had just cause to say: Cum Petro prae caeteris soluendi and
ligandi sit tradita potestas, pascendarum tn^ ouiu^ cura specialius mandata
est. Whereas the power of bindi^g and loosing is delivered to Peter above
others, yet the care of feeding the sheep is more specially committed. Will you
see how much more specially?

Arnobius notes none of the Apostles ever to have had the name of a Pastor
given to him by Christ, beside S. Peter alone, to whom it was said, pasce oues
meas, feed mie sheep. That is to say, be thou the pastor of my sheep.
Arnobius in Psalm. 138. Joan. 10.
Nullus Apostolorum nomen pastoris accepit. Solus enim Dominus Jesus Christus
dicebat: Ego sum Pastor bonus. and iterum: me, inquit, sequuntur oues meae. Hoc
ergo nomen sanctum, and ipsius nominis potestatem post resurrectionem suam
Petro poenitenti concessit, Joan. 21.
and ter negatus negatori suo ha^c, quam solus habuit, tribuit potestatem.

None of the Apostles has received the name of a pastor. Four our Lord Jesus
Christ alone did say: I am a good pastor: and again he says, My sheep do
follow me. But this holy name and the power thereof after his resurrection he
granted to Peter repenting, and being thrice denied, he did give unto him, who
denied him, this power, which he alone had. Christ alone had the power to feed
his own flock, this power he gave to Peter in such sort, as none other
Apostles had it.

For he gave to Peter the name of a Pastor, and ipsius nominis potestatem, and
that power which the name did import. But as Arnobius said before, nullus
Apostolorum nomen Pastoris accepit. None of the Apostles took the name of a
pastor: therefore none of them took the power of feeding after such sort, as
the name and power thereof was now given to Peter. And seeing every Apostle had
authority before to feed all nations through his Apostleship: this feeding
which is now given to Peter alone, and must be mea^t of some other power beside
the Apostolic function, is doutlesse meant of Peter's bishoply power.

I beseech the discreet Reader neither to use cauils himself, nor to give care
to them who love to wra^gle. Here would M. Jewel straight way show, that Christ
gave many pastors and teachers to his Church, Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. 5.
and that every Apostle did feed, of which things I deny no one. But I say
there was beside the Apostleship a kind of feeding so peculiar to Peter, that
no Apostle took (so specially as S. Peter did) either the name thereof, or the
thing meant by the name.

Which thing the holy scripture does insinuate, when it shows Peter to have
loved more then other, and consequently according to the measure of his love
to have taken the measure of feeding. In which sense Saint Chrysostom, S.
Augustine, Leo and Arnobius do evidently agree. We must therefore confess a
supereminent power of the pastoral office in Peter, that preeminence (say I)
consisted in the ordinary power of being the chief shepherd. He that denies
my interpretation, must bring a better, which I marvel how he shall come by.

But let us also consider the mind of S. Ambrose in this behalf. Ambros. in
24. ca. Lucae.
Who having said by S. Peter, that he was vbique aut solus, aut primus, every
where either alone, or chief, at the last he comes to speak of these words
of Christ spoken to Peter, amas me, do thou love me?

Dominus interrogabat, non vt disceret, sed vt doceret, quem eleuandus in
coelum amoris sui nobis velut Vicarium relinquebat. Sic enim habes: Simon
Ioannis diligis me? vtique tu scis Domine quia amo te. Dicit ei Jesus, pasce
agnos meos. been conscius sui no^ ad tempus assumptum, sed iamdudum Deo
cognitum Petrus testificatur affectum. Quis est enim alius qui de se hoc facile
profiteri possit? Et ideo quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, oi^bus antefertur.
Our Lord asked, not to learn, but to teach him who^ he, being to be assumpted
into heaven, The Vicar of Christ's love.
did leave to us as the Vicar of his love. For so thou read. Simon the Son
of Ion, do thou love me? Yea Lord thou know that I love thee. Jesus said
to him, feed mie lambs. Peter being privy of a good conscience, does testify
his own affection not taken for the time, but already well known to God. For
who else were able to profess this thing of himself? And because he alone among
all professes, he is preferred before all.

First note well, that S. Ambrose compares the love with the feeding. For he
reasons always from the one to the other.

Secondly he says, that Christ, in consideration that he should ascend into
heaven, Vicare.
taught him, whom he left the Vicar of his love. Behold if Peter be the Vicar
of Christ, it is no wonder that the Pope sitting in Peter's chair, is called
also the Vicar of Christ. Yea but (say you) he is the Vicare of his love, and
not of his pastoral office. Yeas Sir, of both.

For now S. Ambrose speaks of that love, which consisted in having authority
to feed the flock. For it follows in S. Ambrose: Sic enim habes, for thus thou
read. And immediately he comes to the power of feeding, which Christ gave
unto Peter in the highest degree of any mortal pastor, because Peter loved
more then other. Christ left to us a Vicar of his love, who was that? Peter.
when was he leaft a Vicar? When Christ said, feed mie lambs. The love then
left to us was the power of feeding, which Peter had over us, and the Vicar of
Christ's love was the Vicare of Christ's power, which he had to feed us.

Although Christ our everlasting meat feed us always by his mighty power,
Joan. 6.
yet when he should go corporally into heaven, he leaft us a Vicar of his
corporal kind of feeding.

His words do not now sound in our ears, as they did whiles he lived, in
preaching, in teaching, in administering the Sacraments, in governing the
Church, and in sending other to preach. Christ has a Vicar, whom to that
effect he loves above all other, and who loves him above all other: to that
effect, I say, of feeding his flock.

Moreover S. Ambrose notes, that Peter omnibus antefertur, is preferred before
al, why so? Quia solus profitetur ex omnibus. Because he alone of them al, does
profess. But why says S. Ambrose that he alone does profess? Might any other
man profess, when Peter alone was asked? No verily. And so does S. Ambrose
mean, that Peter alone professes his love, because he alone is asked whether
he loved more the^ these. otherwise if S. John who stood by, had been asked, I
think he was not guilty of any lack of loving Christ. But Christ intended to
give unto Peter more love then the other had, even for this purpose, that he
might receive a higher power to feed, then other had.

Last of al, S. Ambrose notes, as it were three degrees in the commission of
Peter's authority of feeding, and that, according to the power of feeding thrice
repeated. Agnus.
Ia^ non agnos (vt primo) quodam lacte vescendos, Cuicula. Ouis.
nec ouiculas (vt secundo) sed oues pascere iubetur, perfectiores vt perfectior
gubernaret. (At the third time wherein our Lord said to Peter, pasce feed) he
was not now bid to feed as it were with milk, the lambs (as at the first
time) nor the smaller sheep, as at the second time, but the sheep, to the end
he being more perfect might govern the more perfect.

It is now also to be noted, that S. Ambrose puts the word gubernare, to
govern, in steed of pascere, to feed. For in deed the shepherd has
authority to rule and govern his sheep.

Peter then has authority not only over the lambs, which are, as it were, the
childern, and the unlearned Christians, nor only over the smaller sheep, which
yet are elder then the lambs (as the Christian lawyers, the learned
physicions, the Judges and Princes of Christendom) but also he has power to
govern even the sheep which are of most perfect age. Verily the ewes, Oues.
the weathers, yea the rams themselves, which in diverse places are capitaines
of diverse flocks. So that parissh Priests, Bisshops, Archebisshoppes and
Patriarchs are committed to the government of Peter alone. He is the vicar of
Christ, in love and power of feeding: therefore as none was without the
cumpasse of Christ's fold, no more may he be without the cumpasse of Peter's
fold, who will be reckened in Christ's fold. De consid. ad Eugen. lib. 2.


S. Bernard writing to Eugenius the Pope of Rome (whose books he that reads,
may well perceue he spoke it for no flattery) has these words: Alij Pastores
habent sibi assignatos greges, singuli singulos, tibi vniuersi crediti, vni
vnus. Nec modo ouium, sed and Pastorum tu vnus omnium pastor. Ex verbo Domini.
Vnde probem, quaeris? Ex verbo Domini. Cui enim no^ dico Episcoporum, sed
etia^ Apostoloru^ sic absolute and indiscrete totae commissae sunt oues? Si me
amas Petre, pasce oues meas. Quas? Illius aut illius populos ciuitatis, aut
regionis, aut certi regni? Oues meas, inquit. Cui non planu^, non designasse
aliquas, sed assignasse omnes? nihil excipitur, vbi distinguitur nihil.

Other pastors have flocks assigned to them, every pastor one flock: to thee
all are committed, one flock to one shepherd. And not only of the sheep, but
also of the pastors thou alone art the pastor. Do thou ask, how I prove
it? By the word of our Lord. Gods word.
For to whom (I say not only) of the Bisshops, but also of the Apostles so
absolutely and without distinction are all the sheep committed? If thou love
me Peter, feed mie sheep. Which sheep? whether the people of this, or of that
city, or country, or of a certain kingdom? He says, mie sheep. To whom is
it not evident, that Christ did not appoint out some, but assigned all? Nothing
is excepted where nothing is distincted.

This place needs no declaration it is so full in all points. Wherefore I
suppose it is by this time sufficiently proved, that S. Peter did excel a
great way even his fellow Apostles in the pastoral authority of feeding
Christ's flock. By which power S. James (otherwise S. Peter's equal) yet after
he was once bishop of Jerusalem, was thereby of necessity subject unto Peter,
as who could not feed a part of that flock, which was wholly committed unto
Peter, but by the acknowleging of Peter his general shepherd.

In sign whereof S. Peter being not readen himself to have been ordained
bishop of any other then of Christ, did yet with two other Apostles orde in S.
James Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius. li. 2 cap. 1.
as the Ecclesiastical history does witness. In consideration of which S.
Peter's Bishoplie power, Arnobius (who would never have called Peter the Apostle
of the Apostles) yet douted not to name him the Bishop of Bishops, and to
confirm the same by this place of the Gospel, where Peter alone is made the
pastor, whiles it is said to him, feed my sheep.

And because his other words were alleged before, it may suffice now to
hear him say this much only of S. Peter: Arnobius in Psalm. 138.
Ecce Apostolo poenitenti succurritur, qui est Episcoporum Episcopus. Behold,
the Apostle who is the Bishop of Bisshoppes, being penitent finds succor.
Could any thing be spoken more plainly?

But you will say, In epist. ^. ad Iacobu^ fra. Dom.
that S. Clement gives the very same title to S. James also. As though Saint
James being the Archbishop of Jerusalem, had not diverse other bishops under
hi^, of which bishops he might well be called the bishop. But S. Peter being
alone called the pastor (as Arnobius showed before) and so being a bishop as
he was a pastor, must be understood, not only to be a bishop of some
bishops (as every Archbishop is) but also a bishop of all bishops, as noman at
al is, beside S. Peter and his successors. But Peter being alone the pastor,
is alone the bishop of the very Apostles also, in that behalf as they were
bishops, and not in that respect as they were Apostles.

Yea, but here an other may bring forth S. Cyprian, Ad Quintum de haeret.
baptizand.
who says: Neque quisquam nostrum Episcopu^ episcoporum se esse constituit.
Neither does any of us make himself a bishop of bishops. I pray you sir, what
is this to the purpose? Because no man makes himself a bishop of bishops,
shall therefore Christ make no man a bishop of bishops? S. Cyprian speaks of
his own deed, and Arnobius speaks of Christ's deed. But if Christ himself
make noman a Bishop of bisshops, how is then S. James called a bishop of
bishops? Or was S. James that, which S. Peter could not be?

Again, Saint Cyprian means, that in matters, which are yet in controversy,
no man may play the bishop of bisshoppes in judging an other bishop: Or, in
prescribing to him, what he shall believe in doutfull cases. But S. Augustine
expounding this very place of S. Cyprian, De baptis. cont. Donanist. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
shows it to be otherwise in matters which are already well known and
thoroughly discussed in the Church.

Moreover, Ibidem. Se in omnibus humilians.
Saint Cyprian in that place shows his humility and his love of unity (as
Saint Augustine has well noted) in that he being in deed a Bishop of some
Bisshoppes (because he was an Archebisshop) yet does renounce to use his
authority, whereas notwithstanding, if he had not ben above other Bisshoppes,
he should not have always both sitten, and spoken first in the prouincial
Counsel, as both he and his Ancestors also had done.

Last of al, S. Cyprian does most evidently confess, the Supremacy of S.
Peter, by that which he writes of his principal Chaier and succession, lib. i.
ep. 3. et de unit. Eccles.
as it shall appear afterward. At this time it suffiseth, that S. Peter is
taught by Arnobius, to have been a Bishop of Bishops, which thing no Catholic
Father did at any time deny. Lib. 7. de Schis.
Yea on the other side Optatus feared not to write thus of S. Peter: Preferri
apostolis omnibus meruit, and claues regni coelorum, communicandas coeteris,
solus accepit. Peter deserved to be preferred before all the Apostles, and he
alone took the keys of the kingdom of heaven to be communicated unto others.

how the keys are communicated.
This preferment in taking the keys to be communicated with others, is to be
meante, concerning that whiles S. Peter alone was made the high Pastor and
Bishop, thereby the keys were communicated to the other Apostles, in such
sort as they all were Bisshops, and not so as though he communicated the keys
to them in respect that they were Apostles, for the Apostles took the keys
belonging to their Apostolic office immediately of Christ, and not by the
mediation of S. Peter. Accordingly as S. Paul teaches him self to be an
Apostle neither of men, Galat. 1.
nor by a man, but by Jesus Christ.

Therefore, when Peter alone is said to have taken the keys, it is meante,
that he alone as high Priest and chief Bishop, took the keys of his
pastoral office, to be communicated by him to particular Bisshops his
inferiors. For as Leo writes of his christian brethern: Petrum non solum
Romanae sedis praesulem, Leo. Ser. 2. in aniuers. assumpt.
sed and omnium Episcoporum nouerunt esse primatem.

They know Peter to be not only the Bishop of the Sea of Rome, but also to be
the Primate of al Bisshops. This most plain sentence I suppose, needs no
declaration. But it shows S. Peter beside his Apostolic office, to have a
dubble power of governing the Church, one particular in the City of Rome, an
other general over al Bisshoppes. Now such a primate of al Bisshoppes S. James
was not, albeit he was a Bishop of some Bishops.

To end this matter, let us hear the judgment of S. Gregory: Certe Petrus
Apostolus primum membru^ sanctae, Lib 4. ep. 38.
and vniuersalis Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Andreas, Ioannes, quid aliud quam
singularum sunt plebium capita? Surely Peter the Apostle is the chief member
of the holy and universal Church. Paul, Andrew, John, what other thing are
they, then each one the heads of particular Churches? Here S. Gregory means
not to say, that Saint Paul or S. Andrew could not preach in all the world
(God forbid) but only that (as Bisshoppes) they could have but this or that
flock under them, In 1. Reg. lib. 4. c. 4. totius Ecclesiae principatu^
obtinuit.
whereas otherwise Saint Gregory him self confesses, that S. Paul obtained
the chief government of the whole Church.

And the like, all the other Apostles obtained by their Apostleshippe, without
any division of flocks or Churches assigned by Christ. But Peter had the
charge of the whole Church, not only as an Apostle, but also as a high
Bishop. And therein only S. Gregory means that he passed Paul, Andrew, or
John.

This much I trust may suffice them who will be satisfied, for proof that
whereas every Apostle had in him the whole right of the Apostleshippe, and also
the right of being a particular Bissshoppe: Saint Peter had not only those two
Authorities, but also he had the right of the highest Bisshoppe in respect of
all other Bisshoppes. He as a Bisshoppe, was the chief member of the whole
militant Church (that is to say, to the head thereof) as S. Gregory teaches.
Lib. 4. ep. 38.
He was the bishop of bisshops, says Arnobius, in Psalm. 138.
and the Primate of al prelates, says Leo. sermon. 2. in aniuers
lib. 2. ad Eugen.
the pastor of al pastors, says S. Bernard. He alone by the judgment of
Arnobius was called of Christ a Pastor, because there was none other advanced
to that power of feedinge, which he received. He was preferred a great way
before the Apostles in authority, lib. 2. de Sacerdotio
says lib. 2. ad Eugen.
S. Chrysostom. In him (being one Pastor) unity was signified, says S. in
Psalm. 138.
Homil. de pastor.
Augustine. He was the vicare of Christ's love in feeding us, as S. in Lucae.
24.
Ambrose affirmed. Concerning this primacie of his Bisshoply power, in that
sense, he was much more properly the guide, top, mouth, chief, and head of
the Apostles, then in the Apostolic function. For whereas they were chosen
Apostles aequally with him, he alone was chosen high Pastor above them. Al
these things have been proved out of Gods word, and out of the holy Fathers.

Order now requires, that I should show S. Peter's prerogative also by the
continuance of his authority.

That the pastoral or chief Bisshops authority of s. Peter was an ordinary
authority, and therefore it must go for ever unto his successors, whereas
the Apostolic authority being extraordinary, has no successors in it. The
Xiij.
THe Apostles were instituted for a certain purpose, Matthew. 23 Act. 1.
verily to publish the Gospel, and to plant the faith of Christ in all
nations, with a most absolute power and with an authority which never should be
controlled.

For, seeing S. Peter being one man alone, was not able to preach the Gospel at
once in all places, nor by and by to govern diverse nations newly converted (as
whose commission from Christ was not as then sufficiently known) Christ gave
him twelve Companions, with as full authority over the sheep for the time, as
he had, who having converted many countries to the faith, might commend them
all as sheep to be fed of many pastors under one perpetual chief shepherd
S. Peter.

Who knows not, that it is much easier for one man to govern all the faith
full (being once converted and well instructed) by the help of many inferior
officers, then it is for him to subdue al those unto the faith, which being as
yet infidels, are also dispersed into diverse quarters? But when the Apostles
had spread the faith into all parts of the world, with the death of them, the
Apostolic authority likewise was at an end. And that being confessed by our
Adversaries, even this last year in a Confession printed at Zurich, needs no
farther proof. An. 1566. tit. 18.
For they say: when the Churches were now stablished, the Apostles ceased to
be. But that S. Peter must have successors, not in his Apostleship, but in his
supremacy of being chief Bishop above al Bisshops, that now is to be
declared.

Who so marketh the peculiar names of a Rock, of a Pastor, Matthew. 16. Joan.
21. Luc. 22.
and of a Co^firmer of his brethern, which are given by Christ to S. Peter
alone: may well perceive, that S. Peter's supremacy being meant by those names,
must necessarily continue for ever. If a rock be laid in the foundation of the
house, to stay it up: out of al question, the rock must not be taken away, if
we will have the house to stand.

The Rock whereupon the whole Church is built from the beginning of the world
to the end, 1. Cor. 3. and 10. Dan. 7.
is Christ himself, but not only the whole Church, but also that part which
lives in the earth for the time, wherein vessels both of honor and of
co^tumelie are (which vessels of contumely are not in heaven) that part I, 2.
Tim. 2.
1. Tim. 3.
say, living on the earth is called the house of God, as S. Paul teaches.
Therefore it also must have a rock of his own sort and nature to lean unto.

For as Christ alone is the universal Rock of that universal house, and the
universal shepherd of that great flock: so beside him, God always erected
some certain particular stones, and certain small Rocks in the earth, which
might stay up that part of his house, which for the time wandered in this
world. Such were Adam, Enos, Henoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Math. 23.
Moses, Aaron, and his successors, who sat in the chair of Moses until the
coming of Christ. For always there was some visible Rock of the Church in
this life, Deuteronomy. 17.
who might be so strongly fastened in the faith of Christ the great Rock, that
he (though not for his own, yet for the Churches sake) might be able to stay
up other small stones which leaned unto him.

Christ at the length having taken flesh, and walki^g visibly in this world,
and preachi^g in the la^d of Iewrie, did not only stay his universal house upon
his Godhead (as he had ever done before) but now also he stayed the militant
Church upon the visible example of his own life, and upon the preaching of his
own sensible doctrine according to his manhod, even after the same rate, Deuteronomy.
18.
as Moses did whiles he lived.

Now in consyderation that Christ would forsake this world concerning his
visible conversation, and that he would go in his manhood to reign in heaven
gloriously over the glorious part of his Church: he instituted an other
particular Rock and shepherd, Joan. 21.
who by the outward preaching and confessing of his faith, might for his life
time stay the militant Church of God in a right belefe, as Abraham or Moses
had don whiles they lived.

Matthew. 16
This particular militant Rock was S. Peter for the time. But when he died, he
left behind him still a particular militant Church (I call it particular in
respect of the universal Church which for ever was and shall be) therefore some
mortal man ought still to be in the earth, who may so uphold the militant
Church by the assurance of his faith and confession, as S. Peter did once
uphold the same: who likewise may still so confirm his brethern as S. Peter was
once willed to confirm them. Matthew. 23.
Al Christians are brethern among themselves, but al bishops are brethern in a
nigher degree of holy government.

The Rock therefore which shall strengthen both all the Christians, and namely
all the bishops, must continue so long, as there are either bishops or
Christians in the earth. The same reason is also found in the name of a pastor.
For as the flock of sheep continues after S. Peter's death, even so must such
an other pastor (as S. Peter was) be made, who may still feed and rule the
flock of Christ. whereupon S. Chrysostom says: Lib. 2. de Sacerdot.
Christus sanguinem fudit, vt pecudes eas acquireret, quarum curam tum Petro,
tum Petri Successoribus committebat. Christ has shed his blood, to get unto
him those sheep, the cure of whom he did commit both to Peter, Peter's
successors.
and to the successors of Peter.

In that very place it was were S. Chrysostom said, that Peter being endowed,
Long praecellere.
with authority passed the other Apostles a great way. As therefore Peter in
the authority of feeding, passed the other Apostles: so must the successors
of Peter pass a great way the successors of the other Apostles which are al
Bisshops. For now Chrysostom confesses, that the same care is committed to
the successors of Peter, which was committed to Peter himself.

Sermon 2 in aniuers. assumpt.
With S. Chrysostom Pope Leo agreeeth, saying: Soliditas illius fidei quae in
Apostoloru^ pri^cipe est laudata, perpetua est. Et sicut permanet, quod in
Christo Petrus credidit, ita permanet, quod in Petro Christus instituit. The
strength of that faith which was praised in the prince of the Apostles is
everlasting. And as that remains, which Peter believed in Christ (that is to
say, the Godhed of Christ) so does that remain, which Christ instituted in
Peter, that is to say, a sure rock which may always confess the true faith of
Christ.

And Leo showing afterward, how that remains, which was ordained in S. Peter,
Ibidem.
he says: In sede Petri sua viuit potestas, excellit authoritas. In the seat
of Peter his power lives, his authority exelleth. Therefore the authority of
S. Peter, is an ordinary power, which has an ordinary succession in Christ's
Church.

These reasons are so plain, so strong, so true, so forceable, that I muse
what understanding, what wit, or sense they have, who granting Peter to have been the rock, whereupon the Church was built for the time (which thing they
must needs grant, unless they will deny the express word of God, and the
perpetual consent of all the Fathers) yet will not grant that an other like
Rock should be substituted after S. Peter.

Verily seeing the reason of S. Peter's confession, Vbi eadem ratio, ide^ iu^.
and of his power is such as agrees to an ordinary office of the Church, the
office also of S. Peter's being a rock, of stre^gthning his brethren, and of
feedi^g Christ's sheep, is an ordinary office, which has and must continue so
long as there is a Militant house of God in earth, and so long as either any
brethern are who may be confirmed, or any sheep who need to be fed.

And verily if S. Peter have no successors in his pastoral office, what mean
li. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, lib. 2. de schismate.
Optatus, and Ep. 165.
S. Augustine by name to reckon up such successors of S. Peter as had lived
til every of their age and time.

Moreover, whereas noman (excepti^g the cases of necessity) may rightly preach
to them to whom he is not sent: Romans 10.
if, as every particular pastor has (as S. Cyprian teaches) a portion of
the flock assigned to his government, lib. 1. ep. 3
for which he shall be acco^ptable unto our Lord: so there be not some general
pastor always in the Church, who, beside his particular charge, may send
others to preach unto them, which are not yet converted, and who (when they
are converted) may erect new Churches, and plant new bishoprikes in those
parties: (as S. Gregory did in England) if there be not some, Beda li. 1. c.
23. and 27. Tit. 1.
who may (as Paul says) correct the things which lack, and also control
other Bisshoppes when they are negligent, and who may excommunicate even those
Christians which live in no particular diocese, but being conversant among the
Jews or painims, do there teach false doctrine, and thence do write
heretical books or treatises: if, I say, there be not some general pastors,
who may sommon all other Bisshoppes to General or provincial Councels, and
may change the former positive laws of the Church, when either necessititie
or charity requires it, and who may either make two Bisshoppes where one was
before, or unite two into one, Greg. li. 2. epist. 31. and 35.
or commit the cure of any See or chair vacant to the next bishop, and so in
all cases may provide for the benefit of Christ's flock: it will come to
pass, that the house of God shall not be so well provided for, as other mean
States and commonweals are.

But if there be a power in Gods Church, whereby all the former cases may be
well provided for, seeing it is clear, that the Apostolic power is ended: it
must needs be the high pastoral power of S. Peter, which shall procure these
affairs. And consequently the high pastoral office of S. Peter is an ordinary
office, which ceased not with his own death, but is tranferred to his
Successors, as it shall farther appear in the next chapter saving one.

That the ordinary authority of S. Peter's primacy belonge^h to one Bishop
alone. The XIIII. Chap.
SAint Peter had not only the same power of binding and loosing committed to
him alone, which was given in common to all the Apostles, but also he (as the
head of all Bishops) had it specified to him before they had it. For whereas
their authority is showed to have been given in the eighte^th chapter of S.
Matthew; Matthew. 18.
and in the twenteth of S. Ihon: Joan. 20.
the authority of S. Peter is described and promised in the sixtenth of S.
Matthew, Matthew. 16
and it depended of the promise of Christ, wherein he said, thou shall be called
Peter, or the rock: the which promise was made (as it appears in S. Ihon) not
only before the Apostles were chosen, Joan. 1.
but also before they were called to be the Disciples of Christ.

Ad iubaianum.
In consideration whereof S. Cyprian might boldly say: Petro primus Dominus
(super quem aedificauit Ecclesiam, and vnde vnitatis originem instituit, and
ostendit) potestatem istam dedit, vt id solueretur in terris, quod ille
soluisset. Our Lord did first give unto Peter (upon whom he built his Church,
and from whom he did institute and show the original or beginning, of unity)
this power, that what soever he did loose, it should be loosed in the earth.

Notevvel
When one has first that right and power alone, which afterward others have, if
there be any ordinary power of that thing at al, it must needs be in him who
has it first. Ordinary Order.
For whereas all ordinary power depends chefelie of order, and whereas in
order nothing can be before that which is first: First one.
seeing S. Peter had first of all the right of the keys of the kingdom of
heaven in himself alone, Matthew. 16.
and seeing the power of the keys, that is to say, of forgeuing and of
reteining sins is ordinarily in the Church, it cannot be otherwise, but that
ordinary power was first in S. Peter alone. Augustine in Joan Tract. 124.


If the pordinary power of binding and loosing be once in one pastor alone, it
must still continue (co^cerni^g that degree) in one alone, if it shall (at the
least) remain still the same power. For if it be given to many, and be equal in
them al, it is not now the same which was promised and given first to Peter
alone, Monarchy, aristocratie, democratie.
but an other kind of power, even as the government of one prince differreth
in kind from the government which is equally common either to many, or to the
whole people.

Seeing it is clear that the Apostles had the same power over the sheep, which
S. Peter had (concerning the exercise of all manner of binding, loosing, Joan.
20.
preaching and baptising) and yet their authority could not be the ordinary
power which is in the Church (because they were many, whereas the ordinary
power was promised before to one alone) it does ensue, Mat. 16.
that they had their authority delegated and specially appointed to them
extraordinarily. The Apostles power was delegated for their lives only
Therefore although they fed the flock of Christ as well as S. Peter, yet they
did it by delegatio^, and by special co^missio^: whereas S. Peter alone was the
ordinary chief shepherd, according to whose pattern there must still be some
one appointed to feed Christ's whole flock.

No man is at this day, that which the Apostles were. No man is able to write
us an other Gospel, or to increase the Canonical Epistles, or to warrant that
he received the first fruits of the holy Ghost, Romans 8.
as the Apostles did. That authority died with them, and came to none other
after them: and consequently, it was not ordinary, but only was committed to
a few, during their own lives. But the ordinary authority of this high
administration began in one alone, and therefore it must continue still in
one alone. There must be still one Rock, Matthew. 16
beside and above all petite Rocks.

There must be still one shepherd, Joan. 21.
beside and above many petite shepherds. There must be still one greater then
other, Luc. 22.
who may be made as the younger, and for whose faith Christ has prayed, to the
end he may strengthen his brethern.

And verily seeing (as S. Bernard says) there is most perfection in unity, De
consid. lib. 2.
and in all division some imperfection is included: shall we thinck that Christ
has chosen to govern his Church in earth, rather in an imperfect, then in a
perfect sort? Again, sithe^s the state of the new testament, must needs be more
perfect, then the state of the Law, which brought nothing to perfection: Heb. 7.
and yet seeing in the Law, the ordinary Pastor was one high Priest and Bishop
(as Aaron and his sede after him) having many synagoges and Leuits under his
supreme government: Number. 3.
what reason can bear, that the state of our visible Church should lack also
in earth one high priest and bishop over many particular parishes and
dioceses? Thus have we both natural reason, the example of the Law, and the
institution of Christ for one chief Bishop.

And that this was the mind of all the ancient Fathers also, it appears most
evidently, because they give such a reason, why the Church was built upon S.
Peter, the which reason (without an extraordinary appointement of God) ca^
never agree, but only to one shepherd who may be above the rest. I say,
without an extraordinary appointment of God, for that the Apostles being
many, why twelve Apostles governed equally.
and being all equal, did govern the church in a maruelouse unity and concord,
as if they had been al but one man. The which spirit of unity Christ gave them,
that his institution (of twelve equal governors for the time) might well
appear not to be slaunderouse or hurtful unto his Church. For he would never
have sent many with equal authority into the whole world, except he had been
able to make them govern with one mind, spirit, and heart.

But seeing it were still a miraculouse thing to see twelve, and much more to see
many thousand bisshops and rulers, being al equal, still to govern the whole
Church in their equal authority without schism, (as the Apostles did) that
Apostolic authority being only instituted for the better publishing of the
faith, does now cease, and one shepherd is ordinarily alone set over al, by
whose general power it may appear, that Christ's Church is but one.

For that is the reason which S. Cyprian brings, why Christ built his Church
upon S. Peter. Ecclesia quae vna est, super vnu^, qui claues eius accepit, Ad
Iubaianum.
voce Dn^i fundata est: The church which is one, was founded by our Lords voice
upon one, who took the keys thereof. De simplicitate praelatorum.
And again: Qua^uis Apostolis omnibus, etc. tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret,
vnitatis eiusdem origine^ ab vno incipiente^ sua authoritate disposuit.
Although Christ after his resurrection gives to all the Apostles like power,
and says: As my Father sent me, Joan. 20.
and I send you, take ye the holy Ghost: i^ you do remitte to any man his
sins, they shall be remitted: and to whom you shall retain them; they shall be
retained: yet to the end he might make unity manifest, he disposed by his
authority the original of the same Unity beginning from one.

Note, good Reader, that the Church was built upon one, both that it might be
one by the institution and ordinance of Christ, and also that it might appear
^ne. That it might be one, Vnitatem disposuit, vt vnitate^ manifestae ret.
that is to say, that all the faithful might be in this ^ife one visible
flock, because they have ^n this life one visible chief shepherd, ^o whom if
al obey, Cyprian. lib. 1. ep. 3.
no schisms can ^e in the Church: that it might ap^eare one, because this
external v^itie of one flock under one shep^eard in this world, is a sign
that the ^niuersall Church (which was, is, and shall be) is in deed for ever
one, through the one shepherd Jesus Christ ^ho is alone the universal
shepherd: whereas Peter had no more but that ^eece of the flock committed
unto him, which was in the earth whiles he li^ed.

But if Peter's chief authority, shall be now divided into many Bishops of
aequall power: then the Militante Church, neither is one ^isible flock under
one visible shep^eard, nor it does not signify, that the universal Church
was, and is, and shall be one by Jesus Christ: but rather it most falselie
signifies, that, as in earth there are thowsands of flocks all equal, and al
several: Note.
so there are as many Christ's, and as many shepherds over the universal
Church. Which signification seeing it is impiouse, and meet for heretics only,
Matt. 24.
who being many, and coming al in Christ's name, do make so many Christ's, as
they are me^: I exhort all men, who favor the only one universal head Jesus
Christ, to believe and profess only one general head of thi^ flock of his which
is in earth. For (...) this militant flock is one, by one milita^t shepherd:
so is the universal Church one flock and one body, through Jesus Christ alone
the universal shepherd and head.

Lib. 2. de schism.
Optatus shows likewise, that S. Peter's chair was singularis, that is to say
such a one, as had no fellow and why so? vt in vna cathedra in qua sedit
Petrus, vnitas ab omnibus seruaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli singulas sibi quisque
defenderent, vt ia^ schismaticus and peccator esset, qui contra singularem
cathedram, alteram collocaret. Ergo cathedra vnica quae est prima de dotibus,
sedit prior Petrus. (Peter's chair was singularly one) to thend unity might be
kept of all men in that one chair, Unity kept in one chair
wherein Peter sat. And that the other Apostles might not challenge every man a
chair to himself: so that he should now be a schismatik and a sinner, who
should place an other chair against the chair which has no fellows. Peter
then satte in the only chair, which is the chief dourie of those that belong
to the Church.

Could any thing be devised more plain? the Chair of Peter is one, singularis
vnae, vnica.
and only, and singular, wherein he being foremost satte, to thend none other
Apostle might erect a contrary chair to Peter's chair. Whereby he means
not, that any Apostle would so much as endeavor any such thing, but it was
don, to thend no successor of the Apostles might take any occasion to say: Mie
chair is as good as Peter's. For an Apostle also did sit in my chair. For
this cause, I say, Peter alone had the first chair and the singular chair,
which had no fellow at all.

S. Hierom also brings the self same reason, why S. Peter alone was the head
and chief of all, Aduersus Iouinian. lib. 1.
saying: Propterea inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto
schismatis tollatur occasio. Therefore among twelve one is chosen, that a head
being made, the occasion of schism might be taken away. But who was that one?
Aetati delatum est, quia Petrus senior erat, ne magister bonus in Ioannem
adolescentem causam praebere videretur inuidiae. The age was preferred, because
Peter was the elder, lest the good master (Christ) should seem to give occasion
of envy, if he had chosen the young man Saint John.

If then Peter was the one who was chosen, and if he was chosen of Christ to
take away the occasion of schism: one chief pastor must still continue, still
to take away the occasion of schism. for S. Peter was not made the Apostles
head, as though the Apostles themselves had been in danger to make a schism
(it were a madness to thinck so of those blessed vessels of God) but his
primacie (as Leo does record) was a plat foorme for other bisshoppes, Sermon. 3.
in anniuers. assump. cu^ctis rectoribus Petri forma proponitur.
who should have less grace, and would have more pride: that they might
understand, how themselves ought not to disdain to have one head set over
the^, if the very Apostles had a head among them. For their deeds are our
instruction.

If then a head was set over the Apostles, for their sakes who should be
pastors afterward, what extreamitie of folly is it, to make S. Peter alone a
head over them, A fortiore
who least of al needed a head: and to leave our weak prelates al without a
head? Who (many of them) need not only a head, but also a dilligent and a
severe head.

Here might I worthily fall into a common place, and show, that according to
the saying of S. Cyprian, heresies have sprung of none other cause so much,
Lib. 1. epistol. 3.
as for that one judge has not been acknowledged in the steed of Christ for
the time, to who^ the whole brotherhod might obey. The which saying if it be
verified (even by M. Jewels and M. Nowels confession) in every particular
diocese: how much more is it true, that the whole Church containing certain
thowsands of dioceses, must have one judge for the time, to whom the whole
brotherhod should obeie, to thend heresies and schisms may be avoided?

For if one judge be so necessary, that one little shere and diocese can not
lack him, but that (whiles one parish priest disdaineth an other) the diocese
falls straight into a schism* can the whole Church being spread throughout
the world lack the same one judge, A fortiore
and yet not fall into schisms? Or shall the part be provided for, and shall
the whole remain without so good a provision? But this argument is begone
alredie between M. Dorman and M. Nowel. And we have many a day looked, what M.
Nowel will answer to it.

Farthermore, we never found, nor shall find one word or syllable in the
whole new testament, where it may appear, that ever Christ committed any
particular company of the faithful men (who then lived) to any one apostle or
disciple, who might be reside^t with the^ alone, as their only Pastor. The
parts and members of Christ's whole milita^t flock which are now made here, and
there, were instituted by th'Apostolike and Ecclesiastical authority, not
surely without the special providence and inspiration of the holy Ghost, Tit.
1. Act. 14. Leo. ep. 87
but yet not immediately by Christ, but through his will by man's authority. And
therefore the bounds of any parrissh or diocese, may for probable causes be
changed again by an other man, Greg. li. 2 ep. 31.
who has such like authority to change the bounds of parisshes as they had,
who first made them.

Particular flocks then are voluntary, and likewise particular pastors. But
one flock and one pastor, is of absolute necessity in the earth, and so does
S. Cyprian witness: Deus vnus est and Christus vnus, L. ep. 8.
and vna Ecclesia, and Cathedra vna super Petru^ Domini voce fundata. There is
one God and one Christ, and one Church, and one chair, founded upon Peter by
our Lords voice. Behold, One Chair.
this one chair which is founded upon Peter, must needs be meant of the one
pastoral preeminence which Christ him self did institute in the militant Church.

This matter standing so, shall we say that the Church of Christ continues in
the earth or no? If it do continue, shall Christ's own absolute institution
continue above the virtuous, but yet voluntary institution of men? or shall
the good and voluntary institution of man preuail more the^ the most perfect
institution of Christ? Men made many particular flocks according as they
thought most convenient for this or that place, and they did set over them many
particular pastors, somwhere a Priest, and somewhere a Bishop. Christ made in all but one militant flock, which should consist both of Jews and Gentiles, and
did set over it Saint Peter one general shepherd. And there was made (even in
earth after Christ's ascension) one sheepcote, Joan. 21.
Joan, 10.
and one shepherd.

Shall now these many flocks, and many shepherds, which men appointed,
continue still: and shall not the one flock, and the one shepherd which Christ
assigned much more continue? Forasmuch as a flock of sheep is one by the force
of one pastor, if the pastor in earth be not one, the flock in earth is not
one. Credo vnam Ecclesiam.
But al me^ believe one milita^t church, which is the flock of Christ in earth:
therefore al men ought to confess one milita^t shepherd of the same flock in
earth also. For although the Church be one more ways then by one shepherd, yet
if Christ had not meant, that his Church should be one flock, not only for
having one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4.
or one spirit, but also for having one shepherd: he would never have said:
There shall be made one sheepcote, and one shepherd.

Joan. 10.
But now, seeing he faith: I have other sheep, which are not of this fold (to
wit, of the Jews synagog) and I must bring those, and they shall hear my
voice, and there shall be made one fold (or flock) and one shepherd: it is
evident, that as the Jews and the Gentiles, beside the unity to come in
heaven, are one fold and one flock in this world: even so, that they have one
temporal shepherd in this world, beside Christ the everlasting shepherd.

Which thing since it is so, is it possible, that any Protestant will be so
iniuriouse to Christ, as to prefer the good institution of S. Paul (who
planted one Church at Corinth, Romans 16. Act. 14.
an other at Ephesus, and the third at Athens) before the absolute and
perelesse institution of Christ, who in the whole earth planted one great
Church, whereof he made one great shepherd under himself the universal
shepherd?

I see, that the Protestants talk much of Gods word, but the word they speak
of, is written in no Gospel.

They will have many flocks and many shepherds to continue still, neither do
we deny it, because it was so instituted by the Apostles: but the Catholics
will much more have all these flocks to be only one church in earth, because
they are al to be reduced unto the obedience of one chief shepherd in earth,
which was the institution of Christ. Either let the text be named, where
Christ did institute many parishes, and many dioceses, or seeing there is none
such, and on the other side seeing we bring a plain text, where it is said to
one pastor, Joan. 21.
feed my sheep, let not the order virtuously taken afterward by the Apostles
be so maintained, that the former appointment of the Son of God be thereby
made void. Either let both orders take place (as with the Catholics they do)
or if one of the two shall needs be disapointed, let us rather have in all but
one chief shepherd, as Christ immediately left the matter, then to have many,
and not to have one.

Moreuer to what other thing does all the whole order of the Church tend in
earth, but only to an unity? The whole government of the militant Church
te^deth to unity.
Why is one Curate in a parish set over many families and houses? Why is one
Bishop in a diocese set over many parishes? Why is one Primate or Metropolitan
in a province set over many Bishops? Why are all the primates of one quarter of
the world, reduced under one Patriarch? but only evermore to show, that the
government of the Church te^deth by many middle unities, Ep, 82. ad Anastasiu^
Thessal.
to one supreme pastoral unity in this life. Whereupon Leo says: Magna
dispositione prouisu^ est, vt esse^t in singulis prouincijs singuli, quoru^
inter fratres haberetur prima sente^tia, and rursus quida^ in ma^oribus vrbibus
co^stituti, sollicitudine^ suscipere^t ampliore^, per quos ad vna^ Petri sede^
vniuersalis Ecclesiae cura conflueret, and nihil vnquam a suo capite
dissideret. It was ordained with great providence, that there should be in
every province one, whose judgment (or sentence) might be chief among the
brethern. And again, that certain being apoi^ted in the greater Cities, See (M.
Ievvel) who has the cure of the universal Church.
should take greater charge, by whom the cure of the universal Church might
flow together to the one seat of Peter, and that nothing might at any time
dissent from his head. Lo, by may primates the cure of the whole comes to him,
who sits in S. Peter's See, which is at Rome.

Again, seeing al Ecclesiastical in^^itutio^ and government of the Church came
from Christ one way or other, it must needs be, Cyp. l^b. 1. epist. 3.
that every bishop has the portion of the flock (which he governs) assigned
to him by some order or other, taken by Christ himself. But Christ by his own
expres wor^ assigned not, that S. Peter should rule any one piece of the
Militant flock, and S. James an other, and S. John the third, but rather by
his appointment, S. Peter might rule the self same flock, which S. John, or S.
Paul, or S. James might, and contrariwise, they might rule the same flock
which S. Peter did. For all were sent aequallie into the whole world. Matthew. 28


Therefore except beside this common commending of the flock indifferently to
al, S. Peter alone had been made the chief Pastor and head of the whole flock
(as in deed he was) and that not only as an Apostle, Joan. 21.
but as a Bisshoppe and as one ordinary officer, the like whereof should for
ever continue in the Church: we might boldly say, that the example of having
any one ordinary Curate, Bishop, or Metropolitan, in any one parrissh or
Diocese, or Province, were utterly without any example of Christ's institution
in the Apostles themselves. And therefore (that aequall institution of many
pastors over on^ flock only standing, which thing the protestants do
maintein) it should inuincibly follow, that seeing no devise of man is able to
control the institution o^ Christ, it were at this day much better, to have
twelve or thirten curates in one parish and so many bishops in one diocese,
then to have one alone.

For Christ (if Peter alone were not above the Apostles in the chief pastoral
dignity) made thirteen Apostles to be equal pastors and gouerners of the self
same flock, Math. 18. and 2^.
and that foorm of government, which Christ ordained, ought still to continue in
every particular Church: for who dare change our Lords institution? Cypri. lib.
1. epi. 3. and li. 4. epi. 2 Hieron. in 1. c. epist. ad Titum.


But on the other side, if all the world confess, that now in one Church,
there ought to be at one time, but one bishop, or one pastor, in so much that
S. Hierom says, in vna ciuitate plures, vt nun cupantur, Episcopi esse non
poterant: In one city there could not be many bishops, (according as a bishop
is now taken to signify one that is above common priests) If whereas once
many priests (according to S. Hieroms mind) ruled one Church for a time
equally, In. 1. epist. ad Titum. vt dissensicnu^ plantaria euelletentur.
yet for the better avoiding of schisms, that government was changed, and one
bishop was set over them al: seeing S. Hierom allows well the change, as being
made for the better, and yet it could not have been for the better, if it had
wholly lacked a foorm and pattern in that government, which Christ himself
appointed to the Church: seeing the same S. Hierom says, Lib. 1. aduersus
Iouianum.
that among twelve one was chosen, (and that by the good master Christ) to
thend the occasion of schism might be taken away: al these things (I say) well
weighed and conferred together: I may most certainly conclude, that Christ did
not only institute S. Peter to be as one chief pastor in the whole militant
Church according to S. Hieroms express meaning, but that also he did institute
him alone as an ordinary officer, according to whose unity, every other Church
should be at the length ruled by one curate or bishop. For as the twelve
Apostles governed the flock for a time together with S. Peter extraordinarily,
AEqualiter inter piures Ecclesiae cura diuiditur.
and S. Peter alone governed the whole flock ordinarily: so whiles the Apostles
yet lived, some few parishes were governed extraordinarily by many pastors at
once, as S. Hierom thinks. But as we see most clearly, that the equal
government of many pastors in any one parish or diocese in the whole world
long before S. Hieroms time was wholly expired: so we may as evidently perceive
(if we be not given over to a blind heart) that the extraordinary government of
the twelve Apostles, or of any other prelates with equal power, was fiften
hundred years past expired. And that now the only ordinary mean to govern
Gods Church, as well in the whole, as in the parts, is to have one pastor
alone in every parish, and one chief pastor alone over the whole militant
Church, the which one chief pastor is the bishop of Rome, as now it shall be
proved by Gods grace.

That the Bishop of Rome is that one ordinary pastor who succedeth in S.
Peter's chair, and is above al bishops according to the meaning of Gods word.
The XV. Chap.
AS Sina, being a mountain in in Arabia, Galat. 4.
is said of the Apostle to be joined, or to be nighe unto the earthly city of
Jerusalem, not so much for the nighnes or affinity of the place, as for the
likeness of condition (because the self same Law of Moses, which had been given
in Sina, was afterward continued and preserved in Jerusalem) And as by that
mean the Jews who (at the time of the Law first received) were not bound to
Jerusalem at all (as the which was then full of Idolatry) were afterward bound
to come thither thrice every year, Exodus 23.
because the high priesthood and temple was settled there, Deuteronomy. 17.
as in the place which God chose: even so fares it between the chief power,
which Christ gave to S. Peter, and the Church or bishop of Rome.

Joan. 21.
For albeit when the Church was built upon Peter, and when he was made chief
pastor of the same, he were in Palestina, and not in Rome, and for that time
was rather accounted the high bishop of the Circumcision, Galat. 2.
that is to say, of the faithful Jews, then of the Gentiles (who were not then
converted from their Idolatry) yet for as much as the same S. Peter (whose
primacie is plentifully set forth in Gods word) at the length settled himself
at Rome by Gods appointment, Iren. lib. 3 cap. 3. Tertul. de praescript.
and left a successor there: for this respect I may well affirm that the Bishop
of Romes Primacy is commended and warranted by Gods own word.

And seeing it has been already declared, that S. Peter alone, according to the
first litteral sense, was both the rock, Matthew. 16
whereupon Christ promised and also the pastor, Joan. 21.
who as he loved Christ more so he had authority to feed Christ's flock more
then any other Bishop: Item that the ordinary, and must continue still in
the Church of God: Item that it must continue in Now if I show, that the
Bishop of Rome is that one ordinary chief Shepherd, who succedeth in the
said Authority of Saint Peter, how can it be avoided, but that the Supremacy
of the Bishop of Rome is avouched and taught by Gods own word?

Egesippus lib. 3 c. 2. Iren. lib. 3 cap. 3. Eusebius. histor. lib. 2. c. 14.
First, not only all the histories, all holy writers, and the general tradition
of all ages have testified, that S. Peter came to Rome (notwithstanding some
brainesick men would now persuade the contrary) but also the self same thing
is witnessed by the express word of God, when S. Peter says in the end of his
own epistle, Petrus in epist. 1. c. 5
salutat vos Ecclesia, quae est in Babylone collecta. The Church which is
gathered together in Babylon, saluteth you. For there he called Rome Babylon:
Because as Babylon was named of the confusion of tongs, and had in it (whiles
it was the seat of the monarchy) al manner of nations, and consequently al manner
of vices: even so had Rome (being now the seat of the Roman Empire, when S.
Peter wrote thence) al manner of tongues, of nations, and of vices in it. And of
this mind was that Ancient Father Papias, Eusebius. histor. lib. 2. c. 15. and
Graecae scholia.
and diverse other holy writers concerning the same place of S. Peter's epistle.

Neither did S. Peter only come to Rome, and preach at Rome for a time, but he
also died there, and so died there, that it appeared evidently God would have
him die no where else. For whereas (according to the duty of the chief pastor)
he came to Rome chiefly to save his flock there from the raging fury of
Simon Magus the captain of al heretics (who began to be worshipped for a God
in Rome) when by his prayer he had caused the devils who carried Simon Magus a
long in the air, Eusebius. li. 2 c. 13. and 14. and 15.
Egesippus lib. 3. c. 2.
to let him fall (whereupon his death insued shortly after) the Emperor Nero
(who took no small delight in the sorcerie of Simon Magus) being sore offended
with S. Peter's deed, sought straight ways his apprehension and destruction.

At that time the Christians being very loath to be deprived of so good a
pastor as S. Peter was, Amhros. post epist. 32. lib. 5
with much entreating and many tears prayed him to go out of the way, and to
save himself. At whose request Saint Peter (otherwise unwilling thereunto)
began to take his journey out of the city.

But when he was come to the gate, he sees Christ coming toward him, whom he
adoring said, Domine quo vadis, Ambos. episto. lib. 5. post epi. 32
O Lord, whether go thou? Christ said unto him, venio Romam iterum
crucifigi. I come to Rome to be crucified again. Peter understood thereby,
that Christ would suffer in him at Rome, who suffers in every of his members,
not by pain of body, but by compassion of pity, or rather by the greatenes
of glory which is gotten to him by the victoriouse death which his Saints are
put unto.

Upon this vision Peter returned again into the City of Rome, and being
taken, he was put to death upon the cross with his head downward: so that
Christ himself appointed Rome to be the place, where S. Peter should rest.

This matter is witnessed, Lib. 5. post epist. 32. Egesip lib. 3. cap. 2.
not only by Saint Ambrose, but also by Egesippus, who was a very ancient
writer, even straight upon the time of the Apostles: albeit his work being
translated into Latin, seems to have certain names of Cities added by him,
who did translate it about the time of S. Ambrose, and of Ruffinus.

Neither is it to be douted, but S. Luke would have written the same appearing
of Christ unto S. Peter (as well as he wrote the appearing of Christ unto S.
Paul) if he had gone so far forward in his story of the Acts of the
Apostles. Actor. 9.
But seeing he did not continue his narration until the death of S. Peter, and
of Saint Paul, we must needs credit those faithful ancient witnesses, who
report the same. By which history we learn that Christ (who might easily
have granted the the glory of Martyrdom to his Apostle in any other place) had
a special regard that both he, Why S. Peter should die in Rome.
and his fellow Apostle S. Paul, might die in Rome. Whereof I find diverse
causes alleged in the Fathers.

Augustini de sanctis sermon. 27.
One is, for the glory of the Apostles, ne alteri Roma deesset, that Rome might
not lack to either of them, or that they might not lack the glory of the
chief City Rome, concerning the place of their Martyrdom.

Augustine. ibidem.
Vt vbi caput superstitionis erat, illic caput quiesceret sanctitatis. Et vbi
gentiliu^ principes habitabant, illic Ecclesiarum morerentur. That where the
head of superstition was, there might be the head of holiness. And where the
Princes of the Gentiles dwelt, there the Princes of the Church might die.

The third cause is, for the honor of the west Church. Ibidem.
Cum Dominus orientis regionem propria illustra uerit passione, occidentis
plagam ne quid minus esset, vice sui Apostolorum sanguine illuminare dignatus
est. Et licet illius passio nobis sufficiat ad salutem, tamen etiam horum
Martyrium nobis contulit ad exemplu^. Whereas our Lord has made the East part
lightsom with his own passion: he voutsafed in his steed (that it might be no
less) to give light unto the west quarters by the blood of his Apostles. And
albeit our Lords passion suffiseth us for salvation, yet their Martyrdom also
has done us good for example.

The fourth cause is, Leo sermon. 1. in natali Petri and Pauli.
for the spreading Vt lux veritatis, quae in omnium gentium reuelabatur
salutem, efficacius se ab ipso capite, per totum mundi corpus effunderet. That
the light of the truth (which was revealed for the salvation of al nations)
might spread it self more effectuouslie from the very head through out the
whole body.

Now, forasmuch as God used the City of Rome as a most special mean, whereby
to enlarge and spread his faith through all the world which obeyed that one
city, it came also to pass, that the same city per sacra^ B. Petri sede^
caput orbis affecta, Leo, ibide^.
latius praesideret religione diuina, quam dominatione terrena. Being made the
head of the world, through the holy See of S. Peter should rule more largely by
Gods religion, then by earthly dominion.

Lib. 6. epist. 37.
Petrus eni^ (says S. Gregory) subli mauit sede^ in qua etia^ quiescere and
praesente^ vita^ finire dignatus est.

For Peter has lifted up a high the Sea wherein he also voutsafed to reast, and
to end this present life. Mark, that the glory and prerogative of the Roman
Church is most specially imputed to S. Peter.

For although two Apostles died in one City, at one time, for one truth of
Christ's Gospel: yet they left not two Chaiers or successions there. Iren. lib.
3 cap. 3. August. ep. 162. 165.
Neither is the Bishop of Rome called the successor of S. Paul, or said to
sit in his chair, but only in the Chair of Peter, as the whole practice of
the Church, and all the writings of the Fathers do witness.

Whereby we are infourmed, that Rome is the place chosen by Christ him self,
where S. Peter's Chair should reast. Ambros. lib. 5. post ep. 32. In
Pontificali.
For S. Peter retourninge to Rome upon the former vision, did before his
death consecrate S. Clement Bisshoppe cui and Cathedram (says Damasus) vel
Ecclesiam omnem commisit, dicens. To whom he committed also his chair, or all the Church, saying: Sicut mihi gubernandi tradita est a Domino meo Jesus
Christo potestas ligandi soluendique, ita and ego tibi committo. etc. As the
power of governing, of binding and loosing, is committed to me of my Lord
Jesus Christ, even so I commit to thee also, that thou may ordein others by
whom diverse causes may be disposed, and such acts (as be not meet for the
Church) may be repelled, and thou must not be found given to the cares of this
world, but only endeavor to give most leisure to prayer, and to preaching unto
the people.

Clemens in epist. 1.
The like report S. Clement himself makes of this commission, which S. Peter
gave to him, whose Epistle Ruffinus turned into Latin above eleven hundred
years past: Ruffinus in Praefatione Recognit.
and in the preface which he makes to the Recognitions of S. Clement, he so
well declares that Epistle of S. Clement to have been of full credit in his
time, and before, that he answers such objections as might seem to make
against that which is said in it. Tertullian also confesses, De praescript
aduersus haeret.
that the Church of Rome does show evidence, that S. Clement was ordained of
Peter.

And S. Hierom namely says: In Catalogo.
Plerique Latinoru^ secundu^ post Petru^ Apostolu^ putant fuisse Cleme^tem. The
most part of the Latins think Clement to have been second (or next) after Peter
the Apostle. And in an other place he says: Aduersus Iouin.
Clemens successor Apostoli Petri scribit epistolas. Clemens the successor of
Peter the Apostle writes Epistles. Leo the second, Marianus, Scotus, and
diverse other, are of the same judgment. Now whereas Linus and Cletus by the
life time of S. Peter (as Damasus and Ruffinus do witness) did administer many
things belonging to the Bisshoprike (as being in the exterior matters
coadiutours of S. Peter) the Grecians, who were farther absent, Vbi supra
and were less expert in the Roman affairs, supposed Linus to have been
chosen next after S. Peter. Whereas Clement was only chosen, but Clement (as
other think) yielded to Linus for a time, as to his elder.

Howsoever that be, whether Linus or Clement practiced that high authority,
once S. Peter's Chair was settled at Rome, not without the special providence of
Christ. In so much that Athanasius writes, that S. Peter and Paul audieru^t,
In Apologia de fuga sua.
oportere se Romae Martyrium subire, heard that they must suffer martyrdom at
Rome. And what so ever hearing he means, surely he means it of a hearing
which came from God, either by their own vision, or by some prophetical
revelation, such as both they did well believe, and we also ought to credit.

But to come near to our present purpose, S. Irenaeus speaking of the
successions of Bisshoppes in those Churches which the Apostles had first
instituted: calls the Church of Rome Maximam, and antiquissimam, Lib. 3.
aduersus hereses. c. 3.
and omnibus cognitam, a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis, Petro and Paulo
fundatam and constitutam.

The greatest Church, and most aunciente, and known to all men, being
planted and setteled by two most gloriouse Apostles, Peter and Paul. Ibidem.


Ad hanc Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem
conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt vndique fideles. To this Church, for
the mightier principality, or authority of government, every Church, that
is to say, the faithful which are round about, must needs come or agree.

Whereas then every Church has a certain principality or authority of
gouernemente committed to it by Christ, through which principality, it may
preach the faith, Tit. 3.
ouercom sins, and heresies, and excommunicat open sinners and heretics: The
Church of Rome being founded and planted by the most gloriouse Apostles has
potentiorem principalitatem a mightier principality then any other Church. For
it is a wilful ignorance whereas Ireneus speaks only of the successors and
traditions of faithful Churches, In his Reply 244.
for M. Jewel to say (as he has don) that the mightier principalty here
mentioned is meant of the Civil Dominion and of the Roman Empire, as though
Ireneus had spoken any syllable in that place of the Roman Empire.

He spoke of the Churches which the Apostles had founded and instituted, The
Church of Rome is the greatest.
among which he calls the Church of Rome maxima^ the graetest. Why so, but
because it was founded of the greatest Apostle? and how founded? For if S.
Peter had only made a bishop thereof, as he did of diverse other Churches:
surely thereby it had not ben greater then the other. But because he being the
graetest of the Apostles (as Hist. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Eusebius and S. In epist. ad Galat. cap. 2.
Hiero^ speak) left in Rome a Successor in his own primacy, that is to say, a
rock, and a chief shepherd, as great as himself had be^, therefore it was the
greatest Church in the world. And thence comes the pri^pality whereof this
au^cie^t father speaks. Rome is the most ancient Church.
S. Ireneus calls the same Church of Rome a^tiquissima^ the most ancient
Church. how so? was not Jerusalem and Antioche before it? Yeas verily in time
of having a bishop and of professing the faith: but not in the perpetual honor
and reside^ce of the chief bishop. For Peter was the first and chief bishop of
the new testament. In him was the root, the fountain, the head of al bishoply
power, De simplicitate praelatorum.
and from hi^ (as S Cyprian witnesses) priestly unity took his beginning
touching the ministry of the new testament: and for that cause his successors
being reckoned (as in deed they are) one with him, (concerning his office of
feeding Christ's sheep) cause the Church of Rome still to be the most ancient
and the mother Church of the Roman circuit, Metropolis ad Solitariam vitam
agent.
as also Athanasius does name it: For this cause the mightier principality is
in the Church of Rome. And for as much as the same succession of Peter is now
at Rome which was in the time of Ireneus, the same Church is still the greatest
and the most ancient Church whereunto all other faithful me^ ought to resort,
by reason of the mightier principality or preemine^ce thereof.

S. Cyprian confesses the chair, that is to say, the authority of S. Peter to
be at Rome. For whereas certain factiouse heretics sailed from Carthage to
Rome as intending to complain upon S. Cyprian and the other bishops of Afrik
to Pope Cornelius: S. Cyprian writes thus of that matter: Audent ad Petri
Cathedra^ atque Ecclesiam principalem, Li. 1. epi. 3.
vnde vnitas sacerdotalis exorta est, a schismaticis and prophanis literas
far, nec cogitare eos esse Romanos, quorum fides Apostolo praedicante laudata
est, Romans 1.
ad quos perfidia habere non possit accessum. They dare carry letters from
scismatical and profane me^, to the chair of Peter, Principal Church.
and principal Church, whence the priestly unity began. Neither do they
consider them to be Romans, whose faith is praised by the report of the
Apostle, to whom infidelity can not have access.

In this sentence all the privileges of S. Peter's supremacy are acknowleged to
be at Rome.

First, there is S. Peter's chair, to

Again, there is the pri^cipal church the prince of the Apostles. For otherwise
Jerusalem might have seemed the mother Church to all Christians, were it not
that S. Peter committing Jerusalem to the government of S. James, carried his
own authority with him, and left it all at Rome.

the unity of priests or of bishops (for sacerdos co^teineth both dignities)
began at the Church of Rome, but because it has the whole pastoral authority of
Peter in who^ the beginni^g of al ecclesiastical p^emine^ce was, Joan. 1.
Matthew. 16
because he first was promised to be called Peter, that is to say, the rock,
and, to have the keys of the ki^gdo^ of heaven given to hi^? but take away S.
Peter's prerogative, and the Church of Rome is not the beginni^g of priesthod,
but rather Jerusalem or Antioche.

unity does import that as Peter alone had in him the whole power of the chief
shepherd in earth (which can be but one) so Cornelius the successor of Peter
has in him the same power: and so unity continues still in the succession of
Peter, not every unity, but priestly unity, because he sits in Rome, by whom
and in who^ al priests and bishops are one, whiles they al (concerning their
government and jurisdiction) are ouerseen, are confirmed and fed of him, who is
without fellows in his supremacy.

Farthermore when S. Cyprian says, infidelity ca^ have no access to the
Romans, what other thing is that, then to say, Lucae 22,
that in the church of Rome he rules, for whose faith Christ prayed? For what
flock ca^ be sure to be always safe from infidelity except it be warra^ted by
Jesus Christ the only safeguard of his Church? Add hereunto that the same
Ecclesiae catholicae matrice^ and radice^, Lib. 4. epist. 8.
the mother and root of the Catholic Church. Verily because thence al bishoply
authority of feedi^g Christ's flock did spri^g first, and is continually
nourished and maintained.

Basilides lawfully out of Spain, Lib. 1. ep. 4
albeit he show also, that Basilides for his part, did unjustly appeal, and did
deceive the Pope by false suggestion and evil report?

Stephanus the Pope, lib. 3. ep. 13
to depose Marcianus the Bishop of Arles in France. Which surely to do in
an other province, is a sign that the Pope of Rome is above other Bisshops.
Thus did that holy Martyr defend both the right and the practice of the Church
of Rome.

Cyprianus contra epist. Stephani.
because he otherwise dissenting from the opinion of Pope Stephanus (concerning
the baptizing of such in the Catholic Church, as had been baptized before of
the heretics) did not yet for the gredy defense of his own opinion, deny the
prerogative of the Bishop of Rome, but therein showed, that not withstanding
his private error, he kept still the unity of the Militant Church, in
acknowleging the visible head thereof.

Nouatus taught falsely, that those who had once denied Christ, or had
committed great and mortal sins, might not be admitted afterward, by
Christian Priests or Bisshops to do penance, nor to their old state of grace.
With which heresy, a Christian Priest (who was named Hippolytus, Hyppolitus.
because he was torn in pieces with wild horses) was for the time deceived.
But for as much as the said Hippolytus did otherwise love Christ so hartelie,
that he was content to die for his name: that the said death might not be
unprofitable to him, God of his great mercy revealed to him, the true
Catholic faith and religion before his death. The which true faith he did not
keep to him self, but as well for the recompense of his own evil example, which
he had given whiles he followed that heresy, as also for the instruction of
others, he had grace to confess the same.

For when he was now leaden to the place of his Martyrdom, the Christian people
came about him, and asked which was the better religion, whether the Catholic,
or else that of Nouatus? to whom he answered thus: as Prudentius does recite.

Periste. phano^, in passione Hippoliti.
Respondit: fugite o miseri execranda Nouati
Schismata, Catholicis reddite vos populis.
Vna fides vigeat prisco quae condita templo est
Quam Paulus retinet, quamque Cathedra Petri,
His answer was: O flee the schisms
of cursed Nouats lore,
And to the Cath'like folk and flock,
Your selves again restore.
Let only one faith rule and rain,
Kept in the Church of old,
Which faith both Paul does still retain,
And Peter's Chair does hold.
avoid schisms and divisions. Before the time of Nouatus, there was but one
faith: after him, there began to be two faiths. He then divided the former
faith.

Avoid ye the division, and restore your which were spread every where before
Nouatus was borne. Let one faith Which one? That which is in the most ancient
Church. Which Paul and the Chair of Peter keeps. What is the Chair

May we not now say, according to the example of Hippolitus to our Country me^,
avoid the Schisms? May we not say, restore your selves to the Catholic
people? Follow not the two faiths which are now stirring, but let that one
faith prevail which is preserved in the ancient Church of Rome, and kept
there in the Chair of Peter? Does any man doubt, but that the Pope of Rome is
elder then Luther, then Wiclef, then Berengarius? Restore your self then to the
old faith, to the chair of Peter, therein you may reast without al fear. Let
your Pastor S. Peter answer for you, if that See can deceive you: yea let
Christ answer for you, if it be possible, either the faith of Peter, which he
prayed for, to fail in it self, Luc. 22.
or not to strengthen others. It is the Rock planted by Christ: build upon it
without fear, and no fluddes or winds of heresy shall at any time
overthrow your house. Matthew. 7.


Athanasius the second Patriarch in all the world, and in honor next unto the
Bisshoppe of Rome, Paulus the Archbisshoppe of Constantinople, which seat
afterward came to be preferred before the Patriache of Alexandria, Marcellus
the Bisshoppe of Ancyra, Asclepas the Bisshoppe of Gaza, and Lucyanus the
Bishop of Hadrianople, being al Grecians, all of the East Church, but so
far distant one from the other, that there was no part of the East Church
which to some of them did not belong: all these, I say, being expelled not by
one or two, but by Councels of other Bisshoppes, coming from diverse quarters
met together at Rome, in the days of Pope Julius, of whom Sozomenus (him
self also a Grecian) writes in this wise.

Athanasius relinquens Alexandriam, Romam prosectus est. Tripart. lib. 4. c. 15
Co^tigit autem eode^ tempore etia^ Pau lu^ Co^stantinopolitanu^ Po^tificem
illuc vna co^currere, and Marcellum Ancyrae, Asclepa^que Gazae. Quasi
subuertisset altar.
Qui du^ Arrianis esset aduersus, calu^niam passus ab his, quasi subuertisset
altar da^natus est. Quasi subuertisset altar.
Pro quo Gazeoru^ Ecclesia Quintiano co^mittitur. Lucianus autem
Hadrianopolite^ Episcopus, ob alia^ accusatione^ ecclesia sua priuatus, degebat
in vrbe Roma. Cognoscens ergo Romanus Episcopus crimina singuloru^, and omnes
Nicaeno Concilio concordare co^periens, Omnium curam gerens propter sedis
propriae dignitatem.
eos in co^munionem suscepit, tanqua^ omniu^ cura^ gerens propter sedis
propriae dignitate^, singulisque reddidit suas Ecclesias, et orie^talibus
scripsit Episcopis, culpans quod no^ recte tractassent viros inculpabiles de
suis Ecclesiis eos expellentes, and quod co^stitutiones Niceni Concilij minime
obseruare^t. Adesse praecepit.
Quoru^ paucos ad certa^ die^ fibimet adesse praecepit, vt cora^ eis oste^deret
iustu^ se super illis protulisse decretu^. Et dei^ceps no^ se passuru^
interminatus est, nisi ab huiusmodi turbis and nouitate cessarent. Et ille
quide^ haec scripsit. Athanasius au^t and Paulus epistolas Iulij orientalibus
Episcopis miserunt, and singuli eoru^ suas seeds adepti su^t.

Athanasius leaving Alexandria, went unto Rome. It chanced him eue^ at the
same time to meet there Paul Bishop of Constantinople, and Marcellus of Ancyra,
and Asclepas of Gaza. Which Asclepas being an adversary to the Arrians,
suffered injury of them, and under the pretense, It was a great falt in the
primitive Church, to overthrow an Alter.
that he had overthrown an Altar, he was condemned. In whose steed the church
of Gaza is committed to Quintianus. Also Lucianus the Bishop of Hadrianople,
being deprived of his Church for an other accusation, did remain at Rome.

The Bishop of Rome then discussing the crimes of every one, Note.
and finding that they did al agree to the Nicene Council, The B. of Rome has
cure of al. for his own seats sake.
did receive them into the Communion, as one that had cure of al, for the
worthiness of his own See, and did restore to every of them their own Churches,
writing also to the bishops of the East, and blaming the^ for that they had not
well handled men not worthy of blame, in expelling them from their Churches,
and (likewise blamed them) in that they had not observed the co^stitutions of
the Nicene Counsel. of which (Arrian bishops) he commanded a few to appear
before him at a certain day, to thend he might show them, that he had justly
given a decree or sentence upon them. And did threaten, that he would not
longer suffer it, unless they would cease from these trobles and novelties.
And thus he wrote. Now Athanasius and Paulus did send the letters to the
bisshops of the East, and every of them received his own See.





against every one.

Fourthlie, that he did it tanquam as he that had the charge of all.

Fifthlie, he had this charge, not only propter sedis propriae dignitatem. For
the worthiness of his own See.

Moreover he restored to every one his

Besides this he cited some of the Bisshops

Last of al, his decree was obeyed and of the East) received their bishopriks
again.

Note well.
If by the confession of the world the supremacy of Pope Julius was not now
acknowledged, I can not tell what can make a man known to be the supreme head
of the militant Church. He judged the highest patriarchs next himself. He
meadled with matters as far distant in places and provinces from him as lightly
could be. He undid the judgment of prouincial Councels. He did these things by
the prerogative of his own See. He was obeyed by the faithful Christians, and
that even whiles the Council of Nice was yet fresh in every man's remembrance,
so that no tyranny or usurping need to be feared.

Anno D. 300. In Psalm. 106.
Arnobius gives a marueilouse witness for the Church of Rome. Petrus in
deserto huius seculi perambula^s, quousque perueniret ad Romam, praedicauit
baptismum Jesus Christi, in quo vniuersa flumina benedicuntur vsque hodie a
Petro. Ipse exitus aquaru^ in sitim: Vsque hodie. Exire ab Ecclesiae Petri est
perire.
ita vt qui exierit for as ab Ecclesia Petri, siti pereat. Peter wandering in
the desert of this world, preached the baptim of Jesus Christ until he came to
Rome, Rome.
in which (baptism) al fluds (that is to say, Churches) are blessed of Peter
even til this day. Til this day.
He himself has made thirsty (or dried up) the foorthru^nings of the waters:
so that, who so goes forth from the Church of Peter, he perishes for thirst.

This ancient writer in his Co^me^ts upon the psalms, understanding baptism
by the name of fluds and of waters, does account those only to be baptized unto
salvation, who are baptized in the fluds which are blessed of Peter. That is to
say, in the founts of those bishops and priests, who tarry in the unity of the
successors of Peter. For except he spoke of Peter's successors, he could not say
vsque hodie, even til this day. For whereas Arnobius lived about three hundred
years after Peter, in saying, al fluds are blessed of Peter until this day, He
calls every bi^^op of Rome Peter.
he maeneth that all the ministeries of baptism in the Church are still
profitable to salvation, through that they are don in the unity and obedience
of Peter's Church.

But where is that Church of Peter? for soth in Rome. For Peter wa^dered
preaching Christ's baptism until he came to Rome. Rome.
But at Rome he rested, thence the fluds are blessed even til this day. But if
any man of discreation be baptized in those fluds, which are without the Church
of Rome, he is without healthful water, because the grace of unity, and the
participation of of Christ's mystical body the Church, is not given to him.
For that grace is derived from Christ the chief head, by Peter the under head,
unto all those who are made members of Christ's milita^t Church. Ita vt qui
exierit for as ab ecclesia Petri, fiti pereat, so that he who goes from the
Church of Peter does perish for thirst. Verily, because he lacks the grace of
the Catholic unity which is only preserved in Peter's Church as in the head
Church, where it is first planted, and whence it is derived to all other
Churches, which tarry in the unity thereof.

Negare no^ potes (says Optatus) scire te in vrbe Roma Petro primo cathedram
Episcopalem esse collatam, Contra Parmenia nu^ Dona. lib. 2.
in qua sederit omnium Apostoloru^ caput Petrus, vnde and Cephas appellatus
est. In qua vna cathedra vnitas ab omnibus seruaretur. Thou can not deny, but
that thou know the bishoply chair to have been first given in the City of
Rome unto Peter, Rome.
wherein Peter the head of all the Apostles has sitten. Whereof he was also
called Cephas, in the which one chair unity might be kept of all men.

Optatus writing against Parmenianus a Donatist, says unto him: thou can not
deny, Thou ca^nest not deny.
but that thou know Peter to have had first the chair at Rome. That heretic
could not deny it, but now other heretics have profited so well in their
faculty, that they are become doctors, in warra^ti^g that S. Peter was never
at Rome. But in the old time it was a most famous, and a most confessed truth.
Well, the chair the^ was at Rome. But whose chair? wherein Peter satte. what was
Peter? the head of all the Apostles. How prove you that? because Christ named
him Cephas, Joan. 1.
that is to say, a rock or stone. For the foundation is the head of the house,
and the rock is the most sure and strong foundation. What is then the end, Note.
why this chair is at Rome? to the end unity might be kept of al men in that
one chair.

It suffised not to say, that unity might be instituted or begun: it must be
kept and preserved still. Unity must be kept.
But wherein? Whether only in faith hope, and charity? So in deed, but not
only so, but in the Chair also. Yea, but in what soever Chair? Nay, in one
Chair. Which one? In one chair. At Rome
in that one, wherein Peter sat at Rome. Be they not blind, who can not see,
what Optatus thought of the bisshops of Rome? Yet it follows, vt iam
schismaticus esset, so that now he should be a schismatike, qui contra
singularem Cathedram, alteram collocaret. Who should set an other Chair,
against the singular Chair, which has no fellow: not that there are no more
Chaires, but that there are no more such Chaires as that of Rome is.

After that Optatus had written this much, he goes forward, showing, that the
said singular and one Chair wherein Peter satte, did not only continue for
Peter's time, but says he: Petro successit Linus, The B. of Romr successors in
Peter's one chair
Lino successit Clemens. Linus succeeded to Peter, and Clement succeeded to
Linus. and so he names the Bisshops of Rome in order, until the time of Pope
Siricius, who sat in the said Chair of S. Peter, in the days of Optatus. And
because Siricius was fellow of the same Communion and faith whereof Optatus
was, qui noster est socius.
he thereby concludes himself to be a Catholic, as in whose side the singular
Chair of Peter is found, which is the chief gift and dourie, which the
Militant Church has.

Contrariwise, seeing Parmenianus had no fellowship with the Chair of Peter,
nor with his successors, Optatus concludes him and his fellows, Co^tra
Cathedram Petri militatis.
to be schismatikes. Hearken to this M. Jewel, if any spiritual ears be at al
unto you. He is a schismatike, who does not communicate in Religion and faith
with the Bishop of Rome: you do not communicate with him: therefore you are a
schismatike: and consequently, your part (except you repent) is in hell fire
with Core, Dathan, and Abyron. Number. ^0.
God save us al thence, which must be obtained by returning to the unity of
S. Peter's Chair at Rome.

S. Hierom writing to Damasus concerning the faith in the Trinity says thus
in certain places of his Epistle: In Epist. ad Damasum.
Mihi Cathedram Petri and fide^ Apostolico ore laudatam censui co^sulendam.
Successor Petri.
Cum successore Piscatoris and discipulo crucis loquor.

Ego nullum primum nisi Christu^ sequens, beatitudini tuae, id est, Super
Cathedram Petri aedificata. est ad ecclesia.
Cathedrae Petri co^munione co^socior. Super illam Petram aedificata^ Ecclesiam
scio. Quicunque extra ha^c domum agnum comederit, profanus est. Si quis in arca
Noe no^ fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio. No^ noui Vitalem, Meletium respuo,
ignoro Paulinum. Quicunque tecum non colligit, spargit: hoc est, qui Christi
non est, Antichristi est. I thought best to ask council of the Chair of
Peter, and of the faith praised by the mouth of the Apostle. Romans 1.
I speak with the Successor of the Fissher, and with the disciple of the
Cross. I, following none first but Christ, am joined in Communion with thy
holiness, that is to say, with the Chair of Peter. I do know, that the Church
is built upon that Rock. Whosoever shall eat the Lamb out of this house, he is
profane. If any man be out of the Ark of Noe during the time of the flud he
shall perish. I do not know Vitalis, I despise Miletius, I have no acquaintance
with Paulinus. Who so ever does not gather with thee, he does scatter abroad,
that is, he that is not of Christ, is of Antichrist.

Who can deny, but that when he faith: he will ask council of S. Peter's
Chair, he means, that he will ask Council of Pope Damasus, who sits in
his Chair. Every Pope of Rome is Peter's sucessour.
The which Pope he calls the successor of the fissher, and the Disciple of
the Cross, that is to say, the successor of S. Peter, who was a fissher, and
who died upon the Cross. When he says: he follows none as first or chief,
but Christ: he well declares, Christ absolutely first.
what an infinite distance is between Christ, who is absolutely first and
chief, and any other Pope or Bishop, who is not absolutely first, but only so
first and chief, as S. Peter was. For we ask no more at any time, but that
the Pope of Rome be confessed to be so great a Bisshoppe, as Saint Peter was.
And as Peter was first after Christ, so after the same Christ, Saint Hierome
places Damasus, and joins him self in Communion with Damasus. That is to
say (as himself expounds it) with the Chair of Peter.

Note, I pray you, that Damasus the Pope, and the chair of Peter is alone. And
the Chaier of Peter is the Rock (says S. Hiero^) whereupon the Church is
built. Cathedrae Petri co^iungor. Super illam petra^ aedificata^ Ecclesia^
scio. I am joined with the Chair of Peter, Scio.
to wit, of the Rock. Upon that Rock I know the Church to be built. There was
no doubt of the matter it was a knowledge.

Peter's Chair is the Rock
To what point are we now come? Not only Peter, but the Chair of Peter is taught
to be the Rock whereupon the Church is built. And by the Chair the Bishop of
Rome is understood, who sits in the Chair, as Damasus then did. He is
profane (says S. Hierom) who eats the lamb without this house. Exodus 12.
That is to say, there is but one house in all Christendo^, and that house is
there, where this Church is acknowleged. Who so eats the Paschal lamb that
is to say, who so receives the Sacraments, or is fed by preaching without
that house, where the Pope is governor: he is profane, he is an Heretic and
a schismatike, as Vitalis, Meletius and Paulinus were.

The Chair of Peter, that is to say, the Church of Rome is the same to us,
which the Ark of Noe was to him and to his childern. He that is not in this
fellowship of Rome, shall as surely perish at the day of judgment, as they
did perish in the flud, who were without the Ark of Noe. Gen 7.
By these means S. Hiero^ shows what a necessary thing to salvation it is,
that a man should tarry in that fellowshippe of Christians who believe and
profess their belief as the Bishops of Rome do.

It is not I that say it, but S. Hierom. Who generally gives this rule: Whosoever
ever does not gather with Damasus (who was Pope of Rome) he scatereth. What is
it, to gather with Damasus? He expounds, that it is to be of Christ. What is
it to scatter? To be of Antichriste. What is Damasus? The Chair of Peter and
the succession of the fissher. Who is with that succession at this day? The
Catholics, The Catholics are with Peter.
called now Papists, who are all and continue still one flock under one chief
shepherd. They then are of Christ. Who scatter from the succession of Peter?
The Protestants scatter from Peter.
The Protestants, as who make more heads, and more shepherds all of equal
authoirtie, without any one visible chief shepherd, and more houses without
any one master. They then are of Antichrist.

Epist. 166.
Saint Augustine gives us this rule. Coelestis magister, etc. The heavenly
master makes the people secure, concerning evil overseers, The Chair of
healthful doctrine.
lest for their sakes the chair of helthful doctrine should be forsaken, in the
which Chair evil men are even constrained-to say good things. For the
things which they speak, are not their own, but they are the things of God.

We have then in the Church a chair of healthful doctrine. Happy were they, who
finding that Chair, might at the lest be sure of the true doctrine of Christ.

You will say perhaps, it is every Bishops Chair. If that were so, every Bishop
should be co^streined to speak good things. How could then so many Bishops have been the inuentours of heresies, as have been since Christ's time? If every
Bisshops Chair have not this privilege, to be constrained to speak the
truth, and yet there be such a healhful Chair in the earth, as really, as
ever the Chair of Moses was at Jerusalem (the which example S. Augustine
uses oftentimes to prove, Matthew. 23
De Verb. Dom. sermon 49. Ep. 166. Et homil. de Pastor.
that such another Chair is in the Church) S. Augustine might have eased us of
much pain, if he would have named us the said Chair.

But let us see, whether we can not find it named in him. It follows: Deus
in Cathedra vnitatis, Epist. 166.
doctrina^ posuit veritatis. God in the chair of unity, has placed the
doctrine of verity. This much then we have won toward the finding out of that
chair, which is constrained to teach the things of God: Cathedra vnitatis.
it is the chair of unity. What is that to say? Verily not only, that it is one
certain chair which it self tarieth in unity, but also that it keeps unity
in all the states of the Church.

For if God has made us secure (as S. Augustine signified before) that we
should not need to forsake the chair of the healthful doctrine, for the
faults which are in the governors or teachers: doutlesse he means that to be
the chair of unity, which must not be forsaken, but be followed and embraced.
So that the chair of unity is that chair, which causes unity not to be
forsaken. For when all other Chaires agree with one principal chair, and
confoorm themselves to it, that must needs be the chair of unity: and
consequently, therein is the doctrine of verity.

Then the chair of unity is that, wherein one pastor sits, in whom all
other pastors in the earth are one. Inuenio omnes pastores bonos in vno
pastore. Homil. de pastoribus.
Non enim vere pastores boni desunt, sed in vno sunt. Multi sunt, qui diuisi
sunt: hic vnus praedicatur, quia vnitas commendatur. I find (says S.
Augustine) al good pastors in one pastor. For truly good pastors do not
lack, but they are in one. Those are many, who are divided: here one is
praised, because unity is commended.

Behold, the one pastor is to be sought for, in whom al other good pastors
are one. But this one (say you) of whom S. Augustine here speaks, is Christ
himself. I confess: but Christ has his chair and seat at the right hand of
his Father in heaven, and therefore S. Augustine calls not his chair now the
chair of unity, wherein even evil me^ are constrained to speak good things.
For in Christ's own chair at Gods right hand there sits nor evil nor good
man beside himself.

The chair of unity is in the earth.
The chair then of unity, wherein evil men speak good things, must be a chair
placed in earth, wherein one pastor may sit, who may for the rate of his
measure and ministry make other good pastors to be for the time one, in hi^
being one, even as Christ makes all good pastors, that ever have be^ or
shall be, to be for ever one in him, most singulary being one.

Is there then an other kind of unity among pastors, beside that everlasting
unity of all good men in Christ? Yea verily and of that other ki^d of unity S.
Augustine says: Ibidem.
Imo vero Dominus and in ipso Petro vnitatem co^mendauit. Multi erant Apostoli,
and vni dicitur: Pasce oues meas. Absit vt desint modo boni pastores, sed omnes
boni pastores in vno sunt, vnum sunt. Yea our Lord has also commended unity in
S. Peter himself. There were many Apostoles, and it is said to one, feed mie
sheep. God forbid there should now lack good pastors, but al good pastors
are in one, they are one thing.

Thus, Unity is in s. Peter
beside the unity which is in Christ, we have also found an unity in Saint
Peter, and that unity was not only to tarry for his own time, but to be
preserved in the Church for ever.

There is a temporal unity in Saint Peter, and in his successors, by the
which unity we come afterward to enjoy the everlasting unity which is in
Christ. For Saint Peter (as the same S. Augustine does witness) bare the
figure of the whole Church, Epist. 165.
and that, In Joan. Tract. 224
propter Apostolatus sui primatum, by reason of the primacy of his Apostleship.

Therefore as the Apostles have continually successors in their bishoplie and
pastoral ministry: so has S. Peter the prince of the Apostles a continual
successor in his primacie, and in his chair of unity, concerning the force
of which succession S. Augustine justly says: Contra epistolam fundame^.
In Ecclesia me tenet ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli, cui pasce^das oues suas post
resurrectionem Dominus commendauit, vsque ad praesentem Episcopatum, successio
Sacerdotum. Among other things, which stay me in the Church, the succession of
priests from the very seat of Peter the Apostle (to whom our Lord commended his
sheep to be fed after his resurrection) the succession (I say) of priests from
Peter's seat to the present bishoprik, does stay me in the Church.

Is there any man so proud, or so well liking with him self, who if S. Augustine
were now alive, would not be glad to follow his judgment in stablishing his
faith and conscience? He being within little more then four hundres years of
Saint Peter's time, The succession of S. Peter stayed S. August.
yet so much wondered at the continuance of Saint Peter's chair in the right
faith (whereas all other successions had been spotted with heresies and
schisms) that he confessed the succession of Bisshoppes in that Chair of Peter
to have stayed him from being either a Maniche, or an Arrian, or any other
thing, saving a Catholic.

For he saw the promise of Christ so fulfilled in the successors of Saint
Peter, he saw the doctrine of verity so well fortified in the Chair of unity,
that it was no small force to strengthen him in his faith. In so much that he
said in an other place: Si ordo Episcoporum sibi succedentium considerandus
est, Epist. 165.
quanto certius and vere salubriter ab ipso Petro numeramus, cui totius
Ecclesiae figuram gerenti: Dominus ait, super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam. Et portae inferorum non vincent eam. Petro enim successit Linus, Lino
Clemens. etc.

If the rue of bishops one succeding to the other, is to be considered, how
much more safely, and in deed healthfully do we number from Peter him self? to
whom bearing the figure of the whole Church, our Lord says: upon this Rock I
will buid my Church, Matthew. 16
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it. For Linus succeeded to Peter,
Clement to Linus: and so he goth forward, until he come to pope Anastasius, who
was bishop of Rome in S Augustines time.

Who after all the popes reckoned up in order, concludes thus: In hoc ordine
successionis nullus Donatista Episcopus inuenitur. In this order of succession,
no Donatist Bishop is found. If S. Augustine after four hundred years proved
the Donatists to be far from the doctrine of verity, because in the chair of
unity no Donatist was bishop, or because no bishop, A fortiore
who succeeded in S. Peter's chair was a Donatist: what shall we say after a
thousand five hundred years?

Let us reckon up all the popes from Saint Peter himself, until we come to
pope Pius the fifth, (who in our days sits in S. Peter's chair, and is
notable for virtue, learning, holiness, and the grace of working miracles) and
in all that order of succession, we shall find never a Lutheran, never a
Zuinglian, never a Caluinist, never an Anabaptist, or a Swenkfeldian.

Who is then so mad as to go from S. Peter's Chair (to whom our Lord
commended his sheep to be fed) to the vpstart Chair of Luther, Joan. 21.
Calvin, or Zuinglius (to none of whom, nor to any predecessors of theirs,
our Lord is readen to have commended his sheep) except he be more like unto
the heretical Donatists, then unto the most wise and learned man S. Augustine,
who after the Apostles, had scant ever his match in discerning the true faith
from falsehod, and heresy or hypocrisy, from the Catholic religion.

He presses the Donatists every where with the breach of unity.

And think you, that when they should come to talk with him, he would only say
generally to them: Masters, you are to blame because you are gone from Christ
the only one Pastor? If he should have come no nere to the mark he shot at,
they would quickly have answered: The talk of the Donatists.
Sir, we love Christ, and believe him as well as you. We hold him for our only
one Pastor, we obey his voice, why burden you us with forsaking him? It is you
that have other Pastors: for you flee to the seat of Peter, and to his
successors, whereas we content our selves with the everlasting Pastor Jesus
Christ. I trow we are not without one Pastor, so long as we have him for our
Pastor.

But now S. Augustine talks not only of Christ to them, nor only of that
unity which is in Christ, but of that also, which is in the Church, and in
the successors of S. Peter. And therefore in his Psalm which he made against
the Donatists, having showed that the Prophets, albeit they saw most grievous
faults in the clergy of Jerusalem, yet did not set up an other Altar, and an
other Religion, nor did not break unity, says at the length unto the
Donatists:

Venite fratres, In psalm cont. Par. Donati.
si vultis vt inseramini in vite. dolor est cum vos videmus praecisos ita
iacere. Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede. Et in ordine illo patrum
quis cui successit videte. Ipsa est petra, qua^ no^ vincu^t superbae inferoru^
portae. Come ye, o brethern, if ye will be graffed in the vine. It grieueth us
when we see you lie thus cut of. Number ye the Bisshops eue^ from the very seat
of Peter. and consider who succeeded who^, in that order. That self is the Rock
which the proud gates of hell do not overcome.

Is not this a marueilouse witness for the Primacie of the Sea of Rome? First
S. Augustine calls the Donatists to unity. To Christ, say you: no doubt of
that. But whereas the Donatists named Christ as fast as the Catholics, S.
Augustine shows them where unity is in this world, saying: number the Bishops
eue^ from the very seat of Peter. Ab ipsa Petri sede
Behold the vine into which in this life we must be graffed. Behold the unity
whereby we must hold. Number the bishops eue^ from the self seat of Peter.
Higher we can not go in this world. But let us number them. At the lest, let us
see who succeeded the o^e after the other. Why should we see that succession, I
pray you? Ipsa est petra. that See or succession is the rock. not only Christ,
not only Peter, but the self See and succession of Peter is the Rock. The Sea
of Peter is the Rock,
Which Rock? that rock, which hell gates do not overcome. What S. Augustine?
You are become a stark Papist. There was never Scholema^, Canonist, Popish
priest, no there was never any Pope, who said more for the sea of Rome then S.
Augustine now has said. That See or successo^ is the rock which hell gates do
not overcome, and to be cut of from that See, is to be cut of from the vine,
whence the branches receive life and nourishment. Who is now cut of from that
See? Whether the Catholics who lie in prison for the defense of it, or the
Protestants, who call it the seat of Antichrist.

To the Sea of Rome the two Councils gathered against Pelagius in Africa and
Numidia sent their decrees, Epist. 90.
vt statutis nostrae mediocritatis etia^ Apostolicae sed is adhibeatur
autoritas, that the authority of th'Apostolike See may be given to the decrees
of our mediocrity: they add also the cause hereof, protue^da salute multoru^,
and quorunda^ peruersitate etia^ corrige^da for the defense of many men's
salvation, and for the correction also of some men's frowardnes.

And whereas Pelagius was absolved in The East (as it is to be thought, of those
Bishops who understood not his crafty meaning) the Counsel of Carthage does
show that the Pope was the judge who ought to examine this question: Ibidem.
Vtrum Pelagius episcopalibus gestis quae in Orie^te co^fecta dicu^tur, just
visus fuerit absolutus. Whether Pelagius seems justly to have been absolved by
those Acts, which are said to have been made in the East by the Bisshops.

Neither is this required of the Pope only by the way of charity, but they
require his holiness to take compassion of the^ pastoralibus visceribus,
according to that mercy, which a Pastor ought to have toward his sheep. And
after the absurdity of his opinions rehearsed, thus they conclude: Quaecunque
alia ab eis obijciuntur, non dubitamus Venerationem tuam, cum gesta Episcopalia
perspexerit, quae in Orie^te in eadem causa confecta dicuntur, id iudicaturum,
vnde omnes in Dei misericordia gaudeamus. What so ever things else are objected
of them, we dout not but your Reverence (when it has examined th'Acts, which
are said to have been made in this behalf of the Bisshoppes in the East) will
judge (or will decree) that thing, whereof we may al rejoice in our Lord.

The which Epistle of the Council of Carthage being received, Epist 91.
Innocentius the Pope praises the^, because antiquae traditionis exe^pla
servants, keeping the examples of ancient tradition, they referred such
matters to the judgment of the Bishop of Rome, scientes quid Apostolicae sedi
debeatur, knowing what is due to the Apostolic See: cum omnes hoc loco positi
ipsum sequi desyderemus Apostolum, a quo ipse Episcopatus and tota authoritas
nominis huius emersit: que^ sequentes ta^ mala iam damnare nouimus, quam
probare lauda^da. For as much as all we that sit in this place, desire to
follow the Apostle him self, from whom the Bisshoplie office it self, and all
the authority of this name sprang: The which Apostle, we following, do now
as wellknow how to condemn evil things, as to allow those things which are to
be praised.

What is it then, which the ancient tradition delivered? Epist. 91.
Patres non humana sed diuina decreuere se^tentia, vt quicquid de disiunctis
remotisque prouincijs ageretur, non prius ducerent finie^dum, nisi ad huius
sedis notitia^ perueniret, vbi tota huius autoritate iusta quae fuerit
pronunciatio firmaretur, indeque sumerent ceterae Ecclesiae, velut de natali
suo fo^te aquae cu^cte procederent. The Fathers (says Innocentius) have
decreed, not by man's, but by Gods sentence, that what so ever was done in the
Provinces or countries a far of, they should not account it before to be
ended, except it came to the knowledge of this See, where (what so ever had
been justly pronounced) it should be stre^gthened by the authority of this See,
and thence other Churches should take it, as it were waters which should
proceed or flow from their own native fountain.

Likewise the Council of Mileuitum wrote from Numidia to the same pope
Innocentius: Epist. 92.
Quia te Dominus gratiae suae praecipuae munere in sede Apostolica collocauit,
magnis periculis infirmoru^ me^brorum Christi pastorale^ diligentia^ quaesumus
ad hibere digneris. Because our Lord has placed you through the gift of his
special grace in the Sea Apostolic, we beseech you, to use your pastoral
diligence in the great dangers of the weak members of Christ.

Marck here, that these bishops of Numidia speak to the Pope as to their
pastor, and as to the pastor of the sheep which were under them, among which
bishops it is evident, that S. Augustine was, who also writes to Hilarious of
the same matter in this wise: Iam cum ista scriberem, Epist. 94.
cognoueramus in Ecclesia Carthaginensi aduersus eos Episcopalis Concilij
conditum fuisse Decretum, per epistolam sancto and venerabili Papae Innocentio
dirigendum, and nos de Concilio Numidiae ad eandem Apostolicam sedem iam
similiter scripseramus. Now whiles I wrote these things, we understood a Decree
to have be^ made in the Church of Carthage by a Council of bishops, which was
to be directed by an epistle unto the holy and reverend Pope Innocentius. And
we likewise had written from the Council of Numidia to the same Apostolic See.

It is then evident, that these two Councels sent their Decrees to the Sea
Apostolic (as also all other Councels were wont to do) according to the most
ancient tradition: and that as from the authority of their own head under
Christ, and of their chief shepherd:

Whereupon, the Fathers of the Mileuitan Council say: Epist. 92.
Arbitramus, adiuuante misericordia Domini Dei nostri Jesus Christi, qui te and
regere consulentem, and orantem exaudire dignatur, auctoritati sanctitatis tuae
de sanctarum scripturaru^ authoritate depromptae, facilius eos qui ta^ peruersa
and perniciosa sentiunt, esse cessuros. We thinck these men, who have so evil
and froward opinions, the popes authority is taken out of the holy scriptures.
will the sooner yield to the authority of your holiness, being taken out of the
authority of the holy scriptures, by the help of the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who voutsafeth both to rule you whiles you consulte, and to hear you
when you pray.

Two things are specially to be noted in these words: one, that the authority
of Pope Innocentius is taken out of the authority of the holy scriptures,
verily because it may be proved by the word of God, that the bishop of Rome
(who succedeth S. Peter) is the high shepherd, whose voice all the faithful
are bound to hear. The other point is, in that these Fathers affirm, that
Christ rules the Pope at his consultatio^: alluding therein to the faith of S.
Peter which was prayed for, Luc. 22.
to thend al his successors might not err in consulting about matters of
Religion.

To which epistle pope Innocentius made answer, praising them, because in
doutfull matters they asked him what sentence or judgment was to be followed,
Ep. 93.
antiquae scilicet regulae forma^ secuti, quam toto semper ab orb mecum nostis
esse seruatam. Ye followed (says Innocentius) the pattern of the ancient
rule which ye know as well as I, Note well.
to have been always kept of the whole world.

Mark, that Innocentius douteth not to affirm, that the Fathers of the
Council of Miliuite (among whom Saint Augustine was) did know, that the whole
world always used to refer doutfull matters to the Sea Apostolic, and that
(as it follows) praesertim quoties fidei ratio ventilatur, specially so often
as the matter of faith is discussed.

If any man say, that the Pope in deed wrote so, but that he said not true:
let him consider, that Saint Augustine does also acknowledge and praise the
Popes answer in these words. Epist. 106.
Scripsimus ad B. memoriae Papam Innocentium etc.

We wrote to Pope Innocentius of blessed memory. Ad omnia ille nobis
rescripsit, eodem modo quo fas erat, atque oportebat Apostolicae sedis
Antistitem. He wrote again to us to every point in such sort, as it was right
and as it became the Bishop of the Apostolic See.

What can be now required more? Saint Augustine acknowlegdeth the answer to
have been mete for Saint Peter's successor: and yet shall the Protestants now a
days be suffered to rail at that epistle, which Saint Augustine esteemed so
much, that he makes mention thereof with great commendation? Saint Augustine
then does confess, that, from all quarters of the world the Pope of Rome was
wont eue^ in the old time to be consulted, as being the general pastor, whose
duty it was, to provide for the whole militant flock, the particular bishops
them selves being comprised therein.

I have been somewhat long about S. Augustines doctrine, partly for the
worthiness of the man, partly because I perceive, that our Adversaries pretend
to give more credit to him, then to any other Father. But if S. Augustine be
not clear for the Supremacy of the bisshops of Rome, there was never nothing
clear in him. Let this one place be added for a surpluse to the rest.

The bishop of Carthage (says he) needed not to care for the multitude of his
ennemies, for so much as he saw himself to be joined in communion, as well with
other countries, whence the Gospel came to Afrike it self, as also with the
Church of Rome, in qua semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit pri^cipatus, Epist.
162.
in the which Roman Church the principate or primacy of the Apostolic chair
has always flourished: not only the chair of the Apostle S. Peter, but also
the principal power of the Apostolik chair did not only stand in the Roman
Church, but it flourished there: and that not only during S. Peter's life, or a
little after, but semper, always. Happy then are we, who til this day
communicate in faith with that Apostolic chair. And woe to them, that call the
Apostolik chair, the Seat of Antichrist.

To go forward with some other holy Fathers, In Lib. de ingratis.
Prosper the Bishop of Regium being of the same time (though sumwhat you^ger
then S. Augustine) and speaking of the condemnation of the heretic Pelagius
writes thus touching the Sea of Rome.

Pestem subeuntem prima recidit Seeds Roma Petri, quae pastoralis honoris facta
caput mundo, quicquid non possicet armis, Religione tenet. Rome the Sea of
Peter did first cut of (Pelagius) being a pestilence which then began to crepe
into the Church. The which Rome being made the head of pastoral honor unto
the world, holds all that by religion, what so ever it does not possess by
the sword.

Rome then is the Seat of Peter, the head of Bisshoplie honor, or of Pastoral
power, the which reaches farther, and has more Christians subject to it,
because the Vicare of Christ sits there, then ever it had through the
mighty Empire thereof.

The self same thing Prosper says in an other place: De vocat. gentium. lib.
2. c. 16
Roma per Apostolici sacerdotij principatum amplior facta est arce religionis,
qua^ solio potestatis. Rome through the chiefedome or primacie of the Apostoke
Priesthood (or Bisshoplie power) is made greater by the chief Castle (or
Fortress) of Religion, then by the Throne of (Imperial) power.

In anuiuersa, assumpt. sermon. 2.
Leo the Great, having said that, in Saint Peter's Seat his own power lives,
his authority excels: in an other place shows himself to have been the
successor of S. Peter and therefore to be the president of the Church. For
thus he writes to Iulianus the Bishop. epist. 30.


Memor sum, me sub illius nomine Ecclesiae praesidere, cuius a Domino Jesus
Christo est glorificata confessio, and cuius fides omnes haereses destruit. I
am mindful, that I am Praesident of the Church under his name, Matthew. 16
whose confession was made gloriouse of our Lord Jesus Christ, in epist. 82.
and 87.
and whose faith destroieth al heresies. It were infinite, to bring all that
Leo says in this behalf.

Eulogius the Patriarche of Alexandria wrote to S. Gregory after this sense,
Lib. 6. ep. 37.
as S. Gregory himself does report it. Suauissima mihi sanctitas vestra multa
in epistolis suis de sancti Petri Apostolorum principis Cathedra locuta est,
dicens quod ipse in ea nunc vsque in suis successoribus sedeat. Your most sweet
Holiness has said many things in his letters concerning the chair of S.
Peter the prince of the Apostles, saying: that S. Peter himself sits it it
even til this present time in his successors. And S. Gregory with great
humility acknowlegeth it to be true, affirming in an other place that, Lib. 11.
Ep. 54.
the Apostolic See is head of all Churches.

For the honor of our country I will not omit the testimony of S. Bid, who in
a sermon made upon the Feast of a certain Abbate of England, named Benedictus,
In Natali Benedicti, inter homilias hyemales de Sanctis.
affirms him to have gone to Rome, vt ibi potius perfecta^ viuendi formam
sumeret, vbi per summos Christi Apostolos totius Ecclesiae caput eminet
eximium. That he might there rather take the perfect example of living, where
the excellent head of the whole Church does appear above the reast, through
the highest Apostles of Christ.

Whereas much more may be alleged, yet these few testimonies may suffice to
prove, that the bishop of Rome is the Successor of S. Peter in his most
principal and chief pastoral office. And surely if we may be deceived in any
point of the faith, which is so well grounded in Gods word, so uniformly
confessed by the holy Fathers, and so notoriously practiced in the Catholic
Church, as the Supremacy of S. Peter, and of his successors in the Sea of
Rome is: I can not devise, when a man may be sure of any article of his faith.

But if there be a mean whereby a man may be sure of his belefe, surely that
mean whatsoever it be, shall well appear to be found in the prouf of the
supremacy of S. Peter and of his successors.

That the good Christian Emperors and Princes, did never think them selves to
be the Suprem Heads of the Churh in Spiritual causes, but gave that honor to
Bisshops and Priests, and most specially to the Sea of Rome, for S. Peter's
sake, as well before, as after the time of Phocas. The XVI. chap.
An D. 246
PHilippus who was the first Christian Emperor, did so little think him self to
have been the Head of the Bisshoppes in Spiritual causes throughout his
Dominion, that whereas on Easter day he would have been at the Vigils and holy
watches, and would have communicated of the holy Mysteries: the Bisshope of the
place would not let him do it, Nisi consiteretur peccata sua.
except he had first confessed his sins, and stood among them that did
penance, and so by penance had washed away, the faults which were reported of
him.

Ferunt igitur libenter eum (says Eusebius) quod a sacerdote imperatum fuerat
suscepisse, eccles. histor. lib. 6. c. 25. apud Ruffinum.
diuinum sibi inesse metum, and fidem religionis plenissimam, rebus atque
operibus comprobando. They say therefore, that he took gladly that which was
enjoined to him of the Priest, Imperatu^.
making faith by the things and works, that the fear of God, and most full
persuasion of Religion was in him.

Is he chief in all causes, who in some must obey the Priest? the priest was
above the Emperor in Ecclesiastical causes.
Or can he that is supreme governor in all things and causes Ecclesiastical,
have an other above him in puttng him back from the mysteries, and in enioyning
him publik penance, and in constreining him to confess his sins? Or is the
coming to the Mysteries no cause Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual? Or is not the
Bisshoppe or Priest, who in this cause governs the Emperor, the Superior
and governor of the Emperor in the same cause? Or is it not a kind of
governing, to command him to stand back? to threaten him if he repine? to
punish him, if he be stubborn?

Yea, how to punish him? to come to him in a rod (as S. Paul speaks) that is
to say, 1. Cor. 4.
in power and authority to beat or to correct. And is not he a governor who
may justly beat the child? If then in prescribing confession, satisfaction,
and abstinence from communion, the priest be the governor of the king: I ask,
whether al other Ecclesiastical causes be greater or less then these are?

Note an infallible argument against your Antichristian supremacy, The one
part of the Dile^ma.
M. Nowel. If other Ecclesiastical causes be greater then these were, surely
the Emperor or king, who is governed by a priest in the lesser Ecclesiastical
causes, and therefore can not be supreme head in them, is much more to be
governed by a priest in the greater causes of the same kind. And therefore he
is much less supreme head in them.

For if when one thing stands above an other, I am to low to reach the
lower: much more I am to low, to reach a higher then the other was. But if
other Ecclesiastical causes be lesser then the suspending from communion, the
other part.
or the inioyning of public penance: then the bishop or priest, who is the
governor of the Emperor or King in the greatest Ecclesiastical causes, is
much more his governor in the lesser Ecclesiastical causes. Because the
lesser are of the same order, kind, and kindred, whereof the greater are.

As therefore he that is supreme head in the greatest temporal causes (as in
judging over life and death) A similitude.
is much more supreme head in the lesser temporal causes (as in judging over
lands or goods) and as he that is not of sufficient authority to be supreme
ruler in sitting judge upon men's lands or goods, can much less sit judge
over their lives by any his former authority: even so neither the King, who
can govern in the lesser causes, can by his Kingly power judge in the greater,
nor the priest, who is the Kings superior in the lesser, can possibly but much
more be his superior in the greater.

The removing of the objection.
Or have we diverse Kinds of Ecclesiastical, and of spiritual causes? Be there
never so many, the Act of parliament gives the highest and the supreme
government of them all, In all causes.
unto the King.

And yet the King lacks not only practice, experience, or cunning, but also
he lacks spiritual and Ecclesiastical power to hear confessions, to
absolve men from their sins, to inioyne penance, to consecrate the Sacrament
of the altar, to Order bishops and priests by the Imposition of hands, or to
excommunicate open sinners.

Here Master Jewel would say, that he never meant the prince should be supreme
governor, either in administering, or in frequenting, or in directing others to
frequent the holy mysteries, or in any like sacramental functions.

Why then does he and his fellows swear men, The oath of the supremacy.
generally to acknowledge the secular Christian prince Supreme governor in all
things and causes? Why does he not rather declame and speak with all his
force, against that most impiouse and blasphemouse oath? Yea so impiouse, that
those Protestants, who most earnestly pressed the setting forth thereof, dare
not now justify the foorm of it.

Shall men in a Christian realm be sworen upon the holy Evangelists, to
keep, believe, or acknowledge that which noman at all, no, not they who
procured it, dare maintain? See, good Country men, see the discretion of your
parlaments in matters of Religion. A men alive abhor from that act, which the
Laity made and enacted, as a form so warely drawn, whereunto men might commit
their everlasting salvation or damnation.

Mark, I say, that M. Nowel, M. Horn, M. Jewel dare not warrant the King to be
suprem governor in all Ecclesiastical causes. But rather they confess, that a
Bishop or Priest may, and ought to govern the King, concerning his coming to
the Mysteries, and in such like matters. This much being said concerning
Philippus the first Christian Emperor (who obeyed, but governed not the
Bishop in Ecclesiastical matters) let us now go forward.

An. Dom. 324.
Constantinus the Great, perceiving the Bisshops which came to the Synod at
Nice, to have many quarrels and suits among them selves, appointed a day wherein
every man should offer Ruffinus lib. 10. Eccles. histor. cap. 2.
he said unto the bishops: Deus vos constituit Sacerdotes, and potestate^ vobis
dedit de nobis quoque iudicandi, and ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur: vos
aute^ no^ potestis ab hominibus iudicari: propter quod Dei solius inter vos
expectate iudicium. God has made you priests (or Sacrificers) and has given
you power to judge of us also. And therefore we are rightly judged of you. But
ye can not be judged of men. For which cause expect ye (or tarry for) the
judgment of God alone among you.

This discourse of Constantine contains three things worthy to be noted.
First he says, the bishops Sacerdotes, Priests, or men that have publik
authority to make external sacrifice unto God for the whole Heb. 5.
they have power to judge even of the Emperor himself. And this their power of
judging, depends of their power of priesthod. For the highest power may judge
the lower. But no power can be higher then the power of a priest, because he is
the minister of God in that office which most directly touches Gods honor and
service. Malac. 1.


Whereupon S. Augustine having said: what was Moses if he were not a priest? In
Psalm. 98
gives this reason of his words, Nu^quid mayor Sacerdote esse poterat? Whether
could he be greater then a priest? as who should say: seeing Moses was the
greatest officer among the Israelits, and yet he could not be greater then a
priest, it must needs be, that he was a priest.

The priests then of God being the greatest officers in earth have power to
judge even of an Emperor, if any be in their parishes or Dioceses.

Thirdly of these former points Co^sta^tine that priests can not be judged of
me^. How then can they be judged of the Emperor? Neither does it skill, that
Constantine seems to have judged certain priests, or Ecclesiastical causes,
when the Donatists appealed unto hi^: for he did it (as S. Augustine says) a
sanctis antistitibus postea veniam petiturus, In epistol. 162.
as one that would afterward ask leave or pardon of the holy bisshops.

Who asks leave or pardon for that, which he may do by his own power? He
did it then through the importunat suit of heretics, for the peace of the
Church: otherwise detesting them, that demanded his judgment after that the
bishops had judged, Optat. li 2 August. in epist. 162.
and finding great fault therewith himself, as Optatus, and S. Augustine also
do witness. But take away importunity of heretics, and the commission, leave
or pardon of the right bishops (who may for diverse respects, either
commit certain Ecclesiastical causes to lay me^, or winck for a time at such
judgments) take away, I say, heresy and permission: and ordinarily it is
against the law of God, that any secular Prince (who needs the office of a
priest for his reconciliation unto God) should sit judge upon him in causes
of the Church, 2. Cor. 5.
at whose hands he must receive the Sacraments of the Church, and by whose
ministry his soul must be purged.

Now if one priest do judge an other, that is Gods judgment, Deuteronomy. 17. and
Number. 3
and not the judgment of men. For God has set one priest over an other, as
the high priests was above the Levites in Moses law, and as the Apostles
wereof a higher degree, then the seventy Disciples, or then the seven Deacons.

These words then of Constantine vos non potestis ab hominibus iudicari,
Ruffin. li. 1. cap. 2.
ye (o priests of God) can not be judged of men, are thus meant: the order of
priesthood is such, as is not subject to any secular or earthly jurisdiction.
And seeing all the power of judgment, which even Christian Emperors or Kings
have by their own state, is earthly and secular: it will follow, that no King or
Emperor can by his own power judge a priest in priestlie causes and in
Ecclesiastical matters.

That all the power of Emperors, though they be Christians, is secular,
Constantine himself pronounces, saying to the Donatists (as Optatus records)
Petitis a me in seculo iudicium, De schism. Donatist. lib. 1.
cum ego ipse Christi iudiciu^ expectem. Ye ask of me judgment in the world,
whereas I my self look for Christ's judgment.

There are then two judgments: one in the world, an other of Christ. That is
worldly or secular: Secular judgment
this is heavenly or spiritual. Constantine had none other judgment but
secular, because his sentence could bind no farther, then in this life.

But Christ's judgment (which he excerciseth as well presently by his Priests
and Ministers, Joan. 20.
as at the later day in his own person) is spiritual, Spirital judgment
Matthew. 16. In Coelis.
and rather apperteineth to heaven, and to the life to come, then to this world.

Again, that Constantines judgment was earthlye, S. Augustine in diverse
places declares: saing of the very same Donatists: In ep. 162.
Terrenum Regem suae causae iudicem esse voluerunt. They would an earthly King
to be the judge of their cause. He means there, Constantine the Christian
Emperor, by the name of an earthly King.

Hitherto I have showed, that Constantine believed and professed, that Bishops
or Priests are not (ordinarily and where aequitie or conscience may take
place) to be judged by secular Princes. Now it only remains to consider
specially, the great honor which he gave to the Sea of S. Peter, and to his
Successor the Bishop of Rome.

First, I take it for most certain, that Constantinus the Great, Consta^tin
baptized at Rome.
was instructed and baptized of Syluester the Pope of Rome, as not only most
ancient witnesses, but eue^ the very stones and pillars of marble do
witness, which being erected in the Emperors own house (named Constantiniana)
bear the name of his baptisterie, to wit, of the very place, wherein
Constantinus was baptized. 1 in vita Syluestri in Pontificali. 2 De sex
aetatibus. 3 in Chro^. 4 lib. 2. Histor.


Which thing also Pope Damasus, who lived not long after, and conseque^t lie.
2. S. Bid, 3. Ado, and Marianus Scotus affirm the same. Yea 4 Gregorius
Turonensis, who lived long before, alludeth to the same story, in describing
the baptism of King Chlodoueus.

Neither only the Latins have thus avouched the truth, 5 In vita Constant. 6.
Lib. 7. c. 35. 7 In Anna libus.

but the Grecia^s also, as 5 Zonaras, 6 Nicephorus, 7 Cedrenus, not esteming
what Eusebius and some other moved by him, report in that behalf, as whom for
his affection to the Arrian heresy they had suspected.

Constantine then being baptized at Rome, and thereby instructed, that S. Peter
had died there (to whom he built a fair Church in the hill named Vaticane) and
that he had left a successor in that See, Damasus in Pontif.
who beside his Bisshoprike of Rome, should have the chief pastoral cure over
all the faithful: gave such reverence to the said Chair and See of S. Peter,
that he thought it not convenient for him, to keep his ordinary court and
Residence any more in that City, where the chief causes of all Christendom
should be daily examined.

In so much that he did not only protest his faith in Christ, and the honor
due to S. Peter in express words, which are before the first Nicene Counsel
(some of which words are likewise alleged at the second general Counsel kept
at Nice) but also he in deed went out of the City of Rome with this intent,
in Praefat. Concilij Niceni.
to keep no more his Imperial residence in the same.

Which thing is farther proved, in that he gave away his own Palaice,
dedicating it a Temple unto our Savior (which temple stands till this day)
wherein also the Pope had aftetward a dwelling place. And who does not
perceive, that he departs with the mind to return no more, who at his going,
gives his own house away?

Add hereunto, In vitae Constantini.
that Constantine went to seek a new dwelling place, as Zonaras reports,
and at the last reasted in Bizance, calling it of his own name,
Constantinople, or new Rome. Why should Constantine thus advisedly deparete
from the head City of all the world, the glory of his Empire, and the chief
roialtie of his inheritance, except he had been fully persuaded, that S. Peter
and his successors the Bisshops of Rome had been placed at Rome by the will of
God, Sermon 1. de Natiuit. Pet. and Pauli.
thence to publish the faith of Christ into al Countries (as Pope Leo says)
whereunto he would that his Imperial court should be no hinderance. For
otherwise if he had yielded to a simple Bishop, there was a Bishop in
Constantinople also, as in every other great City. But it was not every
Bisshoppe to whom Constantine yealded, but the chief Bissbop of all, and the
head of the whole Milita^t Church. Which Example of his al good Emperors
following never kept afterward their court and ordinary residence in Rome,
Zonaras in vita Constantis Nepotis Heraclij.
al be it Constance perceiving more honor to be given to the Mother (which was
Rome) then to the daughter (which was Constantinople) would have returned to
Rome, but (as Zonaras declares) without success. Which thing who so thinks
to have chanced with out the singular providence of God, may seem to think,
that the world is governed by chance.

To this fact of the Emperors (in their absteining to keep their residence in
Rome) let us ioyn the express words also of diverse good successors of
Constantine the Great. For if any evil came between, it is no marueil, if
they did hate so good a thing as the Primacie of the Church was.

Concerning Constantius the heretic (who was the son of great Constantine)
Athanasius complains, An. D. 360
that he and his adherents the Arrians, had no reverence toward the Bishop of
Rome, In Epist. ad Solitar. vitam agentes.
not consideringe vel quod seeds illa apostolica esset, vel quod Roma
Metropolis esset ditionis Romanae: either that it was the Apostolic See, or
else that Rome was the Mother city of the Roman circuit. So that we may see
even from the beginning, that as the most faithful Emperors did always honor
the Apostolic See of Rome, even so the heretics and worste men did always
hate it, and despise it.

For on the other side, in the midst of the Arrian heresy, the noble and
virtuous Emperors, Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius doubted not to
set forth a Law in these words: An. D. 386 leg. 1 Cod. de summa Trinitat.
Cunctos populos, quos Clementiae nostrae regit imperium in tali volumus
religione versari, quam D. Petrum Apostolu^ tradidisse Romany, religio vsque
ad huc ab ipso insinuata declarat, quamque Pontifice^ Damasu^ sequi claret, and
Petru^ Alexa^driae Episcopu^, virum Apostolicae sanctitatis. We will al nations,
which are governed by our Cleme^cy, to live in such a religion, as the religion
which is used from S. Peter til this day does declare him to have delivered to
the Romans, and which religion it is evident, that Pope Damasus and Peter the
Bishop of Alexandria (a man of an Apostolik holiness) do follow.

By this Law it is witnessed, first, that (as well concerning the Trinity, as
other things)

Secondly, that the said religion coming was kept still in the Church of Rome.

Thirdly, that it was kept specially by the perpetual succession of Bishops.
For which cause Damasus the Bishop of Rome is named in the Law. After Damasus,
a blessed Bishop of Alexandria, called Peter, is also named, not with the
intent to show also that the Bisshops of Alexandria, kept always the true
faith (for at that moment Lucius a raging wolf, occupied the seat in
Alexandria) but because this Peter of Alexandria who is now named, was in deed
the true bishop of Alexandria, albeit he was now kept out of his Church by
violence.

Nicep. lib. 11. cap. 26
Whereas then there were two bisshops of Alexandria, one who agreed with the
bishop of Rome, an other who disagreed* because the said Peter did agree with
Damasus, and fled out of prison to him, he is named with Damasus, and thereby
the other bishop is insinuated to be an usurper. So that the whole force of the
Decree rests upon the tradition and succession of S. Peter at Rome, and of
those who agree with him.

If Peter of Alexandria had not followed that succession of S. Peter, he had no
more ben esteemed, then Lucius, Georgius, Gregorius or Dioscorus, An. Do. 4^4.
Tom. 1. Council. and distinct. 97.
who being bishops of Alexandria, wree al heretics.

Pope Bonifacius the first wrote to the Christian Emperor Honorius, in this
wise: Mihi Deus noster meu^ Sacerdotium, vobis res humanas regentibus
deputauit. Our God has appointed mie priesthood to me, whereas you do govern
woordlie matters.

And in the same epistle he requires the Emperors help, not I warrant you for
the disposing of his own priesthod, but for the conservation of the peace of
the Church. To whom the Emperor promises his help, confessing that he
received the writings of his blessedness with dew gratulation of reverence,
Apostolatus tuus.
desiring his Apostoleshippe to pray for the safeguard of his Empire.

Honorius faith then was, that the Emperors were heads of the civil
government for the defense of Ecclesiastical peace, and not supreme heads in
all Ecclesiastical things and causes: to defend, I say, the laws of the
Church made by bishops, and not to make new Ecclesiastical laws, wheru^to to
bishops should be subject against their wills.

An. Dom. 450.
Let us add hereunto, that which an Empress also writes of the same matter
for we may well believe that she wrote according to the faith of Church in her
time. In epistol. Gallae Placidiae ante synodum Chalcedonens.
Thus then Galla Placidia says, concerning the Church of Rome. In Apostolica
sede primus ille, pro coelestes claues dignus fuit accipere, principatum
Episcopatus ordinauit. He that was worthy to receive first the heavenly keys
(that is S. Peter) has ordained the primacy of the Bishoply office in the
Apostolik See. If this be so, Peter was not only first and prince himself, but
he also ordained the bishop of Rome to be the first and chief of bishops after
him. Ad synodu^ Chalcedo. Domino meo Theodosio. etc.
When I say, Peter ordained it, I mean, that Christ by Peter ordained it.
Valentinian is of the same belefe and judgment, saying: Fidem a nostris
maioribus traditam debemus cum omni competenti deuotione defendere, and
dignitatem propriae venerationis B. Apostolo Petro intemeratam and in nostris
temporibus conseruare, quatenus beatissimus Romanae ciuitatis episcopus, cui
principatum Sacerdotij super omnes antiquitas contulit, locum habeat ac
facultatem de fide and sacerdotibus iudicare. We ought to defend with all
competent devotion the faith delivered from our elders. And to conserve and
keep in our times to the blessed Apostle S. Peter the dignity of his proper
and own worship uncontrolled: so that the most blessed bishop of the City of
Rome (to whom ^ntiquity has given above al me the cheefty of priesthood) may
have place and power to judge of faith and of priests.

Lo the honor that is given to the bishop of Rome, is given to Saint Peter:
verily, because the bishop of Rome sits in his chair. And when the bishop
of Rome is despised, the worship of S. Peter is stained. If the old time gave
the primacy of priestod unto the bishop of Rome for S. Peter's sake, and that
super omnes, over al men: if eleven hundred years ago, it was true to say,
that Antiquity gave the chiefty of priestly power to the bishop of Rome: are
not they new teachers, who after fiften hundred years, go about to pluck, the
primacy of priesthod from the bishop of Rome?

An. Dom. 4.57. Act. 3. In Council. Chalce^o. Autoritate To. Episcopi.
Martianus likewise with Valentinian confesses of the General Council which
came together at Chalcedon, in ^^^^wise: Quae Synodus dum fidem diligenter
inquirit authoritate beatissimi Leonis Episcopi aeternae vrbis Romae, and
religionis fundamenta constituit sanctae ciuitati, and Flauiano palmam mortis
tribuit gloriosae. The which council whiles it makes diligent inquisition
concerning the faith, it both appointed the foundations of religion to the holy
city (the Church) by the authority of most blessed Leo bishop of the
everlasting City of Rome, By the authority of Pope Leo.
and also gave to Flauianus the crown of a gloriouse death. All this was done by
the authority of the bishop of Rome. And why by his authority, the same Martianus
gave the cause thereof before, in an oration which he made in the fourth general
council, Act. 1. Fol. 740.
where he said of Leo the Pope, qui Apostolicu^ gubernat thronu^, who governs
the Sea Apostolic. And it is well known he meant only the Apostolic see of S.
Peter. An. D. 534 In Codicad^ summa Trinit.


For the honor of that See Iustinia^ writes thus to John the second pope of
Rome: Nos redde^tes honore^ Apostolicae sedi, and vestrae sanctitati (qdsemper
nobis in voto fuit, and est) and vt decet patre^, honora^tes vestra^ beati
tudine^, oi^a quae ad ecclesiaru^ statu^ pertine^t, festinauimus ad notitiam
defer vestrae sanctitatis. We rendering honor to the Sea Apostolic, and to
your Holiness (the which thing ever was and is our desire) and we honoring
your blessedness, as it becomes us to honor our Father, have hastened to
bring to the knowledge of your Holiness all things which do appertein to the
state of Churches.

If the Pope be as a Father to the Emperor, and be so to be honored: it is
utterly impossible for the Emperor, who is, as it were, a Son, to be the
supreme head or governor in spiritual causes of his spiritual Father.

Again he says: Nec enim patimur quicqua^ quod ad Ecclesiaru^ statu^
pertinet, quamuis manifestu^ and indubitatum sit quod mouetur, vt no^ etiam
vestrae innotescat sanctitati, Caput.
quae caput est omnium sanctarum Ecclesiaru^. Neither do we suffer any thing,
that does apperteine to the state of the Churches (how manifest and undoubted
so ever it be, which is called in question) but the same is also notified to
your holiness, The Pope is head of all holy Churches
who is the head of al holy Churches.

If the Pope be head of al holy Churches, and therefore be made privy to all
ordinances and laws which apperteine to the state of Churches: it must needs
follow, that the Church, whereof a King or Emperor shall be suprem head, is no
holy Church, but a profane Synagog and a maligna^t congregation, such as those
of the Arrians, Donatists, and Pelagians were, who obeyed not the Bishop of
Rome, nor such bisshops as were of his fellowship, Who was the supreme head
of the Heretics.
but either Iulianus the Renegate, or Valens, or the Kings of the Goths, and
of the Vandals, as the Histories of the Church do witness.

Here the order and place requires, that I should declare also, how Phocas the
Emperor, An. Dom. 609.
in the time of Pope Bonifacius the third, pronounced the Sea of Rome head of
al churches, but the Protestants not able to deny the story, sai: that now
first the Sea of Rome began to be accounted the head of al Churches. A false
assertion.
Which thing shall appear as true as the rest of their doctrine is.

For S. Gregory being before Bonifacius, An. Dom. 607. Lib. 11. epist. 54.
says of the Sea of Rome: Apostolica seeds omnium ecclesiarum caput est. The
Apostolic See is Head of all Churches.

Before him also the Bishop of Patara, An. 538.
being a Grecian, said of Syluerius the Pope: Ille Papa est super Ecclesiam
mu^di totius, He is Pope over the Church of the whole world.

An. 534.
Iustinia^ writing to Ioannes the Pope (as I alleged before) calls his holiness
caput omnium Ecclesiarum, Head of al Churches.

An. 486.
Eugenius the Bishop of Carthage being an African, had said before Justinians
time (as Victor writes) Romana ecclesia caput e^ omniu^ ecclesiaru^, Lib. 2.
de persecut. Vandal.
The Roman Church is the head of all Churches.

Yea Prosper had written before Eugenius: Seeds Roma Petri, An. 460. De ingratis.
quae pastoralis honoris facta caput mu^do. Rome the Sea of Peter, which is
made unto the world, An. 446. In natiuit Petri and Paull.
the head of pastoral honor. Leo the great, being elder the^ Prosper, preached
thus: Roma per sacra^ B. Petri sede^ caput orbis effecta. Rome by the holy seat
of Peter, is made the head of the world* and again perquos vniuersalis
ecclesiae cura ad vna^ b. Petri sede^ co^fluit. Ad Anastas. ep. 82
By who^ the cure of the universal church flows to the one See of Peter, that
nothing might at any time dissent from his head.

Now the fourth general Counsel, An. 456.
albeit it was not elder in years then Leo, yet consisting of 630. Bisshops
gathered out of the whole world, it is worthy to be harkened unto of all the
Christian flock, as of most ancient and perelesse authority.

This great Council making relation to Pope Leo of such things as had been done
there, Act. 3. Sancta and magna etc.
writes to him: Tu quidem sicut membris caput praeeras. Thou wast over us, as
the head is over his members. And whereas the Church is compared to a vineyard,
Isai. 5.
they there confess, that unto Pope Leo vineae custodia a Saluatore commissa
est, The keeping of the vineyard is committed of our Savior. Note here, gentle
Readers, that this famous, great, and learned Council refers the matter to
our Savior, and not unto Phocas, or to any mortal man. The keeping of the
vineyard is committed to the Pope of Rome by our Savior himself.

An. D. 426 Lib. 12. in Joan. c. 64
If we shall go yet higher, when Cyrillus confesses S. Peter to have been caput
Apostolorum, the head of the Apostles: does he not confess, the successors of
S. Peter (who are the Bishops of Rome) to be much more the heads of the
successors of the Apostles, which al bishops are?

Shall we go from Cyrillus to S. Ambrose, An. D. 308
who writing upon S. Paul's epistle to Timothe, In c. 3. 1. epistol. ad Timoth.
calls Damasus (the bishop of Rome) the ruler or governor of that Church in
his time, which Church is named of S. Paul the house of God, the pillour of
truth, meaning, that Pope Damasus was governor of the whole Militant Church,
and not only of any one parish or Diocese. And what other thing is it to be a
temporal ruler of Gods whole Church, Tripar. li. 4. c. 15.
but to be the temporal head thereof? Says not Sozomenus, that pope Julius
cura^ gessit omniu^, propter sedis propriae dignitatem? He took the cure of
all, for the worthiness of his own See? where al is comprised, what can be
excepted?

Optatus, An. D 370 Lib. 2. de schism. Donatist,
who proves S. Peter to have be^ head, because he was called of Christ Cephas,
a rock (for the rock or foundation is that unto the house, which the head is to
the body) does thereby refer the primacie of S. Peter and of his successors to
Christ him self.

An. 300.
If I shall go now to the Council of 300. Bisshops held at Sinuessa, where
although Marcellinus had confessed him self to have done Idolatry, yet all
the Bisshops answered: Prima seeds non iudicabitur a quoquam, Tom. 1. Council.
the first See shall be judged of no man: will it not thereby appear, that the Sea
of Rome beig the first See was not preferred to that honor by any mortal man
(otherwise he that had p^ferred it, might also have judged it) but was made
head of al churches, by him who said to S. Peter: upon this rock I will build my
Church? Matt. 16.
It is not therefore Phocas, but Jesus Christ, who making S. Peter the temporal
foundation and head Pastor of the church, made the Bishop of Rome his
successor. as I have declared before.

Let us now go forward with other good Emperors and Ki^gs, showing that not
Phocas alone, but others also after hi^ honored the Sea Apostolic, as the
highest power in the church of God.

Consta^tinus the fourth, being a most Catholic Prince, Beda de sex aetat.
mundi.
procured the sixth general Council to be called, and therein confessed himself
to have wo^dred at the relation of Pope Agatho, as if it had be^ the voice of
Peter. Act. 18. Synod. 6.
The same Emperor in the time of Benedictus the second Pope of that name,
decreed: An 688. Platina in vita Benedict 2
vt deinceps que^ clerus, populus exercitusque Romanus in Pontifice^
delegisset, eu^de^ statim verum Christi vicariu^ esse omnes credere^t. That
from thence forward, whom the Clergy, people, and the Roman army should chose
to be bishop, all men should straight believe him to be the true vicare of
Christ. The true Vicare^ of Christ.
He says not the Vicare of Phocas, or the Lieutenant of the Emperor, but the
Vicar and Lieutena^t of Christ.

It was then the public faith not only in the Latin, but also in the Greek
church, that who so was duly chosen Bishop of Rome, was Christ's own Vicare.

An. Dom. 749.
If the whole nobility and people of France, had not believed the Pope of Rome
to be of such authorie: for what purpose would they have sent to Rome to know
the mind of Pope Zacharias, who should be King of France, whether Chilpericus,
Paene nullius potestatis.
who had the bare name thereof, without exercising any kingly power in manner,
or the great Stuard, Mayor domus.
who exercised the publik office and power of the King without the name?

In Chron.
The Pope answered (as Ado testifies) Regem potius illum debere vocari, qui
rempublicam regeret. That he rather should be called the King, who ruled the
common weal. Upon which answer, Pipinus was anointed King autoritate
Apostolica and Fra^ little electione (says Sigebertus) by the Apostolic
authority, In Chron. An. Dom. 750.
and by the election of the French men. Neither may this so great credit,
which the whole people and Nobility of France reposed in the Sea Apostolic,
be righly imputed to the sentence of Phocas, who before that, had declared the Sea of Rome to be head of al Churches. For even after this election of King
Pipinus the first Emperor of the French men, or rather of the Germans (for the
French men came out of Germany) Carolus Magnus, protesting his reverence to
the Sea Apostolic, shows, the cause why he honors it, to be the Chair of
S. Peter, and not the judgment of Phocas. His words are these:

In memoriam beati Petri Apostoli honoremus sanctam Romanam ecclesia^, and
Apostolica^ sede^: An. Dom. 806. 19. disti^ct.
vt quae nobis sacerdotalis matter est dignitatis, ecclesiasticae esse debeat
magistra rationis. Quare serua^da est cu^ mansuetudine humilitas. et licet vix
fere^du^ ab illa sancta sede imponatur iugum, tamen feramus, and pia deuotione
toleremus. Let us honor the holy Church of Rome, and the Sea Apostolic for the
remembrance of blessed Peter the Apostle: The sea of Rome is the mother of
priestly Worship
that as (the same See) is to us the mother of priestlie dignity, so it may be
the teacher of the Ecclesiastical trade. Wherefore humility is to be kept with
meekenes. And although a yoke be put upon us from the same holy See which is
scant to be born, yet let us bear, and suffer it with godly devotion.

Thus we see, that Carolus honored the Sea of Rome, not for Phocas, but for S.
Peter's sake.

Ludouicus, who for his singular virtue and godliness was surnamed Pius, having
ben triatorouslie ordered by Adalgisus the Duke of Beneuentum, Regino in Chron.
An. 872.
(who went about to kill him in his palaice) and being afterward forced to
swear, that he would not revenge that injury, was so far from taking himself
to be the supreme head over the Bishop of Rome, that rather he was content to
take absolution from his oath of John the pope, Authoritate Dei and Sancti
Petri, by the authority (not of Phocas) but of God, and of Saint Peter.

I would go forward to show at large the obedience of all good Emperors and
Kings to the Sea Apostolik even till this day, but that it should be accounted
a superfluouse labor, since, as I suppose, no man does doubt of it.

And verily concerning our own country, as above fourtene hundred years past,
An. D. 188
Lucius the first Christian King of the Britans, did send to Eleutherius the
Bishop of Rome, to receive from thence by his authority the ordinary mean of
administering the Sacraments for him and his realm: eue^ so Ethelbert the first
Christian King of the English Saxons took his faith and the government of the
Church from the Sea of Rome (S. Gregory being the^ Pope) by our Apostle S.
Augustine. An. D. 630
And the good King Osui of Northumberlu^d, Bedae lib. histo. Angli. 3. c. 29
and Ecbert the King of Kent, understanding that the Roman Church esset
catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia, was the Catholic and the Apostolic Church,
sent Wichardus with the consent of all the faithful of England to Rome, that
having there taken the degree of an Archbishop, he might ordein bisshops to all
the Catholic Churches through Britannie.

From that day forward it is evident by all our Chronicles (which at the least
were made, before that schism and heresy began) that as every King, not only
of England, but of all Christian Countries was best, and most given to godliness
and to virtue: so was he most obedient and frindful to the bishop of Rome. And
co^trariewise, as every of them was most licentious, most given to extorsion,
to tyranny, or to robling of Churches: so was he most disobedient to the Sea
of Rome.

So that as all the heathen Emperors, from Nero to the Renegat Iulianus, did
always persecute the Apostolic See of Rome: and as afterward all the heretical
Emperors did the same, as well those of Constantinople, as of the West, so
contrariwise all the good Constantines, the Theodosians, the Martia^s, Carolus,
Ludouicus, Otho, and their good successors did so little thi^ck themselves the
supreme heads over the bishops of Rome, and of the other Christians in
spiritual causes: that contrary wise they obeyed them as their chief
pastors, and as the Vicars of Christ, and the successors of S. Peter.

And that they did, not only being a part every man in his own Realm, but also
when that most famous battle against the Turks and Saracens was by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost begun at one time by the Spaniards, Sigebertus in
Chron. Anno Do. 1096.
Gascons, Britans, Normans, English, Scottish, and Frenchmen: by the
Burgundions, Almains, Lumbards, and Italians, when diverse Dukes (as Godfrid of
Lorrain, and Baiamund of Apulia) when diverse Earls (as Baldwin of Mo^s, one
Robert of Flanders, and an other of Normandy, Stephen of Blese, and Raimund)
when Hugh the brother of Philip the King of France took that most holy warfare
in hand, when, I say, they were stirred up with one spirit, and heart, to
recover the holy land: did not they show as well their own belief, as the
universal faith of al their countries and nations, in that they had Hamarus the
bishop of Podium set over them Apostolica authoritate by the Apostolic
authority?

And how marueilouse success of victory had they, conquering as well Antioche
as Jerusalem? It can be unknown to no man who reads the old histories, what
prosperity these realms have always had, which keeping them selves in the
obedience of the Sea of Rome, kept also the faith which that Church professes.
In so much that Afrike was invincible, until the Donatists, and the Pelagians
had withdrawn the obedience thereof from the Sea of Rome. Neither was the Turk
able to co^quer the Grecia^s, either of Asia, or of Thracia, until after the
counsel of Florence against their consent there given, they had again divided
themselves from the society of the Pope.

I will come nere home. The English Saxons conquered the Britons for no cause
rather, then because the Britons began to forsake the old faith, wherein
Fugatius, Damianus and Germanus all coming as Legates and preachers from the
Pope, had instructed them. Beda hist. Anglor. li. 2. cap. 2.
For (as S. Bid testifies) the Britons now had left the keeping and profession
of Easter after the use of the Church of Rome (with whom the Catholic Church
agreed therein) and began to keep it as the Jews did. Yea also they ministered
the sacrament of Baptism otherwise then the Church of Rome did.

If then we continue again in this division and schism against the Church of
Rome, we have to fear the like spoil and conquest, or some worse, and even of
temporal calamity beside the everlasting damnation of those, who die without
the society of S. Peter's See, who was made of Christ, and in his successors
continues still, the shepherd of the whole milita^t flock.

Their doctrine who teach the bishop of Rome to be Antichrist himself, is
confuted by the authority of Gods word, and by the consent of the ancient
Fathers. The XVII. Chap.
ANtichrist does signify the adversary or ennemy of Christ our Savior. Aug.
in c. 2. episto. 1. Joan.
In which kind of malice as Lucifer the captain of all cursed rebels was the
first and chief: so he was first named Satan, which is to say, an adversary.
Satan.
For as the goodness of God, not being content to send his prophets and priests
to guide men to life everlasting, at the last sent his own son in man's
flesh, thereby to work most effectually our salvation: so on the other side
Satan, having procured as much as lay in him, that men should not believe in
Christ, nor follow his prophets, shall at the lgenth attempt to possess a
certain accursed man, by whom he may work his feats against Christ, so much
the more hurtfullie, how much the priuier he shall ly, being covered and hidden
both with ma^s flesh and with the very name of Christ.

As therefore the Devil shall give his strength and power most specially to
that cursed man: so the Devils name is most specially given him also in the
holy scripture. Where he is called of S. Paul (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2
the Adversary, and S. John shows whose adversary he is, 1. Joan. 2.
by naming him (...), which is to say, that Antichrist who is most spitfully
set against Christ, and is most certeinely foretold to come, and ought most
carefully to be eschewed of all Christians.

For albeit every false teacher be a certain Antichriste, or ennemie of
Christ, and therefore (as S. John says) there are many Antichrists: 1. Joan.
2.
yet as there is one above other, so he says of hi^ (...), you have heard,
that the Antichrist comes you have heard, not only that an Antichrist, but
that the same one most notable Antichrist comes.

Now this singular Antichrist shall be suffered to come, why Antichrist is
permited
partly for the trial and revealing of the invincible strength which God has
given to the elect, partly to show, how inexcusable the stubborn Jews are,
who pretending to believe the old Prophets, and to look for the true Messiah,
yet having repelled Jesus Christ, who most evidently was described in the Law
and Prophets, shall in the end embrace the Devil him self, of whom all the
Prophets has willed them to beware.

For S. Paul says: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Because they have not receued the love of truth that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them the working of error, that they may believe lying.
To the end al men may be judged, who have not believed the truth, but have
consented to iniquity.

Thus, whereas there are three kinds of Antichrists, first the Devil, who is
only a spirit, next, false teachers, thirdly he that being possessed of the
Devil, shall in the end oppugn Christ's glory most of al in apparent show, and
in outward working: The question.
the question is not now, of the two first kinds, but only of the last. to wit,
whether the Pope of Rome be this main and chief Antichrist, who was
prophesied of to appear so singularly toward the end of the world. For some
Protestants are grown to that excessive malice against the Church of Christ,
that they doubt not to affirm, to preach, yea to set forth in print, that
the chief pastor of the whole Church, to whom Christ commended his sheep and
Lambs, is not only an arm, or hand of Antichriste, but the very head and
captain Antichrist himself, who shall be destroyed with the spirit of
Christ's mouth. Isay. 12.


Among others, Bullinger
one Henry Bullinger, and an other as wise as he, Gualter.
called Rodulph Gaulter, each of them Ministers of Zurich, have set this
doctrine abroad in books: whom I name the sooner, because their books are
translated into the English tongue, as a special treasure to enriche fools
withal: where as in deed, that blaspemouse doctrine is directly against the
express word of God, as I will show hereafter.

And verily, if God said generally of all his elect people, yea if it be said
of the hard hearted Jews: zacha. 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye: if he said more
specially concerning his Prophets and Priests: Psalm. 104.
touch not mine anointed, if his Apostles were nere to him then any other,
Luc. 22,
because they tarried with him in his tentations, if among all the Apostles, S.
Peter loved him best, Joan. 21.
and was best beloved of him (concerning the love which belongs to the chief
shepherd and pastor of his flock) if Christ provided by singular providence,
that S. Peter should glorify him by suffering death upon the Cross in the
City of Rome, if Saint Peter's Chair and the succession in the chief
Bisshoprike has been acknouledged in Rome with great reverence, of lib. 3. c.
3
S. Irenaeus, of lib. 1. ep. 3
S. Cyprian, of De Antichristo.
Hippolytus the Martyr, of Tripart. lib. 4. c. 15 and in ep. ad Solitar.
Athanasius the Patriarch of Alexandria, and likewise of Paulus the
Archebisshoppe of Constantinople, both being holy Co^- essours, if In Psalm.
106. et 138
Arnobius, lib. 2. de schismat.
Optatus, S. ad Damasum.
Hierone. S. 1. Tim. 3
Ambrose, In Psalm. co^tra Donatis^as. and in ep. 162.
S. Augustine, with the rest of the holy Fathers, have so esteemed the said
succession of Peter, that without the unity of that Chaier, they account no
salvation, and in it, they reckon an assurance of the Catholic faith: if God
has prospered that succession against the envy of al heretics, and to the
comfort of all Catholics in all ages: if thence, the faith of Chricte has been dilated and spread into diverse countries: After al these gratiouse and
miraculouse works of Christ, to charge that See so well-beloved of God, not
only with error (which yet is false) nor only with decreeing of heresies
(which is impossible, Luc. 22.
because Christ has prayed for it) but to charge it even with the begetting,
and nursing, and fostering up, and mainteining of Antichrist himself: it is (to
speak in short words) to burden Christ himself with the bringing forth and
with the comme^ding of Antichrist unto the world.

The raging madness of the Protestants not being content to burden the
Apostolic see of Rome with abuses, or with mean errors, will needs have, not
a frind or member of Antichrist, but the very head and captain of all the
ennemies of God to sit in S. Peter's own chair. And that is not only affirmed
by bawdes, and minstrels, and plaiers, but also by Preachers and Doctors of
this new divinity.

And it is believed of ignorant men, as if it were an article of their faith. As
though it had not been Christ only, who has set Rome in so great honor, as
it has always had. Ambros. Lib. 5.
It was not Antichrist, but Jesus Christ, who made S. Peter to go thither, and
to die there, and to have a perpetual succession of Bishops in that City,
without any intermission or coming between of infidelity, or of professed
heresy, from the beginning of our Christian profession even til this day.
Vide Pontificale.
It was not Antichrist, but Christ who gave the crown of Martyrdom to almost
forty Bisshoppes of Rome. Did Christ the^ prepare the way for Antichrist by
the chief af al his Apostles? Could ye make none other man to be the
foreru^ner of that cursed creature, besides the Son of God, and the redemer
of mankind? O blasphemouse tongues, and cursed thoughts. Or tell me, whom have
so many general Councils, so many faithful Princes, and nations honored all this
while in the City of Rome? We say they have honored Christ Jesus in his
Vicare. Ye say, they have committed fornication with Antichrist, ergo had
Christ no man else, upon whom he might permit Antichrist to be built, but only
upon the foundation of Peter, upon whom he built his own Church? Christ said,
hell gates should not preuail neither against the rock (which was Peter, Math.
16.
as it has been evidently proved) nor against his Church, which was built upon
the Rock. And yet have hell gates so far prevailed against the rock which was
Peter, that even Antichrist himself does sit in the seat of the Rock?

Did Christ so much labor to prefer S. Peter, that in the end Antichrist
might have a most honorable seat prepared by God himself, for his
abominable enterprises?

Are they worthy of the name of men, who fear not to auouche this detestable
and blasphemous fable? Surely although the very filthiness of the doctrine
being once understood, be hable to overthrow it, self for ever, yet that
they may perceive I fight not against them with words only, but also with
authorities and reasons, I will briefly declare out of the holy scriptures and
ancient Fathers, why the Pope of Rome can not be Antichrist himself, as the
Protestants do most impude^tly and vnlernedly teach? I must in deed confess
the thing I speak of to be so hard, that no more can be said in it, the^
either Gods word or the consent of the Catholic doctors has revealed.

Isai. 11. Dan. 8. and 9. and 11. Math. 24 Joan. 5. and 1. epist. e. 2 2 Thessalonians. 2 Apoca. 13
It is then the common and certain judgment of all holy writers, that
Antichrist (who is so notably prophesied of in Isaias, in Daniel, in the
Gospels, in S. Paul, and in the Apocalipse) is one certain man, But the Popes
of Rome are not any one certain man, but their succession is the continuance
of a certain office, in which some hundreds of men have succeeded one after the
other: therefore the Popes of Rome are not Antichrist.

As the name of Christ being given in the old time to many prophets, Psalm.
104.
priests and Kings (who were anointed for a figure of the truth which was to
be fulfilled) did not hinder, but that there should come one certain singular
person, who alone should be the savior of mankind: 1. Joan. 2.
so the name of Antichrist being given to many wicked adversaries of Christ,
and namely to all heretics, does not hinder but rather helps to prove, that
some one singular man shall come at the length, who shall pass all other men
in setting himself against Christ.

This comparison of mine is directly proved by the express word of God. For
Christ says unto the Jews: Joan 5.
I came in the name of my Father, and ye received me not: if an other come in
his own name, him ye will receive. Hieron. quaest. 11. ad Algasiam. Cyril. in
Joan. lib. 3 cap. 6. Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in Joan.
Which words being confessed by the ancient Doctors, to be spoken
prophetically of Antichrist, do prove that as Christ was one certain man, so
Antichrist shall be one certain man. The only ods is, that Christ comes from
God, but Antichrist from the devil. He to save, this to destroy. He to unite,
this to divide and to distract. But in this they both agree, that each of them
is one singular person.

2. These. 2.
And this much S. Paul does manifestly teach, saying: that the man of sin
must be revealed before the day of judgment. The said man of sin is
described in S. Paul, by the article (...), the man, or that man, and not a
man. For the man betokens one certain man by name, who is there called also
(...), the wicked man, (...), the son of perdition, (...), the adversary, and
not (as the English bible has evil translated it) an adversary who is spoken
of such as never came before, nor shall come after, who is called of S. John,
(...), 1. Joan. 2.
the Antichrist.

The strength of the Greek article in this word, the man, Saint Cyrillus
declares in this wise: In Joan. lib. 1. c. 4.
Quum homo sine articulo dicitur, homo quispiam designatur: quando autem
articulus accedit, vnicum atque singularem hominem denotat. Man.
When a man is named without the article, any man is meant: but when the
article (the) is adjoined, The man.
then it points to one certain singular man. And of the same judgment all
other learned Grecians are.

Seeing then we read Antichrist to be called (...), and (...), not a man, but
the man, or that man, not generally an Antichrist, but the Antichrist, or that
Antichrist, by the judgment of the Fathers, one singular person is meant, and
not a whole order and succession of many men, such as the popes of Rome are. So
that S. Hierom says: In cap. 7. Dan.
Putemus vnu^ esse de hominibus, in quo totus Satanas habitaturus sit
corporaliter. Let us thinck him to be (not the devil, or a spirit) but one of
the kind of men, in whom Satan shall dwell corporally. Behold, he is one of
the number of men, and not certain hundreds of men.

In cap. 11. Dan.
Again S. Hierom says: As our Savior had Solomon and other Saints for a
figure of his coming: so Antichrist must be rightly believed to have had
Antiochus the worst King, who persecuted the Saints, and defiled the temple,
for a figure of him. Whereby we lern, that as there was one certain person
Jesus Christ: so he meant there should be one certain person, who should be
Antichrist.

S. Ambrose by distincting three kinds of Antichrist, In cap. 22. Lucae.
of the which the second is the devil, the third is every heretik, shows the
first of all, to be that cursed, Antichrist, who shall fulfill the prophecies
which are of him. Whom he numbreth in the first place, not because he passes
the devil his master and founder, in setting himself against Christ: but
because in the name and nature of Antichrist, he passes hi^: as only we mean
by Antichrist, not generally an adversary, but such an adversary coming in
flesh, as never walked in flesh beside him. In epist. 2 ad These. cap. 2.
For S. Ambrose also in an other place says of him, that as the son of God
took flesh: so Satanas in homine apparebit, the devil shall appear in a man. He
says not, in hominibus, in men, as though they were many, but in homine, in a
man, who is but one.

S. Augustine also confessing many Antichrists with S. John, De ciuita. Dei
li. 20. cap. 19.
called one of them, ipsum principem, the very head, and afterward illum
nouissimum Antichristum, the last Antichrist. The words (prince) and (last)
agree to one only, and not to a whole succession of men in one state of life.

In 2. Thessalon 2.
S. Chrysostom having asked, who is the Antichrist of whom S. Paul spoke,
answers: homo quispia^ omnem Satanae energiam adeptus, a certain man having
in him all the strength of the devil.

In eu^dem locu^ Pauli
Theodoretus says, as the son of God took flesh to procure our salvation: so
the devil chooses a man to himself who may receive his whole working of
mischeife.

In 13. Job. li. 14. c. 11
S. Gregory agrees with all the rest of the Fathers in these words Diabolus
in vltimis temporibus illud vas perditionis ingredietur, quod Antichristus
vocabitur. The devil in the last days shall enter into that vessel of
perdition which shall be called Antichrist.

With these Fathers agree Sedulius, In 2. ca. 2. epist. ad Thessalo.
Primasius, Haimo, Theophilact, and the writers of the Greek Commentaries
gathered together by Oecumenius. All which witnesses may suffice for proof,
that not the order and state of the Bisshoppes of Rome, but only one certain
man is properly Antichrist, who shall set himself against Christ more
singularly, then ever any heretic has done hitherto.

Again, whereas Antichrist is the adversary: it is meant, that he
withstandeth Christ so much, that no man is able to withstand him more. He does
not therefore withstand only a piece of the faith, but he withstandeth the
whole faith, denying Jesus Christ to be God and man, or to be our mediator.

Quaest. 11. ad Algasiam.
For S. Hierom says in commenting this place of S. Paul: Extollitur supra omne
quod dicitur Deus, vt cunctarum gentium deos sieve probatam omnem and veram
religionem suo calcet pede. He is exalted above all that which is called God,
that he may tread under his feet, the Gods of al Nations, or else, al true and
approved religion. Again he says out of the same Apostle, that God shall send
not only operatorem, the worker of error, sed ipsam operationem, id est,
fontem erroris, the very working, that is to say, the fountain of error.

In Luc. 21
S. Ambrose affirms, that he shall dispute out of the scriptures, that he is
Christ. What speak I of these small matters? Antichrist shall teach himself, and
no man else, In 2. ad Thessa. hom. 3.
to be God. Non enim ad Idololatriam adducet ille (says Chrysostom) sed (...)
quispiam erit, quosuis deos pessundans, iubebitque seipsum pro deo coli ac
venerari, and in templum dei collocari, no^ Hierosolymitanum solum sed and in
Ecclesias. He shall not lead or bring to Idolatry, but he shall be one certain
man so contrary and against God, (...)
that he shall make him self aequall with God, throwing down al Gods: and he
will also command himself to be worshipped and adoured, and to be placed in
the temple of God, not only at Jerusalem, but in the Churches also.

S. Ambrose accords therewith: Scie^s enim venturum Dominum ad se
comprime^dum, In ep. aed These.
nomen eius sibi vsurpabit: and vt regnum eius verum videatur, attrahet secum q
simul cum eo pereant, vt in domo Domini in sede sedeat Christi, and ipsum Deum
se asserat, non filium Dei. Antichrist knowing, that our Lord shall come to
beat him down, will usurp his name unto himself.

And to the end his Kingdom may seem true, he will draw with him such as may
perish together with him, that he may sit in the house of our Lord, in the
seat of Christ, and may affirm him self to be very God and not the Son of
God.

And now ye know what withholdeth, or what lets the coming of Antichrist,
verily the Roman Empire, nisi venerit discessio primu^, and reuelatus fuerit
homo peccati (Christ says, he shall not come to judge the world) unless the
departing come first, and the man of sin be revealed.

Defectio.
The departing is meant, when all nations and countries shall depart wholly from
the Roman Empire. For that it must be a full departing, it appears, because it
is the Emperor himself who staieth the coming of Antichrist, and who must be
taken out of the way. For thus we read in S. Paul: Tantu^ vt qui tenet, teneat,
donec de medio fiat. Only that he who holds, may hold, until he be taken
away,

(...), which signifies to hold, and to withhold, being of the Masculine
gender, does show the talk to be of a man. Verily of the Emperor, who both
holds the Empire (as S. Augustine does expound the word) and withholdeth or
stops the coming of Antichrist. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 20 cap. 19.
If any man ask why the Emperor of Rome should be said to stop the coming
of Antichrist: thereof diverse reasons may be given, and which of those is most
true, or how many are true, it is hard to judge, How many ways the Roman
Empire may vvithhold the coming of Antichrist.
because al prophecies and the reasons of them are obscure and dark, until
they are fulfilled.

The first cause may be, either the revelation of the holy Ghost, or the
prophecies of Isai, of Daniel, and of such others by who^ S. Paul might
understand that Antichrist comes not, until the Roman Empire be destroyed. And
in this only sense, the Emperor is a stop unto Antichrist by the way of sign
or token, because God has given such a watchword, that Antichrict shall not
rise, til the Roman Empire does wholly fail.

that the mystery of iniquity works now. As who should say, when it has
done working, then is the coming of Antichrist ripe. S. Lib. 5.
Irenaeus, and S. Ad Alga siam. quest. 11.
Hierom also incline vehemently to this reason.

can not have full obedience done to him: and so does S. Chrysostom, In 2.
These. Hom. 4.
and many Grecians after him, take the matter.

The last reason may be, for that God Lib. 3. de euangel. demon.
Eusebius, in nati. Petri. sermon. 3.
Leo, in epist. ad Valerian.
Eucherius do affirm, the Roman Empire to have been provided for the
propagation and preservation of the faith. It is possible truly, that in
diverse reaspects al these reasons may be true.

But how so ever it be, once, forasmuch as the Emperor withholdeth the coming
of Antichriste: so long as there is one who holds the Empire, Quaest. 11 ad
Algasiam. Tom. 3.
Antichriste can not be in the Church of Christ. For Saint Hierome gives this
sense to Saint Paul's words: Non veniet Antichristus, nisi prius deleatur
Romanum Imperium. Antichrist shall not come, unless the Roman Empire be first
destroyed. And again: nisi fuerit Romanum imperium ante desolatu^, Unless the
Roman Empire be first desolated. And again: vt omnes ge^tes, quae Romano
imperio subiacent, recedant ab eis. That al those Nations, which are under the
Roman Empire, may go or depart from them.

S. Augustine (although he could not assure himself to understand perfectly
this hard place of the Apostle) yet of this part, which I now speak of, thus
he writes: De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 20 cap. 19.
Illud quod ait Apostolus, tantu^ qui modo tenet, teneat, donec de medio fiat,
non absurd de ipso Romano imperio creditur dictum, tanquam dictum sit: tantum
qui modo imperat, imperet, donec de medio fiat, id est, de medio tollatur, and
tu^c reuelabitur iniquus, que^ significari Antichristum nullus ambigit. That
which the Apostle says, only he that holds now, let him hold, until he be
made away, is not absurdly believed to be said of the Roman Empire it self: as
though it were said, only he that does govern now, let him govern, until he be
made away, that is, be taken away, and then shall be revealed that wicked man,
whom no man does doubt to be Antichrist.

See what S. Augustine says: let him rule who does rule, until he be taken a
way. Which is not only spoken of Nero by name (who then ruled) but of every
successor of his, In 2. ad Thessa. 2.
as Haimo expresselie writes. As if it were said, let the Emperor rule so
long as he shall rule.

And when he cease to rule, Antichrist shall be revealed.

How is then the Pope Antichrist, whereas there is as yet a Roman Emperor
living? Hereunto S Chrysostom agrees, saying: tantu^ quitenet in praesentia,
donec e medio fiat. hoc est, quando e medio sublatum fuerit Romanum imperium,
tum veniet ille, and non abs re. Donec enim imperij illius timor fuerit, nemo
Antichristo statim subdetur. Quando vero istud fuerit destructum imperium,
vacantem imperij principatum inuadet, and tentabit ad se rapere and hominum and
Dei imperium. Only he which holds presently, until he betaken away. That is,
when the Roman Empire shall be taken away, then he shall come: and not without
cause. For so long as there is fear of that Empire, no man will be straight
ways subject to Antichrist. But when this Empire shall be destroyed, he will
invade the dignity of the Empire being void, and will assay to get unto
himself the Empire of man and of God.

In 2. Thessalo. 2.
Haimo says: Reuelabitur congruo tempore Antichristus, postqua^ oi^a regna
discesserint a Romano imperio. Antichrist shall be revealed in a meet time,
after that all kingdoms shall depart from the Roman Empire.

Note, that all kingdoms must depart from the Roman Empire. If then it be
clear, that Antichrist does not come, until the Roman Empire be void, and
all nations be gone from it: seeing Maximilian reigns in it at this day, it is
clear, that the pope of Rome is not Antichrist, who has dured these fifte^
hundred years together with the Emperor, whereas Antichrist shall not come,
until there be no more Roman Emperors.

Let us go foreward. Whenever Antichrist comes, his deeds and doctrine
against Christ must be open and without all cloking or dissembling. For S.
Paul shows a difference between Antichrist himself, and between the mystery
of iniquity. Mysteriu^.
For a mystery is as much to say, as a privy thing. And so the mystery of
iniquity was the privy and close working of all impiety against Christ.
Whereas on the other side he says by Antichrist, reuelabitur iniquus ille,
Reuelabitur. Hom. 4
that wicked man shall be revealed, and made open. Whereupon S. Chrysostom says:
Neronem hic dicit tanquam typum Antichristi gerentem. nam ille volebat reputari
Deus. and been dixit mysterium, hoc est, non aperte hoc agit (Nero) sicut ille
Antichristus) acturus est, neque adeo perfricta front and impudenter. He
says, that Nero does here bear the figure of Antichrist, for he would be
taken as God. And he said very well, the mystery, that is to say, Nero does
not this openly, as he (that is to say, Antichrist) will do, neither with so
brazen a face, and so impudently.

In. 2. ca. 2 ad Thessa.
Theodoretus: Haereticos appellauit mysterium iniquitatis, vt qui habe^t celatum
iniquitatis laqueu^. Ipse enim (Antichristus) aperte a Deo abducit homines.
quamobre^ etiam eius aduentum reuelatione^ vocauit Apostolus. Quod enim
clanculum semper confirmabat, id palam and aperte praedicabit. He does call
heretics the mystery of iniquity, as whose iniquity is hidden. But Antichrist
himself does bring men from God openly, wherefore also the Apostle does call
his coming a revealing: for that which he did privily always confirm, he will
preach openly and manifestly. Haymo and Theophilact are of the same mind.

If then Antichrist shall oppugn Christ without al dissembling: how is it
possible for the Popes to be Antichrist, who surely forbid no man in plain
words to believe in Christ, nor yet deny any part either of the Gospel, or
of the holy scriptures of the new testament.

All which things Antichrist will not only do, but he will do them openly
and plainly. Moreover seeing Antichrist shall say himself to be God, and yet no
pope did ever say so: doutlesse no pope can be Antichrist.

An objection. M. Ievvel in his Reply. 258.
I know here that a wra^gling protestant wolud not fear to say, that the Pope
accompteth himself God, because some gloses of the Canon law call him so, or
make him aequall with Christ.

The answer.
But in truth there is no gloss, that ever called the pope God in that sense,
as though he were God by nature, but only God by the office which be bears
under Christ, as Moses was called the God of Pharao. Exodus 7. and 22. Joan.
10. Psalm. 81.
And every judge is in the holy scripture called God.

Now whereas the gloses alluding evidently to those texts, and to other which
were made according to the example of them, do call the pope God by an
aequiuocation, and that also by the example of Gods word: is it not a
marueilouse desperate point for the Protestants to ground a doctrine, upon
such an abuse and aequiuocation of a word.

Now Antichrist must not only be called God of others, but he must extol
himself above God, even after such sense as the blessed Trinity is God by
nature. Whereupon Haimo says: supra sancta^ Trinitate^ se extollet, In 2.
Thessalon. 2
He will extol himself above the holy Trinity. Certainly no Pope did ever so
much as dream to do any like thing, and much less do they profess it, but
they profess only themselves to be the servant of them who serve God.

The fifte difference between the Pope Joan. 5
I came in my Fathers name, and me ye have not received: if an other man come
in his own name, him ye will receive. This other man is expounded to be
Antichrist, by Saint Ad Algasiam.
Hierom, Saint Hom. 4 in Joan.
Chrysostom, Saint In 2. ad Thessalon.
Ambrose, Lib. 3. in Joan. c. 6.
Cyrillus, In 2. ad Thessalon. 2. epi. c. 2. In 2. ad Thessa.
Theodoretus, and all the other Fathers. And seeing the words are spoken to
the Jews, they also must receive Antichrist. And so much does S. Paul teach
also in his epistle to the Thessalonia^s. According to which sort S. Ambrose
says: Ex circumcisione aut circumcisum illum venire sperandum est, vt sit
Iudaeis credendi illi fiducia. It is to be looked, that Antichrist shall come
circumcided or of the circu^cisio^, that the Jews may have some confidence in
believing him.

Ad Algasiam.
Faciet haec omnia (says S. Hierom) non sua virtute, sed concessione Dei
propter Iudaeos. He shall do al these things not by his own power, but by the
permission of God, for the Jews. Theodoretus: Iudaei eu^ expecta^t, and ei cum
aduenerit crede^t. In 2. Thessalon.
The Jews do look for him, and when he comes, they will believe him.

Who sees not, that the Jews have not yet received the pope? yea rather as
they hate Christ most of al, so do they hate his Vicar above all other
Christians yea al most as much as the protestants them selves do hate him, as
by whom they understand their religion and faith to be most hindered.

The sixth difference is expressed in the fourth beast (which is the Roman
Empire) had ten horns, Dan. c. 7.
I considered the horns. And behold an other little horn sprang out of the
midst of them, and three of the first horns were pulled up before his face,
and behold the eyes, as it were of a man, were in this horn, and a mouth
speaking great things.

In c. 7. Daniel.
Upon this place, S. Hierom says: Dicamus quod omnes scriptores Ecclesiastici
tradiderunt. In consummatione mundi, quando regnum destruendum est Romanorum,
december futuros reges, qui orbem Romanum inter se diuidant. Et vndecimum
surrecturum esse regem paruulum. Qui tres reges de december regibus superaturus
sit. Id est, Aegyptiorum regem, and Africae, and Aethiopiae, sicut in
consequentibus manifestius dicemus.

Let us say that which all the Ecclesiastical writers have lest by tradition.
In the consummation of the world, when the kingdom of the Romans must be
destroyed, there shall be ten Kings, who will divide the Roman Empire or Dominion
among themselves. And there shall arise the eleue^th being a very little King.
Who shall overcome three of those ten Kings, that is to say, the Kings of
Egypt, and of Afrike, and of Ethiopia, as we will declare more manifestly
afterward.

Herewith Hippolytus and Theodoretus in his Comment upon the same Prophet
agrees. In homil. de Antic.
But what need I write their words, seeing S. Hierome confesses it to be the
opinion of al Ecclesiastical writers? Wherefore seeing the Pope has not
conquered to him the kingdoms of Egypt, Aethiop, and of Affrike: who soever
says him to be that chief Antichrist who is prophesied of, is no
Ecclesiastical writer, but a false Prophet and a seducer.

The seventh difference is, that Antichrist Daniel. 7.
Sancti tradentur in manu eius vsque ad tempus, and tempora, and dimidium
temporis.

The Saints shall be delivered in his hand until a time (that is to say, one
year) times (that is, two years more) and half a time, that is, half a year.
And that we may be sure this interpretation to be true, it is noted of S.
Augustine, that Daniel afterward nu^breth the days, and in the Apocalips the
months are also nu^bred, Apoc, 13.
to wit, forty and two months.

Daniel says: From the time wherein the continual Sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the abomination of desolatio^ shall be set up, days a thousand,
Daniel. 12
two hundred, nientie. Where S. Hierom says: Perspicuum est, tres istos and
semis annos de Antichristi dici temporibus, qui tribus and semis a^nis, hoc est
mill ducentis nonaginta diebus sanctos persecuturus est. Et postea corruiturus
in monte inclyto and sancto. It is evident, that these three years and an
half, are said of the time of Antichrist, who shall persecute the saints three
years and an half, that is, a thousand two hundred and nienty days, and
afterward he shall fall in the glorious and holy hill. Of the same mind were
Eusebius Caesariensis, Appollinarius Laodicenus, and Methodius, who^ S. Hierom
names at the end of the same Chapter.

S. Irenaeus likewise says: Iren. lib. 5. Aduersus haeres.
Cum vastauerit Antichristus omnia in hoc mundo, regnans annis tribus and
mensibus sex, and sederit in templo Hierosolymis, tunc veniet Dominus, etc.
When Antichrist reigning three yers and six months shall have spoiled all
things in this world, and shall sit in the Temple at Jerusalem, the^ our Lord
shall come. If Antichrist then prevails but three years and a half, seeing the
Popes have kept their succession fiftene hundred years together, and have had
their temporal power which is annexed to the bishoprik eue^ by the confession
of our Adversaries, at the least these viij. or ix. hundred years, I can not
see, what ground they have to teach the Pope to be Antichrist himself.

I might add to these differences, that Helias shall come at the time of
Antichrist, as Sermon. de Antich
Hippolytus, De ciuit. lib. 20. c. 19
S. Augustine, in 2. Thessal.
S. Chrysostom, and in 2. Thessal.
Theodoretus teach, who is not yet come, although the Popes has florisshed so
long.

Antichriste shall be born of the tribe of Dan, as lib. 5.
Irenaeus, de Anti.
Hippolytus, in 2. Thessal.
Theodoretus, and S. In 14. in Job. 11.
Gregory have written (whereas the Popes are of no such tribe) and also, that
Antichrist comes but even a little before the end of the world, as Lib. 5.
Lib. 20. c. 19
S. Augustine, and in 2. Thessal.
Theodoretus: In ipso tempore co^summationis, in the very time of the last
end. But either these former differences do suffice, or with them who have
settled their hearts against the truth of Gods word, and against the
judgment of the Catholic fathers, no arguments at al will preuail. Whose
infinite self will, if it be punisshed with infinite damnation, it is but the
just judgment of God. Only I beseech him to stay their hearts, whiles yet
the time of penance is not shut up

I have not lightly spoken one word in this behalf without authority,
because the matter is hard, and above man's capacity. In so much that S.
Hierom, considering Daniel him self not to have perceued the mysteries, before
they were expounded to him, writes in this wise: In cap. Dan. 12.
Si Propheta audiuit, and non intellexit: quid faciunt hi qui signatum librum
and vsque ad tempus consummationis multis obscuritatibus inuolutum,
praesumptione mentis edisserunt? If the Prophet did hear, and did not
understand, what shall they do, who by presumption of the mind, do expound and
declare the book sealed, and folded up with many obscurities until the time
of consummation?

Let now the Protestants speak without the book after their presumptuous
fantasy, or else let them show us one ancient Father of the first six hundred
years (among so many as have written) who said at any time, the Pope of Rome was
or should be Antichrist.

Dan. 7. Joan. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2
Or if none can be named, yea if the Prophets, the Gospels, the Apostle describe
Antichrist in such wise, that it is impossible for the Popes to be meant
thereby: shall yet this furious opinion still prevail? It shall in deed, but with
men possessed by some evil spirit, who have neither eyes at liberty to see,
nor ears to hear, nor common sense to conceive either the word of God, or the
consent of grave and learned men. God open the eyes of the blind, if it be his
will.

The argument of the Protestants.
Now, whereas to make a show of somewhat, the Protestants allege, that Babylon
is expounded by Tertullian to be Rome, and that Rome is called the harlet
clothed with purple in Saint Hierome, and that there are the seven hills which
are spoken of in the Apocalips, Apoc. 13.
If these men care not what they say, or how they allege the Fathers, so that
they may seem to the ignorant not to lack words: I can not envy them their
small pleasure, which shall be afterward recompensed with so bitter a sauce of
aeternal damnation.

But if they seek the truth with a sincere conscience, they are well assured
that Rome is called Babilo^, not in respect of the Christians which are now
there, but only in respect of the co^fusio^ of al tongs and al people which
haunted thither in the time of the Emperors. And then Rome was full of Idolatry,
and did persecute the Saints, and did put to death above thirty of the first
Bisshops of Rome. So that Rome is called Babylon for persecuting the Bishops,
and not for honoring them. For disobeying the Popes, and not for obeying them.

Ad algaesiam.
Again S. Hierom expounds the harlet clothed with red purple, namely to be
that everlasting wordlie Empire and monarchy, which (as the Romans dreamed)
should continue still over the whole world. The which opinion (of the eternity
of the Roman Empire) S. Hierom calls the name of blasphemy which is written in
the harlets forhead. And in this respect the Roman Empire prepared a way for
the abomination to come, which being once come to his ripenes, Antichrist
shall be revealed. One of the graetest signs of whose coming is the weakness of
the Roman Empire. Which when it is clean taken away, then comes Antichrist.

But it is to be understood (if I shall play the child with childish Divines)
that the city of Rome at this day stands not upon the seven hills, but as
the Empire is gonne from the city, so is the City gonne from the hills, and
stands in the plain along by the rivers side, in the field, which sometime
was called campus Martius. And so by the changing of the place the Protestants
have lost their argument.

The pope also does sit for the most part on the other side of the river
upon the hilnamed Vatican, hard by S. Peter's Church, The seven hills.
by whom he holds his chair, not at all deriuing his power from the seven
hills, whereupon the seven Kings dwelt, or from the Roman Empire.

But in deed the seven hills are well meant the fulness of pride and vain
glory, which is in all the world, and specially in secular princes, Hereof I
shall speak in the next chapter.
to whom yet the protestants committ the supreme government of the Church,
being thereby nere to the state of Antichrist, then they are ware of. But let
all our new brethern bring but one holy Father or ancient doctor (who has been always accounted Catholic) who ever said, that the bishop of Rome should
be Antichrist: or if none can be alleged, let this doctrine of theirs be
accounted a profane nouelty of words, 1. Tim. 6.
which S. Paul would have to be avoided among good Christians.

Not the Pope of Rome, but the Protestants themselves are the members of
Antichrist by forsaking the Catholic Church, by setting up a new Church, and
by teaching false doctrine against the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The XVIII. chap.
THis being once cleared, that the Pope of Rome can not be that notable
Antichrist, who was so long before prophesied of, the next shift of the
Protestants must be to say, that the Pope is at the lest a forerunner of that
principal Antichrist. 1. Joan. 2
Of which sort all such are, as by teaching false doctrine do promote his
kingdom, who is the head and captain of all error and heresy.

I am not ignorant, that if I should exactly handle this argument, I should
run over all the articles which are at this day in controversy. For in every
of them, he that holds the false part, is a member of Antichrist: and he that
defends the truth, is of Christ. But for so much as that were an infinite
labor, it shall suffice by a few general reasons to show the way unto him,
who list to prosecute the said argument more fully.

The first mark of an Antichristian.
Seeing we now speak not of Panims or nolite exire, Matthew. 24
go ye not out. As who should say, you are at this time within. If ye can
tarry where you are, no danger can come to you. But all the peril is in going
out after them, who preach otherwise then the Church believes. 1. Joan. 2.
Of them S. John said, exierunt ex nobis, they went forth from us. Act. 15.
Likewise the Apostles co^plain of them who went out from the^, and preached
the necessity of circumcision. Homil. de Pastor.
And S. Augustine says generally, exire haereticorum est. It is the point of
heretics to go out.

Who then went from the Church of these two? Did the Pope go out of the true
Church, or did the Protestants? If the Pope went forth, who^ did he leave
behind him? where dwelt they who^ he forsook? Let the country, the City, the
town, the village, the Church, the chapel, the cumpany of never so few men be
named, from whom (being members of the true Church) the Pope went. For he that
goes out, goes from some, and leaves some behi^d him. But it can never be
named, whom the pope left behind him in the true Church, when he went out of
the said Church, because in deed he never went forth, but dwelt in the midst
of all faithful Nations, being their guide and Pastor.

Neither did he depart from the Grecians, but some of the Grecia^s for a time
departed from him, upon the quarrel, of the proceeding of the holy Ghost from God
the son. Which truth the Grecians unjustly denied. And therefore after a time
upon better advise and conference, some of them came into that Church again,
An. Dom. 1440.
where the Pope remained head, as at the Council of Florence. And some other
tarried without still, and died in the schism. But all this while the pope went
not out of the Church.

On the otherside we can al tell when An. Do. 1044.
Berengarius, 1350.
Wiclef, 1410.
Hus, 1517.
Luther, 1522.
Zuinglius, 1540.
Calvin, and such others professed to go out the Roman Church. We know whom
they left behind them within the Church: verily they left all Italy, al
France, al Spain, al Polonia, all Hungary, all England, all Sicily, and so
much of Germany in the Church, as went not out after them.

If now it be the point of an heretical Antichrist, to go out of the
faithful company of Christ: who is liker to be Antichrist, the Pope who
departed from no company of Christ, or the Protestants, who departed from so
many Christian nations, as now I named, and most of all the Sacramentaries, who
departed also both from the Pope, and from the very Lutherans themselves?

An objection.
As for that vain brag, wherein they are wont to say, the pope departed from
the Apostles and prophets: is it not as easy for us to say the self same
thing unto them? The an^vver.
when we speak of departing, we speak of the departing from the unity of such,
as once lived together with us in one house of God: For then some go out, and
some tarry within. As Arrius and Eusebius of Nicomedia departed out, and his
bishop Alexander, with good Athanasius tarried still in the Church. Nouatus went
out, Cornelius tarried within. Pelagius went out, Saint Augustine and Saint
Hierom followed him not, but tarried within. Even so Luther went out from the
company with whom he once lived peaceably, and the pope tarried still within.
Therefore Luther and his adhearents are heretics and the members of Antichrist.

If it be said here, An other objection ansvvered.
that the Apostles and disciples departed from the Chair of Moses, and yet
were not heretics: I answer, that such examples make nothing for the departing
of the Protestants from us, except they can bring such prophecies, and such
evident miracles for their departing from us, as the Apostles brought and
wrought for their departing from the Jews.

There should be but one such change of Religion in all the world, and because
it was so hard a matter to make men forsake their former trade of serving God,
it was not done without the coming down of the Son of God from heaven into
the earth, Luc. 24.
who showed by the Prophets, and by his very works, that the same one change
of the whole religion, should then only be made, and never else.

If now, Luther be the same to undo, Matthew. 5.
or to fulfill Christ's Law, which Christ was, in the dissoluing or rather in
fulfilling Moses Law: then I have done, let Luther prevail. But if Luther may
be an heretic, whereas he can not be Christ: surely the Argument of his
departure, still concludes him and al his to be members of Antichrist. Hitherto
concerning the going out of the Church.

The second mark of an Antichristian.
Secondly, he that goes out of one antiquissimam, Lib. 3. c. 3.
the most ancient. Neither did he make a new Church of his own. For then it
must needs be known which Pope it was, who erected this new Church. And of the
Pope it must have taken a proper name, as the Arrian Church was named of
Arrius, and the Church of the Donatists was named of Donatus. And the holy
Martyr Justinius fourtene hundred years past, gave this note, that all new sects
be named by their Authors: Justin. in tryphone.
Exorientur multi pseudoc christi et pseudo apostoli, and multos seduce^t o
fidelibus. Et sunt inter nos distincti cognominibus.

Denominati a quibusdam viris, vt quisque fuit author alicuius nouae doctrinae
and sententiae. Auctor nouae doctrinae.
Ex ijs alij vocantur Marciani, alij Basilidiani, alij Saturniniani: alij alio
vocabulo, quisque a primo inuentore sui dogmatis. There shall arise many false
Christ's, False Christ's.
and false Apostles, and they shall seduce many of the faithful. And they are
distincted among us by their surnames: taking their names of certain men, as
every one was author of any new doctrine and judgment. And of these some were
called Marcianists, others Basilidians, others Saturninians: and other some
with an other name, every one, of the first inuentour of his opinion.

In Apolog. secunda.
To this rule Athanasius alludeth, saying: Meletius schisma fecit, adeo vt
illius sectatores etiam nunc pro Christianis Meletiani vocitentur. Meletius
made a schism, in so much that even at this time his followers are named
Meletians, Lib. 4. c. 30 De vera sapient.
in the steed of Christians. Cum Marcionite aut Arriani nominantur, Christiani
esse desierunt. When they are named Marcionits, or Arrians, they have ceased to
be Christians, says Lactantius Firmianus. But now if all the Popes from S.
Peter dounward, should be named, the Protestants were not hable to say, that
either Anacletus, or Victor, or Calixtus, or Sozimus, or Leo, or Gregorius, or
Bonifacius, or any other Pope began any new sect, or left any disciples who
might be named after his proper name. And yet if the Popes did go out of the
Church, it was some one or other, who did lead the dance. He had a certain
name, he had a time to do it in, he had companions who followed him: otherwise
there could be no such going out if there were no circumstance thereof.

Seeing then it is not possible, to name any Pope, who first went out of the
Church and made the Schism, nor to show any name given to his Disciples: it is
clear, that it is only a vain fable, and slander fained upon the Popes,
without any truth at al. For no heresy began without an author. Who if he were
unknown in some obscure sect, yet at the least the heresy was straight named
of the country, or of the doctrine it self, or of some other notable
circumstance.

But when our ennemies study to give us a name, eight or nine hundred years
after, that we departed (as they say) from the true Church, what sign is
that? Verily that they belie us.

Now they name us Papists, and Romanists, and what they list. But, I pray you
Masters, was there any man called Papa, by his proper name, or any called
Romanus, who was our Captain? Show the History, and we believe you. Or did
ever any heresy tarry in the Church eight or nine hundred years wlthout a
name given to it? Naie, I think, it can not be showed, that ever any heresy
tarried eight or nine years without a name, whereby all the church might learn
to beware of it. Al these vvrote against heresies.
I appeal herein to antiquity, to Philaster, to Epiphanius, to S. Augustine,
to Theodoretus, Damascenus, Euthimius, who al writing against heresies, never
left any of them al, without a pecular name. And in deed how could they else
describe the heresy unto us, but by naming it?

And yet those who now first after eight or nine hundred years, begin to have
a name, have all this while remained without any proper name at al, which
might show or describe any sect or heresy of theirs: and that, because it was
not possible, to name that which was not. For we in deed are, and always were
Catholics, and nothing else, what so ever spightfully mai^ be invented and
fained upon us, without cause or ground, after so many hundred years: whereas a
new sect has straight a new name.

But is it so, trow ye, with the Lutherans, the Zuinglians, the Caluinists, and
the Suenck feldians? Do not their names show, who instituted and invented
that sect? Can we not tell, in what year every of them began? How he went
forward? And who succeeded in his Chair of Pestilence?

The Protestants therefore going out of our Catholic Church, and leaving us
within, did not go to any elder Church, either of the Grecia^s, or of
Aethiopians or any like, but did set up a new Synagoge, which was named of
them. Wherefore they are heretics and members of Antichrist. An other
objection ansvvered.


Neither can they justly object (as they do folishlie endeavor) that we have
also Benedictins, Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits, and such other: for the
rule of S. Justinius then takes place, when (as himself expreslie says) there
is an author, or a beginner nouae alicuius doctrinae and sententiae, of any
new doctrine or judgment. Behold, it is not only a new name given of a
special man, which name shows an heresy: but it is a name given by reason of
a new doctrine, and of a new judgment or sentence in Gods religion.

Saint Benedict or Saint Francis, A great heresy. Matthew. 19.
taught none other thing, but that it was good to forsake all that a man had,
and to follow Christ. The which thing, because it is not easy to do
perfectly without a guide, they declared, what way seemed best unto them to
accomplish that Counsel of the Gospel. And that their institution was not
fulfilled by their authority. But they submitted their order and rule unto
the chief bishop, who allowed it for good and virtuous, so that, now their
followers be named of their rule and obedience, and not of their doctrine,
which in all points was Catholic, as the very written rule does testify.

It is then the property of heretics to go out of the Church. And the
Protestants are gone out. It is the property of Captain heretics, to leave
their own names to their scholars. Hereof some protestants are called
Lutherans, other Zuinglia^s, other Caluinists, other Hosiandrines and so
forth: from both which conditions the popes of Rome, and their adherents are
free, as it has been declared.

The third marck of an Antichristian.
THirdly, when heretics are once without the Church, they can not possibly
agree: partly because the grace of God and the spirit of unity is not among
them, partly because they are without one visible judge and head, and are al so
proud and puffed up, that every man will be a master, so that no one of them will
yield to the other. So the old heretics were divided as S. Lib. 1. c. 30.
Ireneus witnesses. So the Arria^s went straight into three diverse sects: as
here is. 73.
Epiphanius declares. And the like chanced to the Donatists, as S. here is. 69.
Augustine has testified. But are the popes, or the Catholics in this case
concerning their faith? Who can show a pope unlike his predecessors, or a
Catholic disobedient to the pope? from the first to the last, their faith is
one: their profession still the same: their government is al after one rate.

Which thing could not possibly come to pass, except they were all directed
by the God of peace, and by the spirit of unity.

But on the otherside, how many sects are sprung in Germany alone, within these
forty yers? How do the Luthera^s daily write and preach against the
Caluinists? in so much that they were in arms of late in Antwerp the one
against the other. How do the Anabaptists dissent from them both? How cruelly
do the civil Luthera^s of Wittemberg persecute even with filthy and
slaunderouse Images Flaccus Illyricus a stout and straight Lutheran?

Neitheir can this matter be justly colored (as it is to them who perish) by
the example of the Apostles and disciples. how the Catholics end their strife.
Act. 15.
For if any small disagreing did fall out between them, it was first rather
about some temporal fact, then any doctrine of the Gospel. As when Paul and
Barnabas dissented in this point, whether Marck should go with them or no.

Again, if the fact did towche in any point the doctrine of the Gospel, the
one straight ways yielded to the other, Galat. 2.
as S. Peter did yield unto S. Paul, who reproved him for a dissembling deed
concerning the law of Moses. Or if the doctrine it self was called in doubt,
straight ways a visible judge was chosen, who might end the strife: Act. 15.
as when S. Paul and Barnabas came to Jerusalem, to have the Apostles decree
concerning the law of Moses not to bind any more.

Thus the Catholics also dissent sometime, either upon a fact, as whether it be
best to reduce the keeping of Christmasse to the shortest day in the year or no
(which is of no great importance) or else the one yeldeth to the other who
reproves him, if the matter be plain: or if it be intricat, they both must
under pain of damnation be content, to refer them selves to a visible judge
in the earth, after whose determination their strife is at an end, as it was
evidently seen in the matter of Clandestine Marriages at Trent. For among us he
that obeys not the sentence of the high priest, is excommunicated, Deuteronomy. 17.
and separated from our society.

But Luther being reproved of his brethern at many meetings, did evermore stand
in this matter of faith, against the^, that the body of Christ was really
present with the substance of braed. Zuinglius on the otherside, being reproved
often times, yet died stubbornly in this opinion, that the body of Christ was
present, not in truth, but in a sign and figure.

As it is certain to us, that neither of those two is saved, so their faith
must needs be monstrouse, Note well.
who believe that they both are saved. The contention was not of a matter which
as yet was hidden or unrevealed. For what in all the world ought to have been,
or was more known, then the supper of Christ? Which these fiften hundred years
has been in daily practice, and therefore the whole doctrine concerning the
substance of it, may not be unknown, no not to weome^ and to young men.
Moreover each of the^ said he was sure of the truth, and believed his opinion
most constantly. And shall now both he be saved, who teaches stubbornly even to
death, that, in this sacramental bread the substance of Christ's body is
present: and he also who teaches stubbornly even to death, that in this
sacramental bread, the substance of Christ's body is not present?

If both these preachers defended the truth, what kind of religion is this,
where contradictory articles are true at once? If the one was a false teacher
even with stubburnes, he was therein a member of Antichrist. And seeing it must
needs be, that the one did auouche false doctrine, and yet did warrant it for
the true Gospel: we are sure, that one of the two, must needs be a member of
Antichrist. And yet seeing the Popes Catholic doctrine does dissent from them
both, which soever of two be an Antichrist, the Pope shall not be thereby in
any danger to be an Antichrist together with any of them.

Mark the reason well. It goes not to this opinion, or to that, wherein there is
no end of contention. But it concludes a necessary sequel upon a confessed
truth.

If any man for false doctrine may be an enemy of Christ (as doutlesse he may)
he is that enemy, who teaches most presumptuously his false doctrine. But of
these two doctrines, it is the body of Christ, and, it is not the body of
Christ, the one must needs be false.

Therefore seeing Luther tawght stoutly the one, and Zuinglius stoutly the
other, either Luther or Zuinglius is an adversary of Christ.

This poi^t vvuld be ansvvered.
But all the whole number of Protestants (a very few Illyricans excepted)
account them both saved, and consequently, they justify the stubborn
preachers of clean contrary doctrines: therefore the whole number of
Protestants does justify one who is an Antichrist.

And therefore the whole number of Protestants is condemned of God, for
justifying a false prophet, and for defending an evident member of Antichrist,
as who teach evil to be good, VVo to them, Isai. 5.
and good to be evil.

To you I speak, M. Jewel: did not Luther teach false doctrine, when he said,
that the body of Christ was really and substantially present with the
substance of bread in the Sacrament of our Lords supper? I know you believe his
doctrine to be starck false in that behalf. Well, was he not warned thereof,
not only by his own Catholic bishop, but also by Zuinglius a man of God, as
you say? Did he not after a sharppe warning or two, yet still defend his false
doctrine many years together most stubburnlie? Tit. 3.
Therefore by Saint Paul's doctrine Luther was an heretic, and was to be
avoided, as a man condemned by his own judgment.

How do you avoid him, when in your Apology of the Church of of England, you
justify him, as a man whom God reised after long darkness, to give fresh light
unto the world? Call you then an error in religion the light of the Gospel?
What was there I pray you, why the old false Prophets of the primitive
Church, were accounted heretics the which is not also found in Martin
Luther? Luther had all the properties of the old Heretics.
Did they teach erroneous doctrine? So did he, even by your confession. Did
they stand in it being warned? So did he. Did they die in it? So did he. Made
they a schism for it? So did he. Left they scholars behind them, who bare their
names? As though the Martinists and Lutherans, be not named of Martin Luther.
Did their Schism hurt the peace of the Church? So does this. Was their heresy
condemned by General or Prouincial Councels? So was the doctrine of the
Lutherans condemned at Trent, at Rome, at Magunce, at Colon, at Cambray, and
where not?

To be short, define an heretic for your life, how ever you can, and Luther
shall be within the cu^passe of your definition. And yet shall you, that justify
him, be saved? No surely, no more the^ they that justify the Nicolaits, or
Monothelits.

It will not now serve to say, that S. Cyprian died in his opinion of
rebaptising those, who were baptized of heretics. For then, partly the
Catholic faith in that point was not fully and universally revealed in any
General Counsel, partly S. Cypria^ did not die wtih such a stubbornes in this
behalf, that he was ready to judge, or to excommunicate the contrary teachers
as his own ad Qui^tum. and ad Iubaianu^.
Epistles, and S. lib. 2. and 3. de baptismo co^t. Donat.
Augustine does well prove at large. Neither would he have refused a judge even
in earth, if occasion had been given to have come to the trial of the matter.
But the question of our Lords supper was universally known, and five hundred
years past, it was defined in judgment at certain Councels, even to the
recantation of Berengarius, the first public mainteinour thereof. And when the
great general Council of Lateran had ended it, the whole Church was confirmed
in their former belefe. Now the definition of that great Counsel does co^de^ne
both Luther and Zui^glius.

Moreover, Luther and Zuinglius died with such a presumptuouse stubbornes,
that each of them refused any Judge in the whole earth: because each of them
said him self to be sure of the word of God, beside the which, each of them
refused any judge at al. So that now no excuse in the world remains, but that
either Luther, or Zuinglius must be an Antichrist. And that who so justifies
them both (as the Protestants and Sacramentaries do) is utterly damned for
allowing one Antichrist at the least.

The fourth marck of an Antichristian.
The Fourth mark of an Antichrist, is, in that God suffers as not Antichrist
himself in his own person, so neither his ministers and false Prophets to
continue or tarry long. For (as Christ said, Matthew. 24.
where he entreated of these matters) Except those days had been shortened, 2.
Pet. 2.
no flesh should be saved. And S. Peter says: The perdition of false teachers
sleeps not. For in deed except God provided, that heresies might have a short
reign, the whole faith would be in danger to be corrupted by them. And, I pray
you, The short reign of Luther.
see, how short a reign Luther had, who was the first false Prophet of our
age. His heresy and doctrine is in manner, now come to remain only in two or
three persons. For whereas his sect is only that which he him self taught,
he was no sooner dead, but Philip Melancthon began to change his doctrine. The
which thing so displeased Flaccus Illyricus, with a few others, that they took
upon them the defense of their Master Luther, and thereby they are so hated in all the states and Cities of the Civil Lutherans (who are spread through most
parts of Germany) that now it is not lawful for the said Illyricus, so much
as to appear in those quarters, nor his books may not be openly sold at Lipsia
or Wittenberge, except some few of them which are by name permitted.

The short reign of Hosiander.
Hosiander a Protestant taught in Prussia at Coninsperg, That God justifies
man only by his divine nature. And that the man justified, must be just with
the very same justice, wherewith God is just in his own nature and substance.

And whiles this Hosiander lived, Duke Albertus was altogether of his opinion,
and favored him above measure. But now at my being in Prussia, I learned,
there were scant three men left, who openly maintained this sect. And the Duke
was said to care now no more for it. And good reason why: for their heresies
die with the inuentours of them.

As for Zuinglius opinion, The short reign of zuinglius
it is utterly extinguisshed by the Caluinists. For Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius thought these words: This is my body, directly to concern
and to appertain to the bread, and only to make it a figure of Christ's
body. Whereby he that should receive the same bread, might be put in mind of
Christ's death. But Calvin has affirmed the said words of Christ, not to be
directed to the bread, but only to be a sermon, and a preaching made to the
audience, which is present. Whereby the body of Christ is consecrated, not
now in the bread, as in a sign (which Zuinglius believed) but in every man's
heart by faith, and by the remembrance of Christ's death. And in the heart Christ
is present (says Calvin) not only by faith (as Zuinglius had taught) but
reallie, and in very deed, whiles certain beams come from the flesh of Christ
in heaven into his heart, who eats with Caluins fantastical faith.

The short reign of Calvin.
Now as for Caluins own doctrine, it shall decay every hour, since he is once
dead. Even already in Polonia it is overwhelmed with Trinitaries, Iosephits,
and with those who circumcide them selves, and with diverse other blasphemies,
whereunto those are now fallen, who were once Caluins Scholars.

In England it is forsaken by his own scholars, who allow, defend, and both do
swear themselves, and make other men to swear unto the supreme government
of temporal Princes, over the spiritual Pastors in all things and causes by
Act of parliament, In Amos. cap. 7.
which thing Calvin accounted a beastly matter.

Again, at Geneua, his doctrine is decayed. For whereas he believed, that
Christ's soul went down into hell, even to the place where the souls are
tormented in everlasting fire: In 2. Act. Apostol.
Beza so much misliketh him therein, that he will have Christ's soul to go no
lower then into the grave. The which opinion the English translation of the
Acts of the Apostles made at Geneua, does embrace.

And concerning his opinion of the Sacrament (that I may omit, how vehemently
Flacius Illyricus has shaken it already in his books against Beza) it can not
long stand, because the common sort can not understand it.

And worthelie, for that which is not true, is not able to be understood,
and his doctrine is altogether grounded upon imagination, without any
assurance of God words. To be short, if the Anabaptists shall not by a worse
heresy oppress the glory of Caluins doctrine, or if all other means to
destroy it should fail, at the lest by this one way it is sure to perish. For
as the Marcionists, the Manichees, the Arrians, the Nestoria^s, the Eutychians,
the Monothelites, the Pelagians, the Donatists, the Imagebreakers, were at the
last all wrapped in Apostasy, and infidelity, and were swalowed up by the
Moors, the Saracens, and the Turcks: even so is it most certain, that if the
Caluinists do escape other destructions, they shall perish in the end, either
being made infidels, or being conquered of others.

But in the mean time how safe stands the Sea Apostolik? How many hundred
years has it dured, always like to it self? How unremovable is that rock?
How does the doctrine thereof flourish more and more every day? Truth, which is
the dawghter of time, has now made many heretics to confess, that they
thought so much could never have been said for the Apostolic See of Rome, as
now they find. In so much that if al these things which are now revealed, had been known before, thowsands of them would never have gonne that way. But now
either shame, or slewth, or covetousness or fear of wordly princes, or the hard
profession of the Catholics, or desperation, causes them to stop their eyes
and their ears, lest perhaps they might see the truth, and be converted.
Joan. 1^.
Yet God to show his almighty power, does daily revoke some to his true Church,
both in Germannie, and France, and I beseech him to do the like in our
country of England also.

The fifth marck of an Antichristian.
THe fifth marck, whereby to know the man preach Gods Word without commission
rom his superiors. For such a one runs before he be sent, and comes of
himself, as Antichrist shall do. Romans 10.
For how shall they preach, says S. Paul, except they be sent? Now as Christ
the head preacher of all, was sent of his Father visiblie in flesh: so he
visiblie sent his Apostles, Joan. 20. 2. Tim. 4.
and they, by imposition of hands, sent others to preach. And their
successors from age to age have sent others in the Catholic Church even till
this day. So that all Catholic preachers are hable to reduce their commlssion
from step to step, until they come to Christ himself. But seeing Luther,
Zuinglius, and Calvin rebelled against their own bisshops, who are the
successors of the Apostles, and seeing they were not sent of any in all the
world, who had a known and public authority from the Apostles of Christ: it
must needs follow, that they came of themselves, and were not lawfully sent at
all.

As for temporal magistrates, who are only sheep, and which can not preach
themselves, can much less send others to preach. For no man can send an other
to do that, which him self is not able to do: Joan. 13.
since no Apostle or Legate is greater then he that sent him.

And yet it was not possible for any temporal magistrate or any common weal to
send Luther to preach, because they, who should have sent him, were (by his
judgment) misbeleuers, until he had converted them to a new faith. And so when
he had first preached his doctrine, he was sent of no man in all the world, but
came of himself, and therefore was an Antichrist, Joan. 5.
who comes in his own name, as Christ has tawght.

It is well known also, that Luther would not send Zuinglius to preach
against himself. Neither would Zuinglius send Calvin to deface his own
doctrine. And consequently every one of these is a false preacher, who comes
not from Christ, nor from his Apostles or their successors, as the Pope does,
who succedeth lineally S. Peter, as it is known.

The sixth marck of an Antichristian.


And in deed when his master the devil said to Christ: Math. 4.
If thou fall down and adore me, I will give thee all these things (showing all the kingdo^s of the world) he declared himself to be of this mind, to pluck
the service dew to God to himself, and to make us prefer the kingdoms of the
world, before the faith of Christ.

And therefore Antichrist who is ruled by the devil, shall put confidence
also in an earthly Kingdom. And as Saint Paul says, he shall come, in
virtute, that is to say, 2 Thessalonians. 2
in power and strength.

Whereunto it is very agreeable, that his preachers also do prefer the
jurisdiction of temporal princes, Note. In Horn against M. Fecknam.
above the jurisdiction of the spiritual ministers of Christ, teaching that
Kings are the supreme governors of Christ's Church: And that secular princes
may visit, correct, reform, and depose any bishop in their own realms.

Which is directly to say, that the power of the King is a higher and a
greater power in Gods Church, then the power of a bishop, or of a pastor. For
as the lawiers know, and natural reason teaches, Lege. 3. and 4. de Arbitris.
nec par in parem potestate^ habet, nec inferior in superiorem. Neither any
aequal has power upon his equal, nor any inferior has power upon his
superior.

But (say the Protestants) the temporal King may depose a bishop, and yet that
he can not do justly, except he may first sit judge upon a bishop even as
he is a bishop: and sit judge over him as he is a bishop, he can not, except
he he be his superior: therefore it is the protestants doctrine, that a Kings
temporal power (for we speak not of that King who is also a bishop) is greater
then a bishops power, which is spiriritual, and heavenly.

What is this to say, but only that the body is above the soul, the civil
policy above the Church of Christ, and the temporal reign above the Kingdom
of heaven? This is a vehement marck to betraie our new brethern by. For we
speak not now of works or manners, that is to say, whether a man love the
world more then God, or whether a pope be more gredy of his temporal
iurisdistion, then of his spiritual duty. We speak not, I say, of these
abuses (let him that has them yea though he be a pope, look well to himself
in that behalf) but we speak of doctrine at this time.

The Pope teaches, that every spiritual pastor is of a higher dignity, the^
any temporal officer, whatsoever he be. And that, because he is instituted of
Christ for to help us toward life everlasting. The Protestants teach, Ephesians.
4.
that a Christian Emperor or King is above all spiritual pastors in his own
realm, and may depose them by his own power: which is the very doctrine of
Antichrist.

For the Emperors and Kings, though they be Christians, may not yet in
spiritual matters rule the bishops and pastors of Gods people, What power
the Christian pric^e has.
but only they may with their temporal laws and power, defend the laws and
ordinances which the bisshops have already made, as Theodosius, and al other
good Emperors used to do.

But if they will use their princely power to change the old laws of the
Church, or to make new laws in spiritual matters which were not before made by
the priests, or to depose the ancient bishops, who have cure of their sowles:
then they are the members of Antichrist, as great Athanasius has at large
declared, in describing the heinouse factes of the Arrians in his time: In
epist. ad Solitar. vi tam agentes.
who reports, that when Constantius the Emperor called Paulinus the Bishop
of Treuers, Lucifer the bishop of Sardinia, Eusebius the bishop of Marcels, and
Dionysius the bishop of Millan before him, willing them to subscribe against
Athanasius, because it was his pleasure and his procedings: those blessed
bishops exhorted him, ne ecclesiastica corrumperet, neue Romanum imperium
ecclesiasticis constitutionibus immisceret, that he should not corrupt Church
matters, and that he should not mingle the Roman Empire with the Ecclesiastical
ordinances.

Here you see, that the Roman empire is discharged from meddling with Church
matters. It is not only said, Arrians, or heretics, but it is said, the Roman
Empire ought not to mingle it self with Ecclesiastical causes. Even a
Bishop being an heretic is removed from Church matters: but an Emperor is
not only removed from them, if he be an heretic, but also because he is an
Emperor only, and not a Bishop. Only this has been always the custom,
that Emperors should be careful, to maintain the former co^stitutions of
Bisshoppes, and the civil peace of the Church. For they being Christians, ought
to use the sword, which they bear by Gods appointment for the Church.

But the outward and civil peace: and the Ecclesiastical constitutions (which
towche the belefe and the inward direction of the soul) are two things, much
different: Apud Athan. ibidem.
in so much that Pope Liberius said to the messinger of the same Emperor
Constantius (as Athanasius also does witness) after this sort: If the Emperor
will needs interpose his care for the Ecclesiastical peace, Ecclesiastical
peace.
let an Ecclesiastical synod be made, long a palatio. vbi nec Imperator
praesto est, nec Comes se ingerit, nec iudex minatur, Ecclesiastical synod.
and caet. Let the Ecclesiastical meeting be made a great way of from the
palaice, where neither an Emperor is at hand, nor a County thrusts in
himself, nor a judge threateneth, but where the only fear of God, and the
institution of the Apostles is sufficient. Thus he said, not that an Emperor
might in no case be at a Council of bishops, but because he might not be there
to use his Emperial authority in judging the bishops, or in prescribing what
the Church shall decree or believe, but only in maynteining that which the
bishops, according to the Apostolic institution, either have or shall agree
upon.

That Reverend Father Hosius, who after that he had suffered persecution for
Christ's faith under Maximian, lived threescore years in the Church: being
tempted by the same Constantius to subscribe against Athanasius, In epi, ad
Solitar. vit. age^t.
asks first of him by letters, whether his brother Constans (the good and
Catholic Emperor) did use to banish bishops or no? and then, whether Consta^s
his brother, aliquando iudicijs Ecclesiasticis intersuit, was at any time a
medler with the Ecclesiastical judgments? Ibidem.
Last of all he says to him: Ne te misceas Ecclesiasticis, neque nobis in hoc
genere praecipe, sed potius ea a nobis disce. Tibi Deus imperiu^ commisit,
nobis, quae sunt Ecclesiae, co^credidit: and quemad modum qui tuum etiam
imperium malignis oculis carpit, contradicit ordinationi diuinae, ita and tu
cave, ne, quae sunt Ecclesiae ad te trahens, magno crimini obnoxious fias. Date
(scriptum est) quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and quae Dei Deo. neque igitur fas
est, nobis in terris imperiu^ tenere, neque tu thymiamatum and sacroru^
potestate^ habes Imperator.

Do thou not intermedle with Ecclesiastical matters, neither do thou co^mau^d
what we shall do in this kind of matters, but rather lern the^ of us. God has
committed the Empire unto thee, and he has put us in trust with those things
which concern the Church: and like as he that malignly ^arpeth thy Empire, does
gainesay the ^rdinaunce of God: so do thou take ^hede, lest, in taki^g unto
thee those things which belong to the Church thou be made gilty of a great
crime. It is written, Math. 22.
give unto Caesar those things which are Cesars, and unto God, those things
that are Gods. Therefore it is neither lauful for us, to have the rule of the
Empire in earth, neither have thou (o Emperor) any power over the holy incense
and sacrifices. Mark that it is rehearsed for a praise in the Catholic Emperor
Constans, not to have meddled with Ecclesiastical judgments.

Also Athanasius himself says thus for his own part. In epist. vt ante.
Si istud est iudicium Episcoporum, quid commune cum eo habet Imperator? and
caet. quando iudicium Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore cepit? and
caet. Paulus Apostolus habebat amicos in Caesaris familia, and per eos in
literis salutabat Philippenses, Philip. 4.
non tamen eos in iudidicio socios assumpsit. If this be the judgment of
bishops, what has the Emperor to do with it? and co^trarywise, if these
judgments are gathered by the threatenings of the Emperor, what need is
there of men, who have the title of bishops? When has it been heard of,
since the beginning of the world? Note.
when did the judgment of the church take his authority from the Emperor? or
when at any time was this acknouleged for a judgment? There have been very many
synods hertofore, many judgments of the Church have been kept. But neither the
Fathers went about to persuade these things to the prince, nor the Prince did
show himself curiouse in the matters of the Church: Paul the Apostle had
frinds in Cesars house, and did salute the Philippians in their name in his
letters, yet did he not take them as his fellows in judgment.

By this ye may perceive, that no Emperors at al, were they never so good, no
County Palatines, or secular Lords, be they never so much faithful (as Consta^s
was and those of the Emperors house of whom S. Paul speaks) have yet any
right or power, Philip. 4.
to sit presidents in Ecclesiastical matters (otherwise then to keep civil
order and peace) but only those, to whom God has committed the cure of
sowles. In so much that Athanasius douteth not by name to call Constantius the
foreruner of Antichrist, because he being a secular prince, intermedled with
the spiritual government of the Church. Quid igitur Constantius quod
Antichristi non sit, In epist. vbi ante.
omisit aut quomodo ille in aduentu suo non repererit sibi expeditam viam ad
dolos ab isto praeparatam? Siquidem in locum ecclesiasticae cognitionis, suum
palatium tribunal earum caufarum constituit, seque earum litium summum
principem and authorem facit. What has Constantius then omitted, that does not
appertain to Antichrist? Or how shall not Antichrist, when he comes, find a
fit way for him to all deceits, prepared by this man* For in steed of the
Ecclesiastical judgment, The part of Antichrist.
he appoints his palace to be the place of judgment for their causes: and
makes himself the chiefest prince, and bearer out of those controversies.

Ibide^ vbi ante.
And again Grauia sunt ista, and plusquam grauia, sed tamen istiusmodi, quae
congruant in eum, qui Antichristi imaginem induerit.

Quis enim videns eum in decernendo principem se facere Episcoporu^, and
praesidere iudicijs Ecclesiasticis, non merito dicat, illu^ eam ipsam
abominationem desolationis esse, quae a Daniele praedicta est? nam cum
circumamictus sit Christianismo, and caet. These things are grievous, and more
then grievous, but yet they are such, as do well agree to him, who has put on
the the Image of Antichrist. For who, seeing him, in making a decree, to take
upon him to be prince of the bishops, and to be president in Ecclesiastical
judgments, may not worthily say, that he is the abomination of the desolation,
which was foretold by Daniel? The property of antichrist
For when he being clothed with Christianity, does both enter into the holy
places, and also being there, does spoil Churches, abrogate the Canons, using
force to make men observe and keep his (commandments) who will at any time
dare say, that this is a quiet time to the Christians? and not rather a
persecution? and such a persecution, as neither has been before, nor perchance
no man will at any time make again, but that son of iniquity (which is
Antichrist.)

Thus have we the determinate sentence of Athanasius: of Athanasius, I say the
most notable bishop that ever was for virtue and lerning, since the Apostles
time. And his sentence is, that the Christian Emperor (and the like is of any
Christian Prince) who takes upon him to be prince of the bishops in making a
decree, and to be president in Ecclesiastical judgments, is a member of that
abominable desolatio^, whereof Daniel prophesied. Can any plainer sentence be
wished for to conclude my present purpose? Neither was this doctrine only meant
of an heretical Emperor: for the Catholic Emperor Constans is praised, for
not meddling with Church matters. Philip. 4.
Yea S. Paul is alleged, not to have communicated the Church matters with
those good Christians of Cesars house.

I know with what wranglers I have to do. They will bring examples, to show
that some Emperors have sitten in general Councils, as Constantine the great,
Martianus, and some others. But I answer, that they satte to keep good order,
and to preserve peace and quietness among the bishops, specially, because the
Archeheretikes were commonly themselves great Prelates, as being the
patriarchs of Antioche, or of Alexandria, or of Constantinople. Who (if the
Emperor were not present) would use force in the stead of holy scriptures, as
Dioscorus did, In the schismatical Ephesine Counsel.
and Eusebius of Nicomedia in the time of the Arrians. For the preserving the^
of civil and ecclesiastical peace, the Emperor was present, and not as supreme
judge in Ecclesiastical causes.

S. Ambrose notes, and thincketh, that even an heretical Emperor coming to
years of discreatio^ will be hable to consider, In epi. 32. What manner of
bishop M. Horn i^.
qualis ille Episcopus sit, qui Laicis ius Sacerdotale substernit, what manner
of bishop he is, who lays the priestly right under the lay men's seete. And
yet by giving of the most proud and most intolerable title of supreme Head or
governor in all ecclesiastical causes to lay princes, all the religion used now
in England wholly stands. What bishops then are those of England, who making
the secular prince their head put the priestly right under his feet?

S. Augustine being fully persuaded, that nothing could be greater then a
priest in the house of God, thereupon concludes, that Moses must needs have been a priest for (says he) nunquid mayor sacerdote esse poterat, August. in
Psalm. 98.
Could he be greater then a priest? Yea Marie, says M. Horn, he might have been
a King or a secular Prince. But S. Augustine knew no such divinity. And yet the
world, toward the coming of Antichrist is grown so wise, that these men have
found now, that every Emperor, King, Prince, or Duke (who has any temporal
state of his own) is greater, even in Ecclesiastical causes, then the lawful
successor of S. Peter.

This, I say, is the divinity of England. For therein, our country makes a
peculiar Sect of his own, wherein they disagree, even from their fellow
Caluinistes.

But let them look to it as well as they will, they shall find it a badge of
Antichrist, as Athanasius has plainly affirmed. And when the day of trial
comes, it shall evidently appear, that those are most faithful subjects to
the prince, who give him his due place of honor in Gods Church, without
derogation to that heavenly power of bishops, which Christ himself came down
from haven to plant, and whom he has set even over the Kings themselves, Joan.
21.
as being the sheep of their foldes.

Theod. lib. 4. c. ^.
Choose such a bishop in Milan (said the good Valentinian) cui nos quoque
Imperij moderatores nostra subdamus sincere capita. To whom we also being the
governors of the Empire, may syncerlie submit our heads. And now such
Antichristian bishops are chosen, Suidas in vita Leontij.
as may make a lay man their supreme head. When Co^stantius was preferred
before, and above the bishops, by flattering heretical prelates, then said
Leontius most freely to him, (...), and caet. I wonder that you being set, to
dispose and govern one thing, do meddle with other things. You are chief ruler
in warlike and civil matters, and you prescribe what bishops shall do in
matters which belong to Bishops alone.

When the capitain of the heretical Emperor Valens required the priests and
Deacons of Edessa, to embrace the Emperors proceedings (for it is a madness,
says he, to resist so mighty a prince and Lord) then Eulogius said mildly:
Nu^quid vna cum Imperio, Theod. lib. 4. c. 17. and 1^.
etiam ille Pontificatum est consecutus? Whether has Valens together with his
Empire obtained also the office of a bishop? Et pastorem habemus (says
Eulogius) and nutus illius sequimur. We both have a pastor, and his
commandment we follow.

Our Lord grant, that our country men may remember, that they have pastors,
whose voice they ought to follow by Christ's commandment, even in matters of
their faith: But Chris never commanded us, to follow any secular prince in our
belefe and religion. That precept remains for Antichrist, who sets the
world above the Church, and the earthly power above the heavenly.

The seventh Mark of an Antichristian.
(...) 1. and 4.
caused the Jewish temple to be shut up, and no sacrifice to be made externally
unto God, for the space of three years, and as Antichrist, for his part
fulfilling the foresaid shadow shall cause the continual sacrifice (of the new
testament) to cease likewise for the space of three years and a half: Daniel. 12
so the forerunners of Antichrist, do show their masters badge as it were
upon their sleue, by taking away the external sacrifice of the new testament,
and by destroying holy altars dedicated unto Christ's name, which have been
erected and have continued even from the Apostles time till this day,
throughout all nations, as the very form of all manner of ancient Churches,
1. Cor. 10 Heb. 12. Dionys. de Eccle. bi^rar. c. 3.
and as all holy writers do declare.

Yea, the prophet Malachie did so evidently foretell, that in all nations a
clean external and public sacrifice (for thereof he spoke) should be made
to Gods own name, that no man is hable, to deny the plain word of God in
that behalf, except he take the impudency of Antichrist upon him.

For whereas the priests of the Jews had offered polluted bread upon Gods holy
table and altar (which two names stand in Malachie to signify one thing, that
is to say, Malac. 1.
the place whereupon the sacrifice was offered) and whereas the said polluted
offering of the Jews was a dishonor to Gods name among men (for otherwise God
can not be dishonored in himself) the Prophet does show, that this dishonor
done to God among the Jews, shall be recompensed and amended among the Ge^tils:
where Gods name shall be great, and a clean offering shall be made unto him, not
in one temple only, but in every place. Now let us compare these things
together.

The defects of the Jews. The perfection of the Gentiles. 1 Ye (o priests)
despise my name. 1 My name is great among the Gentiles. 2 Ye offer upon my
altar (which was only in Jerusalem.) 2 In every place there is sacrifice made
to mie name. Ye offerre polluted bread, or the blind and lame. 3 A clean
oblation is offered, or a fine cake of meal, for so the Hebrew word also does
signify. 4 Here lacked a clean outward sacrifice, whereof specially the
prophet now speaks. 4 Here the body and blood of Christ is mea^t, the most
clean outward sacrifice that can be devised. 5 Here it is said, I will not
accept the gift (or meat offering) at your hand. 5 It is meant on the
otherside, that he will accept the clean oblation or fine meat offering of the
Gentiles. 6 The talk is not here of their inward sacrifices. For they are as
acceptable among the Jews, as among the Gentiles. And are not known to men. 6
It is the outward sacrifice, which at this time is both rejected among the
Jews, and accepted among the Gentiles: as by which only Gods name is either
despised, or honored among me^, who see but the outward things. 7 Among the
Jews the Altar or table is rejected, with the meat upon it. 7 Among the
Gentiles the table of our Lord is willed to be regarded, and the Altar whereof
the Jews can not eat. 8 Here God has no pleasure, specially in the priests
of the Jews. 8 Here on the otherside the priests of the Ge^tils are specially
meant to be acceptable unto God. 9. That which lacks in the Jews concerning
sacrifice. 9 Is mea^t to be supplie^ among the Gentiles concerning sacrifice. 10
These have both inward and outward sacrifices: for there never lacked some just
men among them, who might sacrifice inwardly. 10 Here may be more less there
can not be therefore here must b^ outward sacrifice also least if these have
ani^ thing less, the word o^ God be found false. 11 These men's outward
sacrifice was shut up in one place, but not their inward sacrifice which Daniel
made even at Babylon. 11 Therefore these me^ outward (and not onl^ their
inward) sacrific^ is meant to be made in every place, because Churches and
Aultars are built unto the nam^ of God in all nations. 12 Here lacked not
prayers also, but they were not the kind of sacrifice which is now rejected,
but they were joined with the chief ^crifice, as well among ^he Jews as the
Gen^ils. 12 Neither among the gentiles do praier^ lack, but neither they are
the chief kind o^ clean sacrifice which is prophesied of for they are no new
kind of sacrifice, but are common to all that serve God. 13 The proper
sacrifice ^f the Jews is rejected, which is made according (...) the law of
Moses and ^f the old testament. 13 The proper sacrifice of the Gentiles is
accepted, which is made According to the law of Christ and of the new
testament. ^4 It is a sacrifice co^si^ting in fact (and not in word only)
which is ^eere rejected. 14 And here the sacrifice consists in fact, and not
in word only: for Christ said: hoc facite do or make this thing. ^5 The
very fire which devoured the sacrifice ^here is co^temptible, but ^et it did
really devour ^he thing that was ^hrought unto the altar. 15 The word of
God which says, this is my body, is the fire which deuoureth the earthly
substance of bread and wine brought unto the altar, the which word works that
which it sou^deth, and is honorable. 16 They are cursed who having a beast of
the male kind, do not offer it, but rather do offer a spotted or weak one,
as the rejected Jews did. 16 We should likewise be cursed, it having Christ's
bodiwe should not offer it, but rather should sa^ our own righteousness (...) be
most principally the clean oblation, where of the prophet speake^* Which yet
the member of Antichrist do say*

Read the prophet Malachie wit^ diligence, and see whether the conference of
the holy scripture does not necessarily import this sense, which (...) have now
given And I have given it according to the uniform interpretati^ of the
ancient fathers, of whom no^ one denies the body and blood of Christ to be
here meant, albeit some of them expound some part of this chapter of prayers
and of inward righteousness, the which inward sacrifice is always to be joined
with the vnblodie outward sacrifice, or consecration, and oblation of Christ's
body and blood: which is the new oblation of the new testament, with Lib. 4.
cap. ^.
Ireneus, with whom Demo^st. euange. li. 1. c. 10.
Eusebi^, In Malach. 1.
S. Hierom, Orat. 2. aduersus Iudaeos.
S. Chrysostom, Lib. 4. c. 14.
Da^ascene agree.

Neither does this our unbloody sacrifice derogate any jot to that one ^loody
sacrifice of Christ's cross. For we honor that one sacrifice so much, that
through the power of it, we believe the daily remembrance thereof, being made
by the outward consecration of bread and wine into the same body and blood
which was once offered upon the cross, to be necessarily a public sacrifice,
because it is not possible, Note.
but that every public and external fact, which is made by Gods authority, to
put us in mind of that great sacrifice once fulfilled on the cross, must also
partake the nature of that sacrifice, whereof it is the remembrance.

For if even the killing and burning of a calf was an external and public
sacrifice because it signified that Christ should die for us: how infinitely
more shall the body and blood of Christ, being made of bread and wine to
signify his own death, be a public and an external sacrifice? And because in
the said body of Christ, the whole merit of his priesthod and cross is still
really contained (for he is a priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedech) whenever that body is made present by consecration (as it is
always at Mass) then, Heb. 7.
seeing that substance is made present which even till this day (whersoeuer it
be, 2. Joan. 2.
or in earth) makes God merciful to us, a propitiatory sacrifice in his kind
is made, hable to be applied to the use of the live and of the dead.

Which doctrine, who so denies upon pretense of a zeal to Christ's death, let
him be well assured, he dishonors his death above measure, if whereas every
sign externally made in calves, or gotes which went before his death, was
therefore a publik external sacrifice: he will now deny the same honor to a
sign of the same death, appointed to be made, even by Christ's own mouth and
example in the self same body which died for us. I can not tarry any longer
upon this matter because, it is not my principal purpose.

The eight mark of an Antichristian.
THE viij. mark of the false prophets Psalm. 2.
David, 60. and 61
Isaias, yea the Luc. 14.
Gospel does teach. Neither is it only meant, that in diverse nations some or
other shall, some at one, and other at an other time privily believe in Christ,
but it is meant, Isai. 2. Psalm. 44. Malac. 1.
that many nations together shall profess Christ's religion and name outwardly
and openly: for his name is great among the Gentiles, not in one nation only,
but among many, nor surely by those who lie privy, but by those who are not
ashamed to be known for Christians and for Catholics. For such only do
honor the name of God, as be known to be of his Church.

Math. 5. Isai. 2.
Hereof, it is called a city which can not be hidden, a hill built in the top
of hills, Psalm. 18. Matthew. 5.
a tabernacle set in the son, a candle being light and set upon the
candlestick, the children of light, Luc. 16. Matthew. 13.
the kingdom of Christ, who reigns in the house of the spiritual Jacob for
ever. Yea it is called the croune of glory in the hand of God, Isai. 62.
and the pride or magnificent joy of all ages from generation to generation.

Al which texts notwithstanding, the protestants will make us believe, that they
are Christ's Church: whereas fifty years a go, there were not only not many
nations of them, which professed their faith openly (so that Gods name might
thereby be great among the Gentiles) but there was not one nation, no not one
city, not one town, not one whole village in all the wide world, where it may
be showed, that they had one Church, or chapel, or house of public prayer
under the son. And yet though they showed half a dosen such, it could not
serve. Is this the gloriouse kingdom and common weal which Christ does
inherit?

O unspeakable blasphemy unto his gloriouse name. Isai. 54. Gal. 4.
The Jewish synagoge was never half so base: whereas Christ's Church among the
Gentiles was prophesied to pass it in number and greatness. And yet this misery
of the Church (say they) dured eight or nine hundred years. Math. 16.
Ergo so long hell gates prevailed against the Church of Christ. But on the
other side, there can no moment of an hour be named, in the which we are not
ready to show, that many, Note the true Church.
yea very many nations professed openly, and outwardly practiced Christ's true
religion together with the pope of Rome, from S. Peter's time to this hour. O
gloriouse City of God, and a kingdom prophesied of in all ages before Christ,
worthy of his Son Jesus, against which hell gates never did, nor never shall
prevail. To this City and kingdom ye must all resort, who look to inherit
the kingdom of heaven.

The ninth Mark of an Antichristian.
to be a good judge of the said word of God, beside themselves. And among
themselves they make every woman and child a sufficient, yea the supreme
judge in earth of Gods own word.

Was there ever heard of any such pride, besides only in the members of
Antichrist? Mark whether this be not true, by this example. 1. Cor. 7.
It is written in S. Paul: Qui matrimonio iungit virginem suam, been facit, and
qui non iungit, melius facit. He that joins his virgen in marriage, does well,
but he that does not join (her in marriage) does better. Upon this most plain
text, we ground this doctrine, that, whereas both states are good and honest,
yet virginity is a better state and more acceptable unto God then the state of
marriage. No says the Protestant. I take it no so, and why Sir I pray you? Is
not facere melius, to do better? and does not he better please God, who does
the better thing? And is it not said of S. Paul to be the better thing, not to
join his virge^ in Marriage?

Nay but (says the Protestant) by this word better, the Apostle means not a
thing better in the sight of God, but a thing better in the sight of the world.
For he that is unmarried has l^sse worldly care, and therefore he is in better
case for an easy and pleasant life, but not in a better state of a more
virtuous life. I answer, if melius be not meant better in the sight of God,
neither is been mea^t well in the sight of Cod: But if he that joins his
virgen in Marriage does well in the sight of God, he that does not join her in
marriage, does better in the sight of God. Therefore my interpretation is the
better. No, says the Protestant, Beza ibidem.
melius stands for commodius this word better stands for more commodious,
and none otherwise. I say, it stands also for more virtuously, and more
godly. And that is the plain sense of the word of God. It is not so, says he.

Well, what shall we do? I say, it is so you say, it is not so. Will you take
a judge? Yea (quoth he) if he judge according to the word of God. I pray you
Sir, what is Gods word concerning this point we now speak of? Is not our
question, whether this word (better) does signify better in the sight of God,
as I say, or else better only according to the world, as you say? Is this
question defined in Gods word? We must confer Scriptures (says he). A
Gods name.

The more ye co^ferre, the more plain it will be, that Christ chose virginity for
himself, not as for the better state according to the world (who therein sought
no ease (but as better according to God, Math. 3.
as who fulfilled in himself all righteousness. He gave the same state to his
Mother, not for the quieter (for a sword of sorrow also went through her soul,
Luc. 2.
that is to say affliction and travail) but surely for the purer state, as
being near to the nature of Angels, and of the blessed souls in heaven,
Matthew. 22
where no marriage is exercised. Also it is a mean to serve God with less
distraction of the mind, 1. Cor. 7.
as also S. Paul does teach. Math. 29.
Or how says Christ, there are eunuchs who have gelded themselves, not for
ease and wordly commodity, Propter regnum coelorum.
as you say, but, for the kingdom of heaven: if it be not better toward God to
live chaste, then in marriage?

Thus if we went through the whole Bible, you should never be hable to show,
Heb. 13.
that marriage is of aequall dignity with virginity, thowgh it be honorable in
all, and an unspotted bed, and therefore be a right good state, the which only
thing all the sciptures that you can bring do prove.

What shall we then do? will our Protestant yield? to whom should I yield,
says he? At the least, to Gods word, say I. no (says he) you
misunderstand Gods word. Are you content to be tried by the ancient Fathers?
If you be, Hiero. aduer. Iouin.
Saint Hierome wrote against Iouiniam, who held this very error, to wit,
that marriage and virginity were of aequall merit.

Saint Hierome (says he) was to much affectionate to virginity. And I dout
not, but that he would say the like of your affection toward marriage, if he
were alive. Whom then should we rather believe? you, who may hap to be damned,
or him whom your self douteth not to be saved?

But go to: like you then S. Augustine? he writes thus: Iouinianus ante paucos
annos haereticus nouus virginitate^ S. Mariae destruebat: Co^t duas epis. Pela.
lib. 1. c. 2.
and virginitati sacrae, nuptias fideliu^ coaequabat. Iouinian a new heretic
before a few years, did destroy the virginity of (our Lady) S. Mary: and made
aequall the marriage of the faithful with holy virginity. What say we to S.
Augustines judgment? He was a man (quoth he) and he might err. I cry you
mercy, Sir: are you a God? Is it more like that he did err, then you? What if
I show S. Chysostome to be of the same mind, as vndoutedlie he is? what if I
join to them S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, In Psalm. 127.
Gregory Nyssen, S. Hilary, S. Bernard, and diverse others who with one accord
prefer the state of virginity even in the sight of God, and that in whole
treatises made of that argument? What if I show, that pope Siricius condemned
Iouinian with his companions in public consistory? Apud Ambros. epist. ^0.
and that S. Ambrose praised him for it, and also condemned the same Iouinian,
even by the force of those words of S. Paul which affirm him to do better, 1.
Cor. 7.
who joins not his virge^ in marriage?

What if I join also the practice of the whole Church, Universal practice.
which in every nation under heaven has built monasteries for virgins, and
has given the first place of honor and merit to the state of virginity? will
you then yield at the least to this universal judgment of most best, grave,
and wise men, who directed all their writings and doings according to Gods
word? No, no, he will never yield (if he once have the mark of Antichrist)
whatsoever be brought forth to the contrary: and that because he crediteth
himself and his own proper judgment, more then all the world beside.

Is not this an intolerable pride, all this not withstanding, to tarry still in
the former mind? And the very same tyranny do they exercise in every other
question. Say holy scripture what it will, say the Fathers, say the Councels
what they list, howsoever the matter be practiced, if they once judge
otherwise, they will believe themselves, and remain still supreme judges over
every man and every thing, without conforming them selves to any superior
authority.

Yea, what shall we say, if the Protestants will not only be supreme judges
over the meaning of Gods word, but also over the books themselves, and over
the reading thereof? For beside that they reject the books of Tobie, of
Wisedo^, and of the Machabees, with certain other parts of holy scripture from
the Canon of Gods word, they also reject the epistle of S. James, and that
was done not only by Martin Luther, who called it straminea^, of no more force
then a straw is, An. Dom. 1^66. Confessio edita Tiguri.
but even this last year of our Lord there came forth a Confession of the faith
printed at Zurich, whereunto all the Sacramentaries of Zuicherland, yea also
the preachers of Geneua gave their assent and consent, as the title of the
book does witness. In which book it is said, that S. James is to be
rejected, if he be contrary to S. Paul. The which heathenish saying does
presuppose, that S. James may be contrary to S. Paul, and in that case he is
to be rejected, say they. Their words are, Iacobus ille dixit, opera
iustificare, non contradicens Apostolo, rencie^dus alioqui, Cap. ^.
that fellow James said, that works do justify, not speaking against S.
Paul, otherwise he were to be rejected.

No man could say this much of S. James, but he who thought it possible for S.
James epistle to be no holy scripture. Eusebius. li. 1. cap. 23.
For if it be clearly admitted (as it has been always among true Catholics)
for holy scripture, then (if it could be contrary to S. Paul) it were no more
true, that S. James should be deceived, then S. Saul. For of that which is
confessed to be the word of God, there is noe difference at all. But one Holy
ghost speaks with like authority in all his instruments, Psalm. 44.
whatsoever they be. Therefore this pestilent opinion is privily fostered among
the Protestants, that S. James epistle is not the undoubted word of God, and
thereof can they give none other reason, but because he is contrary to their
deuilish doctrine of only faith.

A false. opinion.
For whereas they say, that S. James means, that works declare our
justification before men, and do not in deed justify before God, it is stark
false which they say. For he says: What good shall it do, Jacob. 2.
if a man say himself to have faith, and have not works, shall his faith save
him? Behold, he speaks of works necessary to that justification, whereby we
are saved before God, and not to that only, whereby we are declared just
before men. For salvation depends of God only, and not of men at all. The
which thing may be proved out of S. James by diverse other arguments. For he
speaking of Abraham (whom no man saw offering up his son beside God alone)
says, Jacob. 2,
that faith was made perfect of works, and concludes generally, a man is
justified of works, and not of faith only. And again, faith without works
is dead. Therefore, if the Protestants will have faith without works to
justify, they will have a dead faith to justify.

Whenever S. Paul said that faith did justify, he meant of faith, Romans 3. S.
Paul's meaning. Galath. 5.
which works by love, as himself has declared. And when he says, that faith
justifies without works, he means, without works which go before
justification, and not without charity or love of God, Romans 5.
which is spread in our hearts by the holy ghost, at the time when God loving us
first, 1. Joan. 4.
makes us believe, and also to love him: and so does justify and rectify us
which were his ennemies before. The which love being infused to us with a right
faith, does cause us to bring forth such good works, Ephesians. 2.
as God has prepared for us to walk in, and by those works our former
justification is increased, and fortified, according as we read, Apoc. 22.
qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc, he that is just, let him be justified as
yet.

Thus do all the Catholic Fathers expound the one Apostle, both by himself
and by the other: In lib. de (...) and operi. c. 14.
in so much, that S. Augustine confesses an old error to have sprung upon
S. Paul's words to the Romans not well understood, for which cause he
testifies, that S. James, S. Peter, S. John and S. Jude wrote their epistles
all in commendation of charity, and of such good works as be joined with
faith. And S. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthians, does also well declare,
what faith he would have to justify, for as much as he says, all faith to do
no good, 1. Cor. 13.
if a man have not charity. Now when the Protestants perceived, that of all
other, S. James was most plain against their only faith, they first did cast
a smoke before men's eyes, as though his words might be defended. And yet when
they considered that solution would not serve, they gave an other, that S.
James is to be rejected, if he be contrary to S. Paul.

Neither only do the Protestants make themselves judges over whole books and
epistles of the Apostles, but also over the very letter of Christ's Gospel.
For beside their wicked interpretations thereof, they find fault with the
construction of the Evangelists, and bring the text it self in dout. For
whereas S. Luke witnesses, Luc. 22.
that Christ said in his last supper, this cup (is) the new testament in my
blood which (that is to say, which cup) is shed for you: whereas the
participle (shed) is manifestly referred in the Greek text of S. Luke unto
(the cup) and not unto the name (blood) yet Beza translating the Greek words
into Latin, In his notes upon that place of s. Luke
reads thus. Hoc poculu^ est nouum illud testamentum per sanguinem meum, qui
pro vobis effunditur. He shoud have said, quod, and not, qui. This cup is that
new testament by mie blood, which (that is to say, which blood) is shed for you.

S. Luke then reads, which cup, but Beza reads, Os impudens.
which blood is shed for you. Was there ever any like impudency heard of, as to
correct the very text of the holy Gospel? But perhaps Beza did find it so in
some copies. No surely For he himself confesses in his annotations printed at
Geneua upon that place, in this wise: Omnes tamen vetusti nostri codices ita
scriptum habebant. Yet all our old books had it so written, that is to say, so,
as the Greek copies every where extant do read. In all which the participle
(shed) can not be referred to the blood, but unto the cup.

What is then the matter, why Beza would needs translate it otherwise? forsooth
S. Luke (in this kind of reading) is directly against his sacrementary heresy.
For S. Luke gives us the words of Christ in this sense: This cup, that is to
say, the liquor and drinck contained in this cup, is the new Testament in my
blood. the which liquor contained in the cup (being so the new testament in my
blood) is shed for you. Mark well.
But no liquor contained in the cup is shead for us, beside the substantial and
real blood of Christ: therefore the liquor contained in the cup (after the
words of Christ once spoken) is none other liquour, beside the substantial
and real blood of Christ.

To avoid this argument, Beza, who was at a point never to yield in his
heresy, would needs signify, that S. Luke does not well rehearse Christ's
words, and therefore he himself has rehearsed them better, if yet he shall be
credited more then the Evangelist. But let us also see the words of Beza in
his Comment upon this place. Qui pro vobis effunditur, In Oliua Rob Stephani.
1556.
(...). Quum haec verba, si constructionem spectemus, necessario non ad
sanguinem, sed ad po culum pertinent, neque tamen de vino, nedum de poculo
intelligi possint, aut manifestum est Solaecophanes, quu^ dicendu^ fuerit
(...): aut potius cu^ haec essent ad marginem annotata ex Matthaeo and Marco,
postea in contextum irrepserunt.

Whereas these words (which is shed for you) if we look to the constructio^,
do necessarily appertain, not to the blood, Mark his confession.
but to the cup, and yet they can not be understand of the wine and much
less of the cup, either it is an evident appearance of inco^grue speech
(where that is reade^ in the nominative case, He corrects S. Luke.
which should have been readen in the dative) or rather, whereas these words
were noted out of Matthew and Mark in the margent, they crept afterward into
the text.

See, for Gods love, this man's own confession.

First the participle (shed) in Greek

Again, the participle may and

Thirdly, the participle can not be understood of the wine: for wine was not
shed for us, and that Beza confesses.

Beza confesses.

the blood in the cup made of the wine. For so the word cup stands to
signify that which is in the cup, Math. 26. Marc. 14.
as all men know that have common sense: and that is in the cup, which Christ
pronounced, saying: this is my blood, and cat.

Therefore Beza should have confessed the fifth point, The true sense of S.
Luke.
to wit, that the blood of Christ contained substa^tially in the cup and made
there present by changing the wine into it, is the new testament in Christ's
blood, that is to say, it does testify unto us, that Christ by his
bloodshedding upon the cross is our sacrifice reco^ciling us to God. The which
blood so mystically contained in the cup is shed for us, because the substance
of that in the cup, and of that which is shed on the cross, is all one
substance, the difference being only in the outward foorme, and not in the
inward truth. So that, whereas Christ's blood was really shed for us on the
cross in his own foorme, that which is mystically contained in the cup under
the foorme of wine, is the self same blood, made also present after the sort of
a mystical sacrifice, to represent in the truth of Christ's own substance made
inuisibly present, the great visible sacrifice openly made upon the Cross.

This only was the whole meaning of S. Luke, the which thing if Beza would not
have learned of the catholic church, he should have learned it of S. Luke at the
least: for his words give that sense. But he would not learn it of S. Luke,
because he had hated it in the Catholic Church, perhaps before he knew what
S. Luke wrote. For these men profitte more by spite, then by reading. They
first chose to forsake the Church, and then if any thing make for the same
Church, be it epistle be it gospel, it shall sooner be false Greek and false
Latin to, then they will come into the Church again. I pray you, what a
shameless point is this, to teach that S. Luke wrote false Greek, and did put
the nominative case, instead of the dative case? well, therein Beza would not
stand over long. But he rather thi^keth, that the words (which is shed for
you) are not at all of the Gospel, but crept in, or were put in.

O God! All their ancient Greek copies have it, by his own confession: al our
Greek and Latin copies have it also. Yea our mass book has it to. And yet
now we must thinck, that it is an error crept in. If this gloss may be
admitted, every thing which in holy scripture makes against the furiouse
opinion of any member of Antichrist, shall be a thing that out of the margent
crept into the text. O Satanical pride of our proresta^ts where is the
obedience you pretend to Gods word? where is the reverence, which ye ought to
give, and we do in deed give to the blessed gospel of Christ? which reverence
is so great among the Catoliks, that we dare not change a letter, nor a point,
neither in the Greek, nor Lati^ copies, except we find it so in many ancient
and well corrected books, and those well known to many witnesses, and that by
the judgment of a Synod. But albeit al you know not so much, yet now learn,
that your heads and your false preachers are so maliciously set, that if the
gospel be not conformable to their co^modite, and preiudicate opinion: be he
Luke, be he James, be he John, he shall be made as light of, as ever was any Pope
of Rome.

Look up at the last for Christ's sake, and consider that you are held
captives of ravening wolves, who spoil your souls of all their spiritual
treasures, and feed you with mere dreams, and fantasies, the which if you
amend not before, at the hour of death, will bring you to desperation, and to
everlasting fire of hell. Other places I could bring where the Protestants have
thus abused Gods own word: but it would carry me to far away from my
principal purpose. Only this I assure you of, The Pope has no such custom, to
say, S. Luke speaks false Greek, or the words have crept out of the margent
into the text, or if James be contrary to Paul, he must be rejected, or the
Machabees is no scripture with the Christians, because it is not in the Canon
of the Jews, but he keeps all thing as he received them without any manner of
change.

The tenth marck of an Antichristian.
WHat an infinite disputation would

Eunomius (as s. Augustine witnesses said, Ad quod vult her. 54.
no sin should hurt a man if he were partaker of the faith which he taught.
And are not the Protestants secure of their salvation (whatsoever their works
be) if they have that presumptuouse faith which Luther taught them? We read in
the Tripartite history, Lib. 2. c. 13
that Acesius the bisshops of the Nouatians affirmed, that who so had sinned
mortally after baptism, he might hot hoape for remision of his sins by the
priests, De Poenit. lib. 1. ca. 7.
but by God alone. Against which heresy of the Nouatians, S. Ambrose
raesoneth, shewi^g, that the priests have no less right given them to remit
sins by penance, then by baptism. Vnu^ in vtorque mysterium, there is one
mystery (or sacrament) in both cases. Do not now all the Protestants deny the
priests to have any right given them to forgive sins? Panopl li. 2. tit. 22
Euthymius writes, that the Massalians denied baptism to pluck up the root of
sins. Is not the same the opinion of the Protestants?

Tawght not Aerius, that we must not pray for the dead, nor keep solemly the
appointed fastings? and that there is no difference between a priest and a
Bishop? August. ber 53. Epiphan. haer. 75.
which things both Epiphanius, and S. Augustine with the consent of all the
Catholics of their time, and all that followed after, witness to be
heretical. And yet our Protestants teach the self same.

S. Augustine reckons it an heresy in Iouinian, Her. 22.
because virginitate^ sanctimonialium and continentiam sexus virilis in sanctis
eligentibus celibem vitam, coniugiorum castorum atque fidelium meritis a
daequabat. Iouinian did make the virginity of Nuns and the continence of men,
in those who chose to live chaste, aequall with the merits of chaste and faith
full marriages, whereas S. Augustine does account virginity the higher state. But
our Protestants hold the same heresy word for word.

S. Hierom reputeth Vigilantius an heretik, for denying prayers to Saints, In
lib. aduersus Vigilantium
and the geuinge of honor to holy relikes. Are not these men of the same mind
with Vigilantius?

The Arrians would not believe the consubsta^tiality of the son, Hilar. de
Synod. aduersus Arrianos.
because that word was not written in Gods word: and how many things by the
same pretense do the Protestants deny?

Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 33.
It is recited for a heinouse impiety in Nouatus the heretik, quod Chrismatis
signaculo non est consummatus. Because he was not consummated with the seal or
sign of Chrism: do not our Protestants abhor Chrism, calling it greasing?

Ruffin. lib. 11. cap. 3.
Lucius the Arrian pesecuted the holy Monks, as our Protestants now do.

Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. Hieron.
The Montanistes blasphemed the whole Church throughout the world: and the
followers of Lucifer, said there was a stues made of the Church. Is not this
the talk of our Protestants?

Aug. haer. 69.
The Donatists said the Church was lost from the whole world, and preserved in
Africa alone: say not the Protestants worse, that the Church was once lost form
the open face of the world, and was not preserved, but reised in Germany
again? Neither will their most absurd opinion be excused, by saying, that some
in every contrie were privily of their opinion. Romans 10.
For that is noe true Church of Christ, which does not so profess his faith,
that it may be known to be Christ's Church: Romans 1.
for his Church is not a shamed of Christ and of his Gospel.

The heretics called Seueriani used the Law the Prophets, and the Gospels;
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16.
sed propria quadam interpretatione scripturarum sensum peruerteru^t. But they
perverted the sense of the scriptures, by a certain peculiar interpretation.
The same do the Protestants, who will neither admit the practice of the
Church, nor the consent of the Fathers, against their own peculiar
interpretation.

It has been always a trick of Jews and heretics, to be still in hand with
translating the holy scriptures, to thend by much changing, Hieron. in Catal.
in verbo Origenes.
they might get some appearance to have the scriptures on their side. Such
were Theodotion, Aquila, Symachus, all who forsook the Catholic faith, and
translated the old bible upon a stomak conceived against the Church of God*
and what end is there now of translating the scriptures into every tongue?
Whereof although they that are learned take great profit (as also S. Hierom, and
S. Augustine then did) yet it brings the word of God into an uncertainty, and
to a confusion with them, who not being learned, see so great changes, that they
know not what to take for the word of God. Why the Catholics confirmed at
Trent the old latin translation.
Against which mischief, the Catholics judged it necessary without prejudice to
other copies, either of Hebrew, or of Greek, to confirm the translation which
has been always used in the Latin Church, as whereof it self has been a most
faithful and diligent keeper.

But whiles the Protestants pretend to appeal to the originals, and by many
translations make the meaning of the originals more doutfull day by day, it
must needs come shortly to pass, that none of them all will be hable to know,
how the word of God is either pointed, or meant. It were a thing without end
thus to prosecute every particular agreance of our new Protestants with the
old prophets of Antichrist. But this one thing seems to gather all into one.

The eleventh marck of an Antichristian.
Seeing that Antichrist is contrary to Tertull. de praescript. aduersu^ haeret.
Antichrist to puldown: Christ to gather into one, Antichrist to scatter
abroad: Christ to enriche us. Antichrist to rob, and spoil us of our heavenly
treasures. If then it appear, that the Protestants do spoil Gods Church of
certain graces, which the Pope does diligently maintain: it must needs be,
that the Protestants are the members of Antichrist, and that the Pope with his
company, is the flock of Christ.

De praescript.
It has been always the fashion of all heretics (as Tertullian says) to
destroy other men's buildings, as to undo that, which other men do. Ipsum
opus eorum non de suo proprio aedificio venit, sed de veritatis destructione:
nostra suffodiu^t, vt sua aedificent. Their very worck rises not of their own
building, but from the destroying of the truth. They undermine our things,
that they may build up their own. And Hippolytus thinks the seal of
Antichrist to be nego, In Homi. de consum mat. sec.
I deny. For as says he) the devil did exhort the Martyrs to deny their God,
who was crucified, so at the last day the seal of Antichrist and of his
members shall be, Nego creatorem coeli and terrae, nego baptisma, nego
adorationem a me Deo praestarisoliatam. I deny the maker of heaven and of
earth, I deny baptism, I deny the adoration which I was wont to do unto God.

Thus in the old time, whereas the Apostles preached Christ to be true God and
man, What the old heretic deny.
Arrius denied his true Godhead, Marcion and Valentinus and Manicheus denied
his true manhood, Apollinaris is denied his true soul, the Monothelits denied
his doble will, the Donatists the Continuance of the universality of his
Church, the Pelagians the necessity of Gods grace, and the like may be said of
all other heretics, whose opinions always detracted some perfection from
Christ or from his Church.

Now I will show, that the Protestants do the like in our time. For whereas
the universal Church, as well by the preaching of the Apostles, as by the
witness of Gods written word, was in possession of a public sacrifice, of
priesthood, of seven Sacraments, as of most undoubted instruments of grace,
and of diverse other godly and divine orders and Canons: have they any other
Gospel, any other Church, or any other doctrine, then that which consists
in deniyng, How many things the Protestants take away from the Church. Joan.
1.
and in taking away that which was before?

The holy scriptures and Church tawght, that a man being justified, is both
really delivered from his sins, and really receaueth faith, hoape, and
charity. They deny our sins to be taken away by the lamb of God, who came for
that purpose, saying, they tarry still, but only that they are not imputed.
They teach also that no justice is at all made in us by spreading charity in
our hearts, Romans 5.
whereas S. Paul says, iusti co^stituentur multi, many shall be made just. But
they only say justice is imputed to us.

Again they five Sacraments of the seven. They deny that baptism remitteth our
sins, or that baptism is necessary to children which are born of Ghristian
parents. Augustine. epist. 106.
Which was the heresy of the Pelagians: They deny the use of holy oil and of
chrism. They deny the real presence of Christ's body, the adoration, and
reservation thereof, the transubstantiation of the bread into his body, the
vnblody sacrifice of Christ's supper, the communion of one kind to be
sufficient, and consequently they deny, that whole Christ in under each kind,
and the mingling of water with the wine.

And that one may receive alone, that Aultars are lawful, that there are
Priests of the new Testament, that Bishops are of any higher degree, then
Priests, that there is any one bisshoppe chief of all other: that Priests can
forgive sins, but only may preach that they are forgeuen: that it is
lawful to appoint certain days of fasting, or the abstinence from certain
meats for obedience, although God both willed Adam to abstain from a certain
fruit, Genes. 2.
and the Jews to abstain from certain meats. They deny that it is lawful to
pray to the Saints in heaven, or to pray for the faithful which died in Christ,
wherein they deny any communion of prayer between the faithful which are alive,
and their brethern who live out of this world with Christ. They deny the
infallible authority of general Councils, the visible succession of bishops,
the place of purgation after this life, the remaining of pain after the sin
is forgeuen, the cha^ging or pardoming of the said pain by the high bishop,
the use and moderate honor of Images, the sign of the healthful cross, the
making of a vow to live chaste, or to renounce all propriety of goods, or to
live in obedience, the reverence don the relics of the blessed Martyrs, the
use of prayer in the holy tungs, the universal tradition of unwritten verities,
and to be short their deny the books of the old Bible such as are not in the
Canon of the Jews.

These things and many other like whiles they deny, what other thing do they,
the^ pull down the religion of Christ, which has been a building these fiften
hundred years? And therein they prepare a way to Antichrist who in the end
must deny all that they as yet leave vndenied. For if they should openly deny
every whit, 2 These. ^.
then the mystery of iniquity should not be a working and many simple men
should not have been deceived by them, who now are deceived, because they
pretend to refoorme, and not to take away Christ's religion. But when the time
is ripe, then the iniquity, which is now begun must be fulfilled, and so is the
whole religion destroyed.

I would this were not true. And yet it is possible that every Protestant
knows not so much, because Satan the great captain of their army keeps
his Counsel to himself, knowing that how much the closer he works, the more
hurt he is like to do. But God through mercy detecteth his snares, and warns
them, Genes. 1^. and 6.
who will be saved, to flee into the hill with Loath, and to the ship of the
Church with Noe, there to provide for their eternal salvation which our Lord
grant through his bitter passion. Amen.

Finis.
Librum istum de primatu Romani Pontificis and Petra Ecclesiae vniuersalis
legerunt viri sacrae Theologiae and Auglici idiomatis peritissimi, quibus
iudico merito and tuto credendum esse, vt fine periculo, imo summa cum
vtilitate euul gari possit.

Cunerus Petri, P.S. Petri Louanij 25. Februa. Anno. 1566.
A BRIEF SOME OF THE chief points of this treatise.
THE preface contains the marks of the true Church. The difference between a
dominion, and a primacy. 17. The Apostles strife concerning superiority is
declared, 25. 26. 27. That there was one greater among the Apostles. 20. vsque
37. To be a ruler and as a minister do not repugne. 46. 47. The preeminence of
priests above Kings. 51. 52. and caet. A King can not be supreme governor in
all ecclesiastical causes because by right and Law he can not practice al
ecclesiastical causes 61. 64. 67. The high priest is preferred before the King
by Gods law. 72. 74. 76. The evil life of a bishop takes not away his
authority. 78. 79. The differences betwe^ the bishop of Rome and temporal
princes. 80. vsque 88. That Moises was a priest. 83. 84. 85. The literal sense
of holy scripture. 96. The promise to be called Peter was the first cause why
the church was built upon him. 110. The Protestants can not tell which is the
first literal sense, of these words, upon this rock I will build my Church.
135. How Peter bears the person of the Church. 165. The objections against S.
Peter's supremacy, are answered, 219. vsque 230. How Christ loved Peter above
others. 237. The Church never lacked a visible rock. 270. 271. The whole
government of the Church tends to unity. 299. Why S. Peter died at Rome. 313.
313. S. Augustins mind touching the supremacy of the Pope of Rome. 348. vsque
372. A priest above the Emperor in Eeclesiasticall causes. 378. The oath of the
roial supremacy is intolerable. 383. Co^sta^tine baptized at Rome. 391 Phocas
did not first make the Sea of Rome head of al Churches. 405. vsque 410. Why
Antichrist is permitted to come. 423. Heretics depart from the Catholic
Church. 469. Heretics being once departed out of the Church, have new names.
471. Why among the Catholics some are called Franciscans, Dominicans, and caet.
477. Heretics can never agree. 479. The short reign of heretics 489 and
caet. Heretics preach without commission. 496. Heretics do prefer the
temporal reign or sword before the spiritual. 499. They are the members of
Antichrist, who withstand the external and public sacrifice of Christ's
Church. 518. Heretics deprive Christ of his glorious inheritance in many
nations together. 517. The intolerable pride of heretics, in making themselves
only judges of the right sense of Gods word. 530. The Protestants teach the
same doctrine which the old heretics did. 553. The Protestants are the right
members of Antichrist, in that they spoil Gods Church of very many gifts and
graces, and articles of the faith. 560.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 10. 10. shephead shepherd 23. 22. them)
because them) but because 98. 22. resurrection: by resurrection by: 103. 24.
confession. Being confession being 106. 13. stedfastnes of stedfastnes or of
^16. 9. and promised and being promised 145. 8. and in that and that 177. 21.
the thing the man 186. 6. rock of rock or 195. 14. sbme some 208. 23. when.
Augustine when Augustine 209. 11. hy me by me 214. 1. to true. to be true 2^9.
17. in omnibus. in ouibus. 26^. 1. to the the 273. 15. was were was where
281. 6. the pordinary the ordinary 382. 7. can govern can not govern 426. 14.
Co^essours. Confessors 430. 13. teach? teach. 432. 24. (...) (...) 408. 1.
out the out of the 496. 2. rom from 516. ^. haven heaven 539. 22. S. Saul. S.
Paul 553. 21. bishops. bishop.

I F
RESP^^ITE VOLATILIA COELI ET PVLLOS CORVORVM printer's device of John Foulerum


