TWO SERMONS: PREACHED AT TWO SEVERAL VISITATIONS, AT BOSTON, in the Diocese
and County of Lincoln.

BY ROBERT SANDERSON, Bachelour of Divinity, and late fellow of Lincoln
College in OXFORD.

PSALM. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
it. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Green Dragon. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of London, my very
singular good Lord.
My good LORD:
I Had ever thought, the interest of but an ordinary friend, might have drawn
me to that, whereto the despite of a right bitter foe should not have driven
me: till the Fate of these Sermons has taught me my self better, and now
given me at once a sight both of my Error and Infirmity. The improbity of
some good friends, I had out-stood, who with all their vexation could never
prevail upon me for the publishing of but the former of them: when lo, at
length the restless importunity of hard censures, has wrung both it, and the
fellow of it out of my hands. So much have wea stronger sense of our own
wrongs, the^ of our friends requests: and so much are we forwarder to justify
our selves, then to gratify them. How ever, if (by Gods good blessing upon
them) these slender labors may lend any help to advance the peace and quiet of
the Church, in settling the judgments of such, as are more either timorous then
they need be, or contentious then they should be: I shall have much cause to
bless his gracious providence in it, who, with as much ease, as sometimes he
brought light out of darkness, can out of private wrongs work public good.
In which hope, I am the rather content to send them abroad: though having
nothing to commend them, but Truth and Plainness. Yet such as they are, I
humbly desire they may pass under your Lordships protection: whereunto I stand
by so many dear names engaged. By the name of a Visitour; in respect of that
Society, whereof I was of late a member: which founded by your Lordships godly
Richard Flemming, and Thomas R^therham, Bishops of Lincoln.
Predecessors, has had ple^tiful experience of your Lordships singular both
Care and Justice i^ preserving their Statutes, and maintaining the rights of
their foundation. By the name of a Diocesan; in respect of the Country, wherein
it has pleased God to seat me: which has found much comfort in your
Lordships religious and moderate government. By the name of a Master; in regard
of that dependence I have upon your Lordship by special service. Which, as it
puts a boldness into me, to tender this small pledge of my thankfulness
to your gracious acceptance: so it lays a strong Obligation upon me to tender
my best prayers unto Almighty God for the continuance and increase of his
blessings upon your Lordship, to the good of his Church upon earth, and your
eternal crown in heaven.

Bootheby Paynell Linc. Nouem. 20. 1621.

Your Lordships Chapleine in all dutiful observance, ROBERT SANDERSON,

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
GOod Christian Reader, understand, that in the delivery of these Sermons
(because it was fit I should proportion my speech as near as I could, to the
hour) I was forced to cut off here and there part of what I had penned: which
yet now, together with that which was spoken, I here present to thy view,
distinguished from the rest with this note (,,) against the lines. Thus much I
thought needful to advertise thee (because I see men are captious more then
enough,) lest I should be blamed of unfaithfulness, in either adding any
thing unto, or altring any thing of, that which I delivered: which I have
avoided, as near as the imperfection both of my Copies, and memory would
permit. Read without gall, or prejudice: Let not truth fare the worse for the
Plainness: Catch not advantage at Syllables and Phrases: Study, and seek the
Churches Peace: Judge not another servant. Let us all rather pray one for
another; and by our charitable support, help to bear the burdens one of
another: and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Amen, Amen.

THE FIRST SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not
him that eats not, judge him that eats.
IT cannot be avoided, 1. The occasion.
so long as there is or Weakness on earth, 17. April 1619.
or Malice in hell, but that scandals will arise, and differences will grow in
the Church of God. What through want of Judgment in some, of Ingenuity in
others, of Charity in almost all; occasions (God knows) of offense are too
soon both given and taken: whilst men are apt to quarrel at trifles, and to
maintain differences even about indifferent things. The Primitive Roman
Church was not a little afflicted with this disease: For the remedying whereof,
Saint Paul spends this whole Chapter. The Occasion, this: In Rome there lived
in the Apostles times many Jews: of whom, as well as of the Gentiles, diverse
were converted Act. 28. 24.
to the Christian Faith, by the preaching of the Gospel. Now of these new
Conuerts, some better instructed then others, as touching the cessation of
legal Ceremonies, made no difference of Meats, or of Days; but used their
lawful Christian liberty in them both, as things in their own nature merely
indifferent: Whereas others, not so thoroughly De nou^ conuersus, and de lege
Catholica minus sufficienter instructus. Lyra.
catechized as they, still made difference for Conscience sake, both of Meats,
accounting them Clean, or Unclean; and of Days, accounting them Holy, or
Servile, according as they stood under the Leuiticall Law. These later, Saint
Paul calls Verse. 1.
(...), weak in the Faith: those former then must by the law of Opposition, be
(...). Romans 15. 1.
Strong in the Faith.

It would have become both the one sort, 2. Scope,
and the other, (notwithstanding they differed in their private judgments,
yet) to have preserved the common peace of the Church, and labored the 2. Cor.
10, 8
edification, not the ruin one of another: the strong by affoording faithful
instruction to the consciences of the weak; and the weak, by allowing
favorable construction to the strong. But whilst either measured other by
themselves; neither one nor other did Gal. 2, 14.
(...), as our Apostle elsewhere speaks, Walk uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel. Fault and offenses there were on all hands. The Strong
faulty, in Contemning the Weak; the Weak faulty, in Contemning the Weak;
the Weak faulty in Condemning the Strong. The strong proudly scorned the
weak, as silly and superstitious; for making scruple at some such things, as
themselves firmly believed were lawful. The weak rashly censured the strong,
as profane and irreligious; for aduenturing on some such things, as themselves
deeply suspected were vnfawfull. The blessed Apostle desirous all things should
be done in the Church in love and 1. Cor. 14. 26.
unto edification Cai^tan. i^ hunc locum.
aequa lance, and Bulling. in hunc locum.
eodem charitatis moderamine, as Interpreters speak, takes upon him to
arbitrate, and to mediate in the business: and like a just vmpire Job 9. 33.
lays his hand upon both parties, impartially shows them their several
ouersights, and begins to draw them to a fair and an honorable
composition: as thus. The Strong; he shall remit somewhat of his
superciliousnesse, in dis-esteeming, and despising the Weak: and the Weak; he
shall abate somewhat of his edge and acrimony in judging and condemning the
Strong. If the parties will stand to this order, it will prove a blessed
agreement: for so shall brotherly love be maintained, Scandals shall be
removed, the Christian Church shall be edified, and Gods name shall be
glorified. This is the scope of my Text, and of the whole Chapter.

In the three first Verses,. 3. Coherence,
whereof there is (...), and (...). First, there is (...), in the first Verse;
the Proposal of a general Doctrine as touching the usage of weak ones: with
whom the Church is so to deal, as that it neither give offense to, nor take
offense at, the weakness (...). Him that is weak in the Faith receive you,
but not to doubtful disputations. Next, there is (...), in the second Verse, a
Declaration of the former general proposal by instancing in a particular
case, touching the difference of Meats. There is one man Strong in the Faith;
he is infallibly resolved, there is no^ meat Verse 14.
unclean of it self, or (if received with thankfulness and sobriety) 1.
Cor. 10. 23.
unlawful: and because he knows he stands upon a sure ground Verse 2.
(...), he is confident he may eat any thing, and he uses his liberty
accordingly, eating indifferently 1. Cor. 10. 27.
of all that is set before him, making no question for conscience sake, One man
believes he may eat all things. There is another man Weak in the Faith; ^he
stands yet unresolved and doubtful, whether some kinds of Meats; as namely;
those forbidden in the Law, be clean; or he is rather carried with a strong
suspicion that they are unclean: our of which timorousness of judgment, he
chooses to forbear those meats, and contenteth himself with the fruits of
the earth; Another who is weak, eats Herbs. This is Species Facti; this the
Case. Now the Question is, in this Case what is to be done, for the auoidance
of scandal, and the maintenance of Christian Charity? And this question my
Text resolves in this third Verse: wherein is contained (...), Saint Paul's
judgment; or his counsel rather, and advice upon the Case, Let not him that
eats, despise, etc. The remainder of the Verse, and of the Chapter being
spent, in giving reasons of the judgment, in this and another like case,
concerning the difference and observation of Days.

I have made choice to entreat at this time of Saint Paul's advice;. 4. and
Division of the Text.
as useful for this place and auditorie, and the present assembly. Which
advice, as the Parties and the Faults are, is also twofold. The Parties two: He
that eats, that is the Strong; and he that eats not, that is the Weak. the
Faults likewise two: The Strong man's fault, that is Literally, setting at
naught^ so it is translated, Luke 23. 11. and the Latin translation, which
Tertul. followed, reads here fitly to the Greek, Qui manducat, ne nullificet
non monducantem. Tertullian. de ieiun: aduersi^^ Psych. cap. 5.
(...)* despising of his brothers infirmity; and the Weak man's faults, that is
(...), judging of his brothers liberty. Proportionably, the parts of the
advice, accommodated to the Parties, and their Faults, are two. The one, for
the Strong; that he despise not, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not. The other, for the Weak, that he judge not, Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats. Of which when I shall have spoken some what
on their general use; I shall by Gods assistance proceed by way of application
to enquire how far the differences in our Church, for conforming, and not
conforming, agree with the present case of eating, and not eating: and
consequently how far forth Saint Paul's advice in this case of eating and not
eating, ought to rule us in the cases of conforming, and not conforming in
point of Ceremony. And first of the former rule or brand of the advice, Let
not him that cateth, despise him that eats not.. 5. We must not despise
others.


The terms, whereby the Parties are charactered, He that eats, and He that
eats not, have in the opening of the Case been already so far unfolded; as
that I shall not need any more to remember you, that by him that eats, must
be understood the strong in Faith, and by him that eats not, the weak. And
so reducing the words ab hypothesiad Thesin; this part of the Advice, Let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not, bears sense, as if the Apostle
had said, Let not the strong in faith despise the weak. Weak ones are easily
despised: Strong ones are prone to despise: and yet despising is both a
grievous sin in the despiser; and a dangerous scandal to the despised. In
all which respects, it was but needful the holy Ghost should lesson us, not to
despise one another weakness. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not.

Weakness and Smalnesse, 6. Though they be never so weak,
be it in what kind soever, is the fittest object to provoke contempt. As we
travel by the way, if a fierce Mastiffe set upon us, we think it time to
look about, and to bestirre our selves for defense: but we take no notice of
the little Curres that bark at us, but despise them. When Goliath saw little
David make toward him, 1. Sam. 17. the Text says, 1. Sam. 17. 42.
He disdained him; for he was but a youth. And S. Paul charging Timothy so to
behave himself in the Church of God, as that none should 1. Tim. 4. 12*
despise his youth; implies, that youth is obuious to contempt, and likely
enough to be despised. And though Eccles. 9. 16.
Wisdom be better then strength; yet Solomon tells us, the poor man's wisdom
is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccl. 9. Psalm. 119. 141.
I am small, and of no reputation, says David, Psalm. 119. And our Saviors
Caveat in the Gospel is especially concerning little ones, as most open to
contempt: Matthew. 18. 10.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones. But of all other,
that weakness is most contemptible, which is seen in the faculties of the
understanding Soul: when men are indeed weak in apprehension, weak in
judgment, weak in discretion; or at leastwise are thought so. Far from any
real weakness this way, or any other, was our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Col. 2. 3.
In whom were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: yet because upon
conference with him, he seemed such unto Herod, not answering any of his
questions, nor that expectation which the same of his Miracles had raised of
him in Herod; Herod took him forsome silly simple fellow, and accordingly used
him: for he Luke 23. 11. (...).
set him at naught, and mocked him, and put him in (...).
a white coat, as he had been some fool, and sent him back as he came, Luke
23. And of this nature is the weakness my Text has to do withal: a
weakness in judgment, or as it is verse. 1. a weakness in Faith. Where, by
Faith, we are not to understand that justifying Faith, whereby the heart of a
true believer lays fast hold on the gracious promises of God, and the
precious merits of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins: nor by weakness
in Faith, that (...), wherewith the Apostles are Mat. 8. 26; 14. 31; 16. 8.
sometimes charged; when the Faith of a true believer is sore shaken with
temptations of incredulity and distrust. But by Faith we are to understand an
Fide^ hic significat persuasionem de vsu ^erum indifferentium: per Synecd^chen
generis. Piscat. Schol. in Romans 14. 1.
historical Faith only, which is nothing else but a firm and secure assent of
the judgment unto doctrinall truths in matter of Faith or Life: and by
weakness in such faith, a doubtfulnesse and irresolution of judgment
concerning some divine truths appertaining to the doctrine of Faith or Life;
and namely, concerning the just extent of Christian liberty, and the
indifferent or not indifferent nature or use of some things. Which weakness
of judgment in Faith, bewraying it self outwardly in a nice, and scrupulous,
and timorous forbearance of some things, for fear they should be unlawful;
which yet in truth are not so, but indifferent: does there by expose the person
in whom such weakness is, to the contempt and despisings of such as are of
more confirmed and resolved judgments, and are stronger in the Faith.

Weakness then is in it self contemptible: * 7. and we never so strong;
yet not more, then Strength is contemptuous. Passive contempt is the
unhappiness of the weak.: but Active the fault of the strong. They that find
truly, or but ouerweeningly conceit in themselves abilities either of a higher
nature, or in a greater measure, then in other men, be it in any kind
whatsoever: it is strange to see, with what scornful state they can trample
upon their weaker and inferior brethren, and look upon them (if yet they will
at all vouchsafe a look) from aloft, as upon things below them! which is
properly and literally to despise. For so much the very words, (...) among the
Greeks, and among the Latins Despicere do import. The Pharisee, it is like,
cast such a disdainful look upon the poor Publicane, when in contempt he
called him Luke 18. 9. 11.
Iste Publicanus: sure I am, that Parable was spoken of purpose concerning such
as trusted in their own righteousness, and (...). Luke 18. 9.
despised others, Luke 18. And they are ever the likeliest thus to despise
others, that conceit something in themselves more then others. Wealth, honor,
strength, beauty, birth, friends, alliance, authority, power, wit, learning,
eloquence, reputation, any trifle; can leaven our thoughts, (partial as they
are toward our selves) and swell us, and heave us up above our brethren: and
because we think we do ouer-top them; we think we may ouer-looke them too,
and despise them as vulgar and contemptible. Agar could despise Sarah; the
bond-seruant, the free woman; the maid, her mistress: only for a little
fruitfulness of the womb beyond her; because Ge. 16. 4. 5.
she saw that she had conceived, and her Mistress was barren, Genesis 16. All
strength and eminency then we see, be it in any little sorry thing, is apt to
breed in men a despising of their weaker and meaner brethren: but none more,
then this strength of knowledge and of faith, wherewith we now deal. It should
be quite otherwise: our knowledge should praeferre facem, hold the light
before us, and help us for the better discovery of our ignorance; and so
dispose us to Humility, not Pride. But pride and self-love is congenitum
Malum; it is a close, and a pleasing, and an inseparable corruption: which by
sly and serpentine insinuations conueyeth it self, as into whatsoever else is
good, and eminent in us, and poysoneth it; so especially into the endowments of
the understanding part. Sharpness of wit, quickness of conceit, faithfulness
of memory, facility of discourse, propriety of elocution, concinnitie of
gesture, depth of judgment, variety of knowledge in Arts and Languages, and
what ever else of like kind; are but as wind to fill the sails of our pride,
and to make us swell above our brethren, in whom the like gifts are not, or not
in like eminency. Scientia inflat, our Apostle might well say, 1. Cor. 8. 1.
Quo didici^^e, nisi hoc fermentum, etc. Pers. Satyr. 1. vide Casaub. ibi.
Knowledge poffeth up: And that it does so readily and vnmeasurably, that
unless there be the greater measure both of humility to prevent, and of
charity to vent it, it will in short time breed a dangerous spiritual Tympany
in the soul. A disease, from which the strongest constitutions that have
been, have not been altogether so free, but that they have had, if not a
spice of it, yet at leastwise an inclination unto it. Even this our blessed
Apostle, who had so much humility, as to account himself 1. Cor. 15. 9.
of Apostles the least, but 1. Tim. 1. 15.
of sinners the chiefest; was in so great danger 2. Cor. 12. 7. (...).
to be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations; that it was
needful he should have a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet him, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2. Cor. 12. No marvel
then, if these new Conuerts, but lately called by God out of the darkness of
their ignorance, 1. Pet. 2. 9.
into his marvelous great light; and having their understandings well
informed, and their judgments thoroughly settled in the Doctrine and Use, in
the nature and extent of that Evangelical Liberty whereinto they were called:
no marvel I say, if these, upon so sensible a change, were more then a little
distempred with this swelling above their brethren; even as far as to Despise
them. So hard is it, even for the most exercised Christian, not to take
knowledge of his own Knowledge: or doing so, not to despise and neglect the
infirmities of his lesse-knowing brother. It was not then without good need,
that S. Paul should become a remembrancer to the strong in faith, not to
despise the weak. And there is as good need, the very strongest of us all
should remember it, and take heed of despising even the very weakest. This
Despising being hurtful both to the strong, and weak: to the strong, as a
grievous sin; and to the weak, as a grievous scandal.

Despising, 8. both for the sins sake,
first is a sin in the strong. Admit thy weak brother were of so shallow
understanding and judgment, that he might say in strictnes of truth, what Agur
said but in modesty, and that with an Hyperbole too, Prou. 30. that Prou. 30.
2.
surely he were more brutish then any man, and that he had not in him the
understanding of a man: yet the community of nature, and the common condition
of humanity, should be sufficient to free him from thy contempt. His body was
formed out of the same dust, his soul breathed into him by the same God, as
thine were: and he is thy neighbor. Let his weakness then be what it can be;
even for that relation of neighborhood, as he is a man, it is sin in thee to
despise him, Pro. 14. 21.
He that despises his Neighbor, sins, Prou. 14. But that is not all: He is
not only thy Neighbor, as a man; but he is thy Brother too, as a Christian
man. He has embraced the Gospel, he believes in the Son of God, he is
within the pale of the Church, as well as thou: though he be not so exquisitly
seen in some higher mysteries, nor so thoroughly satisfied in some other points,
as thou art. If it have pleased God to endow thee with a larger portion of
knowledge: thou first, that thou art bound to be so much the more thankful
to him that gave secondly, that it is expected, thou should do so much the
more good with it; and thirdly again, that thou art charged with so much the
deeper account for it. If the same God have dealt these abilities with a more
sparing hand to thy brother: in despising his weakness, what other thing
do thou then even despise the good Spirit of God, Ioh. 3. 8.
that blows where he lists, and 1. Cor. 1^. 11.
gives to every one as he lists? For though there be 1. Cor. 12. 4.
diversities of gifts, (both for substance, and degree;) yet it is the same
Spirit, 1. Cor. 12. And the contempt that is cast upon the meanest Christian,
reboundeth upwards again, and in the last resolution reflecteth even upon GOD
himself, 1. These. 4. 8.
and upon his Christ. He that despises, despises not man but GOD; who has
given unto us his holy Spirit, 1. These. 4. And 1. Cor. 8. 12.
when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye
sin against Christ, 1. Cor. 8.

Thus you see Despising is hurtful to the despiser, 9. and the Scandal.
as a sin: it is hurtful also, as a scandal, to the despised. And therefore
our Savior in Math. 18. discoursing of Math. 18. 6, etc.
not offending little ones; anon varieth the word, and speaks of Ibid. 10.
not despising them: as if despising were an especial and principal kind of
offending, or scandalizing. And verily so it is, especially to the Weak.
Nothing is more grievous to Nature, scarce death it self, then for a man to
see himself despised. Plaut. in Cistel. Act 4. Scen. 1.
Ego illam anum irridere me vt sinam? Satius est mihi quouis exitio interire,
could he say in the Comedy. It is a thing that pierces far, and sinketh
deep, and strikes cold, and lies heavy upon the heart: flesh and blood will
digest any thing with better patience. The great Arist. lib. 2. Rhet. 2. cap.
2. where he thus defines Anger. (...).
Philosopher, for this reason makes Contempt the ground of all Discontent; and
sufficiently proves it in the second of his Rhetoriques: there being never any
thing taken offensiuely, but sub ratione contemptus; nothing provoking to
Anger, but what is either truly a contempt, or at leastwise so apprehended.
We all know how tenderly every one of us would take it, but to be neglected
by others; to have no reckoning at all made of us; to be so reputed as if we
were not, or not worth the looking after Vide opus Adag. Mega^^renses neque
tertij neque quarti.
(...), as the Oracle said to the Megarenses. And yet this is but the least
degree of Contempt; a (...). Arist, vbi supra.
privative contempt only. How tenderly then may we think a weak Christian
would take it; when to this privative he should find added a (...). ibid.
Positive contempt also? when he should see his person, and his weakness,
not only not compassioned, but even taunted, and flouted, and derided, and made
a laughing stock, and a jesting theme? when he should see them strive to
speak and do such things in his sight and hearing, as they know will be
offensive unto him, of very purpose to vex, and afflict, and grieve his tender
soul? Certainly for a weak Christian newly converted to the Faith, to be
thus despised; it were enough, without Gods singular Have mercy upon us, O
Lord, have mercy upon us: for we (...) exceedingly filled with contempt. Our
soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and
with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123. 3, 4.
mercy and support, to make him repent his late conversion, and revolt from the
Faith, by fearful and desperate Apostasy. And he that by such despising
should thus offend, though but Math. 18. 6. 10.
one of the least and weakest of those that believe in Christ: a thousand times
better had it been for him, that he had never been borne; yea, ten thousand
times better that a Millstone had been hung about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the Sea, ere he had done it. Despising is a grievous Sin, in
the despiser, in the Strong: and despising is a grievous scandal to the
despised, to the Weak. Let not therefore the Strong despise the Weak. Let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not. And th^s much for the former
branch of Saint Paul's advice: the other follows. Let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats.

Faults seldom go single; 10. Despising and judging compared.
but by couples at the least. Sinful men do with sinful prouocations, as
ball-players with the Ball. When the Ball is once up, they labor to keep it
up: right so when an offense or provocation is once given, it is (...)Et mox.
(...); Max. Tyrius (...).
tossed to and fro, the receiver ever returning it pat upon the giver, and that
most times with advantage; and so betwixt them they make a shift to preserve a
perpetuity of sinning, and of scandalizing one another. It is hard to say who
begins ostener, the Strong, or the Weak: but whether ever begins, he may
be sure the other will follow. If this judge, that will despise; if that
despise, this will judge: either does his endeavor to cry quittance with other;
and thinks himself not to be at all in fault, because the other was first,
or more. This Apostle willing to redress faults in both; begins first with
the strong: and for very good reason Not that his fault simply considered in it
self is greater; (for I take it a certain truth, that to Judge one that is in
the right, is a far greater fault, considered absolutely without relation to
the abilities of the persons, then to despise one that is in the wrong:) But
because the strong through the ability of his judgment ought to yield so much
to the infirmity of his weak brother, who through the weakness of his
judgment, is not so well able to discern what is fit for him to do; what in
most other contentions is expected, should be done in this: not he that is
most in fault, but he that has most wit, should give over first. I^deed in
reason, the more faulty is rather bound to yield: but if he will be
unreasonable, (as most times it falls out,) and not do it; then in
discretion, the more able should do it: as Genesis 13. 9. 11.
Abraham in discretion yielded the choice to his Nephew Lot upon the contention
of their Herdsmen, which in reason Lot should rather have yielded unto him. But
where both are faulty, as it is not good to stand debating who began first; so
it is not safe to strain courtesy who shall end, and mend first. In the case
of my Text, both were faulty: and therefore our Apostle would have both mend.
He has schooled the Strong, and taught him his lesson, not to despise another
infirmity; Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Now the Weak
must take out his lesson too, not to judge another liberty; Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats.

I will not trouble you with other significations of the word; 11. We must not
judge others.
to Judge, as it is here taken, is as much as to Ne condemnato. Beza.
Condemn: and so the word (...) is often taken in the worser sense for (...).
Tropically, by a Piscator in Schol, ad hunc locum.
Synecdoche gener is, say Scholiasts: and they say true. But it is a Trope, for
which both in this, and Evil manners have bin the spoiling of many good words;
as (...), Tyrannus, Sophista, ^atro, (...), Venenum, Magus, and in our English
tongue, Knave, Villain, Churl, etc. See Minsheu Verstegan, etc.
in diverse other words, we are not so much beholden to good Arts, as to bad
manners. Things that are good, or indifferent, we commonly turn to ill, by
using them the worst way: whence it grows, that words of good or indifferent
signification, in time degenerate so far, as to be commonly taken in the
worst sense. But this by the way. The fault of these weak ones in the case in
hand, was, that measuring other men's actions, and consciences, by the model of
their own understandings, in their private censures they rashly passed their
judgments upon, and pronounced peremptory sentence against such, as used their
liberty in some things, concerning the lawfulness whereof themselves were not
satisfied; as if they were loose Christians, carnal professors, nomine tenus
Christiani, men that would not stick to do any thing, and such as made either
none at all, or else very little conscience of their actions. This practice my
Text disalloweth, and forbids: and the rule hence for us is plain and
short, We must not judge others. The Scriptures are express; Math. 7. 1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, Math. 7. 1. Cor. 4. 5.
Judge nothing before the time, etc. 1. Cor. 4. Romans 2. 1.
Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that iudgest, Romans 2. And Iom.
4. 11.
if thou iudgest, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge, Iam. 4.

Not that it is unlawful to exercise civil judgment, 12. This kind of
judging being
or to pass condemning sentence upon persons orderly and legally convicted,
for such as have calling and authority thereunto in Church or Commonwealth:
for this public politic judgment is commanded Exodus 22. 9. 2. Chron. 19.
6. Romans 13. 4. and elsewhere.
in the Word of God; and reason shows it to be of absolute necessity for
the preservation of States and Commonwealthes. Nor that it is unlawful
secondly, to pass even our private censures upon on the outward actions of
men; when the Law of God is directly transgressed, and the transgression
apparent from the evidence either of the fact it self, or of some strong
signs and presumptions of it. For it is Stupiditie, and not Charity, to be
credulous against sense, Charity is 1. Cor. 13. verse 5. (...).
ingenuous, and will Ibid. verse. 7. (...).
believe any thing, though more then reason: but charity must not be As Walter
Mapes sometimes Archdeacon of Oxenford, relating the gross Simony of the Pope
for confirming the election of Reginald, bastard son to loceline Bishop of
Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe; concludes the narration thus: Sit lamen domina
materque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus; and absit credere, quae videmus.
Mahap de nugis Curialium distinct. 1. cap. 22.
servile, to believe anything against reason: shall any charity bind me to
think the Crow is white, or the Blacke-Moore beautiful? Nor yet thirdly, that
all sinister suspicions are utterly unlawful, even there where there wants
evidence either of fact or of great signs: if our suspicions proceed not from
any corrupt affections, but only from a Cum de^emus aliquibus malis adhibere
remedium sieve nostris, sieve alienis, expedit ad hoc, vt securius remedium
apponatur, quod supponatur id quod est deterius: quia remedium quod est efficax
contra maius malum, multo magis est efficax contra minus malum, Aquin. secundae
secundae qu. 60. art. 4. ad 3.
charitable jealousy of those over whom we have especial charge, or in whom
we have special interest, in such sort as that it may concern us to
admonish, reprove, or correct them when they do amiss: so was Job Job. 1. 5.
suspicious of his sons, for sinning and cursing God in their hearts. But the
judgment here and elsewhere condemned is; either first, when in our private
thoughts or speeches, upon slender presumptions we rashly pronounce men as
guilty of committing such or such sins, without sufficient evidence either of
fact or pregnant signs that they have committed them. Or secondly, when upon
some actions Aperta non ita reprehendamus, vt de sanita^e desperemus. Gloss
Ordin. in Romans 14. 13. Non, quicquid reprehendendum, etiam damnandum est. Sen.
l. 6. de benef. cap. 39.
undoubtedly sinful, as blasphemy, adultery, perjury, etc. we too severely
censure the Persons either for the future, as Reprobates and Castawales, and
such as shall be certainly damned; or at leastwise for the present, as
Hypocrites, and unsanctified and profane, and such as are in the state of
damnation: not considering into what fearful sins it may please God to
suffer, not only his As Paul, Mary Magdalene, etc.
chosen ones before Calling, but even his As David, Peter, etc.
holy ones too after Calling, sometimes to fall; for ends most times unknown to
us, but ever just and gracious in him. Or thirdly, when for want either of
charity or knowledge, (as in the present case of this Chapter) we interpret
things for the worst to our brethren: and condemn them of sin for such
actions, as are not directly, and in themselves necessarily sinful; but may
(with due circumstances) be performed with a good conscience, and without
sin. Now all judging and condemning of our brethren in any of these kinds is
sinful and damnable; and that in very many respects: especially these four;
which may serve as so many weighty reasons, why we ought not to judge one
another. The Usurpation, the Rashness, the Uncharitableness, and the scandal
of it.

First, 13. 1. Unlawful.
it is an Usurpation. He that is of right to judge, must have calling and
commission for it. Exodus 2. 14.
Quis constituit te? sharply replied upon Moses, Exodus 2. Who made thee a
Judge? and Luke 12. 14.
Quis constituit me? reasonably alleged by our Savior, Luke 12. Who made me a
Judge? Thou take too much upon thee then, thou son of man, whosoever thou
art that iudgest: thus saucily to thrust thy self into Gods seat, and to
(...); etc. Chrysoft. in Genesis hom. 42.
invade his Throne. Remember thy self well, and learn to know thine own
rank. Quis tu? Iam. 4. 12.
Who art thou that iudgest another? Iam. 4. or Who art thou that iudgest
another servant? in the next following verse to my Text. As if the Apostle had
said; What art thou? or what have thou to do to judge him that Romans 14. 4.
stands or falls to his own Master? Thou art his fellow-seruant, not his
Lord. He has another Lord, that can and will judge him; who is thy Lord too,
and can and will judge thee: for so he argues anon at verse. 10. Why do thou
judge thy brother? We shall all stand before the Iudgement-feat of Christ. God
has reserved M^li operis vindictam, B^ni gloriam, vtriusque Iudicium.
three Prerogatives royal to himself; Isa. 47. 8.
Vengeance, Deu. 32. 35; Rom 12. 19.
Glory, and Romans 14. 4. 10; Iam. 4. 11. 12.
Judgment. As it is not safe for us then to encroach upon Tres hominu^ species
maximam Deo faciunt iniuriam: Superbi, qui auferunt ei. Gloriam; Iracundi, qui
Vindictam; Rigidi, qui Iudicium.
Gods royalties in either of the other two; Glory, or Vengeance: so neither in
this of Judgment; Dominus iudicabit, Heb. 10. 30.
The Lord himself will judge his people, Heb. 10. It is flat usurpation in us
to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Secondly, 14. 11. Rash.
it is Rashness in us. A Judge must Et nunc Reges, intelligite: erudimini, qui
iudicatis terram, Psalm. 2. 10. Stiudicas, cognosce, Sen. in Med. Act. 2.
(...). Phocylid.
understand the truth, both for matter of Et Formam, and Causam. Normam,
secundum quam; and Causam, de qua statuendum. Ad Factum haec pertinet; illa ad
Ius; ad illam, Peritia opus est; ad hanc Prudentia.
Fact, and for point of Law; and he must be sure he is in the right for both,
before he proceed to sentence: or else he will give rash judgment. How then
dare any of us undertake to sit as Judges upon other men's consciences,
wherewith we are so little acquainted, that we are indeed but too much
unacquainted with our own? We are not able to search the depth of our own
Ier. 17. 9. I know nothing by my self; yet am I not hereby justified: but he
that judges me is the Lord 1. Cor. 4. 4. If our heart condemn us, God is
greater then our heart, and knows all things, 1. Ioh. 3. 21. Latet me
sacultas mea, quae in me est; vt animus meus de viribus suis ipse se
interrogans, non facile sibi credendum existiment, quia and quod inest
plerunque occultum est. Aug. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 32.
wicked and deceitful hearts; and to ransacke thoroughly the many secret
windings and turnings therein: how much less then are we able to fadome the
bottomes of other men's hearts, with any certainty to pronounce of them either
good or evil? We must then leave the judgment of other men's spirits, and
hearts, and reins; to him that is Heb. 12. 9.
the Father of spirits, and alone Psalm. 7. 9; and 26. 2; Ier. 11. 20; and 17.
10; and 20. 12; Reu. 2. 23.
searches the hearts and reins: before whose eyes all things are Heb. 4. 13.
(...), as the word is most Emphaticall, Heb. 4. Wherefore our Apostles precept
elsewhere is good to this purpose, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 4. 5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts. Unless ^e be able to bring these hidden things to light, and to
make manifest these counsels; it is Temeritas est, damna^e quod nescias. Sen.
in Epist.
rashness in us to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Thirdly, 15. III. Uncharitable;
this judging is uncharitable. Charity is not easily suspicious; but upon just
cause: much less then censorious, and peremptory. Indeed when we are to
judge of In rerum iuditio debet aliquis niti ad hoc; vt interpretetur vnu^.
quodque secundum quod est: in iudicio autem personarum, vt interpretetur in
melius, Aquin, 2a secundae qu 60. art. 4. ad 3. and he gives substantial
reason for it, ibi in resp. ad 2.
Things, it is wisdom to judge of them secundum quod sunt, as near as we
can, to judge of them just as they are, without any sway or partial
inclination either to the right hand, or to the left. But when we are to judge
of Men, and their Actions; it is not altogether so: there the rule of Charity
must take place, Glossa Ord. in hunc locu^; and Theologi passim. Semper quod
dubium est, humanitas inclinat ad melius, Sen. in Epist.
Dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda. Unless we see manifest cause to
the contrary, we ought ever to interpret what is done by others, with as much
favor as may be. To err thus is better, then to hit right the other way;
because this course is Error charitatis, salutaris error.
safe, and secureth us as from Melius est, quod aliquis frequenter fallatur,
habens bonam opinionem de malo homine, quam quod rarius fallatur, habens malam
opinionem de bono homine: quia ex hoc fit in^^^ia alicui; non autem ex primo.
Aquin. 2a secundae qu. 60. art. 4. ad 1.
iniuring others, so from endangering our selves: whereas in judging ill,
though right, we are still Aequum licet statuerie, haud aequus fuit. Sen. in
Med. Act. 2.
unjust (...), the event only, and not our choice freeing us from wrong
judgment. True Charity is ingenuous; it 1. Cor. 13. 5.
thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13. how far then are they from charity, that are
ever suspicious, and think nothing well? For us, let it be our care to
maintain charity; and to avoid, as far as humane frailty will give leave,
even sinister suspicions of our brethrens actions: or if through frailty we
cannot that, yet let us not from light suspicions fall into uncharitable
censures: let us at leastwise suspend our Si suspiciones vitare non possumus,
quia homines sumus: iudicia tamen, id est, definitiuas sirmasque, sententias
continere debemus, Gloss. Ordin. in 1. Cor. 4.
definitive judgment, and not determine too peremptorily against such, as do
not in every respect just as we do, or as we would have them do, or as we
think they should do. It is uncharitable for us to judge, and therefore we
must not judge.

Lastly, 16. IIII. Scandalous.
there is Scandal in judging. Possibly he that is judged, may have that
strength of faith and charity; that though rash uncharitable censures lie
thick in his way, he can lightly skip over all those stumbling blocks, and
escape a fall. Saint Paul had such a measure of strength; 1. Cor. 4. 3.
With me it is a very small thing, says he, that I should be judged of you, or
of humane judgment, 1. Cor. 4. If our judging light upon such an object; it is
indeed no scandal to him: but that is no thanks to us. We are to esteem
things by their natures, not events: and therefore we give a scandal, if we
judge; notwithstanding he that is judged take it not as a scandal. For, that
judging is in it self a scandal, is clear from verse. 13. of this Chapter;
Let us not therefore, says S. Paul, judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way. And thus we see four maine Reasons against this judging of our
brethren. 1. We have no right to judge; and so our judging is usurpation. 2. We
may err in our judgments; and so our judging is rashness. 3. We take things
the worst way when we judge; and so our judging is uncharitable. 4. We offer
occasion of offense by our judging; and so our judging is scandalous. Let not
him therefore that eats not, judge him that cateth. 17. Application to the
case in our Church.


And so I have done with my Text in the general use of it: wherein we have
seen the two faults of despising, and of judging our brethren laid open; and
the ugliness of both discovered. I now descend to make such Application, as I
promised, both of the case and rules; unto some differences, and to some
offenses given and taken in our Church in point of Ceremony. The Case ruled in
my Text was of eating, and not eating: the Differences which some maintain in
our Church, are many in the particular; (as of kneeling, and not kneeling;
wearing, and not wearing; crossing, and not crossing, etc.) but all these, and
most of the rest of them, may be comprehended in gross under the terms of
conforming, and not conforming. Let us first compare the cases; that having
found wherein they agree, or disagree, we may thereby judge how far Saint
Paul's advice in my Text ought to rule us, for not despising, for not judging
one another. There are four special things, wherein if we compare this our
Case with the Apostles; in every of the four we shall find some agreement, and
some disparity also; 1. The nature of the matter: 2. The abilities of the
persons: 3. Their several Practice about the things: and 4. Their mutual
carriage one toward another. And first, let us consider how the two cases
agree in each of these.

First, 18. Agreement betwixt the two Cases.
the matter whereabout the eater and the not-eater differed in the Case of the
Romans, was in the nature of it indifferent: so it is between the conformer,
and not-conformer in our Case. As there fish, and flesh, and herbs were
merely indifferent; such as might be eaten, or not eaten without sin: so
here Cap, and Surplis, Cross, and Ring, and the rest, are things merely
indifferent; such as (in regard of their own nature) may be used or not used
without sin; as being neither expressly commanded, nor expressly forbidden in
the Word of God.

Secondly, the persons agree. For as there, so here strong in faith, some
weak. There are many, whose judgments are upon certain and infallible
grounds assured and resolved, and that certitudine Fidei, that Cappe, and
Surplis, and Cross, and the rest, are things lawful, and such as may be used
with a good Conscience. There are some others again, who through ignorance, or
custom, or prejudice, or otherwise weakened in their judgments; cannot (or
will not) be persuaded, that these things are altogether free form
superstition and Idolatry: nor consequently, the use of them from sin.

Thirdly, the practice of the persons are much alike. strong did use his
liberty according to the assurance of his knowledge, (...) and did eat freely
without scruple; and the weak did forbear to eat, because of his doubting
and irresolution: So here, most of us in assured confidence that we may wear,
and cross, and kneel, and use the other Ceremonies and Customs of our
Church, do willingly, and ex animo conform our selves thereunto; yet some
there are, who out of I know not what niceness and scruplositie make dainty of
them, and either utterly refuse conformity, or at leastwise desire respite,
till they can better inform themselves.

Lastly, there is some correspondence also in the fauie Carriage of the parties
one toward another. For as there the eater despised the not-eater; and the not
eater judged the eater: so here, it cannot be denied, but that some Conformers
(although I hope far the lesser, I am sure far the worser sort,) do
despise and scandalize the non-Conformers more then they have reason to do, or
any discreet honest man will allow. But is it not most certain also, that the
non-Conformers (but too generally, yea, and the better sort of them too, but
too often and much) do pass their censures with marvelous great freedom; and
spend their judgments liberally upon, and against the Conformers? Hitherto the
Cases seem to agree. One would think, mutatis mutandis, the Apostles rule
would as well fit our Church and Case, as the Roman; and should as well free
the non-Conformers from our Contempt, as us from their Censures. Let not him
that conformeth, despise him that conformeth not: and let not him that
conformeth not, judge him that conformeth.

But if you will please to take a second surview of the four several
particulars, 19. Difference betwixt the^, l. in the Matter.
wherein the Cases seemed to agree; you shall find very much disparitie and
disproportion betwixt the two Cases in each of the four respects. In the case
of my Text, the matter of difference among them, was not only indifferent in
the nature of it; but it was also left as indifferent for the use: the Church
(perhaps) not having determined any thing positiuely therein; at least no
public authority having either enjoined, or forbidden, the use of such or
such meats. But in the Case of our Church it is far otherwise. Cappe,
Surplis, Cross, Ring, and other Ceremonies, which are the Matter of our
differences, though they be things indifferent for their nature, and in
themselves: yet are not so for their use, and unto us. If the Church had been
silent, if Authority had prescribed nothing herein; these Ceremonies had then
remained for their use, as they are for their nature, indifferent: Lawful, and
such as might be used without sin; and yet Arbitrary, and such as might be
also forborne without sin. But men must grant (though they be unwilling, if
yet they will be reasonable) that every particular Church Article 20. agreeably
to the confessions of other Protestant Churches.
has power, for (...). 1. Cor. 14 20.
decency and orders sake, to ordain and constitute Ceremonies. Which being
once ordained, and by public authority enjoined, cease to be indifferent for
their use, though they remain still so for their nature: and of indifferent
become so necessary, that neither may a man without sin Constit. and Canon.
30.
refuse them, where authority requires; 20. The maine objection, from
Christian liberty, answered:
nor use them, where Authority restrains the use.

Neither is this accession of Necessity, any impeachment to Christian Liberty;
or Ex 1. Cor. 7. 35.
insnaring of men's consciences: as Lincolnsh. Abridg. page 34.
some have objected. For then do we ensnare men's consciences by humane
Constitutions, when we thrust them upon men as if they were divine; and bind
men's consciences to them, immediately, as if they were immediate parts of Gods
worship, or of absolute necessity unto salvation. This Tyranny and Usurpation
over men's Consciences, the Mar. 7. 8, etc.
Pharisees of old did, and the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and we
justly hate it in her: Conc. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 13; In Spiritum Sanctum
blasphemant, qui sacros Canones violant. 25. qu. 1. Violatores.
equalling, if not Calumnia est, quam ex hoc loco extrudunt Haeretici, cuiuis
fas esse scrutari Scripturas: multo vero etiam magis Papae atque Conciliorum
excutere verba, and sentetias. Lorin. in Act. 17. 11.
preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of God. But our Church (God be
thanked) is far from any such impious presumption: and has sufficiently
Constit. etc. Can. 74; Artic. 20 Act for uniformity; and Treat. of Ceremonies
prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer.
declared her self by solemn protestation, enough to satisfy any ingenuous
impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these ceremonial
Constitutions, she has no other purpose, then to reduce all Without prejudice
to the liberty of other Churches. See Praef. ^e Com. Book.
her children to an orderly uniformity in the outward worship of God; so far
is she from seeking to draw any opinion, either of divine The Church ought not
to enforce any thing besides the holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of
salvation. Artic. 20.
necessity upon the Constitution; or of effectual holiness upon the Ceremony.
And as for the prejudice which seems to be hereby given to Christian liberty:
it is so slender a conceit, that it seems to bewray in the obiecters a
desire, not so much of satisfaction, as cavil. For first, the liberty of a
Christian to all indifferent things, is in the Mind and Conscience: and is then
infringed; when the Conscience is bound, and streitned, by imposing upon it an
opinion of doctrinall Necessity. But it is no wrong to the Liberty of a
Christian man's Conscience, to bind him to outward observance for Orders sake,
and to impose upon him a Necessity of Obedience. Which one distinction, of
Doctrinall and Obedientiall Necessity, well weighed, and rightly applied, is
of it self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point. For, to make all
restraint of the outward man in matters indifferent an impeachment of Christian
Liberty; what were it else, but even to bring flat See Conference at Hampton
Court. p. 70. 71.
Anabaptisme and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond of
subjection and obedience to lawful Authority? I beseech you consider, wherein
can the immediate power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers
over their inferiors consist; or the due obedience of inferiors be shown
toward them: if not in these Indifferent and Arbitrary things? For, things
absolutely Necessary, as commanded by God, we are bound to do; whether humane
Authority require them, or no: and things absolutely Unlawful, as prohibited
by God, we are bound not to do; whether humane Authority forbid them, or no.
There are none other things left then, wherein to express properly the
Obedience due to superior Authority, then these Indifferent things. And if a
See Sam. Collins Sermon on 1. Tim. 6. 3. page 44. etc.
Father or Master have power to prescribe to his child or servant in
Indifferent things; and such restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian
Liberty in them: Why should any man, either deny the like power to
Church-Gouernours, to make Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning indifferent
Things? or interpret that power to the prejudice of Christian Liberty? And
again Secondly, Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things merely Indifferent:
I mean in the general. For howsoever every particular Ceremony be
indifferent; and every particular Constitution Artic. 34.
arbitrary and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies, it is
necessary, Necessitate absoluta, in as much as no outward work can be
performed without Ceremonial circumstances, some or other: and that there
should be some Constitutions concerning them, it is also necessary (though not
simply and absolutely, as the former; yet ex hypothesi, and) See Calvin. li. 4.
Instit. cap. 10. 27
necessitate conuenientiae. Otherwise, since some Ceremonies must needs be
used; every Parish, nay every Quot capita, tot Schismata. Hieronym.
Man would have his own fashion by himself, as his humor led him: whereof what
other could be the issue, but infinite distraction, and unorderly confusion in
the Church? And again thirdly, to return their weapon upon themselves; If
every restraint in indifferent things be injurious to Christian Liberty: then
themselves are injurious no less by their negative restraint from some
Ceremonies, Like that, Col. 2. 21. Touch not, taste not, handle not.
Wear not, Cross not, Kneel not, etc. then they would have the world believe
our Church is by her positive restraint unto these Ceremonies of wearing, and
crossing, and kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let themselves that
are parties judge, whether is more injurious to Christian Liberty; public
Authority by mature advice commanding, what might be forborne, or private
spirits through humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be used: the whole
Church imposing the use, or a few Brethren requiring the forbearance; of such
things, as are otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, or for
forbearance.

But they say,. 21. And the purpose and practice of our Church herein justified.
our Church makes greater matters of Ceremonies then thus; and prefers them
even before the most necessary duties of preaching, and administering the
Sacraments: in as much as they are imposed upon Ministers under pain of
Suspension and Deprivation from their Ministerial Functions and Charges.
First, for actual Deprivation; Our Church, it is well known, has not always
used that rigor she might have done. Where she has bin forced to proceed as
far as deprivation; she has ordinarily by her fair, and flow, and
compassionate proceedings therein, sufficiently manifested her unwillingness
thereto: and declared her self a Mother every way indulgent enough to such
ill-nurtured children, as will not be ruled by her. Secondly, suspended or
deprived; suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt. For howsoever
they would bear the world in hand, that they are the only per secuted ones,
and that they suffer for their consciences: yet in truth, they do but abuse
the credulity of the simple therein; and herein (as in many other things)
iumpe with the Papists, whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent
from. For as Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out, they are martyred for
their Pro inficiatione pontificatus faeminei. Aquipont. in resp. ad Solm. de
Antichristo, These. 15. Speaking of the Priests executed in the Reign of Qu.
Elizabeth.
religion; when the very truth is, they are See Donnes Pseudo-Martyr per totum;
especially, c. 5. etc.
justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and felonious or treacherous
practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the Brethren pretend they are
persecuted for their consciences; when they are indeed, but justly censured for
their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of lawful authority. For, it is not
the refusal of these Ceremonies they are deprived for, otherwise then as the
matter wherein they show their contempt: it is the The practice of our Church
sufficiently confirms this: which censureth no man for the bare omission of
some kind of Rites and Ceremonies now and then; where it may be presumed by
the parties cheerful and general conformity otherwise that such omission
proceeds not either from an opinatiue dislike of the Ceremony imposed, or
from a timorous and obsequious humouring of such as do dislike it. Whosoever
willingly, and purposely does openly break, etc. Artic. 34.
Contempt it self, which formally and properly subiecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical Censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of
Authority, though in the smallest matter, deserves no small punishment: all
authority having been ever sollicitous (as it has good reason) above all
things to vindicate and preserve it self from Contempt; by inflicting sharp
punishments upon contemptuous persons in the smallest matters, above all other
sorts of offenders in any degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared
the first and maine difference betwixt the Case of my Text, and the Case of our
Church, in regard of the Matter: the things whereabout they differed, being
every way indifferent; ours not so.

And as in the Matter;. 22. I. In the Persons.
so there is secondly much odds in the condition of the Persons. The refusers
in the Case of my Text, being truly weak in the Faith; as being but lately
converted to the Christian Faith, and not sufficiently instructed by the Church
in the doctrine and use of Christian Liberty in things indifferent: Whereas
with our refusers it is much otherwise. First, they are not new Pr^selytes; but
men borne, and bred, and brought up in the bosom of the Church: yea many, and
the chiefest of them, such as have taken upon them the Calling of the
Ministry, and the Charge of Souls, and the Office of teaching and instructing
others. And such men should not be weakelings. Secondly, weak ones? Thirdly,
our Church has sufficiently declared Ceremonies: not so only; but has been
content to hear, and receive, and admit the objections and reasons of the
refusers; and has taken pains to answer and satisfy to the full all that
ever yet could be said in that behalf. And therefore it is vanity for these
men (or their friends in their behalf) to allege weakness; where al good
means have been plentifully used for full information in the points in doubt.
Lastly, upon the premises it does appear that the weakness of our Brethren,
pretended by those that are willing to speak favorably of them, proceeds for
the most part not so much out of simple ignorance, arising from the defect
either of understanding or means; as out of an ignorance at the best in some
degree of wilfulness and affectation, in not seeking, or not admitting such
ingenuous satisfaction, as they might have by reason: if not out of the poison
of corrupt and carnal affections (as they give us sometimes but too much cause
to suspect) of pride, of singularity, of envy, of contention, of factious
admiring some men's persons. By which, and other like partial affections, men's
judgments become oftentimes so blinded; that of unwilling at the first, they
become at length unable to discern things with that freedom and ingenuity
they should. And so the Cases differ in regard of the Persons.

They differ thirdly in the practice of the Persons.. 23. III. In their
practice.
There the Strong did eat, because he was well assured he might do it, (...)
in the Verse before my Text: and the Weak did no more but forbear eating; as
indeed he might do, no authority interposing to the contrary. But here, we
conform, not only because we know we may lawfully do it; but for that we
know we must of (...). Romans 13.
necessity do it, as bound thereunto in obedience to lawful authority, and
in the Not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, Ibid.
conscience we ought to make of such obedience. And the refusers do not only
de facto, not conform; to the contempt of authority, and the scandal of
others: but they stand in it too, and trouble the peace of the Church by their
restless Petitions, and Supplicatio^s, and Admonitions, and other publications
of the reasons and grounds of their such refusal. And verily, this Country and
County* has been not the least busy in these factious and tumultuous courses:
both in troubling our most gracious, judicious, and religious Sovereign with
their Meditations on the Lords Prayer, page 12. in the Margent.
petitions; and also in publishing their reasons, in a Book called The
Abridgement printed 1605. to their own shame, and the shame of their Country.
He who (as I have been informed) was thought to have had a chief hand in the
collecting of those reasons, and printing of that book; was for his obstinate
refusal of conformity justly deprived from his Benefice in this Diocese, and
thereupon relinquished his Ministry for a time, betaking himself to another
Calling, so depriving the Church and people of GOD of the fruit and benefit of
those excellent gifts which were in him. But since that time he has, upon
better and more advised judgment, subscribed and conformed: and the Church
like an indulgent Mother has not only received him into her bosom again;
but has restored him too, though not to the same, yet to a Benefice elsewhere
of far better value.

Lastly, 24. IIII. In their behavior.
there is difference in the faulty carriage of the persons: and that on both
parts; especially on ours. For though our Nonconforming Brethren condemn us
with much liberty of speech and spirit, having yet less reason for it then the
weak Romans had (for the Strong among them might have forborne some things
for the Weake's sake; and it would well have become them for the avoiding of
scandal so to have done; which we cannot do without greater scandal in the
open contempt of lawful Authority:) yet we do not despise them, (I mean
with allowance from the Church; if particular men do more then they should, it
is their private fault, and ought not to be imputed to us, or to our Church)
but use all good means we can to draw them to moderate courses and just
obedience; although they better deserve to be despised then the Weak Romans
did: they being truly Weaks, ours Obstinate; they Timorous, ours also
Contemptuous.

Now these differences are opened betwixt the Case in my Text,. 25. We despise
not our Brethren.
and the Case of our Church: we may the better judge how far forth S. Paul's
advice here given to the Romans in their case of eating, and not-eating,
ought to rule us in our case of conforming, and not-conforming in point of
Ceremony. And first, of not despising: then of not judging. The ground of the
Apostles precept for not despising him that ate not, was his weakness. So
far then as this ground holds in our case, this precept is to be extended;
and no further. And we are hereby bound not to despise our Nonconforming
Brethren, so far forth as it may probably appear to us they are weak and
not wilful. But so far forth, as by their courses and proceedings it may be
reasonably thought their refusal proceeds from corrupt or partial
affections, or is apparently maintained with obstinacy and contempt: I take it
we may, notwithstanding the Apostles admonition in my Text, in some sort even
despise them.

But because they think they are not so well and fairly dealt withal as they
should be:. 26. Their grieuances propounded;
Let us consider their particular grieuances, wherein they take themselves
despised; and examine how just they are. They say, first, they are despised in
being Puritanes, and Brethren, and Precisians, and in having many jests and
fooleries fastened upon them, whereof they are not guilty. They are secondly
despised, All benefit of Law being d^nyed them, and they debarred of other
means by conference or writing for their Defense. Def. of Ministers reasons.
part. 1. pref. to Reader. We do accuse the Reverend Bishops i^ the sight of
God and Man, for their hard and extreme dealing toward us. Remouall of
imputations, page 40.
they say, in that when they are conuented before the Bishops and others in
Authority, they cannot have the favor of an indifferent hearing: but are
proceeded against as far as Suspension, and sometimes Deprivation, without
taking their answers to what is objected, or giving answers to what they
object. Thirdly, in that many honest and religious men, of excellent and
useful gifts, cannot be permitted the liberty of their Consciences, and the
free exercise of their Ministry; only for standing out in these things,
which our selves cannot but confess to be indifferent.

To their first Grieuance we answer,. 27. and answered: The first.
that we have nothing to do with those that are Popishly affected. If they
wrong them, as it is like enough they will (for they will not stick to wrong
their betters;) we are not to be charged with that: let them answer for
themselves. But by the way, let our Brethren consider, whether their stiff and
unreasonable opposing against those lawful Ceremonies we retain, may not be
one principal means to confirm, but so much the more in their darkness and
superstition those that are wavering, and might possibly by more ingenuous and
seasonable insinuations be won over to embrace the truth which we profess.
And as for loose persons and profane ones, that make it their sport upon their
Ale-benches to rail and scoff at Puritanes; as if it were warrant enough for
them to drink drunk, talk bawdy, swear and stare, or do any thing without
control, because forsooth they are no Puritanes. As we could wish our
Brethren, and their Lay-followers, by their uncouth and sometimes ridiculous
behavior had not given profane persons too much advantage to play upon them,
and through their sides to wound even Religion it self: so we could wish also
that some men by unreasonable and vntust, othersome by unseasonable and
indiscreet scoffing at them, had not given them advantage to triumph in their
own innocence and persist in their affected obstinacy. It cannot but be some
confirmation to men in error; to see men of dissolute and loose behavior, with
much eagerness, and petulancy and virulence to speak against them. We all
know how much scandal and prejudice it is to a right good cause; to be either
followed by persons open to just exception, or maintained with slender and
insufficient reasons, or prosecuted with unseasonable and indiscreet violence.
And I am verily persuaded, that as the increase of Papists in some parts of the
Land, has occasionally sprung (by a kind of Antiperistasis) from the
intemperate courses of their neighbor Puritanes; so the increase of Puritanes,
in many parts of the Land, owes not so much to any sufficiency themselves
conceive in their own grounds, as to the disadvantage of some Profane, or
Scandalous, or Idle, or Ignorant, or Indiscreet opposers. But setting these
aside, I see not but that otherwise the name of Puritan, and the rest, are
justly given them. For appropriating to themselves the names of Brethren,
Professors, Good men, and other like; as differences betwixt them and those
they call Formalists: would they not have it thought, that they have a
Brotherhood and Profession of their own, freer and purer from Superstition and
Idolatry, then others have, that are not of the same stamp? and doing so, why
may they not be called Puritanes? The name, I know, is sometimes fastened upon
Of late our English Arminians have got the trick to fetch in within the
compass of this ^itle of Pur^a^es, all orthodoxe Divines that oppose against
their Semipelagian subtilties; of purpose to make sound truth odious, an^ their
own corrupt novelties more paffable, and plausible.
those that deserve it not; Rascal people will call any man that bears but
the face of honesty, a Puritan: but why should that hinder others from placing
it where it is rightly due?

To their second Grieuance I answer: 28. The second.
Public means by Conferences, Disputations, and otherwise, have been often
used: and private men not seldom afforded the favor of respite and liberty to
bring in their allegations. And I think it can be hardly, or but rarely
instanced; that ever Deprivation has been used, but where fatherly
Admonitions have first been used, and time given to the Delinquents to
consider of it, and inform themselves better. This course usually has been
taken: though every private particular man has no reason to expect it.The
Reverend Fathers of our Church, we may wel^ think amid so much other
emploiment, cannot be so unthrifty of their good hours, as to lavish them out
in hearing contentious persons eandem cantilenam, sing the same note a hundred
times over, and require farther satisfaction, after so many public and
unanswerable satisfactions already given. Yet have the Witness the learned
Books of diverse Reverend Prelates; John Whitgift, John Buckeridge, Thomas
Morton, etc.
Bishops, and others, Church Governors, out of their religious zeal for the
peace of Gods Church, been so far from despising our Brethren herein: that
they have dispensed sometimes with their other weighty occasions, and taken
pains to answer their reasons, and confute their exceptions, satisfy all
their doubts, and discover the weakness of all their grounds in the points
questioned.

And as to their third Grieuance.. 29. The third.
First, for my own part, I make no doubt, neither dare I be so uncharitable as
not to think, but that many of them have honest, and upright, and sincere
hearts to Godward, and are unfeignedly zealous of Gods Truth, and for Religion.
They that are such, no doubt feel the comfort of it in their own souls: and
we see the fruits of it in their conversation, and rejoice at it. But yet I
cannot be so ignorant on the other side, as not to know, that the most
sanctified and zealous men are men, and subject to carnal and corrupt
affections; and may be so far swayed by them in their judgments, as not to
be able to discern without prejudice and partiality, truth from error. Good
men, and Gods dear children may continue in some error in judgment, and
consequently in a sinful practice arising thence; and live and die in it (as
some of these men have done in disobedience to lawful Authority,) and that
unrepented of otherwise, then as in the lump of their unknown sins. It is
not Honesty, or Sincerity, that can privilege men from either erring or
sinning. Neither ought the unreproved conversation of men, countenance out
their Opinions, or their Practices, against the light of Divine Scripture, and
right Reason: As we read Cyprians error in old time; and we see So P^lagius,
from whose root Popery (in that bran^h) and Arminian^sme sprouted, was a man as
strict for life, as any Catholike^yet a most dangerous and pestilent Heretic.
Arminius his corrupt doctrine in our days have spread much the more for the
reverend opinion men had of their personal endowments and sanctity. Secondly,
though Comparisons be ever harsh, and most times odious; yet since honesty and
piety is alleged, (without disparagement be it spoken to the best of them,)
there are as good, and honest, and religious, and zealous men every way of them
that willingly and cheerfully conformed, as of them that do not. In the times
of Popish persecution, how many godly Bishops, and conformable Ministers laid
down their lives for the testimony of Gods Truth, and for the maintenance of
his Gospel? And if it should please God in his just judgment (as our sins,
and amongst others our Schisms and distractions most worthily deserve,) to put
us once again to a fiery trial (which the same God for his goodness and mercy
defend:) I make no question but many thousands of Conformers would (by the
grace of God) resist unto blood, embrace the Faggot, and burn at a S^ake, in
detestation of all Popish Antichristian Idolatry; as readily, and cheerfully,
and constantly, as the hottest, and precisest, and most scrupulous
non-Conformer. But thirdly, let men's honesty, and piety, and gifts be what they
can: must not men of honesty, and piety, and gifts, live under Laws? And what
reason these, or any other respects, should Non enim in cuiusqua^ persona
praetermittendum est, quod institut is generalibus continetur. Leo did. 61.
Mi^amur.
exempt any man from the just censure of the Church, in case he will not obey
her Laws, and conform to her Ceremonies? especially, since such men's
immunitie would but encourage others to presume upon the like favor: and
experience teaches us, that no men's errors are so exemplary and pernicious;
as theirs, who for their eminency of gifts, or sanctity of life, are most
followed with popular applause, and personal admiration.

We see their Grieuances against us,. 30. Our Brethren how they judge us.
how unjust they are, in the matter of Despising. I would they did no more
despise the Churches authority; then we do their infirmities! But in the
matter of judging; see if we have not a just grieuance against them. As might
be declared at large in many instances, out of their printed Books, and
private Letters, and common discourses. I will but give you a I refer the
Reader for more particular satisfaction to Fr. Masons Sermon: on 1. Cor. 14.
40. page 30. Sam. Collins Sermon on 1. Tim. 6. 3. p. 21, 22. and others; but
especially to their own writings.
taste; because I know I grow tedious; and I long to be at an end.

First they judge our Church as half Popish and Antichristian, 31. I. The
Church.
for retaining some Ceremonies used in Popery: though we have purged them from
their Superstitions, and restored them to their Primitive use. Their great
admired Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
opener of the Revelation, makes our Church the Linsey-Wolsey Laodicean
Church; neither hot nor cold. And some of them have slouenly compared our late
gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth of most blessed memory, to a This Simile
was first used by a very Reverend, grave and worthy Deane, (who has many ways
des^rued well of our whole Church) in a Sermon before Queen Elizabeth: and
modestly and moderately urged, not at all against the Ceremonies (which by his
practice he did allow) but for the further restraint of Popish Priests and
Jesuits, who lay thick in Ireland, and the Western coasts of England and
Wales, as heaps of dust and dirt behind the doors. yet I here ascribed it to
the Puritanes, who (though they father it upon that good man) must own it as
their own brat; because by mis-applying it to the Ceremonies, they have made
it their own -- Male dum recitas, incipit esse tuum.
sluttish housewife; that having swept the house, yet left the dust and dirt
behind the doors, meaning thereby the Ceremonies. If our Church were but
half so ill, as these men would make it, I think every honest religious man
should hold himself bound to separate from it; as his most excellent Majesty
Meditation^ on the Lords Prayer. p. 11. and^. primae edit. 1619.
has observed the Brownists have done upon their very grounds: accounting them
as lukewarm for not quite separating, as they do us for no further reforming.

Secondly, 32. II. The Bishops.
they judge our Bishops and other Church-Gouernours, as Limbs of Antichrist;
Locusts of the bottomless pit; domineering Lords over Gods heritage; usurpers
of temporal Jurisdiction; Spiritual Tyrants over men's Conscienences, etc.
seeking by all means to make the name of Lord Bishop odious to the Gentry and
Commons. Witness their Mar-prelate; and other infamous and scandalous Libels
in that kind. Having power in their hands, if the Bishops should use more
rigorous courses toward them, then they have done: could ye blame them?

Thirdly,. 33. III. Conformers.
they judge those that subscribe and conform Machiauellian time-seruers;
formal Gospellers; State-Diuines; men that know no conscience, but Law; nor
Religion, but the Kings: and such as would be as forward for the Mass, as the
Communion, if the State should alter.

Fourthly, 34. IIII. Ministers of inferior gifts.
all such Ministers as are not endowed with gifts for the Pulpit, they damn,
as hirelings, and not Shepherds: calling them idol-Shepheards; betrayers of
Christ's Flock; intruders into the Ministry without a Calling; dumb Dogs, and
I know not how many names besides. Yea, although they be such as are diligent,
according to their measure of gifts to perform such duties as the Church
requires; to present the prayers of the people to God; to declare (by reading
the holy Bible and good Homilies for that purpose appointed) the will of God to
the people; to instruct the younger sort in the points of Catechism; to visit
and comfort the sick and afflicted; and to administer reverently and orderly
the holy. Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Fifthly,. 35. V. Them that oppose them.
they judge all such as interpose for the Churches peace, and oppose their
novelties, as enemies to all goodness, men of profane minds; haters of
Religion; despisers of the Word; persecutors of the Brethren, impes of Satan;
instruments of Hell; and such as utterly abhor all godly and Christian
courses.

Sixthly,. 36. VI. All but themselves,
and lastly (for I irke to rake longer in this sink) they bewray themselves to
be manifest Judges of all that are not of their stamp; by singling out unto
themselves, and those that favor them, certain proper Appellations, of
Brethren, and Good men, and Professors: as if none had Brotherhood in Christ,
none had interest in goodness, none made Profession of the Gospel, but
themselves. Whereas others have received the sign of their Profession in their
foreheads after Baptism, which perhaps they did not: whereas others daily
stand up in the Congregation to make Profession of their Christian belief,
which it may be they do not: or, those things be not material: whereas others
by the grace of God are as steadfastly resolved in their hearts, if need should
be, to seal the truth of their Profession with their blood, as any of them can
be.

But they will say, 37. Their mitigation removed.
these peremptory Censures are but the faults of some few: all are not so hot
and fiery. There be others that are more temperate in their speeches, and
moderate in their courses; and desire only they may be spared for their own
particular: but they preach not against any of these things, nor intermeddle to
make more stirs in the Church.

If all were of that hot temper, or distemper rather, that many are; they
would quickly tire out themselves without spurring. Far be it from us to
judge men's hearts: or to condemn men for that we know not by them. Yet of
some that carry themselves with tolerable moderation outwardly; we have some
cause to suspect, that they do inwardly and in their hearts judge as deeply,
as the hottest-spirited raylers. And we gather it from their forwardness at
every turn, and upon every slender occasion obliquely to ^^rd, and indirectly
to glance at our Church, and the descipline and the Ceremonies thereof, as
far as they well dare. And if such men meddle no further, we may reasonably
think, Eadem velle eos cognosces: da posse, quantum volunt. Senec. Epist. 42.
it is not for want of good will to do it; but because they dare not.

Congregations; yet in their private Conuenticles it is not unknown some do.
Though their Pulpits do not ring with it; yet their houses do: though their
ordinary Sermons ad populum be more modest; yet their set conferences are
sometimes but too free, especially when they are required their opinions by
those that inuit them. And what themselves for fear of Censure thus preach
but Mat. 10. 27.
in the ear; their Lay-Disciples openly preach on the house top.

Thirdly, although both their Pulpits and Tables Practice sufficiently
preaches their dislike. And who knows not that a Re^ll and Exemplary
seducement makes the Author guilty; as well as a Verbal and Oratory? Saint
Peter did not preach Iudaisme; but only, for offending the Jews, forbear to
eat with the Gentiles: yet S. Paul reproves him for it to his face, and
interprets that Fact of his, as an effectual and almost compulsiue
seducement; Cogis Iudaizare, Gal. 2. Gal. 2. 14. Non imperio, sed facto. Lyra.
Non docentis imperio, sed conuersationis exemplo. Gloss. Ord.
Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Iudaize?

Lastly, it is to be considered; whether it may be Pastor, not to meddle with
these things: and whether he be not in conscience bound, especially in case he
live among a people distracted in opinions, to declare himself expressly
either for them, or against them. If they be utterly unlawful, and he know it
so; how is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that use them, or
require them? otherwise he betrayeth the Otherwise what else do we, but deny
and betray the truth? Defense of Min. reasons part 1. Pref. to the Reader.
truth of God by his silence, and suffers men to go on in their superstition
without rebuke. But if he be sufficiently resolved of their lawfulness; how
is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that refuse them, or oppose
them? otherwise he betrayeth the peace of the Church by his silence, and
suffers men to go on in their disobedience without rebuke. Nay more, every
Minister that has received pastoral Charge, has twice or thrice (if not
oftener) witnessed his allowance of all and singular the 39. Articles of the
Church of England. Once at his Ordination before the Bishop; then at his
Institution into his Benefice, before his Ordinary; and both these by
Subscription under his hand; and then after, upon his Iuduction, before his
own Flock; and that by verbal Approbation. By which Subscription and
Approbation, he has not only acknowledged Artic. 20.
in the Church the power of ordaining Rites and Ceremonies, Act. 20. but he
has after a sort also bound himself Act. 34.
openly torebuke such as willingly and purposely break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, as offenders against the common Orders of the Church,
and wounders of the Consciences of the weak brethren, Act. 34. He then, that
for any respect whatsoever is meale-mouthed in these things wherein he is bound
both in Conscience, and by virtue of his own voluntary Act to speak freely:
neither is constant to his own hand and tongue; nor is Heb. 32.
faithful in Gods House, as was Moses, in discharging a good Conscience, and
revealing unto his people Act. 20. 27.
the whole Counsel of God.

Thus have I endeavored, 38. The conclusion.
having the opportunity of this place, (as I held my self both in Conscience,
and in regard of my Subscription bound, to deliver my opinion freely, so far
as my Text gave occasion, concerning the Ceremonial Constitutions of our
Church: and therein labored to free, not only the Conformer from all unjust
Censures; but even the Non-conformer also, so far as he has reason to expect
it, from all scandalous Despisings. I beseech you pardon my length, if I have
been troublesome: I had much to say; and the matter was weighty; and I desired
to give some satisfaction in it to those that are contrary-minded; and I have
no purpose (for any thing I know) at all to trouble this place any more
hereafter. Let us all now humbly beseech Almighty God to grant a blessing to
what has been presently taught and heard: that it may work in the hearts of us
all charitable affections one toward another, due obedience to lawful
Authority, and a conscionable care to walk in our several callings,
faithfully, painefully, and peaceably; to the comfort of our own souls, the
edification of Gods Church, and the glory of the euerblessed Trinity, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God. To whom be ascribed
by us and whole Church, as is most due, the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON. 24. April. 1621.

ROMANS 3. 8. And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come: whose damnation is
just.
A Little before, 1. The Occasion.
at the fourth verse, Saint Paul had delivered a Conclusion; found, and
comfortable: and strengthened it from David's both experience, and testimony in
That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou
art judged. Psalm. 51. 4.
Psalm. 51. A place pregnant, and full of sinews to enforce it. The Conclusion
in effect was; that Nothing in man can annull the Covenant of God. Neither the
original unworthiness of Gods children, through the universal corruption of
nature, nor their actual unfaithfulness bewrayed (through frailty) in
particular trials; can alienate the free love of God from them, or cut them off
from the Covenant of Grace: but that still God will be glorified in the truth
and faithfulness of his promises, notwithstanding any unrighteousness or
unfaithfulness in man.

But never yet was any Truth so happily innocent, 2. Coherence,
as to maintain it self free from Calumny, and Abuse. Malice on the one
hand, and Fleshlinesse on the other; though with different aims, yet do the
same work. They both pervert the Truth, by drawing pestilent Carollaries from
sound Conclusions, as the Spider sucketh poison from medicinable herbs. But
with this difference; Malice slandereth the Truth, to discountenance it: but
Fleshlinesse abuses the Truth, to countenance it self by it. The cauilling
Sophister, he would feign bring the Apostles gracious Doctrine into discredit:
The carnal Libertine, he would as feign bring his own ungracious behavior
into credit. Both, by making false, yet colorable, Inferences from the former
Conclusion. There are Triplex inconueniens. Lyranus hic.
three of those first; if so, Then cannot God in reason and justice take
vengeance of our unrighteousness. The Color: for why should he punish us for
that which so much magnifieth and commends his righteousness? Verse. 5.
But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance? The second Inference: If so;
then it is iniust either in God or Man to condemn us as sinners, Color: for
why should that action be censured of sin, which so abundantly redoundeth to
the glory of God? Verse. 7.
For if the Truth of God has more abounded, through my lie, unto his glory,
why yet am I also judged as a sinner? The third, and last, and worst Inference:
If so; then it is a good and a wise resolution, Let us sin freely, and boldly
commit evil. The Color: for why should we fear to do that, from which so
much good may come? in this verse of my Text, And not rather, Let us do evil,
that good may come.

This last cauilling Inference; 3. Division,
the Apostle in this verse both brings in, and casts out again: brings
in, as an objection; and casts out by his answer. An answer which at once
cutteth off both it, and the former inferences. And the Answer is double: Ad
rem, ad hominem. That concerns the force and matter of the objection: this,
the state and danger of the obiectors. Ad* rem, in the former part of the
verse; And not rather (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that
we say,) Let us de evil, that good may come. Ad hominem, in the latter end;
Whose damnation is just. In the former part, there is an Objection; and the
Reiection of it. The Objection, And not rather, Let us do evil that good may
come. The Reiection thereof with a Non sequitur; implying not only the bare
inconsequence of it upon the Apostles Conclusion, but withal, and especially
the falsenesse and unsoundness of it taken by it self; As we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, etc.

My aim at this present is to insist especially upon a Principle of practique
Divinity; 4. and Sum of the Text.
which by joint consent of Writers old and new; Orthodoxe and Popish, resulteth
from the very body of this verse, and is of right good use to direct us in
sundry difficulties, which daily arise in vita communi, in point of Conscience.
The Principle is this; we must not do any evil, that any good may come of it.
Yet there are besides this, in the Text diverse other inferior observations not
to be neglected. With which I think it will not be amiss to begin, and to
dispatch them first briefly; that so I may fall the sooner, and stay the longer
upon that which I mainely intend.

Observe first the Apostles Method, 5. OBSER. 1. Divine truths must be cleared
from cavil.
and substantial manner of proceeding: how he clears all as he goes; how
diligent he is and careful, betimes to remove such cauils, (though he Propter
hos arguendos fecit Paulus hic quasi digressionem tractando haec. Caietan. in
hune locum
step a little out of his way for it) as might bring scandal to the Truth he
had delivered. When we preach and instruct others, we should not think it
enough to deliver positive truths: but we should take good care also, as near
as we can, to leave them clear; and by prevention to stop the mouths of such,
as love to pick quarrels at the Truth, and to bark against the light. It were
good we would (so far as our leisure and gifts will permit) wisely forecast,
and prevent all offense that might be taken at any part of Gods truth: and be
careful, as not to broach any thing that is false, through rashness, error,
or intemperance; so not to betray any truth by ignorant handling, or by
superficial, slight, and vnsatisfying answers. But then especially concerns
it us to be most careful herein; when we have to speak before such, as we
have some cause beforehand to suspect to be, through ignorance, or weakness,
or custom, or education, or prejudice, or partial affections, or otherwise
contrary-minded unto, or at leastwise not well persuaded of those Truths we
are to teach. If the ways be rough and knotty, and the passengers
feeble-ioynted and darke-sighted: it is but needful the guides should remove
as many blocks and stones out of the way, as may be. When we have gone as
warily as we can to work, Cauillers (if they list) will take exceptions: it is
our part to see we give them not the advantage, lest we help to justify the
Principals, by making our selves Accessories. Those men are ill advised, how
ever zealous for the Truth, that stir in controuersed points, and leave them
worse then they found them. Aut animo demas, aut viribus addas. Dictum
Archidami ad filium.
Stomach will not bear out a man without strength: and to encounter an
adversary are required As Zuinglius said of Carolosladius (whom he judged too
weak to undertake the defense of the Truth against Luther in the point of
Consubstantiation) Non sa^is humerorum habet. Sleidan.
Shoulders, as well as gall. A good cause is never betrayed more, then when it
is prosecuted with much eagerness, but little sufficiency. This from the
method.

Observe secondly the Apostles manner of speech. OBSERVE. II.
(...).. 6. The Slandey of the Ministers regular doctrine, is more then an
ordinary Slander.
Translators render it; As we are wrongfully bla^ed, As we are slandered, As we
are slanderously reported. And the word indeed from the (...).
Original imports no more: and so Writers both Profane, and Sacred use it.
But yet in Scriptures by a Specialty it most times signifies the highest
degree of Slander; when we open our mouths against God, and speak ill, or
amiss, or unworthily of God, that is, (...), and properly the sin we call
Blasphemy. And yet, that very word of Blasphemy, which for the most part
refers immediately to GOD, the Apostle here uses, when he speaks of
himself and other Christian Ministers (...), as we are slandred, nay as we are
blasphemed. A slander or other wrong or contempt done to a Minister, qu^ talis,
is a sin of a higher strain, then the same done to a common Christian. Not
at all for his Persons sake: for so he is no more Gods good creature then the
other; no more free (...). Act. 14. 15. and Iam. 5. 17.
from sins, and infirmities and passions then the other. But for his Callings
sake; for so he is Gods 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassador, which the other is not: and for his works sake; for that is Gods
1. These. 2. 13.
message, which the others is not. Personal Slanders and Contempts are to a
Minister, but as to another man: because his person is but as another man's
Person. But Slanders and Contempts done to him as a Minister, that is, with
reference either to his Calling, or Doctrine, are much greater then to another
man: as reaching unto God himself; whose Person the Minister represents in
his Calling; and whose errand the Minister delivers in his Doctrine. For
Contempts, Saint Paul is express elsewhere; 1. These. 4. 8
He that despises, despises not Man, but God. And as for Slanders; the very
choice of the word in my Text infers as much. The dignity of our Calling,
enhaunceth the sin: and every Slander against our regular Doctrines, is more
then a bare Calumny; if no more, at least petty We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, Act. 6. 11.
Blasphemy (...), As we are slandered, as we are blasphemed. That from the
word.

Observe thirdly, 7. OBSERVE. III. The best truths are subject to Slander.
the wrong done to the Apostle, and to his Doctrine. He was slanderously
reported to have taught that, which he never so much as thought: and his
Doctrine had many scandalous imputations fastened upon it, whereof neither he
nor it were guilty. As we are slanderously reported, and as some affirm that
we say. The best Truths are subject to mis-interpretation: and there is not
tha^ Doctrine, how firmly so ever grounded, how wari^^ so ever delivered;
whereon Calumny will not fasten, and stick slanderous imputations. Neither Math.
11. 17, 18, 19.
John's mourning, nor Christ's piping can pass the pikes: but the one has a
Devil; the other is a glutton and a wine-bibber. Though Math. 5. 17.
Christ come to fulfill the Law, yet there be will accuse him as a destroyer
of the Law* Math. 5. And though he decide the question plainly for Caesar,
and that in the case of Tribute, Math. 22. Math. 22. 21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: yet there be that charge him, as
if he Ioh 19. 12.
spoke against Caesar, Ioh. 19. and that in the very case of Tribute, as if he
Luke 23. ^.
forbade to give Tribute unto Caesar, Luke 23. Now if they Mat. 10. 25
called the Master of the house Beelzebub; how much more them of his household?
If Christ's did not; think we the doctrine of his Ministers and his Servants
could escape the stroke of men's tongues, and be free from calumny and cavil?
How the Apostles were slandered as Seducers and Sectaries, and vain babblers,
and Heretics, and broachers of new and false and pestilent doctrines; their
Epistles, and the book of their Acts witness abundantly to us. And for
succeeding times, read but the Apologies of Athenagoras, and Tertullian, and
others: and it will amaze you to see what blasphemous, and seditious, and
odious, and horrible impieties, where fathered upon the ancient Christian
Doctors, and upon their profession. But our own experience goes beyond all.
The Doctors of our Church teach truly, and agreeably to unanswerable evidences
of Scripture. The Act. 17. ^8. and Esaias 26. 12.
effectual concurrence of Gods will and power, with subordinate Agents in
every, and therefore even in sinful actions; Gods Romans 9. 11. 15 18, etc.
free election of those whom he purposes to save of his own grace, without
any motives in, or from themselves; The immutabilitie of Gods Ioh 13. 1. Romans
11. 29. and 5. 9. 10. and 8. 35, 38, 39.
Love and Grace toward the Saints, and their certain perseverance therein
unto Salvation; The Romans 3. 28.
Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ, apprehended
and applied unto them by a lively faith; without the works of the Law. These
are sound, and true, and comfortable, and profitable, and necessary doctrines.
And yet that impudent Strumpet of Rome has the forehead, I will not say to
slander, my Text allows more, to blaspheme God, and his Truth, and the
Ministers thereof for teaching them. Bellarmine, Gretser, Maldonate, and the
Jesuits; but none more then our own English Fugitives, Bristow, Stapleton,
Parsons, Kellison, and all the rabble of those Romish hellhounds, freely spend
their mouths in barking against us; as if we made God the author of sin: as
if we would have men sin and be damned, by a Stoicall fatal necessitie^
sin whether they will or no, and be damned whether they deserve it or no: as
if we opened a gappe to all licenciousnesse and profaneness; let men believe,
it is no matter how they live, heaven is their own cock-sure: as if we cried
down good works, and condemned charity. Slanders loud, and false; yet easily
blown away with one single word, (...). These imputations upon us and our
doctrine are unjust: but (...), let them that thus mis-report us, know, that
without repentance their damnation will be just.

It would be time not ill spent, 8. With the Causes;
to discover the grounds of this observation, and to press the uses of it
something fully. But because my aim lies another way; I can but point at
them, and pass. If seldom Truth escape vnslandered, marvel not: the reasons
are evident. On Gods part, on Man's part, on the Devils part. God suffers, Man
rayseth, and the Devil furthereth these slanders against the Truth. To begin
ordine retrogrado, and to take Devils part: a kind of Contrariety and
Antipathie betwixt him and it. He being the Ioh. 8. 44.
Father of lies, and Ephesians. 6. 12.
Prince of darkness, cannot away with the Truth, and with the Light: and
therefore casts up slanders, as Fogs and Mists against the Truth to belie it,
and Light to darken it. Secondly, on man's part: And that partly in the
Understanding; when the judgment either of it self weak, or else weakened
through precipitancie, prejudice, or otherwise, is deceived with fallacies in
stead of substance, and mistaketh seeming inferences, for necessary and
natural deductions. Partly in the Will; when men of corrupt minds set
themselves purposely against the known truth, and out of malicious wilfulness
(against the strong testimony of their own hearts) slander it, that so they
may disgrace it, and them that profess it. Partly in the Affections; when men
overcome by carnal affections, are content to cheat their own souls by
giving such constructions to Gods Truth, as will for requital, give largest
allowance to their practices, and so rather choose to crooken the Rule to their
own bent, then to level themselves and their affections and lives according
to the Rule. Thirdly, on Gods Justice; as a fearful 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10, 11, 12.
upon wicked ones, whereby their hard hearts become yet more hardened, and
their most just condemnation yet more just. Partly, in Goodness; as a
powerful fiery trial of true Doctors, whose constancy and sincerity is the
more 1. Cor. 11. 19
approved with him, and the more eminent with men, if they Ioh. 10. 12.
fly not when the Wolf comes, but keep their standing, and stoutly
maintain Gods truth, when it is deepliest slandered, and hotliest opposed. And
partly, in his Wisdom; as a rich occasion 2. Tim. 1. 6
(...) to awaken their zeal, to quicken up their industry, to muster up their
abilities, to scowre up their spiritual armor, (which else through dis-vse
might gather rust) for the defense, and for the rescue of that 1. Tim. 6. 20;
and 2. Tim. 1. 14.
(...), that precious truth whereof they are depositaries, and wherewith he has
entrusted them.

These are the Grounds.. 9. and Corollaries thereof.
The Uses, for instruction briefly are, to teach and admonish every one of us:
that we be not either first, so wickedly malicious, raise any slander; or
secondly, so foolishly credulous, as without severe believe any slander; or
thirdly, so basely timorous, as to flinch from any part of Gods truth for any
slander. But I must not insist. This from the slander.

Observe fourthly,. 10. OBSER. IV. Every slander,
how peremptory the Apostle is in his censure against the slanderers or
abusers of holy truths: Whose damnation is just. Ambrosius; Lyra; Piscator, etc.
Some understand it with reference to the Slanderers; As we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say: Whose damnation is just: that is,
their damnation is just, who thus unjustly slander us. Chrysostomus; Caietanus;
Erasmus, etc.
Others understand it with reference to that ungodly resolution: Let us do
evil, that good may come; whose damnation is just: that is, their damnation is
just for the evil they do, who adventure to do any evil, under whatsoever
pretense of good to come of it. Both expositions are good; and I rather embrace
both, then prefer either: I ever held it a kind of honest spiritual thrift;
where there are two senses given of one place, both agreeable to the Analogy
of Faith and Manners, both so indifferently appliable to the words and scope of
the place, as that it is hard to say, which was rather intended; though there
was but one intended, yet to make use of both. And so will we. Take the first
way: and the slanderer may read his doom in it. Here is his wages, and his
portion; and the meed and reward of his slander; Damnation. And it is a just
reward. He condemns Gods truth unjustly: God condemns him justly for it,
Whose damnation is just. If we be countable (and we are countable at the day
of Judgment) for Math. 12. 36.
every idle word we speak; though neither in it self false, nor yet hurtful
and prejudicial unto others: what less then damnation can they expect, that
with much falsehood for the thing it self, and infinite prejudice in respect of
others, blaspheme God and his holy Truth?

But if it be done of purpose, 11. Whether malicious.
and in malice to despite the Truth, and the Professors thereof: I scarce know
whether there be a greater sin, or no. Maliciously to oppose the known
Truth, is by most Divines accounted a principal branch of that great
unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost: by some, the very sin
it self. I dare not say it is so; nor yet that it is unpardonable, or has
final impenitencie necessarily attending it: I would be loath to interclude the
hope of Repentance from any sinner; or to confine Gods Mercy within any bounds.
Yet thus much I think I may safely say; it comes shrewdly near the sin
against the holy Ghost, and is a fair (or rather a foul) step toward it, and
leaves very very little hope of pardon. That great sin against the holy Ghost,
the Holy Ghost it self in the Scriptures chooses, rather then by any other to
express by this name of Math. 12. 31. 32.
Blasphemy, Mat. 12. And whereas our Apost. 1. Tim. 1. says, That though he
were a Blasphemer, yet 1. Tim. 1. 13.
he obtained Mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: he leaves it
questionable, but withal suspicious, whether there may be any hope of Mercy
for such as blaspheme maliciously, and against knowledge. If any man's be;
certainly such a man's damnation is most just.

But not all Slanders of Gods truth are of that deep die: 12. or not, is
damnable.
not all Slanderers, sinners in that high degree. God forbid they should. There
are respects, which must qualify and lessen the sin. But yet allow it any in
the least degree, and with the most favorable circumstances; still the
Apostles sentence stands good: Without repentance their damnation is just.
Admit the Truth be dark and difficult, and so easily to be mistaken: admit
withal, the man be weak and ignorant, and so apt to mistake; his
understanding being neither distinct through incapacitie to apprehend and sort
things aright, nor ye constant to it self through vnsettlednesse and leuitie
of judgment. Certainly his misprision of the Truth is so much Inuoluntarium
mintut de ratione peccati.
lesser, then the others wilful Calumny; as it proceeds less from the
irregularitie of the Will to the Judgment. And of such a man there is good
hope, that both in time he may see his error, and repent expressly and
particularly for it; and that in the mean time he does repent for it
implicit, and inclusiuely in his general contrition for, and confession of
the massy lump of his hidden, and Psalm. 19.
secret, and unknown sins. This Charity binds us both to hope for the
future, and to think for the present: and Saint Paul's example and words in
the 1. Tim. 1. 13.
place but now alleged, are very comfortable to this purpose. But yet full
thus much is certain: He that through ignorance, or for want of apprehension
or judgment, or by reason of whatsoever other defect or motive, brings a
slander upon any divine Truth; though never so perplexed with difficulties, or
open to cavil: unless he repent for it, either in the particular, (and that
he must do, if ever God open his eyes, and let him see his fault,) or at
leastwise in the general; it is still a damnable sin in him, His damnation
is just. We have the very case almost in terminis laid down, and thus resolved
in 2. Pet. 3. 2. Pet. 3. 18.
In which are some things hard to be understood, (observe the condition of the
things, hard to be understood) which they that are unlearned, and unstable,
(observe also the condition of the persons, unlearned, and unstable,) wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Where we have
the matter of great difficulty, hard to be understood; the persons of small
sufficiency, unlearned, and unstable: and yet if men, even of that weakness,
wrest and pervert truths, though of that hardness, they do it (...), to their
own destruction, says Saint Peter there; to their own just damnation, says
S. Paul in my Text. This from the Censure in the first sense.

Take it in the other sense, 13. We must not do any evil, for any good.
with reference to this ungodly resolution, Let us do evil, that good may
come: it teaches us, that no pretension of doing it in ordine ad Deum, for
Gods glory, to a good end, or any other color whatsoever, can excuse those
that presume to do evil; but that still the evil they do is damnable, and
it is but just with God to render damnation to them for it. Whose damnation is
just. And thus understood, it opens us a way to the consideration of that
maine Principle whereof I spoke, and whereon by your patience I desire to spend
the remainder of my time; namely this: We must not for any good, do any evil.
For the farther opening, and better understanding whereof, (since the rule is
of infinite use in the whole practice of our lives:) that we may the better
know when, and where, and how far to apply it aright for the direction of our
Consciences and Actions; we must of necessity unfold the extent of this word,
evil, and consider the several kinds and degrees of it distinctly and apart.
We must not do evil, that good may come.

First,. 14. Touching evils of pain.
evil is of two sorts. The evil of fault, and the evil of punishment. Malum
delicti, and Malum supplicij; as Tertul. l. 2. adu. Marcion cap. 14.
Tertullian calls them: or as the more received terms are, Malum Culpae, and
Malum Poenae. The evil we commit against God, and the evil God inflicteth
upon us. The evil we do; unjustly, but yet willingly: and the evil we suffer
unwillingly, but yet justly. In a word, the evil of sin, and the evil of
pain. Touching evils of pain; if the Case be put, when two such evils are
propounded, and both cannot be avoided, whether we may not make choice of the
one, to avoid the other. The resolution is common and good from the old Maxim,
e malis minimum, we may incur the lesser, to prevent the greater evil. As
we may deliver our purse to a Thief, rather then fight upon unequal terms
to save it: and in a tempest cast our wares into the Sea, to lighten the Ship
that it wrack not: and endure the launcing and searing of an old sore, to
keep it from festering and spreading. And this Principle in my Text is not a
rule for that Case: that being propounded concerning evils of Pain; whereas my
Text is intended only of the evils of Sin. We are herehence resolved, that
we are not to do any evil, that good may come of it: for all which yet we may
suffer some evil, that good may come of it. Although (to note that by the way)
the common answer e malis minimum, even in evils of Pain is to be understood,
(as most other practical conclusions are) not as simply and universally; but
as commonly and ordinarily true. For (as Slater on this place.
one says well) perhaps there are Cases, wherein two evils of Pain being at
once propounded, it may not be safe for us to be our own caruers.

But I must let pass the Questions concerning evils of Pain, as
impertinencies. 15. Evils of sin simply such.
The evils of sin are of two sorts. Some are evil formally, simply, and perse;
such as are directly against the scope and purpose of some of Gods
Commandments: as Atheism against the first, Idolatry against the second, and
so against the rest, Blasphemy, Profaneness, Disloyalty, Cruelty, Adultary,
Injustice, Cal^mny, (...), and the like; all which are evil in their own
nature, and can never (positis quibuscunque circumstantiis) be done well.
Othersome are evil only respectively, and by accide^t: but otherwise in their
own nature indifferent; and such as may be, and are done sometimes well,
sometimes ill. To know the nature of which things the better, since they are of
singular use for the resolution of many Cases of Conscience. We must yet more
distinctly inquire into the different kinds (or rather degrees) of indifferent
things; and into the different means, whereby things otherwise in nat^re
indifferent, become accidentally evil for their use.

Indifferent things are either equally,. 16 Things equally indifferent.
or unequally such. We may call them for distinctions sake (and I think not
altogether unfitly) (...).
indifferentia ad vtrumlibet; and (...).
indifferentia ad vnum. Indifferentia ad vtrumlibet, or equally indifferent
things are such, as (barely considered) are arbitrary either way, and hang in
aequilibrio between good and evil, without turning the Scale either one way
or other, as not having any notable inclination or propension unto either
rather then other: as to drink fasting, to walk into the fields, or to lift
up ones hand unto his head, etc. Now concerning such things of these, if any
man should be so scandalous, as to make a matter of conscience of them, and
should desire to be resolved in point of conscience whether they were good or
evil; as namely, whether he should do well or ill, to walk abroad into the
fields a mile or two with his friend, the thing it self is so equally
indifferent, that it were resolution enough to leave it in medio, and to
answer him, there were neither good nor hurt in it: the Action of walking,
barely considered, being not greatly either morally good, or morally evil. I
say morally; for in matter of health or ciuility, or otherwise it may be good,
or evil: but not Quia eorum ob^ectum non includit aliquid pertinens ad ordmem
rationis. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18. art. 8. in corp.
morally, and spiritually, and in matter of conscience. And I say withal
barely considered, for there may be circumstances, which may make it
accidentally evil. As to walk abroad in the fields, when a man should be at
Divine Service in the Church, is by accident morally evil; through the
circumstance of Time: as on the contrary, not to walk, if we have promised to
meet a friend at such a time and in such a place, who stands need of our
present help, is by accident morally evil, through the obligation of that
former promise. But yet still, these and other circumstances set aside; barely
to walk, or barely not to walk, and the like, are Indifferentia ad
vtrumlibet, things in their own nature (and that equally) indifferent.

Things unequally indifferent are such, as though they be neither vntuersally
good, 17. And things unequally indifferent.
nor absolutely evil; yet when barely considered, sway more or less rather
the one way then the other. And that either unto good; or unto evil. Of the
former sort are such outward actions, as being in Moral precepts indefinitely
commanded, are yet sometimes sinfully and ill done: as, giving an Alms,
hearing a Sermon, reproving an offender; and the like. Which are in themselves
good; and so to be accounted, rather then evil, though some unhappy
indefinitely prohibited, are yet in some cases lawful, and may be well done:
as, swearing an oath, traveling on the Sabbath day, playing for money; and the
like. Which are in themselves rather evil, then good, because they are ever
evil, unless all circumstances concur to make them good. Now of these
actions, though the former sort carry the face of good, the later of evil; yet
in very truth both sorts are indifferent. Understand me aright: I do not
mean indifferent indifferentia contradictionis, such as may be indifferently
either done, or not done; but indifferent only indifferentia contrarietatis,
such as (suppose the doing) may be indifferently either good or evil: because
so they may be done, as to be good, and so they may be done also, as to be
evil. But yet with this difference, that those former, though indifferent, and
in some cases evil, are yet of themselves notably and eminently inclined unto
good rather then evil; and these later proportionably unto evil rather then
good. From which difference it comes to pass, that to the Question barely
proposed concerning the former actions, whether they be good or evil; the
answer is just and warrantable, to say indefinitely they are good: and
contrarily concerning the later actions, to say indefinitely, they are evil.

Which difference well weighed (to note that by the way) would serve to
justify a common practice o^^ost of us in the exercise of our Ministry, 18.
A profitable digression, occasioned from the premises.
against such as distaste our doctrine for it, or unjustly otherwise take
offense at it. Ordinarily in our Sermons we indefinitiuely condemn as evil,
swearing, and gaming for money, and dancing, and recreations upon the Sabbath
day, and going to Law, and retaliation of injuries, and Monopolies, and raising
of rents, and taking forfeitures of Bonds, etc. and in our own co^t
Non-residency, and Pluralities, etc. Most of which yet, and many other of like
nature, most of us do or should know to be in some cases lawful; and therefore
in the number of those indifferent things which we call Indifferentia ad vnum.
You that are our hearers should bring so much charitable discretion with you,
when you hear us in the Pulpits condemn things of this nature; as to
understand us no otherwise, then we either do or should mean, and that is
thus: that such and such things are evil, as now adays, through the
corruptions of the times, many men use them; and such as therefore should not
be adventured upon without mature and impartial disquisition of the
uprightness of our affections therein, and a severe trial of all
circumstances, whether they carry weight enough with them to give our
consciences Let every man be fully persuaded ((...)) in his own mind, verse 5.
su^ficient security, not only of their lawfulness in selves, and at large,
but of their particular lawfulness too unto us, and them. But this by the way.

Now to proceed. 19. How things become accidentally evil.
There are diverse means whereby things not simply evil, but in themselves
(either equally or unequally) indifferent, may yet become accidentally evil.
Any defect or obliquity, any unhappy enteruening circumstance, is enough to
poison a right good action, and to make it stark naught. I may as well hope to
graspe the Sea, as to comprehend all those means. I make choice therefore to
remember but a few of the chiefest; such as happen often and are very
considerable. Things not simply evil, may accidentally become such, as by
sundry other means; so especially by one of these th^e^: Conscience, Scandal,
and Comparison. First, Conscience, in regard of the Agent, though the thing be
good, yet if the Agent do it with a condemning, or but a doubting Conscience,
the Action becomes evil. Romans 14. 14
To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is v^eleane, and
Ibid. verse. 23
he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith, verse.
14. and 23. Scandal^, in regard of other men. Though the thing be good, yet if
a brother Ibid. verse. 21.
stumble, or be offended, or be made weak by it, the action becomes evil.
Ibid. verse. 20.
All things are pure; but it is evil for that man who eats with offense,
Comparison, in regard of other actions. Though the thing be good, yet if we
prefer it before better things, and neglect or omit them for it, the action
becomes evil. Math. 9. 13.
Go and learn what that is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Math. 9.

The stuff thus prepared, 20. Nothing simply evil, may be done for any good to
come thereby.
by differencing out those things, which vndistinguished, might breed
confusion: our next business must be, to lay to the Rule, and to apply it to
the several kinds of Evil, as they have bin differenced. I foresaw we should
not have time to go through all that was intended: and therefore we will
content our selves for this time, with the consideration of this Rule, applied
to things simply evil. In them the Rule holds perpetually, and without
exception. That which is simply evil, may not for any good be done: We know
not any greater good (for there is not any greater good) then the glory of God:
we scarce know a lesser sin (if any sin may be accounted little) then a
harmless officious lie. Yet may not Vide fuse Augustinum in lib. de Mendacio;
and contra Mendacium; and alibi.
this be done; no not for that. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Job 13. 7. If not for the glory of God; then certainly
not for any other inferior end: not for the saving of a life; not for the
conversion of a soul; not for the peace of a Church; and (if even that were
possible too) not for the redemption of a world. No intention of any end can
warrant the choice of sinful means to compass it. 21. The first Reason.


The reasons are strong. One is; because sin in its own nature, is Suapte
natura repugnat peccato, quod sit eligibile: and proptereance propter se, nec
propter aliud bonum, est eligibile. Caie^. in hunc locum.
de numero ineligibilium: and therefore as not eligible propter se, for it
self sake, (there is neither form nor beauty in it, that we should desire
it;) so neither propter aliud, with reference to any farther end. Actus peccati
non est ordinabilis in bonum finem; is the common resolution of the Schools.
In civil and popular elections, if men take choice of such a person, to bear
any office or place among them; as by the local Charters, Ordinances,
Statutes, or other Customs which should rule them in their choice, is
altogether ineligible: the election is de iure nulla, naught and void; the
incapacitie of the person elected, making a nullity in the act of election. No
less is it in moral actions and elections: if for any intended end we make
choice of such means, as by the Law of God (which is our rule, and must guide
us) are ineligible; 22. The second Reason.
and such is every sin.

Another reason is grounded upon that Principle, Aquin. 1. secundae. qu. 18
art. 4. ad 3. and qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1. ex Dionysio, cap. 4. de divine. nomin.
Bonum ex causa integra, Malum ex partiali. Any partial or particular defect,
in Object, End, Manner, or other Circumstance, is enough to make the whole
action bad; but to make it good, there must be an universal Non est actis bona
s^npliciter, nisi ^mnes bonitates concurrant: sed quilibet defectus singularis
causa^ malum. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad 3.
concurrence of all requisite conditions in every of these respects: As a
disfigured eye, or nose, or lip, makes the face deformed; but to make it
comely, there is required the due proportion of every part. And any one short
Clause, or Prouiso, not legal, is sufficient to abate the whole writ or
instrument, though in every other part absolute, and without exception. The
Intention then, be it granted never so good, is insufficient to warrant an
Action good; so long as it fails either in the object, or manner, or any
requisite circumstance whatsoever. 1. Sam. 15. 20, etc.
Saul pretended a good end, in sparing the fat things of Amalek; that he might
therewith do sacrifice to the Lord: but God rejected both it and him, 1. Sam.
15. We can think no other, but that 2. Sam. 6. 6, 7.
Vzzah intended the safety of God's Ark, when it tottered in the cart, and he
stretched out his hand to stay it from falling: but God interpreted it a
presumption, and punished it, 2. Sam. 6. Doubtless Math. 16. 22, 23.
Peter meant no hurt to Christ, but rather good; when he took him aside, and
advised him to be good to himself, and to keep him out of danger: yet Christ
rebuked him for it, and set him packing in the Devils name, Get thee behind
me, Satan, Mat. 16.

But what will we say (and let that stand for a third reason) if our pretended
good intention prove indeed no good intention? 23. The third Reason.
And certainly, be it as fair and glorious, as we could be content to imagine
it, such it will prove to be, if it set us upon any sinful or unwarranted
means; indeed no good intention, but a bad. For granted it must be, that the
Intention of any end does virtually include the means: as in a Syllogism, the
Premises do the Conclusion. No more then can the choice of ill means proceed
from a good intention; then can a false Conclusion be inferred from true
Premises: and that is impossible. From which ground it is, that the Greg. lib.
28. Moral. cap. 13; Eusebius. Enuss. hom. 26; and others.
Fathers, and other Divines do oftentimes argue from the intention to the
action, and from the goodness of the one, to the goodness of both: to that
purpose applying those speeches of our Savior, in the twelfth, and in the
sixth of Matthew, Math. 12. 33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt: And, Math. 6. 22, 23.
if thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light: but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. The light of the body,
is the eye; and the work, the intention. No marvel, when the eye is evil, if
the whole body be dark; and when the intention is evil, if the whole work
be naught. That which deceives most men in judging of good or bad intentions
is, that they take the end, and the intention, for one and the same thing:
betwixt which two there is a spacious difference. For the end, is the thing
propter quid, for which we work, that whereat we aim in working, and so has
rationem causae finalis: but the intention is the cause a qua, from which we
work, that which sets us on working; and so has rationem cause
efficientis. Now between these two kinds of causes, the final and the
efficient, there is not only a great difference, but even a repugnancie; in
such sort, as that it is impossible they should at any time coincidere, which
some other kinds of causes may do. It is therefore an error to think, that if
the end be good, the intention of that end must needs be good: for there may
as well be a bad intention of a good end, as a bad desire of a good object.
Whatsoever the end be we intend, it is certain that intention cannot be good,
which puts us upon the choice of evil means.. 24. The first Inference
against the Church of Rome.


Me thinks the Church of Rome should blush, (if her forehead dyed red with the
blood of Gods Saints, were capable of any tincture of shame,) at the discovery
of her manifold impostures, in counterfeiting of Relics, in coining of
Miracles, in compiling of Legends, in gelding of good Authors by expurgatory
Indexes; in iuggling with Magistrates by lewd Equivocations, etc. Practices
warrantable by no pretense. Yet in their account but Sancta Hypocrisis, was
Dominicus his word.
p^aefraudes; for so they term them, no less ridiculously, then falsely: for
the one word contradicts another. But what do I speak of these, but petty
things, in comparison of those her louder impieties? breaking covenants of
truce and peace; dissoluing of lawful, and dispensing for unlawful marriages;
assoyling Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance; plotting Treasons, and
practicing Rebellions; excommunicating and dethroning Kings; arbittarie
disposing of Kingdoms; stabbing and murdering of Princes; warranting unjust
invasions; and blowing up Parliament houses. For all which, and diverse other
foul attempts, their Catholic defense is the advancement (forsooth) of the
Catholic Cause: Like his in the Poet, Horat. lib. 1 Epist. 1.
Quocunque modorem, is their Resolution: by right, or wrong, the State of the
Papacy must be vpheld. That is their vnum Necessartum: and if heaven favor
not; rather then fail, help must be had from Flecte esi nequeo Superos,
Ach^^unta monebo. Virg. Ae. neid 7.
hell, to keep Antichrist in his throne.

But to let them pass, 25. The second Inference against a vulgar error.
and touch nearer home. There are (God knows) many Ignorants abroad in the
world: some of them so unreasonable, as to think they have sufficiently
non-plus't any reprouer; if being admonished of something ill done, they have
but returned this poor reply, Is it not better to do so, then to do worse? But
alas, what necessity of doing either so, or worse; when Gods law binds
thee from both? Iam. 2. 10. 11.
He that said, Do not commit adultery; said also, Do not kill: and he that
said, Do not steal; said also, Do not lie. If then thou lie, or kill, or do
any other sin; though thou think thereby to avoid stealth, or adultery, or
some other sin: yet thou art become a transgressour of the Law; and by
offending in one point of it, guilty of all. It is but a poor choice, when a
man is desperately resolved to cast himself away; whether he should rather
hang, or drown, or stab, or pine himself to death: there may be more horror,
more pain, more lingering, in one then another; but they all come to one
period, and determine in the same point; death is the issue of them all. And it
can be but a slender comfort for a man, that will needs thrust himself into
the mouth of hell by sinning wilfully, that he is damned rather for lying, then
for stealing, or whoring, or killing, or some greater crime: Damnation is the
wages of them all. Murder can but hang a man; and (without favor)
Petty-Larceny will hang a man too: The greatest sins can but damn a man; and
(without Gods mercy) the smallest will damn a man too. But what? will some
reply: In case two sins be propounded, may I not do the lesser, to avoid the
greater? otherwise must I not of necessity do the greater? The answer is
short and easy: If two sins be propounded, do neither, E malis minimum,
holds as you heard (and yet not always neither) in evils of Pain: But that
is no Rule for evils of sin. Here the safer Rule is, e malis nullum. And the
reason is sound; from the Principle we have in hand. If we may not do any
evil, to procure a positive good: certainly Eadem doctrine, qua horremus
facere mala vt eueniant bona, horrere debem^us facere mala vt euitemus peiora.
Euitare enim peiora, multo minus bonum est; quam euenire bonum. Caietan. hic.
much less may we do one evil, to avoid or prevent another.

But what if both cannot be avoided, 26. The objection from the seeming case
of perplexity removed.
but that one must needs be done? In such a strait may I not choose the lesser?
To thee; I say again, as before, Choose neither. To the Case, I answer; it is
no Case: because; as it is put, it is a case impossible. For Nem^ angustiatur
ad peccandum: the Case cannot be supposed, wherein a man should be so
strai^ned, as he could not come off fairly without sinning. A man by rashness,
or fear, or frailety, may foulely entangle himself; and through the powerful
engagements of sin drive himself into very narrow straites, or be so driven
by the fault or injury of others: yet there cannot be any such straits, as
should enforce a necessity of sinning; but that still there is one path or
other out of them without sin. The Perplexity that seems to be in the
things, is rather in the Non enim datur perplexio ex part rerum: sed
contingere potest ex part hominis nescie^tis euadere, nec videntis aditum
euadendi absque aliquo peccato. Caiet. hic. See the gloss on did. 13. item
aduersus* where he proves against Gratian that there can be no perplexity.
men; who puzzle and lose themselves in the Labyrinths of sin, because they
care not to heed the clue that would lead them out, if it were well followed.
Say, a man through heat of blood make a wicked vow to kill his brother: here
he has by his own rashness brought himself into a seeming strait, that
either he must commit a murder, or break a vow; either of which seems to
be a great sin, the one against the fifth, the other against the third
commandment. But here is in very deed no strait or perplexity at all: Here is
a fair open course for him without sin. He may break his vow; and there an
end. Neither is this the choice of the lesser sin; but only the Non d^cet
eligere minur peccatum, sed solutionem minoris nexus. Caietanus hic. speaking
of Council of Toledo.
loosening of the lesser bond: the bond of charity being greater, then the
bond of a promise; and there being good reason that (in terms of
inconsistency, when both cannot stand,) the lesser bond should yield to the
greater. But is it not a sin for a man to break a vow? Yes, where it may be
kept saluis charitate and iustitia, there the breach is a sin: but in the
case proposed, it is no sin. As Christ says in the point of swearing, so it
may be said in the point of breach of vow, Math. ^37.
(...). Never was any breach of vow; but it was peccatum, or expeccato: the
breaking is either it self formally a sin; or it argues at least a former
sin, in the making. So as the sin, in the case alleged, was before in
making such an unlawful vow; and for that sin the party must repent: but the
breaking of it now it is made, is no new sin; (rather it is a necessary
duty, and a branch of that repentance which is due for the former rashness in
making it,) because a hurtful vow is, (and that virtute praecepti) rather to
be broken then kept. The Exodus 1. 16, etc.
Egyptian Midwiues, not by their own fault, but by Pharaohs tyrannous
command, are driven into a narrow strait, enforcing a seeming necessity of
sin: for either they must destroy the Hebrew children, and so sin by
Murder; or else they must de^ise some hansome shift to carry it cleanely from
the Kings knowledge, and so sin by lying. And so they did; they chose rather
to lie, then to kill: as indeed in the comparison it is by much the lesser
sin. But the very truth is, they should have done neither: they should flatly
have refused the Kings commandment, though with hazard of their lives; and
have resolved rather to suffer any evil, then to do any. And so Lot should
have done: he should rather have adventured his own life, and theirs too, in
protecting the chastity of his Daughters, and the safety of his ghests; then
have Genesis 19. 8.
offered the exposall of his Daughters to the lusts of the beastly Sodomites,
though it were to redeem his ghests from the abuse of fouler and more
abominable filthiness. Absolutely; there cannot be a case imagined, wherein it
should be impossible to avoid one sin, unless by the committing of another.
The case which of all other comes nearest to a Perplexity, is that of an
erroneous conscience: because of a double bond; the bond of Gods Law; which to
Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3, 4.
transgress, is a sin; and the bond of particular conscience, which also to
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. Omne quod fit contra
consci^^tiam, aedificat ad gehennam. c. 28. q. 1. Omnes.. Ex his.
transgress, is a sin, Whereupon there seems to follow an inevitable
necessity of sinning; when Gods Law requires one thing, and particular
conscience dictateth the flat contrary: For in such a case, a man must either
obey Gods Law, and so sin against his own conscience; or obey his own
conscience, and so sin against Gods Law. But neither in this case is there
any Perplexity at all in the things themselves: that which there is, is
through the default of the man only, whose judgment being erroneous
mis-leadeth his conscience, and so casts him upon a necessity of sinning.
But yet the necessity is no simple, and absolute, and unavoidable and
perpetual necessity: for it is only a necessity ex hypothesi; and for a
time, and continues but stante tali errore. And still there is a way out
betwixt those sins, and that without a third: and that way is dep^nere
erroneam conscientiam. He must rectify his judgment, and reform the error
of his Conscience, and then all is well. There is no perplexity, no
necessity, no obligation, no expediencie; which should either enforce, or
persuade us to any sin. The resolution is damnable, Let us do evil, that
good may come.

I must take leave, 27. The Rule applied in two instances.
before I pass from this point, to make two instances; and to measure out from
the Rule of my Text an answer to them both. They are such, as I would desire
you of this place to take due and special consideration of. I desire to deal
plainly; and I hope it shall be (by Gods blessing upon it) effectually, for
your good, and the Churches peace. One instance shall be in a sin of
Commission; the other, in a sin of Omission.

The sin of Commission wherein I would instance,. 28. The former instance.
is indeed a sin beyond Commission: it is the usurping of the Magistrates
Office without a Commission. The Question is; whether the zealous intention of
a good end may not warrant it good, or at least excuse it from being evil, and
a sin? I need not frame a Case for the illustration of this instance: the
inconsiderate forwardnes of some has made it to my hand. You may read it in
the disfigured windows and walls of this Church: Pictures, and Statua's, and
Images; and for their sakes the windows and walls wherein they stood, have
been heretofore, and of late pulled down, and broken in pieces and defaced:
without the Command, or so much as leave of those who have power to reform
things amiss in that kind. Charity binds us to think the best of those
that have done it: that is, that they did it out of a forward (though
mis-gouerned) zeal; intending therein Gods glory in the farther suppression of
Idolatry, by taking away these (as they supposed) likely occasions of it. Now
in such a case as this, the Question is, whether the intention of such an end,
can justify such a deed? And the fact of Numb. 2^. 7, 8.
Phinehes, Numb. 25. (who for a much like end, for the staying of the people
from Idolatry, executed vengeance upon Z^mri and Cosbi, being but a private
man, and no Magistrate;) seems to make for it. 29. Reserved from the rule of
my Text.


But my Text rules it otherwise. If it be evil; it is not to be done, no
not for the preventing of Idolatry. I pass by some considerations otherwise of
good moment; as namely first, whether Statua's and Pictures may not be
permitted in Christian adorning of Gods House, and for civil and historical
uses, not only lawfully and decently, but even profitably? I must confess, I
never yet heard substantial reason given, why secondly, whether things either
in their first erection, or by succeeding abuse superstitious, may not be
profitably continued, if the Superstition be abolished? Otherwise, not Pictures
only, and Crosses, and Images; but most of our Hospitals, and Schools, and
Colleges, and Churches too must down: and so the hatred of Idolatry should
but Usher in licentious Sacrilege, contrary to that passage of our Apostle in
the next Chapter before this, Romans 2. 22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? And thirdly, whether
these forward ones have not bewrayed somewhat their own self* guiltiness in
this Act, at least for the manner of it, in doing it secretly and in the dark?
A man should not dare to do that, which he would not willingly either be
seen when it is a doing, or our own, being done. To pass by these; consider
no more but this one thing only, into what dangerous and insufferable
absurdities a man might run, if he should but follow these men's grounds.
Erranti nullus terminus: Error knows no stay, and a false Principle once
received, multiplyeth into a (...). Arist. l. 1. Phys. ^ec. 22.
thousand absurd conclusions. It is good for men to go upon sure grounds, else
they may run and wander in infinite. A little error at the first, if there
be way given to it, will increase beyond belief; as a small spark may fire a
large City, and a ^. King. 18. 44, 45.
cloud no bigger then a man's hand, in short space ouerspread the face of the
whole Heavens. For grant, for the suppression of Idolatry, in case the
Magistrate will not do his office, that it is lawful for a private man to
take upon him to reform what he thinks amiss, and to do the part and
Office of a Magistrate (which must needs have bin their ground, if they had
any, for this action:) there can be no sufficient cause given, why by the same
reason, and upon the same grounds, a private man may not take upon him to
establish Laws, raise Powers, administer Justice, execute malefactors, or do
any other thing the Magistrate should do; in case the Magistrate slack to do
his duty in any of the premises. Which if it were once granted (as granted it
must be, if these men's fact be iustifyable;) every wise man sees, the end
could be no other but vast Anarchy and confusion both in Church and
Commonweal: whereupon must unavoidably follow the speedy subversion both of
Religion and State. If things be amiss, and the Magistrate help it not;
private men may lament it, and as occasion serves, and their condition and
calling permits, soberly and discreetly put the Magistrate in mind of it:
But they may not make themselves Magistrates, 30. The example of Phinehes
examined,
to reform it.

And as to the act of Phinehes: though I rather think he did; yet what if he
did not well in so doing? It is a thing we are not certain of: and we must
have certainer grounds for what we do, then Phinehes had the Magistrates
authority to enable him to that attempt? It is not altogether improbable (to
my apprehension) from the fifth Verse of the chapter where the Story is laid
down, Numb. 25. 5. especially paralleld with another Story of much like
circumstances, Exodus 32. 27. that as there the Levites, so here Phinehes drew
the sword in execution of the express command of Moses the supreme Divines to
this and the like instances drawn from some singular actions of Gods
Worthies;) Men of Heroical spirits and gifts, such as were David, Samson,
Ehud, Moses, Elias, and some others, especially at such times as they were
employed in some special service for the good of Gods Church, were exempt from
the common rules of life: and did many things, (as we are to presume) not
without the Nec Samson aliter excusatur, quod scipsum cu^ hostibus ^uin^ domus
oppressit, nisi quod latenter Spiritus Sanctus hoc iusserat, qui per illum
miracula faciebat. Augustine. l. 1. de ciu. Dei ca. ^1. Si desenditur non fuisse
peccatum, priuatum hab^isse Consilium indubitanter credendus est. Bern.
secret motion and direction of Gods holy and powerful Spirit, which were
therefore good in them (that secret direction being to them loco specialis
mandati, like that to Gen 22. 2.
Abraham for sacrificing his son) but not safe, or lawful for us to imitate.
Opera liber^ spiritus, Chytr. in Genesis 14. and in Exodus 32.
say Divines, non sunt exigenda ad regulas communes, nec trahenda in exemplum
vitae. The extraordinary Heroical Acts of Gods Worthies are not to be
measured by the common rules of life, nor to become exemplary unto others. Of
which nature was 1. Sam. 17.
David's single combat with Goliath; and Judge. 16. 30.
Samsons pulling down the house upon himself and the Philistines; and Exodus
2. 12
Moses slaying the Egyptian; and Judge. 3. 15, etc.
Ehuds stabbing of King Eglon,; and 4. King. 1. 10. 12.
Eliahs calling down for fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their
fifties, and diverse others recorded in Scripture. Of which last fact we have
our blessed Saviors judgment, in Luke 9. that it was done by the
extraordinary and peculiar instinct of Gods Spirit, but is not to be imitated
by others, without Imitando ab alijs exprimi nec poss^ut, nec debent, nisi
e^dem (...), Spiritus excitentur. Chytr. in Exodus 2.
particular certain assurance of the like-instinct. Where when the Disciples
would have called down for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritanes, and alleged
Elias for their precedent; Luke 9. 54.
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them, as Elias did? His answer was with a kind of indignation (as both his
(...) Luk 9. 55.
gesture and speeches show) Nescitis cuius spiritus estis; You know not what
manner of spirit you are of. Elias was endued with an extraordinary spirit, in
the freedom whereof he did what he then did: but it is not for you or others
to propose his example, unless you can demonstrate his Spirit. And if Phinehes
Act also was (as most De Phinees au^em dicendum est, quid ex inspiratione
diuina, zolo Dei commotus, hoc fecit, Aquin. 2. 2. qu* 60. art. 6. ad 2. and
Theologi passim.
think it was) such as these: it can no more justify the usurpation of
Magistracy; then David's act can bloody Duels, or Samsons selfemurther; or
Moses's secret slaughter, or Ehuds King-killing, or Eliahs private revenge. I
have stood the longer upon the discovery of this sin, that men might take
right judgment of it; and not think it either warrantable, or exc^sable by
any pretension of zeal, or of whatsoever other good: and that both such as
have gone too far this way in their practice already, for the time past, may
acknowledge their own oversight, and be sorry for it; and others seeing their
error, may for the time to come forbear such outrages, and keep themselves
within the due bounds of Christian sobriety, and their particular Callings. And
thus much of the former instance; in a matter of Commission. I am to give you
another, in a matter of Omission.

Every omission of a necessary duty is simply evil,. 31. The later instance.
as a sin. But affirmative duties, are but sometimes necessary; because they
do not obligare ad semper: as, being many, it is impossible they should. And
many times duties otherwise necessary; in case of Superior reason and duties
cease to be necessary pro hic and nunc: and then to omit them, is not to do
evil. Among other necessary duties this is one, for a Minister furnished with
gifts and abilities for it; to acquaint Gods people with all material needful
truths, as he can have convenient occasion thereunto. And (such conueniencie
supposed) not to do this, is Sacerdos deb^tor est, vt veritatem quam audiuit a
Deo libere praedice^. 1^. qu. 3. noli timere. Ex Ch^ysostom.
simply evil. Now then, to make the Case and the Question. The Case thus: A
Minister has just opportunity to preach in a Congregation, not his own; where
he sees or generally hears some error in judgment, or outrageous sin in
practice to be continued in with too public allowance: He has liberty to
make choice of his Text and theme, and leisure to provide in some measure for
it; and his conscience tells him, he cannot pro hic and nunc direct his
speech with greater service to Gods Church, then against those errors or
sins. He sees on the other side some withdrawments: his discretion may
perhaps be called in question, for meddling where he needed not; he shall
possibly lose the good opinion of some, with whom he has held fair
correspondence hitherto; he shall preserve his own peace the better, if he
turn his speech another way. This is the Case. The Question is, whether these
later considerations, and the good that may come thereby, be sufficient to
warrant unto him the omission of that necessary duty?

The rule of my Text resolves it negatiuely: 32. A Minister, in what Cases he
may conceal some divine truths from his auditory;
they are not sufficient. The Duty being necessary, pro hic and nunc, it is
simply evil to omit it; and therefore it may not be omitted for any other
good. I deny not, but a Minister may with good discretion conceal many truths
from his flock; at least the opening and amplifying of them: if they be not
such, as are needful for them to know, either for the stablishment of Faith,
or practice of Life; as not only many nice Schoole-points and Conclusions are,
but also many Genealogies, and Leuiticall rites, and other things even in the
Scriptures themselves. Nay more, a Minister not only in discretion may, but is
even in Conscience bound, at least in the public exercise of his Ministry, to
conceal some particular truths from his Auditory; yea though they be such as
are needful for the practice of life, and for the settling of men's consciences:
if they be such withal, as are not fit to be publicly spoken of; as are many
Resolutions of Cases appertaining to the seventh Commandment (Thou shall not
commit adultery;) and some also appertaining to the eighth (Thou shall not
steal.) Our men Moulin. Buckler of Faith, part. 2. sect. 4. and not only
ours, but some of their own too: See Espenceus ad Tit. cap. 1.
justly condemn the Popish Casuists, for their too much liberty in this kind
in their Writings: Whereby they reduce vices into an Art, under color of
reproving them; and convey into the minds of In quibus plus proficit vitiorum
ignoratio, quam cognitio virtutis. Justin. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2.
corrupt men, Notions of such prodigious filthiness, and artificial
Leger-du-maine, as perhaps otherwise they would never have dreamed on, or
thirsted after. The loose writings of the unchaste Poets are but Quis veteru^
Poetarum pl^s obsco^nitatis, impuritatis, flagitiorum, professus (...), quam
doc^t Poenitentiale Burchardi? Quot sint, qui ignorarent multa, quae ibi
leguntur, nisi ex ipso didiciscent? I. R. in confut. fab. Burdon. page 305.
dull tutors of Lust, compared with the authorized Tomes of our severe Romish
Votaries. There be enourmous sins of this rank, which a modest man would be
ashamed so much as to name, especially in public. Now of these, only the
generalities would be touched in the public; the specialties not unfolded,
but in the private exercise of our Ministry: nor yet that promiscuously to
every one, that should out of curiosity desire satisfaction in them; but only
to such men, (and that but only so far,) as they may concern in point of
Conscience, and of practice: Besides these, there are other Cases many, in
which it may be more convenient to conceal, then to teach some divine truths
at some times, and in some places.

But yet as the Case is here proposed,. 33. and in what he may not.
if it be a truth questioned; about which Gods people are much distracted in
their opinions; much mistaken by some through error in judgment; much abused
by sinful, especially public practice; occasioning Scandals and offenses
among brethren; likely to be overwhelmed with custom, or multitude of those
that think or do against it; and be otherwise of material importance: I
take it, the Omission of it upon seasonable opportunity, is a grievous sin,
and not colorable by any pretense. Beloved, the Minister is not to come into
the Pulpit, as a Fencer upon the stage, to play his prize, and to make a fair
(...). 1. Cor. 9. 26.
flourish against sin, (Here he could have it, and there he could have it,
but has it no where:) but rather as a Captain into the Field, to bend his
forces especially against the strongest troops of the enemy; and to squander,
and break through the thickest ranks; and to drive at the Fight neither with
small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. 3. King, 22. 31.
fairest. It is not enough for a Prophet to Esaias 581.
cry aloud, and to lift up his voice like a trumpet, and to tell Judah and
Israel of sins, and of transgressions at large: but if he would whet them up
to the battle, he must give a more If the trumpet give an uncertain sound,
who shall prepare himself to the battle? 1. Cor. 14. 8.
certain sound; he must tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her
transgressions. If there be in Damascus, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus, or Judah,
or Israel; Amos 1. and 2.
three transgressions, or four, more eminent then the rest: it is fit, they
that are sent to Damascus, and Moab, and Ammon, and Tyrus, and Judah, and
Israel, should make them hear of those three or four, more then all the rest.
Sins and Errors, when they begin to get head and heart, must be handled
roughly Silence in such a case is a kind of flattery: and it is Pene idem est.
fidem nalle ass^rere* and nega^e. Fulgent* lib. 1. ad Thrasim. cap. 1. Sicut
incauta locutio in errorem per^ra^it, ita indiscretum silentium in errore
rel^nquit. Greg. in Moral.
almost all one, when sins grow outrageous, to hold our peace at them, and to
cry Peace, Peace unto them. Our Apostle in Act. 20. would not have held
himself sufficiently discharged from the guilt of other men's blood; if he had
shunned (as occasion was offered) to have declared unto them Act. 20. 26, 27.
(...), even the whole counsel of God.

In my Application of this Instance and Case, 34. A more particular
Application, in defense of (...) former Sermon.
blame me not, if I do it with some reference to my self. Being heretofore by
appointment, as now again I was, to provide my self for this place against
such a meeting as this is; as in my conscience I then thought it needful for
me, I delivered my mind, (and I dare say, the Truth too, for substance)
something freely, touching the Ceremonies and Constitutions of our Church. And
I have now also with like freedom, showed the unlawfulness of the late
disorderly attempts in this town; and that from the ground of my present Text.
I was then blamed for that; I think unjustly; (for I do not yet see what I
should retract of that I then delivered:) and it is not unlikely, I shall be
blamed again for this, unless I prevent it. You have heard now already, both
heretofore, that to judge any man's heart; and at this time, that to slander any
truth, are (without repentance) sins justly damnable: (...) they that offend
either in the one, or the other, their damnation is just. To preserve therefore
both you from the Sin, and my self from the Blame; consider, I pray you,
with Reason and Charity, what I shall say.

You that are our hearers, know not with what hearts we speak unto you: that
is only known to our own hearts; and to 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
God, who is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. That which you
are to look at, and to regard, is, with what (...). Act. 17. 11. Non
requiritur quis, vel qualis praedicet; sed quid praedicet. Distinct. 19.
Secundum (...). Plat. in Charmide.
truth we speak unto you. So long as what we preach is true, and agreeable to
Gods Word, and right reason: you are not, upon I know not what light surmizes
or suspicions, to judge with what spirits, or with what dispositions of heart
we preach. Whether we 1. Phi. 15. 16, 17, 18,
preach Christ of envy, and strife, or of good will; whether sincerely, or of
contention; whether in pretense, or in truth, it is our own good, or hurt: we
must answer for that; and at our peril be it, if we do not look to that. But
what is that to you? Notwithstanding every way, so long as it is Christ, and
his truth which are preached, it is your part therein to rejoice. If an Gal. 1.
8, 9.
Angel from heaven should preach any untruth unto you, (...), Let him be
accursed: but if the very Devil of hell should preach the truth, he must be
heard, and believed, and obeyed. So long as Math. 23. 2. 3
Scribes and Pharisees hold them to Moses Text and Doctrine, let them be as
damned Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Math. 23. 13, 14, etc.
Hypocrites, as Scribes and Pharisees can be: yet all whatsoever they bid you
observe, that you are to observe and do.

Let me then demand: Did I ever deliver any untruth? It had been well done
then to have shown it, that I might have acknowledged, and retracted it. Did I
speak nothing but the truth? with what conscience then could any that heard me
say, as yet I hear some did; That I preached factiously, That I came to cast
bones among them, That I might have chosen a fitter Text, That I might have had
as much thanks to have kept away? For Faction; Peace of the Church, and the
Unity of Brethren. casting bones (if that must needs be the phrase) they were
cast in these parts long before my coming by that great enemy to peace and
unity, and busy sower of discord, the Devil: otherwise I should not have
found at my first coming such snarling about them, and such Gal. 5. 15.
biting and de^ouring one another, as I did. My endeavor was rather to have
gathered up the bones, and to have taken away the matter of difference, (I
mean, the error in judgment about, and inconformity in practice unto the
lawful Ceremonies of the Church) that so if it had been possible all might have
been quiet, without despising or judging one another for thanks; I hold not
that worth the answering: alas it is a poor aim for Gods Minister, to preach
for thanks.

Text and Argument, both then and now: how is it not unequal, that men, who
plead (so as none more) for liberty and plainness in reproving sin, should
not allow those that come amongst them that liberty and plainness against
themselves and their own sins? I dare no^ appeal to your selves. Have you
never been taught that it is the Ministers duty, as to oppose against all
errors and sins in the general, so to bend himself (as near as he can)
especially against the apparent errors and sins of his present auditorie?
And do you not believe it is so? Why then might I not nay, how ought I not,
bend my speech, both then against a common error of sundry in these parts in
point of Ceremony; and now against the late petulancy, (or at least oversight)
of some mis-guided ones? The noise of these things abroad; and the scandal
taken thereat by such as hear of them; and the ill fruits of them at home in
breeding iealousies, and cherishing contentions among neighbo^rs: cannot but
stir us up, if we be sensible (as every good member should be) of the damage
and loss the Church acquireth by them, to put you in mind and to admonish you
(as opportunities inuit us) both privately and publicly. Is it not time,
trow ye, to thrust in the sickle, when the fields look white unto the
Harvest? Is it not time our Pulpits should a little echo of these things, when
all the Country far and near ringeth of them?

For my own part; how ever others censure me, I am sure, my own heart tells
me, I could not have discharged my Conscience; if being called to this place,
I should have balked what either then or now I have delivered. My conscience
prompting me, all circumstances considered, that these things were pro hic and
nunc necessary to be delivered, rather then any other: if for any outward
inferior respect I should have passed them over with silence; I think I
should have much swarued from the Rule of my Text, and have done a great evil,
that some small good might come of it. But many thousand times better were it
for me, that all the world should censure me for speaking what they think I
should not; then that my own heart should condemn me for not speaking what
it tells me I should. And thus much of things simply evil.

I should proceed to apply this Rule, We must not do evil,. 35. The
conclusion.
that good may come; unto evils, not simply, but accidentally such: and that
both in the general, and also in some few specials of greatest use; namely,
unto evils which become such through Conscience, Scandal, or Comparison. In my
choice of this Scripture, I aimed at all this: and had gathered much of my
provision for it. But the Cases being many and weighty; I foresaw I could not
go onward with my first project, without much wronging one of both: either the
things themselves, if I should contract my speech to the scantling of time; or
you, if I should lengthen it to the weight of the matter. And therefore I
resolved here to make an end; and to give place (as fit it is) to the business
whereabout we meet. The Total of what I have said, and should say; is in
effect but this: No pretension of a good end, of a good meaning, of a good
event, of any good whatsoever; either can sufficiently warrant any sinful
action to be done, or justify it being done: or sufficiently excuse the
Omission of any necessary duty, when it is necessary. Consider what I say,
and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Now to God the Father,
Son, and holy Spirit, etc.

FINIS.

