THE THIRD DAYS CREATION.

By that most excellent, learned, and divine Poet, William, Lord Bartas.

Done verse for verse out of the original French by THOMAS VVINTER, Master of
Arts.

At sacri vates, and diuum cura vocamur:
Sunt etiam qui nos numen habere putant.
Ovid, Amorum lib. 3. Eleg. 8.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Clerk. 1604.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND hopeful Prince Henry, by the grace of God Prince of
Wales, Knight of the most renowned order of the Garter, etc.
ALthough (most gracious Prince) it be a common received opinion, that the
fruits of learning are only sweet, and the roots bitter; yet to him that will
be but a little conversant in the Hexameron of Du Bartas, it will rather appear
a paradox then a sound position. For though his subject be very excellent, and
consequently very difficult, for (...); yet he has made such an insensible
mixture of profit and pleasure, and so artificially co^pounded them together,
that when the reader thinks peradventure but to tickle his ear, with the
sweet measure and delicate cadencie of a maiestical verse; he finds that both
Divinity and Philosophy do steal upon him unawares, and make him learned, ere
he think of being taught. Which I judge to be one of many reasons, why your
Kingly Father in those his learned instructions to you his dearest Son, does
grace him with so high a commendation; that he not only thinks him most
worthy to be (...) (...).
read by any Prince, or other good Christian; but does specially wish you to be
well versed in his works. Wherein his Majesty has been so much pleased, that
part of his poetical exercises at vacant hours, have been translations of
some of his poems; delighting to beautify his books and speeches with such
pit^ie sayings, as do abound in this incomparable Poet. The consideration
hereof makes me presume, that this Translation which here I offer to your
Princely view, shall not want gracious acceptance. Whereof I do the rather
assure my self, remembering your graceful embracing of my former Essay of this
very nature, coming but accidentally unto your hands. In which confidence
reposing my hopes, I humbly presume to take my leave; continually praying for
your Graces happy growth in all Princely and heroical virtues.

Your Highness in all humblesse of duty T. WINTER.

Sur le troisiesme jour de la premiere Sepmaine, du Sieur Du Bartas, traduict
en Anglois par Tho: Winter.
QVittant le pourpris and plancher de l'air,
D'ou chet la gresle, esclairs, vents, and frimats,
Q^i descochez nous liurent maints combats;
Tu prends ton vol verse la Terre and la Mer.
Ou pourmenant par les flairants destours,
Tu ^ueilles de leur sein plants and fleurs,
Bassinez du ciel, nourriz par ses pleurs,
Alaictez d'eau qui la train son course.
Puis soubs les monts les riches mineraux,
Q^i nous font tant de biens, and tant de maux
Vas recerchant, Or, Argent, Plomb, and Fer.
Lors regaignant des costauts le hault doz,
Et couronnant la terre de ton loz,
Fais icy le Printemps de ton Hyuer.
Iean Sanford.

Ad Thomam Winterum Gulielmi Salustij Metaphrasten.
NOmina qui nobis prima imposuere, videntur
Fatidicis cecinisse modis, quae fata futura, Allusum est ad Ausonij Epigram.
19.

Quae vitae studia, and quantum praecordia fumant
Ardore A Ethereo: sic dictus virbius olim
Hippolytus, quod equis sparsim discerptamarinis
Membra iacent: Medicus sic Virgilianus Iapis
Et magnum augurium Brumali nomine iactas
O Wintere nouem soboles charissima Musis!
Nam deus aequoreas qui cuspide temperat vndas
Te vatem pelago, Phoebo cedente, dicauit.
Ergo age sortitus Brumali a frigore nomen
Perge tuo augurio Neptunia regna refer
Frigidiora noui mundi loca; qualiter olim
Vel dicto tantum verbo, difflauexat vndas
Ille sator mundique opifex a vertice terrae:
Qualiter, and tumidas in vertice comprimit vndas,
Littoribusque datis incingit Nerea ponto;
Qualiter Amphitrite impleto ventre tumescit,
An compressa deo Neptuno, an Sydere tacta
Tethyos vnda vagae Lunaribus aesluet horis,
Expedias; mundi sunt haec arcana refusi.
Quin age commotum Neptunum hortamine blando
Alloquere, vt retrahat truculenti Immanis habenas,
Et refugis imo in Barathro se fluctibus abda^.
Quanquam amnes decet ira, tamen Neptune quiescas;
Non timidi fluctus superare repagula possunt.
Haec miranda Dei quae primum idiomate sacro
Et numeris, dicente Deo, dictante Propheta
Sunt signata pijs, quae dudum Gallia nouit
Art tua, pensoque tuo divine Salusti.
Perge tuo ingenio nostrae procudere genti,
Et patria cantare sono secreta profundi
Wintere; vt vulgus cognoscat in aethere summo
Qui sedet Omnipotens, ima quid praestet Abysso,
Et laudet, timeatque admireturque potentem.
Ioannes Dunster.

Ad Eundem.
QVando alimenta calor coquit, and been digerit; illud
Quod capit haec, fiet pinguius inde magis;
Anglia sermones peregrinos concoquit; ergo
Facta est pinguescens inde opulenta magis:
Inque Hye me accrescit viuus calor; vnde profectum
Totum opus euenta non caruisse potest.
Hoc laudi est (Wintere) tibi; been concoquis arts
Linguas, sermones tanquam alimenta tuos.
Thomas Masonus.

In DIEM tertiam BARTASSII a Tho. VVINTERO Anglice redditam.
BARTASSII secunda, tibi fuit DIES
WINTERE prima: primus idcirco liber
Rores canebat, fulmina and coeli faces:
At nunc secundo (qui tuus labor) libro
Flores canuntur, flumina, and facies soli.
Haec tibi secunda, tertia est illi DIES.
In prima haberis omnibus vates prior.
BARTASSIO excepto vnico vatum patre:
Satis est Homeri si istius fueris Maro.
Prodis secundus in secund^ Nemini
Dum tersiore tertiam versu canis,
Adusque vatis sidus interpres boni.
Sic cautus ipse, dum DIES trudit DIEM
( WINTERE Musis VERIS assulgens vice)
Prehendis ansam Temporis, captas DIEM,
Tamque Bona sequitur prima quam fuit Bona.
Nathanael Tomkins.

In tertium and quasi Mercurialem Diem primae Hebdomadis Guli^lmi Salustij.
ECce Deo est sua cuique dies, nec numine ab vno
Concipit auspicium Lucifer omnis idem,
Altera Sithonio lux est exorta Gradiuo,
Tertia Mercurio prodijt ista dies:
Credo nec antiquos decepit ^abula vates,
Spirat enim numen Lumen vtrumque suum.
Interpres facunde Deum, te namque magistro
Interpres lucis prodijt ecce tuae.
Si fuit vlla dies solemn non passa cadentem,
Splendeat haec, nunquam sole cadente, dies.
Henricus Ashwood.

The Argument.
THE Lord BARTAS having delivered in the former Dayes-worke, an excellent
discourse of the four elements in general, and therein more particularly
comprised both the nature of the fire and the air: does in this third book
(which is an explanation of the third days creation,) descend from the
superior to the two inferior elements; in the description of which, as of the
former, being always like himself, that is, most excellent; he does first
inuoke the Divine assistance; then branching his whole discourse into two
principal parts, he does in the former describe the manner, how the waters
were assembled together for the discovery of the dry land; how the sea is
situated and restrained within his bounds, which it neither does, nor can
transgress; and how it imbraceth the earth in his arms, which together with
the more famous rivers of the world are repeated. Unto which discourse he
adds a brief consideration of fountains, brooks, land-flouds, and rivers;
of their increase and falling into the sea, which being no whit augmented by
their continual access, brings much admiration to those, that labor in
searching the reasons of the ebbing and flowing of the same: which, though it
be a question full of difficulty, and either merely or nearely vnresoluable,
yet does he couch in a very few verses, as much as reason or probability can
persuade in so abstruse a speculation. Then entreating of the saltness of the
sea, and of the admirable effects of diverse springs and bathes, he concludes
the first part of this book with an enumeration of those singular commodities
which all creatures receive by the conglobation of the earth with the water. In
the second part, which is an ample and elegant description of the earth, the
stabilitie and utility thereof is first deciphered; the quaking ouertures and
compass of the same are proposed: which together with the sea, being but a
point compared to the heavens; does give him occasion to deduce therehence a
necessary exhortation, to withdraw the worldly minds of wretched men from the
over greedy pursuit of these earthly things. Now forasmuch as the earth so
separated from the sea, was by the heavenly Providence pre-ordained to be the
mother, nource, and entertaining hostess of all mankind, he does most
artificially emblason the profitable beauties thereof, as being most variously
adorned with trees, plants, herbs and flowers of such singular and sundry
virtues for the use of man, that they seem to have engraven upon them, and
that in Capital letters, the abundant wisdom, and super abundant grace of
the puissant Creator. Which is amplified by the admired sympathies of diverse
creatures; by the variety of grain, of wools, silks, cottons, flax, hemp,
and such other commodities as the diuersified disposition of sundry clymates
produces; all which are yearly renewed by that provident hand, from which
they received their original virtues. Among other wonders of nature, he
mentions the tree called Cocos, whose strange proprieties are almost
incredible; and desiring more perfectly to anatomize the whole body and bowels
of the earth, he rips up her very entrails, to find what metals and minerals
are treasured up in that great storehouse of the world. Then teaching the true
use of gold and iron, he speaks of the admired virtue of the Lodestone, of
the mariners compasse-needle, and sundry sorts of earth which by experience
are of themselves medicinable. Which having performed, he greets the earth,
painting out in fresh and lively colors her deserved praises: and by the
example both of ancient Patriarchs, and men of great esteem among the Painims)
he blames those that contemn husbandry, and the profitable knowledge of
simples. And so with an excellent amplification of the unmatchable pleasures
and happy security of the country life: he conclusiuely prays, that he may
either end his quiet days in the country, or spend them in the Court without
suspicion of flattery.

The third Day of the first Week of the most excellent, learned, and divine
Poet, William, Lord Bartas.
MY Muse that whilome ouer-topt each sphere, The Poets tian sition from the
superior to the inferior Elements.

Whose course life-giuing influence does bear;
That in so brave a style discoursed of Winds,
And ayrie meteors frighting silly minds:
And did of sulphur'd-lightning storms entreat,
And made her verse so grave a path to beat:
Creeping to day on the base elements,
Must cloth her speech with base habiliments:
Where if by chance she sing a lofty strain,
She Is lifted higher by the swelling Maine.
Great King of earth, and of the liquide plain, His invocation

Whose very breath does dreadfully constrain
The sturdiest hills to quake, and often exaults
The stormy waves up to the starrie valuts:
Grant that my measuring skill may well suruay,
The fleeting and firm element this Day.
Grant that my learned verse may well discover
The nature of the sea, and of our Mother:
That with a flowring style I may pourtray
The flowers* that cloth the earth with rich array.
All those high hills, whose forked tops do border
Upon the clouds, that wander in disorder,
Did hide their bo^sed backs under the flood,
Which on the earth a pudled ma^ish stood;
When heavens great King, desiring liberally
T'en^eoffe us with this low worlds Empirie,
Gave charge, that Neptune should the waters gather,
And show the earth, which but a little rather
They had ore-whelm'd; and be content with pleasure,
That one whole day he had this All in seazure.
Just as the heavens showring tears adowne, Si^il.

And froathie floods hiding the plainer ground,
Do make the fields a sea; then ceassing spoil,
Inuisibly forsakes the ^urrowed soil,
Ploude by the painful ox; and seems to drink
It self, and to some channel straight to shrink:
So does the sea this day leave his possession
Of mountains, knoles, and fields by retrogression.
And in the womb of a less continent,
Tuns up with speed that watrie element.
Whether at first the light, by God created, Co^iectural reasons how ^he waters
were gathered together for the disco^erie of the (...).

Had store of this moist humor elevated
Unto such places, as then highest were,
Of which he might next day make every sphaere:
Or whether the Almighty had created
New rooms, to which these waters were translated:
Or opening the poares of hill and plain,
Would hide some arm of that so spacious maine:
Or whether thickening their thinner smother,
That like a cloak of clouds this All did cover,
He did imprison them within their banks,
Against which the Ocean plays his daring prankes,
Yet dares not to transgress: for Gods own might, The Sea consined to
impassable bounds by* the pu^ssance of the Almigh^.

Kenning their nature mutinous and light,
Thus bridled them, and against their fierce brauadoes,
Made of the flower-clad earth his barricadoes:
So that sometimes the fleeting hills which roar,
And threaten to orewhelme the bordring shore,
Do wast in froath, and breaking near the brim,
Dare not beyond their watrie dwelling swim.
And what could herein be impossible
To this high Admiral, whose terrible
And powerful voice did riue the depths in twain,
To save his flock; and made the ruddie maine Exodus 14.

Hang in the air? that forced Iordans course Iosuah. 3. 16.

Back to retire toward his double source?
That drowned the world become deuoid of good? Genesis 7. 21.

That made the rock gush forth a little flood? Exodus 17. 8.
The Earth the great ^land of the world.

Lo then the waters crooked circling path,
An Island of this world yformed has:
As boiling lead poured on a place vnplaine, Simil.

Does diverse forms and sundry fashions gain,
Here runs straight, there windeth like a snake,
Here breaking hands, there hands again does take,
And in an instant makes his small hot rivers,
Within the mould to show themselves so diverse:
So God did spread the waters on the ground,
In steeple form, croysure, and figure round,
Crooked and square, that in the water clear,
The earth might fair more rich and fair appear.
Such is the German arm, the bay of Ganges,
The Gulf of Persia, and the sea that ranges
By Happy Arabie, such the whole Ocean
That parts in three this All by od proportion.
And though that every arm how long soever, Why the ^mes of the Sea are
subdivided into lesser channels.

Compared unto the whole be but a river:
Yet makes a hundred seas in course and name,
By's nookes and crookes, the water still the same:
To slake the thirsty dryness of the plains,
With welcome moisture of their secret veins:
To rampire in the nations, and to daunt
The proudest champion Princes when they vaunt:
To confine kingdoms with eternal borders,
To ease the travel of the trading orders,
Shortning their way, the wind helping to get,
With in a month from The East to the Sunset.
Nor does the earth give to the sea alone The most renowned rivers of the world
rely used.

These bigger arms; she gives the river Don,
And Nilus, Egypts store house, which does hide
Himself so often in the deserts wide.
She gives the Rhene, Danubius, and Euphrates,
Proud Tigris, issue of the hill Niphates,
Broad Ganges river of such ample same,
That Eastern India takes of it her name:
The golden Tagus, Thames, Mariza, Rhone,
Tartarian Rha, Po, Seina, and Garone:
Garone, whose name shall sound so in my verse,
As shall perchance ring through the Universe.
She gives R^o de la Plata.
Parana yielding silver matter,
Great Darien which does new Castile water:
Maraignon too, floods of that newfound All,
Which men for wealth the Golden land may call.
The fruitful earth from her does draw her streams,
And all the water running in her veins:
Which she (not thanklesse) does in time and place,
Repay both ways, as it received was. S^ll.

For as the Lembicke heated, often does hap
T'exhale a vapor to his vpmost cap;
And wanting means to draw that fragrant sweat
Higher, does gently thicken it, and let
That clear as crystal humor drop by drop,
Replenish the receiver to the top:
So the thin humor of the brinie streams
Is drawn into the air by sunnie beams,
Which turned to water showers it down, and makes
That to the sea through the earth a course it takes.
For the dry earth this falling water strains How the springs are engendered:

Through the thin boulter of her hollow veins,
Then makes it way, and from the rockie mountains,
Makes bubble daily millions of fountains;
Of these the little gurgling brooks do grow,
Which joined do make the wasting torrents flow,
The wasting torrents do proud rivers form,
Of which the sailing flood is eftsoons borne.
The snowie hills that border near the sky,
Unto this grouth contribute willingly: How the torrents or landflouds and
rivers are engendered.

For Titans task begun anew, at times
Which bring the fair spring to the colder climes,
He melts upon their backs the heaps of snow;
Their tops turn green, each where the waters flow
Tumbling, and bubling as they froathing run
Along steep trackes of craggie mountain stone,
They make a hundred torrents, one of which
Seeing his brother ouergo him mich,
Hastens his course to make with him an union,
Whiles that a third and fourth help their communion;
Running the same carier, and quickly drown Of their falling into the sea.

Their names and selves in streams of more renown.
Those streams of some great river are devoured,
Which ouerswaying fields, at length is powered
Into that Rendez-vous, where God assigned
They should discharge the taxes they were fined.
Yet all these rivers running to the sea, Why the (...) a (...) of the fresh
water^.

Do not a whit enlarge that watrie Lea:
For besides that these floods heap't all the one top,
Compared to it, are less then one poor drop:
Yet does the Sun and Aeolus his race,
Sweeping eftsoons great Neptunes sweating face,
Exhale as much from that broad wauing field,
As the air and earth unto the same do yield.
But as the quaking heat, and shiuering cold, Of the (...) of the ^ea.

And gnashing teeth which do the feavrous hold,
Come not hap-hazard, but in time and order,
Bring the weak trembling members in disorder.
So does the sea by sits approach to land,
And coming to, forsakes again the strond.
Whether the sea moved with Gods right hand, The thre^ (...) to^ching the ^luxe
and (...) of the sea. Simile.

Took first this motion, and may not stand
Idle not any while from's moving course;
Like as a whirlegig once turned, does force
It self to move around, and virtue takes
From him that formerly the motion makes.
Or that the sea which men the Midland call, 2

Be but a parcel of that liquide All,
Whose waves falling into some higher ocean,
Do dash themselves in their so angry motion
Against the rockie hills, whose solid strength,
Quelling their force, makes them recueile at length.
Or that the Moon, whose influence above 3

Ruling moist bodies, cause it so to move.
And to speak truth, we see the sea to slow, Why this last opinion is most
probable.

When on our Hemisphaere the Moon does show:
And suddenly to ^bbe, when toward Spain
The Cressant takes her backward course again.
Again soon as her face, constant in changing,
Increasing shows the Antipodes her ranging,
It marches forth, and when her waning fire
Does pass the other noone, it does retire.
Yea which is more, the Midland sea, we know, Why some arms of the sea have
greater tides then othersome.

Does farther then the Tuscane ocean flow:
Or that hight Bosphorus: and no such motion
Does stir some duller places of the ocean:
Because the Luna.
silver Planet, which will have
Rule of the flowing and the ebbing wave,
With lesser force does shed her influence
Upon a sea, where the circumference
Is mountainous, or streightened twixt two stronds,
Then where the ocean seems to want such bonds.
As in the Summer, if the windy train Simile.

Of A Eolus be calm, with lesser pain
The Delphian flame the champion fields does dry,
Then dales immured with hills and mountains hie.
If so this flux do show it self more plain Why the eb^ing (...) is better
percei^ed near the sh^e then in the maine sea.

Hard by the shore, then in the deeper maine:
The pulse (Natures true clock) it does resemble,
Whose extreme part more then the mid does tremble;
At least it seems so. Now the starrie king
Is equal to the queen, in governing
The waters. For his hot light-giuing beams, How the saltness of the sea is
caused.

Scorching the fishie vessel-bearing streams,
And sucking up in's each days iournement,
The sweeter juice of that cold element:
Leaves tart and thickened liquor in the Deep, A transition from the sea, to
the consideration of (...) admirable effects of sund^ie springs and rivers.

With salt that on the vpmost top does fleet.
But see, how hear the sea does pull me down
Into deep seas, where I am like to drown.
See how his flux makes my words ouerflow.
Well then let us hie to land, that sitting low
Beside the brim of river, lake and brook,
Our thoughts into their strange effects may look,
Whose maruels nigh exceeding says and wonder,
Astound our wits, our eyes, our ears like thunder.
The spring of Med^o tu ^ corniger (...), vn^ die (...) est, (...). (...) 15.
Meta^.
Hamon, while the Sun gives light,
Is cold as ice; and contrary, by night
Though the cold Cressant make the night less hot,
Yet boiles and fumes like water in a pot.
Some hold for certain, that the boughs of wood,
Which being wind-broke, fall into the flood
Of In stumi^e Silaro vltra (...), non virgul^ modo immersa, verum and ^o l^a
lapidescunt. Pli* lib 2. c. 103.
Silaris, or of Eurimedon,
Are turned both wood, and bark, and leaf to stone.
Ah, can my verse omit that stream in Josephus lib. 7. bell. Iu^, cap. 24.
Jury,
That every Sabbath stays his running fury
Religiously? unwilling to be pained
That seventh day, which God for rest ordained.
If so the shepherd chaunt his lovely rounds
By the Eleusina brook, those musickes sounds
Do make the water boil, and dance and skip,
And point by point the rusticke measures keep.
Plin lib 2. cap. 1 ^3.
Cephis turns white, Ceron black, Xanthus red,
The fleecie troops which there are watered.
Like an Solin^s cap 40.
Arabian spring, that bordring near
To the red sea, turns red their woolly wear.
You Vide Ph^. lib. 2 cap 103. vbi de (...) so^e loquitur.
Solan waters, and In Andro (...) sula templo Liaberi pa^ so^tem nonu Ianuarijs
^per vini sap^e flu^re (...) ter co^. credit. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103.
Andreian river,
Whence comes that oil and wine, which you yield ever
Once in a year? art thou (O earthie Dame)
So fruitful? or beneath this worldly frame
Are vines and gardens? and in them do lurk
Men, that for Bacchus and Minerua work?
What shall I say of thee Sclauonian spring? Pl^ ^id. (...). ^. (...). ^

Or what of thee Dodonian fountain sing?
When one burns cloth, the other wood does stench
Half burnt, and kindles what it erst did quench.
Faith, I should place these virtues admirable,
In the false Register of every fable;
Were not for due respect, which (young) I give
To unreproved Writers that did live:
And that the greedy Pilots of our days,
Had not found rivers stranger many ways.
In this great number of such differing brooks, A continuation of the f^rmer
argument, confirmed by ocu lar witness, of later ages.

Of which a scholar might compile great books,
I Will choose far hence in places harbourlesse,
Some five or six, as true as held truthlesse.
In th'Ile of Fer, (mong other it is an I Will,
Which men of old with Insulae formatae. the Canatie Islands.
Happy name did style)
The savage folk draw not their watrie food,
As others do, from spring or running flood:
Their drink is in the air, their waters source
Takes from a weeping tree his dropping course:
A weeping tree growing in a dry field,
Does make his sweating leaves sweet liquor yield:
And (as the vine late cut, more fruit to bear,
Distilleth gently many a pearled tear)
Ceaseless it droppeth down a water clear,
Where round about the people pressen near,
Yet fail with all the vessels that they bring,
T'exhaust the streams of this one wooden spring.
In Thule.
Ice-land men do find two wondrous springs,
The one yields wax; the other changes things
Cast in, to stone, although his water hot,
Regurgeth bubbles, like a boiling pot.
In golden Peru near Saint Helens mount,
Defyling pitch does issue from a fount.
What should I say? this is that newfound All,
Whose rivers running to their Western fall,
Know bet then we what right use should be made
Of working daytime, and the chillie shade
Of th'idle night, and therefore run by day,
And spend the night in idle resting play.
Great God, I fear I jealous should be counted (...) and (...) me^ble for the
body.

Of thy great praise, if there were not recounted
In my unthankful verse such streams, as run
Through Alume, Lime, Saltpeter and Brimstone*
Whose virtues perfect medecines are held,
For maladies that strike us into eld
In th'Aprill of our age, and with great strife
Would antedate the period of our life.
Now as my Gascoigne is the happiest field A particular description of the
pleasant (...) profitable (...) of Gascoine.

^or corn, and wine, and men, the world does yield;
So free-cost baths do there abounden most,
There stranger people flock from every coast,
There the dry womb, the paralyticall,
The gowtie, vlc'rous, deaf, sciaticall,
Coming from East and Western parts, do gain
The speedy cure of their tormenting pain.
Witness Barege, Eucausse and the hot veins
Of Aigue-caud, Caudret and Baigner plains,
Baigner the beauty, paradise and praise
Of those high hills, on whom in alder days
The Hercules of France with child did bring
Pyrene, daughter to the * sire and King Bebrix.

Of Gascoins, whose attempts so generous
Show they deserved a sire so valorous.
The mountains whited with eternal snow,
Do slanker in a part in stately row.
The Immortal verdure of a smiling plain
Excelling A valley ^n ^ (...) he (...) of whose ^tion do ^ c^use other
pl^asant ^ces to be hyperbolically so called.
Tempe, hemmes it in again
On the other side, the houses new appear,
The very tiles do shine, a river clear
As Crystal, so transparantly does glide
In each street, that the pauement may be spide:
And though that yeie river run hard by
A bath, that cures every malady,
It keeps her nature, scorning all desire Voyez le neuf Mu^es ^y (...) a^ sune
des (...) p^ 165

To mix her coolness with the others fire.
But all these strange effects match not at all,
Strauge Lers, that from a rockie stone does fall.
If it be true, that Aristoteles non capit Euripi^, Euripu^ capiet Aristotelem.
Lauren. Valle dealog. de Libero a^bitrio.
one most rarely wise,
For want of skill the reason to comprise,
How seven times a day Plin. lib. 2 c 97* Pomp. M^la li. 2.
Euripus flows,
And seven times to his ebbing prison goes;
Egd with despair, and with great shame confounded,
Drowned him in floods more fadomed then sounded:
What would he do, if he should beat his brains,
About the spring that waters Masere plains,
Rising at Belestat, near th'hill of Fois,
That stores with wood the people of Toloise?
As often as Phoebus ending his carrier,
Each horizon with welcome light does cheer,
His burthen-bearing streams months five or four,
Does run and stay by turn in each half hour;
For one half hour you may pass over dry,
The other half it runs so stickerly,
As none can pass; his waters as they rise,
The most renowned streams would equalize:
A learned stream that does (Nature her guide)
Without a clock count every time and tide.
Now the great God by his eternal hand, Of the (...) o^ the earth and the sea.

Most wisely placed the water and the land:
For one requiring many moistning drops,
The other channels, banks and underprops,
He enterlin'd them: so that the earth widing
Her bosom to the sea, and the sea gliding
About, throughout, under this earthie round, That the earth and the water are
the center of the world, and why.

Both make the perfect center of the Mound.
For if their mingled selves be proved to be
Beside the mid of the worlds axeltree, 1

All climats should not have the silent night
In equal balance counterpoise the light.
The ill*deuided horizons decline 2

Would stretch too far on one side of the line:
The Antipodes or we should see by night 3

More then six signs to shed their glistering light.
No certain time should show th'eclipsed Moon, 4

The heavens deboshd should seasons alter soon.
This does suffice to show, that so compound The earth and the water make one
round globe.

Into one mass, they yet are fully round,
Which by a turning art made like a ball,
See day and night successively to fall.
For Americ, Dove, Pole surnamed Mark, The reason.

Nor any cunning pilot of a bark
One pole to the other ever could subdue,
Or living on the seas find countries new:
Nor ever lose the Northern star, to view
The Southern pole, if so the ocean blew
To fashion with the earth one globie tumor,
Did not each where circle his fleeting humor.
But (o thou heavenly workman) whose essays Why the water is of a sphearicall
figure.

Are nere in vain, what arches, or what stays
Could thou invent the sea to underprop,
That by a downward line it should not drop?
O God, is it, because the watrie mass 1

Would by his nature to the center pass,
And striving so the deepest depth to sound,
By falling by a line, remains round?
Or is it because the shoares and coasting banks 2

Captive the seas within their prouder flanks?
Or is it because the Sea some stay does win 3

By millions of rocks scattered therein?
Or is it alonely thy all-working grace 4

That makes it thus the tressed earth embrace?
It is thy hand, thy hand (O God) alone, A transition from the water to
the earth, whereof the figure, situation and stablenesse is described.

That firmes with piles man's habitation:
For though it hang in the air, or else be found
To swim upon the sea; though it be round,
And round about it each thing turn, nay more,
Though her foundations have been moved of yore;
Yet it unmoved is, that Adams race
Might here obtain a peaceful biding place. The earth the dearest mother the
tenderest nource and the kindest hostess that man finds.

It is the earth receives man being borne,
Received fosters him; become the scorn
Of other elements, by Natures enmity,
Her lap yields place for his last obsequie.
The air against us often does rebel,
The whelming waters show their malice fell
Against wretched men; against men supernall fire
As well as this below displayes his ire:
But of the four, only the humble earth
Is man's alone best friend after his birth.
It Is she alone, that never leaves the place,
Which erst was her assigned by thy grace.
Yet is it true, that execrable folk (...), the (...) of the earthquak^

With their deboshed manners, do provoke
Thy angry hand (O Lord) some piece to shake,
Although the total frame do never quake:
Aided with Northern winds, which being pent
Within her bowels, cause mad rumblement. ^.

^eare chils our hearts and makes our faces pale,
The wind does stir the woods without a gale:
High turrets tremble, and the infernal cave,
De^oures in choler many a city b^aue.
Since then the earthie and the watrie Round The whole (...) earth and the sea,
is but (...) point (...) to (...) he^uens, whereof the least (...) is eighteen
times b^gger then the earth.

Is center, heart, and nombrill of the mound;
And that, by reason, nothing closde about
Equals the thing enclosing it without:
Who doubts, but that this earthie watrie sphere
Does less proportion then the others bear?
Judge who so will; the greatness of this round,
Which we admiring, does us so astound,
Seems but a point to that high ^.
sphere above,
Which forces all the rest with him to move:
Since the least twinkling star, that with our eye
We see to glitter in the vaulted sky,
(If so Astronomers count not amiss)
Then the whole earth twice nine times greater is*
And if we count all that the Midland maine,
The Indian seas, and all their arms do gain,
Beside what other rivers do possess,
Or desert is by heat or colds excess,
This Little will* be naught. Lo here (^ men) ^ the earth bears to the heavens,
should reach men not to make a heaven of the earth.

The place, for which you heaven do contemn.
See with what confines your great'st renomie
Bounds your best actions proudest memory.
Ye Monarchs (thral'd to pride) that for the gains
Of one hairs breadth, hide the earth with slaughtred swains:
Corrupted Magistrates, that on your chaires
Sell causes as in markets or in faires:
Who traffiquing the Law profane your states,
To leave some trifle to your thanklesse brats:
You that do use upon use multiply,
You that do waights and measures falsify:
That so for you, the yoaked Ox may bear
The coulter, that the clodded earth does tear:
You that do sell your walls; you that would feign
Some inch of land upon your neighbor gain,
Moving by stealth and sacrilegious hands
The ma^kes, that bounded out your grandsires lands:
Alas what get you? When a warlike prince,
By force or fraud shall all the world euince:
A needles point, a moate, an atomie,
Shall be his virtues largest salarie*
A point his Empire, yea a very naught,
Yea less then nothing, if that less were ought.
When God (whose word does more of nothing make, ^

Then all the pains that proudest kings can take)
Had seuerald the ^louds, equald the fields;
Sunk down the valleys, blown up the hills;
Change, change (quoth he) o solid element,
Thy sadder weed t'a green habilement:
A fragrant flowring girlond be ywreathed
About thy forehead, by my fingers weaued.
Display thy periwinke; with finest paint
Embellish now thy bleake and paler taint.
That from henceforth, thy proper guests alone
May not be fed with plenty of thy womb:
But that thy stored lap may meat provide
For people of each element beside:
So that the water, air, and Angels dwelling
May of thy glorieiealously be telling.
He spoke, and straight the Fur that pitch does drop,
The gummie Larix, Cedar with high top,
And Box still green are placed in trouped row,
And on the highest tops of hills do grow.
The aco^ne-bearing Oak, the Carpie white,
The barke-exchanging Cork, and Elm upright,
On little hills and fields do pitch their ranks.
The writhing rivers border out their banks
With sailing Alder, with green Osier,
With Willow pale, and trembling Popular,
And many other trees for fuel made,
For building carpentrie, and beasts to shade.
Here hairie Peaches and the Orange golden,
Sweet Apricots, the Quince fair to beholden
With his white down, upon their backs they bear
Ywritten fair Gods all-prouiding care.
Sweet Smelling Apples, Nuts of either kind,
Idumean Dates, and Pears still apt to bind,
The milkie Fig, the double died Cherrie,
The sugared plumme, the hungry Olive berrie,
Present a pleasant spring unto the eyes,
And make each field a very Paradise.
Here Pepper grains like clustered Grapes assemble,
There Cynamon does grow; here Nutmegs tremble
With gentle gales, which do each year pouruey
For Bandan ylanders a public pray.
There the white sweetness of moist sugar, breeds
Within the bowels of Canarie reeds;
There balm in tears does drop; there the rich Vide Pl^. l. 12 cap. 14.
wood
Of Saba land weeps fuming incense good.
The loving Vine with winding arms embraces The praise of the vine and w^e
taken with moderation.

Her bearing husband, bout whose stock she traceth.
The Vine for fairness the other trees inferior,
As she for goodness is their far superior:
Her liquor sober-taken rarifies
The spirits, cheares the heart, and purifies
The brains, brings color, and awaketh
The appetite, cleares passages, and makes
Fresh heat, pure blood it breeds and subtilizeth
The gross, and the duld understanding wiseth,
Expels bad excrements, the bladder clears,
Preserues our body that to death anneareth.
Though the earth for sin, whereby our father old Though the degenerating
earth be far inferior to it self, in respect of her primitive beauty and
fertility during man's innocence, yet does the present condition thereof
minister more then sufficient matter to undeserving man for the celebration of
the prudence and providence of the omnipotent creator.

Banished his seed from heaven, no longer hold
Her former glory, having grau'd upon her*
The Eternal makers undeserved dishonor:
Though with the world she strike her self in years,
Though her fertility much less appears,
Like her who bruisd with many a woeful groan
Of bearing child, whose oft-conceiuing womb
Peopling almost the circuit of a parish,
At length becomes barren, dry and warish:
Yet does it yield an ample argument,
To praise the author of her ornament.
The pleasing spring does nere to me propose
The blew-flour'd Flax, or the carnation Rose,
The blushing Gellifloure in's purple fold,
The snow-white Lilly, or the Marigold,
But I admire the Painter that does trace
In them more colors, then Aurorae's face,
Or in that Bow, which on the thirsty plain
Does promise to shoure down his fruitful rain.
God not content to enrich with wholesome fruits, ^.

Perfume with smells, and cloth with flowrie suits
The plants; has in their roots laid up in store
A perfect curing salve for every sore.
Sure without them (death fights so many ways)
Man should not live full twenty years of days:
But (like the flower of flax, that dies in th'wombe
In one self day) his cradle should be's tomb,
His spring his winter, and his birth his death.
Good Lord, how many draw their gasping breath
By Stigian banks, and cured by herbs again,
Make greedy Pluto lose his hoped gain!
By them young Phoebus bearded cunning (...).
son
Restored the (...).
young man, that to death was done,
That did prefer, in modest chastity,
His death before incestuous venerie.
^.
Medea by their juice, to please her Jason,
Made young again cold and old*aged Aeson.
You herbs that do our life in life maintain,
And when it is gone do call it back again:
It Is not your juice dispersed in your veins,
That cur^s alone so many deadly pains:
But your mere smell, your only being by,
Against many dangers does us fortify,
Working such wonders as exceed belief,
Unless the hand and eyes do know the priefe. The (...) of (...). V^de P^n.
lib. 20. cap 8.

He that about his neck does suckorie bind,
It does expel the mists that make us blind;
So Cy^minus. Tradu^t si prag^ radi^em transgrediatur (...)* (...) accelerat,
etc. Diosc. lib* 2. c. 155
Swines-bread hung, does not alonely bring
Long travel to a quick delivering;
But more, if one with child do pass secure
Over the root, she is forced to endure
Abortment there: th'vnwholesome scorching blast,
Th'envenimd glass, nay poison creeping fast,
That so dispeoples all Cyrenia land,
Hurts not the man has Artemisia. Pl^n. lib. 25. cap. 7. Di^sco. li. 3. cap.
108.
Mug-wort in his hand.
The Pionie tied to an infants neck,
It gives unto that cruel Morb^ comi^.
Ill the check,
That tamed Hercules. If in thy brain
God Bacchus chance excessiuely to reign,
Cirkle thy front with Qut ex (...) ^on (...). (...). lib. 1. cap 24. Coro^ae
qu^que ex co (...) e^. (...). lib. 21. cap. 20.
Saffron gatherd new,
And thou shall suddenly that storm subdew.
The Sirens with their subtil-charming times,
The dankish noy some gales from Southern climes,
Hurt not at all, those that alonely use,
Between their teeth Angelica to bruise: Angelica.

A heavenly simple by an Angel brought,
As both the name and force thereof have taught.
So Burnet held within the hand, does stop (...)

The flux of blood which from the sick does drop.
And so his urine redly shall be varied,
That in his fist has Rul^ sieve (...). (...) a^ ud quosdam (inquit (...))
morbu^ reg^um sanar^ (...), etia^si ad^gatus spectet^r tantu^. lib. 24. cap 11.
An ^mplification of this discourse by other admirable instances.
madder long time carried.
The force of Woad is strange, which they that touch,
Do make the color of their humors such.
You Plants, your force does not alone extend
To men; but your strange force does make to bend
The fiercest creatures, and the Iron strong,
The legions black of the infernal throng,
The brightest lamps of heaven, if all be right,
That of Vide Pl^n. lib. 30. cap. 1.
Thessalian sorceries men write.
The Aconitum. (...) (vt satua est) (...) es admot^ (...) qui rurs^m Hellel^ri
contactu, ^ciiantur. Diosc. li. 4. cap 66. Plin. l 27. c. 2.
Libbards-bane touched does of sense deprive
The chequerd Scorpion, that was erst alive:
As Plin. l. 25 c. 10
Lingwort touched reuiues the force,
Which smotherd was in the dead-seeming corpse.
Serpents which Betonica vit tan^a per^betur vt ^clusae circulo cius serpents.
ipsae sese (...) flagella^ lo. Plin lib. 25. c 8 Ma^hiolus in 1. cap 4. lib
Diosc. a^th, that the I aliaus in commendation of any man's excel ling virtues,
do use this proue^biall speech, Tu (...) vntu ^he no he la Betonica that is,
You are more virtuous then Betoni^.
Betonie compasd around,
Advance their wrathful heads above the ground,
They hiss alowd, and from their fire-red eyes
The flames of burning candles seem to rise;
They stem each other, break their long alliance,
And wrathfully do make to each defyance.
With furious onset they together bring
Poison against poison, sting against a sting:
Their blood does soil the blew-green-yellow grounds,
Their bodies couerd are with deadly wounds;
Nay but one wound; and only death so cruel
Can from their fiery feud withdraw the fuel.
As this dissolues the knots of amity,
So Inue^it Lysi^ (...) herbam. Lysinachia^, vis (...) est, vt (...) dis
orda^ibus ^ugo imposit^, asp^ritate^ co^beat. Plin. li. 25. cap. ^.
Water-sage does stint the enmity
Of sighting Genets, if some careful eye,
The same unto their collars chance to tie.
If so a Mat. hiol. upon Diosc. allegeth as much out of Columella.
Hog out of a trough do seed
Made of the Decoctum soliorum cum vin^ potum (...) absunut. (...). (...). 1.
cap. 99.
Tamarix, his milt with speed
Does wast; as if his teeth did lately bruise
A^plenu^ vim han^ (...), vt per dies 40. pot^ Lientem absumat. Discor. lib. 3.
cap 128. Idem affirmat Plin. lib. 27. cap. 5.
Milt-wast, that cunningly does know to choose
By virtue strange among the bowels all
The milt, and hungerly thereon does fall.
Shall I stay here? the jades that feeding go
Upon the ground where The Italians (says Matthiolus) call this he^be
Sferra-cauallo, that is, Vnshoe horse. ^lorio seems to make it all one with
the he^be AEthiopis mentioned by Plini^ lib. 26. cap. 4.
Lunarie does grow
Their wondering master then away does ride
Unshod. Moonwort, where do that Loadstone hide,
That does the iron keep in humble awe?
Moonwort, where are thy pincers that do draw
So cunningly the iron? where do lay
That marshals hand that sweetly pulls away
Their nails? What lock can serve t'exclude
Your crafty skill, if so a horse well shood,
Pacing along where you your growing have,
Cannot be sure his nails from you to save?
But I do think, the world does not bring forth
On hills or dales a plant of rarer worth,
Then Produut i^ C^ta capra^ sagittis per^ussas, (...) herbae pastu eas
excutere. Diosc. lib. 3. ca. 31. Idem affirmat Plin. lib 8. cap. 27 lib. 25.
cap 8. Aelian. lib. 1. de varia hist. Sohu cap. 31
Dittanie, which eaten by the Dear,
Does not his wounded side from danger clear
Alone; but backwardly does daft
Unto the Archer his life-wounding shaft.
What should I say? O God, is it not thy work,
That men may see in every turfe to lurk
A thousand other plants, each place t'adorne,
Diffring in color, in effect, in form?
And that each one pulled timely from the ground,
Does poison one, and make another sound.
Th'hearbe Ferulae asinu^ gratissimae sunt in pabulo, c^teris ve^o (...)
praesentaneo vene^o: qua de cau sa^d. animal Li bero patri assignatur, (...)
and serula. Plin. lib. 24. cap 1.
Ferula brings beeues to deadly pass,
And yet is wholesome for the drudging Ass.
Galen de t^mperamentis: d^scribitur b^c herba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67. lib. 6.
c. 11. Et ^ Plin. li. 25 cap. 13.
Hemlocke to Stares is right commodious,
But unto man is poison odious.
The Galen de t^mperamentis: d^scribitur b^c herba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67.
lib. 6. c. 11. Et ^ Plin. li. 25 cap. 13.
Rose of Daphne mules does ever kill,
But unto man is counter-poison still.
What is to man more poysonfull and vile,
Then that fell weed which Rhododendri stores and ^olia muli^, cambus, asinu
and quad^upedum plurimis venena sunt: hominib. vero contra serpentium morsus
praesidia, evi^opota, etc. Diosc. lib 4. cap. 70 Plin. 16 lib. 20. cap and lib.
20 cap. 11.
(...) ^a est natura, vt hominem oc^ dat, nisi (...) quod in homine perimat cum
eo solo colluctatur, velut part (...) inuento sola haec pugna est cum venenum
in viscerib. reperit, mirum^ (...) per se a^bo cum fin^, du^ v^ena in homine
co^riuntur, vt homo supersit. Plin. lib. 27. cap. 2.
Libbards-bane we style?
And yet his juice does cure that burning smart,
That from a Serpents tail would thrill our heart.
O valiant poison! o courageous juice!
Proud liquor! plant full of disdainful use!
That kills vnhelped, scorns his force to show
Against us, if any succor near he know.
A poison giving health, if so he spy
Some other poison in us; then he will try
His force against it, and with secret spite,
Even hand to hand most cruelly they fight,
So long they combat, and so strong they strive,
That they both die, that man may escape alive.
Briefly, be it in fields abroad I walk, Of grai^s, wool, silk, cotton, flax
hemp, and such other commodities as the earth produces.

Climb up the hills, or in the woods do stalk,
God is each where, from him comes each things store,
He naught but gives, and I take evermore.
Here for my food the harvest fields do wave
Their tops; and here a thousand flieces brave
(Worthy to make the greatest kings array)
Shake in the silken forests of Catay.
And here the lower boughs of Malta cottons;
Do garments bear within their tuffed buttons:
Here linen fine is made of flax ykempt,
And sails and tackling made of hollow hemp:
That carried on the sea with wind and weather,
I may acquaint the East and West together;
And drily pass over the watrie lea,
And many a town may walk upon the sea. As the divine on^ipotence did show it
self mi^aculously in the creation of all things (...) of nothing, so does it
shine most gloriously in the yearly reno^ation of some, and the daily
preservation of all.

Here Indian Wheat grows on a lofty reed,
And thrice a year five hundred grains does breed;
Which Indian men do dry and bray, and knead,
And bake it into hunger-killing bread.
That puissant voice which built this worldly Round
Does ever glad us with his joyful sound:
Renewes the world each year, and by his strength
Each thing is borne, does live, and grow to length.
It makes the plough-swaine scatter (not in vain)
Upon the crumbled earth his hopeful grain:
Which couerd with the plough and hatched with care,
Under the labor of the renting share,
It dies to spring; and moistly hot does tend
Downward his root, upward his blade to send:
Enriching with his verdure all the plains,
And cheares the husbandmen with hope of gains:
The bud grows to an herb, th'hearbe to a reed,
The reed an ear, the ear produces seed:
The ears to save them from the sparrowes wast,
With bearded eyles is hemd and ramperd fast:
The seed has cods, that it nor fall, nor rot,
Nor blast, by wind, water, or weather hot:
And the soft stem to bear more bet the seed,
Is underpropped as it were with a new reed.
Reader, excuse me, if thy wondering eye,
So many trees do in my wood epsy,
My meadow so beslowr'd, my garden hearbed,
My close so fruitful, and my field so garbed:
Since in the I Will of Zebut there is a tree
Surnamed Cocos, which appears to be The tree called Cocos and his strange
proprieties described.

More rich then ought that woods, or hills, or fields,
Or close, or garden, or an orchard yields.
Art thirsty? in his bruised leaves is wine,
Have need of slaxe to make thee linen fine?
Then take the bark, beat it, and do it twist,
To make thee cloth thereof when ere thou list.
Would thou so soon have butter? do but clap
Thy greedy teeth into the tender sap.
Do long for oil? why that it yields also,
If so his fruit be tossed to and fro.
Wantst vinegar? why all that is to be done,
Is for to lay it in the burning Sun.
Will thou have sugar? take his pompions ripe,
And cool them in some fresher water pipe.
It Is what thou will. I fear when Midas shall
But touch it, it will become a golden ball.
I think that God, to make our joys notorious,
The earth so fruitful, and his name so glorious,
Would nothing else have made, if the whole* frame
Should not have had less beauty by the same.
Now th'earthy surface is not only dressed Of the rich metals and minerals
emboweld in the earth.

With things of price; for in her fruitful breast
Such treasures heaped are, as by no mean
Can lucre-hunting men make riddance clean:
As more then all the stars in heavens vault,
Or roaring waves of Amphitrite salt,
Then harvest ears, or branches in the wood,
Then foure-foot beasts or fishes in the flood.
I will conceal the Ieat, Marble and Slat,
Sa^t Su^ and monte^ natius salis, vt in India Oronienus, in quo lapicidinarum
modocae ^itur renasce^. (...) regum vect galex coest quam ex a^ro atque
margari^s. Pl^. lib. 31. cap. 7.
Oromen shall this time be forgot:
That mount in ^.
Arragon also, whose shiuers
Do season meat for all the mountain livers.
I am content that now my book do pass
Adorned with Mercury, Vermilion, Brass,
With Orpine, Copper, Silver, Gold, and Oar,
Antimonie, Lead, Tin, and Iron stoare.
It pleases me t'enchase my work of gold
With Crystal, that each faces life does hold;
The purple Amethist, th'Agate of name
So diverse, and the Diamond of rich fame,
The Cassidon fair circled to be seen,
The Opall, Sardonix and Emraud green,
Hard Topaze, with the Carbuncle that burns,
Although the fire his substance never turns.
I know the earth seems to a wretched wight None of the f^med metals are of
themselves hu^tfull, although the co^ ^pt nature of man do most ungraciously
abuse them.

No mother, but stepmother full of spite;
Because she brings forth, to our little good,
Care-bringing gold and iron shedding blood:
As if man's malice made not vice abound,
But these vnfaultie metals of the ground.
Like as th'alluring treasured gold does kill
Both soul and body of the man that is ill,
So gold does virtue guild, and gives us wings
Wherewith t'aspire unto the Formam quidem ipsam (Mar ce sili) and tanqua
faciem honesti vides qu^ si ^culis cerne^etur, mirabiles am^res (vt a^ Plato)
excitaret sapientiae. Cic. de Ossic. lib. 1.
fairest things.
Man well advised with iron serves his turn
To plow the field, that (thankful) yields him corn:
For to defend his country and his life,
From stranger tyranny and civil knife.
But wicked men do never iron take,
But for hell furies weapons of it make,
To spoil the passenger, to kill his brother,
To wast his country, massacre his mother.
Like drunkards that abuse a gift divine, Other like instances.

And drown their reason in a cup of wine: Simil.
Of the secret virtue and admirable sympathy of the Loadstone.

As corrupt Lawyers with their eloquence
Do palliate vice, and burden innocence:
As Preachers false Gods word do often use,
When they the hearers foully do abuse:
For as the mustie vessel that does stink,
Depriues of smell God- Bacchus richest drink:
So Gods best gifts are turned to vile excess
Of vice, when vicious men do them possess.
Shall I the Magnes appel latus est ab inue^tore (vt author est Nicander) in
Idareperius inuenisse aute^ ^rtur, cla^ crepidarum and baculi cuspide
harentibus, ^m armenta pasceret. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 16.
Lodestone pass, that dead-aliue
My reason does of reason self deprive?
Magnesian praise, vndrawing drawing stone,
Whose Lure is secret, and his hook unknown,
His baits and grapples are insensible;
His lines unseen, his hands invisible
Draw distant iron; and is nere at rest,
Till with a longed kiss his hope be blessed,
Nay with embracement; and knows not the force
(O loyal mind) of vncoupling divorce,
Unless we them disioyne: such tender love
This stone and iron toward each do prove.
And though a put-betweene bar their desire,
It puts not out their inbred loving fire:
But toward one another leap they will,
At least by signs confirming their good will.
Good God, who can conceive, why that a ring
But touched therewith should straight his fellow bring?
That second draw a third, that third another,
And that pull after his fifth iron brother?
Good Lord, whence comes this virtue, that does cause
That one untouched must follow the others laws?
That knit and bound and glued they should be,
Where neither glue, nor knot, nor coard we see?
Disprouing reason, holding no compound
Can hang in the air, not falling to the ground.
Now I know well, that Lucretius.
he whose cunning wit The cause of this sympathy vndemonstrable.

With Latin weeds the Grecians skill did fit,
And from his wife received that deadly drink,
Wherewith t'augment his love she (fool) did think,
Does strive to show, by many a subtle reason,
The reason of this sympathy so geason.
But ( Lucrece) tell whence comes that virtue forth,
That turns the compasse-needle to the North
Touched by this stone? fail not in this essay,
And I will crown thy head with verdant bay,
And say in Natures secrets thou speakst truer,
Then thy Empedocles, or Epicure.
Bacchus for wine, Ceres for corn do bind Of the mariners compass needle.

No faster unto their deserts mankind,
Then Flauus, when he first did bring to light
The compasse-needle, for the sailing wight.
His brave invention guides on watrie rudges,
The caricke that so slowly onward drudges:
Serves for a cresset-light, and for a guide
To search all corners of the earth so wide:
It makes a ship, enforced by the wind,
Almost a new world in one day to find,
To mark the clime, and prick upon the card,
How far from th'Aequinoctiall they are squard.
But the earth does not deserve this glorious name, Of diverse for^ of earth that
are medicinable.

For things that grow alone upon the same,
Or in her bowels; but her proper merit
To sing her praise inuites my thankful spirit.
I call to witness such as have made proof
With profit, for their feebled healths behoof,
Of the earth of Diosc. lib. 5. ca. 94 Plin. lib. 35. c. 16.
Chios, and of Selia,
Of that of Erithrie and Melia.
Hail mother Earth, that bear men and corn, Terr^ Encomion.

Gold, houses, health, fruits, garments to be worn:
Thou nourcing womb, fair, patient, unmoved,
Fruitful and fragrant, various and beloved,
Clad with a robe with flowers all bespangled,
With rivers lac't, fretted with colors fangled.
Hail heart, root, foot to that great Animal,
Which men the World most vulgarly do call;
Chaste spouse of heaven, and foundation sound
For all the buildings of this total Round.
I greet thee mother, sister, nource, and hostess
Of man, the king of creatures; all (great Princess)
Do live for thee: for every wheeling sphere
T'enlighten thee his slaming torch does bear;
To give thee heat, the purer fiery slame,
To motion orbicular does frame.
The air for thy refreshing pleasure takes,
When with the North or gentler West it shakes.
To moisten thee, the sea, fountain and river
With veins do interlace thy body ever.
Oh! how it grieves me, that the wittiest men Against the scornful con tempt
of husbandtie, and careless regard of searching the natures of simples.

Do thee (O earth) so commonly contemn:
That greatest hearts do husbandry deride,
And care of simples proudly lay aside
For simplest men, and men of no demerits,
That iron bodies have and leaden spirits.
Such were not once those venerable Sages,
Whose praise the Bible tells to coming ages,
Noe, Moses, Abram, who did most time spend
In tilling, or upon their flocks did tend.
Such were not Cyrus, or king Archelas,
Hiero, Philometor, or Attalus,
Whose royal hands in stead of conquering blade
And scepter, held a bill-hooke or a spade.
Such were not Manius, Cincinnat, Fabricius, Vide Pl^n. lib. 18 cap. 3.

Or Serran that made war against passions vicious,
And did with coulter crowned, with conquering hand,
With plough triumphant raze the Roman land.
Yea Scipio tired with seeming happiness,
With Court-eclipses, tedious The word Aubades signifies such squea^ing
music, as fidling minstrels plav at men's windows.
sportfulness
Of following troops; and that great ( Diocletian
) Emperor,
That, mad a king, became a labourer,
To petty hamlets did retire again,
And did in tilling take as mickle pain
As erst in war; setting their trees in rows,
As orderly as squadrons against their foes* An excellent commendation of the
country life.

O man thrice happy that himself sequesters
From City troubles! and that never pesters
His thoughts with kings affairs; but does him arm
(By Ceres taught) to plow his fathers farm!
Pale Enuies poisond tooth does not him bite,
Nor greedy Care deprive him of delight.
His will is bounded just as is his farm;
He never drinks such potions as do charm
Men's Love in stead of wine; nor mong his meat
Does ever life-depriuing Arsenicum.
Orpine eat.
His hand his goblet is, the silver stream
His sweetest Ipocras: his cheese and cream,
And apples graffed by his proper hand,
In unprepared readiness do stand.
False pettifoggers (harpies of the bar,
And bloud-suckers of men) with prattling war
Triflingly tedious, never dull his sense.
But birds with their melodious eloquence
Deceive the busy time, on fragrant twigs
Chanting sweet couplets to harmonious jigs.
His wandering ship upon the stormy maine
Becomes no play-game for the windy train:
Nor does he roame upon the Ocean wide,
To seek where death does dreadfully abide;
But quietly his days all passing thorough,
Does never lose the sight of's native borough.
Nor sea, nor river does he ever know,
Save such clear brooks as gurglingly do flow
Watring his verdant fields; and that self earth
Enterres him, that received him at his birth.
To purchase sleep he drinks no dulling ( (...). lib. 2^* cap 18.
) poppie,
Nor the cold ( ^
) rush that grows in Aethiopie.
He does not like ( ^
) Mecaenas music buy,
When his grieved soul in body pained did lie,
And had no resting peace, but without stay
The jealous pain on's very bones did play:
But on green carpets of soft moss that grows
Fringing the banks, from out his side he blows
Sweet slumbring naps, enchanted by the sounds
Of warbling brooks that run on stony grounds.
Nor warlike trumpe, nor clarion, drum or tabour
Breaking his sleep, put him to arming labor;
Nor the command of any chieftaine brave
Leads him from bed blindfold unto his grave.
The wakefull Cock makes him the time to know,
Limits his sleep, and with his cheerful crow
Cheares him to walk among the flowers early,
Which with Aurora's tears waxen all pearlie.
Close stinking air in streets and filthy lanes,
His blood with damps infectious nere enflames:
But open air wherein he ever lives,
Fresh appetite unto him always gives:
Maintains his health, puts very death in doubt,
In many years to find his lodging out.
In clymbe-fall court he spends no wretched years,
His will depends not on the greatest peers:
He changes not religion with his Lord.
His mercenarie style does not accord,
With lies to make an Antan Elephant,
Or style a coward hard and valiant;
Or make an Adon of some foul Thersite,
Or wrong lewd Flora with Alcestes right:
But lives unto himself, serves God in fear,
And sings the very thought his heart does bear.
Pale fear does never feed upon his heart;
Nor does he practice conicatching art:
If he think on deceit, it is to lay snares
For ravenous beasts, or to catch unawares
The birds with twigs, with wieles the sealie fry.
Now if his wardrobe be not sumptuously
With silks and tissue stuffed; if so his chest
Be not unsafe with greedy Lingots pressed:
Yet are his garments made of purer wool,
And with vnboughten wines his sellar full,
His lofts with grain, his wels with water clear,
His grange with hay, his park is stoar'd with dear.
For I speak of that countrie-mans good state,
Whose house a petty commonwealth does mate:
Not of the broken bouth, or hungry need
Of the poor drudge that begs whereon to feed,
Or hungry fisherman, whose foure-legd room
Has but at pushes for to fill his womb. His conclusiue oraison.

Let me (o God) of greatest Kings unkind,
In solitary woods my lifetime end;
My pond my sea, my grove let be Ardena,
Gimon my Nilus, Sarrapin my Sena,
My Lutes and quiresters the winged sort,
Bartas my The Kings house Paris so called.
Louver, and my men my Court:
Where I untroubled may thy praise so thunder,
As may strike dead succeeding men with wonder.
Or if my duty and my Princes grace
Shall call me unto any waiting place,
Grant, with his favor I nere drunken be,
But subject to command, may yet live free.
False honor I may shun, true honor gain,
Loved for no slatterie, but for dealing plain.
FINIS.
Effugiunt auidos carmina sola rogos. Ovid. Amorum lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
To the Translator.
REport that made me read, had thrice the power,
When I had heard thy tongue of silver strike,
To make me once again to spend that hour,
That twice before my heart did so much like:
But while my soul held his respective eye
Upon the Leaves of thy registerd fame,
My Heart constraind my pen to prophecy,
That Love and Fortune shall enrich thy Name.
Thou mildest Winter that our age has felt,
In midst of whom a Lilly freshly grows,
Put all thy heat and calmie power to melt
From off this flower the frostie canded snowes:
That when thy hand has drawn the curtain round,
We may see Bartas picture Lawrel-crownd.
Thomas Mason Suffolciensis.

To the honorable Gentleman, Sir Thomas Chaloner Knight.
TO thee, true picture of humanity,
Learnings dear friend, wisdoms high favorite,
That do discern twixt froathie vanity
Of want on rimes, (bellows of lewd delight,)
And learned strains of sacred poesy:
My Muse this shorter sonnet does address,
Till for thy love and graceful courtesy,
She may in better Lays her zeal express.
For when (of better growth) she shall enroule
The praise of Worthies in records of fame;
Forgetfulness shall not her pen control,
For not enregistring thy worthy name.
*For thy deserts do truly her assure,
Thou rightfully art he that Chaloner, (...) Hal'honneur.
Hal'honneur.
T. Winter.

To the right worthy Knight Sir George Summers.
ALthough (brave Knight) the cold and frozen pen
Of Winter, cannot paint out Summers praise;
Yet give me leave (thou ornament of men)
Among these short and il-compos'd Essays,
With thy rich name to cloth my naked verse,
And only glance at thy deserved glory;
Since if I should thy famous deeds rehearse,
These lines would swell into an ample story.
An ample story that ensample might
Brave minds, to fix their eyes on marks of honor,
Directed by thy true-directing light,
To find out virtue, and attend upon her.
But though I cannot (as I would) express
The love that unto thy desert I owe:
Yet my desire increases nerethelesse,
That this, my Muse may briefly let thee know:
As long as winter somer shall succeed,
Winter is thine in thought, in word, in deed.
T. Winter.

To the virtuous and nobly-descended Sir Thomas Lucy the younger, Knight.
I Know (...) well, it has been held of yore,
That Fo^ne in her largess still is blind:
That there she gives her gifts in greatest store,
Where judgment cannot any merit find.
But seeing Art and Nature have conspired,
To make thee lovely, learned, witty, wise,
Let Fortune in her judgment be admired,
As having clear and true-discerning eyes.
Therefore proceed thou happy, hopeful Knight,
Keep on thy course in one ecclipticke line,
Be constant in thy virtuous delight,
And if thou will in perfect glory shine,
Shun all extremes, doat not on worldly pelf,
But in a word, be still most like thy self.
T. Winter.

To the learned Ciuilian, Doctor James, Justice of Peace and Quorum in the
County of Somerset.
IF will and skill were true correlatiues.
Thy worth should never want dese^ (...);
For in vnflattering superlatiues
I would thy virtues tell, thy credit raise.
Thou flower of courtesy, that do embrace
With both thine arms each wel-deseruing spirit;
Heaping the favors of thy bounteous grace,
Where neuer-erring judgment finds merit;
I will not venture in a daring vain,
To reckon up thy each praise-worthie part;
They are too many for so short a strain,
But since my heart is better then my art,
Let Winters heart obtain this boon of thee,
This Winter-fruit yscorned may not be.
T. Winter.

Scinduntur vestes, gemmae franguntur and aurum,
Carmina quam tribuent fama perennis erit.
Ovid. Amor. lib. ^. Eleg* 10.

