THE VOW BREAKER. OR, THE FAIR MAID of Clifton.

In Notinghamshire as it has been diverse times Acted by several Companies
with great applause.

By WILLIAM SAMPSON.

Virg: Aen: lib: 2. 77. Obstupui, steterantque Comae, and vox fausibus haesit.
LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON and are to be sold by ROGER BALL at the sign of
the Golden Anchor in the Strand, near Temple-Barre, 1636.

The Illustration.
THis faithless woman, by her friends consent
Plighted her troth to Bateman! straight not content
With his revenue! Coveting for more
She marries German for his wealthy store
There Parents iarr'd, and never could agree
Till both of them were dround in misery.
Young Bateman hangs himself, for love of her:
She drownds her self (guilt plays the murderer.)
His Ghost afrights her, sad thoughts do her annoy
(Alive or dead: it is she, he must enjoy.)
The Morrall is Maids should beware in choice,
And where they cannot love, divert their voice.
Parents must not be rash, nor too unkind,
And not for wealth to thwart, their Childrens mind.
All is not gaind, that is got, (ill purchasde wealth,
Never brought comfort, tranquil, peace, and health*)
This president, this principle does allow
Weddings are made in Heaven, though sealed below.
Think on thy promise alive or dead I must and will enjoy thee.

He Is come watch me or I am gone.

O how happy had I been if she had lived.

O how happy had I been if he had lived.



TO THE WORSHIPFVLL and most virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress Anne Willoughby
Daughter of the Right Worshipful, and ever to be Honored Henry Wiloughby of
Risley, in the County of Derby Baronet.
Worthiest, and Noble Mistress,
THIS infant received breath, and being under your noble Fathers roof (my ever
honored Master) and therefore as an Aire-lover belonging to that Hospitable
Fahricke, it properly prostrates it self to you for a patronnesse. The title
of it says ignorant Censurers (those Critticall Momes that have no language
but satirrick Calumny) sounds gross, and ignare, expressing small wit, and
less judgment, in the Author to dedicate (A vow-breaker) under the protection
of A Lady, of your Candor, beauty, goodness, and virtues: against those foul
mouthd detractors, who as much as in their venomous hearts lay; sought to
villifie an unblaunchd Laune, a vestall purity, a truth like Innocence, a
temple of sanstitie, the Altar of real goodness, against those brainles Momes,
I comply my self with Plinies natural similie of the Almond-tree: pick of
the Rind, crack the shell, yet set the kernel upright in earth, and by
natures help it regaines maturity and growth: so have your noble virtues, even
with the Diamond eclipsed darkness, and from obscurity gaind greater luster
even then when the two eldest sons of sin Envy, and Malice sought to obscure
them: but she that has not left the earth, divine Astrea, sacred justice, the
eye, and soul of the law, has vindicated those foul mouthd detractors: as
you are great in goodness, so shine there still, and let the Sun-raies of your
virtues ever yield honored hatchments, and portments, to your most noble
father, and his honored families, of whom you are a principal Column:
continue ever in that noble pedigree of virtues, which your virgin purity
hitherto has justly maintaind, heaven keep you from faunning parasites, and
busy gossips, and send you a Husband, and a good one, else may you never make
a Holliday for Hymen, as much happiness as tongue can speak, penn write, heart
think, or thoughts imagine, ever attend on you, your noble father, and all his
families, to whom I ever rest, as my bounden duty,

A faithful servant, WILLIAM SAMPSON.

The Prologue to Censurers.
TRuth says the Author, this Time will be bold
To tell a Story, truer never was told.
Wherein he boldly vouches all is true
That this Time's spoke by us, or heard by you.
If Chronicle, that ever yet gained favor
May please true Judgments: his true endeavor
From serious hours his gaind it: for us
He hopes our labors will be prosperous.
And yet me thinks I here some Critic say
That they are much abused in this our Play.
Their Magistracy laughed at! as if now
What Ninty years since died, a fresh did grow:
To those we answer, that ere they were borne,
The story that we glaunse at, then was worn
And held authentic: and the men we name
Grounded in Honors Prowess, Virtues Fame.
Bring not the Author then, in your mislikes,
If on the Ages vice, quaintly he strikes
And hits your guilt! most plainly it appears
He like a Tailor that has lost his sheares
Amongst his shreds* he knockes upon the board,
And by the sound themselves they do afford.
If in his scenes, he any vice have hit
To you far better known then to his wit,
Take It to your selves alone: for him, his Penn
Strikes at the vices, and not minds the men.
Actus Primus Scena Prima.
Enter young Bateman meeting Anne. ANNE, My Bateman.

Y. Ba. My sweetest Nan?

An. Had I but one entire affected Pearl
Inestimable unto vulgar censure
And is there none to play the Theife but thou!
Oh misery would have thy love entransd,
Without an echo that would sigh farewell.
Common courtesy amongst rural Hyndes
With this formallity disciplines them
(Kiss at the departure), and you to steal away
Without my Privity?

Y. Ba. Pray thee no more?
Tears are the Heralds to future sorrows,
I have collected all that is man together
And wrastld with affections as with streams,
And as they strive that do oppress the billows
So do I fare in each external part.
My Acts are like the motionall gymmalls
Fixed in a VVatch, who wind themselves away
Without cessation; here if I stay, I find*
I must be where thou art! which when I am
Thy fathers rage increases like a flame
Fedd by ungentle blastes! my absence
May work those bitter sweeteings from his heart
And smooth the rising furrows in his brow.
It is sufficient that I know thee firm
Fixed as a Rock in constancy, and love,
Able to ship-wracke greatness, and despises
A violated heart, as a disease.
I go to Leith as children go to school
Studying what shall please my Mistress best,
My lesson cond, I will return again
And dedicate my labors unto thee.

An. Sweet do not go; and yet if that you will
Leaving me here like a forsaken Lover,
Prithee forget me not; nay be not angry
Soldiers in War make any saint their own
Forgeting those they are devoted too!
It Is I have vowed to have thee quick or dead,
Flattering honors, nor dissembling beauties
Works me not from thee.

Y. Bat. Swear not sweet Nan!
The book of fate, as now may be unclasp'd
And record what thou speak.

An. Be it writ in brass
My love shall be as durable as that!
Now by this kiss, nay I will second that,
When I this hand bequeath to any one
But my sweet Bateman; then may I ever
From heaven, and goodness resta castaway,
If e're I* give this hand, to any one
But my sweet Bateman.

Y. Bat. Thy constancy I resalute.
Death only separates me from thy love.
Alive or dead I shall enjoy thee then
Spite of thy fathers frowns.

Enter Vrsula. Vrs. Why then up-with your bag; and baggage, and to Saint Mary's
presently the Priest stays, the Clarke whynes to say Amen! and for
th'officiall scholars love butterd loaves, an Angel will persuade him to
consent, we that live by the sins of the people may dispense with venial
toys.


Y. Bat. Thou art merry still.


Vrs. Faith, and shall be as long as I keep me out of Cupids mannacles, do
hear Lover? take her now thou have her in the vain trust not we wenches, theirs
as much truth in us, as in Knights o'th post; if she swear love to day,
she will unsweare it to morrow with a safe conscience; stand not shall I shall
I, take me her to have, and to hold, and if either of you repent your bargain
within a twelue-month --


An. What then!


Vrs. Then you shall fetch no Bacon at Dunmowe; we young wenches in our loves
are like Lapwinges, if once we creep out o'th shells, we run from out old
loves like Scopperells, weomens minds are planetary, and amble as fast as
Virginalls Iackes, if you stop 'em not in true time, you mar all your
music. See here is your Fathers.


Enter old Boot old Bateman. Y. Ba. Alas what will thou do.

An. Not shrink a jot for thee.

Bo. I charge thee on my blessing leave that boy.

An. Father! sir.

Bo. Come, come, come.
Must your appetite be married to beggary
Is this the only Phoenix of the World?

O. Ba. Boot, boot, boot, thou art malapert, false, proud,
A wretched miscreant, and dissembler,
H' shall enjoy her, she is his lawful wife
Thy hand enstated hers, though falsely now
Thou plaist the counterfeit.

Vrs. Well said old cock, would thy spurrs were new rowell'd that thou
might pick out his eyes.


Bo. Still are your eyes gadding that way, know this
I Will sooner marry thee unto some slave
Whom mine own will can subordinate
Rather then to him.

Y. Ba. Is virtue grown to so absurd a rate
It gains no better credit with base wordlings.

O. Ba. Tell me Boot.
Does not his birth, and breeding equal hers,
Are not my revenues correspondent
To equal thine; his purity of blood
Runs in as sweet a stream, and natural heat
As thine, or hers; his exterior parts
May parralell hers, or any others
In a true harmony of lawful love.
Wast not thine own motion, did not give way,
And intercourse to their privacies?
Did thou not make me draw conveighances
Did not the assurance of thy Lands seem proball,
Boot, Boot thou shall not carry it thus
I Will make thee know theirs justice to be had
If thou denyst it.

Bo. Say I grant all this!
With my self having deliberated
I do not like 'thassurance of thy Lands
Thy titles are so bangld with thy debts,
Which thou would have my daughters portion pay.
Sir sir, it shall not!

O. Ba. hang thee hang thee miser!
It Is thy base thoughts forges these false conceits,
And but for thy daughter, I Would, i would, i would.

Bo. I Would come, come.

An. Father?

Y. Ba. Dear sir spare your fury?
Anger in old men is a Lunacy
That wounds the speakers, not the spectators?
My thoughts are now embarked to go for Leith
And see the Wars, I hope e're my return
I shall find temperate weather in your looks,
And all these storms vanishd.

O. Ba. Art thou so built on her fidelity
Take heed boy; women by kind are fickle,
Absence in lovers brings strange events
Lovers that hourly kiss find due regard
But those that absent are often lose reward.
I doubt not of her firmenes, but it is common
An absent lover thrives not with a woman.
It Is good counsel boy, and worth observance
But thou dare trust her.

Y. Ba. With my life sir.

O. Ba. Go on then in thy intended purpose
Noble sir Jarvis whose man thou art,
I know will furnish thee.

Bo. This works to my design* and gives free way
For wealthy Germane to my daughters love.
Come hither Nan.

Vrs. I thought the wind was in that door; by my virginity a young wench were
better be heir to a swine-heards chines, then a rich man's bags! we must be
coupld in wed-locke like your Barbary horse, and Spanish Gennet, for breed
sake, house to house, and land to land, the devil a jot of love? poor simple
virginity, that used to be our best Dowry is now grown as bare as a
serving-mans cloak that has not had a good nap this seven years.


Enter Clifton, and a Shoemaker. O. Ba. Well Boot time may make us friends.


Bo. We Will think on it Bateman!


Clif. How many pair of shoes knave ha.


Sho. By Saint Hugh sir Jarvis four thousand pair.


Clif. For every knave two pair good sauce against kyb'd heels by my
hollidam; well shod, and clad will mak'em fight like men! the North is could,
subject to frostes, and snowes, and it is bad fighting without vittle, and cloth!
for which I have provided well for both; forty horse loades, and twently Carrs
of vittle, twill stop a good breach in a soldiers belly! my man shall pay
thee huffit; my Hollidam! my old Neighbor rich Boot, and Bateman, is this
brabling matter ended yet! shall he have her, by my Hollidam not yet, the knave
shall serve his Queen first, see the wars, where twill do him good to see
knocks pass as fillips, say is it done?


Enter Miles. O. Ba. He Is at your service.

Clif. By my Hollidam he shall not want for that
But I am tardy, and my time is precious
My Hollidam, wheir's this knave?

Mi. Faith sir trading as other knaves do! sir yonder is the Tailor the Weaver,
and I the Miller.


Clif. My Hollidam knaves all three! put me a Tailor, a Weaver, and a Miller
into a bag.


Mi. And what then sir?


Clif. Why he that first comes out will be a knave.


Mi. Under correction sir put me a Justice of peace, an Official, an under
Sherriffe into a bag.


Enter Ball Joshua. Clif. And what then knave?


Mi. Why, and they will not come out, let em'tarry their like knaves as they
are.


Cilf. What a knave is this.


Mi. Sir here is two more appears! the one is mad Ball old Huffus man, tho'ther
may be a knave in grain for any thing I know i am sure he is much given to
colors he is a Painterstainer.


Clif. You Are both pres'd, and willing to serve the Queen.


Bal. I am bend leather, and will endure it.


Josh. My name is Marmaduke Joshua a Painter-stainer by Art, and a limner by
profession? I am given to the means, and do fructify among the brethren, it
were obnoxious, and inutiable, and contrary to the sages to press me.


Clif. We Will see how you can edify our Camp.


Josh. For the sistren commisserate.


Clif. Come my old neighbors, let our Drum beat a free march we will have a
health to Queen Besse, cry St. George, and a fig for St. Dennis.


Enter Omnes nisi Bateman, Anne. Mi. Mistress Vrsula, it is not unknown that I
have loved you; if I die, it shall be for your sake, and it shall be valiantly;
I leave an hand-kercher with you, it is wrought with blew coventry; let me not at
my return fall to my old song, she had a clout of mine sow de with blew
coventry, and so hang my self at your infidelity; desiring Jove to bless you
from better fortunes I leave you.


Exeunt. Vrs. The fool doates, but it is no matter, it is no matter, it is Lady like
why should not I have my Monkey to play withal?


Y. Ba. Prithee leave us.


Vrs. Heavens bless me out of your company, for fools I found you, and so I
must leave you in spite of my heart.


Exit. Y. Ba. Now Nan here is none but thou, and I; thy love
Emboldens me to speak, and cheerfully
Here is a piece of gold, it is but a little one
Yet big enough to ty, and seal a knot
A jugall knot on Earth, to which high heaven
Now cries Amen, say thou so too, and then
When either of us breaks this sacred bond
Let us be made strange spectacles to the world
To heaven, and earth.

An. Amen say I.
And let heaven loath me when I falsify.

Y. Ba. Thou now art like a pollishd jvory Table
In pureness without; or stain or blemish.
If thou should soil this whitenes with black deeds
Think what a monster thou would make thy self.
I doubt thee not, but give this cautionary.
Hark the Drum beats, from the arms of love
I now must burnish in the Arms of war, adue.

An. When I prove false to thee; oh may I then
Beheld the scorn of heaven, earth, and men.
Enter severally. Gray, Arguile, Cross, Soldiers, drume, Colors. As far as
my Commission Arguile
I have proceeded, we in the trade of war
Whose Mart consists in blows, and batteries,
Are like small Rivers that must keep their bounds,
Till the Queen Ocean command them rise.
Dunbarr can witness where we skuirmishd last
I require the hostages be deliverd
Twixt England, and the federary Lords.

Arg. Peruse this bedroule from Duke Chattenreault
Wherein their names are, their persons attend
At Inskeith, and with willingness are bound
To attend the mighty Queen of England.

Gray. Lord Claud. Hambleton fourth son of the Duke, Robert Dowglasse brother
to the Lord James Stuart! Archibald Dowglasse Lord of Loughennell George Gram
second son to the Earl of Menteich; James Coningham son to the Earl of
Glencorne; all Hostages to the Queen of England till the Articles be performed
betwixt her, and the Federary Lords. Herald of Arms conduct these noble
pledges from the Red Brayes to Inskeith, see'em delivered to James Croft, and
George Howard Knights from thence to be embarqd for England.


Cro. I shall my Lord.

Gr. What number speak your powers

Ar. Two thousand hardy Scots,
With glaved blades, bum daggers, and white Kerchers,
Such as will fight, and face the fiery French.

Gr. Our numbers then are eight thousand
And still we look for more, sir Francis Leake,
And gentle Sir, Jarvis; two spirits
That in peace are lambs, in war two ravening Lions.

A march, Enter Clifton, Soldiers. Clif. A Soldiers wishes bless my noble
General.

Gr. Thanks valiant Clifton; they can deserve no less
Coming from thee? I see you emulate
That we should take the glory to our selves,
I Will give the first Alar'm, you will be one.

Clif. I by my Hollidam at war as at a feast
I Will scramble for my part, and if I catch a knock
That honor which a Soldier wins in wars
Is of low price unles he bring home scarrs

Gr. What number sir Jarvis?

Clif. Five hundred, and fifty tall white coats,
Fellows that will face a murdering Cannon,
When it blows rancks into the Air as Chafe
Yet dreadles they shall stand it, and not shrink,
Right Nottingham shire Lads.

Gr. It Is well don!
Our bands are well divided, yours my Lord
Keep the green Bul-warke, mine the west Gate,
You sir Iarvis the water-ports to Inskeith.
Pelham from Pelhamus Mount plays at the Town
How now what Trumpets this?

A Trumpet, Enter Trumball. Trum. From the Queen Regent of Scotland I come
To thee Lord General of the English Force.
She craves a treaty with the Lords of England
To know why thus they enter on her grounds,
Depopulate her Countries, Plough her Plains
If lawful cause she finds on enterveiue
She will subscribe to England, sue for peace,
Otherwise by Article she will confirm't;
This is under her highness hand, and seal.
This is my message.

Gr. What Is thy name?

Trum. Trumball, Serejant Trumpetter to her Grace.

Gr. Her Princely offer we accept Rowge Cross
Herrald at Arms, command sir George Howard
Sir James Crofts, and my son Arthur Gray
To show her Grace my Sovereigns grevances
In The interim we will sheath our burnishd blades
Which had been did in scarlet long ere this.
But for thy message.

Enter Trumball. Trum. I shall report you honorable.

Clif. My Hollidam I like not these signs of peace
These French Flies work on advantages
I Will not trust'em.

Gr. To prevent which each stand on his guard; your ears my Lord.


Ios. Resolve me; do they kill men ith wars, and never give warning.


Mi. Not so much time Io! as a theife has at Nottingham Gallows.


Ios. Tirany, tirany; may a not pray insincerity nor request the breethren, and
sisters to have care of a departing brother.


Mi. No Io! nothing but downright blows, just as you fell Oaks, or kill Oxen.


Ios. Most heathenish, and diabollicall; and do the shoot Bullets.


Mi. I Io, as thick as hail a man may hit his own father.


Ios. Oh Infidells, and Barbarians; what will not the wicked do, kill men with
bullets! oh these Guns, they are dangerous things they sprung from the whore,
a Friar was the inventor, and the smell of the Dragon! oh my poor Pusse-cat;
sinful man thou art Io: to bring the poor Pusse forth to die by a Gun! a poor
Pusse, silly harmless Pusse.


Mi. Ty her behind, then if thou runst she may save thee.


Ios. I run! thou profane translater I scorn to run, my Car, and I will enter
battle against the wicked! I run.


Gr. Why return so soon.


Enter Cross. Cross. This my Lord.
Making for Edenborough to the Queen,
Nine hundred shot, and five hundred Corslets,
Came forth of Leith, under the conduct
Of Mortigue, and Doysells their Colonells.
We wished them peaceably return to Leith
Since contrary to all Laws of Arms
They now had issud? Mortigue replide
They on their masters ground resolved stood
And from their mistress would not budge a foot
For any English breathing.

Exit Cross. Gr. Were not our promise given to the Queen
On which they build advantages, i would make
These French Rats run as Wolves from fire,
Bid'em retire, and tell them thus from us
We Will make them win their ground ere the stand on it.
Nothing but circumvention in the French.

Clif. By my Hollidam juglers, constant in nothing but Inconstancy, that's the
French Merchandise.


Ios. And do they fight, as it is in the painted cloth, of the nine worthies,
of Joshua, Hector, Caesar, Arthur, Charle-Magne, Judas, Machabeus, and Godfrey
Bollogine.


Mil. Yes Io: they do.

Ios. In the painted cloth Joshua stands foremost

Bal. With his Cat in stead of a Scutchion.

Ios. Ball thou art full of rebukes --

Enter Cross. Cross. Arm, arm, arm, regardles of true honor
Your message is defide, and facing the van
Dischargd a thousand shot, the Crag, and Chapel
They make a refuge against our great Artillery

Gr. Let the bow-men shoute their flightest Arrows,
As thick as hail, the Musketteers shall follow
Alarm then; it is our first enterprise
When cowards fall the valiant spirits rise.

Ex. Omnes. After skirmishes Enter Gray, Arguile, young Bateman with Colors,
Clifton, Souldioers, prisoners. Gray: The Crag, and Chappells ours, and the
French
Like Hares are leapd out of fierce Greyhounds gripes.
Doysells, and Mortigue, out-ran their Colors,
And with all expedition took the Town.

Y. Ba. Whose Colors I display.

Gr. How many of the French this day are fallen?

Arg. Seven score my Lord, and prisoners of noble worth*
Poiteers, Augois, Burbon, Shamoont, Shaldone,
Labrosse, and of the English merely one man slain.

Gr. Thanks unto heaven whose arm was our defense,
What Is he that beats the French arms displaid?

Clif. A servant of mine, his name Bateman?

Gr. There Is forty Angels for thy good days service,
And if thy merit retain an Ancients place.

Y. Ba. I thank your honor.

Ios. My prisoner is an Anabaptist, all I desire is that I may
convert him,

Mi. It must be in's drink then, else he is none o'th right
brethren;

Gr. Can noble Arguile, and worthy Clifton
After these, toiles of blood, and massacre,
Let Us quench our raging motions in the Grape,
And in the French-mans Vine drink his confusion?
Proud France shall know that our Elizaes Name,
Drives to confusion those that steal her Fame.

Ex. Omnes. Enter Anne, and Vrsula* An. Do thou not believe it?


Vrs. Let me fail of my best wishes, and I do, I cannot amuse my thoughts
to it, thou may as soon persuade me that a Spiders Web will catch a swarm
of Bees as thou marry German! his head's like a Weloh-mans Crest on St. Davies
day? he looks like a hoary Frost in December, now Venus bless me, i would rather
ly by a Statue?


An. Thou art pleasant still.
In natural things we see that Herbs, and Plants
In autumn ever do receive perfection,
As they, so man, never attaines his height
Till in the autumn of his growing age
Experience like a Mistress beautifies him,
With silver hairs, badges of experience.
Of wisdom, honors, counsel, knowledge, arts,
With all th'endowmens virtue has in store.
Contrarily green headed youth
Being in the spring or summer of his age,
Is prone to surfets, riots, intemperancies,
And all the stock of ills that vice is queen of;

Vrs. Thou wrests a good text to an ill sense? but none but fools would ly in
beds of snow that might couch in Roses? but it may be Cozen; but it may be
Cuz? you follow the fashion of our Country Knights that marry your old London
Widows; it is but keeping a handsome Chamber-maide, they are necessary evils,
and will serve with a small Dowery afterward to make parsons wives! you know
my meaning Cuz.


An. He brings wealth, promotion, and it is the way.


Vrs. To your ruin; to your black father presently? cock him with the herb
Moly that will put blood in's cheeks? let him be dieted like your Barbary
horse? heel near stand to his tacklings else? feed him with Vipers flesh
that will make his white head black? do thou refuse youthful Bateman to ly
with wealthy Germane, reject a Mine of virtue, for a Mountain of muck? Cupid
bless thee, for i will swear, he has blinded thee as blind as a Bat.


An. I loved young Bateman in my childish days,
Have vowed to have him, and he again to me,
But what of that, foolish lovers vows
Like breath on steel, as soon are of, as on,
German is wealthy and by him I gain
Recourse amongst the modest sagest dames?
Wealth has a privilege that beauty cannot,
Bateman is young, embellished with a natural,
Active, and generous, unspotted beauty,
German is old, indebted much to age,
Yet like old Aeson, gold can make him young,
Gold like a second nature can elixate,
Make the deformed fair, the fair seem foul,
And we that love not, must be tide to th'face,
A sparkling eye, or a smooth pleading tongue
Will not keep hospitality with time.
Maids that love young men gain their loves by stealth,
We that love old men, wed not man but wealth?

Vrs. If I believe thee not; may I turn Nun before my probation? to be serious
let me touch thy conscience? if young Bateman to whom I know tha'st vowed thy
faith? should at thy falsehood fall into some malevolencies in himself, or on
thee; t'wood greive thee to have Ballads made on thee, to the tune of the
inconstant Lover, and have thy periuries pind on every Post?


An. Conscience, pray no more o'nt?


Vrs. No in troth for I think tha'st as much pleasure in it? as a hanged man has
of his pardon, or a Dog with a Glass bottle at's tail? see here is thy father,
with him the man that must be, not the foreman o'th Parish, but a bucke o'th
first head.


Enter Boot, Germane An. My lovely Germane?


Ger. My fairest Mistress?


Vrs. If I had not rather Kiss a muffe made of Cats-skins, then these moldy
chops of his, wood I might die an Anchoresse.


Bo. Now niece what is your conceit of this?


Vrs. Faith Uncle i am a woman? and they say a woman is a wether-Cocke for mine
own part some are I think? and when I think they are not i will tell you my
conceit, till then i will pay you with thinking.


Ger. Sweet beauty, rumor, that betters nothing,
But disproportionates every act,
Gives it out thus; that you are affianc'd
To youthful Bateman? I wood not have the curse
Of contract breaking fall upon my head,
(If it be so, fairly I here acquit you,
From all engagements twixt your self, and me)
If not, like to a blessing I embrace you.
That jointure which your father most desir'de
I have confirmed, nothing now remains,
But your reply, or mine, or whose you please?

An. Sir I am yours?
I lov'de young Bateman with an inward joy
Affected him beyond a common rate,
Yet not so far, but that I might reduce
My vows, and my affections to my will,
For when I saw how disproportionable
Our jarring fathers were! I then began
To alienate all love; here I renew
To whom it comes as free, as bright, and pure
As are these unstaind Lamps beyond the Moon.

Ger. Which as a blessing from the heavens I take.


Bo. You shall be married instantly! and Girl thou shall have one Bagg more
for this, it gladdes me yet, thou art so free from Bateman. I looked for other
demonstrations! come German this night we will feast, to morrow thou shall be
wedd, At night enfold a maiden in thy bed.


Vrs. Which if he does, may she die of the pip, and go to the grave as a Sallet
for the worms.


Exeunt Omnes. Actus secundus Scena Prima.
Enter Mortigue, Doysells, and the Frenchmen in Women's apparel with Pistols.
Mor. Omit this Doisells,
They now are healthing, and carrowsing deep.
Now is our time to work a stratagem,
Gaining these Trenches that oppress the town.
Thus as we are, we pass without suspect,
Nine Bona Robas nine stout Viragoes,
Nine manly lasses which will stand the squeake;
Jove went a wenching, as we go to the wars;
If this exploit take root, we build a strength
That nine months seidge cannot again redeem.

Do. The scotch language I am perfect in:
Encaule your selves the enter on their guard
Leroy's the word, till then let no man stir
The second Leroy bids every man to kill.
Close, and observe;

Enter Clifton, Bateman, Joshua, Ball, Miles, Soldiers. Clif. Each man betake
him to his instruments
Keep safe this Port for it is the sole defense
To our new Trenches, and raised Bul-warks;
If any issue from the Town give fire,
And the Alarm shall be answered quick;
The French are subtle, and in various shapes,
Combine themselves, therefore to gain the best,
Prevent the worst;

Ios. And they be women* may we not cease on'em for lawful prize.

Clif. To women, and children, be merciful,
But trust none, the politic Fox sometimes
VVrapps himself within the Lions skin,
So working prey upon the innocent Lamb,
These French are subtle Foxes.

Mi. I thought so for a man may smell their footings
As far as a fitchers;

Ios. And they be Foxes we may smell'em out? for as it is in the painted
cloth? by fortune came a Fox where grew a pleasant Vine I will no Grapes said
the Fox, the fruit is none of mine.


Y. Ba. Sir have you dispatched me?

Clif. My Hollidam that's true?
What sudaine business of so maine import
Calls thee from the wars, where thou see
Resolved spirits rate their lives at naught
Regardles of all miseries, for honors;
Thou a proficient in wars Academ
Have profited well; the first day an Ancient
In single duel taken? I tell thee Bateman
It has won a great impression in my Lord.
Resolve thee so; I would not have thee go
To fish for shadows and let go the substance,
Thou know my meaning Bateman.

Y. Ba. I conster it?
That your suspicion deemes it to be love,
In sooth it needs not, such a constant rock
My love is built on that it cannot fall.
I cannot fasten jelousie in my thoughts,
Knowing her loyalty; great excuses
For my intended journey know I none:
And to frame any were but negatives?
Yet in my sleeps I have strange visions,
Which waking I cannot thrust from memory.
I do beseech your license, let me go.

Clif. My letters want but sealing, follow me
To the Generals Tent.

Exeunt. Mi. Fellow Bateman farewell commend me to my old windmill at Rudington,
oh the Mooter dish, the Millers thumb and the maid behind the Hopper? tell
mistress Vrsula I fight for her sake, and will live as long as I can die when I
can no longer live, yet will love her in spite of her heart, in stead of
nutmeggs, and ginger, I send her the three bawbees I got at Dundee. I will fly
on her at my return with the verses out of new Hero, and Leander, oh Vrsula,
Vrsula pity me with a dildo, dildo, dillory?


Ba. Commend me to the Bells of S. Mary's, and tell'em my Chops water to chime
all in?


Ios. As it is in the painted cloth, in morning still when thou do rise see
that in mind thou have to spend the day that does ensue as bed might be thy
Grave; commend me to my learned brother Spritchall the Cobbler of Notingham
brig? and bid him look up, and give me a coal, wishing him good health, as my
cat, and I was at the making hereof?


Y. Ba. I will be mindful of you all farewell.


Mor. Now is the time make your appearance?


Mi. Shoot shoot.


Doy. An the bred an g^d man spear the bonny lasses.


Ba. Down with the bonny Bells?


Ios. Have some compunction they are the weaker Vessels for as it is in the
painted cloth, be meek, and gentle, and thy self shall find a quiet
conscience, and a tranquil mind.


Mi. By The mass a pretty boot halling, hansome pagies each one take one, and
examine the prickers?


Ios. Thy counsels smells of piety? and thus I begin the conversion of a sinner!
-- um -- she Kisses well verily again I will edify on your lips -- are you of
the Family of Love sister -- ha --


Mor. An the beans of me ise a pure lurden?


Mi. And what are you pretty morsel.


Doy. An the dele an the crag ise a Lardes wife ganging to seek my Lourden;


M. And you are ganging to your Lurden, that your Lurden may catch you by the
crag, and claw you are the weame, till your guts garr haggergath, haggergath.


Ios. Will you be contented to leave the wicked, and live among the familists,
exercising your body in the brether-hoods cause?


Mor. An the Lard nare thee with an my bare bones.


Ios. Kiss again then -- in sincerity she Kisses open mouthed like a zealous
sister --


Bal. And you can wash, and scour, and help to launder the camp, and dress
the booties we steal, and at night be content to Kennell with me in straw.


Sol. I by Saint Andrew?


Ios. Let us congregate our selves, and ponder on their miseries.


Doy. Now is the time each man draw, and fight.


Shoot, and Alarm. Alarums, the French beat of, place themselves on the
Walls hanging out a head, Enter Clifton, Soldiers. Clif. Well fought my
hearts: though we have lost one man
Whose head they basely perch upon the VValls.
Base minded Doysels cowardly Mortigue
Though all advantages in war are lawful
They Are not commendable? you came like your selves
Frenchifi'd truls, to scould us from our Trenches
But not to beat us? come either of you single,
And fight with Clifton, if not one, come both,
And by my Countries honor; no man here
Shall dare to touch you but this arm of mine.

Doy. Vex not thy self old man, it is but one head
We came for more, but rest suffiz'd with this.

Clif. And for that one a thousand dastard French
Shall dearly pay, Count I shall meet thee?

Mor. Clifton thou may!

Clif. By my Hollidam; our meeting will seem rough our parting fair? make
this thy quarrel, I pronounce thy Queen defective in beauty, virtues,
honors, unto my mistress, Englands royal BESSE?


Mor. Traitor thou lie?

Clif. Have I sturd thy blood?

Mor. With such an overture, but thy barbarous head nothing can calm it?


Clif. When next we meet we will try it?
Each man unto his charge, for one man's head
A thousand Frenchmen shall be slaughtered.

Ex. Omnes. Enter Vrsula. Vrs. Good Wives, Widows, and young wenches, pardon
me, for I am touched in conscience to rail on my own sex, I blame not those
mysogynifts that say women are froward inconstant, and what not; I protest I
begin to mistrust mine own thoughts, I Am quite out of love with all women's
goodness? fie upon us weather-cocks, of all things sublunary the worst of
creatures, we painted sepulchers, rotten braveries, silly Ciphers until men's
figures supply us, and yet we cannot render 'em a constant minute; all this is
manifest in my new Bride, she that yesterday gave faith to one, the next day
married another; and now married she is sick of the sullens, she wants youth
to inflame, and give satietie a fresh appetite; fie upon us Moon Calves, and
created Fools be those men that credits us I see i am cut off.


Enter young Bateman. Y. Ba. I wear that visage formerly I did,
Six Moons has not so metamorphos'd me,
But that I may be known? all my friends;
My familiar sociates, and acquaintance
Carelessely pass me with a heavy glance
As if I were some rioter, or prodigal
Who having ship wrackt reputation
After an act of banquerout, compounds
With debtor, and creditour; others
Shake me by the hand, but with such lenity
As if I burnt them? or that I from the wars
Had brought home some diseases, as Killing
As the Plague, or more infectious.
My father whether for joy or sorrow,
As tears be answerable to both passions,
But he wep'd, cride welcome home, and sight,
As if some drops of blood fell from his heart
Heaven has a hand in all things; if that
My Nan be well, we will dispense with greifes,
Of lower kinds Kind, cozen Vrsula.

Music. Vrs. You Are welcome home sir.

Y. Ba. How fares my sweetest Nan?

Vrs. Sooth badly, she has been, Planet-strucke e're since you went? she fell
into a Lethargy since noone, a kind of qualme came over her stomach like a
Crampe or a Connulsion?


Y. Ba. The meaning of this Music?

Vrs. We had a Wedding to day, and the young fry tickle trench-more.


Jervis, and Nan are in the Window. Y. Ba. A Wedding, and here this day.
Bless me what prodigious Object
Is yond, that blasts mine eyes, and like a theife,
Steals my understanding! certes it is she*
Is it not speak Vrsula?

Vrs. I know not, for had she as many bodies as hearts, she might be here, and
yonder too.


Y. Ba. Now by my life.

Vrs. Nay swear not; if you have any ill language to spare I Will send my Cozen
to you presently.


Exeunt. Y. Ba. Strange fears assail my senses, and begins
Conflicts of despaires, doubts, and fears,
And but I have a resolution fixed
On her fidelity; this frontispice
And other entertainments might confirm
Former presages.

Enter Anne, Vrsula. An. Who is it would speak with me?

Vrs. One that may be jealous though he wears no yellow.

Y. Ba. Her sight like to a cordial has expelled
All former gross suggestions, me thinks
I taste my happiness e're I touch it.

An. Beshrew thy heart for this.

Vrs. Beshrew your own false, if their be ill it is of your own begetting i will
provide Cocke-brothes, and caudles for your old Cock-sparow.


Exeunt. Y. Ba. She Is dumb with joy, and I like to a man
Intranc'd with joys un-utterable, cannot speak?
But I have lost my self, I am awake,
And see a substance more then dreamers do,
Thus in the arms of love I do enfould thee.

An. I do not know you -- touch me not?

Y. ba. I wonder then how I dare know my self,
When thou forget'st me? I had thought
Had I ben sullide with the sooty Moore,
Or tan'd with heat like some Egiptian slave,
Or spoted like the Persian Leopardes,
Or in the worst form can be termn'd,
Or imagined, yet thou coulds have known me,
I am thy Bateman Nan!

An. If you be Bateman;
It Were best you traveld from my fathers ground
Least he indite you?

Y. ba. If he should, yet if thou stand the judge
I know thou will acquit me of the crime?
But thou art pleasant, and like to a tender nurse
Heightens my infant joys before it comes,
Be not so strange, this nicety in you,
Has not been usual.

An. It must be now for I am married.

Y. ba. I know thou art, to me my fairest Nan.
Our vows were made to Heaven, and on Earth
They must be ratifide, in part they are
By giving of a pledge, a piece of Gold.
Which when we broke, jointly then we swore
Alive or dead for to enjoy each other,
And so we will spite of thy fathers frowns.

An. You talk idely sir; these sparks of love
That were twixt you, and I, are quite extinct
Pacify your self, you may speed better,
You Will show much wit, and judgment if you do?

Y. ba. She floutes me.

An. If you will be wise, and live one year a batchelour it is ten to one that's
odds, I bury my husband, e're I wear out my wedding Ring.


Y. ba. Ha! a Ring, and on the right finger two.
Thou plaist the cruel murderer of my joys
And like the deadly bullet from a Gun,
Thy meaning kills me, e're thy words gets vent.
Whose Ring is that?

An. My Husbands.

Y. ba. And art thou married!

An. I am?

Y. ba. When?

An. This Day?

Y. ba. Accursed Day to whom?

An. To wealthy German?

Y. ba. To wealthy misery?
Now my presaging visions do appear,
Th'unusuall gestures of my mornefull friends
I now perceive was thine; false woman
As subtle in deceit as thy first grandam,
She but deceived her self, deceiving man
As thou her jmpe of subtilty has done.
Strengthen me you ever Hallowed Powers,
Guard me with patience that I may not curse,
Be^^^se I loved her; be assured this,
Alive or dead thy promise thou shall keep
I must, and will enjoy thee?

An. And may I tell you if you le stay my husbands Funeral.
I Will promise you i will mourn, and marry all in a month.

Y. ba. Ah monstrous; she plays with my disasters
As boys with bubbles blown up into air,
You that have care of innocents be my guard
Least I commit some outrage on my self.
For such an overture, and flood of woes
Surroundes me; that they almost droun'd
My understanding; thy perivries shall be writ
With pens of Diamonds upon Leaves of steel,
And kept as statutes are to show the world.
You constant Lovers that have truly loved
Without foul thoughts or lustful appetites,
Come wail with me, and when your swelling breasts
Grows big with curses, come sit down, and sigh
Such an inconstant faireon I have met
Whose deeds I shame to nominate, yet she
Shamed not to do them.

An. Pretty passion this ha, ha, ha?

Y. ba. Take thy good night of goodness; this night
Thy bridall-night take leave of sacred virtue?
Never think for to be honest more,
Never keep promise, for thou now may swear
To any, thou never mean to do?
Hold swelling heart, for thou art tumbling down
A hill of desperation; dark thoughts
Assaults my goodness; but thou shall keep promise
Alive or dead, I will enjoy thee yet.
I have not cursed thee yet, remember that;
And when thou have staind thy innocent sheets with lust,
And with saciety filled thy empty veins,
Weari'd the night with wanton dalliances,
More prime then Goats, or Monkeys in their prides;
Call then to mind how pleasant this had been
Had it not been adulterate; for German
(Is not thy husband; it is Bateman is the best.
I have not cursed thee yet remember that)
I Will muster up the forces of a man,
To quench the rising flames that harbor here
And if I can forget thee* by my hopes I will
And never curse the Auth'resse of my ill*
I have not cursed thee yet! now remember
Alive or dead it is I that must enjoy thee.

Exeunt. Enter Vrsula. Vrs. By my virginity the Groom cries to bed, night goes
to Goast, how now another Niobe turned to stone, bless me has the Conjurer
been here.


Y. Ba. Alive or dead I must, and will enjoy thee,
It was my promise? I cannot choose but weep.
I have not cursed thee yet, remember that.

Vrs. Hey day what inundations are here, will you come away, and the Groom
should geld himself for anger there would be fine sport.


An. I have lost my self, and know not where I am!


Enter Boot. Bo. Come, come, I have daunc'd till every joint about me grows
stiff but that which should be! to bed wench, the groom he is out-gone thee,
he is warming the sheets the first night I faith.


An. To bed! oh heavens, would it were to my grave
So I might never here of my misdeedes
I have not cursed thee yet! remember that
Alive or dead I must, and will enjoy thee
How like the deadly towling of a Bell
A peale of sadd presages were his words.

Bo. Ha, weeping; this is not customary on bridall-mights, Niece who was with
your Cuz too night?


Vrs. Uncle there was a certain man

Bo. I, I, but where is that certain man

Vrs. There is the woman, but the certain man is gone

An. A certain man indeed, for whom I now
Could weep a Sea, to wash out my pollutions?

Bo. But nimble Chaps, tongue Trotter, Neats-Toung Mrs Magpy
What was this certain man called

Vrs. With reverence Uncle his name was Bateman?

Bo. An undermining Knave, I will indite him,
For daring to set foot upon my ground?
This day his father has arrested me
Upon an action of a thousand pounds
A precontract betwixt his son, and thee
To bed my wench, Bateman shall surely find
Me master of my words, when his proves wind.

Ex. Omnes. Enter Mortigue meeting Clifton. Clif. Thou keepst thy promise
Mortigue.

Mor. In all things as befits a man of worth
Thou have abused my princely mistress name
Sullied her royalties with infamies,
And from thy throat, as from a Serpents chaps.
Belched poisons against the Dowager of France;
To prove these false I made this sally forth
Only to combare thee.

Clif. By my Hollidam,
I Am glad I Have waked thy temper!
The end still finds it self in every act,
And so shall thou in thy presumptuous braves?
The honor of my mistress makes me young
Her name shootes majesty into my looks,
Valor into my heart, strength to this arm
Which thou shall feel to thunder on thy Helm,
Guard thee Frenchman, i am sure thou can not fly;
Bravely i will kill thee, or else bravely die.
Thou Art my prisoner Doysells.

Fight, Clifton disarmes him, Enter Gray, Arguile, Soldiers. Mor. Through
chance of war I am.

Arg. Hew him in pieces.

Clif. By my Hollidam?
My life shall stand between him, and danger.
He Is my prisoner, and by the Law of Arms,
Yiedling himself a Captive to our mercy,
His life is ransomable; let our General
Decree his ransom, and after dispose of him.

Gr. Noble Clifton his ransom is thine own,
Dispose of him as thou please.

Clif. By my Hollidam, and will?
There take thy Arms, return back to Leith
With our best convoy; I tell thee Mortigue
My hatred is not capital, though honor,
And wars necessity made me storm;
When to these walls thou see my white coats come
With scaling ladders to assault the Town
Be merciful as I have bin to thee,
This is all Cliftons ransom.

Mor. I shall report thee noble!

Gr. Thanks noble Clifton,
Thou still ad'st honor to thy Countries fame,
Make scaling Ladders, for we straight intend,
By heavens assistance to mount these walls,
Courage brave spirits, every act finds end,
We Will teach the Frenchman keep within his bounds
Or send him home full of heroicke wounds

Exeunt Omnes. Young Bateman ins shirt, a halter about his neck. Y. Ba. It it is
resolved! life is too burdensome,
I Have borne while I can, and have suppressed
All insurrections pale Death has made.
It is my terror that I live to think
I bear a life that is offensive to me.
Pale monster in thy meagerest aspect
Come, and affront me; fill thy unpauncht nerves
With my hearts blood; till with the overture
Thy never satisfied maw be sated?
But cowardly monster thou approchest none
But those that fly thee, and like to greatness
Would be so elivated for doing good,
That of thy self thou never did intend.
Poor Snakes that are in worldly sorrows sowrst
Cannot participate thy Ebon Dart.
It Is said thou art not partial, and do wind
The Prince, the beggar, and the potentate
All in one mould; but they do falsify
That say thou art so tiranously just,
For I have sought thee through the unpend groves,
The shady cells where melancholy walks,
And eccho-like thou answerst me with Death,
But dare not show thy face; the worlds monarch
In three fits of an Ague di'd. Some flies,
Some silly gnats can kill! let me consume
then may thou brag thy conquest, that thou slewst
What neither love nor hatred could destroy.
Since thou disdainst me, I disdain thy power,
There be a thousand ways to cozen Death
Behold a Tree, just at her door a fruitless Tree
That has in autumn cast her leavy boughs
Sorry to show such fruit as she produces.
The night seems silent, sleep charms the house,
And now the periurd woman is a topping,
I Will clime as high as she, yet i will not rest,
My airy ghoast shall find her where she lies,
And to her face divulge her perjuries.
Night be auspicious, draw thy sable weeds,
For daylight is a ashamed of her black deeds
One twich will do it, and then I shall be wed
As firm unto my grave, as to her bed.

Falls, hangs, Enter old Bateman ins shirt, and Torch. O. Ba. I Have missed my
boy out of his bed to night
Heavens grant that he be well, for in his eyes
Sad coffeehouse sits! till yesterday
I never saw him so propense to sorrow.
Nor deeply touched with distemperature,
When I began to tell him of his mistress
Which I in violence of words branded
With damned perjury; as Heaven knows
She has consumed her goodness; then would he
Sit by, and sigh, and with salt tears trilling
Down his cheeks, entreat me not to name her,
Curse her I must not I then would he steal to bed,
As full of mournful sorrows as a sinner.
It Is almost morn and I suspect him here
Hovering about this house! often would he say
He wooed her underneath a Plume-Tree,
And underneath that Tree he vowed to sit,
And tell his sorrows to the gummy boughs
Though she disdaind to here them? protect me!
Good Angels guard me, what heavy sight is this
That like a sullen sadness reaves my sense,
Prove false mine eyes that this may prove untrue?
Better you never had seen then to see this.
Leave your slimy cesternes, and drop out;
It Is he, it is he, would I could tell a ly
The falsest one that e're was told by man
That this might prove untrue; but it is in vain
To dark the Sun, or wrestle against the truth
Murderers look out, i will rowze the thunderer,
To rowze you from your sleeps! false feinds come out,
And see a deed, the day will be ashamed of
Caused by your perjuries.

Bo. Whoes that which calls
Boot, Anne, Vrsula, above. With horrid terror, and such affrightments
As when skath fires devast our vilages,

O. Ba. Look this way monster see thou adultresse
Behold the miserablest Map of woe
That ever father mourned for; my poor boy
Hard-harted fate that brought thee to this end,
Hated Vipers they that were the causers,

Bo. How dare thou Bateman come upon my ground

O. Ba. Cursed be thy ground, and cursed be all trees
That brings forth such a bortive fruit as this.

Bo. Ha, ha, has -- he hanged himself, and saved justice alabor!

An. I never looked for better end of him, he had a malevolent aspect in his
looks, ha, ha, ha!


O. Ba. Laughst thou Crocadile?
Are miseries lamented with contempts?
The books of fate are not so closely shut,
But they may open, and record the scorns
Dwelling in every Region of thy face?
A fixed decree may be set down for thine,
And thou may Swan-like sing a Funeral O'de,
Who then shall laugh at thee?

Bo. I laugh to see, how well sorrow becomes thee.

O. Ba. Such dire becomings may thou never want,
Thou that were once the Jewel of these eyes,
Look here, and see the ruins of pale death.
How soon a Gorgeous Palace is suncke down;
Though he has surfetted upon this piece
He has not taken the color of his cheek,
Nature contests with death, and will out-doe him;
Can not thou spare one tear to balm him in,
Nor lend a sigh as sorry for his fall?
If not to day i will come again to morrow,
So thou will shed two tears, and one poor sigh,
Then gentle Charon will assign him wafftage;
Thy greifes are violent, and work within
It Is a foul sign of an unpersant heart
When as the eyes cannot impart a tear.
Since none of you will weep, i will weep alone
Till Niobe like my tears convert to stone.

An. Had you disciplind your son in's youth
You might then have prevented your tears?
Cause he was bad, and I did shun his evils,
Must I be held the cause'res of his ils?
Must my virtues beget his perverseness,
Or my obedience breed his shameful death,
If the World balance me uprightly just
I care not then which way you turn the Scales;

O. Ba. Worse then the worst that ever could be named.

An. My best counsel is that you bury him as the custom of the Country is,
and drive a stacke through him; so perhaps I that had no quietness with him
whilst he lived, may sleep in peace now he is dead.


O. Bat. I will not curse thee, it was my boys request
Such deeds as these sink not in oblivion,
The justnes of my cause I leave to Heaven.
May thou live mother of many children,
And may they prosper better then did mine.
Come poor boy these arms have borne thee often
I Will have thy picture hung up in my Chamber,
And when I want thee, I will weep to that
Deaths Leaden Plummets draw thine eielids down,
Since none will sing sadd obsequies but I,
I Will call the Linnet, Red-brest, and the Throsle,
The Nightingale shall bear the burden two
For she is exsquisite in tragic notes,
We Will have a Funeral hymn, and over thy hearse,
This woman's perjuiries i will pen in verse.

Enter An. How now cozen weeping?

Vrs. Troth Cozen,
Though griefs of lower kinds assail me not,
I never was so touched unto the heart,
Mine eyes so flexible are to melt in tears
I cannot stop'em; I shall be still afraid
To walk to the door when I behold this Tree,
For fear his Ghost haunte me! I wonder much,
You could forbear from passionating.

An. Afraid on's Ghost, as much as of a picture painted o'th wall! that's just
like we fools that rub our shins against the bed posts in our dreams, and
then swear the faries, pinchd us? he swore he would have me quick or dead.
Let him ly still in's grave I will in my bed, and let consequents prove the
rest?


Bo. Ghosts Hobgoblins, will with wispe, or Dicke a Tues-day.
Thy husband wench this morn journyes to New Castle
And hardly will return these twelve Moons,
Let Us feast with him, for Ghosts, and such like toys
Leave them to foolish dotards, girls, and boys.

Exeunt Omnes. Actus Tertius Scena Prima.
Enter, Anne hastily, pursuing Vrsula, with lights. An. Keep of, keep back,
I charge thee.

Vrs. Las Cozeni'me not infectious my breath cannot blast you?

An. It haunts me as my shadow or a vision?
It will not let me rest sleep, nor eat,
The barricoded doors and iron locks.
No sooner shut but like a new clasped book
Their leavy hindges streightway fall asunder,
And it gets in; I wonder it is not here,
This is a gentle respit, and not usual,
Since German went I never had so much;
It plays the centinnell at my beds feet?
And but it wants the rosy colored face
Whom meager death has played the Horse-Leech with,
It would not seem so ghostly in these eyes.
It bears the perfect form it used to do.
As if it never knew immortality
Nor wasted underneath a Hill of Clay.
Sometimes as curious limners have pourtraid
Tears trilling from the weeping Niobe,
That some would swear the very picture wept,
And art of nature got the mastery?
So did I guess affluxe of brinish tears
Came from this Aerie, and unfadom'd Ghost?
And could the Painters of this age draw sighs
I could demonstrate sighs, and heavy groans
As if a sensible heart had broke in twain?
Then would it turn, and cry false woman.
And leave me to descant on the rest!

Vrs. You tell me of an object, and a strange one,
But whose is the resemblance?

An. I theirs the point,
For that I must be pardoned; oh my shame
That I should be the cause'res of a deed,
I blush to nominate.

Vrs. Has it no name!

An. Yes sweet Vrsula,
But such a one as sadly agrauates
My woes in repetition; pray leave me
I am addicted to contemplation
But rest within my call.

Vrs. It Is but your fond conceit; I Have heard you say that dreams and visions
were fabulous; and yet one time I dreamt foul water ran through the floor,
and the next day the house was on fire; you used to say Hobgoblins, Fairies,
and the like were nothing but our own affrightments, and ye oh my troth Cuz I
once dreamed of a young batchelour, and was ridd with a Nightmare. But come,
so my conscience be clear I never care how foul my dreams are.


Exit. An. Thou now have touched the point,
It Is conscience is the Larum Bell indeed
That makes us sensible of our good or bad?
You that are Lovers, by me you may perceive
What is the burden of a troubled mind,
Take heed of vows, and protestations
Which wantonly in dalliancies you make,
The eye of Heaven is on you, and your oaths
Are registered; which if you break, bless me.

Enter Ghost. Gho. Thou can not fly me,
There is no Cavern in the Earth's, vast entrails
But I can through as pearcant as the light,
And find thee, though thou were entombed in stone,
Thou can not catch my unsubstantiall part,
For I am air, and am not to be touched.
From flameing fires of burning Phlegeton,
I have a time limited to walk,
Until the morning Cock shall summon me
For to retire to misty Erebus.
My pilgrimage has no cessation,
Until I bring thee with me to the place
Where Rhadamant, and sable Aeacus dwell
Alive or dead, it is I that must enjoy thee,
To tell the story where we spirits live
Would pluck Vermilion from thy Rosy cheeks,
And make them pale, as Snowy Apennines,
And from thine eyes draw liquid streams of tears
More full of issue then a steepy Fountain,
Alive or dead I must, and will enjoy thee,
Think on thy promise.

An. Distraction like an Ague seizes me,
I know not whether I see here, or speak,
My intellectual parts are frozen up
At sight of thee, thou fiery Effigies
Of my wronged Bateman.

Enter Boot, Vrsula. Bo. What weeping again?

An. Do you not see it?

Bo. See! what? I see nothing but a Bird fly over the house.

Vrs. Nor I, but a blind Buzzard looks as like her husband as may be.


An. Are you blind, or will you make your selves so?
See! how like a dreadful magistrate it stands,
Still pointing at me the black offender;
And like a cunning poysoner, will not kill me,
But lets me linger on, for days, and years.
It stares, beckons, points, to the piece of Gold
We brake between us; look, look there, here there!

Bo. I see nothing, perceive nothing, feel nothing!

Vrs. Nor I, no quick thing, neither clothed nor naked.

Bo. No, no, no! you drancke Baulme, Burrage or Buglosse last night to
bed-ward, that makes you think on your dreams this morning.


An. But I will to it, hug, and embrace it.

Gho. Thy time is not yet come; i am now exild
I may not touch thee while thou art with chil'd.

Exit Ghost. An. you do not hear it neither?

Bo. Whom should we hear?

An. Young Batemans visage.
In every limb as perfect as he lived.

Bo. If it be so, it is done by sorcery.
The father has combined, with some witch,
To vex thy quiet patience, and gain credit,
That he would haunt thee dead, as often he said,
Hell can put life into a senseles body,
And raise it from the grave, and make it speak;
Use all the faculties alive it did,
To work the Devill's hellish stratagems!
If I but find he deals in exorcimes
I Will make him burn to pacify the Witch,
But do not believe it girl.

An. It Is vanished in an instant!
I will not be too confident in my eyes,
Will you grant me leave to visit Bateman?

Bo. Visit mine enemy?

An. I have an inward sorrow bids me do it,
I did him wrong to gybe his miseries
When as he bore the dead Corpse in his arms,
My Genius tells me, I shall have no rest
Till I have made contrition;

Bo. But not to him.
I Would rather live subjected to a Turk,
Go not my girl, i will feast all thy senses,
Thy pallat shall with viands be supplied,
Thine ears with heavenly rapture live inspired,
Thine eyes with sportive action, and delight,
Thou shall have Music to consume the day,
And wast the night.

An. Music! harsh Ravens croake?
Scritch-Owles shreile, the augurers of night,
Are first companions for my mellancholy,
I must go see him; if this apparition
Appear not in his sight, my conjecture
Shall judge it nothing, but my conscience
That finds me guilty for my black offense;

Exit. Bo. Follow her Niece,
She hears a Plurisie of greifes about her,
And much I fear the weakness of her brain
Should draw her to some ominous exigent!
Would she had never, infringed her vow to Bateman
Or I had never known this wealthy German!
If he prove harsh to her, i will make him know,
An enforced hate to vengeance is not slow.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Joshua, his Cat in a string, Miles, Ball. Bal. Nay sweet
Jo. be persuaded.


Io. Persuade me, I scorn to be persuaded? Ball thou art Heathnish, for the
offense is foul which thou would cloak, I Am not to be persuaded, I will
doom the creature, and burn the cloak of her knavery; yet in sincerity I
will do nothing without good color.


Mil. Thy colors, Jo. were better bestowed on course waiting women Madam
Makeroones that sell paintings, and stop holes with plaster of Paris.


Ios. Miller, Miller, thou art not mealy mouthed; those be the Heathen bables,
the May-poles of time, and Pageants of vanity, but I will convince them of
error, and scour their pollutions away with the waters of my exhortations.


Mi. Why should thou hang thy Cat?


Ios. Thou art saucy, Miller, and ought not to Cathechise me so,


Bal. And it were but for Country sake.


Mi. Sweet Jo. consider thy Cat is thy Countriman,


Bal. Hang a poor Cat for killing a Mouse?


Mi. Knowing the proverb too, Cat after Kind.


Bal. As it is in the painted cloth too; when the Cat's away the Mouse will
play.


Ios. I, but as it is in the painted cloth, beware in time for too much
patience, to Dog or Cat will breed too much offense. She did kill a Mouse, I
but when? on the forbidden day, and therefore she must die on Monday.


Mi. Then shall thy zeal be proclaimed, for hanging thy Cat on Monday for
killing a Mouse on Sunday.


Ios. Miller thou art drunk in thy enormities, and art full of the cake of
iniquity.


Gray, Arguile, Clifton. Bal. Well, to thy execution we commit thee.


Ios. Blessed be the instruments of silence; poor Pusse take it not ill that I
must hang thee, by that means I free thee from bawling Mastifs, and snarling
Currs; I have brought thee up of a whelpe, and now will have a care of thy end.


Gr. A notable exhortation.


Ties her. Clif. List to the sequel;


Ios. When thou art dead, thou shall not curse me, for my proceedings shall be
legal; thou art at the bar of my mercy, and thus I ascend to judgment, as it
is in the painted cloth.


Gr. Harken the indictment.


Ios. Tybert the Cat; as it is in the painted cloth, of the Bull, and Cock,
sometimes housekeeper, drudger or scourer to Marmaduke Joshua, Limner alias
painter-stainer, and now the correcter or extirper of vermin, as Rats, Mice,
and other waspish animalls; thou art here indicted by thy dear Master Marmaduke
Joshua for breaking of the high-day, what say thou for thy self? guilty or
not guilty? hah.


Gr. Would she could mew non guilty.


Ios. Know thou not, thou silly Cat, that thy brethren will not Kill the
Calfe nor roast the Mutton nor boil their flesh Pots on the high-day? was it
not decreed by our learned brother Abolt Cabbidge, Cobbler of Amsterdam, that
they should be held unclean, and not worthy of the means that did it, and did
not expect Cratchet Cool his proud flesh in the Leene for making insurrection
on the high day?


Clif. A point well watered.


Ios Did not Nadab the Sowe-gelder make a gaunt of his gelt for being
cumbersome on the high-day? Ha thy silence argues guilt; have thou not seen
the whole conventicle of brothers, and sisters walk to St. Anns, and not so
much as a fructifying Kiss on the high --


Gr. It seems the elect Kiss weekly.


Ios. And must thou kill a Mouse? oh thou wicked Cat; could not turn up the
white of the eye for the poor creature? thou gluttonous Cat, thou art now
arraigned, I adjudge thee to be hanged this monday, for killing a Mouse
yesterday being the high-day.


Offers to hang her. Gr. Stay, stay, a pardon, a pardon!


Ios. I am hot in my zeal, and fiery in expedition,


Clif. We Will talk with you hereafter.


Ios. I was executing a point of justice, equity, and conscience,


Gr. A pleasant Tragecomedy, the Cat being escaped, What Trumpets this?


Enter Cross. Cross. Monlucke, Bishop of Valens,
Newly anchored in the haven of Inskeith,
Desires safe convoy by your honors forces,
From the red Brayes to Edenborough Castle,
The rest on entervew he will impart.
Such entertainment, as the war affourds
The Drum the Fiffe, the thundering Cannon,
The shrill Trumpets, and all warlike Cymballs,
Such Music as in wars Soldiers measure
Bestow on him; come he in war or peace
He shall be welcome?

Io. Oh that profane surplesse, ho, ho, ho.

Enter Monlucke attendant saluts. Mon. Mary, King Dolphins wife, Dowager of
France,
And heir apparent to the Scottish Crown,
Hearing of devastations in her Lands,
And the oppressions that her neighbor Princess
With rough hostility grindes her people,
Me her Legate she sends to Edinburgh,
To parley with her Mother the Queen Regent,
And Article A peace twixt her dear sister,
The Queen of England, and the Lords of Scotland.
If our conditions may be made with honor,
This is my message.

Gr. Either for peace or war.
The Queen my Mistress now is armed for both,
For like a vertuons Princess, and a Mother
Over us her loving subjects, and her sons,
She knowing a Kings security rests,
In the true love, and welfare of her people,
Raised this hostility for to guard her self,
Not to offend, but to defend her own,
Her Secretary Sicill now attends
On the like Embasy for Edinburgh,
Whither your self shall safely be convoy'de.

Mon. You are an honorable foe.

Gr. Will the Queen,
Lay by her nicety, rough filled phrase,
And not articulate too much with England?
For by the power of war e're two suns rise
We Will mount the walls of Leith, and sacrifize,
Her gilded Towers, and her French insulters;
In flames of fire; we vow to hazard lives,
And honors in the enterprise.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Anne, with a Torch, Vrsula, Bateman, wailing his Picture.
An. Softly, softly; fie on your creaking shoes, what noise they make; shut the
Doors close, it does not here us a jot, look well to the Darneicke Hangings,
that it play not the Court Page with us.


Vrs. Here Is not so much as a shadow to affright us, for mine own part
neither Incubus nor Sucubus can do it; I fear not what a quick thing can do,
and I think y'ore dead things are too quiet to say any harm


An. Yet all is clear, no frightfull vision
Nor Ghostly apparition hauntes me yet;
Yonder Is thy father, good powers assist me,
That I may gain his patience to hear me,
And I am heartily satisfied.

O. Ba. Pigmalion doated on the piece he made,
So do not I upon thy pourtraiture.
I do but hang thy fair resemblance here
To tell me of my immortality.
How sensible young Cedars are o'th wind,
When as the aged Oak affronts all storms
It Is death, and natures fault, for the Diamond,
Of blooming youth, despise decaying age.
He might have taken thee el'ce, and left thee boy.

An. Whom talks he too? my life Coz, he has a ghost too! Yet I see nothing.


Ba. How now Hyena; why camst thou hither?
Come thou again to gybe my miseries?
Has thy maligneing hearted father sent thee
To scoff my sorrows? keep of I charge thee,
Thou did bewitch my poor boy with a Kiss,
Thy breath is sure infectious, and I fear
Their's something in thee smells of sorcery.
Stand at distance.

An. Good sir, use patience,
That in extremity is sovereign Balm,
Tears be my witness I come to comfort you,
Yet I see nothing.

Ba. Tears? it is impossible!
Marble will drop, and melt against the rain,
And from the cragy Rocks, Fountainous Floods
Often get enforced issues; but to gain
Relenting tears from thy obdurate heart
It Is impossible, as to force Fire from snow
Water from flint, say the Sun shall not shine,
As well upon the beggar as the King,
That is alike indifferent to all.

Vrs. Good sir remember,
Forgivenes is an Atribute of Heaven.
She has a hearty sorrow for her sins,
And comes to make atonement, if you please.

An. Still I nothing any where.

Ba. Pray listen;
Would not that Physician be well hanged
That for his practice sake Kills his patient,
And after pleades a sorrow to his friends?
She weeps, an evidence of a hearty sorrow,
My boy would not have seen her weep thus long,
But he would have minister'd comfort I my tears
Plays the theife with mine eyes too.

An. Yet all is safe; sure it was but my dreams,
Sir you had a son, bless me it is here now.
Enter Ghost. In the same figure that it used to be.
Peace is more dear, and precious unto me
Then a nights rest, to a man turmoil'd in Law.
My eyes set here un-mou'd, i will gaze with thee,
Until the windows of my head drop out.
But then my mind will be afflicted too.
For what is unseene there, is visible here.
Lead me, i will follow; though to a desert,
Or any uncouth place* work thy vengeance,
And do not torture me alive; neither*

Gho. All things keep their time!

An. Let all times daughters which are days, convert
To one day, and bring me to my period,

Ba. Whom converses she withal?

Vrs. To her unseene fancies.

An. See with eyes of wonder! see!

Ba. What should I see?

An. Ask you what? why it is your son,
Just as he di'd, look, look, there, here, there.

Ba. Is this thy sorrow, come thou to mock me?

An. Just heavens not I! see how it smiles on you,
On me it hurles a dejected look.

Takes the Picture. Ba. Because I hang his Picture never my bed,
Come thou to laugh me! out out, fond-ling noe!
See thus I gaze on it; stroke his snowy hands,
And prune the curled tresses of his locks,
Which the Arts-man neatly has dishevelled.

Vrs. Good sir; have patience, here is is true sorrow,
And not derision.

Stands between the Picture, and Ghost. An. Another Ganimede!
This eye, and yon'd, are one? this front, that lip*
This cheek, a little ruddier shows then that,
The very ashie palenes of his face,
The mossie down still growing on his chin,
And so his Alablaster finger pointing
To the bracelet, whereon the piece of gold
We broke between us hangs.

Ba. Certes she is madd.

An. Pray come hither,
You shade this Picture from the pearsant Sun,
And curtain it, to keep it from the dust,
Why are you not as chary then of that?
It looks as it were could, alas poor Picture,

Ba. Hee'rs but one Picture!

An. I say theirs two,
You will not see this for to save a Curtain,
His knotty curles, like to Apollo's tramells
Neatly are displayed; I Will swear the Painter
That made this piece, had the other by it.
Why do you not speak too it? it is your son,
May be, he is tongue-tide, and cannot crave blessing,

Ba. I could tell thee, I nailed him to the Earth
Riveted a stake quite through his bosom,
And bid thee go seek him; but I love not
To mock miseries; i will take this Picture hence,
It troubles your sight.

An. And you would remove that, I Would thank you;

Ba. It Is thy forced fancies, and thy guilt together
persuades thee so; pray thee be a woman,
Whom thou came to comfort, comforts thee;
Though I intended to have hurled at thee,
Stings of dishonor, ignominies, reproaches,
And all the stock of calumnies, and scorn,
Which thou art guilty off; now my pity
Converts them into sorrow for thy sorrows;

Vrs. A blessing crown you for it.

An. And can their be a hope you will forgive me?

Exit Ghost. Ba. Heartily I do --

An. See i'ts gone now.
As if it vexed to see your clemency.

Ba. Distemper not your self at fancies;
Your time hastens to maturity,
You Are very big, and may endanger your fruit,
If you give way to passions.

An. It Will be abortiue,
As are my actions, I shall not live
To take felicity in it! see i'ts here again.
Enter Ghost, and Exit.
Gho. All things keep their time.

Ba. Come go with me.
I Will give thee comfortable cordialls
That shall remove these objects from thine eyes,
Expelling all disastrous accidents,
And plain thy thoughts as smooth as innocence,
Which when thou hear'st, then in rapture boast,
Thou dread'st no visions, fury, feind nor Ghost.

Exeunt Omnes. An. Be you my counselor, and father too,

Vrs. Whom I admire for noble honesty.

Actus Quartus, Scena Prima.
Enter Clifton, Gray, Arguile, Joshua, Miles, Ball, Soldiers. Gr. What day is
this?

Clif. Tues-day the seventh of May.

Gr. This day shall in our English Calender stand
Either to our dishonor, or great fames,
When Chronicles in after ages tell
The seventh of May we scaled the walls of Leith,
We have begun, dreadlesse of death, and dangers,
And like to loyal subjects held the rights
Of our dear Mistress Queen Elizabeth.
When Captain Randall gives the Alarm,
Assault, assault, each man salute his friend,
Take solemn farewell till this seige have end.

Omnes. Assault, assault.

Gr. Holds every man his charge as we ordered?

Clif. I guess so my Lord;
Howard with his Launce-tieres quarters
T'wixt Mount Pelham, and the Sea by West.
Stout Hary Percy with his barbed steedes
Neighing for action guardes the Tents by East,
Arguile, with shot marches for the Hill Brey;
Sir Francis Leeke keeps the water-ports,
I the green Bul-warke opposite to Doysells
With tough hardy Nottingham shire boys
We Will fall before we fly, by my Hollidam.

Gr. I Will man this bul-warke against proud Mortigue.
Hark, the Allarum, each man unto his place.

Exeunt Omnes. After squirmishes. Enter Gray, meeting Clifton, with Armor. Gr.
How goes the day, sir Jaruis?

Clif. It Is bloody.
The thunderer, on both sides shootes his boults
Valor is at the touchstone of true trial;
The French like to so many gods of war
Bravely brandish darting fire from steel;
The valiant Scot Arguile commandes the Hill,
The Towne-playes fercely; their came a shot
Of full two hundredth weight into my Tent*
Doysells has thrice assaulted me. I faced him,
And from his sides, like Libian Hercules,
I tore the rough Nemean Lion's Skin
His Armor of good proof which here I bear,
And will not part from, but with loss of life.

Gr. See! Arguile apeares.

Arg. Man the water-ports,
With all the Engines of defensive war;
Well fought Vaughan he man's the trenches bravely
Young Arthur Gray assaults the stony mures,
Un goes the scaleing Ladders, now they mount,
Now Sommerset, now Read, now Valiant Brey,
Towering like eager Hawks who shall get highest!
Like angery Lions, or incenced Tigers;
The Frenchmen labor, greedy for the prey,
Now the hardy Scots as swift as Roes,
Climb the walls, and toss the Frenchmen down,
Now from the mount their thundering Cannons roar,
Whose direful clangors shake their huge structures,
And like an earthquake tumble to the Earth,
Their steeples, Ordinance, Gunners, all at once,
Now Inskeith, Sutton, Newport, Conway, Fitton,
As dreadles enter dangers, as their Tents;
Accursed chance, the Ladders are too short,
Which gives a treble, vantage to the French.
Now the foe triumphs, now our white coats fall,
Now groans the mother, now the virgin sighs;
Death will be master, neither party winns
Now flies the English; now the French follow,
And now their horsemen fling about the sands,
Howard counterbuffs their canvasadoes
Like chaffed Bulls, or foaming Bores they strive
For mastery; the Frenchmen fly the Town,
And seek for shelter. Now men your Trenches,
Count Mortigue, and Doysells from the Town
Make expedition! now sings the god of war
His direful Antheames; now fight, or never,
We now are freemen or elce bondmen ever.

Alarm. Enter Doysells, Mortigue, Soldiers. Doy. Thou bear my armor
Clifton;

Clif. My Hollidam,
Thank me Doysells, I did not take thy head.

Mor. I came to seek thee, Gray;

Gr. The Town I see was too hot to hold thee,
Elce thou'st have nesl'd in thy pent-house still.

Clif. We Will not articulate.

Alarums Monluck, Cross, between the Armies. Mon. Th'effuse of blood is great,
Which had been better never spent, then ill;
You of our party, by our commission,
We do command your tariance; your Lords
Of England, and of Scotland we entreat
A little patience till your Heralds speak.

Cross. William Cecill the Queens Secretary,
Wotton Deane of Canterbury, and York,
With sir Ralph Sadler joint Commissioners,
Commands thee John Lord Gray of Wilton,
Now General of her Majesty's forces,
To make immediate repair to Edinburgh,
And present lay by all hostility,
From this hour until seven a Clock at night.

Mon. The like on your allegiance to Mary Dowager of France, and Queen of
Scots, we do commend.


Mor. We obey, and instant will give order.

Ger. The like do you sir Iarvis,

Clif. Now we have beaten them out of the Town, they come To composition.


Ger. Give order through our Trenches, Tents, Bul-warks,
That not a piece of great nor smaller shot
Prove prejudicial to the French; until from us
You have commission; my Lord of Valens
I Will wait on you to the commissioners,
If we have peace it is welcome, and if war.
We are for either object, both we darre.

Exeunt Mon. Gray. Clif. My Hollidam.
What a new monster England has begot
We cannot fight because we want commission?
Mortigue, Doysells, by my just Hollidam
It greives me that we must not fight it out.
Come le'ts shake hands, 'till seven at night all friends
After such greetings, as on war depends.

Doy. We dread not chances.

Exeunt Omnes. A bed covered with white. Enter Pratle, Magpy, Long-tongue,
Barren with a Child, Anne in bed. Pra. Lord, lord, what pretty impes you are in
your majorities!


Mag. Is it a man-child Mother Pratle?


Pra. No in-sooth gossip Mag-py it is one of us, heavens bless thee babie, and
a well appointed impe it is.


Lon. See how it smiles.


Bar. That Is a sign of anger, it will be a shrow I lay my life.


Pra. No, no, Mistress Barren, an Infant smileing, and a Lambs bleateing is a
sign of fertility it is so in Artimedorus; you frowned when you were borne,
and that's the reason you are so sterill; Artimedorus says so in his fourth
book.


Mag. What pretty dimples it has!


Long. Fathers none nyes.


Pra. None nose.


Bar. Smooth forehead!


Mag. Cherry lip!


Pra. Had it been man-child, their had been three evident signs of an
whoremaster; a Roman Nose, Cherry Lip, and a bald Pare, for so Artimedorus in
his Problems.


Mag. Well, well, whosoever got it, it is as like none father as an Apple to a
Nut, insooth Gossip Pratle it is.


Long. It smiles still! sure it was begot in a merry hour.


Bar. Then I was got in a merry vain; for praised be to memory my Mother said
I hung the lip at my nativity.


Mag. Lord Mother Pratle do the Modernes report so?


Pra. I surely Gossip Mag-py, and it is a great sign of frugality if the
Stars, and Planets be concordant, for says Artimedorus; if it be borne under
Venus, it will be fair as you are, if under Sol, Rich as you are, and if under
Mercury.


Mag. Good Mother Pratle what is that god Mercury? is it he that makes the
white Mercury waters, Ladies scour their faces withal!


Pra. I surely Gossip, and stop their wrinckles with too, and says
Artimedorus, in his third book of his Modernes, if borne under Castor, and
Pollux, store of children.


Mag. Caster, and Bollux?


Pra. You speak broad Gossip, it is Pollux.


Mag. Why Bollux be it then; surely Barren was not borne under Bollux, for she
has been married this seven years, and never had child,


Bar. By your favor Gossip Mag-py, you were borne under Caster, and Bollux
then, for you had two children before you wear married.


Enter Vrsula. Pra. Insooth Gossip, she has given you a veny; Good lack
mistress Vrsula, where have you negotiated Your self; you should have been
present, and have Negotiated your self about the Maxims, and principles Of
childbearing; what? you had a Mother?


Vrs. And a Father too, Mother midnight.


Pra. No matter for the father; we talk of the surer side, you may be sure to
know your mother, when your mother hardly knows your father; it is a very
facetious point, as Artimedorus in his book of dreams sets it down.


Enter Boot. Vrs. Here comes my Uncle.


Pra. Off with your hat sir, you come not here without reverence, see if the
little infidel smile not on him, busse, busse, it.


Bo. Heavens bless the babe! what wares bear my Little infidel?


Pra. Bless the baby, it has sufficient if it live to be of the sages.


Bo. I mean carries it an English Pen, and Inke-horne Or a dutch watch tankerd?


Pra. Bless the baby -- it has -- ey marry has it!


Bo. Is it a boy, has it a purse, and two pence in it?


Pra. Bless the baby, it has a purse, and no money in it yet, but it may have,
and it please the destinies.


Bo. A purse, and no money, by St Antony I thought the groom went drunk to
bed, he stole to it so early --


Pra. Look how it smiles.


Bo. Admit me to the mother;

Vrs. She Is now awake, sir.

Bo. I give my thanks to heaven daughter Nan,
Whose providence has made thee a mother,
Rejoice thou in the first fruits of thy womb,
If any sad distempers trouble thy mind
Sing lullabies unto this pretty babe,
And they will vanish; this must be now thy comfort;

An. Just heaven; I might have taken comfort
In this pretty babe; now it is too late,
Leave me your blessing Sir; and depart hence,

Bo. You have some private occasions i am not to question Niece bring the
groaning cheece, and all requisites, I must supply the fathers place, and bid
godfathers.


Exit. An. Good women whose helps I had but now.
It Is almost now of that necessity
It was before: I pray be vigilant,
For if you slumber, or shut your eie-lids,
You never shall behold my living corpse.

Pra. Bless us daughter say not so! I hope you will not part in a trance, nor
steal away in a qualme; come, come what should be your reason?


An. Nothing but a dream.


Pra. An't be a dream, let me come too it; was it a sorrowful dream?
Artimedorus says there be diverse kind of meats engender dreams; as Beans,
long Peason-Lentills, Cole-worts, Garlic, Onions, and the like; Leekes,
Ches-Nuts, and other opening Roots, as Rad-dish, Carrets, Skirrets, Parsenips;
now there is some flesh is provocative too; as the Heart, the Bore, the old
Hare, and Beef; and then of fowls, as the Crane, Ducke, Drake, Goose, and
Bustard; if you tasted any of these they will engender dreams.


An. Pray mark me, and let my words be written
Within your minds, as in a manuscript,
That when it proves so, you may say I told it.

Lon. Peace, and hear her dream.

An. Me thought I walked a long the verdant banks
Of fertile Trent, at an un-usuall time,
The winter quarter; when Herbs, and Flowers
Natures choicest braveries are dead.
When every saplesse Tree sad's at the root;
Yet then, though contrary to nature,
Upon those banks where foaming surges beat,
I gathered Flowers, Roses red, and Damask,
Love Pauncies, Pincks, and gentle Daffadils,
That seldom budds before the Spring time comes,
Daisies, Cowslopps, Harebells, Marigoulds,
But not one bending Violet to be seen.
My apron full I thought to pass away,
And make a Garland of these fragrancies;
Just as I turned, I spide a lovely person,
Whose countenance was full of splendancy
With such embellishings, as I may imagine
Better then name them; it bad me follow it,
Then me thought, it went upon the water,
As firmly as on land; I covetous
To parley with so sweet a frontis-peece
Leaped into th'water, and so dround my self.
Pray watch me well this night; for if you sleep.
I shall go gather Flowers, and then you will weep

Vrs. It Was a strange dream!

Pra. But a very true one; look you Artimedorus in his third book of his
Moderns says to dream of Flowers is very good to a woman in childbed; it
argues she shall soon enjoy her husband; to walk on the Seas specifies to a
man, delight, but to a woman a dissolute life, for the Sea is like a harlot, a
glicery face, and a broken heart. Come, come, do you sleep? we will watch; by
this good drink; Gossip Mag-py, I was almost dry.


An. Lay the babe by me that I may Kiss it;


Pra. So, so, she sleeps, come sit round, and lets have a Carrouse to the
little infidel.


Vrs. I marry sir this is a silent hour, their teeth will not let their
tongues wag. Well drunck Mother midnight, now will she swear by this Wine,
till she soke the Pot were it a fathom deep.


Pra. By this good liquor, it is so.


Vrs. Here Is sweet swearing, and deep vows, she goes to the bottom at every
oath.


Mag. And In Faith Gossip Long-tongue when peipes the Onion out o'th
parsley-bed, when shalls come to your feast?


Lon. Truly Gossip Mag-py when Caster, and Bollux reigns.


Vrs. Sweet Mother Pratle what be those Castor, and Bollux?


Pra. Twinns daughter that rule most the sign being in Virgo, look you Gossip
Barren, could you once dream of sore eyes you should be sure of children?


Bar. Good sooth Mother Pratle, the first time I dreamed, I was with child I
got a husband presently.


Pra. By this dyet-bread Artimedorus says so; mark Mistress Vrsula, to dream
to have Lyce, either in head or body, in some quantity signifies a proper man
well appointed; and by this drink I dreamed my husband when he came first a
woing; came in the liknes of a Kentish twindle Pippen; that is just, as if two
stones grew together, no sooner was I married, but I had two sons presently
just as Artimedorus says by this diet-bread.


Vrs. They have sworn all the Wine, and Banquet away.


Bar. I know not what your twindles are, but i am sure I tender Castor, and
Bollux as dearly as any of you; I cannot dream, heigho --


Pra. You begin to be sleepy; I can prescribe you a medicine of Poppy,
Mandragora, and other drowsy Sirrops; heida all a sleep? if my charge sleeps,
let me rest, for by this drink i am heavy too --


All sleeps. Vrs. Their all asleep I have a heavy slough,
Come over my eie-lids; Somisdore has struck me,
I cannot wake, and must give way to rest,
Sleep. Enter Ghost.
Gh. Deaths eldest daughter sleep with silencies
Has charmed yond beldams, no jarring clock
Nor murmuring wind dares oppose just fate.
Awake fond mortal ne'reto sleep again,
Now is the time I come to claim my promise,
Alive or dead I must, and will enjoy thee.

An. Bless me I was in my dream again; ha!
Mothers, Cozens, Midwife, all drowned in sleep?
Then my decreed hour is here set down
I must away?

Gh. With expedition;
The Ferry-man attends thee at the verge
Of Cocitus, and sooty Acheron,
And he shall waft thee into Tartary,
Where perjury, and false-hood finds reward
There shall thou read thy history of faults,
And mong'st the furies find just recompense,
I Will bring thee over Turrets, Towers, and Steeples,
Over shady Groves, brineish Mears, and Brooks,
The flattring Sea to me is navigable,
Over steepy Mountains, and the craggy Rocks,
Whose heights Kiss Stars, and stop the flying Clouds
We Will through as swift as Swallows in recourse.
The Chauntecleere summons my retreat,
Signing a period to my pilgrimage;
From nipping frosts, and penetrating blastes
Could Snowes, black thawes, and misty killing deawes.
I Will lead thee to the ever-flaming Furnace,
That like a Fever fed by opposite meats,
Engenders, and consumes it self with heat.
I Will pierce the Air as with a thunder bolt,
And make thy passage free; make speed away
Thy broken contract, now thou go to pay.
Enter. She leaving her bed.
An. Oh help, succor: help! wives, cozens, Mid-wives,
Good Angels guard me, I go, but cannot tell,
Whether my journey be, to Heaven or hell.

Vrs. I have slept this hour, how, do you cozen? ha? cozen, here; ay me, where,
alas no where, ay me she is gone, she is gone.


Pra. Heigho; what is the matter Mistress Vrsula!

Vrs. Alas! my cozen, she is gone, she is gone.

Mar. Mary Jove forbid.

Long. I did not like her dream.

Bar. Nor I, I promise you.

Pra. Dispatch every one several ways some to th'feilds some to the
waterside; las it is but a fit, twill be over presently -- away away severally.


Exeunt, and Enter Boot. Bo. What means this noise! how comes my doors open
at this time o'th night; I hope my daughters well,


Vrs. Oh sir she is --

Bo. Not dead I hope.

Vrs. I know not that neither; but whilst we
After long watching took a little rest
She Is stolen out of her bed, and fled away,
The doors quite open, and the infant-here.

Enter Women bringing Anne. Bo. Heaven bless her; I am struck dead with grief
She has been subject to distempered passions
Jove grant she works no harm upon her self,
Me thinks she should not for the infants sake,
Poor babe it smiles, it lacks no mother yet.
Till it miss the breast, she cannot be far
But they may find her out; their's a great Snow
Fal'ne this night, and by her foot stepps they may
Easily trace her, where she is.

Vrs. Oh misery!
Behold the saddest spectacle of woe,
That ever mortal eyes took notice off.

Pra. We traced her through the Snow, step, by step,
Until we came unto the River side,
Where like a cunning Hare she had indented
To cozen her persuers, and cozened her self
For dround we found her on the River side
Nigh Collicke Ferry.

Bo. Oh my poor girl!

Enter Bateman with his Picture. Ba. Oh my poor boy!

Bo. How happy had I been if she had lived?

Ba. How happy had I been if he had lived?

Bo. Whoes that which echoes me, playing the wanton
With my miseries?

Ba. I come to see how sorrow does become thee
Doo'st thou remember that?

Bo. What make thou here, is there no other wrack,
To work my miseries higher, but thy self,
And art thou come for that? oh my poor girl.

Ba. Monster, behold my poor boys Picture,
Thou would not shed a tear, nor lend a sigh,
Poor emblem of a penitential heart,
When in these arms I hugged my dead boys corpse,
Now monster, who is it will weep or sigh, for thine?

Bo. Monster thou troublest me.

Ba. Murderer I will.
See what the fruits of wealth have brought thee now,
An everlasting scandal to thy name.
A conscience full of horror, and black deeds;
Natures external superfluities
Her white, and red Earth, rubbidg, dross, and oar,
Which she but lent thee to keep Marts withal,
Thou have converted to most gross abuses,
Thou would not else have scorned my poor boys love,
To match with wealthy German; see thy fruits,
Thy bazes, and foundations now are suncke,
And look there lies the ruins of thy works.

Bo. Oh misery! my hart-strings crack with grief,
Yet will not burst, oh say, have thou yet done?

Ba. Noe, I will make thee sensible of thy ils,
First thou art causer of thy daughters death,
For thou enforced her to the breach of faith;
Next my sonns ruin, whom parac'd like,
Thou laugd'st at in his fatal tragedy;
Whom but a villain that abjures all laws,
That breaks all precepts, both of heave'ns, and man's,
And natures too could have done this; should I
Like one that dares affront divinity
Laugh at thy daughters fall.

Bo. Have thou done yet?
I do beseech thee for this infants sake,
Which sets a smiling brow on miseries,
And even by instinct, prays thee to forgive,
Commiserate my woes; it greives me now
I did deri'd thy miseries; be but content
I Will weep till thou shall say, it is enough,
So that we may be friends.

Ba. I cannot choose.
But bear a burden in calamities;
Our angers have like tapers spent themselves,
And only lighted others, and not us.
Striving like great men for supremacy!
We have confounded one another goodness,
Come we will be friends, i will dig a soleme cell,
Which shall be hung with sables round about,
Where we will sit, and write the tragedy
Of our poor children; i will ha'it so set down
As not one eye that vewes it, but shall weep
Nor any ear but sadly shall relent,
For never was a story of more ruth,
Then this of him, and her, yet naught but trnth.

Exeunt Omnes. Actus Quintus, Scena Prima.
Enter Arguile, Clifton, Monlucke, Jo. Ball, Miles, Soldiers Mortigue,
Doysells, Soldiers on the Walls. Clif. After the hand of war has razed your
walls,
Affrighting peace from your Jvory beds,
And like the reaper with his angry sickle
Leaves the Earth full of soars, and wounds,
Yet after plasters her with her own crop;
So come we after war, bloody turmoiles
To bring you peace, which had you sued before,
Thousands that now ly boweld in the earth
Had lived to memory what we have done.
Set open your gates, and with spread arms embrace her
For which as follows ye have articulated,

Mon. Which we, Monluck, Bishop of Valence
Labrosse, Amyens joint commissioners
For the most christian King, and Queen,
Francis, and Mary of France, and Scotland,
Have Confirmed.

Mor. Doy. Which, we as duty binds, must obey.

Clif. The Articles thus follow, The most mighty Princess Elizabeth by the
grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland Queen, defendor of the faith,
etc and the most Christian King, Francis, and Mary, by the same grace King, and
Queen of France, and Scotland have bore Record upon a reconciliation of peace,
and amity to be inviolably kept between them, their subjects, Kingdoms, and
confines; and therefore in their names it is straightly commanded to all manner
of persons, borne under their obeysances, or being in their services, to lay by
all hostility either by Sea or Land, and to keep good peace either with other
from this time forwards, as they will answer thereto, at their utmost perils;
long live Elizabeth, Francis, and Mary;


Omn. Long live Elizabeth, etc.

Mor. We much desire to hear the Articles,
On which this peace stands fully ratified.

Clif. They are thirteen in number;
The principal, and of most effect, are these,
That the French Soldiers, and all men of war
Leave the Realm of Scotland in twenty days,
Six score Soldiers, only are excepted,
Three score of them to remain at Inskeith,
And three score, at the Castle of Dun-barr,
Their wages to be paid from the estates
of Scotland; and to live lawful subjects
To the Laws, and ordinances of that Realm,
All fortifications in, or, about Leith,
Which by the French was built, shall be defaced,
That France conveigh not any man of war
Nor ammunition into this Land,
Without a free consent in Parliament,
Of the three estates of these great Kingdoms.
That Francis, and Mary King, and Queen of France,
From henceforth bear not the Arms of England
Which solely appertain to our dread Mistress
The Queen of England, and to no other.
These as you hope for peace, you must observe.

Mor. We subjects are the hands, Kings are the heads,
And what the head commands, the hands must act,
Our barrocadoed portalls shall fly open,
And yield entrance; if warlike Clifton please,
As we have fought together, so we will feast,
Such viands, as a raized Town can yield
You shall receive; noble sir Francis Leake
Has in this manner proclaimed this peace
On the North-side whom we will gratulate
Which terms of honor, will it please you enter?

Clif. By my Hollidam we accept your offer;
Lay by your arms; still after frayes come feasts,
To which we Soldiers, are the welcom'st guests;
Unbrace our drums, instead of warr's Allarmes,
Exeunt Omnes. We Will meet, like constant lovers, arm in arms

nisi Cross, Bal. Bal. See, Joshua, is entered, one cup of brisk Orleance
Makes him in the temper he was when he leaped into Leene.


Cross. Will he be drunk?


Bal. Most swine-like, and then by the virtue of his good liquor he is able to
convert any Brownisticall sister.


Cross. An excellent quality!


Bal. Nay, in that mood, you shall have him, instead of presenting Piramus,
and Thisbe, personate Cato Censorious, and his three sons, only in one thing
he is out, one of Cato's sons hanged himself, and that he refer's to a dumb
show;


Cross. Me thinks he should hang himself for the jest sake.


Bal. As he did his Cat for killing a Mouse on Sunday, see! he has top'd the
cannikin already; now will he sing treason familiarly, being sober; ask him
why he did it? in sincerity, it was not he, it was his drink.


Enter Joshua, reeling with Jacks. Ios. As it is in the painted cloth, in
sincerity; good liquor quickens the spirit.

When from the wars I do return,
And at a cup of good Ale mourn.
I le tell how Towns without fire we did burn,
and is not that a wonder?

Bal. That Is more then the painted cloth!

Ios. I Will tell how that my General,
Entered the breach, and scaled the wall,
And made the foremost battery of all,
and is not that a wonder?

Cross. Admirable!

Ios. How that we went to take a Fort,
And took it too in warr-like sort
I Will swear that a ly is a true report,
and is not that a wonder?

Cross. There Is wonder in that, Io!
How that we Soldiers, had true pay,
And cloth, and vit'les every day,
And never a Captain ran away,
and is not that a wonder?

Bal. Nay, and but six days to the week.

Ios. Is there any man here desires to edyfie? I am in the humor of
converting; I was converted in my drink, and so are most of my brethren; I Will
stand while I am able, and then will go sleep on it.


Exit Ios. Bal. He Is gone both ways; see the French Lords, and our's enter.


Music, Enter. Lord Gray, Clifton, Arguile, attendants Monlucke, Mortigue,
Doysells, all embrace. Mon. On honorable terms we now embrace.

Gr. If what we articl'd be full performed

Clif. They are my Lord in each particular.
And the French ready to depart the Town,
By my Hollidam, they have feasted us.
Not like to foes but friends, it is my wonder,
That a beseiged Town could yield such Cates,
In such extremities, and exigents,
Full forty several messes, yet not one,
Either of fish or flesh, only one dish,
Which was the daintiest, (a powdered horse)
That, I took notice off.

Gr. Large stomachs, and empty sallet dishes
Are the French-mans viandes; his banquetings,
Cloyes not the stomach, but gives satiety,
A fresh appetite; that makes the body
Active, and full of generous fires,
Full dishes are like potions unto them,
I know not whether nicety or want;

Clif. By my Hollidam; want, want,
Give me the English chine, and that feeds men,
And they that feed well, certainly will fight
Unless some Woolfe, or maw- Worm be internate;

Arg. I relish your opinion.

Gr. Lords of France you may depart at pleasure.

F. Lo. Prosperity, and peace ever t'wixt France, and England.

E. Lo. Amen says England; when France forgets her pride England will honor
her,


Gr. Come my coemates in war,
Our Soldiers instantly shall march for Barwicke,
The Duke of Norfolk, waits their arrival.
Sir Francis Leake shall give them safe conduct,
You, Arguile, Clifton, and my self
With expedition are for Nottingham,
To meet our peerlesse princess Elizabeth
Who in her progress there will lay her Court.
Arguile shall there receive the hostages
Due to the federary Lords of Scotland,
We Will turn warr's clangors into musik's sweet,
And like new vested pares in wed-locke meet

Exeunt Omnes. Enter, Miles, and Ball. Bal. What if it were a Puppet-play?


Mi. Absurd! absurd! thei'le be out in turning up the white of the eyes,
besides, there is none of us can speak in the nose.


Bal. Yes, Joshua;


Mi. Most abominable! wood'st thou have a Puritan speak to a Play; a Puppet
Play! thou ought to be burned for thy heretical conceit, why thou poisoned
sowter, wood'st thou have a Puritan speak to a Play? still give me the
Hobbyhorse.


Bal. But who shall play the Hobbyhorse, Master Major?


Mi. I hope, I look, as like a Hobbyhorse as Master Major I have not lived to
these years, but a man wooed think I should be old enough, and wise enough,
to play the Hobbyhorse, as well as ever a Major on'em all;


Bal. Not so, choleric Miles.


Mi. Let the Major play the Hobbyhorse among his brethren, and he will; I
hope our Town Ladds cannot want a Hobbyhorse, have I practiced my Reins my
Carree'res, my Pranckers, my Ambles, my false Trotts, my smooth Ambles, and
Canterbury Paces, and shall Master Major put me besides the Hobbyhorse?


Bal. Thou will not understand me Miles!


Mi. I am an ass if I do not; have I borrowed the fore Horsebells his Plumes,
and braveries, nay had his mane new shorn, and frizl'd, and shall the Major
put me besides the Hobbyhorse? let him Hobbyhorse at home, and he will!


Bal. Thou art impatient.


Mi. Wooed it not make a man impatient; am I not going to buy ribbons, and
toys of sweet Vrsula for the Marian, and shall not I play the Hobbyhorse?


Bal. Why then, let the Major speak the Oration;


Mi. Disgraceful, am not I able to make a narration to the Prince, I have
played a Major in my time, with as good dacity as e're a Hobbyhorse on'em all;
and the Major will prompt me, let him, he shall find, i will stand out like a
man of Coventry.


Bal. What shall Joshua do?


Mi. Not know of it by any means, he will keep more stir with the Hobbyhorse,
then he did with the Pipers at Tedbury Bull-running; provide thou for the
Dragon, and leave me for a Hobbyhorse.


Ball. Fear not, i will be a fiery Dragon,


Enter Vrsula. Mil. And I a thundering St. George as ever rode on horseback,
but see younders sweet Vrsula, more white then soote, and blacker then white
Snow.


Vrs. Younder's my Antagonist; a haunts me like a ghost, 'cause I used to make
him the prologue to be merry, he forsooth conceits it is love sir reverence, why
Vrsula, Niece Vrsula?


Within. Vrs. That Is my uncle's call, if I staya little, he will fetch me in,
which if he does, I may perchance harp upon a conceit to beat this parboiled
gentleman's love out of my mealy Millers coat.


Sings. Miles. You dainty Dames so finely dek'd
In beauties to behold,
And you that trip it up, and down
Like Lambs in Cupid's fould,
Not far from Nottingham of late,
In Clifton, as I hear
There dwelt a fair, and comely dame,
For beauty without peer.

Vrs. How now Master Miles, singing!


Mi. I Mistress Vrsula, a very merry lamentable doleful new Ditty of young
Bateman, and his Nan; that ever poor young gentleman should die like a bird on
a Tree, for the love to a woman -- for here it is in the third staff.

Her Hair was like the crisped Gold
Often times you may perceive,
The fairest face, the falsest heart,
And soonest will deceive.
Mistress Vrsula I give you this as a caution to remember Bateman, and his
sweet, your cozen, look on me, and veiw your self were it not pity I should
hang my self for love; and that you should die none knows how?

Why Vrsula, Niece Vrsula.

Within. Vrs. Alas! what shall we do? if my uncle comes, he will take thee for
a Ghost, his brain is so fraught with distempers, and then falls he raging
madd,


Mi. Will he not strike?
Why Vrsula, Niece Vrsula:

Within. Vrs. Sometimes he will, so after your fit is over, I Will prescribe a
remedy against love.


Enter Boot i'ns shirt. Bo. Passion* on passion! am I grown old, and odious
in your eyes? what no attendance Mistress!


Vrs. Oh Lo-oooord sir;

Bo. What ailes thee woman, what is the matter? ha! why doo'st thou quake,
shake, tremble, and shiver? ha!


Vrs. Oh there, there, there!

Bo. Be thou the devil, I will talk with thee;

Mi. Ha, ha, no fool to the old one, he takes me for a Ghost;

Bo. Art thou of air, of earth, heaven or hell,
Or art thou of some Incubusses breed?
Is there more walking Batemans? answer me,
Or I will beat thy carcas into a form
That is full substantial, and has feeling,
Seeing, hearing, smelling, and sweete-tasting, Ghost, I Will thunder thee;


Mi. Oh, ho, Master Boot, Master Boot.

Bo. I; can the devil feeleor, is he sensible of beating?
What art thou! have thou feeling?

Mi. I, and hearing, and seeing too; and you will let me alone i will tell you what
I am;


Bo. Ghost, i will confine thee;

Mi. Alas sir I Am no Ghost, I am plain honest Miles the Miller of Ruddington;
a gentleman* and a Soldier,


Bo. And Miles the Miller of Ruddington gentleman, and Soldier what make you
here?


Mi. Alas sir to borrow a few ribbandes, bracelets, eare-rings wyertyers, and
silk girdles, and hand-kerchers for a Morice, and a show before the Queen.


Bo. Miles you came to steal my Niece.

Mi. Oh Lord sir; I came to furnish the hobbyhorse.

Bo. Get into your hobbyhorse, gallop, and be gone then, or i will Morisdance you
-- Mistress wait you on me.


Exit. Vrs Farewell good hobbyhorse -- weehee --

Exit. Mil. It Is but a jades trick Mistress Vrsula; but patience the enemy to
greatness is my content, and in that humor I will forage on like the
Hobbyhorse.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Major Aldermen attendants, Queen, and Lords attendants.
Qu. Master Major!
We thank you for your entertainment,
And for your princely present, a cup of gold!
In gratefullnes we back return the keys
With all the embleames of your government;
We in our progress, are a sojourner,
Not an inhabitant, we will be so with you;
A welcome fuller of bounty, virtue, love,
We have not seen; therefore to gratulate
As a small token of our princely love,
On, to your former motion made for Trent.
You Would have it navigable to Gainsborough
So to Boston, Kingston, Humber, and Hull;
But, what are the causes?

Ma. By St. Lucy Besse, I am a plain honest Tanner, my brothers here, one a
Shoo-maker, to'ther a Felmonger, we are all down right toth'hide; I ha'noe
Lawyers eloquence, our Recorder cannot whistle, but by the bones of sweet St.
Lucy welcome, on welcome.


Qu. I have tasted your welcome, and would feign
Grant your design, so you give reason.

Ma. By St. Lucy, and shall, elce i'man ass, and my brethren Dotterells, Give
reason, brother Sheeps-kin, second me for I must speak Historiography, History
I should say, but these hard words cloy my stomach, like lumpes of Bacon.


Qu. Ya'r a merry man Master Major.

Ma. I were a Traitor elce, I wooed not be merry with thee, Besse still
welcome, and welcome;


Qu. On, to your Charter.

Ma. Thus it was,
Edward the first from whom we bear our arms,
Three Crowns displaied in an Azure feilde,
First, 'gan to make our River navigable,
Small barks it bore, but not of that full weight,
That were transportable for our affairs,
In the two Edwards the second, and third,
Unto the second Richard it continued
Till Bulling-brooke began! then Harry the fifth,
And Pearcy fell at odds; in which division,
Dividing of the land; Glendower began
To stop the watercourse of flowing Trent,
By that means our navigable course was stopped,
And where before we usually transported
With things un-numerous from Hull to us!
And in return releiv'd the neighbor coaste,
With fuel, and commodities of great use.
As Wool, Lead, Corn, fruits, and Iron;
We now have neither; but with double cost,
This is the cause why we entreat your Grace
To sign our pattent, and by St Lucy, Besse;
We Will pray for thee, and that is thy full reward.

Qu. You shall enjoy your wishes;

Enter* Gray, Clifton, Arguile. Omnes: Long live Elizabeth;

Qu. We thank you;
VVelcome renowned John of Wilton,
And you the war like Heroes of his train,
VVar-like Clifton; fame has been before thee,
And with her shrill Trumpe sent your praises home,
E're your arivall; rise noble John of Wilton;
The only champion of Elizabeth.

Gr. Peace, and prosperity guard your sacred throne,
And make your foes submissive like the French;
Leith is surrenderd, the French quite expuls'd;
The Scotch inhabiting their native bounds,
Whom we have found most loyal to your Grace,
And therefore they require their hostages
Due to the federary Scottish Lords.

Qu. And they shall have them; welcome bold Arguile,
Thank thou the god of batles, that have given
Prosperity to our first enterprise,
Being the first Batle that we ever waged,
Linked victory unto a virgin's arm,
For which we render thee all attributes,
Guarded by thee, and these our loving subjects,
We fear noe Spanish force, nor French-mens braves,
Let Austria brag; and Rome, and Italy
Send out their poisoned Darts; dreadlesse we stand
Protected by thy never failing power,
Lord Gray, return you governor of Barwicke,
The Duke of Norfolk, for some special causes
We must recall; Arguile shall have his pleadges,
We but reserved them to preserve our selves,
Clifton; be thou our deputy Leivetenant,
And Lord warden of Nottingham Castle,
Our self will be Leivetenant of the County.
For Howard, Pellham, Leake, and all the rest
That in this victory shared with dangers,
They shall participate our princely loves,

Omnes: Heavens bless your Majesty.

Qu. I know not how to dignifie your deeds
Without a large premeditation;
Gray, and Clifton, Clifton, and warlike Gray
Fought for our father, brother, and sister
At Dennis, Roan, Bullen, and at Callice
The bloody sweat that Muslborough bredd
At Edenborough, and now again at Leith,
In all which we fortunately conquered,
Thanks unto heaven, next your valiant hands.

Clif. Your Majesty begets a spring of youth
In me an old decayed Tree of age,
Worn with as many snowy winters storms,
As makes the brauny Oak grow sap-les,
Leaveles witherd, times period is ruin,
Yet by my life, my heart retains 'its vigor.
And what we want in deeds, we will act in duty,
To you the Sovereign mistress of our hearts.

Qu. Master Mayor, and noble John of Wilton,
And warlike Clifton with all your men of war
We this night do invite you, for our gueasts,
To sup with us; to morrow we will survey
The underminings, and unpaced greise
That Mortimer, and Isabell did devise
To steal their sportive daliancies in,
Of whom your stately fortress does retain
The Labyrinth (now called Mortimers hole)
Heaven for our victory we first will pay,
And praise our subjects that redeemed the day,
Proud France, and poysening Spain, if heave'n us bless
A virgin's arm shall quell your mightines.

Omnes: Long life attend your Majesty.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS. W. S.

