TWO SERMONS: THE FORMER, CONCERNING THE right use of Christian Liberty,
PREACHED At S. PAUL'S CROSS London. May 6. THE LATER, CONCERNING the persuasion
of Conscience, PREACHED At a Metropoliticall visitation at GRANTHAM LINCOLN:
Aug. 22. 1634. By ROBERT SAUNDERSON Chaplain to his MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman and L. Fawn at the sign of the
Brazen serpent in Paul's Churchyard. M DC XXXV.

PErl^gi has duas co^ciones, in quibus nihil reperio bonis moribus, aut sanae
doctrinae contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprima^tur, it a tamen,
ut si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandentur, haec licentia
fit omnino irrita.

Dat' Lambethae Jun. 17. 1635. GuIL: BRAY.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM L. ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, Chauncellor of the University of
Oxford, and one of his Majesty's most Hon: Privy Counsel.
I Have been ever willing, (most Reverend Father in God) as at all other times
upon just occasion* so especially when called to preach at any public meeting
of the Clergy, to vindicate the Government and Rites established in the Church
of England, from the unjust aspersions, which in this last age have been, and
still are, cast thereon by ill affected spirits, with a great deals more noise
then there is cause. Not any way to comply (farther then duty and reason
require) with the times; (which is the ready objection against this course in
every mouth: God pardon their uncharitableness and unrighteousness who so
mis-judge!) but out of an earnest, and as I hope sinc^re, desire of advancing
the peace of this flourishing Church and State: wishing unfainedly, that all
we who live in the visible communion of the same body as brethren, might also
as brethren (so far as were possible) Romans 15. 6.
With one mind and one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. It was no other then this very desire, that gave these two Seri^o^s
their first life; nor is it any other thing now that brings them into farther
light, then the possibility, if not rather hope, of prod^cing some good effect
that way: For as it is at all times in the hand of God, so is it many times his
good pleasure also, to bless well-meant (though weak) endeavors, far beyond
the proportion of their wo^th. I know there are some 1 These. 5. 14.
(...) and Tit. 1. 10.
(...), men that will not be brought into order by any means, nor satisfied
with any reason, so perversely minded are they, and so stiffened in their
resolutio^s: who albeit they deserve very little regard other wise, yet even in
respect of them also it is requisite the truth in these points should be
sometimes opened; either to Tit. 1. 11.
stop their mouths from clamouring, if it may be, or at leastwise (if they
will needs be doing) to render their obstinacy the more inexcusable. But it is
principally requisite for those men's sakes, and in compassion to their souls,
whose honest simplicity has been abused, and their weak consciences
mis-guided, by such Incendiaties, that they may be better informed: and partly
also for the confirmation of those that are regular, that they may continue in
their right minds, and not suffer themselves to be wrested out of their good
belief by the cunning engines of those that are chief factours for the
faction. To any of which ends, if (by Gods good blessing) these my slender
labors shall lend the least furtherance, it shall nothing repent me to have
published them. But this is all I am able to say for them onwards: first, for
the arguments, that I made choice to entreat of such as to me seemed very
useful for these licencious times, wherein too too many plead Liberty and
Conscience, in bar to Loyalty and Obedience: and then for the manner of
handling the same, that I gave all diligence to deliver my self in the spirit
of truth and of meekness; that is to say, with all clear evidence of reason,
but without all either gall of bitterness, or leaven of partiality. However
such as they are, I hubly present them to the service of God and his Church,
under your Graces protection: as unto whom, by a double title they most
properly belong. First, for that they were both preached by appointment from
your Grace: the former, in the City, when you were L: Bishop of London; the
other, in the Country, at your late Metropoliticall Visitation: and to what
hand should they rather return, then to that that first occasioned their
being? As also, for that they tend to the suppressing of Novelties, and to the
preservation of Order and Peace (of both which you are most zealous) in that
Church, wherein (under God and the King) you worthily sit at the stern. The
God of heaven multiply his blessings upon you; prosper the affairs of his
Church in your hands, that Truth and Peace may flourish therein more and more;
and remember you according to all the good deeds you either have already done,
or entend farther to do for his house, and for the prosperity thereof. So
prays

Your Graces in all humble service, ROBERT SAUNDERSON.
Boothby Paynell Linc. 4. Febr. 1634.
THE FIRST SERMON, (Being the seventh ad Populum) PREACHED AT SPAVLS CROSS IN
LONdon 6. May 1632.
THE FIRST SERMON.
1 PET. 2. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
THere is not any thing in the. 1. The scope:
world more generally desired then Liberty, nor scarce any thing more generally
abused. Insomuch as even that blessed liberty which the eternal Son of God
has purch^sed for his spouse the Church, and endowed her there withal, has
in no age been free from abuses: whilst some have sinfully neglected their
Christian liberty, to their own prejudice; and othersome have as sinfully
stood upon it, to the prejudice of their brethren. So hardly, through pride and
ignorance and other corruptions that abound in us, do we hit upon the golden
mean, either in this, or almost in any thing else: but easily swarve into the
vicious extre^mes on both hands, declining sometimes into the defect, and
sometimes into the excess. The Apostles therefore, especially S. Peter and S.
Paul, the two chiefest planters of the Churches, endeavored early to instruct
believers in the true doctrine, and to direct them in the right use of their
Christian liberty, so often in their several Epistles, as fit occasion was
offered thereunto. Which we may observe them to have done most frequently and
fully in those two cases, which being very common, are therefore of the greater
consequence, viz. the case of scandal, and the case of obedience.

And we may further observe concerning these two Apostles, that S. Paul usually
touches upon this argument. 2. Occasion:
of liberty, as it is to be exercised in the Case of Scandal; but S. Peter
oftener, as in the Case of obedience. Whereof, on S. P^ters part, I conceive the
reason to be this: That being Gal. 2. 7.
the Apostle of the Circumcision, and so having to deal most with the Jews,
who Seditiosissima gens. I of. Scalig. not. in Luc. 22. 52.
could not brook subjection, but were of all nations under heaven the most
impatient of a foreign yoke; he was therefore the more careful to deliver
the doctrine of Christian liberty to them in such a manner, a^ might frame them
withal to yield such reverence and obedience to their governors, as became
them to do. And therefore S. Peter beats much upon the point of obedience.

But he no where pressoth it more fully then in this Chapter: Wherein after the
general exhortations of. 3. and coherence of the Text.
subduing the lusts that are in their own bosoms, ver. 11. and of ordering
their conversation so as might be for their credit and honesty in the sight of
others, ver. 12. when he descends to more particular duties, he begineth
first with and insisteth most upon this duty of subjection and obedience to
authority, in the greatest remaining part of the Chapter. The first precept he
gives in this kind, is set down with sundry amplifications and reasons there
unto belonging, in the next verses before the text (submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake:) And then he does by way of Prolepsis,
take away an objection, which he foresaw would readily be made against that and
the following exhortations, from the pretext of Christian liberty; in the words
of the text (As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.)

Conceive the words as spoken in answer to what. 4. The Text pa^aphrased;
those new converts might have objected. We have been taught, that the Son of
God has made us free, and then we are John 8. 36.
free indeed: and so not bound to subject our selves to any Masters or
Governors upon earth, no not to Kings; but much rather bound not to do it,
that so we may preserve that freedom which Christ has purchased for us, and
reserve our selves the more entirely for Gods service by refusing to be the
servants of men.

This objection the Apostle clearly takes off in the text, with much holy
wisdom, and truth. He tells them, that being indeed set at liberty by
Christ, they are not therefore any more to enthrall themselves to any living
soul or other creature; not to submit to any ordinance of man as slaves, that
is, as if the ordinance it self did by any proper, direct and immediate virtue
bind the conscience. But yet all this notwithstanding, they might and ought to
submit thereunto as 1 Cor. 7. 22.
the Lords freemen, and in a free manner; that is, by a voluntary and
unenforced both subjection to their power, and obedience to their lawful
commands. They must therefore take heed they use not their liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, nor under so fair a title palliate an evil
licentiousness; making that a cloak for their irreverent and undutifull
carriage toward their superiors. For albeit they be not the servants of men,
but of God; and therefore owe no obedience to men as upon immediate tie of
conscience, and for their own sake, but to God only: yet for his sake and out
of the conscience of that obedience which they owe to his commands of Exodus 20.
12.
honoring father and mother, and of being Romans 13. 1.
subject to the higher powers, they ought to give unto them such honor and
obedience, as of right belongs unto them according to the eminency of their
high places. (As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes,
but as the servants of God.)

From which words thus paraphrased, I gather 3. observations: all concerning
our Christian liberty, in that. 5. and divided.
branch of it especially which respects humane ordinances, and the use of the
creatures, and of all indifferent things. Either 1. in the existence of it, (As
free,) or 2. in the exercise of it (And not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness,) or 3. in the end of it, (but as the servants of God.) The
first observation this; We must so (As free.) The second this; We must so
maintain our liberty, as that we do not under that color either commit any
(and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.) The third this; In
the whole exrcise both of liberty we have in Christ, and of the respects we
owe unto men, we must evermore remember our selves to be, and accordingly
behave our selves as those that are Gods servants: (but as the servants of God)
The sum of the whole 3. points in brief this: We must be careful without
either infringing or abusing our liberty, at all times, and in all things to
serve God.

Now then to the several points in that order as I have proposed them, and as
they lie in the text:. 6. Observe. 1. collected: That Christian liberty
((...). As free) which words have manifest reference to the exhortation
delivered 3. verses before the text; as declaring the manner how the duty there
exhorted unto ought to be performed: yet so as that the force of them
stretches to the exhortations also contained in the verses next after the
text. Submit your selves to public governors both supreme and subordinate; be
subject to your own particular masters; honor all men with those proper
respects that belong to them in their several stations: But look you do all
this ((...).) not as slaves, but as free: do it without impeachment of the
liberty you have in Christ. Of which liberty, it would be a profitable labor
(but that I should then be forced to omit sundry other things which I deem
needful to be spoken, and more nearly pertinent to the points proposed) to
discover at large the nature, and parts, and causes, and effects, and adjuncts,
that we might the better understand the amplitude of that dower which Christ
has settled upon his Church, and thence learn to be the more careful to
preserve it. But I may not have time so to do: it shall therefore suffice us
to know, that as the other branches of our liberty, whether of glory or grace;
whether from the guilt of sin in our justification; or from the dominion of
sin in our sanctification, with the several appendices and appurtenances to
any of them: so this branch of it also which respects the use of indifferent
things; First 1.
is purchased for us by the blood of Ioh. 8. 36. and Gal. 5. 1.
Christ, and is therefore usually called by the name of Christian liberty.
Secondly is revealed unto us outwardly in the preaching 2.
of the Gospel of God and of Christ; which is therefore called Iam. 1. 25. and
2. 12.
the law of liberty And thirdly, is conveyed unto us inwardly and effectually
by the operation of the Spirit of God and of Christ, which is therefore called
a 3.
Psalm. 51. 12.
free spirit (O stablish thou me with thy free spirit) because, where the
Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. 2. Cor. 3. 17.

Now this liberty, so dearly purchased, so clearly. 7. ought to he
maintained: with the proofs thereof.
revealed, so firmly conveyed; it is our duty to maintain with our utmost
strength in all the parts and branches of it, and, (as the Apostle exhorts)
to Gal 5. 1.
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to
suffer our selves either by the devises of other men, or by our own sloth and
wilful default to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And namely
in this particular branch whereof we now speak, whatsoever serviceable offices
we do to any of our brethren, especially to those that are in authority; we
must perform our duty therein with all cheerfulness of spirit and for
Conscience sake, but still with freedom of spirit and with liberty of
Conscience; as being servants to God alone and not to men. We find therefore
in the Scriptures a peremptory charge both ways; that we neither usurp
mastership, nor undergo servitude. A charge given by our Savior Christ to his
Disciples in the former behalf, that they should Mat. 23. 8. 10.
not be called Rabbi, neither Masters, Mat. 23. and a charge given by the
Apostle Paul to all believers in the later behalf, that they should 1 Cor. 7.
23.
not be the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.

God forbid any man of us, possessed with an Anabaptisticall. 8. cleared from
misconstructio^,
spirit, or rather frenzy, should understand either of those passages, or any
other of like sound, as if Christ or his Apostle had had any purpose therein to
slacken those siuews and ligaments, and to dissolve Non venit Christus
conditiones mutare Hieron. in Ephesians. 6.
those joints and contignations, which tie into one body, and claspe into one
structure, those many little members and parts, whereof all humane societies
consist: that is to say, to forbid all those mutual relations of superiority
and subjection which are in the world, and so to turn all into a vast Chaos of
Anarchy and Confusion. For such a meaning is contrarious to the express
determination of Mat. 22. 21.
Christ, and to the constant doctrine of Romans 13. 1. etc Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22.
S. Paul in other places: and we ought so to interpret the Scriptures, as that
one place may consist with another, without clashing or contradiction. The true
and plain meaning is this: that we must not acknowledge any our supreme
Master, nor yield our selves to be wholly and absolutely ruled by the will of
any, nor enthrall our Judgments and Consciences to the sentences or laws of
any, man, or Angel, but only Christ our Lord and Master in heaven.. 9. by a
twofold distinction of Masters: The former;


And this interpretation is very consonant to the Analogy of Scripture in
sundry places. In Ephesians. 6. (to omit other places) there are two distinctions
employed, the one in the 5. the other in the 7. verses, both of right good use
for the reconciling of sundry texts that seem to contradict one another, and
for the clearing of sundry difficulties in the present argument. Ephesians. 6. 5.
Servants (says S. Paul there) be obedient unto them that are your Masters
according to the flesh. Which limitation affords us the distinction of
Masters -- secundum carnem: quia est and Dominus secundum spiritii. Ille est
verus Dominus -- Augustine. in Psalm. 124.
according to the flesh only, and of Masters after the spirit also. Intimating
that we may have other Masters of our flesh to whom we may (and must) give due
reverence, so far as concerns the flesh, that is, so far as appertains to
the outward man, and all outward things. But of our spirits, and souls, and
consciences; as we can have no fathers, so we may have no Masters upon earth,
but only our Master and our Father which is in heaven. And therefore (in Mat.
23.) Christ forbids the calling of any man upon earth Mat. 13. 9.
Father, as well as he does the calling of any man Master. And both the
prohibitions are to be understood alike, and as has been now declared.

Again (says S. Paul there) with good will doing service,. 10. the later. a
Ephesians. 6. 7.
as to the Lord, and not to men: which opposition imports a second
distinction: and that is of Masters, into supreme, and subordinate: those are
subordinate Masters, to whom we do service in ordine ad alium, and as under
another. Those are supreme Masters, in whom our obedience rests in the final
resolution of it, without looking farther or higher. Men may be our Masters,
and we their servants, the first way; with subordination to God, and --
distingu^^a^t. dominum aeter (...) temperali: tame^ subditi crant, propter
dominum aeternum, etiam domino te^porali. Augustine in Psalm. 124.
for his sake: And we must do them service and that with good will: but with
reservation ever of our bounden service to him, as our only supreme sovereign
and absolute Master. But the later way, it is high sacrilege in any man to
challenge, and it is high treason against the sacred Majesty of God and of
Christ for us to yield to any other but them, the mastership, that is, the
sovereign and absolute mastership over us.

Briefly, we must not understand those Scriptures that forbid either
Mastership or servitude, as if they. 11. Of our care in this point.
intended to discharge us from those mutual obligations, wherein either in
nature or civility we stand tied one unto another, in the state Oeconomicall,
Political, or Ecclesiastical; as anon it shall further appear: but only to
beget in us a just care, amidst all the offices of love and duty which we
perform to men, to preserve inviolate that liberty which we have in Christ;
and so to do them service, as to maintain withal our own freedom (...), as
free.

A thing whereof it behooveth us to have a special care, and that for sundry
and weighty respects. First,. 12. Sundry Reasons: the first;
in regard of the trust reposed in us in this behalf. Every Religiosus homo
sanctusque diligenter and chcumspecte solet tu^r^ fidei commissa. Senec, de
tranquil. c. 11.
honest man takes himself bound to discharge with faithfulness the trust
reposed in him, and to preserve what is committed unto him by way of trust,
(though it be another man's) Nisi adsuum modum curam in deposito praestat,
fraud non caret. l. 32. ss. de deposito.
no less, if not rather much more carefully, then he would do if it were his
own; that so he may be able to give good account of his trust. Now these two,
the Christian Faith, and the Christian Liberty, are of all other the choicest
jewels, whereof the Lord Jesus Christ has made his Church the depositary. Every
man therefore in the Church ought Jude verse. 3.
earnestly to contend, as for the maintenance of the faith (as S. Jude
speaks) so also for the maintenance of the liberty, which was once delivered
to the Saints: even eo nomine, and for that very reason, because they were both
delivered unto them under such a trust. 1 Timothy 6. 20. and 2 Timothy 1. 14.
O Timothee, depositum custodi: S. Paul more then once calls upon Timothy to
keep that which was committed to his trust. He means it in respect of the
Christian faith: which he was bound to keep entire as it was delivered him, at
his peril, and as he would answer it another day. And the like obligation
lies upon us, in respect of this other rich depositum, this (...) of Christian
liberty: for which we shall be (...). Pittac^ dictum apud Stob. Scrm. 1.
answerable to Christ, from whom we received it, how we have both kept it, and
used it. And if by our default, and for want either of care or courage in us
(dolo, vellata culpa, as the Lawyers say) we lose or imbeazell it (as she said
in the Canticles, Cant. 1. 6.
They made me the keeper of the Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not
kept:) no doubt it will lie heavy upon us, when we come to give in our
a^counts. Rather we should put on a resolution, (like that of Excd. 10. 26.
Moses, who would not yield to leave so much as an hoof behind him) not to
part with a jot of that liberty wherewith Christ has entrusted us, by making
our selves the servants of men.

Especially since we cannot so do secondly, without manifest wrong to Christ;
nor thirdly, without great. 13. the Second;
dishonor to God. Not without wrong to Christ: S. Paul therefore disputes it
as upon a ground of right, 1 Cor 7. Ye are bought with a price (says he) 1
Cor. 7. 23.
be ye not the servants of men: and in the next chapter before that, 1 Cor. 6.
19. 20.
ye are not your own, for you are bought with a price. As if he had said.
Though it were a great weakness in you to put your selves out of your own
power into the power of others, by making your selves their servants: yet if
you were your own, there should be no injury done thereby to any third person;
but unto whosoever should complain as if he were wronged, you might return
this reasonable answer ( Mat. 20. 13. 15.
friend I do thee no wrong, is it not lawful for me to do as I will with my
own?) But, says he, this is not your case: you are not your own, but Christ's.
He has bought you with his most precious blood; he has paid a valuable
(rather an invaluable) price for you: and having bought you and paid for you,
you are now his; and you cannot dispose your selves in any other service
without apparent wrong to him.

Neither only do we injure Christ, by making our. 14. the Third;
selves the servants of men; but we dishonor God also: which is a third
reason. For to whom we make cur selves servants, him we make our Lord and God.
The covetous worldling therefore, by Mat. 6. 24.
serving Mammon, makes mammon his God: which made S. Paul two several times
to set the brand of Idolatry upon covetousness ( Ephesians. 55.
the covetous man which is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. 5.
covetousness which is Idolatry, Col. 3.) And the voluptuous Epicure is
therefore said to make his Phil. 3. 19.
belly his God, Phil. 3. because he Romans 16. 8.
serves his own belly, as the phrase is Romans 16. Neither can I imagine upon
what other ground the Devil should be called 2 Cor. 4. 4.
the God of this world, then this, that 1 John 5. 19.
(...), the men of this ev^ll world by doing him service do so make a god of
him. For service is a principal part of that honor that belongs to God
alone, and whereof in his jealousy he will not endure that any part should be
given away from him to another: Mat. 4. 10.
Ipsi soli servies, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. We cannot serve any other, but to his great dishonor.

Yea and our own too; which may stand for a fourth reason. Ye see your
calling brethren, says the Apostle. 15. the Fourth;
1 Cor. 1. 26. He would have men take notice of their Christian calling (it is
a hol^ and a high calling:) that so they might Ephesians. 4. 1.
walk worthy of it, and carry themselves in every respect answerable thereunto.
Now by our calling we are freemen: for Gal. 5. 13.
brethren you have been called unto liberty Gal. 5. or (which is all one) to
the service of God. And being so, we infinitely abase our selves, and disparage
our calling; when of freemen we become slaves; and make our selves of Gods,
men's servants: incomparably more to our own dishonor, then if one that is
free of a rich company and has born office in it, should for base respects
bind himself apprentice again with a master of poor condition in some
pelting trade. It is V. Paul. sf. de capit. deminut.
deminutio capitis (as the Civilians call it,) for a man to descend from a
higher to a lower condition: of the three degrees whereof that is esteemed the
greatest, maxima deminutio capitis, which is with loss of liberty. Leo the
Emperor therefore by special and severe constitution (as you may see it in
Leo Novell. conslit. 59.
the Novels) forbad all freemen within the Empire the sale of their liberties;
calling it facinus in those that were so presumptuous as to buy them, and no
less then folly yea madness, (dementia and vesania) in those that were so
base as to sell them: not without some indignation at the former laws, for
suffering such an indignity to be so long practiced without either chastisement
or restraint. And if he justly censured them as men of -- qui tam ignavi and
abjecti animi est -- ibid.
abject minds, that would for any consideration in the world willingly forgo
their civil and Roman liberty: what flatnesse of spirit possesses us, if we
wilfully betray our Christian and spiritual liberty?

Whereby, besides the dishonor, we do also (which. 16. and the Fifth.
is the fifth reason, and whereunto I will add no more) with our own hands
pull upon our own heads a great deal of unnecessary cumber. For whereas we
might draw an Mat. 11. 30.
easy yoke, carry a light burden, observe 1 John 5. 3.
commandments that are not grievous, and so live at much hearts ease, in the
service of God and of Christ: by putting our selves into the service of men, we
thrust our necks into a (...) Plat. apud Stob. Sermon. 46.
hard yoke of bondage, such as neither we nor any of our fathers were ever
able to bear, we lay upon our own shoulders (...), heavy and importable
burdens; and subject our selves to ordinances, which are both grievous and
unprofitable, and such are so far from preserving those that use them. 17.
Christian liberty encroached upon by Papal usurpations:
from perishing, that themselves Col. 2. 22.
p^rish in the using.

Now against this liberty, (which if we will answer the trust reposed in us,
and neither wrong Christ, nor dishonor God, nor yet debase and encomber our
selves, where we should not, we must with our utmost power maintain:) The
offenders are of two sorts: to wit, such as either injuriously encroach upon
the liberty of others; or else un worthily betray away their own. The most
notorious of the former sort are the Bishops of Rome: whose usurpations upon
the consciences of men, show them to be the true successors of the Scribes and
Pharisees, in Mat. 23. 4.
laying heavy burdens upon men's shoulders which they ought not, and in Ma^k. 7.
9.
rejecting the word of God to establish their own traditions; rather then the
successors of S. Peter, who forbids 1 Pet. 5. 3.
dominatum in Cleris, in the last chapter of this Epistle at verse 3. to teach
their own judgments to be infallible; to make their definitions an universal
and unerring rule of faith, to style their decrees and constitutions Oracles;
to assume to themselves all power in heaven and earth; to require subjection
both to their laws and persons, as of necessity unto salvation; to suffer
themselves to be called by their parasites gloss in extra^ag. Joh. 22. c.
Cummter. c Stapleton de princip sid in p^^esal.
Dominus Deus noster Papa, and Optimum, maximum, and supremum in terris numen;
all which and much more is done and taught and professed by the Popes, and in
their behalf: if all this will not reach to S. Paul's 2 T^es 2. 4.
exaltari supra omne quod vocatur Deus: yet certainly, and no modest man can
deny it, it will amount to as much as S. Peter's 1 Pet. 5. 3.
dominari in Cleris, even to the exercising of such a Lordship over the Lords
heritage, the Christian Church, as will become none but the Lord himself,
whose heritage the Church is.

Besides these, that do it thus by open assault, I would there were not others
also, that did by secret underminings. 18. and undermined by the Magisteriall
dictatcs.
go about to deprive us of that liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, even
then when they most pretend the maintenance of it. They inveigh against the
Church Governors, as if they Lorded it over Gods heritage; and against the
Church orders and constitutions, as if they were contrary to Christian liberty:
wherein, besides that they do manifest wrong to the Church in both
particulars: they consider not, that those very accusations, which they thus
irreverently dart at the face of their Mother, (to whom they owe better
respect,) but miss it, do recoile pat upon themselves, and cannot be avoided.
For whereas these constitutions of the Church are made for order, decency, and
uniformities sake, and to serve unto odification; and not with any intention at
all to lay a tie upon the consciences of men, or to work their judgments to an
opinion, as if there were some necessity, or inherent holiness in the things
required thereby; neither do our governors, neither ought they to press them
any farther: (which is sufficient to acquit both the governors from that
Lording^ and the Constitutions from that trenching upon Christian liberty,
wherewith they are charged:) Alas that our brethren who thus accuse them,
should suffer themselves to be so far blinded with prejudices and partial
(affections, as not see, that themselves in the mean time, do really exercise
a spiritual Lordship over their disciples, who depend in a manner wholly upon
their judgments, (by imposing) upon their consciences sundry Magisteriall
conclusions, for which they have no sound warrant from the written word of God.
Whereby, besides the great injury done to their brethren in the impeachment of
their Christian liberty, and leading them into error: they do withal
exasperate against them the minds of those that being in authority look to be
obeyed, and engage them in such sufferings, as they can have no just cause of
rejoyeing in.

For, beloved, this we must know, that as it is injustice. 19. and
superstitions of Novelists.
to condemn the innocent, as well as it is injustice to clear the guilty, and
both these are equally Prove. 17 15.
abominable to the Lord: so it is superstition to forbid that as sinful, which
is in truth indifferent, and therefore lawful; as well as it is superstition
to enjoyne that as necessary, which is in truth indifferent and therefore
arbitrary. Does that heavy woe in Esaias 5. appertain (think ye) to them
only, that out of profaneness Esaias 5. 20.
call evil good; and nothing at all concern them, that out of preciseness
call good evil? Does not he decline out of the way, that turns aside on the
right hand, as well as he that turns on the left? They that positively make
that to be sin, which the Law of God never made so to be: how can they be
excused from symbolizing with the Pharisees and the Papists, in making the
narrow ways of God yet narrower then they are, in Mat. 15. 9.
teaching for doctines men's precepts, and so 1 Cor. 7. 35.
casting asuare upon the consciences of their brethren? If our Church should
press things as far, and upon such grounds, the one way, as some forward
spirits do the other way; if as they say (it is a sin to kneel at the
Communion, and therefore we charge you upon your consciences not to do^ it,) so
the Church should say (it is a sin not to kneel, and therefore we require
you upon your consciences to do it,) and so in all other lawful (yet
arbitrary) ceremonies: possibly then the Church could no more be able to acquit
her self from encroaching upon Christian liberty, then they are that accuse
her for it. Which since they have done, and she has not: she is therefore
free, and themselves only guilty.

It is our duty, for the better securing of our selves,. 20. We must not be the
servants of men.
as well against those open impugners, as against these secret underminers, to
look heedfully to our trenches and fortifications; and to Gal. 5. 1.
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, lest by some
devise or other we be lifted out of it. To those that seek to enthrall us, we
should Gal. 2. 5.
give place by subjection, no not for an hour, lest we be ensnared by our
own default, ere we be aware. For indeed w^ cannot be ensnared in this kind,
but merely by our own default: and therefore S. Paul often admonishes us to
take heed that none Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 2. 4. 8. 18. 2 These. 2. 3.
deceive, spoil or beguile us; as if it were in our power, if we would but use
requisite care thereunto, to prevent it; and as if it were our fault most, if
we did not prevent it. And so in truth it is. For we oftentimes betray away
our own liberty, when we might maintain it; and so become servants unto men,
when we both might and ought to keep our selves free.

Which fault we shall be the better able to avoid,. 21. Either 1. by an
obsequiousness to the^ in that which we know to be evil;
when we shall know the true causes from whence it springs: which are
evermore one of these two; an unsound head, or an unsound heart. Sometimes we
esteem too highly of others, so far as eitheir to envassall our judgments to
their opinions, or to enthrall our consciences to their precepts; and that is
our weakness: there the fault is in the head. Sometimes we apply our selves to
the wills of others, with an eye to our own benefit or satisfaction in some
other ^arnall or worldly respect; and that is our fleshlinesse: there the fault
is in the heart: This latter is the worst and therefore in the first place to
be avoided. The most and worser sort, unconscionable men, do often transgress
this way. When for fear of a frown or worse displeasure, or to curry favor
with those they may have use of, or in hope either of raising themselves to
some advancement, or of raising to themselves some advantage, or for some other
like respects, they become officious instruments to others for the
accomplishing of their lusts in such services, as are evidently (even to their
own apprehensions) sinful and wicked. So 1 Samuel 22. 18.
Doeg did King Saul service in shedding the blood of fourscore and five
innocent Priests: and 2 Samuel 13. 28 29.
Absolons servants murdered their masters brother upon his bare command: and
Mar. 15. 15.
Pilate partly to gratify the Jews, but especially for fear of John 19. 12.
Caesar's displeasure, gave sentence of death upon Jesus, who in his own
conscience he thought had not deserved it. In such cases as these are, when we
are commanded by our superiors, or required by our friends, or any other way
solicited to do that which we know we cannot do without sin; we are to
maintain our liberty (if we cannot otherwise fairly decline the service) by a
flat and ^eremptory denial, though it be to the greatest power upon earth. As
the three young men did to the great Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 3. 18.
Be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship
the golden image which thou have set up. And the ancient Christians to the
heathen Emperors, Da veniam Imperator, tu carcerem, ille gehennam. And the
Apostles to the whole council of the Jews, Acts 4. 19.
whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you, more then unto God,
judge ye. Acts 4. He that will displease God to Gal. 1. 10.
please men, he is the servant of men, and cannot be the servant of God.. 22.
or 2. by subjecting our selves to their opinions or wills,


But honest and conscionable men, who do not easily and often fail this way,
Romans 16. 18.
(...) (as the word is Romans 16.) men that are not evil, are yet apt sometimes
to be so far carried away with an high estimation of some men, as to subject
themselves wholly to their judgments, or wills; without ever questioning the
truth of any thing they teach, or the lawfulness of any thing they enjoyne. It
is a dangerous thing Jude ver. 16.
(...) as S. Jude speaks, to have men's persons in admiration; though they be
of never so great learning, wisdom, or piety: because the best and wisest men
that are, are Acts 14. 15. and Iam. 5. 17.
(...) subject to the like infirmities as we are both of sin and error, and
such as may both Humana authoritas plerunque fallit. Aug. 2. de ordin. 9.
deceive others, and be themselves deceived. That honor which Pythagoras his
Scholars gave to their Master, in resting upon his bare authority ((...)) as a
sufficient proof, yea as (...) Aelian. 4 var. 17.
a Divine Oracle, many judicious even among the heathen altogether Neque vero
probare soleoid, quod de Pithagoricis accepimus* Cic 1. de not. deorum.
misliked, as too servile, and prejudicial to that libertas philosophica, that
freedom of judgment which was behoveful for the study of philosophy. How much
more then must it needs be prejudicial in the judgment of Christians to that
libertas Evangelica, that freedom we have in Christ, to give such honor to
any other man, but the man Christ Jesus only, or to any other writings then to
those which are in truth 1 Pet. 4. 11.
the Oracles of God, the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament.

There is I confess much reverence to be given to the. 23. be they of never so
great worth or note
writings of the godly ancient Fathers; more to the Canons and decrees of
general and provincial Councels; and not a little to the judgment of
learned, sober, and godly Divines of later and present times, both in our own
and other reformed Churches. But we may not Horat. 1. Ep. 1. -- Vtisti qui in
verba jurant, nec quid dicatur aestimant, sed a quo. Senec. Epist. 12.
jurare in verba, build our faith upon them as upon a sure foundation, nor pin
our belief upon their sleeves; so as to receive for an undoubted truth
whatsoever they hold, and to reject as a gross error whatsoever they disallow,
without farther examination. S. John bids us 1 John 4. 11.
try the spirits, before we believe them: 1 John 4. And the Acts 17. 11.
Beraeans are remembered with praise for so doing, Acts 17. We blame it in the
schoolmen, that some adhere pertinaciously to the opinions of Thomas, and
others as pertinaclously to the opinions of Scotus, in every point wherein they
differ; insomuch as it were grande piacutum, a heinous thing and not to be
suffered, if a Dominicane should dissent from Thomas, or a Franciscane from
Scotus, though but in one single controversed conclusion. And we blame it
justly; for S. Paul blamed the like sidings and partakings in the Church of
Corinth; whilst one professed himself to be of Paul, another of Apollo,
another of Cephas, as a fruit of 1 Cor. 3. 4.
carnality unbeseeming Christians. And is it not also blame worthy in us, and a
fruit of the same carnality, if any of us shall affect to be accounted rigid
Lutherans, or perfect Calvinists; or give up our judgments to be wholly guided
by the writings of Luther or Cnlvin, or of any other mortal man whatsoever?
Worthy instruments they were both of them of Gods glory, and such as did
excellent service to the Church in their times, whereof we yet find the
benefit, and we are unthankful if we do^ not bless God for it: and therefore
it is an unsavory thing for any man to gird at their names, whose memories
ought to be precious. But yet were they not men? had they received the spirit
in the fullness of it, and not by measure? knew they otherwise then in part, or
prophesied otherwise then in part? might they not in many things, did they not
in some things, mistake and err? Howsoever the Apostles interrogatories are
unanswerable; what says he, 1 Cor. 1 13.
was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? even so,
was either Luther or Calvin crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the
name either of Luther or Calvin, or any other man? that any one of you should
say I am of Luther, or any other I am of Calvin, and I of him, and I of him?
what is Calvin, or Luther, nay 1 Cor. 3. 5.
what is Paul or Apollo, but ministers by whom ye believed? that is to say,
instruments, but not Lords of your belief.

To sum up, and to conclude this first point then. To do God and our selves
right, it is necessary we. 24. Observe. 1. We must not abuse our liberty.
should with our utmost strength maintain the doctrine and power of that
liberty wherewith Christ has endowed his Church, without either usurping the
mastery over others, or subjecting our selves to their servitude* so, as to
surrender either our judgments or consciences, to be wholly disposed according
to the opinions or wills of men, though of never so excellent piety or parts.
But yet lest whiles we shun one extreme, we fall into another, as (the Lord be
merciful unto us) we are very apt to do; lest while we seek to preserve our
liberty that we do not lose it, we stretch it too far, and so abuse it: the
Apostle therefore in the next clause of the Text puts in a caveat for that
also, (not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness^.) Whence arises
our second observation. We must so maintain our liberty, that we abuse it
not: as we shall, if, under the pretense of Christian liberty we either
adventure the doing of some unlawful thing, or omit the performance of any
requisite duty. (As free, and no^ using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness.)

The Apostles intention in the whole clause will the. 25. by making it a cloak,
better appear, when we know what is meant by Cloak, and what by
Maliciousness. The Greek word (...), which is no where else found in the
whole new Testament but in this verse only; signifies properly any covering:
as the covering of Exodus 16. 14. and 36. 16.
badgers skins that was spread over the Tabernacle is in the Sep^uagints
translation called (...). And it is very fitly translated a cloak, (though it
do not properly so signify;) in respect of that notion wherein the word in
our English tongue is commonly and proverbially used; to note some fair and
colorable pretense wherewith we disguise and conceal from the conusance of
others the dishonesty and faultiness of our intentions in some things
practiced by us. Our Savior Christ says of the obstinate Jews, that had
heard his doctrine and seen his miracles, that John 15. 22.
they had no cloak for their sin, John 15. he means they had no color of
plea, nothing to pretend by way of excuse. And S. Paul professes in the whole
course of his ministry not to have used at any time 1 These. 2. 5.
a cloak of covetousness. 1. These. 2. that is, he did not under color of
preaching the Gospel endeavor to make a prey of them, or a gain unto
himself. In both which places, the Greek word is (...), which signifies a
fair show, pretense, or color, which we use to call a cloak. [. 26. (as we
are apt to do,)


It is a corruption very common among us; whatsoever we are within, yet we
desire Gal. 6. 12.
(...) to make a fair show outwardly, and to make bright Mat. 23. 25.
the outside of the platter, how sluttish soever the inside be. We are loath
to forbear those sins, which we are ashamed to profess: and therefore we
blanch them, and color them, and cloak them, that we may both do the thing we
desire, and yet miss the shame we deserve. A fault of an ancient original,
and of long continuance: ever since Genesis 3. 7.
Adam first patcht together a cloak of figleaves, to cover the shame of his
nakedness. Since which time, (unless it were some desperately profane
wretches, that being void of shame as well as grace, Esaias 3. 9.
pr^claime their sins as Sodom, and hide them not, but rather glory in them;
what man ever wanted some handsome cloak or other to cast over Nullum vitium
est sine patrecinie. Senec. ep. 116.
the foulest and ugliest transgressions? 1 Samuel 15. 15.
Saul spares Agag and the fatter cattle flat contrary to the Lords express
command: and the offering of sacrifice must be the cloak. 3 King 21. 13.
Iezabel by most unjust and cruel oppression murthereth Naboth to have his
vineyard, and the due punishment of blasphemy must be the cloak. The covetous
Mat. 23. 14.
Pharisees devour widows houses, and devotion must be the cloak. So in the
Church of Rome Menkery is used for a cloak of idleness and Epicurisme; The
seal of confession for a cloak of packing treasons, and diving in the secrets
of all Princes and Estates: Purgatory, Dirges, Indulgences, and Iubil^^s; for a
cloak of much rapine and avarice. Seneca said truly of most men, that they
studied more Senec. Ep. 116
excus^re vitia quam excutere, rather sollicitous how to cloak their faults
then desirous to forsake them: and S. Bernards complaint is much like it, both
for truth and elegancy, that men did not set themselves so much Bernard.
colere virtures, to exercise true virtue and the power of godliness, as
colorare vitia, to mask foul vices under the vizard of virtue and godliness.
Alas, that our own daily experience did not too abundantly justify the
complaint in the various passages of common life, not needful, being so
evident, and being so many not possible to be now mentioned. We have a clear
instance in the text, and it should grieve us to see it so common in the world:
that the blessed liberty we have in Christ should become (...) a cloak, and
that of maliciousness.

You see what the Cloak is: see now what is Maliciousness.. 27. Of
maliciousness:
(...) is the word* which is properly rendered by malice or maliciousness. And
as these English words, and the latin word malitia whence these are borrowed;
so likewise (...) in greek, is many times used to signify one special kind
of sin, which is directly opposite to brotherly love and charity: and the
word is usually so taken, wheresoever it is either set in opposition to such
charity, or else ranked with other special sins of the same kind, such as
are Romans 1. 29. Col. 3. 8. Tit. 3. 3.
anger, envy, hatred, and the like. And if we should so understand it here,
the sense were good: for it is a very common thing in the world to offend
against brotherly charity, under the color of Christian liberty; and
doubtless our Apostle here intends the remedy of that abuse also. Yet I
rather conceive that the word maliciousness in this place is to be taken in a
larger comprehension, for all manner of ovill, and of naughtiness; according
to the adequate signification of the greek and latin adjectives (...) and
malus, from whence the substantive used in the text is derived. Of which
maliciousness so largely taken, that special maliciousness before spoken of,
is but a branch. The Apostles full purpose then in this clause of the text, is
to restrain all that abuse of Christian liberty, whereby it is made a cloak
for the palliating of any wicked or sinful practice in any kind whatsoever.
And so understood, S. Peter's admonition here is paralleld with S. Paul's
elsewhere; Brethren (says he) you have been called unto liberty: only use not
your liberty for an occasion to the flesh. Gal. 5. 15. To use liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, and to use liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; is
the very same thing: and it is a very great sin.

For the proof whereof I shall need to use no other arguments, then the words
of the text will afford. First. 28. proved from the Text, in 3. respects. The
First;
every act of maliciousness is a sin: and secondly to cloak it with a fair
pretense, makes it a greater sin: but then thirdly to use Christian liberty
for the cloak, gives a farther addition to it, and makes it a greater sin.
First it is a sin to do any act of malitiousnesse. (...) and (...) we know
are conjugata, and do mutually infer each other. It is a superfluous thing,
and 1.
such as we might well enough be without: Iam. 1. 21.
(...) superfluity of malitiousnesse, James 1. nor so only, 2.
but it is an hurtful thing and of a noxious malignant quality, as leaven
sowring the whole lump of our services to God; 1 Cor. 5. 8.
(...) the leaven of maliciousness 1 Cor. 5. It is a thing to be repented of;
Acts 8. 22.
(...), 3.
repent of this thy wickedness or maliciousness, says S. Peter to Simon
Magus Acts 8. It is a thing to be 4.
cast away from us, and abominated as a f^^thy garment or polluted cloth: 1
Pet. 2. 1.
(...), laying aside or casting away all maliciousness, says the same Apostle
again in the first verse of this Chapter.

It is evil then to do any act of maliciousness: but much worse when we have
so done to cloak it with a. 29. the Second;
fair pretense. For besides that all things howsoever cloaked and covered from
the eyes of men, are Heb. 4. 13.
naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do; this cloaking of
our sins is but a farther evidence of our hypocrisy in his sight: who as he
is a God of pure eyes and therefore cannot but hate all sin, so is he a God
that loves a pure heart, and therefore of all sins hates hypocrisy. They
that by injustice and oppression devour widows houses, shall certainly
receive damnation for that, but if withal they do it under the color of
devotion and of long prayers, Mat. 23. 13.
(...) they shall receive the greater damnation for that also.

But if men will needs be hypocrites, and must have a. 30. the third.
cloak for their maliciousness: they might yet at lest bethink themselves of
somewhat else of lighter price to make a cloak of; and not use to so base a
purpose so rich a stuff, as is this blessed liberty which the son of God
has purchased with his mostprecious blood. As in nature corruption optimi
pessima; so in morality, by how much better any thing is in the right use of
it, by so much is it worse in the abuse. As the quickest spirited wine has the
sowrest lees; and the best wit misgoverned is the most pernicious, and an Angel
when he falls becomes a devil. So to use this liberty which is a spiritual
thing, for an occasion to the flesh, to take this liberty which (if I may so
speak) is the very livery cloak of the servant of God, and to make it a cloak
of maliciousness for the service of sin: must needs be presumption in a high
degree, and an unsufferable abuse.

Now we see how great a sin it is thus to abuse. 31. Christian liberty may be
abused four ways. 1. by using it profanely.
our liberty, it will be needful in the next place to inquire more
particularly, wherein this abuse consists, that so we may be the better able
to avoid it. We are therefore to know that Christian liberty may be used or
rather abused for a cloak of maliciousness, these four ways following.
First we make it a cloak of maliciousness, if we ho^d our selves by virtue
thereof discharged from our obedience either to the whole moral Law of God, or
to any part of it. Where to omit those that out of the wretched Nolier go
li^ertate a^uti, ad libere peccandum August. ^n Ioh. tract. 41.
profaneness of their own hearts, pervert this branch of Evangelicall
doctrine, as they do all the rest, to their own destruction: as a spider
turns the juice of the sweetest and most medicinable herbs into poison: so
these Jude ver. 4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and the liberty they have in Christ
into a profane licensiousnesse: great offenders this way are the Libertines and
Antinomists, who quite cancel the whole Law of God, under the pretense of
Christian Liberty, as if they that were in Christ were no longer tied to yield
obedience to the Moral Law, which is a pestilent error and of very dangerous
consequence; Whereas our blessed Savior himself has not only professed that
he came not to destroy the Law, but expressly forbidden any man to think so of
him. ( Mat. 5. 17. V. Augustine. lib. 17. 18. etc. co^tra Fauslum Manichaum,
fuse, and in quaest. V. and N. T. quaest. 69.
Think not that I came to destroy the Law, I came not to destroy it, but to
fulfill it.) And Saint Paul rejects the consequence with an absit, as both
unreasonable and impious, if any man should conclude, that by preaching ^he
righteousness of faith, the Law were abolished. ( Romans 3. ult.
Dee we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: yea (says he
rather) we establish the Law. Romans 3.

But they interpret those words of Christ in this sense, He came not to destroy
the law, but to fulfill it: that. 32. How the moral Law binds Christians, and
how not.
is, he came not to destroy it without fulfilling it first, but by fulfilling
it in his own person, he has destroyed it unto the person of every beleev or:
and therefore is Christ said to be Romans 104. Finis per fic^ens, non
interficiens. Augustine. 2. cont. adversar. legis. 7.
the end of the Law to every one that believes, Romans 10. Whence it is that the
faithful are said to be Romans 7. 6.
freed from the law, delivered from the law, Romans 7. 4. Gal. 2. 19.
dead to the law, and to be Romans 6. 14. Gal. 5. 18.
no longer under the law, and other like speeches there are many every where in
the New Testament. I acknowledge both their exposition to be just, and all
these allegations true: yet not sufficient to evict their conclusion. Not to
wade far into a controversy, which I had not so much as a thought to touch
upon, when I fixed my choice upon this Scripture: It shall suffice us to
propound one distinction which well heeded and rightly applied, will clear the
whole point concerning the abrogation and obligation of the Moral Law under
the New Testament, and cut off many needless curiosities, which lead men into
error. The Law then may be considered, either as a Rule or as a Covenant.
Christ has freed all believers from the rigor and curse of the law,
considered as a Covenant; but he has not freed them from obedience to the Law,
considered as a Rule. And all those Scriptures that speak of the law as if it
were abrogated or anulled take it considered as a Covenant; those again that
speak of the Law as if it were still in force, take it considered as a Rule.
The Law as a Covenant, is rigorous; and under that rigor we now are not, if we
be in Christ: but the Law as a Rule, is equal; and under that equity we still
are, though we be in Christ.

The Law as a Rule only shows us, what is good. 33. with the ground of that
difference.
and evil, what we are to do and not to do. ( Mic. 6. 8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee;) without any condition annexed either of reward if we observe it, or of
punishment if we transgress it. But the Law as a Covenant exacteth punctual
and personal performance of every thing that is contained therein, with a
condition annexed of Gods acceptance and of blessing if we perform it to the
full, but of his wrath and curse upon us, if we fail in any thing. Now by
reason of transgression we having all broken that Covenant, the Law has his
work upon us, and involveth us all in Gal. 3. 10.
the curse; so as by ibid. verse. 11.
the covenant of the Law no flesh living can be justified. Then comes in
Christ, who subjecting himself for our sakes to the Covenant of the Law, first
fulfilleth it in his own person but in our behalf as our surety, and then
disanulleth it, and in stead thereof establishes Heb. 8. 6.
a better Covenant for us even the Covenant of Grace: so that now as many as
believe, are free from the Covenant of the Law, and from the Curse of the Law,
and set under a Covenant of Grace, and under promises of Grace. There is a
translation then of the Covenant: but what is all this to the Rule? That still
is where it was: even as the nature of good and evil is still the same it was.
And the Law considered as a Rule, can no more be abolished or changed, then can
the nature of good and evil be abolished or changed. It is our singular comfort
then, and the happiest fruit of our Christian Liberty, that we are freed by
Christ and through faith in him from the Covenans and Curse of the Laws but we
must know that it is our duty notwithstanding the liberty that we have in
Christ, to frame our lives and conversations according to the Rule of the Law.
Which if we shall neglect under the pretense of our Christian Liberty, we must
answer for both: both for neglecting our duty, and for abusing our liberty. And
so much for the first way.

The second way, whereby our liberty may be used for a cloak of
maliciousness, is, when we stretch it i^. 34. II. by using it inordinately.
the use of things that are indeed indifferent beyond the just bounds of
sobricty. Many men that would seem to make consciences of their ways, will
perhaps ask the opinion of some Divine, or other learned man, whether such or
such a thing be lawful, or no and if they be once persuaded that it is lawful,
they then think they have free liberty to use it in what manner and measure
they please; never considering what Because we are free, we may not run wild.
Hall, 15. Contempl 3.
caution and moderation is required even in lawful things to use them
lawfully. Saint Gregory's rule is a good one, Gregor.
Semper ab illicitis, quandoque, and alicitis: things unlawful we must never
do; nor ever lawful things, but with due respect to our calling and other
concurrent Quedam quae licent, tempo^^ and loco mutato non licent. Sin^^
controvers. 25.
circumstances. Wine, and music and gorgeous apparel, and delicate fare, are
such things as God in his goodness has created and given to the children of
men for their comfort; and they may use them lawfully, and take comfort in them
as their portion: but he that shall use any of them intemperately; or
unseasonably, or vainly, or wastfully, abuses both them and himself. And
therefore we shall often find both the things themselves condemned and those
that used them blamed in the Scriptures. The men of Israel for Amos 6. 4, -6.
stretching themselves upon their couches, and eating the lambs out of the
slock, and chaunting to the sound of the Vial, and drinking Wine in bowls,
Amos 6. And the women for their Es^. 3. 18, -23.
bracelets, and earerings, and wimples, and crisping pins, and their other
bravery in Esaias 3. And the rich man for Luk 16. 19.
faring deliciously and wearing fine linen in the Parable. Luke 16. Yea our
Savior himself pronounces a woe against Luke 6, 25.
them that laugh, Luke 6. And yet none of all these things are or were in
themselves unlawful: it was the excess only, or other disorder in the use of
them that made them obnoxious to reproof. Though some in their heat have said
so, yet who can reasonably say, that horse-matches, or playing at cards or
dice, are in themselves and wholly unlawful? And yet on the other side, what
sober wise man, because the things are lawful, would therefore approve of that
vain and sinful expense which is oftentimes bestowed by men of mean estates
in the dyeting of horses, and wagering upon them? or of that excessive abuse of
gaming, wherein thousands of our gentry spend in a manner their whole time, and
consume away their whole substance, both which ought to be far more precious
unto them? I might instance in many other things in like manner. In all which,
we may easily err either in point of judgment, or practice, or both; if we
do not wisely sever the use from the abuse. Many times because the abuses are
common and great, we peevishly condemn in others the very use of some lawful
things. And many times again, because there is evidently a lawful use of the
things, we impudently justify our selves in the very abuses also. That is
foolish preciseness in us, and this profane partiality: by that we infring^
our brethrens liberty; by this pollute our own. The best and safest way for us
in all indifferent things is this: to be indulgent to others, but strict to
ourselves; in allowing them their liberty with the most, but taking our own
liberty ever with the least.

But is not this to preach one thing, and do another? ought not our doctrine
and our practice to go together?. 35. We should not be so strict to others, as
to ourselves.
It is most true, they ought so to do; Neither does any thing I have said make
to the contrary. What we may doctrinally deliver to be absolutely necessary,
we may not in our own practice omit: and what we may doctrinally condemn as
simply unlawful, we are bound in our own practice to forbear. But things of
a middle and indifferent nature, we may not doctrinally either impose them as
necessary, neither forbid as unlawful, but leave a liberty in them both for
other men and our selves to use them or not to use them, as particular
circumstances and occasions and other reasons of convenience shall lead us. And
in these things both we must allow others a liberty, which for some particular
reasons it may not be so fit for us to take; and we may also tie our selves to
that strictness for some particular reasons, which we dare not to impose upon
others. It was a foul fault and blame worthy in the Scribes and Pharisees to
tie Mat. 23. 4.
heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, which they would not touch with one
of their own fingers: but if they should (without superstition, and upon
reasonable inducements) have said such burdens upon themselves, and not imposed
them upon others; for any thing I know, they had been blameless. There are
many things which in my conscience are not absolutely and in Thesi necessary to
be done; which yet in Hypothesi for some personal respects I think so fit for
me to do, that I should resolve to undergo some inconveniency rather then
omit them; still reserving to others their liberty to do as they should see
cause. There are again many things which in my conscience are not absolutely
and in Thesi unlawful to be done, which yet in Hypothesi and for the like
personal respects, I think so unfit for me to do, that I should resolve to
undergo some inconvenience rather then do them; yet still reserving to others
the like liberty as before, to do as they should see cause. It belongs to
every sober Christian advisedly to consider not only what in it self may
lawfully be done or left undone, but also what in godly wisdom and discretion
is fittest for him to do, or not to do upon all occasions, as the exigence of
present circumstances shall require. He that without such due consideration
will do all he may do at all times, under color of Christian liberty, he
shall undoubtedly sometimes use his liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. And
that is the second way, by using it excessively.

It may be done a third way, and that is by using it uncharitably,. 36. III. by
using it uncharitably.
which is the case whereon I told you Saint Paul beats so often. When we use
our liberty so, as to 1 Cor. 8. 9.
stumble the weak consciences of our brethren thereby, and will not remit in
any thing the extremity of that right and power we have in things of
indifferent nature, Romans 15. 2.
to please our neighbor for his good unto edification, at least so farro as we
may do it without greater inconvenience; we Romans 14. 15.
walk not charitably: and if not charitably, then not Christianly. Indeed the
case may stand so, that we cannot condescend to his infirmity without great
prejudice either to our selves or to the interest of some third person. As for
instance when the magistrate has positively already determined our liberty in
the use of it the one way; we may not in such case redeem the offense of a
private brother with our disobedience to superior authority in using our
liberty the other way: and many other like cases there may be. But this I say,
that where without great inconvenience we may do it, it is not enough for us
to Romans 15. 1.
please our selves and to satisfy our own consciences that we do but what we
lawfully may: but we ought also to Gal. 6. 2.
bear one another burdens, and to forbear for one another sakes what
otherwise we might do, and so to fulfill the Law of Christ, S. Paul who has
forbidden us in one place to make our selves 1 Cor. 7. 23.
the servants of any man (1. Cor. 7.) has yet bidden us in another place Gal.
5. 13.
by love to serve one another (Gal. 5. 13,) And his practice therein consents
with his doctrine (as it should do in every teacher of truth,) for though he
were 1 Cor. 9. 19. 22.
free from all, and knew it, and would not 1 Cor. 6. 12.
be brought under the power of any, yet in love he became 1 Cor. 9. 19. 22.
servant to all, that by all means he might win some. It was an excellent
saying of Luther, Luther in Galat. 5.
Omnia libera per fidem, omnia serva per charitatem. We should know and be
fully persuaded with the persuasion of faith, that all things are lawful: and
yet withal we should purpose and be fully resolved for charity sake to
forbear the use of many things, if we find them inexpedient. He that will
have his own way in every thing he has a liberty unto, whosoever shall take
offense at it; makes his liberty but a cloak of maliciousness, by using it
uncharitably.

The fourth and last way, whereby we may use our liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness is, by using it undutifully,. 37. IIII. by using it undutifully.
pretending it unto our disobedience to lawful authority. The Anabaptists that
deny all subjection to Magistrates in indiff^rent things, do it upon this
ground, that they imagine Christian liberty to be violated when by humane laws
it is determined either the one way, or the other. And I cannot but wonder,
that many of our brethren in our own Church who in the question of Ceremonies
must argue from their ground, (or else they talk of Christian liberty to no
purpose) should yet hold off, before they grow to their conclusion; which to my
apprehension seems by the rules of good discourse to issue most naturally and
necessarily from it. It were a happy thing for the peace both of this Church
and of their own consciences, if they would in calm blood review their own
dictates in this kind; and see whether their own principle (which the cause
they are engaged in makes them dote upon) can be reasonably defended; and yet
the Anabaptists inference thence (which the evidence of truth makes them to
abhor) be fairly avoided. Yet somewhat they have to say for the proof of
that their ground; which if it be found, it is good ^eason we should subscribe
to it; if it be not, it is as good reason they should retract it. Let us hear
therefore what it is, and put it to trial.

First, say they, Ecclesiastic^ll Constitutions (for there. 38. 1. The usual
objections against the Laws Ecclesiastical.
is the quarrel) determine us precisely ad u^um in the use of indifferent
things; which God and Christ have left free ad utr^mlibet. Secondly, by
inducing a necessity upon the things they enjoyne, they take upon them as if
they could alter the nature of things, and make that to become necessary which
is indifferent, which is not in the power of any man, but of God only; to do.
2.
Thirdly, these Constitutions are so fair pressed, as if 3.
men were bound in conscience to obey them, which takes away the freedom of
the conscience: for if the conscience be bound, how is she free? Not so only,
but fourthly, the things so enjoined are by consequence imposed upon us as of
absolute necessity unto salvation: 4.
forasmuch as it is necessary unto salvation for every man to do that which he is
bo^id in conscience to do; by which device kneeling at the Commu^ion, standing
at the Gospel, bowing at the name of Jesus; and the like, become to be of
necessity unto salvation. Fifthly, say they, these Constitutions cannot be
defended but by such arguments ^.
as the Papists use for the establishing of that their rotten Tenet, that
humane laws bind the conscience a^ well as divine. Then all which premises,
what can be imagined more contrarious to true Christian liberty?. 39. The
partiality of the objecters discovered.


In which Objections (before I come to their particular answer) I cannot but
observe the unjust (I would we might not say unconscionable) partiality of the
objecters. First, in laying the accusation against the Ecclesiastical laws
only, whereas their arguments (if they had any strength in them) would as well
conclude against the political laws in the civil state; and against
domestical orders in private families, as against the Laws Ecclesiastical;
yet must these only be guilty, and they innocent, which is not equal. Let
them either damn them all, or quit them all: or else let them show wherein
they are unlike, which they have not yet done, neither can do. Secondly, when
they condemn the 2.
things enjoined as simply and utterly unlawful upon quite other grounds; and
yet keep a stir about Christian liberty; for which argument there can be no
place without supposall of indifferency, (for Christ has left us no liberty to
unlawful things,) how can they answer this their manifest partiality? Thirdly,
if they were put to speak upon their consciences, whether or no, if power 3.
were in their own hands, and Church affairs left to their ordering, they
would not forbid those things they now dislike, every way as strictly and with
as much imposition of necessity, as the Church presently enjoyneth them: I
doubt not but they would say Yea: and what equity is there in this dealing, to
condemn that in others, which they would allow in themselves? Fourthly, in
some things they are content to submit to the Ecclesiastical 4.
Constitutions notwithstanding their Christian liberty, which liberty they
stiffely pretend for their refusal of other some: whereas the case seems to
be every way equal in both, all being enjoined by the same authority, and for
the same end, and in the same manner. If their liberty be impeached by these,
why not as much by those? or if obedience to those may consist with Christian
liberty, why not as well obedience to these? In allowing some, rejecting
others, where there is the same reason of all: are they not very partial?. 40.
the First objection answered.


And now I come to answer their arguments, or rather flourishes, for they are
in truth no better. That first allegation, that the determining of any thing in
unam partem takes away a man's liberty to it, is not true. For the liberty of a
Christian to any thing indifferent consists in this; that his judgment is
thoroughly persuaded of the indifferency of it: and therefore it is the
determination of the judgment in the opinion of the thing, not in the use of
it that takes away Christian liberty. Otherwise not only Laws political and
Ecclesiastical: but also all vows, promises, covenants, contracts, and what
not that pitcheth upon any certain resolution de future should be prejudicial
to Christian liberty, because they do all determine something in unam partem
which before was free and indifferent in utramq, partem. For example: if my
friend invite me to sup with him, I may by no means promise him to come;
because the liberty I had before to go or not to go, is now determined by
making such a promise: neither may a young man bind himself an apprentice,
with any certain Master, or to any certain trade, because the liberty he had
before of placing himself indifferently with that Master, or with another, and
in that trade or in another, is now determined by such a contract. And so it
might be instanced in a thousand other things. For indeed to what purpose has
God left indifferent things determinable both ways by Christian liberty, if
they may never be actually determined either way without impeachment of that
liberty? It is a very vain power, that may not be brought into act, but God
made no power in vain. Our Brethren I hope will waive this first argument,
when they shall have well examined it: unless they will frame to themselves
under the name of Christian liberty a very Chimera, a non ens, a mere
notionall liberty, where of there can be no use.. 41. the second objection
answered.


That which was alleged secondly, that they that make such Laws take upon
them to alter the nature of things, by making indrfferent things to become
necessary, being said gratis without either truth or proof, is sufficiently
answered by the bate denial. For they that make, Laws concerning indifferent
things have no intentionat all to meddle with the nature of them, they leave
that in medio as they found it: but only for some reasons of convenience to
order the use of them, the in differency of their nature still being where it
was. Nay so far is oun Church from having any intention of taking away the
indiff^rency of those things which for order and comeliness she enjoyneth,
that she has by her public declaration protested the contrary: wherewith
they ought to be satisfied. Especially since her sincerity in that declaration
(that none may cavil as if it were protestatio contrariafacto,) appears by
these two most clear evidences among many other; in that she both allows
different rites used in other Churches, and also teaches her own rites to be
mutable: neither of 1.
which she could do, if she conceived the nature of the 2.
things themselves to be changed, or their indifferency to be removed by her
Constitutions.

Neither is that true, which was thirdly, alleged, that where men are bound in
conscience to obey, there the. 42. the third objection answered.
conscience is not left free, or else there would be a contradiction. For there
is no contradiction, where the affirmative and negative are not ad idem, as it
is in this case. For Obedience is one thing, and the Thing commanded another.
The Thing is commanded by the Law of man, and in regard thereof the conscience
is free: but, Obedience to men is commanded by the Law of God, and in regard
thereof the conscience is bound. So that we are bound in conscience to
obedience in indifferent things lawfully commanded, the conscience still
remaining no less free in respect of the things, themselves so commanded, then
it was before. And you may know it by this. In Laws properly humans, (such as
are those that are made concerning indifferent things) the Magistrate does not
nor can say: This you are bound in conscience: to do, and therefore I command
you to do it: as he might say, if the bond of obedience did spring from the
nature of the things commanded. But now when the Magistrate begins at
another end, as he must do, and says, I command you to do this or that, and
therefore you are bound in conscience to do it: this plainly shows that the
bond of obedience arises from the power in the Magistrate, and duty in the
subject, which is of divine ordinance. You may observe therefore that in humane
Laws not merely such (that is, such as are established concerning things
simply necessary, or merely unlawful;) the Magistrate may there derive the
bond of obedience from the nature of the things themselves; as for example if
he should make a Law to inhibite Sacrilege, or Adultery, he might then well
say, you are bound in conscience to abstain from these things, and therefore I
command you so to abstain: which he could not so well say in the Laws made to
inhibite the eating of flesh, or the transportation of grain. And the reason
of the difference is evident: because those former Laws are rather Divine then
humane (the substance of them being divine, and but the sanction only humane)
and so bind by their immediate vortue, and in respect of the things themselves
therein commanded: which the later being merely humane (both for substance and
sanction) do not.

The consideration of which difference and the reason of it, will abundantly
discover the vanity of the. 43. the fourth objection answered,
fourth allegation also: wherein it was objected that the things enjoined by
the Ecclesiastical Laws are imposed upon men as of necessity to salvation:
Which is most untrue. Remember once again, that obedience is one thing; and
the things commanded another. Obedience to lawful authority is a duty
commanded by God himself and in his Law, and so is a part of that Heb. 12. 14.
holiness without which no man shall see God: but the things themselves
commanded by lawful authority, are neither in truth necessary to salvation,
nor do they that are in authority impose them as such. Only they are the
object (and that but by accident neither and contingently, not necessarily)
about which that obedience is conversant, and wherein it is to be exercised. An
example or two will make it plain. We know every man is bound in conscience to
employ himself in the works of his particular calling with faithfulness and
diligence; and that faithfulness and diligence is a branch of that holiness
and righteousness which is necessary unto salvation. Were it not now a very
fond thing and ridiculous, for a man from hence to conclude, that therefore
drawing of wine, or making of shoes, were necessary to salvation, because these
are the proper employment of the vintners, and shoemakers calling, which they
in conscience are bound to follow, nor may without sin neglect them? Again if
a Master command his servant to go to the market, to sell his corn, and to
buy in provision for his house, or to wear a livery of such or such a color
and fashion: in this case who can reasonably deny but that the servant is bound
in conscience to do the very things his Master bids him to do, to go, to
sell, to buy, to wear? and yet is there any man so forsaken of common sense,
as thence to conclude, that going to market, selling of corn, buying of meat,
wearing a blue coat, are necessary to salvation? or that the master imposes
those things upon the servant as of necessity unto salvation? The obligation of
the servants conscience to do the things commanded arises from the force of
that divine Law which binds servants to obey their masters in lawful things:
The master in the things lie so commands, has no particular actual respect
to the conscience of his servant, (which porhaps all that while never came
within his thoughts,) but merely respects his own occasions and
conveniences. In this example as in a glass let the Objecters behold the
lineaments and feature of their own argument. Because kneeling, standing,
bowing, are commanded by the Church, and the people are bound in conscience to
obey the Laws of the Church, therefore the Church imposes upon the people,
kneeling, standing, and bowing, as necessary to salvation.

If that which they object were indeed true, and that. 44. and retorted.
the Church did impose these rites, and ceremonies upon the people as of
necessity to salvation, and require to have them so accepted: doubtless the
imposition were so prejudicial to Christian liberty, as that every faithful
man were bound in conscience for the maintenance of that liberty, to disobey
her authority therein, and to confess against the imposition. But our Church
has been so far from any intention of doing that her self, that by her
foresaid public declaration she has manifested her utter dislike of it in
others. What should I say more? Horat. 1. Sat. 3.
Denique te ipsum concute. It would better become the Patriarchs of that party
that thus deeply (but untruely) charge her; to look under their own cloakes,
dive into their own bosoms, and survey their own positions and practice: if
happily they may be able to clear themselves of trenching upon Christian
liberty, and ensnaring the consciences of their brethren, and imposing upon
their proselytes their own traditions of kneel not, stand not, bow not, (like
those mentio^ed Col. 2. of Col. 2. 21.
touch not, taste not, handle not) requiring t^ have them accepted of the people
even as of necessity unto salvation. If upon due examination they can acq^ite
themselves in this matter, their accounts will be the easier: but if they
cannot, they shall find, when the burden lights upon them, that it will be no
light matter to have been themselves guilty of that very crime, whereof they
have unjustly accused others.

As for consent with the Papists in their doctrine concerning. 45. The last
objection answered.
the power that men's laws have over the conscience, which is the last
objection: it ought not to move us. We are not ashamed to consent with them, or
any others, in any truth. But in this point we^ differ from them, so far as
they differ from the truth: which difference I conceive to be, neither so great
as some men, nor yet so little as other some men would make it. They teach that
Humane Laws, especially the Ecclesiastical, bind the consciences of men, not
only in respect of the obedience, but also in respect of the things themselves
commanded, and that by their own direct immediate and proper virtue. In which
doctrine of theirs, 3. things are to be misliked. First, that they give a
pre-eminence 1.
to the Ecclesiastical Laws above the Secular in this power of binding. We
may see it in them, and in these objecters; how men will run into extremities
beyond all reason, when they give themselves to be led by corrupt respects. As
he said of himself and his fellow-Philosophers, Horat. 1. Epist. 17.
Scurror ego ipse mihi, populo^^: so it is here. They of Rome carried with a
wretched desire to exalt the Papacy, and indeed the whole Clergy as much as
^hey may, and to avile the secular powers as much as they dare; they therefore
ascribe this power over the conscience to the Ecclesiastical laws especially,
but do not show themselves all out so zealous for the secular. Ours at home on
the contrary, out of an appetite they have to bring in a new plat. form of
discipline into the Church, and for that purpose to represent the established
government unto the eyes and hearts of the people in as deformed a shape as
they can; quarrel the Ecclesiastical laws especially for tyrannising over
the conscience, but do not show themselves so much agrieved at the secular.
Whereas the very truth is, what soever advantages the secular powers may have
above the Ecclesiastical, or the Ecclesiastical above the secular in other
respects; yet as to the power of binding the consoience all humane laws in
general are of like reason, and stand upon equal terms. It is to be misliked
secondly in the Romish doctrine, that they subject the 2.
conscience to the things themselves also, and not only tie it to the
obedience; whereby they assume unto themselves (interpretative) the power of
altering the nature of the things by removing of their indifferency, and
inducing a necessity; for so long as they remain indifferent, it is certain
they cannot bind. And thirdly and principally it is to be misliked in them,
that they would have 3.
this binding power to flow from the proper and inherent virtue of the laws
them selves immediately and per so, which is in effect to equal them with the
divine law: for what can that do more? whereas humane laws in things not
repugnan^ to the Law of God do bind the conscience indeed to obedi^nce, but it
is by consequent, and by virtue of a former Divine Law, commanding us in all
lawful things to obey the superior powers.

But whether mediately or immediately, may some say, whether directly or by
consequent, whether by its. 46. Whence humane laws have their power of binding
the conscience;
own or by a borrowed virtue; what is it material to be argued, so long as
the same effect will follow, and that as entirely to all intents and pu^poses,
the one way as well as the other? As if a debt be alike recoverable, it
skilleth not much whether it be due upon the original bond, or upon an
assignement. If they may be s^re to be obeyed, the higher powers are satisfied:
^et Scholars wrangl^ about words and distinctions; so they have the thing, it
is all they look after. This Objection is in part true, and for that reason
the differences in this controversy are not altogether of so great consequence
as they have seemed to some. Yet they that think the difference either to be
none at all, or not of considerable moment, judge not aright. For albeit it be
all one in respect of the governors, whence the obligation of conscience
springs, so long as they are conscionably obeyed, as was truly alleged: Yet
unto inferiors who are bound in conscience to yield obedience, it is not all
one; but it much concerns them to understand whence that obligation arises,
in respect of this very point whereof we now speak of Christian liberty, and
that for two weighty and important considerations.

For first: if the obligation spring as they would have it from the
Constitution it self, by the proper and immediate. 47. is a point needful to
be known for two reasons. The former;
virtue thereof; then the conscience of the subject is tied to obey the
Constitution in the rigor of it: whatsoever occasions may occur, and
whatsoever other inconveniences may follow thereupon: so as he sins
mortally, who at any time in any case (though of never so great necessity) does
otherwise then the very letter of the Constitution requires, (yea though it be
extra casum scandali and contemptus) Which were an heavy case, and might prove
to be of very pernicious consequence; and is indeed repugnant to Christian
liberty, by enthralling the conscience where it ought to be free. But if on the
other side, which is the truth, the Constitution of the Magistrate bind the
conscience of the subject not immediately and by its own virtue, but by
consequent only and by virtue of that law of God which commands all men to
obey their superiors in law full things: then is there a liberty left to the
subject, in cases extraordinary and of some pressing necessity not otherwise
well to be avoided, to do otherwise sometimes then the Constitution requires.
And he may so do with a free conscience. So long as he is sure of these two
things: First, that he be driven thereunto by a true and real, and not by a
pretended necessity only; and secondly, that in the manner of doing he use
such godly discretion, as neither to show the least contempt of the law in
himself, nor to give ill example to others to despise government or
governors. And this first difference is material.

And so is the second also, if not much more; which is this. If the Magistrates
Constitution did bind the. 48. The later.
conscience virtute propria, and immediately; then should the conscience of the
subject be bound to obey the constitution of the Magistrate exi^tu^^^
praecepti, upon the bare knowledge and by the bare warrant thereof, without
farther enquiry: and consequently should be bound to obey as well in unlawful
things, as lawful. Which consequence (though they that teach otherwise will
not admit) you in truth they cannot avoid* for the proper and immediate cause
being supposed, the effect must needs follow. Neither do I yet see what
sufficient reason they that think otherwise can show, why the conscience of the
subject should be bound to obey the Laws of the Magistrate in lawful things,
and not as well in unlawful things. The true reason of it is well known to
be this, even because God has commanded us to obey in lawful things, but not
in unlawful. But for them to assign this reason, were evidently to overthrow
their own Tenent, because it evidently deriveth the bond of conscience from a
higher power then that of the Magistrate, even the Commandment of God. And so
the Apostles indeed do both of them derive it. S. Paul in Romans 13. men must
Romans 13. 1-6.
be subject to the higher powers: why? because the powers are ordained of God:
And that for conscience sake too: why? because the magistrates are the
ministers of God. Neither may they be resisted: and why? because to resist
them is to resist the ordinance of God. That is S. Paul's doctrine. And S. Peter
accords with him. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves (says he) to every ordinance of man. What for the man's
sake? or for the ordinance sake? No: but propter dominum for the Lords sake,
ver. 13. And all this may very well stand with Christian liberty: for the
conscience all this while is cum christo ju^ente servis homini, nonilli servis,
sed ^i qui jussit. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
subject to none but God.

By these answers to their objections, you may see what little reason some men
have to make so much noise as they do about Christian liberty. Whereupon if I
have insisted far beyond both your expectations and my own first purpose: I
have now no other thing. 49. Christian liberty, and civil obedience have their
proper bounds.
whereby to excuse it, but the earnestness of my desire if it be possible to
contain within some reasonable bounds of sobriety and duty, those of my
brethren, who think they can never run far enough from superstition, unless
they run themselves quite out of their allegiance. There are sundry other
things, which I am forced to pass by, very needful to be rightly understood,
and very useful for the resolution of many cases of conscience which may arise
from the joint consideration of these two points, of Christian obedience, and
of Christian liberty. For the winding of our selves out of which perplexities,
when they may concern us, I know not how to commend both to my own practice
and yours, a sharter and fuller rule of direction, then to follow the clew of
this Text: Wherein the Apostle has set just bounds both to our obedience and
liberty. Bounds to our Obedience; that we obey so far as we may without
prejudice to our Christian liberty; in all our acts of obedience to our
superiors still keeping our consciences free, by subiecting them to none but
God. Submit your selves, etc. but yet as free, and as the servants of God, and
of none besides. Bounds to our Liberty, that (the freedom of our judgments
and consciences ever rese^ved) we must yet in the use of indifferent things
moderate our liberty, by ordering our selves according unto Christian sob^iety,
by condescending sometimes to our brethren in Christian charity, and by
submitting our selves to the lawful commands of our governors in Christian
duty. In any of which respects if we shall fail, and that under the
pretension of Christian liberty: we shall thereby, quite contrary to the
express direction of both the Apostles, but abuse the name of liberty, for an
occasion to the flesh, and for a cloak of maliciousness.

[As free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.]

And so I pass from this second, to my third and last. 50. Observe. 3. We
should endeavor to be the servants of God
observation; wherein, if I have been too long or too obscure in the former, I
shall now endeavor to recompense it, by being both shorter and plainer. The
Observation was this. In the whole exercise both of the liberty we have in
Christ and of those respects we owe unto men, we must evermore remember our
selves to be, and accordingly behave our seves as those that are, Gods
servants: in those last words, (But as the servants of God.) containing our
condition and our carriage: by our condition, we are (...), the servants of God:
and our carriage must be (...), as the servants of God. I shall fit my method to
this division; and first show you sundry reasons, for which we should desire to
be in this Condition, to be (...) the servants of God* and then give some
directions, how we may frame our carriage answerably thereunto, to demean our
selves (...), as the servants of God.

For the first: We cannot imagine any consideration,. 51. Whose service is of
all other
that may be found in any service in the world, to render it desirable, which
is not to be found, and that in a far more eminent degree, in this service of
God. If Justice may provoke us, or necessity enforce us, or easiness hearten
us, or Honor allure us, or Profit draw us, to any service: behold here they
all concur; the service of God and of Christ is excellently all these. It is
of all other the most just, the most necessary, the most easy, the most
honorable, the most profitable service. And what would you have more?

First it is the most just service; whether we look at. 52. 1. the most just,
the title of Right on his part, or reasons of Equity on ours. As for him, he
is our Lord and master pleno jure, he has right to our best services by a
threefold title, like a treble cord, which Satan and all the powers of
darkness cannot break or untwine. A right of Creation. ( Esaias 44. 21.
Remember O Jacob thou art my servant, I have formed thee, thou art my servant
O Israel, Esaias 44.) Princes and the great ones of the world expect from those
that are their Creatures (rather that are called so, because they raised them,
but in truth are not so, for they never made them) yet they expect much service
from them, that they should be forward instruments to execute their pleasures,
and to advance their intentions: how much more may the Lord justly expect from
us who are every way his creatures, (for he raised us out of the dust, nay he
made us of nothing,) that we should be his servants to do his will, and
instruments to promote his glory? Besides this Ius creationis; he has yet two
other titles to our services, Ius redemptionis, and Ius liberationis. He has
bought us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we are his by purchase: and
he has won us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we^ are his by
Conquest. We read often in the Law of servants Exodus 12. 44. and alibi.
bought with money, (...): and it is but reason, he that has paid a valuable
consideration for a man's service, should have it. Now God has bought us and
redeemed us, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
not with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with his own most
precious blood. And being bought with such a price we are 1 Cor. 6. 19.
not our own to serve the lusts of our own flesh; nor any man's else, that we
should be the servants of men; but his only that has bought us and paid for
us, to 1 Cor. 6. 20.
glorify him both in our bodies and souls, for they are his; jure
redemptionis by the right of Purchase and Redemption. Again, when we were
mancipi^ p^ccati and diaboli, the devils Captives, and slaves to every ungotlly
lust: in which condition if we had lived and dyed, after a hard and toylsome
service in the mean time, our wages in the end should have been eternal
death: God by sending his Son to live and dye for us, has conquered sin and
Satan, and freed us from that wretched thraldom, to this end, Luke 1. 74. 75.
That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives. ( Psalm.
116. 16.
I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the Son of thine handmaid; thou have
broken my bonds in sunder. Psalm. 116.) That is jus liberationis, the right of
Conquest and deliverance. Having so many and so strong titles thereunto, An qui
sundum aufert ejus a quo empt^s est, and tradit ei qui nihil in co habet juris,
injustus est: and qui seips^m aufert dominanti Deo, a quo factus est, and
malignis servit spiritibus, justus est? Augustine. 19. de Civil. 21.
with what Justice can we hold back our fervices from him? It is the first and
most proper act of Justice, jus suum cuique, to Romans 13. 7.
render to all their dues, and to let every one have that which of right
appertains unto him. And if we may not deny Mat. 22. 21.
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; it is but right we should also give
unto God the things that are Gods by so many and just titles.

Especially since there are reasons of equity on our part in this behalf, as
well as there is title of right on his part. You know the rule of equity, what
it is; even to do to others, as we would be done to. See then first how we
deal with those that are under our command. We are rigid and importunate
exactors of service. 53. and equal;
from them: we take on unreasonably, and lay on unmercifully, and be wray much
impatience and distemper, if they at any time slack their services toward us.
How should this our strictness in exacting services from those that are under
us, add to our care and Vit ut tibi serviat, cum quo sactus es; and non vis
servire ei, a quo sactus es? August. de 10 Chord. c. 10.
conscience in performing our bounde^ services to our Lord and Master that is
over us? But as it is with some unconscionable dealers in the world, that
neither have any pity to forbear their debtors, nor any care to satisfy
their creditors; and as we use to say of our great ones (and that but too
truly of too many of them) that they will neither do right, nor take wrong:
such is our disposition. We are neither content to forgo any part of that
service, which we take to be due to us; nor willing Quod laudas in servo, non
exhibes Domino: and co sceleratius, quia vis ut m^^^orem t^ habeas servii, quam
te Deus. Augustine ibid.
to perform any part of that service, which we know to be due to God. See
secondly, how we have dealt even with God himself. It is the masters part to
command, not to serve: yet have we against all reason and good order done our
endeavor to make him who is our Master become our slave. Himself complains
of it by his Prophet ( Esa. 43. 23. 24.
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, and wearied thee with
incense: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with
thine iniquities, Esaias 43.) Now what can be imagined more preposterous and
unequal, then for a servant to make his master do him service, and himself
the while resolve to do his master none? See thirdly, what Christ has done
for us: though he were the eternal Son of the eternal God, no way inferior
to the Father, no way bound to us; yet out of his free love to us, and for our
good, he took upon him Phil. 2. 7.
the form of a servant, and was among us, Luke 22. 27.
as one that ministers. That love of his should in all equity and
thankfulness, yet further bind us to answer his so great love, by making our
selves servants unto him, who thus made himself a servant for us. Thus both in
point of right and equity, the service of God is a just service.

It is secondly, the most necessary service. Necessary first, because we are
servinati, of a servile condition,. 54. 2. the most necessary;
borne to serve. We have not the liberty to choose whether we will serve, or no*
all the liberty we have is to choose our master; (as Joshua said to the people,
Ios. 24. 15.
Choose you whom you will serve.) Since then there lies upon us a necessity of
serving, it should be our wisdom to make a virtue of that necessity, by
making choice of a good master, with his resolution there, I and my house will
serve the Lord. It is necessary secondly, for our safety and security: lest if
we withdraw our service from him, we perish justly in our rebellion: according
to that in the Prophet, ( Esaias. 60. 12.
The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish.) It is
necessary thirdly Nihililli jam liberi est: spospondit. Senec Ep. 36.
by our own voluntary act: when we bound ourselves by solemn vow and promise
in the face of the open congregation at our Baptism, to continue Christ's
faithful soldiers and servants unto our lives end. Now the word is gone out of
our lips, we may not alter it; nor after we have made a vow, Prove. 20. 25.
enquire what we have to do. Thus the service of God is a necessary service.

It is thirdly, (which at the first hearing may seem a. 55. 3. the most easy:
in regard both of the certainty of the service,
paradoxe, yet will appear upon further consideration to be a most certain
truth) of all other the most easy service: in regard both of the certainty of
the employment, and of the help we have toward the performance of it. He
that serves many masters, or even but one if he be a fickle man, he never
knows the end of his work: what he does now, anon he must undo: and so
Sisyphus-like he is ever doing, and yet has never done. Mat. 6. 24.
No man can serve two masters: not serve them so, as to please both; scarce so,
as to please either. And that is every man's case, that is a slave to sin:
Senec.
Tot Domini, quot vitia. Every lust calls for his attendance; yea and many
times contrary lusts Nos tam graves Domin^s juterd^s alternis vicibus
imperantes, interdum pariter. S^nec. Epist. 37.
at once, (as when Ambition bids, let fly, and covetousness cries as
fast, Hold:) whereby the poor man is Enquidagis? Duphei in divers^n seinderis
hame: bunccine an hunt sequeris? Pers. Satyr. 5.
infinitely distracted, between a loathnesse to deny either, and the
impossibility of gratifying both. Saint Paul therefore speaking of the state of
the Saints before conversion, expresses it thus, T^t. 3. Tit. 3. 3.
We our selves also, were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures:) and that diversity breeds distraction. But the
servant of God is at a good certainty, and knows before hand both what his
work must be, and what his wages must be. As is the mast^r himself, so are
his Commandments, Heb. 13. 8.
Yesterday, and today the same, and for ever, without variableness or so much
as Iam. 1. 17.
shadow of turning. ( 1 Ioh. 2. 7.
Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but the old commandment which
ye had from the beginning.) 1. Ioh. 2,

It is some ease to know certainly what we must do, but much more for to
have sufficient help for the. 56. and of the help we have for the performance
thereof.
doing of it. If we were left to our selves for the doing of his will, so as
the yoke lay all upon our necks, and the whole burden upon our shoulders: our
necks, though their sinews were of iron, would break under the yoke; and our
shoulders, though their plates had the strength of brass, would crack under
the burden. But our comfort is, that (as Saint Austen sometimes prayed,
Augustine.
Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis:) so he that sets us on work,
strengthens us to do the work, ( Phil. 4. 13.
I can do all things through him that strengthens me, Phil. 4.) Nay rather
himself does Esaias. 26. 12.
the work ^^ us ( 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Yet not I, but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 15.) The Son of God, nutteth
his ^eck in the yoke with us, whereby it becomes his yoke as well as ours,
and that makes it so easy to us: and he puts his shoulder under the burden
with us, whereby it becomes his burden as well as ours, and that makes it so
light to us. ( Mat. 11. 30.
Take my yoke upon you: for my yoke is easy, and my burden light. Auson. in
carm. ad Theodos.
Iuvat idem, qui jubet. What he commands us to do, he helps us to do: and
thence it is, that 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
his Commandem^nts are not grievous. Thus the service of God is an easy
service.

It is fourthly the most honorable service. Cateris p^ribus he goes for the
better man, that serves the better. 57. 4. the most honorable;
master. And if men of good rank and birth, think it an honor for them, and
a thing worthy their ambition to be the Kings servants, because he is the best
and greatest Master upon earth: how much more then is it an honorable thing
and to be desired with our utmost ambitions to be the servants of God, who is
Optimus, ma^cimus, and that without either slattery or limitation, the best and
greatest master, and in comparison of whom the best and greatest Kings are but
as worms and grasshoppers. Sirac. 23. 28.
It is a great glory to follow the Lord says the son of Sirac, Sirac. 23. And
the more truly any man serves him, the more still will it be for his own
honor. For 1 Samuel 2. 30.
them that honor me I will honor says God 1 Samuel 2. and Christ John 12. Ioh.
12. 26.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Thus the service of God is an
honorable service.

It is lastly and fifthly, the most profitable service. We. 58. and 5. the most
profitable service.
are indeed Luke 17. 10.
unprofitable servants to him: but sure we have a very profitable service
under him. They that speak against the Lord with stout words, saying Mal. 3.
13, 14.
It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinances.) Mal. 3. or as it is in Job 21. Job 21. 15.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we pray unto him?) speak without all truth and reason. For verily never man
truly served God, who gained not incredibly by it. These things among other the
servant of God may certainly reckon upon, as the certain vailes and benefits
of his service, wherein his master will not fail him, if he fail not in his
service: Protection, Maintenance, Reward. Men 1.
that are in danger cast to put themselves into the servic^ of such great
personages as are able to give them protection. Now God, both can and will
protect his servants from all their enemies and from all harms. ( Psalm. 143.
12. (I am thine, O save me. Psalm. 119. 94.) 2.
Of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul,
for I am thy servant, Psalm. 143.) Again God has all good things in store both
for necessity and comfort, and he is no niggard of either: but that his
servants may be assured of a sufficiency of both, when others shall be left
destitute in want and distress* Esaias 65. 13, 14.
Behold my servants shall eat; but ye shall be hungry; behold my servants
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye
shall be ashamed; behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for v^xation of spirit. Esaias 65.) And
whereas the servant of ^^^ne, besides that he^ has no fruit, nor comfort of
his service in the mean time, 3.
when he comes to receive his wages at the end of his term, finds nothing
but shame or death; shame if he leave the service, and if he leave it not,
death; ( Romans 6. 21.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the
end of those things is death.) The servant of God on the contrary, besides that
he reapeth much comfort and content in the very service he does in the mean
time, he receives a blessed reward also at the last, even eternal life. He
has Romans 6. 22.
his fruit in holiness, (there is his comfort onward) and the end everlasting
life, there is his full and final reward. A reward far beyond the merit of his
service. And so the service of God is a profitable service.

And now I pray you what can any man ^lledge or pretend for himself if he
shall hang back, and not. 59. Observe. 4. We must behave our selves as the
servants of God: with all meet-
with all speed and cheerfulness tender himself to so just, so necessary, so
easy, so honorable, so profitable a service? Me thinks I hear every man
answer, as the Israelites sometimes said to Ios^uah with one common voice,
Josh. 24. 16.-24.
God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve any other: Nay but we
will serve the Lord, for he is our God. Joshua 24. But beloved, let us take
heed we do not gloze with him, as we do one with another: we are deceived,
if we think God will be Gal. 6. 7.
mocked with hollow and empty protestations. We live in a wondrous
complementall age, wherein scarce any other word is so ready in every mouth, as
your servant, and at your service, when all is but mere form, without any
purpose, or many times but so much as single thought, of doing any serviceable
office to those men, to whom we profess so much service. However we are one
toward another, yet with the Lord there is no dallying: it behooves us there
to be real. If we profess our selves to be, or desire to be called (...),
the servants of God; we must have a care to demean our selves (...), in all
respects as becomes the servants of God. To which purpose when I shall have
given you those few directions I spoke of, I shall have done. Servants owe many
duties to their earthly masters in the particulars; but 3. generals comprehend
them all, Reverence, Obedience, Faithfulness. Whereof the first respects the
masters person, the second his pleasure, the third his business. And he that
will be Gods servant in truth, and not only in title, must perform all these
to his heavenly master.

Reverence is the first: which ever arises from a deliberate. 60. 1. Reverence
Which consists 1. in thinking meanly of our selves;
apprehension of some worthiness in another more then in a man's self; and is
ever accompanied with a fear to offend, and a care to please, the person
reverenced: and so it has three brauches. Whereof the first is Humility. It is
not possible, that that servant who (...). Menand.
thinks himself the wiser, orany way the better man of the two, should truly
reverence his master in his heart. S. Paul therefore would have servants to 1.
Tim. 6. 1.
count their own masters worthy of al honor, 1 Timothy 6. 1. he knew well they
could not else reverence them, as they ought. Plaut.
Non decet superbum esse hominem servum, could he say in the Comedy; A man that
thinks goodly of himself cannot make a good servant either to God or man.
Then are we meetly prepared for this service and not before, when truly
apprehending our own vileness and unworthiness, both in our nature and by
reason of sin, and duly acknowledging the infinite greatness and goodness
of our Master, we unfainedly account our selves altogether unworthy to be
called his servants, Another branch of the servants reverence is fear to
offend his master. This fea^e is a disposition. 61. 2. in fearing to offend;
well becoming a servant, and therefore God as our master, and by that name of
master challenges it, Mal. 1. ( Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a father, where is my honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear?
says the Lord of Hosts.) Fear and reverence are often joined together, and so
jointly required of the Lords servants. ( Psalm. 2. 11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice to him with reverence. Psalm. 2.) And
the Apostle would have us furnished with grace, Heb. 12. 28.
whereby to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 12.

From which fear of offending, a care and desire of pleasing cannot be
severed: which is the third branch of. 62. 3. in studying to please our master.
the servants Reverence to his master. Saint Paul bids Titus, exhort
servants to Tit. 2. 9.
please their masters well in all things. So must Gods servant do; he must
study to Col. 1. 10.
walk worthy of him unto all pleasing: not much regarding how others interpret
his doings, or what offense they take at him, so long as his master accepts
his services, and takes his endeavors in good part. Who so is not thus
resolved to please his master, although he should thereby incur the
displeasure of the whole world besides, is not worthy to be called the servant
of such a master. ( Gal. 1. 10.
If I yet sought to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.)
And all this belongs to Reverence.

Obedience is the next general duty ( Ephesians. 6. 5.
Servants be obedient. 63. II. Obedience both Active in doing his commandments;
to your masters, Ephesians. 6. Romans 6. 16.
Know you not, who^ you yield your selves servants to obey: his servants ye are
to whom ye obey? Romans 6.) As if there could be no better proof of service,
then obedience: And that is twofold: Active, and Passive. For Obedience
consists in the subjecting of a man's own will to the will of another: which
subjection, if it be in something to be done, makes an Active; if in
something to be suffered, a Passive obedience. Our Active Obedience to God, is
the keeping his commandments and the doing of his will: as the people said,
Ios. 24. Ios. 24. 24.
The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey And this must be
done Psalm. 18. 44.
in auditu auris, upon the bare signification of his pleasure without disputing
or debating the matter: as Mat. 8. 9.
the Centurions servant, if his master did but say, Do this, without any more
ado, did it. So Abraham the servant of the Lord Heb. 11. 8.
when he was called to go out into a place which he should receive for an
inheritance, obeyed, and went out, though he knew not whither. Nor only so,
but in Genesis 22.
the greatest trial of Obedience that ever we read any man (any mere man) to
have been put unto, being commanded to sacrifice Heb. 11. 17. 18.
his only begotten Son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be
called: he never Romans 4 20.
stumbled (as not at the promise through unbeleefe, so neither) at the command
through disobedience, but speedily went about it, and had not failed to have
done all that was commanded him, had not the Lord himself, when he was come
even to the last act, inhibited him by his countermand. If mortal and wicked
men look to be obeyed by their servants upon the warrant of their bare
command, in evil and unrighteous acts; ( 2 Samuel 13. 28.
When I say unto you, smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not: have not I
commanded you? says Absolon to his servants. 2 Samuel 13. Ought not the express
command of God much more, to be a sufficient warrant for us to do as we are
bidden, none of whose commands can be other then holy and just?

That is our Active obedience. We must give proof. 64. 2. Passive, in being
content with his allowances,
of our Passive obedience also: both in contenting our selves with his
allowances, and in submitting our selves to his corrections. He that is but a
servant in the house, may not think to command whatsoever the house affords
at his own pleasure; (that is the masters prerogative alone) but he must
content himself with what his master is content to allow him; and take his
portion of meat, drink, livery, lodging, and every other thing, at the
discretion and appointment of his master. Neither may the servant of God look
to be his own carver in any thing; neither ought he to mutter against his
master (with that Mat. 25. 24.
ungracious servant in the porable) complaining of his hardness, and
austerity, if his allowances in some things fall short of his desire: but 1 Timothy 6. 8.
having food and raiment, be it never so little, never so course, he should be
content with it; nay though he should want either or both, he should be content
without it. We should all learn of an old experienced servant of God Saint
Paul, what grace and long experience had taught him, Phil. 4. 11.
In what soever state we are, to be therewith content.

We are to show our obedience to our heavenly master. 65. and in submitting to
his discipline.
yet further, by submitting to his wholesome discipline, when at any time he
shall see cause to give us correction. Our Apostle a little after the text
would have servants to be subject even to their 1 Pet. 2. 18.
froward masters, and to take it patiently when they are buffetted
undeservedly, and without fault. How much more ought we Lev. 26. 21. 23
to accept the punishment of our iniquity (as we have the phrase, Levit. 26.)
and with patience to yield our backs to the whip; when God who has been so
gracious a master to us, shall think fit to exercise some little severity
toward us, and to lay stripes upon us? Especially since he never strikes us:
first, but for our fault, (such is his justice,) nor secondly, (such is his
mercy) but for our good. And all this belongs to that Obedience,. 66. III.
Fidelity: which consists
which the servant of God ought to manifest, both by doing and suffering
according to the will of his master.

The third and last general duty is Fidelity. ( Mat. 24. 45.
Who is a faithful and wise servant? Mat. 25. 21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant.) As if both the wisdom and
goodness of a servant consisted in his faithfulness. Now the faithfulness of
a servant may be tried especially by these 3. things: By the heartinesse of his
service, by being tender of his masters honor and profit, and by his
quickness and diligence in doing his business. A notable example whereof we
have in Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. in all the 3. particulars. For first, being
many miles distant from his master, he was no less sollicitous of the
business 1.
he was put in trust withal, then he could have been, if he had been all
that while in the eye of his master. Secondly, he framed himself in his
speeches and actions, and in his whole behavior to such a discreet 2.
carriage, as might best set forth the credit and honor of his master.
Thirdly, he used all possible diligence and expedition; losing not any time,
either at first for 3.
she delivery of his message, or at last for his return home after he had
brought things to a good conclusion. Such faithfulness would well become us in
the service of God in all the aforesaid respects.

The first whereof is Heartinesse in his service. There are many servants in
the world, that will work hard,. 67. 1. in the heartinesse of our service;
and bustle at it lustily for a fit, and so long as their masters eye is upon
them; but when his back is turned, can be content to go on fair and softly,
and fellow-like. Such Ephesians. 6. 5, -7. Col. 3. 22. 23.
(...) the Apostle condemns, Col. 3. and elsewhere, admonishing servants
whatsoever they do to do it heartily, and to obey their masters not with
eye-service, but in singleness of heart. Toward our heavenly master, true it
is, if we had but this eye service, it were enough; because we are never out
of his eye: his eyes are in all the corners of the earth, Prove. 15. 3.
beholding the evil and the good, Psalm. 11. 4.
and his eye lids tries the children of men; Psalm. 139. 3.
he is about our beds and about our paths, and spyeth out all our goings. And
therefore if we would but study to approve our selves and our actions before
his sight; it could not be but our services should be hearty, as well as handy;
because our hearts are no less in his sight, then our hands are. We cannot
content our master, nor should we content our selves, with a bare and barren
profession in the service of God; neither with the addition of some outward
performances of the work done: But since our master calls for the Prove. 23.
26.
heart as well as the hand and tongue; and requires truth in the inward parts
no less, rather much more, then show in the outward: Psalm. 51. 6.
let us but join that inward truth of the heart, un to the outward profession
and performance; and doubtless we shall be accepted. ( 1 Samuel 12 24.
Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart. 1 Samuel 12.

Secondly, we must show our faithfulness to our master by our zeal in his
behalf. A faithful servant. 68. 2 in our zeal for our master;
will not endure an evil word spoken of his master behind his back, but he
will be ready upon every occasion to vindicate his credit, and to magnify him
unto the opinion of others: He will make much of those that love his master,
and set the less by those that care not for him. And as to his credit
principally, so he has an eye also in the second place to the profit of his
master. He will have a care to save his goods the best he can; it (...).
Euripid. in Med. act. 1.
will grieve his very heart to see any of them vainly wasted or embeazeled by
his fellow servants; yea and it will be some grief to him, if any thing under
his hand do but chance to miscarry, though it be without his fault. See we,
how far every of us can apply all this to our own selves in the service of
God. If we have no heart to stand up in our rank and place for the maintenance
of Gods truth and worship, when it is discountenanced or overborne either by
might or multitudes: if our blood will not appear a little, when cursed
miscreants blast the honor of God with their unhallowed breath by blaspheming
oaths, fearful imprecations, scurrile prophanations of Scripture, licentious
and bitter sarcas^^es against the holy ordinances of God: i^ a profound
drunkard, an obscene rimer, an habituated swearer, a complete roarer, every
loose companion and professed scorner of all goodness, that d^e but peep out
with a head, be as welcome into our company, and find as full and free
entertainment with us, as he that caryeth the face, and for any thing we know
has the heart, of an honest and sober Christian, without either profaneness
or preciseness: If we grieve not for the miscariages of those poor souls
that live near us, especially those that fall any way under our charge: what
faithfulness is there in us, or what zeal for God, to answer the title we
usurp, so often as we call our selves the servants of God.

Thirdly if we be his faithful servants, we should let. 69. 3. in our
diligence.
it appear by our diligence in doing his businesses. No man would willingly
entertain an idle servant, that is (...). ap. Stob. sermon. 60.
good at bit, and nothing else; one of those the old riming verse describes
(Sudant quando vorant, frigescunt quando laborant) such as can eat^ till they
sweat, and work till they ^^^eze, ( Mat. 25. 26.
O thou wicked and slothful servant,) says the master in the parable, to him
that napkined up his talent Mat. 25. they are rightly joined, wicked and
slothful. for it is not possible a slothful servant should be good. The Poets
therefore give unto Mercury who is interpres divum, the messenger (as they
feign) of Jupiter and the other gods, wings both at his hands and feet: to
intimate thereby what great speed and diligence was requisite to be used by
those that should be employed in the service of Princes, for the managing of
their weighty affairs of State. Surely no less diligence is needful in the
service of God, but rather much more; by how much both the Master is of greater
majesty, and the service of greater importance ( Romans 12. 11.
Not slothful in business, ferve^t in spirit, serving the Lord,) says S. Paul.
Let all those that trifle away their precious time in unconcerning things, or
poast off the repentance of their sins, and the reformation of their lives,
till another age; or any other way slake their bounden service unto God either
in the common duties of their general, or in the proper works of their
particular callings: tremble to think what shall become of them, when all they
shall be Icr. 48. 10.
cursed, that have done the Lords work (in what kind soever) negligently.

We see now what we are to do; if we will approve. 70. The Conclusion.
our selves and our services unto the Lord our heavenly master. What remains
but that we be willing to do it: and for that end pray to the same our master,
who alone can Phil. 2. 13.
work in us both the will and the deed, that he would be pleased of his great
goodness to give to every one of us ^ourage to maintain our Christian liberty
inviolate as those tha^ are free; wisdom to use it aright and not for a cloak
of maliciousness; and grace at all times and in all placcs to behave our
selves as the servants of God; with such holy reverence of his majesty,
obedience to his will, faithfulness in his employments, as may procure both
for us, and our services in the mean time gracious acceptance in his sight,
and in the end a glorious reward in his presence: even for Jesus Christ his
sake his only son, and our alone Savior.

FINIS.
The Second Sermon, (Being the fourth ad Clerum) Preached at the
Metropoliticall Visitation holden for the most Reverend Father in God. WILLIAM
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, at Grantham in the County and Diocese of
Lincoln 22. Aug. 1634.
THE SECOND SERMON.
ROMANS 14. 23. -- For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.
ONe remarkable difference (among many other) between. 1. The scope,
Good and Evil, is this: that there must be a concurrence of all requisite
conditions to make a thing good; whereas to make a thing evil, a single defect
in any one condition alone will suffice. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18 art. 4 ad 3.
Bonum ex causa integra, malum ex partiali. If we propose not to our selves a
right end; or if we pitch not upon proper and convenient means for the
attaining of that end, or if we pursue not those means in a due manner, or if we
observe not exactly every material circumstance in the whole pursuit; if we
fail but in any one point: the action, though it should be in every other
respect such as it ought to be, by that one defect becomes wholly sinful. Nay
more, not only a true and real, but even a ^upposed and imaginary defect; the
bare opinion of un^^wfulnesse, is able to vitiate the most justifiable act, and
to turn i^ into sin. [I know there is nothing unclean of i^selfe: but to
him, that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. at the
xiiij. verse of this Chapter.] Nay yet more, not only a settled opinion that
the thing we do is unlawful* but the very suspension of our judgments, and
the doubtfulnesse of our minds whether we may lawfully do it or no, makes it
sometimes unlawful to be done of us, and if we do it, sinful. [He that but
doubts, is damned, if he eat; because he eats not of faith:] in the former
part of this verse. The ground whereof the Apostle delivers in a short, and
full Aphorism; and concludes the whole Chapter with it, in the words of the
Text, (For whatso^ver is not of faith, is sin)

Many excellent instructions there are, scattered throughout the whole Chapter,
most of them concerning. 2. and importance of the Text.
the right use of that Liberty we have unto things of indifferent nature, well
worthy our Christian consideration, if we had time and leisure for them. But
this last Rule alone will find us work enough and therefore omitting the rest,
we will (by God^ assistance and with your patience) presently fall in hand with
this, and intend it wholly, in the Explication first, and then in the
Application of it. For by how much it is of more profitable and universal use
for the regulating of the common offices of life: by so much is the mischief
greater if it be, and accordingly our care ought to be so much the greater that
it be not, either mis-understood, or mis-applyed. Quod non ex fide, peceatu^:
that is the Rule. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. In the Explication of
which words, there would be little difficulty, had not the ambiguity of the
word Faith occasioned difference of interpretations, and so left a way open to
some mis-apprehensions. Faith is v^rbum (...), as most other words are. There
be that have Marlorat. in Euchirid.
reckoned up more then twenty several significations of it in the Scriptures.
But I find three especially looked at by those, who either purposely or
occasionally have had to do with this Text: each of which we shall examine. 3.
The first conclusion, which some deduce from it.
in their Order.

First and most usually, especially in the Apostolical writings, the word
Faith is used to signify that Theological virtue or gracious habit, whereby
we embrace with our minds and affections the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only
begotten Son of God, and alone Savior of the world, casting our selves wholly
upon the mercy of God through his merits, for remission of sins and everlasting
salvation. It is that which is commonly called a lively or justifying Faith:
whereunto are ascribed in holy Writ those many gracious effects, of Act. 15. 9.
purifying the heart, Ioh. 1. 12. and Gal. 4. 26.
adoption, Romans 3. 28. and 5. 1.
justification, Habac. 2. 4. Gal. 2. 20.
life, Romans 15. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
joy, R^m. 5. 1.
peace, Act. 16. 34. Ephesians. 1. 8.
salvation, etc. Not as to their proper and primary cause, but as to the
instrument, whereby we apprehend and apply Christ, whose merits and spirit are
the true causes of all those blessed effects. And in this notion many of our
latter Divines seem to understand it in our present Text: whilst they allege
it for the confirmation of this Position, that All the works (even the best
works) of unbel^evers are sins.

A position condemned indeed by the Trent-Councel, and Act. 15. 9.
that under a curse; taking it (as I suppose) in a. 4. allowed true; but
rejected as impertine^t. a Si quis dixerit opera omnia quae ante
justi^ication^m ^^^nt ver^ esse pecc^ta, An a t^ema sit, Council. Trident. Sess.
6. Can. 7.
wrong construction: but not worthy of so heavy a censure if it be rightly
understood; according to the doctrine of our Church in the thirteenth Article
of her Confession, and according to the tenor of those Scriptures whereon that
doctrine is grounded Viz. Mat. 12. 33. Romans 8. 8. Tit. 1. 15. Heb. 11. 6. etc.
Howbeit I take it (with ^ubjection of judgment) that that Conclu^ion, what
truth soever it may have in it self, has yet no direct foundation in this
Text. The Verb (...) to believe, and the Nowne (...) faith or belief, are
both of them found sundry times in this Chapter: yet seem not to signify in
any place thereof, either the Verb the Act, or the Nowne the Habit, of this
saving or justifying Faith, of which we now speak. But being opposed every
where, and namely in this last verse unto doubtfulnesse of judgment concerning
the lawfulness of some indifferent things; must therefore needs be understood
of such a persuasion of Judgment concerning such lawfulness, as is opposite
to such doubting. Which kind of Faith may be found in a mere heathen man: who
never having heard the least syllable of the mystery of salvation by Christ,
may yet be assured out of clear evidence of reason, that many of the things
he does are such as he may and ought to do. And as it may be found in a
mere heathen man, so it may be wanting in a true believer: who steadfastly
resting upon the blood of Christ for his eternal redemption, may yet through
the strength of temptation, sway of passion, or other distemper or subreption
incident to humane frailty, do some particular act or acts, of the lawfulness
where of he is not sufficiently per^waded. The Apostle then her^ speaking of
such a Faith, as may be both sound in an unbeleever, and also wanting in a true
believer: it appears that by Faith he means not that justifying Faith,
which makes a true believer to differ from an unbeleever; but the word must be
understood in some other notion.

Yet thus much I may add withal in the behalf of those worthy men, that have
alleged this Scripture. 5. yet with some excusation of the Authors.
for the purpose aforesaid, to excuse them from the imputation of having (at
least wilfully) handled the word of God deceitfully. First, that the thing it
self being true, and the words also sounding so much that way, might easily
induce them to conceive that to be the very meaning. And common equity will not
that men should be presently condemned if they shall sometimes confirm a point
from a place of Scripture not altogether pertinent, if yet they think it to be
so: especially so long as the substance of what they write is according to the
analogy of Faith and Godliness. Secondly, that albeit these words in their
most proper and immediate sense will not necessarily enforce that Conclusion:
yet it may seem deducible therefrom with the help of some topicall arguments,
and by more remote inferences; as some learned men have endeavored to show,
not altogether improbably. And thirdly, that they who interpret this Text as
aforesaid, are neither singular nor novel therein, but walk in the same path
which some of the ancient Fathers have trod before them. The Though S.
Augustine sometimes applies it also to prove, that all the actions of in^idels
(meaning, etc.) be sin. Rhem. annot. in loc.
Rhemists themselves confess it of S. Augustine: to whom they might have added
also E^omne quod non e^t ex side pecca^um est: ut sc. intelligat justitiam
inside^^um non esse justitia^: quia sordet natura sine gratia. Prosper. in
Epist. ad Rusin: V. etiam cundem contra Collat.
S. Prosper, and (whose authority alone is enough to stop their mouths for
ever) Extra Ecclesiam catholisam nihil est integru^, nihilcastum, dicente
Apostolo, Omne quod non etc. Leo sermon. 2. de jejun. Pentec.
Leo Bishop of Rome, who have all cited these words for the selfsame purpose.

But we are content, for the reasons already shown, to let it pass as a
collection impertinent: and that I suppose is the worst that can be made of it.
There is a second acception of the word Faith: put, either for the whole
systeme of that truth which God has been pleased to reveal to his Church in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, or some part thereof: or else
((...)) for the assent of the mind thereunto. In which signification some
conceiving the words of this Text to be meant, do hence infer a false and
dangerous conclusion; which yet they would obtrude upon the Christian Church as
an undoubted principle of truth: that a men are bound for every particular
action they do to have direction. 6. Another conclusion which some deduce from
this text.
and warrant from the written word of God, or else they sin in the doing of
it. For (say they) faith must be grounded upon the word of God, ( Romans 10. 17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10.) Where
there is T. C. l. 1. p. 27 apud Hooker lib. 2.. 4.
no Word then, there can be no Faith: T. C. l. 1. p. 59. etc. apud Hooker lib.
2.
and then, by the Apostles doctrine, that which is done without the Word to
warrant, it must needs be sin, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. This
is their opinion, and thus they would infer it.

I know not any p^ece of counterfeit doctrine, that. 7. which (as they would
have it understood,)
has passed so currently in the world, with so little suspicion of falsehood,
and so little open contradiction as this has done. One chief cause whereof I
conjecture to be, for that it seems to make very much for the honor and
perfection of Gods sacred Law: the fullness and sufficiency whereof none in the
Christian Church but Papists or Atheists will deny. In which respect, the very
questioning of it now, will perhaps seem a strange novelty to many, and
occasion their miscensures. But as God himself, so the holy word of God is so
full of all requisite perfection, that it needs not to beg honor from an
untruth. ( Job 13. 7.
Will you speak wickedly for God? or talk deceitfully for him?) I hold it
very needful therefore, both for the vindicating of my Text from a common
abuse, and for the arming of all my brethren as well of the Clergy as Laity
against a common and plausible error; that neither they teach it, nor these
receive it: briefly and clearly to show, that the aforesaid opinion, in such
sort as some have proposed it and many have understood it, (for it is capable
of a good interpretation, wherein it may be allowed;) first is utterly devoid
of truth; and secondly draws after it many dangerous consequents and evil
effects; and thirdly has no good warrant from my present Text.

The Opinion is, that to do any thing at all without. 8. is neither 1. true;
direction from the Scripture is unlawful and sinful. Which if they would
understand only of the substantials of Gods worship, and of the exercises of
Spiritual and supernatural graces; the assertion were true and sound: but as
they extend it, to I say that the word os God contains whatsoever things can
fall into any part of man's life. T. C. lib. 1. p. 20. apud Hooker lib. 2. 1.
all the actions of common life whatsoever, whether natural or civil, even so
far as to the taking up of a stram: so it is altogether false and
indefensible. I marvel what warrant they that so teach have from the Scripture
for that very doctrine: or where they are commanded so to believe, or teach.
One of their chiefest refuges is the Text we now have in hand: but I shall anon
drive them from this shelter. The other places usually alleged speak only,
either of divine and supernatural truths to be believed, or else of works of
grace or worship to be performed, as of necessity unto salvation: which is not
to the point in issue. For it is freely confessed, that in things of such
nature the holy Scripture is, and so we are to account it, a most absolute and
sufficient direction. Upon which ground we heartily reject all humane
traditions, devised and intended as supplements to the doctrine of faith
contained in the Bible, and annexed as Codicils to the holy Testament of
Christ, for to supply the defects thereof. The Question is wholly about things
in their nature indifferent, such as are the use of our food, raiment and the
like; about which the common actions of life are chiefly conversant: Whether
in the choice and use of such things, we may not be sometimes sufficiently
guided by the light of reason and the common rules of discretion: but that we
must be able, (and are so bound to do, or else we sin) for every thing we
do in such matters, to deduce our warrant from some place or other of
Scripture?

Before the Scriptures were written, it pleased God. 9. either in the rigor of
it,
by visions, and dreams, and other like revelations, immediately to make
known his good pleasure to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and by them unto the
people: which kind of Revelations served them to all the same intents and
purposes, whereto the sacred Scriptures now do us, viz. to instruct them what
they should believe and do for his better service, and the furtherance of
their own salvations. Now as it were unreasonable for any man to think, that
they either had or did expect an immediate revelation from God every time they
ate, or drank, or bought, or sold, or did any other of the common actions of
life, for the warranting of each of those particular actions to their
consciences: no less unreasonable it is to think, tha^ we should now expect
the like warrant from the Scriptures for the doing of the like actions. Without
all doubt the Law of nature, and the light of reason, was the rule whereby they
were guided for the most part in such matters: which the wisdom of God would
never have left in them or us, as a principal relic of his decayed image in
us, if he had not meant, that we should make use of it, for the direction of
our lives and actions thereby. Certainly God never infused any power into any
creature, whereof he intended not some use. Else, what shall we say of the
Indies and other barbarous nations, to whom God never vouchsafed the lively
oracles of his written word? Must we think that they were left a lawless
people, without any Rule at all whereby to order their actions? How then come
they to be guilty of transgression? for where there is Romans 4. 15.
no Law, there can be no transgression. Or how comm^th it about that their
consciences should at any time or in any case either Romans 2. 15.
accuse them, or excuse them, if they had no guide nor rule to walk by? But if
we must grant they had a Rule, (and there is no way, you see, but grant it we
must;) then we must also of necessity grant that there is some other Rule for
humane actions besides the written word: for that we presupposed these nations
to have wanted. Which Rule what other could it be, then the Law of Nature and
of right reason, imprinted Romans 2. 15.
in their hearts! Which is as truly the Law and Word of God, as is that which
is printed in our Bibles. So long as our actions are warranted either by the
one or the other, we cannot be said to want the warrant of Gods word: Tertul.
de coron. milit. cap. 4.
Nec differt Scriptura, an ratione consistat, says Tertullian; it mattereth
not much from whether of both we have our direction, so long as we have it
from either.

You see then those men are in a great error, who. 10. or in the mitigation:
make the holy Scriptures the sole rule of all humane actions whatsoever. For
the maintenance whereof, there was never yet produced any piece of an argument,
either from reason, or from authority of holy writ, or from the testimony
either of the ancient Fathers, or of other classical Divines of later times;
which may not be clearly and abundantly answered, to the satisfaction of any
rational man not extremely fore-possessed with prejudice. They who think to
salve the matter by this mitigation; that at leastwise our actions ought to be
framed according to those general rules of the Law of nature, which are here
and there in the Scriptures dispersedly contained; (as viz. That we should do
as we would be done to; That all things be done decently, and orderly, and unto
edification; That nothing be done against Conscience, and the like:) speak
somewhat indeed to the truth, but little to the purpose. For they consider not,
First, that these general Rules are but occasionally and incidentally
mentioned in Scripture; rather to manifest unto us a former, then to lay upon
us a new obligation. Secondly, that those rules had been of force for the
ordering of men's actions, though the Scripture had never expressed them: and
were of such force, before those Scriptures were written, where in they are now
expressed. For they bind not originally quascripta, but quajusta; because they
are righteous, not because they are written. Thirdly, that an action
conformable to these general rules might not be condemned as sinful, although
the doer thereof should look at those rules merely as they are the dictates
of the Law of nature; and should not be able to vouch his warrant for it from
any place of Scripture, neither should have at the time of the doing thereof
any present thought or consideration of any such place. The contrary whereunto,
I permit to any reasonable man's judgment, if it be not desperately rash and
uncharitable to affirm. Lastly, that if men's actions done agreeably to those
rules are said to be of faith, precisely for this reason, because those rules
are contained in the word: then it will follow, that before those particular
Scriptures were written wherein any of those rules are first delivered, every
action done according to those rules had been done without faith, (there being
as yet no Scripture for it;) and consequently had been a sin. So that by this
doctrine, it had been a sin (before the writing of Mat. 7. 12.
Saint Mathewes Gospel) for any man to have done to others as he would they
should do^ to him; and it had been a sin (before the writing of the 1 Cor.
14. 40.
former Epistle to the Corinthians) for any man to have done any thing decently
and orderly; supposing these two rules to be in those two places first
mentioned: because (this supposed) there could then have bin no warrant brought
from the Scriptures for so doing.

Well then, we see the former Opinion will by no means hold, neither in the
rigor of it, nor yet in the. 11. nor 2. safe; in respect of the evil effects,
viz. 1. Superstitions,
mitigation. We are therefore to beware of it; and that so much the more
heedfully, because of the evil consequents and effects that issue from it: to
wit, a world of superstitions, uncharitable censures, bitter contentions,
contempt of superiors, perplexities of conscience. First, it fills men's
heads with many superstitions conceits, making them to cast impurity upon
sundry things, which yet are lawful to as many as use them lawfully. For the
taking away of the indifferency of any thing that is indifferent, is in truth
Superstition: whether either of the two ways it be done, either by requiring
it as necessary, or by forbidding it as unlawful. He that condemns a thing
as utterly unlawful, which yet indeed is indifferent, and so lawful, is
guilty of superstition, as well as he that enjoyneth a thing as absolutely
necessary, which yet indeed is but indifferent, and so arbitrary. They of the
Church of Rome, and some in our Church, as they go upon quite contrary
grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite contrary errors, and both
superstitious. They decline too much on the left hand, denying to the holy
Scripture that perfection which of right it ought to have; of containing all
things appertaining to that supernatural doctrine of faith and holiness which
God has revealed to his Church for the attainement of everlasting salvation:
whereupon they would impose upon Christian people, and that with an opinion of
necessity, many things which the Scriptures require not: and that is a
Superstition. These wry too much on the right hand, ascribing to the holy
Scripture such a kind of perfection as it cannot have; of being the sole
directour of all human^ actions whatsoever: whereupon they forbid unto
Christian people, and that under the name of sinno, sundry things which the hoy
Scripture condemns not: and that is a superstition too.

From which Superstition proceeds in the second. 12. 2. Uncharitable
Censurings;
place uncharitable censuring: as evermore they that are the most
superstitious, are the most supercilious. No such severe censurers of our
blessed Saviors person and actions, as the superstitious Scribes and Pharisees
were. In this Chapter the special fault, which the Apostle blames in the
weak ones, (who were somewhat superstitiously affected,) was their rash and
uncharitable Verse 3. 4. 10. and 13.
judging of their brethr^n. And common and daily experience among our selves
shows how freely some men spend their censures upon so many of their
brethren, as without seruple do any of those things, which they upon false
grounds have superstitiously condemned as utterly unlawful.

And then thirdly, as unjust censures are commonly. 13. 3. Contentions;
entertained with scor^e and contumely; they that so liberally condemn their
brethren of prophan^nesse, are by them again as freely flouted for their
procesenesse: and so whiles both parties please themselves in their own ways,
they cease not mutually to provoke and scandalize and exasperate the one the
other, pursuing their private spleenes so far, till they break out into open
contentions and oppositions. Thus it stood in the Roman Church, when this
Epistle was written. They Verse 3.
judged one another, and despised one another, to the great disturbance of the
Churches peace; which gave occasion to our Apostles whole discourse in this
Chapter. And how far the like censurings and despisings have embittered the
spirits, and whetted both the tongues and pens of learned men one against
another in our own Church; the stirs that have been long since raised, and
are still upheld by the factious opposers against. 14. 4. Contempt of authority;
our Ecclesiastical constitutions, government, and ceremonies, will not suffer
us to be ignorant. Most of which stirs, I verily persuade my self, had been
long ere this either wholly buried in silence, or at leastwise prettily well
quieted: if the weakness and danger of the error whereof we now speak, had
been more timely discovered, and It is indeed fully handled by M. Hooker in
his second book of Eccles. Policy: but few men of that party will read his
works, though written with singular learning, wisdom, godliness and moderation.
more fully and frequently made known to the world, then it has been.

Fourthly, let that doctrine be once admitted, and all humane authority will
soon be despised. The commands of Parents, Masters, and Princes, which many
times require both secrecy and expedition, shall be taken into slow
deliberation; and the equity of them sifted by those, that are bound to obey,
though they know no cause why, so long as they know no cause to the contrary.
Pet. Blesens. Epist. 131.
Delicata est obedientia, quae transit in causae genus deliberativum. It is a
nice obedience in Delicata satis, imo minus mole. sta est ista obedientia, etc.
Bernard. de praecept. and dispens.
S. Bernards judgment, yea rather troublesome and odious, that is overcurious
in Infirmae prorsus voluntatis indicium est, statuta seniorum studiosius
discutere, haetere ad singula que injunguntur, exigere de quibusque rationem,
and male suspicari de omnipraecepto cujus causa latuerit, ^ec unquam libenter
obedire, nisi etc. Bern. ibid.
discussing the commands of superiors, boggling at every thing that is
enjoined, requiring a why for every wherefore, and unwilling to stir, until
the lawfulness and expediency of the thing commanded shall be demonstrated by
some manifest reason, or undoubted authority, from the Scriptures.

Lastly, the admitting of this doctrine would cast such a snare upon men of
weak judgments, but tender. 15. and 5. the ensnaring of men's consciences:
consciences, as they should never be able to unwinde themselves thereout
again. Men's daily oceasions for themselves or friends, and the necessities of
common life, require the doing of a thousand things within the compass of a
few days; for which it would puzzle the best Textman that lives, readily to
bethi^ke himself of a sentence in the Bible, clear enough to satisfy a
scrupulous conscience of the lawfulness and expediency of what he is about to
do: for which, by hearkening to the rules of reason and discretion, he might
receive easy and speedy resolution. In which cases if he should be bound to
suspend his resolution, and delay to do that which his own reason would tell
him were presently needful to be done, until he could happily call to mind
some precept or example of Scripture for his warrant: what stops would it make
in the course of his whole life? what languishings in the duties of his
calling? how would it fill him with doubts and irresolutions, lead him into a
maze of uncertainties, entangle him in a world of woeful perplexities, and
(without the great mercy of God, and better instruction) plunge him
irrecoverably into the gulf of despair? Since the chief end of the
publication of the Gospel is, to Esaias 40. 1, 2.
comfort the hearts, and to revive and refresh the spirits of Gods people with
Esaias 61. 1-3.
the glad tidings of liberty from the spirit of Romans 8. 15.
bondage and 2 Timothy 1. 7.
fear, and of gracious acceptance with their God, to anoint them with Psalm.
45. 7.
the oil of gladness, giving them beauty for ashes, and instead of Psalm. 30.
11.
sackcloth girding them with joy: we may well suspect that doctrine not to be
Evangelicall, which thus sets the consciences of men upon the rack,
tortureth them with continual fears and perplexities, and prepares them
thereby unto hellish despair.

These are the grievous effects and pernicious consequents,. 16. nor 3.
warranted from the present Text
that will follow upon their opinion who hold, that we must have warrant from
the Scripture for every thing whatsoever we do: not only in spiritual
things, (wherein alone it is absolutely true.) nor yet only in other matters of
weight, though they be not spiritual, (for which perhaps there might be some
color,) but also in the common affairs of life, even in the most slight and
trivial things. Yet for that the Patrons of this opinion build themselves as
much upon the authority of this present Text, as upon any other passage of
Scripture whatsoever, (which is the reason why we have stood thus long upon
the examination of it:) we are therefore in the next place to clear the Text
from that their misinterpretation. The force of their collection stands thus
(as you heard already:) that says is ever grounded upon the word of God; and
that therefore whatsoever action is not grounded upon the word, being it is not
of says, by the Apostles rule here must needs be a sin. Which collection
could not be denied, if the word Faith were here taken in that sense which they
imagine, and wherein it is very usually taken in the Scriptures; viz. for the
doctrine of supernatural and divine revelation, or for the belief thereof:
which doctrine we See Articles of the Church of England. Artic. 6.
willingly acknowledge to be completely contained in the holy Scriptures
alone, and therefore dare not admit into our belief, as a branch of divine
supernatural truth, any thing not therein contained. But there is a third
signification of the word Faith, nothing so frequently found in the Scriptures
as the two former; which yet appears both by the course of this whole
Chapter, and by the consent of the best and most approved interpreters as well
ancient as modern, to have been properly intended by our Apostle in this place:
namely that, wherein it is put for a certain persuasion of mind that what we
do may lawfully be done. So that whatsoever action is done by us, with
reasonable assurance and persuasion of the lawfulness thereof in our own
consciences, is in our Apostles purpose so far forth an action of Faith:
without any enquiring into the means whereby that persuasion was wrought in
us: whether it were the light of our own reason, or the authority of some
credible person, or the declaration of Gods rev^aled will in his written word.
And on the other side, whatsoever action is done, either directly contrary to
the judgment and verdict of our own consciences, or at leastwise doubtingly
and before we are in some competent measure assured that we may lawfully do
it: that is it which S. Paul here denies to be of faith, and of which he
pronounces so peremptorily that it is (and that eo nomine) a sin.

About which use and signification of the word Faith. 17. What is here meant by
says.
we need not to trouble our selves, to fetch it from a trope, eithor of Heming.
in Romans 14. 1.
Metonymie, or Piscat. ibid.
Synecdoche, as some do. For though (as I say) it do not so often occur in
Scripture; yet is it indeed the primary and native signification of the word
(...) says, derived from the root (...) to persuade. Because all kinds of
Faith whatsoever consist in a kind of persuasion. You shall therefore find
the words, (...) which signifies properly to believe, and John 3. 3, 6. and
Acts 14. 1, 2.
(...) which signifies properly not to be persuaded, to be opposed as contrary
either to other in John 3. and Acts 14. and other places. To omit the frequent
use of the words (...) and Fides, in Greek and Latin authors in this
signification: observe but the passages of this very Chapter, and you will be
satisfied in it. At the second verse, Hic verse. 2.
(...) one believes that he may eat all things: that is, he is verily
persuaded in his conscience that he may as lawfully eat flesh as herbs, any
one kind of meat as any other, he makes no doubt of it. Again at the
fourteenth verse, Verse. 14.
(...), I know and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self.
That is, ^ steadfastly believe it as a most certain and undoubted truth. Again
at the two and twentieth verse Verse. 22.
(...); Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God: that is, art thou in
thy conscience persuaded that thou may lawfully partake any of the good
creatures of God? Let that persuasion suffice thee for the approving of thine
own heart in the sight of God: but trouble not the Church, nor offend thy
weaker brother by a needless and un^easonable ostentation of that thy
knowledge. Lastly, in this three and twentieth verse, Verse. 23.
(...), He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
that is, he that is not yet fully persuaded in his own mind, that it is
lawful for him to eat some kinds of meats, (as namely swines-flesh or
bloodings,) and yet is drawn against his own judgment to eat thereof
because he sees others so to do, or because he would be loath to undergo the
taunts and jeares of scorners, or out of any other poor respect: such a man is
cast and condemned by the judgment of his own heart as a transgressour,
because he adventureth to do that, which he does not believe to be lawful.
And then the Apostle proceeding ab hypothesi ad thesin, immediately reduces
that particular case into a general rule in these words, For whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin. By the process of which his discourse it may appear, that
by Faith no other thing is here meant, then such a persuasion of the mind and
conscience as we have now declared, and that the true purport and intent of
these words is but thus much in effect: Whosoever shall enterprise the doing of
any thing, which he verily believes to be unlawful, or at leastwise is not
reasonably well persuaded of the lawfulness of it, let the thing be otherwise
and in it self what it can be, lawful or unlawful, indifferent or necessary,
convenient or inconvenient, it mattereth not; to him it is a Sin howsoever.

Which being the plain evident and undeniable purpose of these words, I shall
not need to spend any more. 18. The application of the Text for the resolving
of sundry Questions:
breath either in the farther refutation of such conclusions as are
mis-inferred hence, which fall of themselves; or in the farther Explication of
the meaning of the Text, which already appears: but address my self rather
to the application of it. Wherein, because upon this great principle may depend
the resolution of very many Cases of Conscience, which may trouble us in our
Christian and holy walking: it will not be unprofitable to proceed by resolving
some of the most material doubts and questions, among those which have
occurred unto my thcughts by occasion of this Text in my meditations thereon.

First, it may be demanded, What power the Conscience has, to make a thing
otherwise good and lawful,. 19. The first Question resolved;
to become unlawful and sinful? and whence it has that power? I answer,
First, that it is not in the power of any man's judgment or conscience to alter
the natural condition of any thing whatsoever, either in respect of quality or
degree: but that still every thing that was good remains good, and every
thing that was evil remains evil; and that in the very same degree of good
or evil as it was before, neither better nor worse, any man's particular
judgment or opinion thereof notwithstanding. For the differences between good
and evil, and the several degrees of both, spring from such conditions as are
intrinsecall to the things themselves: which no Respectus non mutant naturam.
Outward respects, (and much less then men's opinions) can vary. He that
esteems any creature unclean, may defile himself, but he cannot bring
impurity upon that creature, by such his estimation. Secondly, that men's
judgments may make that which is good in its b Opinionostra nobis legem facit,
Ambros. de paradis.
own nature, (the natural goodness still remaining) become evil to them in
the use: essentially good, and quoad rem; but quoad hominem, and accidentally
evil. It is our Apostles own distinction in the fourteenth verse of this
Chapter: Nothing unclean of it self* but to him that esteems any thing to
be unclean, unclean to him. But then we must know withal, that it holds
not the other way. Men's judgments or opinions, although they may make that
which is good in it self, to become evil to them; yet they cannot make that
which is evil in it self, to become good either in it self, or to them. If a
man were verily persuaded, that it were evil to ask his father blessing, that
mis-perswasion would make it become evil to him: But if the same man should be
as verily persuaded that it were good to curse his father, or to deny him
relief being an unbeleever; that mis-perswasion could not make eith^r of them
become good to him. Some that persecuted the Apostles were persuaded they Ioh.
16. 2.
did God good service in it. It was Saint Paul's case before his conversion, who
Act. 26. 9.
verily thought in himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus. But those their persuasions would not serve to justify those
their actions. Saint Paul confesses himself to have been 1 Timothy 1. 13.
a persecuter, and blasphemer, and injurious for so doing although he followed
the guidance of his own conscience therein; and to have stood in need of mercy
for the remission of those wicked acts, though he did them ignorantly, and Act.
22. 3, 4. and Phil. 3. 6.
out of z^ale to the Law. The reason of which difference is, that which I
touched in the beginning, even because any one defect is enough to render an
action evil; and consequently a defect in the agent may do it, though the
substance of the action remain still (as it was) good: but all conditions must
concur to make an action good; and consequently a right intention in the
agent will not suffice thereunto, so long as the substance of the action
remains still (as it was) evil. Thirdly, that the Conscience has this power
over men's wills and actions by virtue of that unchangeable Law of God, which he
establishes by an ordinance of nature in our first creation: that the will of
every man (which is the fountain whence all our actions immediately flow)
should conform it self to the judgment of the practique understanding or
conscience, as to its proper and immediate rule, and yield it self to be
guided thereby. So that if the understanding through Error point out a wrong
way, and the will follow it, the fault is chiefly in the understanding, for
mis-guiding the will. But if the understanding show the right way, and the will
take a wrong: then the fault is merely in the will, for not following that
guide which God has set over it.

It may be demanded secondly, Whether or no in every particular thing we do,
an actual consideration of. 20. The second Question resolved;
the lawfulness and expediency there of be so requisite, as that for want
thereof we should sin in doing it? The reason of the doubt is, because
otherwise how should it appear to be of Faith? and Whatsoever is not of faith
is sin. I answer, First, that in matters of weight and worthy of
consultation, it is very necessary that the 1.
lawfulness and expediency of them be first diligently examined* before they
be enterprised. And secondly, that even in smaller matters the like examination
is 2.
needful, when there is any apparent cause of doubting. But thirdly, that in
such small and trivial matters, as it much skilleth not whether we do them or
no or whether 3. Vbi est suspicio, ibi discussio necessaria. B^rnard. Epist. 7.
we do this rather then that, and wherein no doubt arises to trouble us; an
actual consideration of their lawfulness or expediency is so far from being
requisite, that it would rather be troublesome and incommodious. True it is,
that all voluntary actions are done with some deliberation, more or less:
because it is the nature of the will to consult with the understanding in every
act else it should be irrational and brutish, Yet there are many things which
we daily do, wherein Ratio in rebus ma^isestis non inquiri^, sed statim
judicat. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 14. 4. ad 2.
the sentence of the understanding is so quick and present, because there is no
difficulty in them; that they seem to be, (and are therefore sometimes so
termed) actus indeliberati: (...) etc. Aristot. 1. Mag. Moral. 18.
such as are to sit down and to rise up, to pluck a flower as we walk in a
garden, to ask the time of the day or the name of the next town as we travel
by the way, to eat of this or that dish at the table, and the like. For the
doing of every of which it were (...). Aristot. 3. Ethn: 5.
a ridiculous servility to be imposed upon men, if they should be tied to a
district examination of the lawfulness and expediency thereof. There is not in
them dignus vindice nodus: and a man's time ought to be more precious unto him,
then to be trifled away in such needless and minute enquiries. It is even as
if we should tie a great learned man that is ready in his Latin tongue, to
bethink himself first of some grammar rule or example for the declining and
parsing of every word he were to speak, before he should adventure to utter a
Latin sentence. But as such a man is sufficiently assured out of the habit of
his learning, that he speaks congruously and with good propriety, though he
have no present actual reference to his Grammar rules: so here, an habitual
knowledge of the nature and use of indifferent things is sufficient to warrant
to the conscience the lawfulness of these common actions of life; so as they
may be said to be of faith, though there be no farther actual or particular
disquisition used about them. A very needful thing it is the whilst, for
Christian men to endeavor to have a right judgment concerning indifferent
things: without which it can scarcely be avoided, but that both their
Consciences will be full of distracting scruples within themselves, and their
conversations full of unbrotherly carriage toward others.. 21. The third
Question resolved.


It may be demanded thirdly, Since Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; What
measure of Faith, or what degree of Persuasion is necessary for the warranting
of our actions, so as less then that will not serve? I answer, that what is
here demanded cannot be positively defined by any peremptory and immovable
rules. There is most an end a Latitude in such things as these are; which may
be strained or extended more or less, according to the exigence of present
occasions, and as the different state or quality of particular businesses shall
require. There is a (...), a fullness of persuasion, arising from evident
infallible and demonstrative proofs, which is attaineable for the performance
of sundry duties both of civil Justice and of Religion. And where it may be
attained, it is to be endeavored after, (though it be not of absolute
necessity,) for we cannot make our assurances too strong. The Apostle uses
that word at the fifth verse, ( Verse 5. ^ic. plene certus sit. Heming.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind,) (...): it is a
metaphorical word, and seems to be borrowed from a Ship under Quasi plenis
velis seratur. Piscat. in Schol. ad Romans 14. 5.
full sail, that has both wind and tide with it to carry it with a straight
and speedy course to the desired point, and nothing to hinder it. But as men,
when they are to purchase lands, will desire and propose to have as good
assurance as by learned counsel can be devised; but yet must be content to
take such assurance as the sellers can make, or else they shall make but a few
markets: so although we may desire (ex abundanti) a full assurance of faith in
every weighty action we shall enterprise; yet ordinarily and in most things
we must content our selves to take up with a conjecturall, probable, and
moral certainty, or else we shall find very few things left for us to do.
Fides Logica is not to be expected in all cases: in some, and those the most,
Fides Ethica must serve the turn. Nay I say yet further, and I beseech you
(brethren) to take notice of it as a matter of special use both for the
directing and quieting of your consciences: that ordinarily and in most things
we need no other warrant for what we do then this only, that there is not
(to our knowledge) any Law either of Nature or Scripture against them. As the
Lawyers use to say of men's persons, Quisquis praesumitur osse ^onus, etc. The
Law takes every man for a good man and true, till his truth and honesty be
legally disproved; and as our Savior sometimes said, Luke 9. 50.
He that is not against us is for us: so in these matters we are to believe
all things to be lawful for us to do, which cannot be shown by good
evidence either of Scripture or Reason to be unlawful. Those men therefore go
quite the wrong way to work, to the fearful puzling of their own and other
men's consciences, who use to argue on this manner, [This I have no warrant to
do; for where is it commanded?] Whereas they ought rather to argue thus, [This
I have good warrant to do; for where is it forbidden?] Apply this now a little
to those Ceremonies, that for orders sake, and to add the greater sol^mnity to
sacred actions, are appointed in the Church; Wearing the Surplize, bowing at
the name of the Lord JESUS, kneeling at the holy, Communion, and the rest.
Though I might say, and that truly, that th^se also are commanded even by
divine authority in genere, that is to say, as they fall within the compass of
decent: Ceremoni^s, by virtue of that grand Ecclesiastical Canon, ( 1 Cor. 14.
40.
Let all things ^e done honestly and in order;) and that even in spacio too
they are commanded by the authority of those governors whom God has set over
us, and to whom we are bound in conscience, and by virtue of Gods commandment
to yield obedience: Yet I waive all this for the present, because it is not so
direct to the point in hand. Only I ask, Where are any of these things
forbidden? If they be, let it be shown: and that not by week collections, and
remote consequences, which are good for nothing but to engender strifes, and to
multiply disputes without end, but by direct and full evidence either of
Scripture-text or Reason; which (for any thing I know) was never yet done,
neither (as I verily believe) will ever be done. But if it cannot be shown
that these things are forbidden; without any more ado, the use of them is by
that sufficiently warranted. He that will not allow of this doctrine, besides
that he cherishes an error which will hardly suffer him to have a quiet
conscience: I yet fee not how he can reconcile his opinion with those sundry
passages of our Apostle, [ 1 Timothy 4. 4.
Every creature of God is good, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure, Romans 14. 14.
I know nothing is o^ it self unclean, 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things are lawful, etc.] From which passages we may with much safety
conclude, that it is lawful for us to do all those things, concerning which
there can be nothing brought of moment to prove them unlawful. Upon which
ground alone if we do them, we do them upon such a persuasion of faith as is
sufficient. Provided, that we have not neglected to inform our judgments the
best we could for the time past; and that we are ever ready withal to yield
our selves to better information, whenever it shall be tendered unto us for
the time to come.

It may be demanded fourthly, Suppose a man would feign do something, of the
lawfulness whereof he is. 22. The fourth Question.
not in his conscience sufficiently resolved; whether he may in any case do
it notwithstanding the reluctance of his Conscience, yea or no? As they write
of Herodot. in Clio; Sen^c. 3. do ira. 21.
Cyrus, that to make passage for his Army, he cut the great river Gyndes into
many smaller channels, which in one entire stream was not passable: so to make a
clear and distinct answer to this great question, I must divide it into some
lesser ones. For there are sundry things considerable in it; whether we respect
the Conscience, or the Person of the doer, or the Action to be done. As namely
and especially, in respect of the Conscience, whether the reluctance thereof
proceed from a settled and steadfast resolution, or from some doubtfulnesse only,
or but from some scruple? And in respect of the person, whether he be suijuris
his own master and have power to dispose of himself at his own choice in the
things questioned; of he be under the command, and at the appointment of
another? And in respect of the Action or thing to be done: whether it be a
necessary thing, or an unlawful thing, or a thing indifferent and arbitrary?
Any of which circumstances may quite alter the case, and so beget new
questions. But I shall reduce all to three questions: whereof the first shall
concern a resolved Conscience, the second a doubtful conscience, and the
third a scrupulous conscience.

The First Question then is, If the Conscience be firmly resolved, that the
thing proposed to be done is unlawful;. 23. as concerning a Resolved
conscience, answered in 2. conclusions The former
whether it may then be done, or no? Whereunto I answer in these two
conclusions. The first Conclusion. If the Conscience be firmly so resolved,
and that upon a true ground, (that is to say, if the thing be indeed unlawful,
and judged so to be) it may not in any case or for any respect in the world be
done. There cannot be a Quiagit contra conscientiam, qua credit Deum aliquid
prohibuisse, liceterret, contemnit Deum. Bonavent. 2. sent. did. 39.
imagined a higher contempt of God, then for a man to despise the power of his
own conscience: which is the highest, sovereignty under heaven, as being Gods
most immediate deputy for the ordering of his life and ways. Menand.
(...), a heathen man could say. Woeful is the estate of those men (unless
they repent) who for filthy lucre, or vain pleasure, or spiteful malice, or
tottering honor, or lazy ease, or any other reigning lust, darelye, or swear,
or cheat, or oppress, or commit filthiness, or steal, or kill, or slander,
or flatter, or betray, or do any thing that may advance their base ends:
nothing at all regarding the secret whisperings, or murmurings, no nor yet the
loud roarings, and bellowings of their own consciences there against. Pers.
Satyr. 5.
Stat contra ratio, and secretam gannit in aurem. It does so: but yet they
turn a deaf ear to it, and despise it. Wonder not, if when they out of the
terrors of their troubled consciences shall howl and roar in the ears of
the Almighty for mercy, or for some mitigation at least of their torment, he
then turn a deaf ear against them and despise them. Iam. 4. 17.
To him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin, James 4.
sin not to be excused by any plea or color: But how much more inexcusably
then is it sin to him, that knows the evil he should not do, and yet will
do it? There is not a proner way to Quod sit contra conscientiam aedificat ad
geheunam. c. 28. qu. 1. Omnes.. ex his.
hell, then to sin against conscience. Romans 14. 22.
Happy is he which condemns not himself in that which he allows: but most
wretched is he that allows himself to the practice of that, which in his
judgment he cannot but condemn. Neither makes it any difference at all here,
whether a man be otherwise sui juris* or not. For although there be a great
respect due to the higher powers in doubtful cases, (as I shall touch anon,)
yet where the thing required is simply unlawful, and understood so to be,
inferiors must absolutely resolve to disobey, whatsoever come of it. Gods
faithful servants have ever been most resolute in such exigents. Dan. 3. 16-18
We are not careful to answer thee in this matter; (belike in a matter of
another nature they would have taken care to have given the King a more
satisfactory, at least a more respective answer: but in this matter,) Be it
known to thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods. c. 11. qu. 3.
Quiresistit. ex. Augustino.
Da veniam Imperator, etc. You know whose answers they were. If we be sure God
has forbidden it, we sin against our own consciences if we do it, at the
command of any mortal man whosoever, or upon any worldly inducement
whatsoever. That is the first Conclusion.

The second is this. If a man be in his conscience fully. 24. the Later.
persuaded that a thing is evil and unlawful, which yet in truth is not so,
but lawful; the thing by him so judged unlawful, cannot by him be done
without sin. Even an erroneous conscience binds thus far, that a man cannot
go against it, and be guiltless: because his practice should then run cross
to his judgment; and so the thing done could not be of Faith. For if his
reason judge it to be evil, and yet he will do it, it argues manifestly that
he has a will to do evil: and so becomes a transgressour of that general
Law which binds all men to eschew all evil. Yet in this case we must admit
of some difference, according to the different nature of the things, and the
different condition of the persons. For if the things so judged unlawful be in
their own nature not necessary, but indifferent, so as they may either be done
or left undone without sin; and the person withal be sui juris in respect
of such things, no superior power having determined his liberty therein: then,
although he may not do any of these things, by reason of the contrary
persuasion of his conscience, without sin; yet he may without si^ne leave
them undone. As for example, Say a man should hold it utterly unlawful (as
some erroneously do,) to play at cards or dice, or to lay a wager, or to cast
lots in trivial matters: if it be in truth lawful to do every of these
things, (as I make no question but it is, so they be done with sobriety and
with due circumstances,) yet he that is otherwise persuaded of them cannot by
reason of that persuasion do any of them without sin. Yet, for so much as they
are things no way necessary, but indifferent, both in their nature, and for
their use also, no superior power having enjoined any man to use them:
therefore he that judges them unlawful may abstain from them without sin,
and so indeed he is in conscience bound to do, so long as he continues to be
of that opinion. But now on the other side, if the things so mis-judged to be
unlawful b^ any way necessary* ^ither in respect of their own nature, or by
the injunction of authority: then the person is by that his error brought into
such a strait between two sins, as he can by no possible means avoid both,
so long as he persisteth in that his error. For both if he do the thing, h^
goes against the persuasion of his conscience, and that is a great sin: and
if he do it not, either he omitteth a necessary duty, or else disobeyeth
lawful authority, and to do either of both, is a sin too. Out of which
s^are since there is no way of escape but one, which is to rectify his
judgment, and to quit his pernicious error: it concerns every man therefore
that unfainedly desires to do his duty in the fear of God, and to keep a
good conscience, not to be too stiff in his present apprehensions, but to
examine well the principles and grounds of his opinions; strongly suspecting
that wind that drives him upon such rocks, to be but a blast of his own
fancy, rather then a breathing of the holy Spirit of truth. Once this is most
certain, that whoseever shall adventure to do any thing repugnant to the
judgment of his own conscience, (be that judgment true, or be it false,)
shall commit a grievous sin in so doing: (...), because it cannot be of faith,
and what soever is not of faith is sin.

This is now where the conscience apparently inclines the one way. But say the
scales hang even, so as a. 25. as concerning a doubting conscience
man cannot well resolve whether way he should rather take! Now he is -- animo
nunc huc, nunc fluctuatilluc. Virg. Aeneid. 10.
in one mind, by and by in another; but constant in neither: right S. James
his James 1. 8.
(...) a double minded man. This is it we call a doubting conscience:
concerning which the second question is, what a man ought to do in case of
doubtfulnesse. Perfect directions here, (as in most delib^ratives) would
require a large discourse: because there are so many considerable
circumstances, that may vary the case; especially in respect of the cause from
which that doubtfulnesse of mind may spring. Many times it arises from mere
fickleness of mind, or weakness of judgment; as the 1.
lightest things are soonest driven out of their place by the wind: Evenas S.
James says, Ibid.
a double minded man is wavering in all his ways; and S. Paul speaks of some
that were like Ephesians. 4. 14. 2.
children, off and on, soon wherryed about with every blast of doctrine.
Sometimes it proceeds from tenderness of conscience, which is indeed a very
blessed and gracious thing: but yet (as tender things may soon miscary, if
they be not the more choicely handled,) very obnoxious through Satan's
diligence and subtilty to be wrought upon to dangerous inconveniences.
Sometimes it may proceed from the probability of those reasons that seem to
stand 3.
on either side, betwixt which it is not easy to judge which are strongest: or
from the differing judgments and opinions of learned and godly men thereabout:
and 4.
from many other causes: But for some general resolution of the Question,
(what is to be done where the conscience is doubtful?) I answer.

First, that if the doubtfulnesse be not concerning the lawfulness of any of
the things to be done considered. 26. answered in 3. Conclusions: the 1.
simply and in themselves, but of the expediency of them as they are compared
one with another; (as when of two things proposed at once, wherefore one must,
and but one can be done, I am sufficiently persuaded of the lawfulness of
either, but am doubtful whether of the two rather to pitch upon:) in such a
case, the party ought first to weigh the conveniences and inconveniences of
both as well and advisedly as 1.
he can by himself alone; and to do that which then shall appear to him to be
subject to the fewer and lesser inconveniences. Or if the reasons seem so
equally strong on both sides, that he cannot of himself decide the doubt; then
secondly, if the (...). Arist. 3. Ethic. 5
matter be of weight and worth the while, he should do well to make 2.
his doubts known to some prudent and plous man (especially to his own
spiritual Pastor, if he be a man meetly qualified for it,) resolving to rest
upon his judgment, and to follow his direction. Or if the matter be of small
moment, he may then thirdly do whether of both he has best liking to: (as the
Apostle says in one particular case, and it may be applied to many more, 1
Cor. 7. 36.
Let him do what he will, he sins not:) resting his conscience upon this
persuasion, that so long as he is unfainedly elesirous to do for the best, and
has not been negligent to use all Non ti^i imputabitur ad ^ulpa, quod in vitus
ignoras. Augustine. de not. and great.
requisite diligence to inform himself aright, God will accept of his good
intention therein, and pardon his error, if he shall be mistaken in his
choice.

But secondly, If the question be concerning the very lawfulness of the thing
it self, whether it may be lawfully. 27. the second;
done, or no; and the conscience stand in doubt, because reasons soome to be
probable both pro and contrit, and there are learned men as well of the one
opinion as of the other, etc. as we see it is (for instance) in the question
of Usury and of second marriage after divorce, and in sundry other doubtful
cases in moral divinity: in such a case the person (if he be sui juris,) is
certainly bound to Nilsaciendum, de quo dubites sit necne recte factum. Ci^.
hb. 1. de Ossic.
forbear the doing of that thing of the lawfulness where of he so doubts:
and if he forbear it not, he sins. It is the very point the Apostle in this
verse intends to feach; and for the confirming whereof he vowcheth this Rule
of the Text: He that doubts, says he, is damned if he eat; he is (...),
condemned of his own conscience; because he does that willingly where of he
doubts, when he has free liberty to let it alone, no necessity urging him
thereunto. And the reason why he ought rather to forbear then to adventure the
doing of that whereof he doubts, is, because in doubtful cases wisdom
would that the safer part should be chosen. And that part is safer, which if we
choose, we are sure we shall do well; then that, which if we choose, we know
not but we may do ill. As for example, in the instances now proposed. If I
doubt of the lawfulness of Vsu^y, or of marrying after divorce, I am sure that
if I marry not, nor let out my money, I shall not sin in so abstaining: but
if I shall do either of both doubtingly. I cannot be without some fear lest I
should sin in so doing; and so those actions of mine being not done in faith,
must needs be sin, even by the Rule of the Text, (...), For whatsoever is not
of faith is sin.

But then thirdly, if the liberty of the agent be determined by the command of
some superior power to. 28. the third.
whom he owes obedience; so as he is not now sui juris ad hoc, to do or not
to do at his own choice, but to do what he is command this one circumstance
quite alters the whole case, and now he is bound in conscience to do the
thing commanded; his doubtfulnesse of mind whether that thing be lawful or no,
notwithstanding. To do that whereof he doubts, where h^ has sree liberty to
leave it undone, brings upon him (as we have already shown) the guilt of
wilful transgression: but not so where he is not left to his own liberty. And
where lawful authority prescribes in Alterutram partem, there the liberty ad
utramque partem contradictionis is taken away from so many as are under that
authority. If they that are over them have determined it one way; it is not
thenceforth any more at their choice, whether they will take that way or the
contrary, but they must go the way that is appointed them without gainsaying or
grudging. And if in the deed done at the command of one that is endued with
lawful authority there be a sin, it must go on his score that requires it
wrongfully, not on his that does but his duty in obeying. A Prince commands
his Subjects to serve in his Wars; it may be the quarrel is unjust, it may
be there may appear to the understanding of the subject great likelyhoods of
such injustice: yet may the subject for all that fight in the quarrel, yea he
is bound in conscience so to do, nay he is deep in disloyalty and treason if
he refuse the service, whatsoever pretensions he make of conscience for such
refusal: Neither need that fear trouble him lest he should bring upon himself
the guil^ of innocent blood; for the blood that is unrighteously Is da^nu^ dat,
qui jubet da^e: ej^s vero nulla culpa est, cui parere necesse sit. L. 169 st.
de div. Reg jur.
shed in that quarrel, he must answer for, that set him on work, not he that
spilt it. And truly it is a great wonder to me, that any man endued with
understanding, and that is able in any measure to weigh the force of those
precepts and reasons which bind inferiors to yield obedience to their
superiors, should be otherwise minded in cases of like nature. Whatsoever is
commanded us by those whom God has set over us, either in Church,
Commonwealth, or Family, ( Bernard de p^ecept. and disp^nsat.
Quod tamen non sit certuns displicere Deo, says Saint Bernard,) which is not
evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought to be of us received and
obeyed no otherwise, then as if God himself had commanded it: because God
himself has commanded us to Romans 13. 1.
obey the higher powers, and to 1 Pet. 2. 13.
submit ourselves to their ordinances. Say it be not well done of them to
command it: Sed enim quid hoc refert tud? says he; What is that to thee? Let
them look to that whom it concerns: Toll quod tuum est, and vade: Do thou
what is thine own part faithfully, and never trouble thy self further. Ipsum
quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum in his quae aperte non sunt contra Deum,
^andire debemus; Bernard still. Gods Vicegerents must be heard and obeyed in
all things that are not manifestly contrary to the revealed will of God.

But the thing required is against my conscience, may. 29. Sundry objections
removed: the first;
some say; and I may not go against my conscience, for any man's pleasure.
Judge I pray you what perverseness is this, when the blessed Apostle commands
thee Romans 13. 5.
to obey for conscience sake, that thou should disobey, and that for
conscience sake too: He charge thee upon thy conscience to be subject; and
thou pretendest thy conscience to free thee from subjection. This by the way;
now to the poy^t. Thou say it is against thy conscience: I say again, that
(in the case whereof we now speak, the case of doubtsulnesse,) it is not
against thy conscience. For doubting properly is Isido^.
motu^ indifferens in utramque parteni contradictionis; when the mind is held
Du^ius, incertus quasi d^arum viarum. Isid 10. Etym. (...).
in suspense between two ways, uncertain whether of both to take to; when
the scales hang even (as I said before) and in aequilibrio, without any notable
propension or inclination to the one side more then to the other. And surely
where things hang thus even, if the weight of authority will not cast the scale
either way; we may well suppose, that either the authority is made very light,
or else there is a great fault in the beam^. Know (brethren) the gainsaying
conscience is one thing, and the doubting conscience another. That which is
done repugnanto conscientid, the conscience of the doer slatly gainsaying it,
that is indeed against a mana conscience, (the conscience having already passed
a def^nitive sentence the one way:) and no respect or circumstance whatsoever
can free it from sin. But that which is done dubitanto conscientid, the
conscience of the doer only doubting of it and no more; that is intruth no more
against a man's conscience then with it, (the conscience as yet not having
passed a definitive sentence either way:) and such an action may either b^ a
sin, or no sin: according to those qualifications which it may receive from
other respects and circumstances. If the conscience have already passed a
judgment upon a thing, and condemned it as simply unlawful; in that case it
is true that a man ought not by any means to do that thing, no not at the
command of any Magistrate, no not although his conscience have pronounced a
wrong sentence, and erred in that judgment: for then he should do it,
repugnante conscientia, he should go directly against his own conscience,
which he ought not to do whatsoever come of it. In such a case certainly: he
may not obey the Magistrate: yet let him know thus much withal, that he
sins too in disobeying the Magistrate; from which sin the following of the
judgment of his own conscience cannot acquit him. And this is that fearful
perplexity whereof I spoke, whereinto many a man casts himself by his own
crrour and obstinaey, that he can neither go with his conscience, nor against
it, but he shall sin. And who can help it, if a man will needs cherish an
error, and persist in it? But now if the conscients be only doubtful whether
a thing be lawful or no, but have not as yet passed a peremptory judgment
against it, (yea although Plus est standum praecepto prelati^ quam
conscientiae. Bonavent. 2. sent. distinct. 39.
it rather incline to think it unlawful:) in that case if the Magistrate
shall command it to be done, the subject with a good conscience may do it, nay
he cannot with a good conscience resuse to do it, though it be dubitante
conscientia.

But you will yet say, that in doubtful cases the safer part is to be chosen.
So say I too; and am content that. 30. the Second;
rule should decide this question: only let it be rightly applied. Thou
think it safer, where thou doubtest of the unlawfulness, to forbear then
to do: as for example, if thou doubtest whether it be lawful to kneel at the
Communion, it is safest in thy opinion therefore for thee not to kneel. So
should I think too, if thou were left merely to thine own liberty. But thou
do not consider how thou art caught in thine own net, and how the edge of
thine own weapon may be turned upon thee point blank not to be avoided, thus.
If authority command thee to kneel, which whether it be lawful for thee to
do, or not, thou doubtest; it cannot choose but thou must needs doubt also,
whether thou may lawfully disobey, or not. Now then here apply thine own
Rule, In dubiis pars tutior, and see what will come of (...) Judge, since thou
can not but doubt in both cases, whether it be not the safer of the two, to
obey doubtingly, then to disobey doubtingly. Gregor.
Tene certum, demitte incertum, is S. Gregory his rule: where there is a
oertainty, and an uncertainty, let the uncertainty go, and hold to that which
is certain. Now the general is certain, that thou art to obey the Magistrate
in all things not contrary to the will of God; but the particular is
uncertain, whether the thing now commanded thee by the Magistrate be contrary
to the will of God: (I say uncertain to thee, because thou doubtest of it.)
Deal safely therefore, and hold thee to that which is certain; and obey.

But thou will yet allege, that the Apostle here condemns the doing of any
thing, not only with a gainsaying,. 31. the Third;
but even with a doubting conscience: because doubting also is contrary to
faith; and he that doubts is even for that condemned, if he eat. Oh beware
of misapplying Scripture! it is a thing easily done, but not so easily
answered. I know not any one gap that has let in more and more dangerous
errors into the Church, then this: that men take the words of the sacred Text
fitted to particular occasions, and to the condition of the times wherein they
were written; and then apply them to themselves and others as they find them,
without due respect had to the differences that may be between those times and
cases, and the present. Sundry things spoken in Scripture agreeably to that
infancy of the Church, would sort very ill with the Church in her fullness of
strength and stature: and sundry directions very expedient in times of
persecution, and when believers lived mingled with Insidels, would be very
unseasonably urged where the Church is in a peaceable and flourishing estate,
enjoying the favor and living under the protection of gracious and religious
Princes. Thus the Constitutions that the Apostles made concerning Deacons and
Widows in those primitive times, are with much importunity, but very
importunely withal, urged by the Disciplinarians: And sundry other like things
I might instance in of this kind, worthy the discovery, but that I fear to
grow tedious. Briefly then, the Apostles whole discourse in this Chapter, and
so wheresoever else he touches upon the point of Scandals, is to be understood
only in that case where men are left to their own liberty in the use of
indifferent things: the Romans, Corinthians, and others to whom S. Paul wrote
about these matters, being not limited any way in the exercise of their liberty
therein by any over ruling authority. But where the Magistrates have
interposed, and thought good upon mature advice to impose Laws upon those that
are under them, whereby their liberty is (not infringed, as some unjustly
complain, in the inward judgment, but only) limited in the outward exercise
of it: there the Apostolical directions will not hold in the same absolute
manner, as they were delivered to those whom they then concerned; but only in
the equity of them, so far forth as the cases are alike, and with such meet
qualifications and mitigations, as the difference of the cases otherwise does
require. So that a man ought not out of private fancy, or merely because he
would not be observed for not doing as others do, or for any the like weak
respects, to do that thing of the lawfulness whereof he is not competently
persuaded, where it is free for him to do otherwise: which was the case of
these weak ones among the Romans, for whose sakes principally the Apostle
gave these directions. But the authority of the magistrate intervening so
alters the case, that such a forbearance as to them was necessary, is to as
many of us as are commanded to do this or that altogether unlawful; in regard
they were free, and we are bound: for the reasons alr^ady shown, which I now
rehearse not.

But you will yet say, (for in point of obedience m^n are very loath to yield,
so long as they can find any. 32. and the Fourth.
thing to plead,) those that lay these burdens upon us, at least wise should
do well to satisfy our doubts, and to inform our consciences concerning the
lawfulness of what they enjoyne; that so we might render them obedience with
better cheerfulness. How willing are we sinful men to l^ave the blame of our
miscariages any where rather then upon our selves! But how is it not
incongruous the while, that those men should prescribe rules to their
governors, who can scarcely brook their governors should prescribe Laws to
them? It were good we would first learn how to obey, ere w^e take upon us to
teach our betters how to govern. How ever, (...). Solon. apud Stobae. Sermon. 3.
what governors are bound to do, or what is fit for them to do^, in the poin^
of information; that is not now the question. If they fail in any part of
their bounden duty, they shall be sure to reckon for it one day: but their
failing cannot in the mean time ^xcuse thy disobedienoe. Although I think it
would prove a hard tas^e, for whosoever should undertake it, to show that
Superiors are always bound to inform the cons^iences of their inferiors
concerning the lawfulness of every thing they shall command. If sometimes they
do it, where they see it exp^dient or needful; sometimes again (and that
perhaps of^^er,) it may be thought more expedient for them, and more
conducible for the public peace and safety, only to make known to the
people what their pleasures are, reserving to themselves the reasons thereof. I
am sure, in the point of Eccl^siasticall cer^mo^ies and Constitutions, (in
which ^ase the aforesaid allegations are usually most stood upon) this has
been abundantly done in our Church, not only in the learned writings of sundry
private men, but by the public declaration also of authority, as is to be
seen at large in the preface commonly printed before the book of Common prayer
concerning that argument^ enough to satisfy those that are peaceable, and not
disposed to stretch their wirs to cavil at things established. And thus much
of the second Question, touching a doubting conscience: whereon I have insisted
the longer, because it is a point both so proper to the Text, and where at so
many have stumbled.

There remains but one other Question, and that of far smaller difficulty;
What is to be done, when the. 33. as concerning a scrupulous Conscience.
conscience is scrupulous? I call that a scruple, when a man is reasonably well
persuaded of the lawfulness of a thing, yet has withal some jealousies and
fears le^t perhaps it should prove unlawful. Such scruples are most incident
to men of melancholy dispositions, or of timorous spirits; especially if they
be tender conscienced withal: and they are much increased by the false
suggestions of satan; by reading the books, or hearing the Sermons, or
frequenting the company of men more strict, precise, and austere in sundry
points, then they need or ought to be; and by sundry other means which I now
mention not. Of which scruples it behooveth every man, first, to be wary that
he do not at all admit them, if he can choose: or, if he cannot wholly avoid
them, that secondly he endeavor so far as may be to eject them speedily out
of his thoughts, as satan's snares, and things that may breed him worser
inconveniences: or, if he cannot be so rid of them, that then thirdly he
resolve to go on according to the more probable persuasion of his mind, and
despise those scruples. And this he may do with a good conscience, not only
in things commanded him by lawful authority, but even in things indifferent
and arbitrary, and wherein he is left to his own liberty.

Much more might have been added for the farther both declaration and
confirmation of these points. But. 34. The Conclusion.
you see I have been forced to wrap things together, that deserve a more full
and distinct handling, that I might hold some proportion with the time. I had a
purpose, briefly to have comprised the sum of what I have delivered,
concerning a gainsaying, a doubting, and a scrupulous conscience, in some few
conclusions for your better remembrance and to have added also something by way
of direction, what course might be the most probably taken for the correcting
of an erro^cous conscience, for the settling of a doubtful conscience, and for
the quieting of a scrupulous conscience. But it is more then time that I should
give place to other business: and the most, and most material of those
directions, have been here and there occasionally touched in that which has
been delivered already: in which respect I may the better spare that labor.
Beseech we God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ so to endue us all with the
grace of his holy Spirit, that in our whole conversations we may unfainedly
endeavor to preserve a good conscience and to yield all due obedience to him
first, and then to every Ordinance of man for his sake.

Now to this Father, Son, and blessed Spirit, three persons, and one eternal
God, be ascribed all the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, both now and for
evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

