THE SECOND DAY OF THE FIRST Week of the most excellent, learned, and divine
Poet, William, Lord Bartas.

Done out of French into English Heroical verse by THOMAS VVINTER, Master of
Arts.

Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus Interpres.

Hor. de art Poet. LONDON, Printed for James Shaw. 1603.

To his Translation.
GO little echo of another voice,
Tell in thy mother tongue a strangers mind.
And when thou come abroad, and find choice
Of readers differing in their various kind,
Reeccho back unto the gentle spirit,
Such thanks as his judicious skill shall merit.
But if thou meet with any dunsing lauell,
That is an homager to ignorance,
And yet does enuiously presume to cavil,
And blunder out such words as these by chance:
That he sees not how Bartas does surpass,
Divide his word, and turn him back the Ass.
TO THE HONORABLE hands of the most noble and valorous Knight, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Captain of her Majesty's Guard,
Lieutenant of the county of Cornwall, and Governor of the I Will of Iersey.
BEing desirous (my honorable Lord) to exhibit some testimony of that ardent
desire which I have to do your Lordship service, I am enforced to imitate that
poor man, which wanting better means to express his affection, offered his
hands full of running water to Artax^rxes. For, knowing your Lordships love to
learning, (for Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem) and having no invention
of mine own, I have boldly adventured to draw water from another man's
fountain, and to commend this poor translation to your favorable censure and
honorable protection. Which I do the more humbly desire, for that I know your
Lordships honorable name will be a sufficient bulwark against those snarling
dogs, Quibus innatum est, vt non pro feritate, sed pro consuetudine latrent,
which bark more of custom then of curstness; which being guilty to
themselves of their own imperfections, and having such muddie wits, that a man
would swear they were borne at Puddle wharfe, do notwithstanding labor to
build their own reputation upon other men's disgraces; and by disgorging their
malicious censures upon the painful endeavors of all those which either
diligently write, or painfully translate, do think to purchase a lease of
eternal commendation. I will not blot my paper with any commendation of my
Author, who was so noble for his birth, so famous for his learning, and so
admirable for his invention; lest I should seem to hang out a bush where good
wine is already known to be sold, or to light a candle when the Sun is in
his vertical point. For if he prove any where distastful to your judicious
understanding, I must ascribe the fault to my self, which have done him
injury, to cloth him with a suit so ill fitting to his proportion. But how
mean soever it be, my humble request is, that your Lordship will accept it as
a pledge of his dutiful love, which is desirous to be ever at your Lordships
commandment. And so humbly presuming to kiss your fair hands, I pray
continually for the happy success of all your honorable deseignements.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, TH. VVINTER.

In Gulielmi Salustij primae Hebdomadis Diem secundum a Thoma Wintero Anglice
reddi^um.
QVod tibi materiem tantam, tam nobile pensum
Sumpsisti, valde laudo applaudoque libenter.
Nominis auspicio quid conuenientius aptes,
Quam quod nunc proc^dis opus tam diuite vena?
Quem potuit decuisse magis tot scribere fumos,
Fulmina cum ventis, tempestatesque sonoras,
Vnde repent ruit lapis ille c^^aunius atris
Nubibus excussus, cum Jupiter intonat alte;
Quis melius nimbos and roscida tempora dicat,
Atque pruinosos grumos, cum stiria pendet
Et glacies per quam tecti suggrundia squalent;
Aeris and quicquid dat contignatio triplex,
Qua Natura locans aeterni frigoris arcem
Rorat agros, atque vnde Iouis distringitur ira:
Quam qui fers Hyemis nomen? quippe ille putatur
Nimborumque niuisque pater pluuialibus astris.
Phoebus auus, Tellus matter, matertera nubes,
Aer circus, vbi sese haec miracula pandunt,
Quo natura suam solet exercere palestram.
Macte; tuum vatem vates imitare priorem,
Floribus ornatus vernantia tempora posthaec
Persequere, vt qui nunc nobis tot dira minando
Luxuriem mundique decus frondare videris;
Obstrictis ventis, and factus, mitior auras
Dando salutares, dicare Salustius alter.
Io. Sanfordus.

In secundi Diei primae Hebdomadis versionem.
FRendis Salusti mutatio tanta diei
Quod sit facta tuae? quod quae lux vnica Gallis
Emicuit primo: tandem suffulserit Anglis?
Improbus unjust praecordia liuor adurit,
Et te Naturae capiunt obliuia sacrae,
Quae de vicino fieri vult lumine lumen.
Et tamen hos oculo si quis conspexerit aequo
Winteri radios, quibus est lux addita luci,
Dixerit in Gallis micuisse crepuscula verbis,
Sed medium fulsisse diem sub sole Britanno.
Ed. Lapworth.

Eiusdem de Die translato.
EST fraudulenti trahere de die diem,
Transfer forsan de Die Diem est scelus:
Si sit vel error, error hic culpa caret,
Fietque foelix scelere Translator suo.
Ed. Lapw.

To the Translator.
Heaven, Labor, Art, all jointly did conspire
To crown thy verse with neuer-fading bays:
First Gods sweet breath did teach thy Muse t'aspire
To caroll out Lord Bartas heavenly lays.
Then thy high thoughts to second this rare choice,
Drove forth with matchless pains thy great intent:
And last to sing Gods notes with Angels voice,
Art did consort to make a full concent.
Great choice, great pains, great art, all good, all great*
All three thy little book do greatly praise:
Why strive I then in Honors chair to seat
Thy Muse, which of it self, it self can raise?
O then brave impe of Phoebus still pursue
Thy great deseigne, advance thy Poetry:
Let envious France by reading find this true,
That Bartas scorns not our rich liuerie.
Then shall the French an English wonder see,
How Winter yields a spring of Poesy.
Douglas Castillion.

John Dauies of Hereford in praise of the Author, and Translator.
WInter, a man would think thy works are cold,
That did but hear thy name, or know thy kind,
But yet such heat this work of thine does hold,
As in a Summers day we scarce shall find
Among our hote-brain'd Poets. Thou have hit
Upon that heat (though with another fire)
That did inflame the rarest Poets wit,
That ere in France (worlds garden) did respire.
Bartas, the bosom of whose blessed Muse
With Homers sacred fire (refined) did burn:
Did (as should seem) into thy breast infuse
That fire by touching him; for thou do turn
His heat to thine, and thine to his, if so
Both in this Tract translated thou do show.
His opinion Touching translators, and translation.
TO turn one tongue t'another is a trick
That many tongues-men can in prose perform;
But when the tongues on numbered feet do stick,
It Is hard two tongues discordant to conform.
Who word for word, and phrase for phrase translates
In verse, may vaunt he earnes his Authors fame:
But, but few tongues are tide to our English pates,
That can with ease directly do the same.
Many translators have we, but not many
That turn not the Authors meaning with his words.
Famous were England if she had not any,
That to them selves such liberty affords.
To translate so, is to adulterate:
And all Adulterers God and men do hate.
Omne bonum, Dei donum.
The Argument.
Our Poet intending a D^scou^se of the worlds creation, and having in the first
day of this Week indiciously declared that the world had a beginning, against
the absurd paradoxes of some doting philosophers, which held that it was from
all eternity: and ha^ing both taxed and answered their a^ heisticall
curiosity, which busy their ^dle and addle brains, about enquiring what God
did before the creation: proving also that there can be but one world, and
confuting diverse other errors of the anci^nts: shows, that God first made
some confused matter or Chaos, of which he afterward framed the particular
parts of the whole body of this world. And then shortly and sweetly discoursing
of the light, the d^y and the night, ^ith the singular commodities redounding
to mankind by their successiue reuolutions, he ends that book with the
creation of the Angels. All which being learnedly performed, ^e addresseth
himself in this second book to the d^ciphering of the second days creation.
Wherei^, first he lays open the vanity of the lascivious and wenching
pamphleters of our age, which prodigally spend their precious time, in adorning
some degenerate imp^, or loose-liuing Lady with those honors, which should be
only confined to virtuous design^ments. Then he inuoketh the ass^stance of
Gods spirit, and briefly proposing his chaste intention, falls directly to the
handling of the ^lements, their number and composition in mixed bodies; of the
commodity and inconvenience of their agreeing or disagreeing proportions in
man's body: then reasoning of their continuance, he refutes di^erse errors
touching the generation, corruption and alteration of things in their matter
and form. After, breathing a while, he enters a discourse of the Air, showing
how it is divided, what the temperature of each region is, with the causes of
the same: and how the mists, the blasts, the clouds, the deaw, the ye and
other waterie meteors are engendered: and consequently entreats of the falling
stars, and comets, with the rest of the fiery impressions which are often
seen in the two extreme regions of the air. Hereunto he adioyneth a
philosophical narration of the thunder and lightning, touching in brief their
strange yet certain effects; not omitting, for the more absolute complement of
his discourse, to assign probable reasons of the rainbow, the circles about
the Sun and Moon, and the many Suns and Moons, which affright the
ignorant with their appearance. But albeit he shows himself a Philosopher in
producing these natural reasons, yet he would have every man to show himself
a Christian, in not wholly resting satisfied with these second causes; but ever
so to acknowledge the wisdom of the Almighty, that he rather admire the
creator, then adore the creature: adding thereunto the religious use, which
Christians should make of these impressions and prodigious signs. And that he
may clip the wings of man's pride, which is wont to soar beyond it self in
self-conceits, he demonstrates how it is impossible for the most cunning
naturalist, to render sound reasons of all accidents. Then leaving the air, he
overthrows their opinion which hold but three elements, and shows the
difference between that elementarie and our compounded fire; adjoining thereunto
a brief treatise of the matter, the motion and number of the celestial
spheres. And answering those which are of opinion, that there are no waters
above the firmament, he assumes a fit occasion to mention the general flood;
with an elegant description whereof he ends this second days work. All which
excellent points he adornes with such pleasant illustrations, that Omne tulit
punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.


The second day of the first Week of the Lord Bartas.
THose Learned wits, whose soothing rimes do change The v^nity of lascivious
Poets.

Foul into fair, and lewd with chaste do range,
And of a bastard, dwarf, blind, ^^irting boy
Do make a god, nay all the gods to sway:
They lose both seed and travel of their hand,
In plowing of th'vngratefull fruitless sand.
And setting nets for to entrap the wind
Of some vain praise, which does their wisdom blind,
They imitate the Spiders curious pain,
Which weaues a needless web withou^en gain.
But though more dear then time we naught possess,
Yet would I grieve their loss of that the less,
If by their guilefull verse their too much Art
Made not their hearers share with them a part.
The sugared bait of those their learned writs,
Does shroud that poison, which the younger wits
Quaffe down with breathless draughts, and loves hot wine,
Making them host at drunken Bacchus sign,
Distempers so their stomachs, that they feed
On such ill meats as no good humors breed.
Their charming numbers with a mighty glaunce,
Cast headlong down fresh readers to mischaunce.
Which by a vain desire soon make them ^lide,
From this lives mountain, where they might abide.
The songs to which their Muse sweet notes does frame,
Are bellows of lewd lust, which do inflame
That wanton heat, which yet young tender age,
In modest ashes keeps in vassallage.
The chaste in^e^tion of the L. Ba^tas.
Now all such as I am, I have devoted
That art and wit which heaven has me allotted,
To the honor of great Jove, such verse to frame,
As virgins reading need not blush for shame.
Inuocatio.
Thou Learnings spring, soul of this worldly round,
Since thou will have my low-tun'd verse to sound
Of thy great praise, grant that my keaking quill,
Celestial Nectar ever may distill:
And fill this volume with her horns store,
Which cherisht once a god then late y bore.
That in some rate it may be correspondent,
To the greatness of so grave an argument.
Rid clean the path, which now I am to tread,
From bushie brakes which do it ouer-spread.
Throughout my course so lend me still thy ligh^,
That to my Inn I may arrive ere night.
The chaos created of nothing
That endless end* broad length and height profound,
Which yet no world, yet was a worldly round:
That massy lump which nourisht civil hatred,
Was instantly of very naught created:
And was that fertile soil from which should grow
Earth, water, air, the fire, and heaven also.
The compositio^ of ^he fo^^e ^lement^ i^ mixed ^odies.
Now these four brethren two-twind generation,
Thus made, not only keep their several station,
But are the simples too, to make the mixed
Of every thing, whereon our sense is fixed.
Whether their only qualities remain,
And in each part of each mixed body reign:
Or their essential forms be all combined,
These four as one sole body are defined.
Si^ile.
As in a crystal glass we see the blood
Of grapes, allaide with Achelou^ flood.
Or as the meat and drink* which we have singled
Out for our nouriture, in us is mingled,
And by our inward heat yields moisture, good
To be converted into purest blood.
This in a burning brand we see full plain, Example.

His firetowers up, his heavenly home t'attaine,
His air to smoke, hi^ earth to ashes goes,
Out of his knobs the boiling water flows.
Like war our bodies quiet peace maintains:
For fire and air in vital spir^ts remains,
The flesh is earth, the humors water be.
Yea in each particle we plainly see
Each of these mingled, though some ones minority,
Among his brethren bears not like authority.
So in the blood, those muddie lees which crave
(As being earthie) lowest place to have,
Are melancholy; in the middle swimmes
The purest blood like air; about the brimmes
Lies watrie phlegm; and on the top there ^ubbles
That fiery choler which so many troubles.
Yet in the body no one element One element ^lvv^^es predomin^nt in ^ixt
bodies.

Does daily play the king, but is content
To take his turn, and so his subiect^ awes,
As if they take new Lord, he makes new laws.
As each good townse-man blood or wealth naught heeding, Simile.

Is ruled, which erst in ruling made proceeding
In a free city, which does lose his fashion,
Soon as the rulers suffer alteration.
For the light vulgar tossed with every wind,
Are to their princes humors still enclind
Cameleon-like, which change of colors wears,
As often as change of object him anneareth. Example.

So the element of which wine most partaketh,
Now moist, now dry, now hot, now cold it makes.
And as these four are coupled more or less,
So do the effects and taste the same express:
So that in time the juice of grapes unripe,
Becomes new wine to fill the empty pipe;
And that same new grows good as it grows old*
Which kept too long, for vinegar is sold.
Any ele^ent excessi^ely predomi^^nt, i^ dangerous to the body.
Now whiles the Prince which keeps the rest in aw,
Does subiugate his greatness to the law;
He rules in safety and does still increase,
His commons joy for their so happy peace.
But if of subjects blood which he does spill
By dint of sword, he never take his fill,
At length his rage dispeopling so his land,
Must leave his realm to savage beasts command*
Right so as long as some one element,
Does rule the rest with modest government;
And a proportion in the humors found,
Though some do more then other some abound,
The body's in fair plight, as those fair lines,
Drawn on the surface, are thereof good signs.
Caligula.
But if that cruel king it represent,
Who wished that all of his great regiment,
Had one sole neck, that at one chop he might
Butcher all Rome in furious despite:
Then does it breed corruption of the rest,
And the house whereof the tyrant is possessed,
Does by degrees decay; so that the eye
The bodies total change may soon descrie.
Excess o^ moist^re c^^set^ the dropsy.
So whensoere the liver is oppressed
With moisture, which it cannot well digest,
Which runs along the flesh, it makes it swell,
And stops the conduit pipes which should e^pell
Moist excrements, and bolteth fast the door,
Which to the panting breath should evermore
Yield back; and in the water does torment
The dropsie-sicke with thirsty languishment.
Nor does it leave the patient any rest,
Until the grave be of his corpse possessed.
Excess of dri^esse causes the Hectique ^^^er.
So, too much drought a lingering fever breeds,
Which with some pain on the Hectique daily feeds;
Feebles the sinews, clads the heart with grief,
The face with sadness, plays the very thief,
In stealing from the limbs their moist relief,
Like as the flaming torch, which is the chief
Cause of his peecemeale burning clean away,
Feeds by his life, lives by his own decay.
Nor does it l^nd the patient any rest,
Until the grave be of his corpse possessed.
So too much heat does breed the fever lourdane, Excess^ of h^at^ the cause
of the quarta^e ague.

The tongue surcharging with a slimie burden,
And makes the drudging pulse to trot apace,
And in the brain more diverse shapes does trace
With a fantastic pencill, then can art,
Or chance, or Nature to the eye impart.
Nor does it lend the burning patient rest,
Until the grave be of his corpse possessed.
So too much cold upon the aged pate Excess of cold causes old age.

Does clap a hoarie fleece, and does abate
The flesh, and furrows up the late-smooth forehead,
Hollowes the eyes, and makes a man abhorred
Unto himself, and gliding through each part,
Does by his winters freeze the very heart.
Nor does it lend the aged any rest,
Until the grave be of his corpse possessed.
Yet think not that this great excess does bring Nibil in ^ibilum riducitur.

Annihilation unto any thing:
It only does diuersifie the fashion,
So as the matter by this commutation,
Do it within, or else without remain,
Nor can be said to lose, nor yet to gain.
What ere is made, is of that matter framed,
Which in the ancient naught the M^t^ri^ ^rima.
First was named.
And whatsoever is resolved again,
Unto that former matter runs amain.
For since that God of nothing made this All, ^x ni^il^ ^i^il fit.

Of naught is nothing made, nor ever shall
Ought unto naught be brought: but all that is borne,
Or dies again does only change his form.
His body sometimes shrinkes, sometimes is lengthened,
Sometimes is thickened, sometimes straightened,
(...).
And if (in sooth) of nothing bodies were,
The earth untilled should fruit abundant bear;
Desired children, virgins should enjoy;
And each thing grow each where without annoy;
The thirsty heart should in the Ocean lie;
The monstrous whale should dwell upon the dry;
The fleecie sheep should grase amid the air;
The service tree, and eke the pine tree fair,
Should take their rooting in the raging flood;
Out of the oak the ches-nut tree should bud;
And from the ches nut tree should achornes fall;
And natures laws being violated all,
The eagle with the silly dove should match,
And each of these the others brood should hatch.
Nothing can enlarge it self by it self.
And if that bodies of themselves could grow,
Then man which in his growing is so slow,
Should instantly be of that very stature,
Which in full age is given him by nature.
Unplanted trees with leauie branches dight,
Should rob the shaded groves of Phoebus light.
The suckling elephant his back should yield,
Unto the warlike castle for the field.
The yongling Colt courageously should neigh,
Bucephal-like in war to break the ray.
Contrariwise, if ought annihild be,
Then whatsoere we touch, or taste, or see,
Still losing something of his quantity,
At length should come unto a nulliti^.
If death could something to a nothing bring,
Then should that change be utter perishing.
Exemplific^ti^
Sometimes the mountains prouder tops do fall,
But then the dales are filled therewithal.
And when as Rhone, or Thesis swelling pride,
Does ouerflow the field through which they glide,
No more on either side is drowned and lost,
Then is recouerd on the other coast.
The lovely heaven does shower down many a flood,
That his beloved spouse the earth may bud;
Which she repa^es squirting them up amain,
Through hidden poares of herbs and trees again.
He that this only observation makes, Simil.

How wax a hundred diverse fashion takes,
Yet still the same; to him the daily change
Of this inferior world cannot be strange.
The worlds First ma^ter is this wax unformed*
Which with a thousand forms is all adorned;
The form is the seal, and heavens great King,
Is this high Chancellor, who with his ring,
His great or lesser seals does print upon her,
Which sometime bring her shame, and sometimes honor.
With us is nothing firm and constant; here
Both life and death in turn do dominere.
One body springs not till another fade,
Only the matter is immortal made.
Gods writing table, body of this All,
Receiver of what accidents befall;
All like it self, all in it self compacted,
It neither is enlarged nor contracted.
Whose essence is vuchanged, but her shape
No fewer outward fashions does escape,
Then Proteus, or the fish called Manie-feete,
Which for to prey amid the watrie deep,
Himself discolours, and in imitation
Fitly resembles our French-neighbour nation, Mat^ri^ prima Gall^ similis.

Which like an ape does evermore delight,
To be in stranger fashions always dight:
Whose shirt no oftener suffers any change,
Then his apparel does a fashion strange.
This Matter is a Lais, whose delight
Would change a hundred lovers in a night*
Who scarcely of some yonkers arm unlaced,
Has in her cogitation straight embraced
Another culling, and her novel sport,
Does cause her wish for plenty of that sort.
For this same matter pricked with strong desire
Of change: and yet unable to attire
Her self with every shape, does by succession
Receive in every part a new impression.
The cause of the trans^utation of the elemen^s.
The chiefest cause of these euanishments,
Is deadly fewd of our four elements;
Which in their turn do prey one on the other,
As snow and water being maid and mother,
Do make a mutual change: each of these four,
In two chief qualities does show his power;
Whereof the one does still the scepter sway,
To whom the other does his homage pay.
Those elements whose forces disagree,
And wholly savor of antipathie,
Maintain a longer fight in open field,
Or either of them to the other yield.
The fire to water turns not speedily,
Nor does the air raven so greedily
Upon the earth: for being deadly foes,
They fight both with their fingers and their toes.
But air to water, earth to fire likewise
Does sooner turn; for that they symbolize
Some quality: and easier it is to quell
One enemy* then two that do rebel.
Since then this worlds children none can see,
Until these elements conjoined be
In holy wedlock: and that nothing dies,
Till by divorce these four are enemies;
Which by unconstant changing of their place,
Produce those various forms, wherewith the face
Of this great All is so embellished:
Simil.
(Just as a song is sweetly relished
With some few notes in sundry line and space*
Which by their charming, sweet, harmonious grace,
Do make the hearers ears the broad high way,
By which they may their souls from them convey.
Or as the letters of the Alphabet, Simil.

By being in a diverse order set,
Do make these words; and then these words again,
Which here do flow from my poetike brain,
Changing their rank, enrich these sacred lines,
With choice of new discourse a thousand times.)
It wants not reason: why Gods caref^ll hand,
Sharing among them, all their common land,
Gave ea^h a place fit for his quantity,
Which also might preserve his quality.
He then that sees a drossie wedge of gold, Exampl^*

Mai^terd by V^l^an, how it does unfold
His wished riches, and how lingringly
The gold unto the gold does strive to sli^;
The silver seeks the silver, and the brass
Between them both does run, and how that mass
Composd of pieces neither like his fellow,
Does branch it self in streams, black, white, and yello^:
He does conceive that soon as God assigned
A place, to which each one should be confined*
The earth, the fire, the water, and the air,
Unto their like do speedily repair.
So then this Chaos muddie lees do sink The situ^tio^ of the ^arth and the
fi^e.

Right downward by their natural instinct.
The fire does try a new conclusion,
Runs through the chinkes of this Confusion,
And sparkleth upward by his nimble pace,
And of this lower world gets highest place.
As one may see when as the dawne does paint Simil.

The Zenith of Catay with colors quaint,
Dead pooles to reake, and from the poarie ground,
Exhaled vapors in the air abound.
The situation of the vvat^r and the air.
But least the fire which does the rest enclose,
Should burn the earth by his too near repose,
As arbiters between such deadly foes,
Did God the water and the air dispose.
One of which two could never end their fight,
The water p^rent-like would take delight
To help the earth: the air would desire
T'vphold the quarrel of his cousin fire.
But both of them their sundred love uniting,
Might quickly end their quarrel and their fighting:
Which questionless if it had not been perfou^ned,
This new-made world to his first state had turned.
The air is placed above, the water under,
No chance, but God so placing them asunder,
Who that each thing in other may take ple^sure,
Has made his works in number, weight, and measure.
For if near Vulcan, Neptune had his place,
That choleric element would straight embrace
Suspect of outrage, and his place forsake,
That of his wrong some judgment he might take.
Now then the linkes of this most holy chain,
Which does the members of this All contain,
Are such as he alone can them untie,
Who linked them together cunningly.
The water armd with moisture and with cold,
Does in one arm the cold-drie earth enfold,
And in the other does the air embrace;
The air as hot and moist does hie apace
To join himself by heat unto the fire,
And by his moisture water does desire.
Simil.
As when the shepheardesses chance to meet,
Trampling the flowers with their tripping feet,
Marrying their pitches to the oaten sounds,
And sportfully do dance their rusticke rounds
Under the branches of some shadie tree,
By joining hand in hand so coupled be,
As that the first clinching her fellow fast*
Is joined by her fellows to the last.
For since the earth alonely does not nourish Why the ^^rt^ is the c^^ter of
the world*

Those creatures which in the same do flourish*
But, which is more, does with her dugs supply
Food to the winged people of the sky,
And gluts the scaly troop with longed food,
Which cleave the billows of the briny flood,
So that what ere does creep, run, swim or fly,
Is by this Mother nourced carefully:
It did behoue that she should counter-waigh
Her self, that so she might the firmer stay
Against the barking of the stonnie maine,
And might the anger-swollen cheeks disdain
Of Auster, who in parching heat delights,
And Boreas, who with freezing cold still fights.
It did behoue, her body dull and flow,
Should farthest be from heaven here below,
That she might nere be wheeled about, by force
Of heavens swift and neuer-resting course:
Which does with strong and stubborn rauishment,
Pull round about the highest element.
And since again that the harmonious course
Of heavenly planets, is the immortal source
Of life in earthly things, and that their changing
Is caused by the stars their circled ranging:
The Almighty could no fitter lodge provide,
Whereas our grandame earth might well abide,
Then in the center of this worldly round.
For vital beams wherewith the stars abound,
Do shatter down their powerful influence
Upon the air his waving residence,
On the arched fire, and on the swelling maine
Where scaly people wanting lungs remain.
But they in fine unite their forces all,
Within the circle of this earthy ball,
Simil.
Which is the worlds naue: like as we may
See in a wheel which chalketh out his way
Amid the mudde; whose widest spoakes do meet
Within the button by their joined feet.
Simil.
And as the Sun does pierce the window glass,
So do these starrie influences pass,
Through every part without impediment
Of the transparant fiery element,
The regions of the air, and water bright,
But not the earth, wherein is firmly pight
The worlds foundation; so that we name,
(And justly too) the water, air and flame,
The concubines of euer-mouing heaven,
For that his Sun, and Moon, and Starry-seuen,
Never enjoy their love, but when by chance
By these three regions along they glance:
When heaven husband-like has no intent
To be diuorc'd from the driest element:
And with such seed as still does animate
Each living thing, he does engrauidate
The fruitful earth his lawful wedded bride;
And with a body so diuersifide
In disposition and in outward form,
He does the structure of this All adorn.
Why the vva^er is placed betvveene the earth and the air.
The water lighter then the earthie lump,
And heavier then the air, does pitch his iumpe
Between them both; that being moist and cold,
By those two qualities he may be bold,
To slack the thirsty dryness of our Mother,
And cool the feruor of his airie brother.
Apostrophe ad Musam suam.
But whither away my Muse? thou wanton stay,
Spend not thy Poetry at one essay:
Surcease to day, to sing of sea and land,
Their compass, power and praise* and where they stand.
Do not too hastily prevent the time,
Wherein the world was in his flowing prime:
Le^ue mountain rocks with waters ouer-spread,
Till Phoebus rise again from's eastern bed:
For when he shows again his blushing face,
Then shall Gods powerful hand asunder place
These mingled bodies; and shall richly dight
The earth, with bushie trees of goodly height.
It Is time my love, my joy and only dear,
To soar aloft, to lodge no longer here.
Or never now it is time, to graft my wings
On thy immortal virgin-pin^onings:
That on thy back I being nimbly light,
May safely unto heaven take my flight.
Come, come then luckily, thy shoulder lend,
That mounted on the same I hence may wend
To gain that crown, to win that wreathed bay,
Which never Poets, that in France did sway,
Did wear; and which the heavens nigardize
Has long concealed from my longing eyes.
The air (which foggie mists does entertain, The air hov^ and why it is
d^uided into three r^g^o^s.

The play-game of the tempests and the rain;
The Inconstant house where winged clouds abide,
Swift Aeol^s his kingdom and his pride.
The shop where winds are sold, whose traffic makes,
That every moving thing of life partaketh)
Is not all one, for men by learning guided,
Into three lofts hau't rightf^lly divided.
Whereof the highest (for that the restless course Regi^ suprema.

Of the first Mouer pulls it round by force,
From Ea^t to West, and likewise from the West
Unto the place where fair Aurora's dressed:
And for it bounds upon the burning ^^ame)
The learned do this loft the hottest name.
That loft wherein we breath, by turn does hold Regio infima.

Now melting heat, now all-congealing cold:
Now neither, so his waters in the Spring
Are coldly hot; in Autumn wavering,
In winter cold, and hot in summers reign,
For then the earth rebat^th back again
Those beams, which starrie bow-men shoot apace;
Especially the Sun (the heavens chief grace)
Who for his shafts does eue^^ore d^light,
To make the circled earth his but tand white.
Medi^^^^io.
The middle-loft, for that it still remains
Far from the burning ^eeling, which contains
This lower world in his fiery seat,
Unable also to partake the heat,
Which from the earth is banded bolt-vpright,
Does in continual freezing take delight.
For how could water hardened be to hail,
Even when the summer heat does so prevail,
That harvest fields look white, if y^ie cold
His shiuering climates did not all enfold?
Why the middle region is the c^ld^st.
As Soon as Phoebus has his court removed
From the T^^ sig^^ Gemini.
two twins, so mutually beloved,
And takes his lodging with his Cancer.
Crabbed host,
Or panting Lion; then this middle coast
His cold redoubleth: for environed
With heat of armies newly mustered,
Which more then ere are now encouraged
To have his coldest times vnwintered:
Delays the time to train his men no longer,
His forces joined together are the stronger.
S^mil.
As Christians leaving far their native land,
Fear not the fury of the Turkish band,
Marching disorderly; make now and then,
As many squadrons, as there be of men;
So that sometime the clownes with bills and bows,
Drive them before them with their stubborn blows:
But when they see the Mooned flags appear,
(Arms of old Ottoman) and when they hear
The horrid thunder of cannons sound,
Which by their shocke do level with the ground,
The strongest walls that ever yet immured
Rhodes and Belgrada, while their prime endured,
Straight they retire, and in some neighbor plain,
Do set themselves in order all again;
Their warlike courage does increase their strength,
Their blood does boil for heat, and at the length
The bordring circumcised peoples aid
Doubling their forces, makes their foes afraid.
This antiperistasis (for it is no danger The effe^^s of the A^tip^ris^a^^s of
the ^i^^le r^gio^.

To naturalize a word that is a stranger*
Yea in this work, where we have no one word,
That does so strong an emphasis afford)
Does cause that in the heat of winters cold,
We feel the chimney hotter many-fold
Then in the summer: and that Scythia,
Saluted often by Orithia
Her blustering lover, evermore does breed
Children, whose stomachs craving still to feed,
Continually digest more store of meat,
Both in the winter, and in summers heat,
Then those lean scranlings whom the Delphian torch*
Upon the Lybian sand does always scorch.
This makes that we, which have the happy luck
Sweet air into our spongie lungs to suck,
More lively heat within our stomachs hide,
When freezing Ianiuere does here abide:
Then when the Sun is banished for a while
From Chus, and to our tropicke does recuile,
Gods mighty hand did thus the air divide,
That in the middle lo^t there might reside
The mists, the comets and the windy train,
The tempests and the dew, the y^e and rain.
Some of the which appointed are to make
The earth to yield her fruit, the rest to take
Weapons against our sins: that so they might
Engraue in hardest hearts each day and night,
The awful love, the sweet-alluring fear
Of him, which of this All the crown does wear.
Simil.
As in a cupping-glasse a little flame,
To shun a vacuum (which is natures shame)
Or (...) it self from cupped parts does bring
Th^abounding humor, which lies pestering
The flesh; which being thin and too subtle,
Does by the ruddie eyes distill each while:
Right so the Sun, whose yellow golden hair
Does daily guild this and that hemispheare,
Two sorts of vapors evermore exhales
From wauing fields, and from the flowrie dales.
E^^^atio.
The one is thin, pure, nimble, burning, dry,
Vapor.
The other hot, moist, rising heavily,
Which run amid the air throughout the year,
And make the world unlike it self appear.
O^ ^he blasts, o^ n^l d^vv.
If then a vapor do so thinly rise,
As that it cannot be in any wise
To water turned; and his heavy wing
G^ued with cold, lie only houering
Upon the earth his gaudy flowred weed,
A blackness in the air it straight does breed,
And the^ewithall a sluggish mi^tie blast,
Upon the herbs and flowers hangs fast.
O^ the d^vv a^^ the ye^.
If so this vapor lingringly do fly
Scarce to the middle region of the sky,
Yet higher then the clouds, it is in a trice,
In April dew, in January y^e.
(...) the rain.
But if this vapor actiuely do get,
Unto the shiuering winters cabinet;
The water which has got the highest place,
Is turned in a very little space
By cold into a ^loud, and through the sky,
Upon the winged winds does swiftly fly:
Until his waters dropping down amain,
Do find their grandame rivers once again.
Whether one cloud be driven by the wind, Coni^c^urall reason^of the rain.

Against another in a furious kind;
And with a stubborn shocke are forced again,
To shed their water in a shower of rain:
As oftentimes, a wanton lad does dash Simil.

The brittle vessels, serving for to wash,
B^tweene his waggish hands, and so does spill
The water which the vessels erst did fill:
Or whether it be, a gentler gale do play
Amid the air, and sighing in his way,
Wrings out their tears: as after a great rain,
Another shower stilleth down again
From tops of forests trees; when as the wind
Among their bushy boughs does pleasure find,
And sports to crispe their wauing leauie tresses:
Or whether it be a higher cloud that presses
The under cloud with a moist heavy weight;
And that the humor se^kes an issue straight,
Pressed by another water: as is s^ene,
The more that Grapes.
Bacchus presents piled been
Upon the hurdle in the vintage time,
The faster does the new, sweet, ^uming wine
Stream from the bottom pierced all below,
And to the froathie tub amain does flow.
Then many heavenly streams our floods augment,
Save tears is nothing scene: the firmament
Darkened with clouds, in drops does seem to still,
And stinking frogs the earthie plains to fill: How frogs may b^ ^nge^dred
v^^^h t^^ rain

Whether the vapor that does upward ^lie,
Be of it self both cold, hot, moist and dry;
Whose mixture quickneth every living thing:
Or whether it be, the Eastern blustering
Sweeping the earth, do heap into the sky
Some fertile dust, whereof confusedly
These ougly things are made; as near the brimme,
Where some new mountain flood does swiftly swim,
The froathy mud is turned in a strange kind
Into a frog, which yet vnshhap't behind
Within the dirt enioys some small pastime,
Half dead, and half alive, half flesh, half slime.
Of the snow.
S^^^times it happens, that the freezing cold
Congeales the total cloud; then we behold
Great locks of heavenly wool to tumble down,
The trees vnleau'd, no grass upon the ground,
The world has all one die; above the snow
The stagge his horned head can hardly show.
Of the ^aile.
Sometimes it chances otherwise again,
Soon as the cloud is turned into rain,
Th'excessiue cold that is in the middle loft,
To haily bullets hardneth it full often;
Which falling down (alas they so should fall)
Our hoped vintage greedily forestall;
Without a sickle reap our unripe grain,
Vnblossome all our trees, and do constrain
The birds to leave the neasts they lately made,
Do rob the woods and groves of wonted shade,
Do bruise our bullockes grazing as they go,
Do make our very houses crack for woe,
Of the winds how they are caused.
If so the stars which Gods creating hand
Sowed scatteringly upon the heavenly land,
Draw fumes from off the earth both hot and dry,
Their active fire would lodge them instantly
In Phoebus lap: but they no sooner gain
The loft, where freezing cold does still remain,
And feel the strength of their audacious foes,
But straight they strive to gain a sweet repose
Upon the earth from whence they did ascend,
Assisted by the weight she did them lend.
But from the fields there fumes another fire,
Which comes to aid them in their back re^ire
Which stops their downward course, restores their hearts,
And weapons to their trembling hands imparts.
With these fresh soldiers they fiercely fight,
Now tumbling down, now towering bolt upright,
Driving now here, now there our air along,
According as the matter's weak, or strong.
This holds but for a while, for in this fray
The heat and cold both bearing equal sway,
To end this stir, one lets their upward flight,
The other stops their fall with all his might:
So that this vapor taking little rest,
To move in circled wise does hold it best,
And buzzing flies from pole to pole, from Spain
To Eastern India, and back again.
These puffing winds although they quickened be The f^ur^ thi^^ winds rese^bled
t^ the four seasons of the year, the fo^re hum^^s of a man^ body, the four
elements, and the fo^re ages.

By spirit and vapor of like quality:
Yet does the diverse place where they are borne,
With diverse names and power them all adorn*
Whiles I observe the four winds principal,
Which quarter out the cantons of this All,
In their effects as humming on they fly,
I find that they resemble properly
Four times of th'yeare, four humors that abound,
Four simples, whereof nature does compound
Each mingled body, and the fourfold age,
Which man runs over in his pilgrimage.
The wind which does with fair Aurora dwell, The Eastwind.

Resembles in his nature passing well^,
The naked summer and the tender age,
The fire and choler (apt to kindle rage.)
The wind which barbrous Africa does greet, The Sout^.

Is like the joyful Spring* the air most sweet:
That age wherein man does in strength excel,
The blood wherein the soul of man does dwell.
The wind which does with drops bedew the West, The VV^st.

The water and the phlegm resembles best,
The age wherein man's strength falls to decay,
The time when hoarie winter bears sway.
The North.
The wind which from the shiuering North does fly*
May be compared and not injuriously,
To Autumn, earth, and melancholy sad,
And to the age when man becomes a lad.
Not ^^at until this time we have not learned
More winds then East, West, North and South are termed.
The man that lives upon the watrie plain,
Has on his compass noted thirty twain.
Though, as the places number do exceed,
From whence these exhalations do proceed;
So are the winds in number numberless,
Which cleanse the air of mistie fogginesse.
Yet from what place so ere they sallie forth,
They mustred are by South, East, West or North.
The eff^cts of the winds.
Sometimes they with a whizzing broom do sweep
The air, where duskie clouds their court do keep,
Sometimes they dry the fields which drowned bin,
With tears of Phaeton his weeping kin.
Sometimes they temper with a welcome cold
The air, which while the fainting dog-daies hold,
Do fry for heat. They ripe the ruddie pear,
The bean in husk, the corn within the ear.
They make the winged ship to fly with ease,
Throughout the world upon the raging seas.
And with a li^gring have whirling around
The millstone, under which the grain is ground,
To undivided atomies they bring
The seed, which from the earth they made to spring.
Diverse effects of the hot exhalatio^^.
Now if the fume be hot and glutinous,
And yet unable to be mutinous
Against the ysicles, that rule and reign
Amid the air; then does it still remain,
Houering between us and the middle sky,
Until it kindled be, and downward fly:
Just like a squib (that serves for sportfull games)
Or like an arrow feathered all with flames.
But when again the exhalation Of the comets.

Surmounts cold winters habitation,
It lights it self and makes a blazing star,
Foredooming some mischance that is not far.
But then his flame having more nouriture
Then the other vapor, longer does endure;
Whether the fume ytost withouten stay,
Become a brand by heavens circled sway,
Kindling it self like coals that ouer-spread
With straw, do for a while lie seeming dead,
Which afterward the artisan does shake,
Of darksome night a lightsome day to make:
Or whether from the highest element,
It do receive his fiery nutriment,
Like as the torch of flaming life deprived,
Is by the burning link again revived.
According as the vapour's thick or rare, Of the other fiery impressions in
the air.

Long, equal, large, unequal, round, or square,
It makes those various shapes in the air appear,
Whose sight does make the sottish quake for fear.
Here does a steeple seem to flame by night,
There does a cruel dragon come in sight.
Here is the torch, and there the arrow flies,
The forked beam and spear here greet our eyes,
And there the dart, which crossing in their ways,
Clashing together sparkle out their rays.
The wanton goat with fiery tassels dight,
By often skips does simple men affright,
The bloody tresses of a twinkling star,
Do threaten on the other side from far,
To plague the neat-h^ards with tempestuous hail,
With storms to souce the mariners that sail,
To punish shepherds with their flocks decay,
And citizens with many a bloody fray.
What rumbling noise in heaven do I hear? Of the thunder.

The walls of this great All as does appear,
In every corner suffer batterment,
It seems Proserpina has some intent,
To set at large her furious daughters three,
And leave her queenedome of black Tartarie,
And in the air to hold her hellish reign.
I know that some do study ^o maintain,
That when the vapor does ascend on high,
Compact of air and water euenly,
And burning vapors mounting up likewise
Into the middle region of the skies,
The hotter fume y compassed around
With cold thick clouds which in the air abound,
Doubles his heat, and taking heart of grace,
Makes war on his cold neighbor foes apace.
Simil.
The lion banished from the forest wide
His native home, and forced to abide
In some straight den, where maids and idle boys
Do hisfe, and mock, and anger him with toys,
Does fill his narrow park with dreadful sound,
Runs forth and back in such his straightned pound,
And being mad, does not so much desire
His liberty, as to revenge his ire:
Right so this fire craving for to rent
His floating prison, cannot be content;
But ^till bestirs him running round about,
Wi^h grumbling, rumbling, and a thundering rout,
Until he make a renting breach below,
And thundering cannon-shot on us do throw.
For longing in these sharp and cruel wars,
To join his weak enfeebled soldiers
Unto his brother forces, and obtain
In Cynthia's lap that he may still remain;
He snarlingly endeavors forth to get,
But with so huge an host he is beset,
And so entrenched every where about,
That though he strive on this side to get out,
And now on that side skirmish with the cold,
Yet finds he many a soldier that is bold,
Courageously to stand against his strength,
And so despairing, furiously at length
Forgets his honor, and does back retire,
With shame enough as wanting his desire.
The ocean boiles for fear, and Neptunes band, Effects of the thun^^r.

Finding the sea too straight, do hie to land.
The earth does quake, the shepherd all alone,
Is hardly safe under the rockie stone.
The sky is rift in twain, and Plutoes self
Looks pale and bleake like some night-wandring elfe.
The air does slame throughout with fiery flashes,
For then the lightning which so fiercely dashes
Against the cloud, the which it does surprise,
Does sparkle forth those flames which dim our eyes.
Right like the man on whom the Muses fawn, Simil.

Does with his steel before the morning dawne,
Compel the sparks to issue from the flint
Until they kindle his half burned lint.
And which is more, the lightning being framed Stran^e effe^^^ of the lig^tning.

Of fumes which of themselves are still enflamed,
Can break the bones with his admired art,
Yet keep the flesh from feeling any smart:
Can melt the coin wherewith the niggard's blessed*
Yet with his burning force not hurt the chest:
Can break the foyning blade short off in twain,
Yet miss the scabbard that does it contain:
Can kill the babe, ere it be brought to light,
Yet to the mother offer no despite,
Who with the strange event astonished,
Does see her child no sooner borne then dead.
Can burn the shoo, and not offend the foot,
Nor pierce the tun, yet draw the liquour out.
I have beheld with these (then younger) eyes,
This thundering flame a woman to surprise, ^xa^ple.

And from those parts to whiffe away the hairs,
Which here to name my modest Muse forbeares.
O^ the circles about the Sun and Moon.
Shall I conceal those various shapes, which be
Painted in heavens face? Sometimes I see
A fiery circle framed of many a ray,
Which Sun and Moon, and other stars display;
Which on some cloud whiles they are darted down,
Of substance thick, and by his figure round,
Through which they cannot pass with all their strength,
Fly round about the edges at the length,
And do a crown resemble very right.
Like as the torch, which when it burns bright
Within some angle of a darkesome cell,
Whose gate is bolted, cannot very well
Send through the door the luster of his rays,
But by the chinkes his flaming light displaies.
Of the rainebow.
But when the Sun begins himself to shroud
In Thetis bed, and on some adverse clowd,
Unable any longer to contain
His watrie humor, shootes his beams amain;
Then does he shadow his resplendent face
Upon that cloud* and variously does trace
The bending of that partie-coloured bow,
Whose sight does glad our faces here below.
For the adverse cloud, which does the arrows take
Of this great archer, instantly does make
That on the neighbor cloud they back rebound,
And does with Titans golden beams compound
His various colors: altogether like
The Sun, which while his darts some violl strike
Upon thy window* thou do straight epsy
The trembling brightness banded vpwardly,
Against the s^eling of thy glittering hall.
Of the diverse S^ns and Moons which are som^imes seen.
But if contrariwise the cloud do fall,
Not ore against, nor under, but beside
The Sun or Moon* (the heavens nightly pride)
Both one and the other on that cloud do trace,
With powerful skill their two or threefold face,
The silly vulgar are astonished,
To see at once three coachmen furnished,
To draw the Sun, the father of the day;
And that the night for anger does assay,
To have more Moons in heaven to r^maine,
And there as crowned Queens to rule and reign.
But why (o foolish men) go ye about, An Apostrophe to those that wholly ground
t^^mselues upon reason.

To search the wonders of the Almighty out
With your so shallow sense? what proud desire,
Nay madness rather, makes you so aspire
Without his help to open all his works?
I know that in a learned man there lurkes
That skill, whereby he can some reason show,
Of whatsoever moves here below:
But not so sound, that he may leave a man
Without all scruple; and if so he can,
Yet of these instruments when we do boast,
We should commend those cunning fingers most,
Which set them all on work, and by such ways
Things more then dead to life again do raise.
When thunder roares, that voice me seems rings, The religious use that we
should make of th^se meteors and impressions.

Which makes kings shepherds, and of shepherds kings.
The towre-bruising shocke oflightning, tells
What wondrous power in Gods right hand there dwells.
When as I see the flashes in the air,
I see beams of Gods eyes divinely fair.
When timely rain does fall, I then epsy*
How he showers down his blessings plenteously.
When as the bridges in the fields are drowned,
And streams do ouerwhelme our tilled ground;
Me thinks that God does weepingly lament
Those sins, whereof we never do repent.
And never does the bow in heaven appear,
But it is a seal and pledge to me most dear,
That never more the universal flood,
Shall proudly ouerwaue that forest wood,
Which Atlas seems in the clouds to hide,
Or does on snowie Caucasus abide.
But chiefly I am moved, when heavens ire,
Salutes our eyes with prodigies of fire:
When this great All is all disordered,
And his old customs strangely altered.
The most learned unable to assign true reasons of all accide^ts.
Suppose there do in some one scholar flourish
As many wits, as Pallas deignes to nourish:
And let thilke man out of his subtle brain,
Show me a certain reason of the rain,
Of milk, and flesh, and wool, which whilome fell
From heaven; and let his deeper skill me tell,
How in the clouds that store of grain might grow,
Which has been seen at twice to ouerflow
That part of Germany where it did fall,
Which vulgarly Carinthia men do call.
The heavens great King does now and then delight,
To cross each where the course of natures might:
Minding that such irregularities,
Should heralds be of future miseries.
That fiery shower which once was seen to reign
On the Plutarch in the l^fe of Crafs^^.
Lucanian fields; (when Rome did train,
And send their brauest soldiers to that field,
Which unto fat Euphrates way does yield)
Foretold the Parthians never missing bow,
Should all the Italian armies overthrow.
That rattling noise of arms, those trumpets sound,
Which from about did simple men astound,
(While as the Plutarch in the life of Marius.
Romans most courageous crew,
So many Danes and Almaines fiercely slew)
Tell us that chance in nature works naught,
Against the errors Epicurus taught.
Thou which do see the lightnings threefold stroke
Dash out A certain Arrian Bishop, who for h^s ^orrible blasphemies, was s^ine
by the lightning.
Olympus brains, which did provoke
Bl^sphemously the triple-vnitie:
Dare thou presume t'expect impunity
From God, while thou do bark against his Grace,
And shamest not to spit upon his face,
Whose justice never leaves unpunished
Blasphemous mouths against him opened?
Thou Jew, no Jew, but now a barbrous seed
Of Turkish, ^Scythian, or Tartarian breed;
What is thy thought, when as thou do epsy
Thy Iose^^us i^ the vv^rres of the I^^oes.
temple threatened with a sword on high?
But that the Almighty with his powerful hand,
Should power his vengeance down upon thy land.
That dearth and famine should sweep them away,
Which to the pestilence were not a pray:
And that the sword should seize on them again,
Which had escaped from the former twain:
That execrable mothers in that stowre,
Their miserable children should devour:
That there the plough his rustinesse should scowre,
Where flourished of late thy stately bower.
And all for murdring in thy deadly strife,
That King which came from heaven to give thee life.
That stream of blood which once was seen to flow,
Those craggie rocks from whence great Ione did throw
His fearful lightning on Liguria land,
And all those bloody crosses seem to stand
On mournful habits of appearing men,
Did seem to cry with open mouth, that then
In Genes the Turk with his enraged crew,
Should pitch their standards, as it did ensue.
O frantic France, how is it thou gainest naught, An apos^op^^ to his o^vne
country of France.

By all those signs whereby thy God has sought
To call thee home? can thou with tearlesse eyes
Behold those fearful fiery prodigies,
Wherewith the heavens do us all affright,
That He understands the comet seen in the year* 1577
blazing star which threatens every night,
Our land with war, with pestilence and hunger,
Three deadly points of that prepared thunder,
Which when the Almighty ginneth once to frown,
On us rebellious men he powers down?
But what (alas) can heaven unarmed prevail,
When as thy back thresh'd with so many a flaile,
Draws not one sigh from thy obdurate heart?
Thou art delighted with thy painful smart,
Thy hunger makes thee on thy flesh to feed,
And makes thy blood thy drink; and thou indeed
As dull as one that has the lethargy,
Shunnest the salve might cure thy malady,
The more thou feel'st the spur, the more thou tirest,
And void of holy care, thou less desire
T'amend thy ways, but like an Ass do strive
To fat thy self with blows, with loss to thrive:
And as the iron or the steeled blade,
So thou by hammering art harder made.
But better twere I see this talk to end,
Then speaking to the deaf my time mispend:
I see twere better tread my wonted way,
And in my verse Gods greatest works display.
Of the elementarie fi^^.
As then in court the king is hemmed in
With princes of his royal blood and kin,
And next to them with nobles of his train,
And after them with magistrates again,
Marching along in order and degree,
As they are nearest to his Majesty:
So God in order wisely did dispose,
That Cinthia should that element enclose,
Which did in his resplendent actiuenesse
The nature of the heavens best express;
And after him, the others as they been
Annear'd unto the planets by their kin.
And yet foole-many crediting their eyes
Above their reason, many ways devise
To pull this essence from his native place,
And with his want this lower All deface.
The fire giving brightness, heat and flame, Ignis encomium.

Welspring of motion, Alchymist of fame,
A cleanser, quickner, smith and soldier,
Bell-founder, surgeon, cook and cannoner,
And goldsmith too, which does and can do all,
Embracing round the air and earthie ball.
If so the fire (say they) encamped be Obi^ction.

Between the heaven and us, then should we see
The same by night; for then our eyes do mark
The shining glowormes in the greatest dark.
Besides, how should we see the worlds eyn^,
Throughout so great an element to shine?
Since that with us the sharpest sighted eye
Can nothing through a candles flame epsy,
You unbelieving men, if so the puffes Soluti^n.

Of wanton Zephirus, or angry snuffes
Of rainie Auster, made you not believe
They have a being* you would credence give,
That from the earth unto the firmament,
There were a vacuum and no element.
And your opinion would as well desire,
To think no air, as to conceive no fire.
Those torches wherewith we prolong the days The di^f^r^n^e betvveene the
elementarie and our mixed fire.

(Which in the winter Capricorn assaies
To drown in Western seas, t'enlarge the night)
Compared unto the Sun, the heavens great light,
Are less, by many hundredth times, obscure,
Then is our mixed and compound fire impure,
Compared to that resplendent element,
This lower Universe his chiefest ornament.
Our fire is nothing but a lightsome shade
Of darksome thick and pitchie grosenesse made:
But that above, by being wholly pure
From mixture of compounded nouri^ure.
And being far removed from our sight,
And unacquainted with the blustering might
Of Aeolus, does much resemblance bear
Unto the nature of the heavenly sphere.
Of the matter of the h^auens.
But (heavenly God) what matter may I name,
Of which thou did the heavenly arches frame?
Uncertain, I resemble every hour,
The cock that stands upon some steepled tower,
Which does as often new place and master find,
As in the air we feel a change of wind.
Sometimes I am of Aristotle's train,
Sometimes I follow Plato's mind again;
Tracking the footsteps of the Stagirite,
I rob the firmament of mixture quite.
I do auerre that Gods omnipotence
Did fashion heaven of a quintessence:
Since that the elements directly fly,
Some to the center, others to the sky.
But heavens course giving no inch of ground,
Is ever turned in a circled round.
Their motion dures not, but they so abide,
As God the worlds first day did them divide:
But neuer-breathing heaven still does run,
That constant p^sting course it has begun:
It treads one path, moved with unburdened weight,
And knows not what it is a teeme to bait.
The earth and water, fire and air united,
Are with an inbred warring hate delighted,
Cau^ing in time their springing and their fall,
Increase and decrease; suffering not at all,
Beneath the horned planet any form,
For one half hour one subject to adorn:
But heaven never knows death's equal rigor,
Growing in year^s, it grows not in vigor,
Nor wears with use, but's flowring eld may bear
Resemblance to his childhood every where.
Tracing again the steps of Plato's skill, How and to what use the elements
may be in the hea^e^s, according to Platoes opinion.

The heavenly orbs with elements I fill.
The Earth makes them solid, that they never crave
A fleeting disposition to have;
The air transparant, fire makes them light,
Hot, nimble, active, and resplendant bright.
And all the eadges which do counter-kisse
Their fellow-wheeling globes, do never miss
Of water, whose cold humor stops the course
Of burning heat, arising from the source
Of their swift motion, lest the heavenly land
Should be converted to a flaming brand.
Not that I equalize these elements, The differenc^ between those elements
whereof the heavens, and those wher^of the Sublunarie bodi^s are compounded.

Of which I frame the heavenly tenements,
To those dull bodies which are here below,
Which men by sight and frequent handling know.
They are all pure, a heavenly harmony
Combines their substances eternally.
Their air is free from tossing, and their fire
From burning; and their earth does not desire
From his high mansion to tumble down,
Nor does their water fleet upon the ground.
Lo, here the extent of humane surque dry
Blinded with error and simplicity,
Which dares (as though his cunning could calcine
The matter of the heavenly orbs) define
With an unbridled tongue, what wood and stone
The Almighty chose to carpenter his throne.
I rather had still doubtful to remain,
Then lead awrie the simple of my train;
Waiting for holy Paul his rediscent:
Orfreed from the vicious pesterment
Ofthis rebellious flesh, which does depresse
My clogged soul with counter-heauinesse,
These eyes may see the beauties of that place, Diuers^ ^^^nions touching the
number of the sp^^ares.

If then I ought would see save Gods bright face,
But men as many curious questions move,
About the number of the spheres above:
One holds but one, through which he makes to glide
The eyes, wherewith this All is beautifide:
Like as amid the sea, the scaly train
Divide the surges of the watrie plain.
Another judging all things by his eye,
Marking the seven planets in the sky
To have a diverse course; and that beside
The other stars (which fixed do abide,
Guilding by night the heavenly firmament)
Run but one way; his wise experiment
By such his observation has found,
Eight ^undry lofts in the cele^tiall round.
Another ma^king in the starrie sky,
A threefold motion dancing actiuely,
And that on^ body has but one sole race
By natural instinct; does forthwith place
A ninth and tenth, not numbering in that count
Th imperial sphere, which does the rest surmount;
Where streams of nectar never cease to flow,
Where soule-delighting pleasures ever grow,
Where one may see a^ all times flourishing
The pleasing beauties of a happy spring;
Where life does never die through crooked eld,
Where Gods high parliament is always held
His glorious essence being hemmed in
With troops of many a flaming Seraphin,
And souls of men which he has purchased
By having of that body murdered,
Whose glorious resurrection and ascent,
Has placed the earth above the firmament.
But here i will stop my ouer-posting teame.
Not daring to discuss so deep a theme.
C^eli ^ncomion.
O fair and ten-fold round, which hat'st to stay,
Life of this Universe, spring of the day,
Mould of thy self, begetter of the year,
Which never changest place, yet do appear
To fly so fast, that only in our mind,
We can thy neuer-lingring motion find:
Finite, yet infinite, from growing free,
From discord, death and hateful misery,
Which love sound and dancing harmony,
still like thy self in all eternity,
Transparant, light, law of this lower round;
Which with thy limits every thing do bound*
And yet unbounded art, which do enfold
What ever thing this lower All does hold,
Throne of great Jove: I willingly would sing
The various orders of thy quauering*
If time would give me leave, and that this Day
Would not be ouer-long by that essay.
Besides, I fear that some detracting tongue,
Will blab abroad among each vulgar throng,
That to each gale of wind for small avail,
My tatling Muse does spread her fardled sail;
And that a longer web she moughten weaue,
She quils each thread, not caring when to leave.
But think who ere thou be, that reasonlesse
I do not here so many works express
Of the creation; since I understand
By that great firmament (which Gods right hand What is v^derstood by the
firmament. Genesis 1.6.

Did hang this day between our watrie plain,
And that above the sky) the whirling train
Of spheres and air, and th'hottest element,
Which make a large dividing sunderment
Between the waters of our azurde deep,
And those which God above the sky does keep.
Now in the learned books of high esteem, Against those which hold no waters
above the fir^ament.

My ignorance has not so little seen,
But we^l I know, that their so curious skill
Presumes with subtle arguments to fill
Their volumes, scoffing at the crystal sphere,
And at the waters which are placed there,
And at that ocean which does all contain
Which underneath his compass does remain.
Simil.
But as a modest matrons beauteous face,
(Who as contented with the bounteous grace
Which nature franckly has bestowed upon her,
Strives not with painting to increase her honor
Of her so fair art-wanting countenance)
Deserves more praise, then does th'immodest glaunce,
The wanton gesture, and the mincing pace,
The borrowed tresses and depainted grace,
Wherewith a curtisan of filthy trade
Maintains her beauty which begins to fade:
So of the holy tongue I more account,
Although the country phrase it not surmount,
And that bare truth be her sole ornaments,
Then of Athenian painted eloquence
And gilded lines, wherewith men strive to shade
The errors, which their vain conceits have made.
I rather had my reason often should lie,
Then from the sacred truth once go awry,
Genesis 1.6. Psalm 104.3.148.4.
Which in so many places loud does cry,
That God has placed some waters ore the sky.
Be it that their estranged quality,
With these below have small affinity:
Or turned unto a cloudie element,
Do compass round the starrie firmament*
Or be it (as some say) a crystal sphere,
Embrace the golden firmament each where.
And why shall I tossed with uncertainties,
Conclude of these as doubtless verities?
A^g. a pari.
I see not why man's reasonable sense
Should not believe, that his omnipotence,
Who whilome made the sea like walls to stand
For Jacobs troop to pass as on dry land,
Could not above the wheeling globes compose
That watrie sphere, the others to enclose.
Thou see that every hour the clouds cont^ine,
So many seas which threatening us with rain,
Are only underpropped with feeble air,
Tossed with each wind that thither does repair,
And yet so weak, that it can hardly bear
The litlest burden any one can rear.
Thou see the sea which does our mother bound,
Spite of all accidents remains round;
His waves not daring once their bounds to pass,
To equalize their circled watrie mass.
Why then beleeu'st thou not this vaulted sphere
Upon his back a total sea may bear*
Yet that the water firmly may abide?
O stony heart, persuade thy self beside,
That God sustaines those waters in that case;
And think if natures working take such place, Arg. a mi^^^i.

That pearl and crystal glass are by her skill
Composed of streams, which droppingly distill;
What then at once can the Almighty do,
Which did create both heaven and nature too?
Persuade thy unbelieving mind again,
That this proud palace where thou hold'st thy reign,
Tho built with wondrous art, would soon decay,
If on a watrie ground it did not stay.
For as the brain does hold the highest seat Simil.

Of man's small universe, t'alay the heat
Which from the cordial parts does ever flow,
With his cool moisture; altogether so,
That God might mix the water with the flame,
And cool the ardor of the heavenly frame,
He placed above the starrie firmament,
A vaulted sea of that moist element. Me^ti^^ing the waters abo^^ the
firmament, be assumes occas^^n to mention the flood, which be describes mo^^
elegantly.

These higher waters (as the stories go)
Joining themselves unto the floods below,
And striving with their ouer-swelling pride,
The proudest mountain tops with waves to hide,
Had drowned this All, if (dancing on the flood)
Noe had not shut the world into a wood;
Building an Arc, a huge and mighty frame,
Keeping alive all creatures in the same.
They were no sooner in, but straight the Lord
With only power of his all-mightie word,
Opened the door of that vast, horrid cave,
Where Aeolus his crew their dwelling have;
And bolted in the cloud-expelling North,
And let the rainy southern issue forth;
Which gins forthwith to wag his dropping wing,
His beard has no one hair but is a spring:
A night of clouds enuellops him around,
His hanging locks in rain are showred down,
And whiles the thickest clouds he fiercely dashes,
They break out into showers and stormy flashes.
The froathie torrent, and the river stowre,
Do make each other swell in one self hour;
Their mingled waters scorn their former banks,
Run to the sea to play their furious prankes,
Spoiling the hopeful harvest as they go,
The earth does quake and sweat for very woe,
Not leaving in her veins one watrie drop.
And thou, o heaven, thy scluses do unstop,
To plague thy sister earth, whose former race
Was shameless, lawless and withouten grace;
Who took her only and her chief delight,
To offer to her maker mickle spite.
The land is hid, now Neptune has no shore,
The rivers bend their course to him no more,
They are a sea themselves, and all the number
Of seas, which erst divided were asunder,
Make but one ocean; yea this universe
Is nothing but a watrie wilderness,
Which longs to join his liquid wauing plain,
Unto the floods which in the heavens remain.
The sturgeon coasting by the castled bowres,
Admires the drowning of so many towers.
The mular and the manat side those rocks,
Where lately fed the wantonizing flocks
Of bearded goats: the Dolphin cuts the ^loud
Where it surmounts the highest mountain wood.
The horse, the tiger, heart, the hound, the hare,
By their swift paces now vnsuccour'd are:
They seek for ground (alas) but it is no booting,
For still they see they lose their hoped footing.
The beauer, torteise and the crocodile,
Which did enjoy a twofold house ere while,
Have naught but water now wherein to dwell:
The tender lambkins and the Lions fell,
The ravenous wolf, the nimble fallow dear,
Swim side by side without suspicious fear;
The swallow, yearly Herald of the spring,
The vulture hatched for hateful ravening*
fighting, and striving longer to contend,
Against their certain near approaching end,
Not finding where to perch themselves again,
Do fall at length into the angered maine.
As for poor men in that tempestuous stowre,
Imagine one to get some lofty tower,
Another to ascend some mountain hill,
Another practicing his climbing skill,
With hands and fe^te clasping some cedar tree,
Striving upon his vpmost top to be;
But still the flood rising as they ascend,
If once they stay, their sinful life does end.
One hardily upon some planke does venture,
Another does into some coffer enter,
Another swimmeth in some kneading tub,
Another half asleep perceiues the flood
T'assaile his bed and life at once; another
Keeps with his arms and legs a swimming pother.
Whe^eby he may resist the waters wrath,
Whose rage but even then devoured has
Hard by his side his sister and his brother,
His friend, his child, his father and his mother:
But wearied at the l^ngth does y^^ld again,
Unto the mercy of the cruel maine.
All stand at once at death his loathed door,
But yet the cruel Parcae, which of yore
Were armed with many a murdering device,
To rake to them the things of greatest price,
No other hangmen at this instant have,
Beside the froathie ouer-whelming wave.
Mean while the Arc securely does remain,
Upon the surges of that watrie plain;
Tho all vnrigd from any haven far,
For God was both her pilote and her star.
Thrice fifty days this monstrous flood did stay,
Making of all this lower All a pray,
Until this spoil had moved at length the Lord,
Who had no sooner sounded with his word
Unto those wasting floods a back retire,
But instantly the billows do conspire,
To run unto their former place and state;
And straight the swelling rivers do abate:
The sea bounds in it self* the hills appear,
The forest trees which drowned were whileare,
Do show their slimie boughs; the champion field
Increases as the waters backward yield.
And to be brief, Gods thunder-shooting hand
Did let the Sun behold again the land;
That he again might see the smoke arise,
Of a devout, sweet smelling sacrifice,
Fuming with sweet Panchayan franke-incense,
Unto the praise of his omnipotence.
He concludes with a prayer for the Church.
O God, since thou art pleased in this our age,
To save thy holy ship from stormy rage;
Grant that those few, whose settled confidence
Is anchored on thy sacred providence,
May by thy blessing evermore increase
In number, faith and love, the bond of peace.
FINIS.

