D. SARAVIA.

1. Of the diverse degrees of the Ministers of the Gospel. 2. Of the honor
which is due unto the Priests and Prelates of the Church. 3. Of Sacrilege,
and the punishment thereof.
The particular Contents of the aforesaid Treatises to be seen in the next
Pages.

Job. 8. 8. Inquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thy self to
learn of the Fathers,

9. (For we are but of yesterday, and are ignorant.)

10. Shall not they teach thee?

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by John Perin at the sign
of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1591.

The Contents.
The first Book.

1 WHat the Ministry of the Gospel is, and what be the parts thereof. 2 Of
ordinary and extraordinary calling to the Ministry. 3 Of the twelve Apostles.
4 Of the seventy Disciples. 5 Of Prophets. 6 That the names and titles of
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, were given also unto other Pastors and
Doctors of the Church. 7 Of Deacons. 8 That the Churches in their beginnings
had no other Bishops and Elders, besides the Apostles them selves and their
fellow-laborers. 9 Of Priests (or Pastors) and Bishops. 10 Of two degrees of
Pastors. 11 That the doctrine of the Apostles acknowledges no annuary Elders,
to rule only, and not to teach in the Church. 12 The place of Ambrose
expounded. 13 The place of Paul expounded, in his first to Timothy the fifth
Chapter, what it is to labor in the word and doctrine. 14 That, that order is
of God, which appoints superior Elders Bishops, and that but of man, where
all Pastors and Elders are alike. 15 That our Savior by no statute, repealed
the supereminent authority of Pastors among them selves. 16 That the form of
the Apostles government did not end, with the death of the Apostles. 17 That
the commandment; To preach the Gospel to all nations (the Apostles being now
received up into Heaven) does in like manner bind the Church: to the which the
authority Apostolic is also requisite. 18 That the Apostolic authority is
as necessary for the conseruing and confirming, as for the founding and first
planting of Churches. 19 By testimony of Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history
the former Chapter is confirmed. 20 That the authority of Bishops over Priests
or Elders, is approved by the consort of all Churches throughout the whole
world. 21 That Bishops are ordained by a divine institution, and Apostolic
tradition. 22 That it was the opinion of Aerius, That there is no difference
between a Bishop and a Priest: which opinion was condemned for an Heresy by
the Fathers. 23 Hierome his opinion confuted. 24 Of one Bishop in one Diocese.
25 Of the names of Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Metropolitanes. 26 Of Doctors.
The second Book.

1 THat by a certain Law of nature among all nations, the Presidentes of
Religion were esteemed worthy great honor. 2 How great the reverence of
Priests has been in all nations. 3 What the honor of the Priesthood was
among the people of God. 4 Of that double honor which is due unto those Elders
which rule well, and the arguments of those which think the contrary. 5 An
answer to the arguments of the former Chapter. 6 That the honor which is
given to the Pastors of the Church, is joined with a certain Religion toward
God. 7 Certain other reasons confuted, and the truth confirmed, by many
testimonies of Scripture. 8 That the good examples of our Forefathers,
prescribe a Law to their successors. 9 That the oblations of Christians are
part of Gods worship. 10 An answer to certain objections: with the which it
is confirmed, that the Ministers of the Gospel are worthy no less honor, then
were the Priests of old among the people of God. 11 The judgment of the
Fathers concerning the oblations of the faithful. 12 That the Church had no
small revenues, and certain places in the which they did celebrate their
assemblies, before the time of Constantine. 13 A distinction of Church goods.
14 That the Prelates of Churches are not maintained of alms, but of the due
reward of their labors. 15 Of those lands which are held in fee, and have
annexed with them any civil authority or jurisdiction. 16 That Bishops and
other Pastors are not forbidden to be Lords of Fees, and sometimes to
undertake secular and civil charges. 17 What a Fee is, and what are the laws
and conditions thereof. 18 A distinction of Fees. 19 An answer to the
objection, that civil jurisdiction, outward pomp, and honors which are
annexed with these Fees, do not agree with the simplicity of the Euangelique
Ministry. 20 That it is lawful for Bishops to hear civil causes, and to
determine upon them. 21 An exposition of that place of Luke, the two and
twenty Chapter. 22 That the Pastors of the Church, for the necessity of the
common wealth, may attend some times upon worldly affairs. 23 That diverse
functions are not confounded, albeit undertaken of one man, 24 That David and
Solomon used the aid of Priests and Levites in civil affairs. 25 Their error
confuted, that think no civil affairs of the common wealth ought to be
committed to the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. 26 That where the Church is
the common wealth: the same man, as Bishop, may take charge of the Church for
the Lord Jesus, and render fealty and obeisance to the king, as one that
holds by faith and homage. 27 An other argument, against the endowment of
Fees, confuted. 28 Of the honorable titles which are given unto Bishops. 29 Of
the Bishops family and retinue. 30 Whether it be better for Ministers to live
of the stipends of the Magistrate, or rather of the oblations of the faithful.
31 The Stipendaries called to account, and confuted. 32 Certain reasons why
Stipendaries are disproued.
The third Book.

1 OF Sacrilege, and the punishment thereof. 2 What Sacrilege is. 3 The reasons
with the which they commonly excuse their Sacrilege. 4 An answer to the
reasons of the former Chapter. 5 A distinction of those Church goods, which the
Church of Rome possesses at this day. 6 That the goods of Monasteries are not
al of one kind. 7 That it is another thing to come from Paganism to
Christianity, then to come from Popery, or some other Heresy. 8 How grievous
and incurable the sin of Sacrilege is. 9 Certain examples of Gods vengeance
against Sacrilegious persons.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
YOu will say; what need all this wast? this labor might have been well
spared. For seeing the same argument has been handled long since, and of late;
learnedly, and at large by men of our ownes: what need this foraine aid? In
such abundance of wits and writings, to transport Sarauia out of Latin into
English, is to bring owls to Athens, and to carry sticks to the wood; as it
is in the Proverb.

True it is: the cause has been undertaken long since; but it was late first:
and of late; but it was long first: And the same has been maintained learnedly
enough; if not with learning too much: and it has been handled at large also;
yet all little enough: Such is the female misconceit, of the lascivious
malecontent, and the male miscontent of the learned ignorant of this age, ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Notwithstanding,
seeing in the judgment of the most wise and best learned, this Germane Book
seemed for sound judgment inferior to none, and for grave discourse equal to
any, it was therefore thought by them an action no less commodious to the
people, then commendable to the Author; that he, who in the causes of present
controversy, has propounded his judgment unto all, should have his
judgment expounded unto us. The which although it has been curstly censured
by a certain suspicious and suspected Critic, emulous of his betters
credit, who in his professed lectures has used the remembrance of his name
in disdain, with Sarauia nescio quis: Yet his best auditors there, and others
his betters elsewhere, have found this difference between Sarauia and him:
that, besides his great learning, and no less experience (of the which this
great Censor never had the one, never will have the other) Sarauia has made
known to him and the whole world, by this his resolute definitive, who he is:
whereas the other in one whole term has so behaved himself in the same
cause, that albeit we all know who he is, yet we could never tell where to
find him. So hoppeth he between the stone and the Altar, that as a man
distract between fear and flattery, he makes up his doubtful resolution
with this harmless confession, Sentio quod sentio; quod? nescio. I know what
I know, what? I do not know.

I, but now we see the adverse part (partly by their lawless outrage, and
partly by their lawful restraint) to be now as impotent in their faction, as
they are odious in their opinion, to be at this time as unable, as they were at
all times unworthy to prevail: and then, what need we any longer strive when
the ennemy can no longer stand? I answer; that their increase was seen long
since, to be at the full, and their credit appears even now to be in the
Waine. For the which as we are to give God thanks, (who in taking Justice upon
some of them, has taken pity upon the whole Church,) so likewise are we to
pray for the rest, that in good time we may see, either their speedy
amendment, or their present preferment: (For it is time (O Lord) that thou
have mercy upon Sion, yea the time is come.) Notwithstanding, in the mean
time we have entertained this proffered aid, not so much to invade the
seditious brethren, or to bring home the resolved recreant, as to strengthen
the godly Subject, and to bring forward the well affected Protestant. With the
which if any man find himself agreeued let him show for it; but so, that
Sarauia may understand what he says.

For my part; if I have conceived him right, the fruit is yours: if I have
delivered him not right, the fault is mine. Sure I am, the Author meant you
well; and my Authors: And so do I.

The Translator.

TO THE MOST Reverend father in Christ, John by the providence of God Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of al England, and Metrapolitane. To the
renowned and most honored Heroicke, Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter, and high Chancellor of England. As also to the
noble and right honorable, Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter, and high Treasurer of England, of her Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel, my very good Lords, true felicity.
THe ancient received custom of dedicating books to men of name and
authority, is grown and grounded upon many reasons great and weighty, all
which it shall be needelesse for me to reuise in this place: But for my part,
there are chiefly three causes moving me to consecrat this my small travel to
you the most Honorable, and honored of me (my good Lords.) First, that thereby
I might testifye unto you the duty and devotion of a loyal and grateful
mind toward you, that find my self severally and singularly bound unto you
all and every one of you. For first, one of you (upon my repair into England)
disdained not to entertain me a stranger with no strange countenance, and
strange courtesy: The other also dained to accept me (unworthy) into his own
family: And the other of his especial favor brought to pass, that by her
Majesty's privilege and preferment, I might be made of a forreiner a freeman,
of an alien a Citizen. And seeing I have received all these favors without
any deed or desert of mine, (God thou know mine unworthiness) I were but too
ingrate and unkind, if I should bury in dark and deep silence your so rare
and religious demerites. But whereas I have no other thing to render or repay
unto your Honors, but a mine of thanks, and a thankful mind, that mind will I
always bear, and that duty in mind, so that I will not cease to worship the
sacred memory of your religious love toward me.

Another cause is, the very nature of the argument I undertake, the which I
could not well prosecute, without some particular mention of the Church of
England. In the which, seeing I have now my part and portion of a pastoral
province (and praised be the Lord, my lotte is fallen unto me in a fair
ground) might I not seem unmindful of my good and neglecting my duty, if when
I undertake the cause of those Churches which are alien and outlandish, I
should ouerslip the state of mine own Church now gremiall to me and mere
English? But when mine hearts desire and prayer to God is, that I may some
ways benefit my countrymen, if I forget thee O Jerusalem? And yet if I
should forget my duty herein, the mere alliance and relation of the matters
them selves, is such and so great, as that by ordinary course of necessary
consequence I must be enforced, to infer and praefer the mention thereof in
my books. But because I am but new made of Flemish, sterling, that is, of
Outlandish, English, it may be happily, that they which are homebred, will
think I deal not well with them, to deal with them, and that I meddle too
far, when I come so near. For which cause I thought it necessary for me,
to commend and commit my self unto your Honorable patrocinie, that this
stranger book might freely pass under your safe conduct. Neither shall it
grieve me much, though it be unjustly cast by most voices, if it may justly
pass your accoumpt: neither shall it hurt me much, though the enraged
multitude in disordered throngs cast stones at me, only if your Honors
vouchsafe to give me the white stone.

But the last cause is, for that I am in some doubt, how this discourse will be
taken of them, for whose sakes especially it was undertaken. For it is to be
feared, that they are so far from turning stones unto bread, that they will
make stones of bread, and that which I have done to relieve their weakness,
they will account as devised to undermine their estate, and so take that with
the left hand, which I proffer with the right. And in deed what other thing
should I look for at their hands, who (in lieu of my well deserving toward
them) have sought heretofore, rather to cast me off with disgrace, then to give
me up with reward? How desirous I have always been of public peace, and
how zealous over them that laid snares for my life, I dare appeal unto God
and men: and yet for my good will what great reward have I received at their
hands, but sharp revenge, or what better meede for my pains, then bitter
malice?

But no reason I should take this kind of cruelty unkindly, seeing it is so
common a case, and commonly incident to me, with many my betters. And therefore
far be it from me, that the injuries of a few (though no few injuries) should
so far prevail with me, that I should therefore less regard the better health
of the whole Church. Should I be for private wrongs so far enraged beyond all
sense, and besides my self, as to study to be revenged upon many good men,
being offended but of a few bad fellows.

After I was last called from hence by the Belgike Churches, I conuersed among
them in diverse places ten whole years together: in what time I found by
advised experience, that there were two things of great moment greatly missed
in those Churches, the which I could not then without grief, and cannot now
without sin conceal, namely, That the ministry of the Gospel received of
them by public authority, is not adorned by them with due honor: And again,
That wealth and worship in the order of the ministry, is thought a needless
thing to advance the estimation thereof in a civil society. (Men that we are)
misconceauing is the cause of all this. For now a days (for sooth) no Church
is thought reformed, unless First all Church dignities, be either thrust out
at the Church porch, or thrust down to the belfry, and then all the Church
goods, be either put in the great bag, or given to the greedy baggage. The
which error if it do proceed (as it will if it be not nipt in the head) it
will one day reuele, not only upon the church, but also upon the whole state a
greater misery, then can easily be driven into every common man's head. To the
which this also may be added, that there are many of opinion (and they are of
many opinions) That the abolishing of Bishops is not the least part of
reformation, and That their authority in the Church is crept in, not of any
divine institution of Gods word, but (that which not any Church before this
time did ever avouch) of the only error and ambition of man's wit. Our elders
and all ancient divines (for the preventing of Scisme, and conuenting the
headstrong and giddy headed rashness of many) held the prudent moderation of
one (in one City or province) to be ordained from above. And they knew very
well, that albeit the quirke of speaking (for so they speak) be found in many,
yet the art of governing, and the rule of well ruling, is known but of a few.

How great a stay a godly and prudent Bishop may be, to any troubled or
distressed State, ancient histories do plainly teach, and present experience
might make us learn. Do you not know (I know you are not ignorant) how that
many times, many things betide in a christian common wealth, which require the advice of Ecclesiastical Prelates? As also where the Gospel is publicly
authorized, that there are many things requisite for the Church, which cannot
be effected with out the civil Magistrate? And how then, are not they in a
peevish and a perverse error, which either exclude the Magistrate from causes
Ecclesiasticke, or sequester the Minister from affairs politic? (silly men
that they are) as if either the Christian Magistrate were no part of the
Church, or the sacred Minister not Citizen of the same common wealth? And yet
neither the Magistrate (if he be Christian) is to neglect the safety of the
Church, nor the Minister (if he be godly) not to regard the safeguard of the
state. But these two (the Magistrate and the Minister) so long as they shall be
distracted into parts, and as it were divorced in state the one from the
other, and shall not take sweet counsel together like friends, or not
communicate in consent for their common benefit, they cannot but conceive
diverse and doubtful surmises, fond yea, and some times false opinions of each
others government. The Magistrate that keeps fresh in memory the new broken
yoke of the Popes tyranny, fears least by any means he should fall again
into the like, though unlike. And therefore is jealous over the counsels and
conuenticles of the Clergy, and suspecteth always some snare to be laid in
them to entangle his liberty. Of the other side, the Pastors (so many as are,
or will be accoumpted faithful in their Ministry) cannot but be careful for
the welfare of their flock, and therefore seek by all means to benefit the
Church, and to shun those things which may prejudice the same: who when they
see diverse kinds of people to prevail in the Commonwealth, and they some of
them open professed enemies to the Church, some but suspicious and suspected
favorites, few faithful and unfeigned friends; no wonder though they dare
hardly commit their cause and their credites, them selves and their safeties,
to such Governors. Besides, they being ignorant of the common counsels, how
should they be good interpreters of such things as are done in the
Commonwealth? neither can such counsels be well communicated to the common
people, and yet reason would they should, seeing they are common.

If the States in the Low Countries (brought to low estate) had their learned
and reverend Bishops, in that estimation they ought to be, in every well
ordered state, no doubt with their vigilancye and moderation, they might more
easily have remedied their present miseries. I did complain (not without
cause,) to see the Church goods pilde and pilferd, and learned Pastors set to
their stipe^ds: Of the which, some in deed do live and relieve their families
(though porely God knows) and some again for the moity of their stipe^ds, and
the multitude of their familiars, are by no means able to keep open shop
windows. I speak not, (or need not) of them which are denied their wages, or
serve (like our soldiers) for cheese flemish, if that they can get it. But by
this means, when as (to the grief of al good men) I did see the most sacred
study of Divinity to languishe, that young wits were afraid of it, and old
heads a weary of it, Churches without Pastors, Schools wanting professors: I
lamented with my self, and sorrowed for these mischiefs, and those we might
easily coniect, would issue out of these as out of Pandoraes box. Neither did I
sorrow for these things to my self alone: I acquainted my griefs, where I
was acquainted. But because in those intempestuous times, I could not safely
either speak, or write my mind, without suspect of contention, covetousness,
or ambition, I contained my self disconte^t, expecting a fitter opportunity.
In the mean while, I could have wished that this argument might have bin
undertaken of some other, and of some other profession: And that doubtless
might have been performed of such an one with so much the more ease and less
envy, by how much the matter did less concern himself. But seeing no man
offered himself to this service, (and the service honorable) after many
delays, I overcame my self at last, and in the zeal of my duty, have
undergone that burden, which Atlas himself can not sustain alone: and
therefore in the conscience of mine own weakness, I come laden to your Honors
with mine ouer-burden, and lay down the same in three little books under
your names (thrice reverend and renowned.) And this also have I done with the
greater confidence, and the less conflict, for that both the truth of the
cause it self, will bear me up, that I slip not, and also your honorable
favors (as I hope) will bear me out, if I slip not.

And now, if it shall please God to put them in some better mind, whom these
things do chiefly concern, so that these may be commended of them, and they
amended by these, I verily shall rejoice in them, but they shall be beholding
unto you. But if these things displease them, and they find themselves
offended with my liberty, I shall find others (I doubt not) as amorous of the
present truth, as they are of their private humor, and as far in love with
reverend antiquity, as they are in liking with insolent novelty; unto whom I
persuade my self (though they should fore-speake the contrary,) this my
labor shall not be altogether unwelcome. Wherefore for your Honors I will
pray, and importune the most great and Almighty, that he would vouchsafe to
give you life, even a long life, for the benefit of the Church, and the
advancement of the kingdom of Christ.

London 4. Kal. April. Anno Dom. 1590. Your Honors most bounden Hadrian Sarauia

TO THE GODLY AND Faithful Ministers of the Church of Christ, throughout the
Low Countries, my brethren beloved in the Lord.
AT what time I lived at Leiden (worshipful and beloved) I many times, with
many of you, bewailed the state of the Church there: In the which, the devil,
(the devil it is) spreads his net, as many other ways, so especially now
with a certain new slight after another fashion: In the which he has his
gins and engines, nothing like unto those of old, when he went a hirding with
gainefull hypocrisy, and entangled the souls of Christian people with a kind
of costly superstition: then did the Clergy, and the Layitie ambitiouslie
contend, (as yet they continue under the Papacy) whether should exceed the
other: they in their pompous sanctimonie, or these in their superstitious
munificencie: So they, sold (and sell) at a dear reckoning: these, bought (and
buy) at the hucsters hands: The one deceiving, the other deceived; both in an
error, never a better. And is it not strange to see (a thing that is not
strange,) how superstition and hypocrisy is of more force and prevails more,
to conquer and lead captive the minds of men, then true and sincere religion,
which is pure and plain, without wealt or guard? But such is either the
negligence of men, or the nature of man, it will be deceived, and will deceive.
Who is able to recompt (and keep reckoning,) the quircks and the tricks, the
gybing and the iugling of the Roman Alcaron, by the which they hold play
with the simple, and play noddie with the peoples simplicity? The pains of
Purgatory, the Popes pardons, Images, false miracles, pilgrimage to statues,
shrines and crosses, relics of saints, bones, teeth, and ashes, vestments,
belts, and sandals, and a thousand such like trumperies? These are the martes
and the merchandise which they make over to the people for hid treasure, while
they sell the people for old shoes, What should I more say? They say
themselves, (and the more shame) they are not ashamed to say: That these and
such like, are the Religious illusions of the Religious. What a commodious
craft auricular confession is, the Jesuits (besides other the Romish Prelates
minions) do feel, and find. But now adays, because the true Ministers of
Christ, and the faithful stewards of his house are not trained up in these
trades, nor guilty of these trains, they are set at naught of naughty men.

And yet of old, when the people doted over their false Gods, and spared for
no cost, so they might satisfy their souls with neuer-satisfied superstition,
they were notwithstanding nothing so rank in seking to satisfy the rauine of
that unkind lust toward their false God and his worship, as they were slow
and slack to inquire after the true God his service, and his true servants:
and why then should it seem a thing rare or insolent among us, if the like
kind of unkindness be reuolued upon us in this age? For man to man, and age to
age is as like, as is the water to the water, day to day, to day and heareafter.

In what honor and estimation the Ministers of the Church are among the
Romanists, is well known to such as either now live, or at any time have
lived amongst them. But now, amongst us the professors of the Gospel, they
which sincerely teach the true religion, and truly teach what way leads to
heaven, and by what means we are reconciled to God, ar either nothing at al
acounted, or as nothing. Is any thing (for honor sake?) for pity sake
yielded unto them? it is by and by thought much of, and thought too much, be
it never so little. For which sin, not only the unkindness of the people is
to be condemned, as principally guilty, but our own foolishnes also may be
convicted, as accessorie faulty. And how? Forsooth a toy has taken us in the
head, and we have taken a toy in hand, by surprising the Popes tyranny, to
suppress our own liberty: As if indeed, the excessive riot, and not
expleable avarice of the Popish Clergy could by no possible means be
rebated, unless we thrust down the reformed Ministry beneath the
Bell-ferie, and hand over head lay wast all the possessions of the Clergy. A
passing device indeed, to bring this to pass (as it has already brought it
within come to pass) that the Church wants wherewith to nourish the sacred
Muses, and is feign to honor the painful Minister with monthly menstruous
fees.

From hence is foisted into the Church, a kind of temporal biter, after a new
fashion and an evil example: who chiefly attending, upon their own drudgerie,
by the way join hand with the Pastor in his province, and that for a year or
two at the most (that they may be good in their office.) And by this means,
(that which I account worse then all the rest) the beauty of the Church is
vanished, and that united force of the brethren which in placed in one Bishop,
who dare with confidence, and may with authority control the wicked in their
enterprises, is utterly lost and languished. For whilst every one is
despised, all are contemned and likewise, whilst every one takes care of his
own Curch only, they altogether neglect the good of the whole Church
generally. I spare to exemplify this: your selves suppose, what, and where
upon I speak it. But do you not see, or can you not conceive, how that many
things may daily chance in the Church, which concern all Churches in common,
and for the which, a present remedy must be had? In this case no private man
dare undertake the cause: and why? he sees and considers that the matter
pertains not to him, or to any one, or to a few, but unto all the rest of
that whole Province in common. But whilst he which could find in his heart to
put himself upon the action for the common good, yet finds many doubts in
his heart, and is still affeard least either himself should not be allowed, or
that he should perform not confirmed, by the rest; of necessity the time is
deferred in this necessity, and needs must a further time be expected, until
the brethren may be assembled. That a Synod should be called for every such
matter, it is both costly and inconvenient: and many times also before either
they could be called, or come together, either the mischief that was feared
would be received, or the occasion that was proffered would be ouer-passed,
whereby the evil might either altogether, or more easily have been removed.

Amongst you, the Church-goods are rifled and ruined without any reverend
regard of sacred or profane: as if (forsooth) it were religion for the Church
of Christ to be worth one dodkin in a christian Commonwealth: or as if
indeed it were the only error of the Church of Rome, that they are rich. Does
any thing remain yet vnransackt in any of your Churches? the better for those
Burgreeues and Burgomaisters in whose hands it is. As for your selves, there
is not so much as one mite left to be at your disposing: you that stand so
much in your ownlight, and have put out two lights with your too much lightness,
can you put out mine with an half penie? alas good souls: if you were every
one pore, yet might you be all rich. But now it is the common opinion, that
Pastors ought of congrutie to be poor and needy: and that is so deeply
infixed in the hearts of the simple people, that they can hardly be persuaded to
the contrary. Is it possible, but by such means it should one day come to pass
(if they thus proceed) that the whole Ministry of the Church should fall either
into utter decay, or wretched contempt? I was purposed (if I had stayed with
you) to have conferred about this matter with the States themselves. And verily
I would have exhorted and entreated the^, that they would take some better
course in this cause: I would have taught them, that they had no right at all
unto the church-goods: I would have proved and protested unto them, that
whatsoever calamities have befallen the Low Countries, they are al but the just
vengeance of God for their sacrilege: that the goods of Cathedral and
Collegiat churches, and also of many Monasteries, were destinate and
consecrated to the use of sacred studies: And last of all, I would have
informed them, and confirmed to them, that whatsoever has varied from the
first institution thereof, ought not to be destroyed, but restored by the
christian Magistrate. But this my good purpose was hindered, first by the
untimely death of the Prince of Orange, and then also for the Earl of
Leycester his sake: Least I might seem to have attempted the same, either at a
bad time, (in the greatest tumult of the country) or else by bad means
(presuming upon the favor and furtherance of my L. the Earl.

In the mean while, I might greatly wonder at the error of many, and they not
meanly conceited toward the Gospel: neither should I cease to wonder, were it
not that I know the Ministers themselves, whom the matter does more nearly
concern, to be the authors of that error. But when I consider with my self
the iniquity of these evil days, and the bad meaning of evil men, I cannot
well tell whether I might rather lament or rejoice in that their foul
oversight. For albeit to have the churches spoiled and left desolat of such
helps with the which it ought to be releued, may bring upon both Church and
State a greater misery then many can suspect, or any can avoid:
notwithstanding, that in the beginnings of reformation, there was nor mention
nor motion made for the Church-goods, it greeueth me the less; for that by
this means the adversary cannot well say, that we rather sought the treasure
of the Church, then the glory of God. For had they made any question of the
Church-goods, these cauils and quarrels might have taken some advantage of
them. But now, when as they esteemed of whatsoever the Papists possessed, as of
things nothing pertaining unto them, and referred all the whole matter to the
moderation of the Magistrate; by this means, Suspicion it self could not but
clear them of suspicion. So God sometimes does use the very ignorance of his
servants, to some good end: namely, when as a truth taught out of time, would
do more hurt then good. Notwithstanding, that which sometimes has been
objected, can neither be denied nor defended; that there were some which took
our part in hope of the pray only. And albeit these things were not altogether
unknown unto the godly at that time, (as their writings do witness) yet in
wisdom they chose rather to suffer and say little to that injury, then that
in have they should go about to offend any. And in this they did imitate Saint
Paul, who in the rich City of Corinth, had rather labor with his hands, and
so get his maintenance, then otherwise to give any occasion of suspect to a
nouice people, not seen into the dignity of his right Apostolic. And shall
I tell you? that only consideration was not the least cause, why my self
dared not bewray unto every one the silence of my thoughts: And yet (such was
my native weakness, or my foole-hardie forwardnes) I could not hide my self
from my brethren and companions, and some also of the Magistrates of Gaunt. But
I spoke not then so freely, as I mean to do in this discourse: For I always
feared, as I ought to do, least such as were but newly won to the faith of
Christ, might be happily lost by my indiscreet liberty, and my self brought
into a needless gealosie of avarice and ambition.

But now, seeing I am in that place and condition, in the which no man can
justly accuse me, as if I sought any especial commodity for my self, or
desired any other thing, then that which is commodious and necessary for the
Church: I thought it my duty to speak plainly, what I think of the goods and
possessions of the Church. Neither is it enough for me, that I am here well
provided for my self: I wish the like unto my brethren. And although I may
justly complain my self, to be injuriously forsaken of you, whom I ought to
have found the chief Patrons of mine innocence: yet notwithstanding, my love
and my Zeal, both toward the Church, and also unto you-wards, is not
therefore either altered, or alienated. And how then should I be less careful
for yours and your Churches good, then when my self was in the same ship with
you? Wherefore, seeing we have now sufficiently wincked at this error, as
well of the people, as the Magistrate, which (if it be suffered) will bring to
the Church, either a deadly ruin, or a desperate mischief: we may no longer
dissemble the matter; the Church it self must be taught her duty toward her
Ministry. It is a perilous and pernicious thing, to bequeath an evil
president unto our posterity: who shall take all for reformation, whatsoever
they received in the name of Reformation (for what cause so ever it was done.)
Men (as you know) for the most part, use rather to regard the deed, then to
respect the cause: what is done every man can tell, but for what cause it was
done, there are few which can conceive, or well consider.

I must needs confess, I have proceeded somewhat farther into this matter,
then my purpose was, when I came first hither: For that I see here in England,
by the evil presidents of other Countries, most men are carried away with the
same errors. Some streine their consciences so far, and open their mouths so
wide, that like dronken men they stretch and yawne after the Church-liuings,
and do even gourmandize them already in their hopes merciless, and bottomeles
conceits. And some again while they grutch the Pastors their fields, and envy
the Euangelique Bishops the riches of Romish Prelates, (as if it were not
lawefull for us to succeed them, and not exceed them) would seem to eat their
hearts in garlike (as they say) while they eat and spit their own gall in
malice. A strange opinion they hold, that the place, power, and authority, it
has pleased her Majesty and the rest of the states, the Bishops should
retain in this kingdom, is a grant utterly auerse unto the reformation of
religion. Wherefore now, what honor is due in a Christian Commonwealth to
the Ministers of the Church, and how forforth the same may extend, is to be
examined more at large.

But it is to be feared, least some will be scarcely well pleased, especially
such as be ignorant of the ancient Church government) with this my treatise of
the diverse degrees of the Ministers of the Gospel: and the rather, for that I
have noted in their newecome reformation two things not to be liked of: namely,
that the autentique order of Bishops is abrogated, and a novel kind of
Presbyters intruded. The which I have the rather noted, for that the common
sort of people are of opinion, that not the least part of reformation
consists in the dilapidation of Church-goods, in the extirpation of
Provincial Bishops, and in the creation of Demi-laicall, and mongrell
Presbyters. The which opinion of the people, I do therefore reprehend, not
that I dissallow, that certain grave seniours and godly men should consort
with the Pastors, (that is, the true Presbyters of the Church:) but that they
may know, (as they shall be taught) not to mistake them for those Elders, of
the which, in the Acts of the Apostles, and in Paul's Epistles there is often
mention, and is it not needful also, to point at an error betimes, least it
being by time confirmed, should not afterward be easily corrected?

If any man shall think my self in the error, or that I have gone further
then he likes well of: let him teach me that which is better. I will presently
alter my judgment, and give over the bucklers unto him that can do best. The
which I speak not as if I doubted, or were not thorowlie resolved, that those
things of the which I affirm in this book, were not assumed out of gods book.
(For I do verily believe that I have not swarued from that rule which God has
given me to follow.) But yet, if any man presume he can teach the contrary out
of the word, (and make not the word contrary) I am more ready to attend and be
taught, then to teach, and had rather be overcome, then overcome: condition,
that that only truth may prevail, which in truth ought to prevail. In the
mean while, as I have always borne, and bear with such as dissent in opinion
from me, (so long as they hold entire the Lord Jesus:) so likewise in the
same charity may they bear with me, if I dissent from them, I hartelie wish,
and entreat earnestly. If it shall please God, by the counsel of christian
Princes, that there may be a general and a free council celebrated, that (as
it becomes me) I refuse not to be judge of my judgment: but if otherwise,
neither I can be persuaded by others, nor persuade others: let us expect with
one accord the judgment of Almighty God, when every one shall render according
to the moitie of his talent, a reason of his Ministry. For me to contend with
my brethren after a bitter manner? it is no part of my meaning. If in any place
my style shall seem more sharp: believe me, (I will not fable with you) the
greatness of the mischief, not any private grief, has set an edge on it. And
to speak reason, what reason have I to be violent, or virulent in this
question? Seeing whatsoever is held amiss, I impute it to the error and
ignorance of art, not to the malice or evil meaning of men.

The horrible sacrilege of men is not so manifest to the world, as the
execrable authors thereof are unknown unto me: (and it greueth me not that they
are unknown.) Of whom then should I exclaim? Against whom should I
declaime? But whereas certain ungodly men are craftily crept in amongst us,
who make a show of religion, and would seem to favor the Gospel, and that not
so much of any devotion toward God, as in detestation of all godliness: I am
constrained many times, more earnestly to inueigh against the subtlety and
impiety of such: (let them be of what estate they may be, if they be of that
condition) For neither are our own colors clear of such stains: against
whom can there be any worme-wood too bitter?

This I note, that if at any time I name the Hollonders, I note not the whole
nation: (God forbid) but only those that degenerate from the natural
integrity of their own nation. But are not they so much the more worthy
greater ignominy, by how much the more fondly they abuse their own authority,
and the peoples simplicity? such therefore I must necessarily, and may
worthelie accuse of Atheism and irreligion, the rest, I cannot excuse of
error and ignorance only. Indeed error and ignorance do sometime mitigate
the guilt of the offender, but never can it obliterate the stain of the
offense.

It will seem a hard matter I know unto some, that sacrilege should be openly
reprehended, and unto some an absurd thing, that in the policy of the Church,
Bishops should be required. For there are here in England a certain number
of wicked men, (and I am very sorry for them) who are so far out of order
with that order, as if no Ecclesiastical Discipline were to be had under them.
Amongst whom, the quarrel is grown so far, that now they deuorce
themselves from the communion of the English church, as Papisticall and
Antichristian, and so betake themselves to their private and not permitted
conuenticles. Whom I could do no less then lightly note in this place,
because they seem to patronage their odious scisme, and mutinous huggor-muggar
by the precedent presidents of our foraine Churches. O God thou know, and
themselves cannot be ignorant, that the first peregrine churches which were
here in England, had their Lord Bishop Alasco, and these which at this day are
under the protection of the most gracious Elizabeth, do acknowledge the
Bishops of those Diocesses in the which they are, and to them they supply. But
(thanks be unto God) there are others, who being somewhat more mild and
moderate in their proceedings, do not altogether estraunge themselves from
the assemblies of their churches: but yet, they have the Bishops in emulation
also, and promise unto themselves a golden world, could they but once bring to
pass, that by a preposterous Alchymy of earthly policy they could turn gold
into dross, that is, Bishops into Presbiters, and their revenues into
annuities. But to them I dare say, and can foreshew, that they shall bring,
themselves? The whole state Ecclesiastik into deep disdain, disdain worse
then themselves deserve. And whereas (the Lord be praised for it) we have now
some good Discipline, it will come to pass that then they shall have none at
all, but voluntary, which as soon as it is begone, will be gone. I omit the
tumults and contentions with the which they shall first trouble and turmoyle
both heaven and earth. But this is plain, and I dare promise them, that they
which were the first authors thereof, will prove their first enemies, so sone
as under these colors they shall have obtained their desires.

The calamities of your present churches your selves see, and suffer: but from
whence they arise, or what is the true remedy (pardon me, I beseech you, if I
speak as I think) you seem not to see or conceive at all.

Do you not hear of the turbulent state of other Churches? and you know what
they were from the beginning. Where, if they had entertained for a popish
Prelat, a true BB. and for Romish masmongers Euangelique Ministers, contented
and contenting themselves, with the rites and revenues of their own Churches:
no doubt all things amongst them, had continued more peaceable and prosperous,
as well in Church as, Commonwealth.

The like I affirm of other provinces, from whence is exiled the tyrant of
Churches. But what can be done, where the minds of men are foreseasoned with
prejudice, and already resolved, That to be ruled by bishops, and to be
relieved by Tithes (and other oblations of the people,) is a point of Popery.

But may I not be so bold to tell them, (and I will tell them but the truth)
that these, and such like medicines as they go about to administer unto the
Church maladies, are like to prove but prouocations unto further mischiefs?
Admit the drugs they concoct be not simply offensive, yet is it to be
considered, (and wise men will consider) whether the faintnes and infirmity of
the whole body of the commonwealth, may abide the same. Here there is need of
great wisdom, and no less moderation: the which as it may be in many, so
must it be in one, which may execute the same: and this is he, which is not to
look over one part, but to watch over all, not of the whole world, (which
never any mortal thing, or could, or can,) but of one City or province, so
far forth as the power of man may extend it self. And may we not also more
saflie walk in the steps of the ancient fathers, then rashly to step aside
into tracts of our own treading?

Now, how you will accept of this my liberty, I cannot well tell, but I hope
well of you, and commit the whole cause unto God himself. This I am persuaded,
and this have I learned, that in an unstayed estate, it is not the part of a
good Citizen, to suspend his censure of the Commonwealth, nor of a faithful
Christian, to suppress his opinion of the Church of Christ. For mine own
part, if in this dangerous enterprise, I shall obtain that only, which I
have propounded unto my self, I shall have just occasion to give thanks unto
my GOD: but if it fall out otherwise, yet shall I have discharged my duty
unto my Brethren, and performed my vow to the Church of GOD. Unto the which,
I have hitherto thought my self indebted as much as this comes unto, That a
known error ought not to be ouer-slipped in the silence of me. But put
case, I do small good upon those, for whose sakes especially I have traueiled
in this duty; yet shall their remain a perpetual note of that notorious
error unto all posterity, that they yet at the length may amend that, in the
which they have found their Fathers to have been faulty.

London the fourth of the Kal. of April. Desirous of your welfare. Hadrian
Sarauia.

To the courteous Reader.
Whosoever thou be (gentle Reader,) into whose hands this book shall come, in
any case I would not have thy mind troubled with this discourse, as if we did
reuerse some graund Article of thy faith, when we do but restore, (for so we
hold it behofefull) the grave Senate of Bishops into the reformed Churches (so
called.) Do we cross herein the judgment of some late writers of great name?
Why then judge you, (and judge me worthy of double blame) if I should be
either so frontlesse, or so forgetful at least, as to adventure upon this
contradiction, of mine own head: suppose ye me at the least, backed with the
pillar of truth, (the sacred scripture) and borne out with the consent of the
ancient Fathers, and countenaunced with the continued custom of the whole
Church. What then? (Will you say) did they, whom you call men of name, see
nothing? I answer, they did see indeed, that which I see: But as they which
take upon them to repair an old house, albeit within doors there be many
pretty romes, and necessary corners, which they would willingly, and might
well be reserved; yet notwithstanding, when they behold on every side, the
most parts rotted and ruinated, and those good parts to hang together by
putrified and imperfect joints, they are in despair, that the house can not
be well turguised, except the whole frame should be ouerturned: Even so the
reformers of gods house, albeit they did see to their grief, many excellent
things which might well, and well worthy, be reserved, yet perceiving them to
be either utterly disteined with superstition, or doubtfullie entangled
therewith, and consequently dispairing, that they could not root out the
grounded superstition and tyrrany of the pope, unless they plucked up by the
roots many singular ornaments of the church; in the anguishe of their zeal
they cried at once, down with it, down with it, even to the ground. And so is
it come to pas that together with impiety and Idolatry (if not before them
both) such and so many instruments are taken away, as might have been very
great helps to the Church, both for the preserving of Discipline, and also for
the retaining of that dignity to the Ministry, which is decent and requisite
in a civil society.

But to the purpose: although in material things, that which we have
exemplified before, many times must be so of necessity: yet in moral causes
there is no such necessity. The state therefore of this question (friend
reader) is not of thy faith in Christ, or of thy souls health, but by what
guides especially, and governors, thou may be best lead in the way of
truth, and kept in the path of eternal life. And upon this point is all this
variaunce. For there are some of opinion, that all discipline of manners, is to
be referred to the Magistrate, and that the Minister is to be restrained to the
bare Preaching of the word, and ministering of the Sacraments. The which fancy
of men, seeing it has neither the word of God to confirm it, nor any
president of our Elders to give countenance to it, I can but wonder, how so
friuelous an opinion, could once either creep in, or peep out of the heads of
Divines. But there are other which yield (as they ought to do) the power of
Ecclesiastical censures to those Bishops and Elders, which are such, both in
name and indeed: unto whom, they deny not that authority which God gave unto
his Apostles, and their successors the Bishops. And last of all, there is a
third kind of them, which rejecting the order of Bishops, join with the
Pastor certain annual Elders, unto whom they commit the regiment or the
Church, and the ordering of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Thus did the
Philosophers of old, when it came in question, what kind of Government was
best: Of whom, some preferred the Monarchy of one, and that (as it is indeed)
they judged the best: yet others maintained, that an Oligarchy or joint
government of a few, was as good as the best: again there were others, who for
a Democratie, or state popular, would yield to none of the rest. And last of
all, there were some, who to the former three added a fourth, which they
indifferently, (not equally) mixed of all three; and that they would make good,
to be as good as they al, and better then any of the rest. But in the mean
while they considered not this, that any kind of government as it is in it
self, is not so much to be considered in governance, as is the nature and
condition of them, who are to be governed, and for whose good that kind of
government is ordained. So that now, that form of policy is to be
accounted best, not which is such in his own nature, but that which is most
necessary for the people, the time, and the place. For which cause, (as I
conceive) GOD himself in the secrecy of his wisdom, has not set down unto
any nation, any perpetual form of government, the which it was not lawful to
alter according to the incidencie of time, place, and persons.

But in the government, of the which we dispute, the case is far otherwise: for
in that it proceeds immediately from God, men may not alter the same
according to their fancies, neither is it necessary: For the wisdom of God
has so tempered the same, that it repugneth no form of civil government. In
deed, where any one whole state is become Christian, the government happily
may receive some kind of alteration, but not such as shall alter the nature of
it. Were they before in government diverse, and in no one thing alike? now
they consort in one, and lend each other their mutual aid. Wherefore,
whatsoever other men think in this matter: doubtless the Christian
Magistrate, in a well ordered state, ought not to be held as a private person,
either in Church or commonwealth. The which distinction being not
sufficiently looked into, has distracted us into diverse errors in Church
Discipline. For my part, (and the best will take my part,) I hold, that the
state of Bishops is necessary in the Church, and that Discipline is best and
from above, in the which, godly Bishops, with the not nicknamed Elders do
sit at the helm.

And yet when I consider with my self, the badnes of these times, and the
badde condition of some places, in the which it has pleased God, by the hands
of learned and religious men to gather together his dispersed flock out of
the captivity of Babylon. I do not see indeed, how the true Bishops could have
been restored. In the Churches of Flanders and Holland, my self have sustained
the office of a Pastor: but shall I tell you? I cannot easily tell, how many
impediments I there found in this business. But shall that which was done
extraordinarily, and partly of necessity, and that but in a certain few
places, and that but in our age only, prescribe a law to the world besides?
This divorce of minds and opinions had never been, were it not for the tyrrany
of some misrulie Bishops, a novel opinion is crept up, opposing it self
against all antiquity, which holds all Bishops generally in jealousy: and
yet, the like and no less suspicion is raised of our new consistories also,
wheather rightlye or wrongfully, I will not say.

Wherefore, he that will undoubtedly attain to the certain knowledge of these
things indeed, must be sure, that he examine and try the cause him self,
deuoyd of all passion or preoccupation of affection. Many times within these
six and twenty years, have I delivered my mind unto my friends in familiar
conference, (though not at all times, nor to all) concerning the government of
Bishops. What they would conceive of me for so doing, I might easily coniect
by others, who had in like manner reueiled themselves unto their brethren. For
as it happened, a certain disputation fell out between certain Ministers,
concerning the same position: in the which M. Doctor Villerius, (whose name I
cannot remember without due reverence) assumed, that the authority of Bishops
was not so rashly to have bin rejected. But Lord, how they were netled and
nestled with this? as if with that one word, he had utterly ouerthowen that
equality, which they expected in the French churches, and which they thought
requisite in all Ministers. O grief: to me they made known their grief, and
(pitiful complaining) they complained to me thereof. But what should I here
do? defend him I dared not, (and yet I liked well the cause of his opinion,)
least I should incur the like suspicion of aspiring thoughts. But from that
time forward, that conference gave me occasion to search and sift out more
narrowlye, those matters by my self. And that which then happened to me, I
doubt not but is incident to many others with me, who in wisdom see, also and
consider, that the authority of Bishops is greatly wanting in ours, and al
Churches.

There are some which can endure, nor equal, nor superior: I give God thanks,
I can see my superior without envy, and sustain my inferior without contempt.
But now, seeing I am here in England, no man can challenge my affection as
guilty of a Bishoppricke, or as if I seek dominion over my brethren: (the
calling I affect, but not to be called.) And therefore now I dare more boldly,
and will more freely speak what I think, then before I thought it requisite;
neither was it convenient, when I conuersed among brethren neuer-a better.

Yea, but I may seem in this action, to sooth up the Bishops, and seek their
countenance: countenance? nay then must I seek further, and never look the
Bishops in the face, whose condition in this thankles age, is more subject to
the envy and obliquie of men, then my self am. And indeed, if that were all,
and all but so little, it were the part of a wary child, and him that would
husband his credit to make the most of it, rather with safety and silence to
say nothing, and with patience and policy, to expect the issue of these
things. The which I dare say, I also could have done as well as others,
without displeasure to my self, or disfavor to any. But what moved me, God
knows: men may construe my fact as themselves affect: but it is the Lord that
judges my soul. Notwithstanding, let the courteous Reader conceive my meaning
in few words: I desire to benefit the churches already, and to be reformed,
to extirpate Scisme where it is rooted, and to prevent it where it is rising.
He that thinks this cannot be done by these means, shall have his own saying
for me: but yet the event of things (mother of fools,) will one day make it
plain, how good and profitable my meaning was; and in the mean while, the
Church (if it beware not) may receive that detriment, which it cannot repair.

The ground of our salvation, is to know God, and whom he has sent, Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior, the Bishop of of our souls. But as in every
thing which men go about: whether weauing, caruing, or any other craft, of the
which, either the City, or the civil Magistrate has any care, that it should
be well done, there must be a decent order kept, and a diligent ouer-sight
had of the works, the which by how much the more curious it is, by so much the
things themselves do flowrish the better, and continue the longer: So likewise
in Religion, the same order and ouer-sight ought to be had, if we will have the
same to flowrish amongst us, or to continue pure and intemerate for ever. But
that al men do not agree about the manner of ordering and governing the Church,
why should that trouble the quiet of any peace-able man? Do ye not know,
that the more profitable and necessary a thing is to be used, the more lets
and delays are made by the enemy, either to infect, or else to interrupt the
use thereof? Was there ever at any time, any thing so clear and manifest
among men, that was out of all controversy? How then know thou this, that
thou know nothing? Or how comes it in question among men, whether a man
sees, or does that, which in very deed, he both sees and does? Without
controversy there is no part of Philosphie, or precept of Divinity, no point
of Religion, which has not been called into controversy; This sore traueile
has God given to the sons of men, that they might be exercised therein. But
the vanity of man's will, detracteth nothing from the verity of any thing.
And therefore, go to gentle Reader, be doing with the sequel, and do well by
it.

THE PRAEAMBLE.
THe surprising of the Bishop of Rome his tyranny, to whose scepter (a
croisier) all churches, and kingdoms, and empires were enthralled, is, now of
late grown so hot, that now a days, all Primacie, and the name of Primacie
is found guilty, (not guilty,) and thought worthy to be exiled the Church
of Christ: (wisely.) For by that means, all the tyrranie of Prelates may be
subdued. But they are far wide in my judgment. The Tarquines once exiled
Rome, the very name of King becam odious among them: as if (for-sooth) with the
name of those tyrants, tyranny had ceased. But were they not afterward (and
then justly) thralled and threshed, as men thresh corn, with more, and more
kinds of tyranny, then if they had retained still the sovereign name of Kings
and their princely authority? Neither indeed, is there any tyranny at all in
the name of a King, but in the nature of a Tarquine. And the like we may
justly say in this action: that the pride and tyranny, with the which the
Church of Christ was wearied and wasted, was not in the Primacie of Bishops and
Archbishoppes, but in the persons which did abuse their authority, and going
beyond their commission, extended the bounds of their Province, further then
might lawfully stand with the modesty and moderation of christian Religion: by
which means indeed, the power of Rome is become excessive and insupportable.
But shall I now, upon this bare presumption, indite of tyranny, the more
ancient form of Church policy, and so many godly men, (or rather Gods
amongst men) of rare learning, sincere lives, and sound Religion? Or shall I
condemn of error, those sacred and religious Synodes, in the which, holy men
of God did ratify that ancient policy of the Church, which with reverence
(as they ought,) they received of their godly predecessors? Far be that
sin from my thoughts, as far as is this impure age from their perfections.
For albeit I am not ignorant, that both Fathers and Councels may err, (if they
enact against the will and word of God,) notwithstanding, it follows not,
that therefore they erred in this. But if so be we were thus equally affected
toward others and our selves, that as we know a natural infirmity to be
universally infused in the natures of all men, so with all we would acknowledge
the same, to be particularly imprised in our selves also: we would then more
diligently search and pry into the reprehension of our selves, rather then of
others: But now it is far otherwise with us. Is there any thing in the Fathers
(for some especial cause moving us) misliked of us? By and by we have this
theoreme at our fingers end: We must remember, they were but men; and because
men may easily err, we muster whatsoever we mis-conceiue of them, among the
errors of that age. In the mean while, we never remember our selves, that we
also are but men, and therefore may err with them: yea, we are such men,
(neither are we exempt from the common infirmity of men) who may then er, when
we think amiss of them, and in that very thing may we err, for the which
we condemn them.

This is once: that against the constant and consonant conclusions of the
ancient church, we ought not to attempt, or admit any innovation, without a
plain commission from Gods holy writ: and this also I dare boldly say, that
whosoever takes away al authority from the Fathers, he leaves none for
himself. Indeed it must be confessed, that the Fathers were men, and that
they had their wrinckles: yet can it not be denied, that to have our Fathers to
be our Patrons in the principal points of faith, and externe policy of our
church, (things controuerted between the Popelings and us) is a matter of no
small moment, and of especial account. And albeit, the uniform consent of
Gods children from the Apostles times unto this day, may not be compared with
the eternal word of God: Notwithstanding, of right it may come in, and stand
for the second place.

The custom of gods people, received of all Churches through out the whole
world, is in manner of a law, sacred and inviolable: Neither is there any
likelihood, that there could ever have been an universal consort of all
Churches and ages, without either the authority of gods word, or the tradition
of the Apostles. Notwithstanding, for as much as no consent, no custom, no
ancient prescription, can, or ought to prevail in the Church of Christ,
against the word of God; Therefore, those reasons are to be weighed, and those
Scriptures to be examined, which moved the Fathers to intertaine, and
continue that Church government, which our new reformers will in no case agree
upon; that we may certainly know, whose is the error; theirs, or ours.

The time has been, when no good men disallowed of Bishops and Archbishops:
but now, in despite of the Popes tyranny, and his accomplices, it is come to this
pass, that their very names are called into question: and that of diverse men,
for diverse causes. Some, because they are (as they suppose) the devises of
Antichrist, or his forerunners, think them unworthy thee Church, and worthy
to be cast ouer-boorde. Others, yet more modest, in some reverence of
antiquity, think they may be borne with all for a time, (although in the mean
time they allow not of them) until such time, as commodiouslie the names may
be antiquate with the things themselves. In the mean while, for that they
know, (neither can they be ignorant) to what singular effect the Church of God
has bin governed by grave and godly Bishops, they have not the face to
condemn them openly: yet because they see certain reformed Churches of this
age, to be governed without Bishops: It is enugh: they have not the power any
longer to tollerat the more ancient government. O the regiment of Pastors and
Elders passing all antiquity, our souls have longed for thee, and we have a
desire unto thee: for that thou alone art grounded upon the Lord Jesus his
institution, and thou, (if any) art wholly purified of all tyranny and ambition.

O, but by your leave (good brethren) the shadow you embrace, is no substance:
neither is the plot you conceive, a priueledged place. Are you so far in love
with your liuelesse Pigmalion, the work of your own hands? I know who is not:
and he has reason for his, why not; For neither is your new draught of
strange government, sufficientlye proved by the word of God: neither is it
yet, (or can at any time) be confirmed by the example of our Elders. And how
should it? (if we should judge aright of it) seeing it was partly unknown unto
them, as a thing insolent and not heard of: and partly condemned of them, as a
thing Heriticall, and not approved of. Wherefore, to speak the plain truth,
without flattery or partiality: I think of this new form of Church
government, as some think of our Bishops regiment: Namely, that it is but a
devise of man's conceit, and there to be tolerated, where a better cannot be
obtained. And contrariwise; that which is disallowed of some, as devised by
man, seems unto me to be the very ordinance of God, and the only true
government of the Church; as that which has his institution from God; not only
in the old, but in the new Testament. But because it is defiled with the
manifold abuses of men: that which were to be laid upon the person, is
imputed to the function; as if (forsooth) no such miscariage might befall this
their novel kind of government.

The Romish Antichrist, with his Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and
Metropolitanes, has so troubled and entangled the Church of Christ, that
tyranny it self, is thought to be masked under those honest and honorable
titles. It is most true: He that is once stong of a Serpent, suspecteth every
stone: and once bitten of a dog, is afraid of every cur. Some therefore, that
they might apply some remedy to this malady, have reuersed those names, and
yet retained the same things; and for Bishops, have anointed Superintendents,
and for Archbishops, general or provincial Superintendents: as if the
controversy were not for the thing it self, but for names sake. But (wise as
we are) seeing the signification of words, is variable and voluntary: when we
agree in truth, what need these garboyles about terms? If the forms of
government, which are signified by those terms, are contained in gods word;
Is there any reason or sense, that in disgrace of those names, these forms
should not be retained of us? If any man object, that in the government of
Bishops there are many corruptions: I make no question of that; So we might
cavil with the government of the civil Magistrate: has it not his
corruptions? Have they not their infirmities? Yet was there never any that had
his five wits, who thought that a sufficient reason to remove those from their
place, that are president in the state. Wherefore, our question is not, how the
Bishops have abused their authority, but whether the Lord has so forbidden
this their Primacy, that there may be, nor Pastor over Pastor, nor Bishop over
Bishop, in the outward policy of the Church. As for the rest, if any will
accuse the Bishops or their Consistories, either of neglect duty, or corrupt
dealing: no man will be their hinderance, why they may not prosecute that, (and
persecute them) before the chief Magistrate. I take not upon me the apology
of any Bishop: I am not so worthy; they are not so weak, as that they need
my Patrocinie; they are able to say for themselves, and to gainsay their
accusers; only I lament, that the antique order of church government, (of
great and long esteem with our forefathers) should be negligentlie lost, or
violently taken from us: and I fear me greatly, least in the infelicitie of
this age, it be utterly taken from us. For who seeeth not, and greeueth not to
see, how men are set together upon mischief? even to reduce the whole
Ministry of the church, to the bare Ministry of the word.

But this our present controversy, can by no means better be decided, then
by conferring the orders of the Ministry in that order as they were ordained
of God, and delivered of the Apostles: according to their singular degrees, and
several seasons, as they were then in use: So shall we easily learn, what
order is consonant to the word of God, and what dissonant: the which, that I
may the better perform; there are two things which afford me fit ingresse
thereunto. The first is, the first institution of those several orders: The
second is, that one place of S. Paul to the Ephesians, the fourth chapter,
where he sets down the diverse Ministeries of the church, distributed into
their several degrees. Wherein the first place are invested (as the chief
Patrons, and first Patriarchs of the gospel) Apostles; in the second,
Prophets; in the third, Evangelists; in the fourth, Pastors and Doctors. Of
all the which, we are now to discourse in their due order. And albeit Paul
seem to write of the functions given to the church after the Assention of
Christ: Notwithstanding we will look back a little further for this matter,
neither will we cease our diligent persute, until we come to that time and
place, in the which Christ selected his twelve Apostles; and so return by the
seventy and two Disciples, whom he ordained also, and added to the Apostles,
for the preaching of the gospel throughout Iewrie.

And albeit, this discourse do chiefly intend the distinction of Ministers;
yet by the way, we have somewhat to say of Deacons also. For whereas the
doctrine of life, does not nusle us up in any idle contemplation of good
things, but rather traineth us up in the practice of all goodness, especially of
christian charity: Therefore of the Ministry of the gospel, there arises an
other Ministry, which exercises it self about bodily necessaries of this
life, and consequently has imposed upon it the dispensation of the church
stock: whereby it comes to pass, that there is a twofold Ministry of the
church: One, which only respects the glory of God, and ou souls health: An
other, which regards the procuration of earthly things, and the preservation
of this present life. After these things handled, and set out of hand as I
may: in the sequel of this my travel, I will entreat of that honor and
reverence, which by the law of God, instinct of nature, and right of nations,
is proper and peculier to the sacred Minister. And last of all, against the
gourmandiers of church goods, I will set down and lay before their eyes, the
odious sin of Sacrilege, with the dires and punishments accompaning the same.
And these three things, according to the variety of their natures, I have
distinguished into three books: but because they are of some affinity, and
rise together insequence, I have also laid them together in this one volume.

Doctor Sarauia, of the diverse degrees of Ministers.
What the Ministry of the Gospel is, and what be the parts thereof. Chap. I.
ALthough this present Treatise does chiefly aim at the inequality of
Ministers, yet notwithstanding I take it a good way, or not much out of the
way, if we set on first with the definition of the Ministry: that thereby it
may the better appear, what is common to the Ministers among them all, and what
is proper to every one in his particular order.

Upon diverse grounds of the Scripture, diverse definitions may be diuersely
framed; but I comprise them all in one word or two, of the Apostle Paul: and
upon his bare word I affirm: 1. Cor. 4.1. 1. Tim. 3.16.
That the Ministry of the Gospel is a certain dispensation of the mysteries
of God, which were revealed unto the world by the coming of Christ. Where I
call a mystery, not only that doctrine of the wonderful counsel of God in the
redemption of mankind, but also all other things which God has annexed unto
that doctrine. And those I resolve into three sorts: Whereof the first is, The
preaching and publication of the Gospel: the second is, The use and
administration of the Sacraments: the third is, The exercise and execution of
Ecclesiastical government.

The preaching of the Gospel is a sacred Embassee in the name of Christ, in
the which sinners are entreated to reconcile themselves to God; or thus; It is
the publishing of that doctrine of free pardon of sins, which Christ himself
sued forth from his Father, and purchased with his precious death; or otherwise
also thus; It is the doctrine of the free justification and sanctification of
the holy Ghost, which is obtained by faith in Christ Jesus. Many other
definitio^s might be added, were it not that I delight to be brief: Of these,
if you couceiue what the Gospel is, and the preaching thereof, it suffices, and
I am satisfied. To the second part of this ministry, do appertain the
commands of the Lord, to baptize the faithful and to administer the Lords
Supper. Mat. 16.19. and 18.18.
But to the third part (which is of government) is reserved the power of the
keys of heaven, and the pre-eminence of binding and losing upon earth. And
this authority has two branches, whereof the one co^priseth the Ordaining of
Ministers, the other co^prehendeth the Censure of manners. Act. 14.13.
By this power the Apostles ordained Bishops and Elders in the church, unto
whom they demised their authority; that all things might be done duly and
decently, and that good order might be mantayned in the Church of Christ. In
the assurance of this power, the Apostle delivers unto Satan, the stiff
necked and self willed enemies of the truth; and of this power, in his
Epistles he many times inter serteth imperious menaces with gentle admonitions.
But of this matter there is some controversy in these days: have you not
heard of it? neither did our fathers. For there be some of strange opinion (but
strongly opinionat) that the whole Ce^sure of manners is to be set over to the
Magistrate; and how so? because it appertains to his duty to take care for
good order and public honesty, and to take punishment of disordered persons
and pernicious offenses. But to the Pastor (under a christian Magistrate) no
such matter. Let him only teach virtue and tax vice, and administer the
Sacraments hand over head. In deed he may admonish al men to prove themselves
before they eat of that bread and drink of that cup: to the which if they do
obey, it is so much the better; but if not, yet that must be left between God
and their conscience. Forbid any man the Communion? God forbid.

Is it not to be wondered, that they which confess that the Minister has
power of binding, should not consider that the same Minister has the like
power of loosing also? Do they not know, that there is the like reason of them
both? or can they not conceive, that the effects being contrary, they are
performed of the Pastor with contrary actions? It is without all controversy,
that sinners are loosed by the Ministers, when remission of sins in the name
of Christ is pronounced to the faithful; But when as by the same power, the
wrath of God and vengeance eternal is denounced against the unfaithful, and
that they are denied the sweet comfort of the holy Sacraments, who doubts,
but that they are bound in like sort? Is it not abhorring from the duty of a
faithful Pastor, to let in Wolves into his masters sheepfold? so is it also,
if he thrust not out those, which are closely crept in. If so be it so fall
out, that any man fall from the faith after baptism, or when he confesses
Christ with his lips, that he deny him in his life, and within himself crucify
again the God of life; What? is there here no part of the Pastors office to be
performed? He shall restrayn (they will say) the disobedient, and release the
penitent. Very good. But seeing these things cannot be done, but with contrary
facultyes; as to the penitent he shall pronounce the sweet promises of Gods
mercy and receive him into the Church; So to the disobedient he shall denounce
all the dires and execrations of Gods wrath, (that he is a recreant from the
kingdom of God, that he is exiled the City and forbidden the house of God)
and he shall deny the dog returned to his vomit, the bread of the children of
God. Wherefore as a faithful dispenser of the mysteries of God baptiseth none
that was once an infidel, without some public confession of his faith: so
neither does he receive to the Communion a notorious sinner, without apparent
conversion of life. This is old Divinity.

But to spend many words in the confutation of this conceit, is no part of my
meaning, neither would it quite for cost; this only cause would require a whole
quire of conclusio^s, and that too painful a course, for so needles a
discourse. This only seems to me a sufficient confutation thereof, that it
is a new and an inexpert error, crossing the advised judgment of all ancient
Divines: that I urge them not with the Heathen, more holy then themselves, with
whom there was always great difference, between things sacred and profane.
But if Popish Prelates have heretofore abused, and abuse at this day the lawful
power of the church, by their lawless tyranny, shall their unlawfulness make
a lawful thing of none effect? Together with religion a law was made, which
excluded the irreligious from religion, since the world began. And is not then
the condition of the Church present to be pitied, being now come to this stay,
that when as it ought to be the school of virtue, it will not endure the
censure of conformity? And that which to the Heathen (men rude and untaught in
the true worship of God) seemed most beautiful in it self, and no less
beneficial to the common wealth, should altogether of us Christians be
neglected as needelesse, or contemned as erroneous?

But to return to the principal issue in this controversy: albeit the
ministry of the Gospel committed to the pastors of the Church, be one and the
same in them all: yet in this third part, concerning the diverse degrees of
authority, which first the Lord himself constituted, and afterward the
Apostles continued, there is great ods between them, and no small inequality
to be found among them. Amongst the which, there is no controversy, but that
the Apostles have the first degree of dignity, Evangelists the second, Prophets
the third, Pastors and Elders the fourth, Doctors the last. For as the
authority of an Apostle was greater then of an Evangelist or a Prophet, and of
a Prophet greater then of a Bishop or an Elder: so was the authority of Titus
and Timothy, who were both Elders and Bishops, greater then was the authority
of those Elders, whom by their Apostolic commission themselves had created in
every Town. And albeit the Baptism of Christ be one and the same, by whom so
ever it be administered, whether of an Apostle of the highest, or of an Elder of
the lowest order, and the doctrine of the Gospel is neither better nor worse
which is delivered of these, or of those: Notwithstanding good order of
government does not permit, that the authority of al should be all alike, or
that the like commission should be granted to these, and them; the constant and
continued custom of the Church ministry, derived from the Apostles time, and
unrepealed unto this day, does euince the same.

The first creation of the twelve Apostles, and the seventy Disciples, does
contain a manifest demonstration of this whole matter. For that the beginnings
of the old, and new Church might accord: First the twelve Apostles were elected
to be the first Patriarchs and progenitors of a new people: but afterward,
when the harvest was greater then the laborers, and the kingdom of Heaven
already began to suffer violence, as the Lord joined with Moses in the old
Testament seventy Elders, to assist him in the governance of his people: so in
like manner upon the like occasion, our Savior added unto the twelve
Apostles, seventy other Disciples. And so in the first infancy of the Church,
we may see how the Lord ordained two diverse degrees of Ministers: whom when he
distinguished in number, and disseuered into distinct companies, did he not
declare, that in honor and authority they were not equal, not all of a
company? The which thing verily he would never have done, had he once known
(and he should know) that it had been a sin, for Ministers to be diverse in
degree, and not equal in dignity. And these were the first preachers of the
Gospel under the Lords direction, whiles himself was yet resident among them.
But after he ascended into Heaven, he raised up Prophets also in the Church,
when as at Whitsontide he poured forth of his spirit, whereby he might make
his Disciples as miracles, not only for their manifold languages, but also for
their divine wisdom and foreknowledge. But in process of time, when the
number of Churches increased and multiplied exceedingly, so that themselves
were now no more able to ground and govern them; they took unto them of their
followers, and made them their fellow laborers. Who although they were of rare
faith and ripe gifts, yet were they the scholars and followers of the
Apostles and Evangelists, much inferior to their masters. But when as not
only the number of the Churches, but the multitude of believers increased
still above number, then were there ordained for several Churches, several
Pastors, who in that age without distinction were called Bishops and Elders.
And of all these we purpose to speak particularly, so soon as I shall have
showed you my mind concerning the diverse kinds of Calling to the Ministry.

Of ordinary and extraordinary calling to the Ministry. Chap. II.
NO man not lawfully called, may intrude himself into the holy Ministry of
the Church. For it is belonging unto God alone to choose his own Ministers,
and to prescribe laws unto men, by the which he would have them chosen.
Wherefore, there are now two kinds of lawful callings to the Ministry: one,
when a man is called of God himself: an other, when he is ordained of men,
according to the laws prescribed of God. This we call ordinary, the other
extraordinary. That which is extraordinary comes to pass two sundry ways,
and at two several times: namely, either immediately from God without any
inter-meane: or else from God, but yet by means of his Prophet. And that also
is of two sorts, either when there was no certain order set down in the same
matter, or else when there was a certain order appointed for the same. Of the
first, we have an instance in Moses and Aaron, both called extraordinarily;
Moses immediately from God without any inter-mean: and Aaron by his brother
Moses: Who, being so commanded of God, preferred to the Priesthood, Aaron with
his sons, and the whole Tribe of Leuy. But then there was no law written, so
that from them the order and function of Leuy had their foundation. Of the
latter we have an example in Samuel, who^ God called after the order of
Priesthood was received and confirmed amongst the people of God: So was Elias
the Thesbite raised besides the common order, when an order was set down; and
so were for the most part all the Prophets of the old Testament. But Elizeus
and others were so called of God extraordinarily, that he used in this business
his Prophet Elias, as a mean thereof. So likewise in the new Testament, Christ
called his twelve Apostles, unto whom also he added seventy other Disciples,
when as yet there was no certain order set down for the Ministry of the
Gospel: But Paul and Mathias he added to the twelve, after the institution of
the Ministry.

The Privilege of an extraordinary calling is this, that as it has God the
only author, so it has the same God the only director of the same. For always
extraordinary gifts do accompany an extraordinary calling: in so much that they
which are so called of God, have no need to be informed of man, in those
things which concern the execution of their charge: as it appears in Moses
and the Prophets, as also in the Apostles and Evangelists.

The ordinary calling is that, which is made of men, according to such laws as
God has set down for the same. As was the Priesthood of the family of Aaron,
and the Ministry of the Levites in the old Testament: and as is at this day
the calling of Bishops and Elders, who both of the Apostles themselves, and
also of their successors, were chosen assistants for the founding of Churches,
and appointed presidents over them being founded, and so for ever (so long as
there is a Church) are to endure.

As for men, they have no power (not commanded of God) to call any man to the
Ministry extraordinarily. Wherefore they are deceived that think Titus or
Timothy, or John Mark and other the Apo. followers and fellow-laborers
extraordinarily called, seeing they were called no otherwise, then were the
other Elders and Bishops whom the Apostles ordained over diverse Churches. Was
there any thing in them singular or extraordinary? impute not that to their
extraordinary calling, but to their ordinary conuersing, with tutors and
instructors, excellent and extraordinary, (the Apostles and Evangelists.) I
admit their gifts were rare, and their perfections extraordinary, yet
notwithstanding (no dispraise to any) they wanted much of that manhood of
strength, which was in their instructors, neither were they wiser then their
teachers. Never did Apostle give Apostle instructions, as Paul did to Timothy
and Titus; who as they supplied the Apostles places, so they followed not their
own, but the Apostles precepts. So were they at once and together both
scholars and masters: for as they did conform the Churches, and inform
their pastors with wholesome doctrine, so themselves also were informed of the
Apostles, the Apostles immediately from God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. So that
Paul might boldly say (as he said truly) What things I have received of the
Lord, I have delivered unto you: but Timothy might say with us (and we with
him) what things we have received of the Apostles, we have delivered unto you.
And albeit both he and we, have received of the Lord, that which we have
delivered to the Churches, yet notwithstanding our receipt is after another
sort. They lived with the Lord, and those things which they heard and saw, and
handled with their hands of the word of life, they delivered to the Church:
but Titus and Timothy, and all they which succeeded, taught and teach with us,
such things as were delivered by their hands unto us.

Besides Titus and Timothy, Paul had his fellows and joint laborers, Sylas and
Barnabas; I say his fellows, not his followers; his schoole-fellowes, not his
scholars. For why? they had their calling as he had, extraordinary from God,
and therefore unto them he set down no precepts of wholesome doctrine, he gave
no instructions of Church government, as he did unto Titus and Timothy. Where
I leave it to every indifferent man's judgment, what difference there was
between the calling of those, and of these. As for the calling of those, whom
it has pleased God to raise up for the reformation of his Church, there be
many which move many questions, and make more to do, then they need: out of
the which when they can no ways wind themselves, at al adventure they cast
anchor in this unknown coast of extraordinary calling. But unless I be
wonderously deceived, they do but ride in a shallow, and they need not. For
to oppose himself against a false and corrupt opinion concerning the Son of
God, or of the chief grounds of religion, every good Christian (well seen in
sacred writ) both can and ought. Wherefore amongst so many, as God has
stirred up to so singular a purpose (as he has stirred up many) how few I pray
you have they been, whose calling was extraordinary, except a few? And what
then can the adversary object in this case against the Church of England? Or
wherein can it justly be challenged? May it not defend her calling ordinary, as
may also many other Churches in Germany? Say that irreligion has universally
possessed some certain Church; I say, there need no calling extraordinary to recall
the same. The Church, may be extraordinarily reformed (if so it be required) by
them, which have ordinary authority to perform it. We have heard of many
reformations in the kingdom of Judah, to the which neither civil Magistrate
was ordained more then ordinary, nor novel Priesthood. Did not the Priests
themselves, which before were defiled with foul Idolatry, purify the Temple,
the people, and themselves together from foul Idolatry? And at this day, if
the Bishops of the French Churches, would redeem themselves from the Popes
tyranny, and sweep their Churches clean of all error and Idolatry; what need
should they have of any other calling, then that which they have? The like I
affirm of all other Churches, (in what part of the world soever) which through
the iniquity of these days, and the subtilty of the ennemy, are inuolued and
ouercast with the most dangerous mists of error and ignorance. If they please
to send for our Countrymen, and use their counsel, they may but if otherwise
they will not, they are to usurp no authority over their Churches, but rather
to rejoice and congratulate with them for their conversion, making profer unto
them of their company and their countenance.

Of the twelve Apostles. Chap. III.
THe twelve, which were the first preachers of the Gospel, were chosen of the
Lord himself. With them he deyned familiarly to converse, and friendly to
acquaint with all his counsels (which according to the time, they were capiable
of) that afterward they might the better testify of those things, which they
both saw, and heard. Their first province extended not it self beyond the
confines of Iewry; for they were then forbidden to go into the way of the
Samaritanes, or to enter into the streets of the Gentiles. And in this their
first circuit, the Lord unto the office of preaching, joined the power of
Baptism, and the working of miracles,. But so long as no end was imposed unto
the ceremonies of the old Church, neither yet the order of Aarons priesthood
was abrogated, they founded no particular Churches, but retained company and
communion with the rest of the Jews, in such things as concerned the service
of God.

But what the peculiar office of the Apostles was, is easily understood by the
commands which our Savior gave them after his resurrection, and also by those
promises which he made in John, concerning the comforter which he would send
them after his ascension. In the last of Matthew these are the words of our
Savior to his Disciples: Al power (says he) is given to me in Heaven and in
earth; Go therefore and teach al nations, baptising them in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe al things
what so ever I have commanded you. And behold I am with you until the end of
the world.

In which words the chief parts of their Apostolic function, are thus to be
discerned: The first, is that Legacy which is immediately given them of God,
unto all nations, and not restrained within any limitte; an other, is the
publication of that doctrine which they received of the Lord; the third, is the
administration of those Sacraments which were instituted of God; the last, is
the protestation of that especial aid, which albeit generally it concern the
whole church, yet particularly it respects the Apostles them selves. Likewise
in the fourteenth, and sixteenth of John, the gift of the holy Ghost is
promised unto them, for the better performance of their Apostolic function.

And that was it, which did so moderate their tongue and their talk, as that
they should utter no doctrine of their own, but of their master Christ. And
albeit the commission of teaching, with the power of working miracles, were
granted out unto others also, yet this always remained proper to the
Apostles, and entire to their calling, that their only doctrine was a paragon
and a pattern, by the which al others doctrine was to be tried, And also: that
they alone in the beginnings of the Church, conferred the holy Ghost under a
visible sign, by the laying on of hands, (as it is in the eight of the Acts
and the seventeenth verse.) Wherefore as Moses had God the first author of the
law, so was it requisite the Apostles should have the same ground of their
consecration, that the foundation of the Church might be laid sure and
indefeyseble.

As for the authority of the Apostles among themselves, it was one and the
same, and their honor alike: there was no ods between them, but that which
either gifts, or gravity did make. And albeit Peter be every where called the
first, yet was that primacy in the order only of his vocation, not in the
pre-eminence of his commission. For if so be that (out of those words of the
Lord,) Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and such
other like, the Apostles had conceived any especial authority committed to
Peter, they would never have moved the question twice after that, which of them
should seem the greatest. And albeit the Lord vouchsafed Peter, James and
John, the participation of some greater secrets; yet notwithstanding he bare
himself so indifferently toward them all, in the donation of any especial
place, as that themselves could not tell, among themselves, whom to prefer
before his fellow. But from this degree of Apostolic dignity, Judas through
his treasonable and sacriligious avarice fell, and into his place was Mathias
invested after the ascension of Christ: and last of al other, was Paul also
ascribed into this holy society, after a right wonderful and miraculous manner.

Of the seventy Disciples. Chap. IIII.
ALbeit Paul for honor sake, have placed Prophets in the second place, yet
notwithstanding upon just occasion, I have domised them to the third: For that
I am here to observe, not the honor, but the order of their calling; and to
take them as they fall, not in regard of the pre-eminence of their titles, but
in respect of the priority of those times, in the which they were called in the
new Testament. Wherefore, when as the Lord perceived, that for the smalnes of
the time the Harvest was great, and for the greatness of the Harvest, the
laborers were but few; he elected seventy other Disciples to preach the
Gospel, and to publish the glad tidings of peace. Unto whom albeit he gave
the power of miracles also, and no less privilege then had before the twelve
Apostles, (to be honored of them, unto whom they preached;) yet
notwithstanding, he united them not together with the Apostles, to make of them
al, one order or society: For ye shall always read, that the twelve were ever
separate from the seventy: Who in this regard seemed inferior to the Apostles:
For why? they were not in ordinary with the Lord, as were the Apostles; so that
they could not be witnesses of such things, as he did and said. If there were
any, any more familiar then the rest, they were but few, namely two; Iosephe
(surnamed the just) and Mathias: of the which one (God being governor of the
lottery) was invested into the place of Judas. Barnabas also, was appointed
Apostle-like to discourse through diverse countries, and to plant certain
Churches, who notwithstanding (most certain) was none of the Apostles. Phillip
likewise may be taken for one of this order, (and many other) who labored with
the Apostles in the work of the Gospel. And seeing it is so plain a case, that
these all were called immediately from God, and that (as we read) God gave unto
his Church Evangelists: who shall we say were those Evangelists, if not these?
Resolve then, that those seventy Disciples were Evangelists, and those
Evangelists inferior to the Apostles. For why, they were given as Legates or
Lieutenants, under those graund Capitains, to undertake (with like authority)
their task and their turns.

And yet besides these, the Apostles took unto them diverse others, as fellow
laborers with them: But in them there was not that valor, as was in those, whom
the Lord himself did choose, and infuse with an Apostolic spirit. We have
read of Barnabas, Jude and Sylas, their great travel, and no small authority in
the Church: In which respect they came near, and were next (in deed) unto the
Apostles themselves. But how might this have been, if so be the spirit of God
had not wholly possessed them, as it did the Apostles? But we know, how that
they all met, (that were at the election of Mathias) the same day in the same
place, with the Apostles themselves, when the Lord poured forth of his spirit
a visible shape. And albeit Barnabas was no Apostle, none of the twelve; yet
can we make no less of him, then an Evangelist, one of the seventy.

As for Mark and Luke, albeit their authority in the Church were great, and
their deserts great, for their perfect and well penned Histories of the
Gospel: yet are they not to be reputed with the seventy Evangelists, by
reason their calling was by men unto the Ministry. Tertullian in in his fourth
book against Marcion, writes thus: Luke (says he) not an Apostle, yet
Apostolic, not a master, but a scholar, as he was less then his Master,
so likewise was he so much the more less then an other, for that he was
follower of a less Apostle. As for Mark, Papias in his Commentaries (as
Eusebius reports in his third book) has left us this testimony. Mark the
interpreter of Peter, wrote in deed very diligently, what so ever he
remembered; yet not altogether in that order, as they were spoken and performed
by the Lord. Neither in deed did he hear the Lord himself, neither was
he any follower of his, but afterward (as I have said) became the companion
of Peter, etc. Wherefore Mark did not amiss in this, that he diuulged in
writing such things, as before he committed to memory: seeing above all
things he chiefly regarded this one thing, that neither he would omit any
thing he heard to be true, neither commit any thing he knew to be false.

Thus says he of him: And it is well known, that he was inferior unto
Barnabas also, in authority: for he was his follower, and in a manner his
scholar; as he was also Paul's and Peter's, and that in no other order, then
were Titus and Timothy. And yet notwithstanding, the name and credit both of
Mark and Luke (for their faithful register of the Apostles precepts) is
such, and so reverend, as that their Gospels are recorded among the canonical
scriptures, and are equaled in authority, with the more exquisite labors of
Matthew and John.

And reason too: For in their Euangelike records, whom had they for their
patterns or their patrones, but the Apostles and Evangelists? So that,
whereas the Gospel of Ma hew, may seem to be only Mathewes, and that of
John to be John's only, these their Gospels may be reputed the Gospels, not of
Mark and Luke, but of all the Apostles and Evangelists. In the which thing
verily they are worthy great commendations, that they sauoured no whit at all
of men; (as commonly they do which pen Histories,) but they so nearely and
narrowly followed the very spirit of the Apostles and Evangelists, as if the
Apostles themselves had been rather the penners, then perusers of so great a
work.

Wherefore Luke is for good cause commended of Paul (in the second to the
Corinth: the eight chapter, and eighteenth verse) when as he says, We have
also sent that brother whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all Churches.
But by these you may easily conceive, who were properly Evangelists, and who
not.

Of Prophets. Chap. V.
AS we reckon none in order with the twelve, ( Paul only excepted) so with
the seventy, find we not any that may be compared. And albeit we doubt not,
that God could have added to the 70. others also, no way their inferiors, yet
seeing we have no record of sacred writ to avouch the same, it were hard for
man to affirm, that there were any such: But now when as besides the twelve
Apostles, and those seventy Evangelists, we read of other also, who in like
manner have been honored with the first fruits of the holy Spirit; by what
name or title shall they be called? or by what addition shall we distinguish
the^ from the rest? Of the number of an hundred and twenty men, there remayn
fix and thirty still: whom seeing we neither account with the twelve Apostles,
nor yet with the seventy Evangelists, it remains, that we adorn them with
the name of Prophets. For this it is which Peter does insinuat unto the people,
out of the Prophet Joel (in his Apology for himself and his fellows) namely,
That the spirit of Prophecy, promised of old to be given out in the later
days, was then poured forth upon that assembly, whom then they heard
preaching and prophesying in diverse tongues, to their great astonishement.

Wherefore those thirty six men, which neither are ascribed into the company
of the twelve Apostles, nor yet are recounted in the society of the seventy
Evangelists, were those first Prophets, whom God gave into his Church, after
our Savior was received up into Heaven. In which order (as it might very well
be) was Ananias of Damasco reputed, and Agabus, both of them renowned Prophets.

Judas and Sylas are also called Prophets, and for that cause are they sent by
the Apostles to Antioch, to exhort and confirm the brethren. And I am of
opinion, that these and such like were properly called Prophets, not
Metaphorically; seeing they did foresee things to come by the spirit of God,
and by the same spirit revealed things secret and recondite. And albeit the
interpreting of the Scripture be a kind of prophesying, yet is that kind
more proper to the Doctor, then the Prophet, and more truly may a man account
Doctors interpreters of the Scripture, then Prophets. But doubtless God
restored to his Church, in those latter days, that true kind of Prophecy,
which in Israel was familiar from the beginning, and in singular wisdom did
erect three kinds of Doctors in his Church, and gave them to his new people;
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets. And these were the first Elders and
Bishops of the Church of Jerusalem.

That the names and titles of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, were given
also unto other Pastors and Doctors of the Church. CHAP. VI.
ALbeit, by that which I have already written, it may sufficiently be
understood, whom I call by the name of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets:
yet notwithstanding, because those names are for good causes given unto others
also, some what must be said of them in like manner. In the Epistle to the
Romans the sixteenth Chapter, Andronicus and Iunius, are called notable among
the Apostles: and out of the eight Chapter of the last to the Corinthians,
Titus and the brethren which were with him, are called Apostles: and in the
Epistle to the Philippians, Epaphroditus is called their Apostle.

The deriuation of the greek word is well known, that Apostles are called, of
sending, for that they are Posts or speedy messengers, sent of especial
purpose as Legates or Ambassadors into diverse parts of the world; and
according to this signification, whosoever is sent as a messenger in any
business, may be called an Apostle. In this sense, our Savior himself, (who is
Prince and Lord over the Apostles) in the epistle to the Hebrews, is called an
Apostle. But (to be short,) this name is no where given in the new Testament
to any (so far as ever I could learn) but to the ministers of the gospel
only: Amongst whom because there was great inequality; Paul calls those
first twelve Apostles, the chief Apostles: (as it is in the eleventh chapter
of the last to the Corinthians,) where he says; I suppose, that I was not
inferior to the chief Apostles: (as it is also in the 11. verse of the 12.
chapter.) By the which it appears most plainly, that besides those chief
Apostles, who held the commission of their embassage immediately from God, there
were many other also, which were in like manner called Apostles: either for
that they were accounted of the Apostles, as fellow laborers in their
sea-apostolique; or else for that they were sent as Legates in the same business,
by the church of Jerusalem, which was the mother Metropolitan church. Among
whom sometime, there foisted in of their own heads, certain other jolly
fellows, false Apostles, whom Paul calls false brethren, and deceiptfull
laborers: who under a coppie of fair semblance, could transform themselves
into the colors and companies of Christ his Apostles. And these were they
which sought by all possible means, to impair the authority of Paul, as of
one (forsooth) that saw not the Lord in the flesh, and therefore not worthy to
mate and match with the other Apostles, in like equipage of authority. But do
you see their purpose? Or do you conceive their policy? By this means they
meant to thrust Paul into the last and lowest form of Apostles, that themselves
being mate with Paul, might more easily give the truth a check.

Against the malapertnes of these men, the Apostle maintains the authority
of his power Apostolic, affirming that he was chosen apostle, not by men, but
of God. To how great, or rather to how small purpose should the Apostle have
urged this, had not the name of Apostle been common unto others also, which
were not of that company and convent of the twelve Apostles, but were sent from
men, and by men, and were not immediately from God? among whom are to be
accounted, Titus, Andronicus, Timothy, Mark, and many other, whom al
posterity has reverenced, and accounted for Bishops and Archbishops of the
church.

May not the like be said of the name of Evangelists? For who knows not, that
the same name was given unto many other, besides those seventy two: because
indeed, they were called to the same function, both under the seventy, and
under the Apostles. True it is, they had not the like measure of Gods spirit,
and yet according to the moytie of their several talent, they did much edify
the church, and magnify the foundation which the Apostles had laid. And
therefore are they called Apostles, and Evangelists, not only in respect of the
sense and signification of the words, but also in regard of the Apostolic,
and Euangelike function, into the which they were associate and assumed by the
Apostles, as helpers and fellow laborers.

But as for the name of Prophets; not only, they are so called in the
scriptures, unto whom God has revealed the secrets of things to come, but
they also, which do faithfully reueile the secrets of Gods eternal truth to
others, and know how to apply ancient prophesies, to present circumstances.
In which sense, all Euangelique teachers and interpreters of sacred scripture,
may be said to be Prophets.

Of Deacons. Chap. VII.
IF my purpose had been in recounting the degrees of Ministers, to have
followed the course of honor, I would have set next under Prophets, Pastors
and Doctors. But for as much as I have tied my self unto the order of time, in
the which they were first ordained; of force I must first speak of Deacons,
before I come to Bishops and Elders: for we read that they were first created,
when as yet (besides the Apostles and those Evangelists, and Prophets, of the
which we have lately spoken) the Church had no Elders: and reason to. For when
as the Ministry of the gospel, according to Gods holy institution, has
annexed unto it a religious care, and consideration of the poor, the Apostles
took that unto themselves, as a thing pertaining to their charge: until the
murmr and mutiny of the Greeks against the Hebrews, gave occasion of the
Deacons Election. But were there not at the beginning, dispensers and disposers
of the common treasure? When Christ himself kept residence here upon earth,
who but Judas discharged that pension? and doubtless, if the Apostles could
have performed both, they would never have given charge that others should
have been chosen for that charge. And yet that charge, was not so wholly given
over of the Apostles to the Deacons, as that afterward, they thought the same
nothing at all appertaining unto themselves. Have we not read, what Paul and
Barnabas did, being requested to be mindful of the poor? how vigilantly
they undertook that care themselves? And therefore they thought it requisite,
that the men to be chosen into that charge, should be men full of the holy Ghost.

But do you not wonder now, that these new elects did not imploye themselves
in gathering and giving of alms only? Why (men forgetful of themselves) they
take upon them the office of teaching also. See how Phillip preaches the
gospel to the Samaritanes also, and baptiseth them that believe: how, while
Stephen preached Christ more fervently, he is become the first martyr of
Christ. May we not conceive by these presidents, what the rest of them did? or
shall we be so foolish as to think, because there is nothing written of the
rest, that therefore they did nothing, or not this? Of the greatest part, even
of Christ his Apostles, is there not deep silence, or little said? of whom
notwithstanding there is nothing more clear, then that they performed their
imposed pensions with impeachable diligence.

The like president therefore, has been well followed of our godly
predecessors, who did also employ their Deacons in the ministry of the word,
and holy mysteries. For why? they doubted (and that not without cause,) least
that profitable function should become contemptible, and be had in esteem, as
stewardish and too homely, and not at all belonging, or not beseeming the
sacred ministry. Wherefore, that they might be of greter reverence and regard
in the clergy, they were permitted to read the gospel to the people, and to
minister the cup in the Sacramental symposy. And at the length, their authority
incresed so far, that no BB. would want his Deacon: yea, sooner would a Bishop
want his Priest, then be without this Deacon. But now, how this kind of
Deaconie deceased, it is nothing to our purpose: It suffices me, that I have
showed, what was of old the office of Deacons. I need not add, that what
things the Apostle requires in Deacons, are in a manner equal with those he
desires in a Priest: But this I may say, that by that only one thing, it may
full well appear, that the office was then esteemed as a charge of no small
import. And therefore, it need not seem so strange a matter to any man, if
some greater thing then a Church-warden-ship was committed to the order of
Deacons, by our honorable predecessors. The which I note to this end, that al
men may know, how the churches of old committed no absurd thing in this, nor we
(if there be any which at this day, do immitate them) when they make the
Deacony a degree to a further ministry.

This therefore is the fourth order of the ministry, acording to the order of
time; and the first, that was devised of man, when as yet there were no other
Priests created, then those whom the Lord himself had invested with his own
hands. Now, whether this order be observed every where, that they should be
created Deacons before they be ordained Priests, I cannot tell. In the epistle
to Titus, in the which Paul commands, that he should retain Pastors in
every city: there is no mention made of Deacons. And in the 19. chapter of
the Acts, where it is said of Paul and Barnabas, that they ordained Pastors in
the churches, there is nothing said of Deacons. And indeed, for as much as there
are greater parts required in a Priest, then in a Deacon; a competent Deacon
might sooner be had, (where need was) then a sufficient Priest: whose present
want, the Apostles and Evangelists themselves (for a time) could better
supply, then of Deacons: because the function Apostolic, is further from
procuring the Church treasuries, then from Preaching the mere sacred
mysteries. With the which, this also is to be considered, that the necessities
of the poor, are not patient of any long delays.

That Paul in his fourth chapter to the Ephesians, makes no mention of this
order, it need not greatly to trouble any: seeing his purpose was not to
specify all the degrees of the ministry, but only to note the especial. Our
Savior himself taught, that care and compassion showed to the poor, was a
most blessed work: when he said, That was given or not given to himself,
that was granted or grudged the poor. But in the reformation of some churches
in these dais, it is now no more a church office, but a civil duty. The care of
the poor, ouer-sight of the hospitals and widows, and orphans, which was wont
to be the Bishops charge, the Magistrate has taken to himself. But upon what
occasion it first grew to this under the Bishop of Rome, I will declare else
where. No doubt the Magistrate, that desires to restore the church to her
first beauty, will refer that function to Ecclesiastical persons. For if they
shall find any corruption in them, it shall be always in their power to
punish the offenders, and to amend the fault: but it is not in the Bishops or
Pastors power, to do the like, if it shall fall out, that the Magistrates
themselves, or they which are deputed by them in these affairs, shall in like
manner offend. Ought they not to consider, that the same thing may befall
themselves, which they fear in the ministry? No question, the ministry of
the poor, is a religious thing, and part of gods service. Where I find two
things greatly to be complained of: First, that in some reformed churches, the
whole office of a Deacon, is made oeconomicke, rusticall, and not unlike unto
an annual baliwick: and then, That the order of Deaconisses, atending upon the
poor, impotent, sick, (of the which, there is yet some shadow remaining in the
Papacy) is among us altogether relinquished. It is much to the purpose (in my
judgment) how and of whom the necessities of the pore be relieved in the house
of God. I am not ignorant indeed, that the old custom of the church is grown
to some smacke of superstition: but this of ours, which we now have, whether (a
Gods name) will that grow? We are apt to fall from superstition to
profanation, but to keep the golden mean, we have no means.

It has been of old, the greatest beauty of the Church, the greatest praise
of the Pastors; bounty toward the needy, and mercy toward the distressed.
And what should I say of noble women (and no less renowned) maids and widows,
Queens and Empresses, who of their earnest devotion toward God, and their
inward compassion toward the poor, have wholly consecrated themselves (under
their superuigill Bishops) unto this holy ministry.

When I look into our churches, I cannot but prefer the commendable care of
them, who continue in the church the true Deaconie, before those, who (as if it
were some vile and civil charge) trauerse it over to men of life and
profession unhallowed and profane (For so they range the collectors for the
pore, among the basest drudges of the city.) But in this I pity them, that
satisfiyng (if not rather deceiving) themselves with the bare name, they seem
not sufficiently to conceive the true and full nature of a Deacon. Of the
which, there are yet many things to be spoken, but my discourse plies it, and
applies it self to the order of Elders and Bishops.

That the churches in their beginnings, had no Bishops and Elders, besides the
Apostles themselves, and their fellow laborers. CHAP. VIII.
IN the eleventh chapter of the Acts, is the first mention made of Elders, in
the church of Jerusalem: In the which, so long as the Apostles and Evangelists
did themselves continue, they had no need of any other elders. But after they
once began to be dispersed (James their head being cut of, and Peter slipped
aside) then they began to have their Elders, whom (from that time forwards)
Luke always joins with the Apostles, which were at Jerusalem: but when and
how, and of whom they were ordained, it is not read. Notwithstanding this
order, although it was ordained in the church after Deacons in time, yet is it
before the^ in regard. But that churches were for a time without Priests, (or
Elders,) it is more manifest out of the epistle to Titus, and the fourteenth of
the Acts, then that it can be denied. But how long they were so, I will not
define: In this matter, I suppose the Apostle had not at any time so great a
regard of the time, as of the persons, and their perfections. For it was not
for the wisdom of the Apostles, rashly to lay their hands of any, or to
appoint them over the church, whom God had not anointed with those graces,
which are required in a Pastor of the church. Wherefore, when as the churches
which were newly converted to the faith, did consist but of nouices: there was
no remedy, but they must stay a time, until they had made trial of their
dispositions, and taken notice of their abilities, unto whom the
church-gouernment was to be committed. In the mean while, all things were
moderated, by the vigilant ouer-sight of the Apostles, and Evangelists, and
such, as they entertained to their succors, as helpers and fellow laborers.

No doubt, the Apostle Paul is like unto himself in all his Epistles, and
therefore it was not hap-hazard, that in the Epistle to the Philippians only,
he saluteth Bishops and Deacons, and in none of the rest. By the which, as we
are put out of all doubt, that the church of the Philippians had their Elders
and Deacons: so are we left in suspense, for any of the rest. (If so be (as
else where) we are to gather of his style, the state of the church.) Here
therefore it behooves the reader to be very attent, that will learn to know,
what churches had their Priests, and what not. Is it likely, that he which
ordinarily accustometh to greet so lovingly in all Epistles, all that he
knew to be endued with any virtue, so willingly to comme^d all that he knew to
be of any desert in the church, and also so freely to note all that he knew to
be in any defect, (I say) is it likely, that of all other, he would have left
the Bishops and elders unsaluted? in the epistle to the Romans he saluteth many
whom albeit he call his fellow-laborers, yet ar they no where said to have borne
any sway in the church of Rome. He remembers Aquila (and the church which was
in his house) who was now at Corinth, then at Ephesus, and sometimes again at
Philippos: neither forgets he Andronicus and Vrbanus, whereof the one he
commends, as notable among the Apostles, and the other he confesses, as his
fellow laborer. These and all other, whom he knew resiant at Rome, he
deygneth with titles of condign praises, because they labobored together with
the Apostles. And therefore no doubt if so be any of them had been the proper
Pastor of that Church, he would surely have taken some knowledge, or made some
remembrance of it: As we read that he did in his Epistle to the Philippians,
of Epaphroditus, and to the Colossians, of Epaphras, and Archippus.

Moreover when Paul came to Rome, we read how he was received of the brethren,
and of the Elders: the which thing might even as well have been there (if
there had been any such Elders there) as in the fifteenth of the Acts, and
the one and twenty also, it is well noted, how he was intertayned of the
Elders. But by these it may appear, what the state of the Church was at Rome,
when the Apostle did write unto them. The like may be declared out of either
Epistle to the Corinthians, (that I name not any other) namely, That they had
not their proper Pastors, or peculiar incumbents, when those Epistles were
written. For who knows not, that Paul did write unto new born Churches, which
either were then but in the mould, or as yet in their nonage? Who besides
Timothy and Titus, Apollo and Lucas, Stephanus and Fortunatus, Achaicus and
such like, (whom the Apostle did send to them in common) had no other Elders,
nor yet any other Bishop, but the Apostle himself. And although the Churches
were not without order, yet there was not that order, as afterward they had,
when they were not set in order, under Elders, that had taken orders. In mean
season, the Apostles and Evangelists, and other religious teachers, did visit
them by turns, as their opportunity served. And hence is it, that Paul and
Apollo do excuse themselves unto the Corinthians, that they did not visit
them so often as they could have wished. The which was also very well noted of
Ambrose and Epiphanius. Epiphanius aduersus hereses, in the 75. heresy has
these words. When the Gospel was young the holy Apostle wrote according as
the matter then stood. For where there were Bishops appointed, he wrote to
Bishops and Deacons. Neither could the Apostles appoint all things at the
first. In deed the greatest need was of Priests, and Deacons, for by these
two, all Ecclesiastical functions may be discharged. But where there was not
any man found worthy a Bishopric, there they remained without a Bishop. But
where need was, and there were that were worthy of it, there were appointed
Bishops. But where there was no great multitudes, there were not found among
them, that might be made priests. and so they contented themselves with one
Bishop in that place, etc. And he adds: So the Church received the fulness of
her functions: for every thing had not all things at the first, but in process
of time, those things were provided, which were requisite to the perfection of
things necessary. Ambrose upon the 4. of the Epistle to the Ephesians, writes
thus: In all things the writings of the Apostle, does agree with the order which
is now in the Church, because these things were written about the beginnings of
the Church. For he calls Timothy also a Bishop, whom he had ordained a
Priest; because the first Priests were called Bishops; that one going away,
the next might succeed him. Thus says Ambrose: And therefore the writings of
the Apostles are to be understood, according to the seasons in the which they
were written. In deed the Apostles laid the foundations: but others raised the
work; Paul planted, Apollo watered. And therefore so soon as with the time
the Church increased, and the number of believers multiplied, they were not
sufficing for the multitude whom the Lord himself had sent: for which cause
the Apostles took unto themselves fellow-laborers in the Ministry, first
Deacons, then Priests or Elders. Of who^ we are now to speak.

Of Priests, or Pastors, and Bishops. Chap. IX.
THe Apostle Saint Paul, next after Evangelists, places Pastors and Doctors,
but whether he meant by them, two distinct orders, or but one only, there is the
question; and that because whosoever is a Pastor, ought also to be a Doctor,
but it is not so conuersiuely on the other part: For it may be that he is a
Doctor, which not any where is a Pastor. This is once: that as by the three
former names of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, the Apostle seems to
note those, which had an extrordinary vocation from God immediate, and not from
men; so by these two last names of Doctors and Pastors (whether we take them
as both one, or otherwise) he seems to understand those, which by men were
preferred to the Church. And that Bishops and Elders are those, whom Paul
calls Pastors, it sufficiently appears by that in the twentieth Chapter of
the Acts, where Paul intertaining the Elders he had sent for from Ephesus,
tells them, that they were appointed of god, Bishops to feed the Church. And
thereuppon we also acknowledge no Elder or Bishop in the Church of Christ,
that is not a Pastor or feeder. For it is in the essence of an Elder his
office, with wholesome doctrine to feed the flock of Christ.

Presbyter is a Greek word, and answers to that which the Hebrews call
Zachen, which signifies not only an Elder in years, (who for his age is to
be reverenced, but also an ancient in the common wealth, who for his place and
authority is to be honored: yea it is a title of honor, with the which the
Nobles and Magistrates of the old Testament are graced: from whence also it is
derived to the Rectors of the Church in the new Testament, who are called
Bishops, by reason of their oversight and watchful care; which is a title of
work and labor, but the name of Pastor is a title declaring a special charge
and office, so called of feeding the Lords flock with the Angel-like food of
his heavenly word. Albeit there are many other titles also, common to the said
Pastors in the Scriptures, as that they are called Stewards, Presidents,
Prelates, Guids, Governors, Ministers, and such like. The virtue and property of
which titles, I will not here stand to explain: it is that you may have else
where: Only I will enforce from thence such arguments, as the occasion shall
serve, and the matter which I handle shall require.

In the mean time you shall understand, that the office of these Pastors, and
doctors (albeit ordained of men) does not differ in kind, from that of the
Apostles. For the chief part of them both, is to instruct, exhort, reprehend,
and refell the adversaries of the truth, (Besides the administration of the
Sacraments, a thing no less pertaining to Pastors, then Apostles.) Neither is
a Pastoral oversight disiusticed of that Apostolic authority of
Ecclesiastical censure, which remains, and is requisite for the edifying of
the Church. For why? they succeed (that I may use Hierome his own words) the
Apostolic order: and in another place, It is no easy matter to stand in Paul
his place, or to mayntaine the dignity of Peter, now reigning with Christ.

Of two diueas degrees of Pastors. Chap. X.
But now, for as much as there is not the same, or the like proportion of
charge committed to all Elders; there is also no small difference among those,
whom the Scripture calls by the same name of Bishops and Elders. The which
seeing it must be discerned, rather by themselves as they are in deed, then by
their names as they are called, let us always chiefly regard, what they are,
then, what they are called; that we may truly distinguish between things
that differ, not so much in name as in nature.

The first Elders therefore whom the Apostles ordained, were their
fellow-laborers in the Lord his vineyard, as John, Mark, Titus, Luke, Timo hy,
Demas, Siluanns, and many others of who^ we read in the Scriptures. All the
which, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, were created Ministers,
no otherwise then the rest, who afterward were placed over their several
Churches. Notwithstanding, that which we read of Timothy, we conceive of the
rest; and therefore that charge which was given unto these, was rather
provincial, then particular: seeing they were the associats, and assistants of
the Apostles themselves.

But when as daily the number of the faithful increased, and the increase of
Churches was thereby more and more advanced, together (as supply could be made
of able men for the Ministry) the Apostles and Evangelists, (or their
associates) installed into particular Churches, particular Pastors: who being
placed in their wards (as it were) should not range at large from thence, but
under the Apostles (as faithful Pastors) should keep watch and ward over the
vineyard of the Lord. And yet they were not so invested into those their
several charges, that the sole and whole authority being demised to them,
they should rule the Church alone, and the charge thereof should thence-forth
concern the Apostles no more: but to this end were they so disposed, that
seeing the Apostles themselves could not be always resident in every place,
there might notwithstanding (by their good means) be nothing wanting in any
place. If twelve men could have been suffising for all Churches, there should
never have been levied any new increase of other seventy. But when they
altogether could not serve, to serve the turn, both these, and they both, had
need of more abettors, to help them out withal.

And albeit the Ministry of the Gospel under Christ, be only one, as the
priesthood of the law under Moses was one: yet notwithstanding, as in one
priesthood there were diverse degrees of government, so likewise in one
Ministry of the Gospel, there are (as you have heard) diverse degrees of
Pastors. For have you not seen, how of the Lord himself, there were two
degrees of Ministers ordained? (and of them the one was superior to the other.)
How afterward of the Apostles, there were in like manner ordained two orders?
(for to some they gave in commission the Churches of one whole province, and to
some again the single rectorie of one only Church.)

That Titus and Timothy, had a superior intendencie over many Churches, as
also over them, which were already, or were to be preferred thereunto, it is
sufficiently manifest unto every indifferent sense. For otherwise, why was he
so diligently admonished to beware, that he lay not his hands upon any man
extemporie? And again: to what purpose is he so cautionately forbidden, to
admit any accusation against an Elder, without the testimony of two or three
witnesses? This therefore leads us thus far, as it were by the hand, that
of force we must confess, how that under the Apostles, and of the Apostles,
there were ordained two degrees of Ministers, and they of diverse authority,
though not of diverse titles: unto whom, albeit the Scripture for the present,
gave no proper or distinct denomination, yet in good time Posterity did it,
well advised. For although the names of Pastor and Bishop, were commonly given
to all Ministers of old, yet presently upon the Apostles time, the name and
title of Bishop was imparted, as a proper addition to the first and chief
order of Elders. And yet they were not destitute of their distinction by their
more sacred titles, even in the Apostles time. For did not the Apostles
themselves grace the chief Elders with the title of their fellow-laborers, and
their fellow laborers with their own titles? In the which notwithstanding, we
find their posterity very sparing, and that for just cause; namely, for that
obsequious reverence, and religious regard they had of the Apostles lately
deceased; the chief instruments and ornaments of Gods Church.

That the doctrine of the Apostles acknowledges no annuarie Elders, to Rule
only in the Church, and not to Teach. Chap. XI.
OVt of that place of S. Paul not well understood (it is in the fifth chap. of
the first to the Corinthians) there are many now adays which have devised a
fond and newfound distinction, clean contrary to the Apostles meaning. (Alas
for them) he thought nothing less, then of any temporal Elders, to play the
bugs in the Church (like special bailyes) for a spurt, and be gone: whereas in
the whole school of the Apostles, you shall not find, the worst Elder, that
is not placed in one of the two foresaid forms. Generally in all Elders, the
Apostle requires thus much; That they be apt to teach: And, 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit.
1.9.
that they may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improve them
which say against it. If in this novel kind, we look for parts agreeable to
these: sure I am, we shall never find, that dumb Elders, of a years grouth,
mute to instruct, made to command in the Church, are any where comprised in
this form.

As for that government, the Apostle numbreth among the gifts of Gods spirit,
it is to be understood indeed of a singular and supereminent gift. For no
doubt the right art of government, is a rare and a religious thing: the which
albeit there are scarce any that will not boldly arrogate unto himself, yet
is it truly to be found but in a few. Wherefore (as I rather judge) this so
exquisite a gift of government, is to be reserved unto the more excellent
order of Elders; as namely, the Apostles and Evangelists, and others the
principal Ministers of that time, as were Titus and Timothy, and such other,
which governed many Churches with power Apostolic.

And therefore me thinks, that they of all other are far wide, who think so
rare and singular a gift of Gods spirit, ought to be impropriate to so base an
order of Elders, mute and momentarie, which govern not long, and teach not at
all. Sure I am, that the Apostolic Churches, and the sequel of many years
after, never interteined any such kind of aldermen, for Church officers. And
had not the Apostles and Evangelists, and their associates, sole pre-eminence
over the Elders of particular Churches, in the absolute authority of Church
government?

True it is, I find certain Sages and Seniours, who did usually sit in
counsel with the Priests of the old synagogue, who were not Priests; but I
read not of any in the Church, of counsel with the Pastors, but the Pastors.
And in very deed, in the Apostles days, and many ages after, there were not
in Esse any Christian Magistrates, which could consult with the Elders of the
Church, in matters concerning the Church. As for those Elders and Seniors, whom
we read to have been joined with the Priests in council and commission, they
were the ordinary Magistrates of Israel, which lawfully could not be sequestered
or secluded from the counsels and constitutions of the Priests, no more then
at this day the Christian Magistrate is to be restrained from the Sinods and
assemblies of the Church. For albeit there be two kinds of government; one
of the City, an other of the Church: yet are they both derived from one and
the same author. The which also, although they be executed after a diverse
manner, and that the one proceed of God, as he is the creator and moderator of
all things, and the other of one and the same GOD, as he is the restorer and
redeemer of mankind, and each of them have their several end also: yet
notwithstanding, seeing the same society is both Church and City, and the
authority of them both is drawn from the same head: so likewise are they
driven to one end, and come all to the same pass. And of this it comes to
pass, that they both have many things in common, which cannot easily be
propounded without a common assembly, nor concluded without a general assent.

The Minister has authority from the Lord our Savior, to govern the Church:
the Magistrate from the same Lord our creator, has the like sovereignty to
rule the City. The which two diverse and distinct estates, so often as they
do friendly consort together in one vnisone, and direct all their counsels to
the same end, I say so long, the City must needs thrive, and the Church
cannot do amiss. As for any other Elders in the Church (besides these of the
which I have now spoken, and you heard) I would to God some man would show me
which be they (if there be any such.) Doubtless it passes my cunning, to
find any such Church-bugs or Burgesses in the word of God.

Do you not know, that the offices of the Church, are gifts of the spirit,
and as it were talents of the Lord, laid out to loan among men; of the which
there must one day an account be rendered to the Lord? I tell you, it is not at
the pleasure of any servant in the house of Christ, rashly to exonerate
himself of any office he has undertaken: He that once puts his hand to
the plough, and afterward looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God.
For my part, I could never yet read, that there was at any time in the Church,
any office temporary, if it were ordinary. I admit, that Deacons may
afterward be made Ministers; but that cannot be accounted a defection from the
office, which is the perfection of the same, neither is that offfice forsaken,
when in the same order a higher is undertaken; they fall not from that they
were, but rise to that they were not. This custom Tertullian sometimes
reprehended in his book De praescriptionibus contra haereticos, in these
words: Their giving of orders is rash, light, and inconstant: sometimes they
praefer yonglinges, sometimes wordlinges, and sometimes recreant reuolters,
that they may bind them with their titles, whom they cannot hold with the
truth: A man can never gain more, or with more ease, then in the raunges of
recreantes, where the only being there, is to deserve pay. Therefore one is
to day a Bishop, to morrow another; to day a Deacon, to morrow a Parson; to day
a Priest, to morrow a lay man: (for they give to lay men also Church offices.)

The place of Ambrose expounded. Chap. XII.
THat which is alleged out of Ambrose, to confirm that kind of Elder-shippe
which some reformed Churches in this our age have received, is nothing at all
to this question. For Ambrose there speaks of Elders in age, not in office.

Such indeed, the Bishops and Elders in times past, took in counsel with them,
as did also of old the ancient Synagogue; And yet Ambrose brings them not
into any equipage with those, which were Elders in calling, whom he had about
him, and who governed the Churches under him; but he greeueth that such grave
and ancient men in years, whom the Apostle would not have reproved any thing
roughly, should not remain in the like esteem with the Pastors and Elders of
the Church, as they were of old. For expounding those words of Paul to
Timothy: 1. Tim. 5.1,
Rebuke not an ancient (or an Elder) but exhort him as a father, he writes
thus. That in reverence of his years, an ancient man is to be provoked with
mildnes to goodness, that he may the rather take warning: for being gently
admonished, he will be afraid, least afterward he should be more roughly
dealt withal; which were a shame for an Elder. For among all nations age is
honored, for which cause both the Synagogues of old, and afterward also the
Church, had always certain ancient men, without whose advise nothing was
done in the Church. The which by what negligence it was left off, I cannot
tell, except happily it were through the sloth, or rather the pride of some
Pastors, because they alone would seem to be some thing. Thus much says
Ambrose: who (I dare be bound for him) thought nothing less, then that any
order of the Ministry, set down by the Apostles, was now worn out: For
himself had Elders, which did also rule the Church with him, or under him;
besides that, the words do show as clear as noonday, that he spoke here
of Elders, not in office, but in age.

If any vouchsafe certain ancients (experienced in many things) the senate
of the Church, I say not against it; but this I avouch that such (were they all
more ancient then Iaphet) are not to be accounted among the Church officers
and Elders, which the Apostles ordained. And I dare be bold further to
affirm, that they are in no small error, who think, that the Elders and
ancients in certain reformed Churches in this our age, are of the same suit
with those, whom the Apostles ordained in the fourteenth of the Acts, and
Paul sent for from Ephesus in the twenty chapter, Whose order and office is
described at large in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

I perceive here the reformation of the English Church, appoints in every
place certain Church officers, which represent in some sort those ancients
and Elders, and they are commonly called Churchwardens. Notwithstanding these
come short of that authority in Ecclesiastical censure, To excommunicate: but
if any excommunicate person, shall disorderly press into the holy assembly,
they are to endeavor (by the advice of the Minister) to remove him. Their
ordinary office, according to law, is this; To gather and collect, to lay up,
and lay out the rents and reuenews of the church; to keep the body of the
Church, and the rest in repair, to keep the Church book (together with the
Minister) to admonish offenders, and unruly fellows, and as for the stubborn,
infamous, and offensive, to present them to the Bishop, or his deputy, and
that upon their oaths: furthermore also, to note who they are that absent
themselves from divine service, upon the Saboth, or holy days, and to set a
fine on their heads, according to the law provided in that case: and also, to
look that due silence, and all other kind of honest seemlines be observed in
the time of divine service. If the ancient Primative Church, had any such kind
of Elders, they were not (I am sure) at any time accounted of our elders, among
the Elders and Bishops of our Church: for they always made a difference in the
Church, between the laike officers, and the Church Ministers. In Tertullian his
Apology, the Elders, which we read, were present and president in christian
assemblies, were Bishops and Elders, no temporal men; unless we would make him
contrary to himself, who justly vpbraided the Heretics of that time with that
fault, That they profaned Church functions with lay persons.

Neither are these things so spoken of me, neither would I be so taken, as if I
challenged those reformed Churches, that use some such like Seniors (for so they
suppose) as Ambrose seemed to wish for: I my self did use them, when I
supplied the place of a Minister in some reformed Churches. For the tyranny of
Popish Bishops being overthrown, when as they which are indeed the true
Elders, do themselves in like manner sustain the office of a Bishop: they
could not well take unto themselves the entire government of the Church,
without some suspicion of the like; if no less tyranny. And therefore it was
necessary for them, to join with themselves certain godly men out of the
whole corpse of the Church: for that without the assistance of their associates,
it was not possible for them alone, to counter-checke the immodestie of bad
men, and to bring them into some Coram.

That place of Paul expounded, in his first to Timothy, the fifth chapter,
What it is to labor in the word and doctrine. Chap. XIII.
IT need not greatly trouble any man, when Paul says; That those Elders
especially are worthy double honor, which labor in the word and doctrine: as
if it followed thereupon, that there were other Elders also in the church, which
taught not: For these two, do not signify one and the same thing, to Labor in
the word, and to Teach; seeing there was no Elder ordained of the Apostles,
that was not apt to teach. But for as much as the measure of the gifts of Gods
spirit, are not alike in all; (for there be which have received five talents,
who must also pay use for five unto the Lord; and there be again, which have
received but two:) To whom much is given, of him many things are required. If
the dolours Paul suffered for preaching the Gospel, were compared with other
men's labors, we might well conceive, how well worthy he was of greater honor
then they, whose labors were far unlike in the like labor. Some enjoy their
office, and have joy thereof in rest and peace, and teach their people at home,
and endure no hardship abroad; whose doctrine is determined within the
precincts of their own precession. But others there be, which teach not one
only Church, but the whole Church, with their learned labors, and that not
once for all (while they live only) but also, (a great deal more) after many
generations. The which that they may the better perform, they let for no
labor, they spare nor oil, nor toil, nor health, nor wealth, nor life it
self, in that regard.

Besides there be, that for the Gospels sake, set light by the loss of
friends, and favors, and riches, and revenues; they overcome dangers not to
be numbered, and undergo slanders not to be suffered, only that they may
enforce and set forewards the Gospel of Christ. And such does the Apostle seem
to understand in this place; not every ordinary and perfunctory Teacher, that
gouernes in the Church, and instructs with wholesome doctrine the people of
God committed to his charge.

The verb (...), to labor, (used by him, not in this place only) signifies
properly, great and grievous labor. And therefore they are far wide, that
think Paul meant in this place the bare preaching of Gods word, and take this
to be the ods between their Elders, that some teach the people, others govern
only, and that for a while only, and therein supplying also, and applying
themselves to the Ministers of the word. More proportionable to those times,
and proper to this word (...), such Elders are to be understood, as were at
that present among them; as Titus and Timothy, and Tithitus, Mark, Luke, and
such like Paul his legates and ioynte laborers, which in deed feared no
danger, refused no labor, whereby they might advance and diuulge the blessed
doctrine of the sacred truth. Of Timothy, Paul testifyeth in the last Chapter
of the first to the Corinth: when as he thus writes, If Timothy come unto you,
see that he be without fear among you, for he works the work of the Lord,
even as I do. By which we may perceive that Timothy was not without fear, nor
yet without danger, neither that without cause. A while after speaking of
Stephanus, and Aechaicus, and Fortunatus, who had given themselves to minister
unto the Saints, he says:

And be ye subject unto such, and to all that help with us, and labor.
After which sort, I also expound that place in the first to the Thessalonians,
the first chapter and the twelfth verse.

We beseech you brethren, that ye know them that labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you. In all which places, the Apostle uses
the same word (...), to labor, by the which he understands no ordinary,
vulgar, or trifling exercise, but an extraordinary, vehement, difficult, and
troblesome labor. And therefore Paul his meaning is, that how much greater
trouble, and more troblesome turmoyle the Elders undertake in their office,
they are so much the more worthy to be graced with the greater Honors. So that
Paul in these words, respects the singular care of some, not the single
preaching of all.

Writing to Timothy, he defines a Bishopric to be a work: of the which it
follows, that the greater the Bishopric is, the greater is the labor, the
greater is the work. If he which is over one only Church, shall find himself
somewhat to do: what shall we say of them, unto whom the care of many
Churches is committed. So was it with Titus and Timothy, and diverse other
Bishops and Elders, of that order.

The whole sum therefore of our assertion, resolves into thus much: that among
the Bishops or Elders in the Scripture, which governed Churches under the
Apostles, there were diverse degrees in deed, by what names soever ye please to
call them; of the which some were over one Church only, and that under the
direction of an other, and some again over many Churches, suppliant to none of
the same order: as it is well known of Titus and Timothy, and the rest. I know
there are many, who in the secret prejudice of their foreseasoned opinions, will
not stick to say, that Titus and Timothy, and the rest of that form, were
Evangelists, and invested with an extraordinary kind of a not immitable
authority.

To whom I answer, that I have heard so in deed, and read it to: but without
reason or proof at al, of any credit. For where as Paul writes to Timothy,
and charge him that he do the work of an Evangelist, 2. Tim, 4.5. 1. Cor.
16.10
it does no more conclude that Timothy was an Evangelist, (so properly called)
then that other place of Paul to the Corinthians: He does the work of God even
as I, does prove that he was an Apostle.

That that order is of God, which appoynteth superior Elders, Bishops. And that
but of man, where all Pastors and Elders are alike. Chap. XIIII.
We have showed before, what was the extraordinary calling, and the efficacy
thereof, (which was to be found in Titus and Timothy.) To the which I add,
that all ancient and autentike writings held Titus and Timothy for Bishops,
unto whom the Elders of inferior orders were suppliant and subject. In whose
footings our fathers insisting (which next succeeded the Apostles) retained in
use that form of government, which they received of the Apostles. Now a
days, there be some of this belief, that there were only these two degrees
of Ministers left us by the Apostles, namely Pastors and Doctors: who cutting
short that difference of Pastors, which I have noted, and casting of that
ancient decency of Church government, which I have proved, do christen a new
a forrayne and a forged kind of Presbitery, and with much boldness stand forth
to avouch, that this their new devise, is divine, and that other (continuing a
lawful descent from the Apostles time, is but human. Wherefore here (beloved)
it is time to look about us. For they easily avoid all that we have already
auowed of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Pastors; when they answer, that the
government Apostolic was but temporanie and momentary, and determined with
the Apostles and Evangelists themselves, long since deceased, so that now there
is no more any one Apostle before another.

But that the truth of this question may the better appear, we must now have
an especial eye to all those gifts, which were especially pregnant in the
Apostles and Evangelists, that thereby we may know, what was proper to the
Apostles and their times, and what common to all Pastors unto the worlds end.
To which end, the first thing we are to reuise in the Apostles, is that their
extraordinary calling (for they had it immediately from God,) then also, their
general Embassee and commission without restraint, or limitation: Thirdly,
that in all things which concerned their function, they had a neuer-errant
director, (the spirit of truth) who suggested unto them, whatsoever they
before had heard of the Lord, or should otherwise be requisite for them to
know. And the last thing, is their power Apostolic.

Of these, the first three were necessary, for laying the groundwork of
Churches, upon the which others should build: the which unless they had been
semented (as it were) with the more sure joints and strongest sinews of Gods
spirit, what soever should have been raised and reared thereuppon by others,
must needs have reeled, and ruined together with the same. As for the gift of
miracles, I stand not upon that, seeing that was bestowed upon many other of
the faithful also, as it pleased God. Of all these gifts, they could
communicate nothing unto their successors, besides the Ministry of the
Gospel: The which seeing it was inherent in the power Apostolic, they
surrendered that also to their subsecutors: and that, because it is a thing
necessary, not only for the increase, but also for the continuance of Churches.
For without the word preached, the Sacraments administered, and the Church
governed, there can no Church well continue. Wherefore as the preaching of the
word, and the use of the Sacraments was not given to the Church, only for the
Apostles time, but that they might continue unto the age to come, even to the
worlds end: So likewise the form of government, which was ordained of God,
and delivered of the Apostles, and confirmed of the fathers, ought to remain
and continue in like sort. But that form had Pastors inferior and superior,
and therefore that also is to be retained in the Church of God. Neither does
the equality in the Ministry hinder, why there may not be an inequality in the
policy of the Church. In the old law there was one Priesthood equal and
alike to all the Priests: and yet were there diverse degrees of Priests in
respect of government, and in an equal order of Priesthood, there was a not
equal Honor of government. Neither is it prejudicial to us, that their
Priesthood was Leuiticall and typical, seeing the state and government which
was among the Priests and Leuits, did not so much respect any intricate type,
as a well ordered state: that al things might be done decently and in due
order. Wherefore for as much as God himself was author of that policy and
government, in the which Leuits were subdued to Leuits, and Priests to Priests:
it ought not to be recounted any human constitution, where a Minister is
subject to a Minister, and one Pastor to an other: For that is no more
unlawful at this day, then it was at that.

That our Savior by no statute repealed the supereminent authority of Pastors
among themselves. Chap. XV.
AS for our Savior and his censure in this matter, I do not find that by any
means he did abolish the superiority of Ministers but rather that he did
establish it, when as in the first ordinance of the Ministry, he appointed
Ministers of the Gospel, some superior and some inferior to the rest. To the
which ordinance of Christ, those his words are not any whit adverse, where he
says; The Kings of the nations rule over them, and they which have power
among them are called gracious: but it shall not be so with you: but he that is
greatest among you let him be as the least, and he which is chief, as he that
ministers. etc. The true and plain sense of which words is this. Your kind of
government shall be diverse from that which is proper to Princes, whether you
take those which are more tyrannous and truculent over their people, or those
which in their government, are more mild and moderate, accor-to their laws.
Does this sense or sentence take away that difference of persons, which the law
of nature and the rule of government do prescribe? If there be any place in the
Gospel (and there are many) which may be cited for the superiority of
Ministers, this is one. For unless the Lord had meant that in the government
of the Church, there should be some greater then the rest, he would never have
said, He which is greatest among you let him be as the least; he might have
made short work of al, and as soon have said, There is none first among you,
none greatest, none chief. But he that is greatest among you (says he) let
him be as the least, and he which is highest, as he that ministers. Which were
no advice, where there is none higher then another. Where all shall be alike,
what need there any precept, how he which is greatest among them should behave
himself? The meaning therefore of this precept is this: How much any of you is
superior to the rest, so much more submisse shall he carry himself toward the
rest. For albeit all the Apostles were of the same order and power, yet the
difference of age, and diversity of gifts was great among them, and therefore
it could not be, but that they which had received greater gifts of the Lord,
should receive greater countenance of men.

The Apostle Paul in his first Chapter to the Galathians does sufficiently
declare this, where he shows that he had conferred of the Gospel with them,
which seemed to be somewhat, the which he forthwith repeating again,
shows, that there were certain of these Apostles of chief authority among
the rest, of whom notwithstanding he affirms, that he received nothing.
Such was the mildnes and moderation of his spirit; he would not go about to
make that equal in-equality odious, of the which the Lord himself was the
author. For he well knew, that neither he which had received five talents,
ought to think he has but two, and much less, he which has but two, to
compare himself with him that has five. And in deed, can there be any reason
given, why there should be rather an inequality in government, then in other
gifts? or do men abuse authority only, to maintain their tyranny? Doubtless
it is not greatly material, with what gifts a man enthronize himself Pope
over his brethren; whether for his fine wit, or deep knowledge, or smooth
eloquence, or any other such inward virtue: Whether for the holiness of life, or
strictnes of fasts, or largenes of alms, or any such outward complement: or
else for his wealth, his worship, and superior authority. As for the answer
of our Savior it extends far and near: neither is it to be referred to the
Apostles alone, as if it were only forbidden an Apostle, to domineere over an
Apostle, but it stretches it self unto al other. For albeit the power was
great, in the which they were to be installed of the Lord, to the benefit of
the church; notwithstanding, that was rather to be employed of private men over
private persons: and thereupon the Lord forbids that they should after the
manner of Kings and Princes (...), that is domineer, or rule by force. Hence is
it that Paul writes to the Corinthians; Not that we have dominion over your
faith: but that we are ministers of your joy: 2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Pet. 5.3.
And in the first of Peter; Not as if we ruled by force over the chosen. For
that in deed, because it beseemed men private over private men, the Lord has
forbidden his Apostles that, and has taught them rather to make the hearts of
the people to relent by lenity and entreaty, as we read the Apostle Paul did in
many places, and specially in the second to the Corinthes, 2. Cor. 5.20.
where he thus writes; Wherefore are we now ambassadors in the name of
Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we entreat you in the name
of Christ, that ye be reconciled to God.

And yet notwithstanding in other places he is again more sharp and severe, as
when he says, What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod? or in love,
and the spirit of meekenes? And in the latter Epistle the tenth Chapter, when
he speaks of that power he received of the Lord, he shows how little
primacy was in the Church, in such things as pertayned to the kingdom of God.
By all the which it does appear, that by that prohibition of violent dominion
which Kings may use over their subjects, the power of government in the Church
is not inhibited, by the which one Minister is eminent in authority over
another, no more then the power of the Pastor is thereby intercepted, which is
ordinary and ought to be over his people. Will any man say, that the Lord has
so confounded those two distinct orders of Ministers, that the Apostles should
differ in nothing from the seventy Disciples? I do therefore greatly wonder,
that men learned should so far ouer-shoote themselves, as once to persuade, or
to be persuaded, that out of this place (so often aledged to so little purpose)
the superior authority of Bishops over Priests was forbidden by Christ: the
which they can by no means do, without the reproof and reproach, the prejudice
and impeachment of all the most ancient and best learned Fathers, whose
persons they may sooner accuse, then convince of Tyranny, and whose government
they may more easily discommend, then mend. The Lord his purpose was to take
that error from the Apostles, which was in their minds, not to take that power
from the Apostles, which he had given into their hands.

That the form of the Apostles government, did not end with the death of the
Apostles. Chap. XVI.
THat the government of the Apostles, is said by some to have deceased with
the death of the Apostles, it is neither grounded upon true authority of
Scripture, nor proved by any consequence of reason, nor maintained by any
president of the Fathers. Neither is it of any greater force, nor have they any
greater reason, that say the Apostles authority was extraordinary: For by the
same reason they may at this day deny, that any man has any authority to
baptize and to preach. If what things were extraordinary in the Apostles, they
could not return to their posterity: may not the same reason serve to prove,
that there is no authority left unto us after the Apostles, either to preach or
to baptize? I would gladly then hear some just cause, why rather the Church
government should cease with us which was under the Apostles, then the
preaching of the Gospel, or the administering of the Sacraments. For in them
there was as much extraordinary, as in the other.

This is much like, as if of old a man should have said, that after the death
of Moses and Aaron, the Priests and Levites had not the same power with Moses
and Aaron, because theirs was extraordinary. Wherefore as after their decease,
the same order of government which was used of Moses and Aaron, remained to
their posterity: In like manner, the Apostles and Evangelists were a lantherne
and a law unto us which should come after them, of perfect Church government.
And that which our Savior said of the Priests of the Jews, That they did sit
upon the chair of Moses and Aaron, may be said of our Bishops, that they sit
in the chair of Peter and Paul, that is, that they have succeeded them in the
same seat and state of government.

There are two words, which being not well taken, may be very offensive,
namely, Temporary and extraordinary: For it is to be understood, that there
are not jointly to be given alike to the whole function Apostolic, and every
part thereof. And yet some are made to believe, that whatsoever was in them
extraordinary, the same was also temporary: When as indeed, whatsoever was in
them extraordinary, was not temporary: For all things in the Apostles were
extraordinary, of the which many things in process of time became ordinary.
Only those things which deceased with the Apostles were temporary. But what
things those were, I have already declared at large.

And now, that I may first begin with the preaching of the gospel: it were
very hard to restrain that to the persons of the Apostles, and their age
only: For albeit so large a legacy, as was the Apostles, be not committed
vno any: yet is there some such like of the same kind, with the like
authority.

That the commandment, To preach the gospel unto all nations, (the Apostles
being now received up into heaven) does in like manner bind the Church: to the
which the Authority Apostolic, is also requisite. Chap. XVII.
THe command, to preach the gospel, and the commission, to all nations, we
understand to be so given in charge to the Apostles, that withal it obliges
the church also; nether did the charge of preaching the gospel to the
incredulous heathen, respect the apostles only, but al future ages to the
worlds end. In the last of Matthew, when the Lord had said, that all power was
given unto him in heaven and in earth, and had commanded, that they should go
forth, and teach al nations, etc. he added; I am with you unto the worlds end.
Which cannot be restrained to the Apostles only, seeing it concerns all whom
he commands to preach, and to whom he promises his divine presence for ever:
neither can this promise be deuorced from the former command, and thereby it
appears, that Christ commanded the church also; that Apostles having taken
heaven, order might be taken, that the gospel might be preached to the
Gentiles in all coasts, upon al occasions. And verelie if the Apostolic
authority had bin Temporary, that also had been a personal gift, and
particular: neither would they have presumed to have taken themselves
companions and copartners in that Apostolik charge, to the which themselves
only were appointed of the Lord. But when as they knew, that their office, and
whatsoever authority they had received, was rather given to the whole church,
then to their sole selves; they thereupon were bold, to make others, joint
partners with them in their Apostolic power, whom they also knew should be
their successors. Neither in nature, could so great a work be finished of so
few laborers: and therefore also the commandment of the Lord, could no further
bind the Apostles, then for the term of their mortalitye: in the which time,
the Lord did not purpose to determine, either the promise of his help, or the
preaching of his word.

The Apostles then had need of many helpers in the Lord, and fellow laborers
for the business of the Lord: the which when they could not accomplish
themselves, they left their posterity to finish that, which themselves could
not effect. Had the Apostles carried their commission to heaven with them, and
besides the private care of particular Churches, the Bishops (whom the
Apostles left their successors) had thought the further propagation of the
gospel did nothing pertain to them: I doubt me, the co^fines of Christ his
kingdom had never been enlarged to so great a monarchy as it is. What need I
remember you of the rare and memorable examples, of the thrice reverend fathers
in the Primative church? With what serious study, with what earnest desire,
with what constant endeavor, and last of al, with what great labors, and many
streaming showers of the blood of Martyrs, were the churches of old planted,
watered, and increased? It is a thing better known and commended, then that I
need to repeat it, or themselves to repent it.

Notwithstanding there be some in these days, which take up but to shrewdly
this sentence of ours: as if it were some Anabaptisticall fancy, when it is
said, that the Church has at this day, if not Apostles, yet Apostolic
Ministers: but as for the fancy, (if Anabaptisticall) let themselves look to
that, least they take themselves by the nose. For my part, I would but know,
whether the gospel yet at this day, now after a 1500. years, be come to the
ears of all Nations. In the mean time, let them consider how many nations,
(whom the Apostles never saw) by the pains and preaching of godly Pastors,
(who in this labor succeeded the Apostles) have received the Lord Christ.

I will not now stand to tell them, only this I conclude, that the command
and commission of preaching the Gospel, stands yet in his full strength and
force in the church of God, and should, so long as there is any nation, that
knows not the Lord. That at this day there is none sent by the churches of
Christ, to the nations which have not known Christ, it is not long of the
lack of sufficient power to send, but of sufficient persons to be sent, or at
least wise, of a better zeal to advance the kingdom of Christ. Indeed no man
ought to tempt the Lord: Did not himself forbid his Apostles to stir one foot
out of Jerusalem, to discharge their duty before they had received the holy
Ghost? So requisite is it, that a man be thoroughly furnished for so great an
enterprise, before he undertake it. And therefore, because the judgment of one
man may be ouer-weening and deceived, (especially if he may be his own judge)
it is requisite, that the authority of the church in that case be expected.
But here is required an Authority Apostolic: the which if the Church have
not, (although it have fit men) neither has it the power to send. For who can
give that to another, which he has not himself? Whosoever therefore is sent
(whether you please to call him an Apostle, or an Evangelist; or a Bishop,) he
has need of the like, and no less power then Timothy and Titus had in the
like, and no less charge.

This therefore is the authority which is assigned to the church by the Keys:
the which the Lord our Savior gave, not so much to Peter and his collegiats,
as to the Church it self: so that of right it may do that at this day,
which it could of old; namely, where occasion serves to give in commission unto
sufficient men, the publishing of the Gospel, with Authority Apostolic.

That the Apostolic authority is as necessary for the conseruing and
confirming, as for the founding and first planting of Churches. Chap. XVIII.
But for as much as the power Apostolic, is no less needful and necessary
for the conseruing and confirming, as for the planting, and first placing of
churches, we must also have a special regard to that. For by reason (as it is
thought) of Bishops and Archbishops, Primats, and Metropolitanes, which have
succeeded the Apostles and the Evangelists, there is now some controversy
moved for that. And verily I have oftentimes wondered with my self, what it is
that should make any learned or religious man think, that the office of
Apostles and Evangelists, is ceased in the Church, and that at this day there
are none possessed of any authority Apostolic, to whom the other Elders ought
to supply in the governance of the Church: and I wonder the more, that there
be any that should think the power Apostolic, a thing so extraordinary, as
if it were not possible, that it should be deuolued to their posterity.

Indeed the Church has not continued those names amongst us: but is that
sufficient to prove, that with those titles, the authority also is surceased?
First, if a man would but well mark the latter days of the Apostles (of Paul
especially) he should find, that the Apostolic government could not possibly
end with the Apostles. For by those things the sacred Scripture does testify
of Paul, we may judge of the rest, who no doubt, were no less careful for
the good of the Church, even to their last gasp, wheresoever it pleased God to
translate them out of this life: But the second Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy
(indicted about the last of his days) does witness abundantly, what an
universal care he had even then of the Churches. There he makes mention of
his fellow laborers, whereof some he had sent to go unto diverse Churches, and
some he sent for to come unto himself; that being now ready to flit out of
this life, he might give them his last charge of all things, concerning the
welfare of the Church, and the furnishing of that building himself had left
unfinished.

This his last will and Testament he left with them. The which had been to no
purpose, had the power Apostolic died with him, or had the authority of that
their legacy been compelled within the circuit of every particular parish.
For they all, whom Paul there remembers (as Titus, Mark, Luke, Crescens,
Tithicus, and Timothy himself) were associate with Paul in his Apostolic
sea, as unto whose several charge, he had demised many and sundry Churches;
The which if it were not free for them (with that recreant Demas) to cast up,
and give over, while Paul yet lived, how much less, after he was dead?
Wherefore now they were made, and remain his heirs (as before they were his
peers) of his Apostolic pains and praeheminence.

That the other Apostles had also their consorts and collegiats in their
Apostolic charge, unto whom (themselves discontinuing this life) they demeaned
the no less care of the Churches with the like authority, there was never
wise man that doubted of it. And furthermore, that their lawful authority,
with the which they prosecuted and perseuered in the Lord his affairs, could
no more be extinguished with them, then it was abolished with the Apostles (so
long as there was any church remaining.) But as they succeeded the Apostles, so
had they their successors: upon whom if themselves did not bestow the power
they had received, the Church did; which is heir general of the power
Apostolic.

But go to now: let us imagine (if there can be such a conceit) that it is
not so, as I have said: let us suppose also for a while, that the Apostles
left all unto Pastors and Elders of equal authority, who had only the charge
of their several Churches, and their provinces limited within the precincts of
their own only parishes; What then (shall we say) became of those Churches,
in the which the Apostles (intercepted by death) or they which with the
Apostles did govern the Churches, could not ordeine any Pastors? Did their
death fall out so pat, that every Church had their Pastors and Doctors, and
that none of them was left out of fashion, (I mean without their Deacons, and
Doctors, and Pastors, and Presbyters) as were sometime the Churches of Creet
under the Apostle Paul? Who then followed the work that was unfinished? Was
there no need then of some Timothy or Titus, to make perfect that, which was
yet not performed? The Apostles yet living, it was needful that Titus and
Timothy, and diverse such others, should have a larger commission; how much
rather after their death? Wherefore to conclude, either the work of God, begun
of the Apostles, was altogether to be left off, or else to be followed a
fresh by those, whom for that purpose they left behind them.

By the testimony of Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history the former chapter
is confirmed. Chap. XIX.
EVsebius, in the third book and fourth chapter of his Ecclesiastical
history, writes thus; But that Paul preaehed the word of God unto the
Gentiles, and that he laid the foundation of Churches from Jerusalem, and
the confines thereof, even unto Illyricum, it sufficiently appears, not only
by his own words, but also out of the book of Luke, entitled, The Acts of
the Apostles. Furthermore, in what Provinces or dominions, the Apostle Peter
preached the Gospel unto them which were of the Circumcision, and delivered
the word of the new Testament, it is plain and evident enough out of his
own words, taken out of that Epistle, we have truly proved to be his by the
consent of all men, and which he wrote to the Jews dispersed throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithinia, etc. And again in the same place;
But how many, and who were the true and natural followers of the Apostles,
which were accounted able and fit men to govern the Churches which they had
founded, it is not easy to say, they only excepted, who^ some perhaps may
gather by the way out of Paul his writings. For the which purpose Luke also
makes not a little, who reckons by name the Disciples of Paul, whilst he
labors to record them in the Acts. Among whom was Timothy, who is said to
be the first that obtained the Bishopric of the Church which is at Ephesus.
Titus also was over the churches which are in Creet. And in the same place he
says: That among the rest of Paul his companions and Disciples Crescens was
one, whom Paul himself witnesses, was gone into Galatia: Linus was another,
who^ in his second to Timothy, he witnesses to have been with him at Rome,
whom also we have declared before, to have been the first Bishop of the Church
of Rome, after Peter. And another was Clement, who was the third Bishop of
Rome, whom Paul affirms, to have been his copartner and fellow laborer in
the Lord. Unto which we may add that Areopagite, Dionisius by name, of whom
Luke in the Acts reports, that he was converted to the faith after that
sermon of Paul, which he made in Mars street at Athens, and of whom an other
Dionisius, pastor of the Church at Corinth (a very ancient writer) does
record, that he was the first Bishop of the Church at Athens.

The same Eusebius in the same book, the one and thirty chapter, has these
words; And besides these, there were many other of that age very famous, who
both immediately succeeded the Apostles, and also as the Disciples of so great
and excellent Masters, being adorned with many singular and divine virtues,
raised a most comely edifice upon the the foundations of the Apostles, which
they had well laid in all places: who both amplified more fully and plentifully
the preaching of the Gospel, and sowed the seeds of the kingdom of heaven
far and near, throughout the universal world. For all the Disciples for the
most part, which lived in that age, being inflamed with a more ardent Zeal and
earnest love of the heavenly wisdom, and being ravished in mind with a
rare kind of desire after Gods word, executed very exquisitely the
commandment of our Savior, which before was given; and to them which wanted
their help they willingly unfolded all their treasures. Afterward, straying
far from their own home, they performed the pensions of Evangelists, and to
those which had not as yet so much as heard of the word of faith, they labored
with all care and constancy to preach Christ, and to deliver the Scripture of
the holy Gospel. Who, when as in diverse far and foreine countries they had
laid the foundations only of the faith, and had ordained other Pastors, and
committed the care to them of those which were newly brought to the faith, that
they might be diligently trained up in the doctrine of Christ, themselves
departed into other regions and countries, with the grace and power of God. For
many wonderful powers and miracles, by the help of the holy spirit, were
done by them even unto that day: so that throngs of people being persuaded,
even at the first hearing of the Gospel preached, with ready wills enterteined
and embraced that religion and worship, which is only due unto God, the
author of all things. Thus far Eusebius.

I could allege other particulars out of the same author, and others, of
diverse Bishops, sent by diverse Churches, at diverse times, to convert the
Gentiles. In whom it was necessary, that they should have the like authority
with that, which Titus and Timothy received of the Apostles. That some here
fly unto their old starting hole of extraordinary calling, when they are
called upon with these reasons; they have small reason. For, an ordinary
Ministry being established in the Church, it is as badly, as boldly done of
them, and it will prove but an evil example to others, to allege an
extraordinary calling, unless they could make some certain proof thereof.

Wherefore, if we would but a little more attentively conceive and consider,
what the state of the Churches was through out the world, when the Apostles
departed from hence, we should soon find that in many places they left well
ordered Churches, in the which there was nothing a wanting, that is, which had
there one Bishop over them, (as were the seven Churches of Asia, unto whom the
spirit of the Lord speaks in the Revelation:) and again we should find some
other Churches, as yet not finished and thoroughly fashioned, which wanted many
things to their perfection, some more, some less, according to the time, the
place, the plenty and scarcity of the people, which had given their names to
Christ. And besides all this, we shall find innumerable places, whether the
Apostles could not come, where were no Churches at all. But whatsoever, or of
what manner soever they were, they were all dependant upon the Apostles
government: whom if no man did succeed with like authority, it must needs
be, that they were all left as widdowe Churches and Orphans; which is an
absurd thing to say. But if we shall say, that they changed that manner of
government, with the which they were acquainted under the Apostles: how could
that possibly be permitted, without the great mischief and misery of all
those Churches?

Of these things therefore I infer, That there was left of the Apostles
Authority Apostolic to their successors, whom they had disposed over many
Churches: and that, partly for the establishing of such Churches as were
thoroughly finished, and partly, for the finishing of such as were left not
thoroughly formed, and partly also for the planting of new, where as yet there
was none founded. And this was the cause, why Paul being shortly to take his
leave of his life, sent Crescens into Galatia, and Titus into Dalmatia, and
sent for Timothy and Mark to make their repair unto himself. Even as the
Lord himself, being now ready to give up this life, provided for his
Disciples; in like manner, the Apostles took great care for those Churches,
which were gathered, and were to be gathered from among the Gentiles;
otherwise, how should the Churches have received their so great increase after
the Apostles? Verily, it is with tears to be lamented, that their holy
Apostolic zeal is at this day so cooled amongst us, that no man so much as
once thinks of publishing the Gospel, unto Nations altogether estraunged
from the faith of Christ.

But now, seeing there were many Churches left of the Apostles but new
begun, and more, not yet begun, according to that power they had received of
the Lord, the work of the Gentiles conversion which was begun by them, was to
be followed to the end. Of the which it follows, that the Apostolic power,
given of the Lord for the edifiying of his Church, does yet remain in the
Church. And those parts of Apostolic government, as they were given of old to
certain singular Bishops, so are they to be given at this day, where they are
not given, and so are they to remain, where they are given. If any man desire
some reformation to be had in that kind, for my part I am not against it. The
disposing of this power, the Church has, as it always had; yet so, as where
the Lord has given a Christian Magistrate, he be not left out, nor loose his
part. For they doubtless are those Seniors, Ancients and Elders, of the which
there is so often mention in the Bible: whom we read to have been joined of
old with the Priests and Levites in weighty matters: for they are in stead of
the whole people.

That the authority of Bishops over Priests or Elders is approved by the
consent of the Churches throughout the whole world. Chap. XX.
THat which we read to be done of al Churches from the Apostles times, and of
the Fathers throughout the compass of the whole earth, and the same continued
even unto these our days, I do always hold as a sacred Canon of the
Apostles, not to be repealed. Neither is it a small presumption to abrogate
that, which has been received with so great and universal consent; from the
which to revolt, besides that it is in it self an uncouth declination of a
conceit giddie and headstrong, it will also bring with it a greater mischief
and misery to the Church, then many at the first will conceive, or any in the
end can relieve. Among the old Canons, which for their antiquity are called the
Apostles, we read this that follows: It becomes the Bishops of every
nation to know, who is the chief among them, which is to be accounted as it
were the head, without whose opinion these ought to do nothing of any great
moment, but that every man do those things which belong unto his own parish,
and the villages which are of the same. Neither let himself do any thing
without the knowledge of all: for so there shall be concord, and God shall be
glorified through our Lord in his holy spirit.

This Canon (a word or two translated) is renewed in the Council of Antioch,
in these words: The Bishops which are in several provinces ought to know,
that he which is Bishop in the Metropolitan City, has charge also of the
whole province, for that they which have any business, recourse from all
places to the Metropolis or mother City. Wherefore it seems expedient, that
he excel the rest in honor, and that the other Bishops do nothing of any
great moment without him (according to the ancient decree of our Fathers) but
only those things which pertain unto their own precincts, and the Parishes
subject to the same. For let every Bishop have authority over his own
province, and let him govern the same according to his own devotion: and let
him have charge of the whole province which is subject to his City, that he
may create Priests and Deacons, and dispose all things with judgment: besides
this, let him do no other thing without the Bishop of the mother Church,
neither he himself without the opinion of the rest. In which Canon renewed
and reestablished, I observe two things: the first is, the Antiquity of the
Canon; the other is, That the province was not always committed to the Bishop
of the Metropolitan City; seeing a cause is added, why Ecclesiastical
controversies are to be presented to the Bishop of the Metropolitan City,
rather then to any other: of the which seeing the Apostles Canon made no
mention, the first Fathers seemed not always to have had that respect of the
said Metropolis.

The antiquity of this custom, is sufficiently declared in the seventeenth
chapter of the Nicene council, as follows: Let the ancient custom prevail,
which was in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolie, that the Bishops of Alexandria have
an excellency and supreme dignity over all these: Seeing that this is also the
custom with the Bishop of Rome. In like manner, at Antioch, and in other
Provinces, primacie, dignity, honor, authority, is given unto those Churches.
But this is most plain: that if any man he made a Bishop, without the consent
of the Metropolitan, The great Council defines, that he ought not to be a
Bishop. Thus goes the Law, neither were it any great matter to confirm the
same, with the Canons of other Councels, and Ecclesiastical histories. But by
this it may appear, what was the judgment of all those ancient fathers
concerning this matter.

That some are of opinion, that Patriarchs and Archbishops were first created
of the Nicene council, or (as some will have it) of the first
Constantinopolitane Council; their opinion is their error: for the Nicene
council, which was called about the twenty year of Constantine the great,
testifies, that it enacteth no new thing, when it commanded, that the old
custom should be continued: so that, it was no new thing at that time, for
some one Bishop to have superior authority over the rest of his brethren, his
authority being limited by certain laws. But that some argue, how that to be
president over diverse Provinces, and to have charge of them, belongs to the
office of an Apostle, and an Evangelist; and that one and the same man cannot
be an Apostle and an Evangelist and a Bishop, for that these are distinct
offices: I may answer them, that never yet any before these our days, did
ever either so think, or write. The Fathers have testified in their writings,
what they received of their forefathers, that James an Apostle was ordained of
the rest, Bishop of Jerusalem. The which thing also seems to have been done
upon just and necessary occasion: namely, for the necessary good of the
Church. For when as that was the mother of all other churches, and that the
Jews resorted thither out of all the parts of the world, it ought not but to
have an Apostle resiant among the^, so long as might be: who might resolve the
brethren in such doubts, as were likely to arise among them. Although indeed,
to pilgrim through diverse regions, and to preach the gospel, is most properly
appertaining to the office of an Apostle: so that they may not abide in one
place, but where necessity requires.

As therefore the Apostles discharged the duty of a Bishop when as they took
upon them the particular charge of some on special church (namely, when the
necessity of the church universal did so require,) neither did think they did
any thing therein; contrary to their Apostolik calling, so likewse if that
which wholly pertains to the Apostles, be committed to the Bishops, it need
not seem a thing either unreasonable, or not profitable, when the good order of
church government does require the same. But whereas the Canon says, that we
should keep the old custom, not the Lords institution: it may seem that the
power of Patriarks, crept into the church of a contrary custom, rather then
of any divine institution. I answer, that the canon does not gainsay, that
the power Apostolic in church-gouernment was not left unto the church, of the
Apostles: but that, besides or above the rest, these or they, should enjoy it
(as namely he of Antioch Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Rome,) that indeed was of
the mere custom, and at the sole disposition of the church. For those
particular Bishops did not receive their Apostolic power immediately from GOD,
as did the Apostles, but from the church and by the church; the which as it is
not restrained to any certain situate places or persons, cities, or Bishops:
so neither is the authority Apostolik. Who doubts but that the Nicen counsel,
or any other like to that, might have translated the Patriarkie of the Romain
BB. to some other place, and have given it to the BB. of Rauenna, or of
Aquiline, for good cause, if their had been any? The like I say of the
Patriarks of Antioch and Alexandria. But that the councels of Bishops had this
authority, they declared then sufficiently, when as they made him of
Constantinople com-peer in all things with him of Rome. By the which also it
may evidently apeare, that the prerogative of the power Apostolic, was not
given by succession, but as it was best befitting the commodity of the church,
by those especial cities. And therefore, in that the Canon gives that to
custom, it does not thereby take from it the divine institution. But that I may
return to the next successors of the Apostles and Evangelists, Titus and
Timothy, and the rest whom sacred writ records, were joined with the Apostles
as assistants, that they were Bishops, and had charge of many churches, the
most ancient and authentike tradition approoueth the same: neither are those
things so far at variance between themselves, as some would have them, to be
a Bishop, and to do the work of an Apostle, or an Evangelist. For this is the
common consent of all the fathers, that the office of a Bishop, and an Apostle
or Evangelist are all one, only that the office of the one is more ample, and
augustious. Cyprian in his 10. epistle writes thus. The Deacons ought to
remember, the Lord himself did choose Apostles, that is Bishops and Prelates: but
the Apostles themselves ordained them Deacons, after he was received up into
heaven. Thus says Cyprian; out of whose words we may learn, that a Bishopric
is an Apostleship, as also an Apostleship is a kind of bishopric. Hereupon
the Apostle Peter in the Acts, calls the Apostleship of Judas a bishopric.
And in like manner speaks Augustine. For no man is ignorant (says he) that
our Savior ordained bishops in the church. For before he ascended into heaven,
he laid his hands upon his Apostles, and made them bisheps. And Ambrose upon
that in the 4. to the Ephesians, some were given to the church Apostles:
writes thus. The Apostles are BB. but the Prophets are expounders of the
scriptures, which may now be called Priests. For in a BB all the orders are
contained, because he is first a priest, who is chief of ths priests, and a
Prophet, and an Evangelist, to the furnishing of the rest of the offices of the
church. Theodoret also upon the 1. to Tim. cap. 3. says thus. Of old they
called the same men Priests and BB. but those that are now called BB. they then
called Apostles: but long since, they left the name of Apostles, to the^ which
were indeed apostles: but the addition of BB. they imposed upon such, as of old
were called Apostles: so was Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philip, and so
Titus of the Cretensians, and Timothy of Asia. All the fathers which succeeded
the Apostles, were not of opinion, that the form of government they had
received of the Apostles, should ever have been altered or exauterate: the
which verelye they could never have persuaded themselves, had they known, that
the government of Titus and Timothy, had been but Temporary, and
Extraordinary. But is it credible, nay is it possible, that Timothy and
Titus, and others, unto whom the like province was demised, should be
ignorant of this themselves? Augustine expounding that in the 44. Psalm,
Instead of thy Fathers, thou shall have children, shows that our Bishops
inherited the Apostles, as children their fathers. And were it not a point of
frontles and ungracious in solencie to deny, that our fathers had their Bishops
and Prelates, even from the Apostles times, and a part of needles and
superfluous diligence, to prove a thing so manifest: I might easily, and would
willingly stay upon the citing and summoning of many more fathers, until we
were fully compassed with a cloud of witnesses. But this is not the question:
but rather it is now doubted, whether the ordinance of Bishops be of God, or
of men, as an order that slipped into the church, rather of human custom, then
divine co^stitution. Wherefore of things confessed and granted, let us decide
and determine things doubted and in question.

That Bishops are ordained by a divine institution and Apolique tradition.
Chap. XXI.
THere is nothing more certain, then this, That the Apostles ordained nothing
in the Church, which they received not of the Lord. But they created Bishops,
(as Titus and Timothy) wheresoever need was in the Church. And indeed, had not
the Apostles created Bishops, as they dispersed themselves thorough out the
whole world, how could ever the calling of Bishops have been so universally
approved by so general an assent of all cities?

But when as many Churches were infinitely distant from others, is it not
strange, that not any one Church retained that divine kind, of government
(as it is thought) which is adored at this day in some reformed Churches?
Doubtless, Churches so diverse and distant, could not but greatly differ in
things indifferent, where there was no certaynty set down by the Apostles.
And therefore this could not be without a miracle of either part: Namely, that
either they should so universally consort in this one government, if it were
not received by tradition from the Apostles, or that with so general a consent
they should alter the same, if it were. For all the world knows, that in all
the world the government was one, and the same for all the world.

This is without question and beyond all exception, that all the ancient
autentike fathers, (so many as held the right faith) were of this belief, that
in this only plot, they did follow the Apostolic tradition, and divine
institution. Ireneus in his third book the third Chapter, against Heresies,
writes thus. It is easy for all men to see (that will see the truth) the
ancient tradition of the Apostles in the Church, through the whole world: and
we can reckon up those which were ordained Bishops of the Apostles themselves,
and their successors also even unto our selves, which neither taught, nor knew
any such thing as these men doat of. Out of the which it appears: That, what
thing was received in all Churches, which were founded of the Apostles, was an
Apostolic tradition, and divine institution, but the order of Bishops was
received every where in all Churches, and therefore an Apostolic tradition
and a divine institution. Ciprian in his fourth book the ninth Epistle. From
whence (says he) are scismes bred, and yet do breed, but where the Bishop
which is one and over the Church, is condemned by the proud presumption of
some, and the man which is honored by the acceptance of God, is dishonored by
dishonest men. etc. The same Ciprian in his seven and twenty Epistle (according
to the order of his Epistle) citing that of Mathews, Thou art Peter and upon
this work etc. he infers, That eue^ from thence, according to the course of
time and succession of ages, the ordination of Bishops, and the computation of
the Church does run? So that the Church may seem to be grounded upon Bishops,
and every action of the Church to be governed by the same Presidents. Wherefore
seeing this is thus founded upon the divine ordinance of God, I ca^ but wonder
at some.

That it was the opinion of Aerius, That there is no difference between a
Bishop and a Priest: which was condemned for an Heresy by the Fathers. Chap.
XII.
THus have we heard of the acceptance of God, and the divine ordinance, upon
which the authority of Bishops relied, as our Fathers believed. To the which I
now add, that had not the orthodoctike fathers believed, that the order of
Bishops was grounded upon the word of God, they would never have recounted the
opinion of Aerius, among other Heresies: Who three hundred years long after
the Apostles times, was the first that durst affirm, That there was no
difference between the holy Bishop, and an ordinary Priest. Of whom Epiphanius
records, that he spoke more like a fury, then a man; who (as he also
reports) was wont to say, What is a Bishop to a Priest? there is no
difference between them: for there is but one order, and one honor, and one
dignity. The Bishop lays on his hands, the Bishop sits on his throne, so
likewise does the Priest. Thus says Aerius. But of the other side, Epiphanius
first shows, That a Bishop may create Priests, and that he cannot be created
of Priests. The order of Bishops (says he) is the begetter of Fathers, for be
begets Fathers unto the Church; but the order of Priests cannot beget
Fathers: by the regeneration of Baptism it begets children to the Church,
but not Fathers, or Teachers: For how should he create a Priest, who has not
the power of laying on of hands in the election? And he answers Aerius for
his cauels, That his trifling and emulation deceived him, and that he was
ignorant of the nature of antique histories. For that when the preaching of
the word was but a new thing, the holy Apostle writ according to the state of
the thing, as it then stood. And therefore where there were Bishops appointed,
he wrote to Bishops and Deacons: (neither could the Apostles do all at once.
But they had present use of Priests and Deacons: For by those two all
Ecclesiastical functions are to be performed) But where there were not any
found worthy a Bishopric, there the place was void of a Bishop, but where
need was, and there were that were worthy, there they placed Bishops. But
where as there were not many, there were not many to be found among them to be
made Priests, and therefore they contented themselves with a Bishop only in
that place: But it is not possible, that a Bishop should be without a Deacon
and the Apostle had an especial care of that, that he should not be without
his Deacons. And thus the Church received the fulness of his functions,
according as the condition of time and place did require. For every thing was
not furnished with all things at the first: but in process of time, such
things were provided as were requisite to the performance of things necessary,
etc. These things he confirms by the example of Moses, who finished his
common wealth, not all at once, but after a time. But as of old, he should have
taken a wrong course, who to reform the Church of Israel, would have taken
his pattern from the imperfect, and not composed state thereof: So likewise at
this day, they maintayn but too foul an error, that would bring the state of a
Church well grown in years, back again to the swathling clouts. And
therefore Epiphanius very well infers thus: So likewise (says he) are those
things which are written in the Apostle, until the Church be enlarged, until
it come to her ripe years, until it be most perfectly preyzed with the
or-nature of wisdom, by the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Epiphanius perceived
that there were many things wanting, and that al things were not in their
perfect temper, and that after a time, one and the same man was not both Priest
and Bishop, as it well appeared by that which Saint Paul writ to Timothy, who
was a Bishop: Against a Priest or Elder receive no accusation without two or
three witnesses: He said not to any Elder; receive no accusation against a
Bishop, etc. Augustine in like manner, mightily confirms this the censure and
sentence of Epiphanius, who also mustereth this error of Aerius among the
mid-ranke of old confused Heresies.

Hierom his opinion confuted. Chap. XXII.
THat which is objected out of Hierome, upon the first Chapter of the Epistle
to Titus, namely, that Bishops are greater then Priests, rather by the custom
of men, then the constitution of God etc. I answer: that it was the private
opinion of Hierome, consenting with Aerius, dissenting from the word of God.
Wherefore we are now diligently to examine his reasons, for that his assertion,
least we might seem without cause to have forsaken him.

These therefore are his words: Before that (through the instigation of Satan)
there were parts taking in the Church, and the people said, I hold of Paul, I
of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common consent of
Eldres: but after that once every man thought those that he baptized, were his
own, and not Christ's: it was decreede throughout the whole world, that one
chosen from among the Priests should be placed over the rest, unto whom the
whole care of the Church should appertain, and by whom al occasion of Scisme
should be taken away, etc. That here he says, how that at the beginning, the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of the Elders: I will not greatly
stand with him: and yet that proves not, that the Bishops were not afterward
preferred by the Lord his institution. For then might we not as well say and
with as good reason; that the Elders themselves, and the Doctors which the
Apostles created, were not according to the Lord his institution, because at
the first the Church was governed of the Apostles without Elders or Deacons,
when as yet there were neither Elders nor Deacons. But that the Apostles
themselves governed the Churches by themselves (and some other their
coadiutors) before there were any Elders, there is no man but knows, or may
learn to know out of the Epistle to Titus. And likewise, whosoever is of any
judgment (or has not his judgment blinded) may easily gather of the thing it
self, that in those beginnings, while yet the Churches might be visited ever
and anon of the Apostles themselves, and their associats, so long it was not
needeful they should anoint any other Bishops over the Churches; the Elders
might serve the turn: Who also (so long as there were no other besides the
Apostles) might likewise be called Bishops. So also I confess, that there was
a time, when the Churches were governed by the common counsel of the people,
as in Creete (before the creation of Elders) and at Corinth, and at Rome: which
afterward having their Elders (as at Philipos and at Ephesus) were then ruled
by their more sacred counsel; but yet under the care and oversight of the
Apostles and Evangelists. Wherefore hitherto it follows not of all this, that
the Apostles (as God afforded able men) did not prefer over several Churches
several Bishops, and them over the other Elders; that they succeeding in place
of the Apostles, might perform those very same things, which the Apostles them
selves would, if they could either have lived always, or have been every where
resident. But in deed, what need had they of Bishops, so long as the Apostles
themselves discharged the duty of Bishops? And yet when as in the whole world,
the number of Churches did daily increase, so that the Apostles could not stay
in one place, nor go to all places: of force (and as soon as need was) they
created Bishops, unto whom they committed that charge (as were Titus and
Timothy and many other) no doubt with the same power, and according to the same
divine institution of God, by the which before they created Elders.

But that Hierom says, how that Bishops became greater then Elders, of custom
rather then of any divine institution; it has no semblaunce of truth. Which
challenge I make good upon him, first from the time, when he says this
custom began. Before (says he) through the instigation of the devil they
began to make sects in the Church, aad it was said among the people; I hold of
Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were ruled by the common counsel
of Elders, etc. But now those factions began under the Apostles; and therefore,
that custom began in good time, and the Apostles themselves for the avoiding
of scisme altered (if not abrogated) the Lord his institution. The which (me
thinks) were more then absurd to say. Our Savior no doubt, who is the
wisdom of his father, knew much better then the Apostles, what was needful
and commodious for the preventing of scisme. Whom as it did not beseem, to
seem more wise then their master; so was it not their parts, for the default
of one Church, to alter Gods institution. Again how knew Hierome, that before
those scismes brake forth, the Church of Corinth had their Elders, by whose
council they were ruled? It is more likely by Paul his Epistles (all
circumstances considered) that they had as then none especial and peculiar
Elders.

If any man come in and say, that these things happened after the Apostles
time, and that Hierome did not so much respect the Church of Corinth, as
diverse others (and therefore speaks not of Corinth, but of the people) who
were fallen into diverse scismes; I come upon him again, and tell him, it is
not enough for him to say so, but it must be proved out of approved Histories,
what those scisms were, and how, and where, and when they began; and how from
that time, this foresaid custom began. We read in the Revelation of seven
Angels, the Prelates of seven Churches, of the which one was Ephesus, the which
(as it is manifest) had many Bishops before that time (as were also at
Philippos) all which, as I have showed, were Elders also.

I say therefore, that in the original of the Church, there was a time, when
they had nor Elders, nor Bishops, besides the Apostles themselves, the
Evangelists and their fellow-laborers: (as in Creete) (for the beginnings of
all were alike.) Shall we therefore say, that those Elders were set over the
Church of custom, not of any divine constitution, because the Churches at the
first, under the Apostles governed themselves without Elders? or, that after
they had abused that their popular kind of governance, that thereuppon the
government was committed to the council of Elders, of custom?

Moreover if this argument were good, we might argue in like manner, against
the institution of Deacons, and say they were not ordained according to any
divine institution, because that in the beginning there were none of that
order: namely, so long as the faithful were of one heart, and one soul, and no
man said, the things he possessed were his own: but after that through the
instigation of Satan, the Greeks began to mutiny against the Hebrews: For the
avoiding of contention there were some chosen to be Deacons among them: So
therefore ordained of custom, not of any divine institution; the which how
wekely it follows, he is but a weke man that cannot well judge. For albeit
the Apostles allege some other secundary causes, yet (it is most certain) the
creation of Deacons did chieffy begin of that: And therefore I say in like
manner, that albeit I should confess, that the first occasion of creating one
Bishop, over and above the rest of the Elders, was by reason of scisme,
notwithstanding it therefore follows not that it was done for that cause
only, or that it was not done of any divine institution. But the occasion of
creation of Bishops alleged by Hierom, is a conjecture but too uncertain, and
grounded upon no likelihood of reason; that for the offense of one Church, the
Apostles (contrary to the Lord his institution) should place one Bishop over all the Churches, which had not offended, and that throughout the whole world: This
were very hard. Neither do we read at any time, that the Elders of the Church
of Corinth, gave the occasion of this scisme, but that it was taken of the
people by reason of that opinion they had of their Pastors and Elders, by whom
they were either baptized, or brought to the faith. But for men to swell in the
vanity of their humors, with an ouer-prised conceyt of their Teachers, as also
of their parents, and place of their na^^uity and such like singularities, it
is (as you know) an ordinary thing among men. And yet they, for whose sake this
scisme was set abroache at Corinth, were not at Corinth, so that, for the
avoiding of this scisme, the Elders which were to be set in some better order
under one Bishop, were Paul himself, and Apollos and Cephas, and such
disordered fellows, by whom the people were drawn to such a singularity.

Without doubt, me thinks this was a vain motion, and an idle conceit of
Hierome, as is also that which he adds of a decree made throughout the whole
world. Good now, let me ask him this question: When, or of whom that decree
could be made? or at least wise how, or by what possible means so general a
consent could be obtained, against the will of the Lord in the first
ordinance of Elders. For presently in all the Churches throughout the whole
world, Bishops were above Elders, both in honor and authority: That blessed
Paul would change the Lord his own institutitutio^; or if he would, that he
could, it is not likely. The other Apostles, dispersed throughout diverse
regions, were ignorant of those things which were done at Corinth, so that
they cannot be suspected to have given their voices to the ratifying of this
decree. But that we may imagine, that this scisme at Corinth came to their
knowledge at the length; and that, after some miraculous manner they all met
together from diverse foreine and the farthest parts in the world (I say) to
imagine all this; yet can any man ever imagine, that for the avoiding of this
one scisme, they all would conspire together for the overthrow of the Lord his
own institution? And much less could this be done after the Apostles time,
that all Churches should assemble and consent, to alter and exautorate that
which was both ordained of the Lord, and delivered of the Apostles: At the
least some of them would have still received the first institution.

But of the antiquity of this custom, we will call Hierome himself for a
witness: and we shall find him, not only in this place, but also in his
Epistle to Euagrius. At Alexandria (says he) even to Heraclas and Dionisius,
Bishops, the Elders chose one from among themselves, and placed him in a higher
degree, and named him their Bishop: In like manner, as if an army should name
them an Emperor. And yet by the way, I would not the people should here be
deceived, and think by these words of Hierome, that the Elders always placed
one of their own company over them. There are innumerable examples, where the
Elders being discarded, the people and the clergy, have elected either
Deacons, or some others, which were not reputed among the clergy. By the
which also it may appear, that the churches were not acquainted at all with
that general decree, or that they had any such regard thereof in their
elections of Bishops, that they must always choose from among their Elders,
their ordinary Bishop. Yet be it so: and let us yield thus much to Hierome,
that there was such a decree made: then must we needs say, that either they
made the same, contrary unto the Lord his institution, and so we must also
say, that al those fathers, and al their councels shamefully erred, (which we
cannot say they did in any other thing, and we have showed they could not do
in this) or else we must say, that they made it in a thing indifferent, neither
with the institution of God, nor against it, but in the mere power and sole
disposing of them, from whom it proceeded: And then what are we, (silly men)
that we should once dare to condemn that decree, unto the which all
Christendom did condescend? Wherefore, (as before) I now again infer, that
this censure was but the private conceit of Hierome, repugnaunt to the general
judgment of all the fathers, which either went before him, or lived after him.
And therefore, when as he knew full well, that it would be objected against him,
that this was but his bare censure, not the sentence of the holy Scripture, he
assaieth to make good the same with scripture, and thereupon he first pawneth
Paul his Epistle to the Philippians, in the which he greeteth the Bishops and
Deacons of that church: as also the 20. of the Acts, and the 1. of Titus, where
they which were Elders, are called Bishops. To the which places, before I make
any further answer, it shall not be amiss to hear what Theodoret says of this
matter: he expounding this place of Paul, writes thus: they call Bishops,
Elders, for that at that time, they had hoth the names, as it well appears in
the 20. of the Acts, and the 1. to Titus. For with Bishops he joins Deacons,
when he had made no mention of elders: neither could it otherwise be, that
there should he many Bishops the Pastors of one city: by which means it
comes to pass, that they were the Elders of one city, whom he calls
Bishops. But in this Epistle he calls the blessed Epaphrodite then Apostle,
for he says, your Apostle and my companion in labor. So that he manifestly
shows, that he had the dispensation of a Bishop committed to him, when he had
the denomination of an Apostle. Thus much Theodoret Now you shall understand,
that the error of Hierom and Aerius, grew of the not different and confused use
of these titles, (a Bishop and an Elder) as they were then in use. But when as
the same thing befalls the title of an Apostle also: is it not strange, that
they should rather err in the one, then the other? For where as Barnabas,
Epaphroditus, and many others are called Apostles; yet no man thereby ever
thought, that there was no difference between them and the twelve Apostles:
but because the history of the calling of the twelve Apostles, (and those
other, which were likewise called Apostles,) is better known unto them, and
more familiar with them, then is that of the Elders and Bishops, (so commonly
called:) therefore this whole matter seems inuolued in more dark and thick
mistes of obscurity, unto such as are not expert in searching out hidden and
unknown histories in the acts and monuments of the Apostles? For by reason of
the interchangeable community of names, they think not that there is any
difference, (or conceive not what it is) between those distinct persons, which
are called by names not distinct. As for exemple, this name (Apostle) would
have deceived him fowly, that should have gone about to have equaled all of
this name with the twelve Apostles; and so stands the case also with the name
of Bishops, for that it is in danger to deceive (if it do not daungerouslly
deceive) those, which indistinctly apply that one name, to the two degrees of
Elders. Wherefore they must know, that the same name is not always of the same
nature, and many times one word is significant as well for the general, as the
particular. And this must we conceive of this word Elder, that in the capacity
of his signification are indifferently entertained all degrees of Pastors, so
that the Apostles themselves may generally be called Elders, when as properly
the lowest degree of Pastors is best known, and most fitly called by that
name. Besides all this, there is in many words an Etimology, or proper
interpretation, according to the which also it so falls out, that many times,
diverse names have the same use: by which means, not only Elders, but
Apostles also may be derived into the same name of Bishops. This may very
easily be exemplified in civil things and names, where we may well perceive
the like use of no less titles, (as Dukes, Earls, Knights, Lords and
Barons:) all which titles are given to many, which differ much in honor and
dignity: neither is it any new or insolent thing, for one mighty King to have
many meaner Kings under him of his name, but not of his power. The like we
may say of Dukes, who have also under them other Dukes, of whom they receive
due fealty and homage: and some Earls also, (as the Count Palatine, of Rhene,
and Flanders) are Lords also over other Earls. What should I speak of
Knights, Lords, and Barons, which under the same titles, have not the same tipe
of honor or authority. He would be laughed to scorn of very children for his
labor, that should infer an equality of their callings, from the quality of
that they are called. I, but (will some say,) there is not that reason of the
Ecclesiasticke ministry, and the civil policy. I also tell them, that I do
not compare office with office, but name with name: that all the world may see,
how childish a reason it is, for the community of names and titles, to take
away the diversity of things and persons. Albeit there be some new writers of
this age, who hold opinion, that the presidency of on over many elders, is to
be abolished, as a thing that has prevailed in the church of custom, and upon
the courtesy of me^ only, and that against the grounded verity of gods sacred
constitution; yet for all that, the universal consent of alchurches in the
world, consorting with gods word, shall further with me, then the opinion
malcontent of the heretik Aerius, or the misconceited judgment of Hierome
alone, having lost himself in the ambiguity of doutful words, and not found
out the antiquity of the first age of the church. For this is manifest out of
the word of God, that in the time of John the Apostle, those 7. Cathedral
Churches of Asia had their seven Bishops, and they imposed over them by a
certain divine, not any human ordinance. For when as the holy Ghost there
conceileth nothing, in the which, either the Angels themselves, or they which
were under there government, had offended: he would never have passed over
without just reprehension so insolent and ambitious an innovation, (for so it
seems unto some) as then but newly subborned, and boldly brought forth into
the church of God, and that confronting the flat ordinance of God himself. No
doubt, those so famous and renowned Churches had many Elders, and happily a
college of Elders: and yet the defaults of those churches, were not laid upon
the many Elders, but he calls upon the several and principal Elder of
every particular church: whose authority in the church government, unless it
had been somewhat more then ordinary, they alone should never have borne the
blame of that function not well performed.

A certain writer of this age goes about to defend, or at least to excuse
this heresy, (or error if you had so rather) of Aerius: but his reasons with
the which he would do it are so slanderous, scandalous, and reproachful
against the councels, and against the fathers, as of truth I am altogether
ashamed of them. Aerius, like a good honest fellow, is excused, and the
fathers (poor souls) or openly accused of no small faults, ambition and
tyranny: who seeing he brings nothing worth any thing, besides that we have
before touched out of Hierome, I will not vouchsafe his cauils the confuting.
How much more christian-like, and modestly has that most famous man, and
thrice reverend father Zanchius, (never sufficiently renowned for his rare
learning and religion) how much more like a good christian, has he written in
his Confession, what he thought concerning the controversy? These are his
words: My faith is grounded chiefly and simply upon the word of God, and then
somewhat also upon the common consent of the whole Catholic Church; if so be
it repugne not the sacred writ. For I do believe, that what things were
concluded and received of the holy Fathers, assembled in the name of the Lord,
by a common consent of all, without any contradiction to the holy scriptures,
that those things also (although not of like authority with the scripture) are
of the holy Ghost. Hence it comes, that whatsoever things are of this sort, I
nor will, nor dare with a safe conscience disallow them. But what one thing is
more certain, out of histories, out of Councels, out of the writings of all
the Fathers, then that those orders of Ministers (of the which we have spoken)
were received and established in the Church by the common consent of the whole
Christian commonwealth? And who am I, that what the whole Church has allowed,
I alone should disallowe? Neither yet have all the learned men of our time
dared to disallow them, for that indeed they knew, that both these things were
lawful in the Church, also that they all were ordained and performed of a
godly religion, and to good ends, for the good of the elect. Besides that,
reason was, I should have regard of those Churches also, the which although
they have embraced the Gospel, yet they retain their Bishops, both in deed
and name. And what shall we say of the Churches of the Protestants also, where
they want not their Bishops and Archbishops in deed, whom (having cast their
good Greek names, into bad Latin) they call Superintendentes, and general
Superintendentes? But where also, nor those good old Greek, nor these bad
Latin names are in use, there notwithstanding are commonly certain private and
especial men, in whose hands, in a manner, is all the authority. Wherefore now
the controversy is concerning names; but seeing we do agree in deed, what do
we contend about names? In the mean while, as I have not disalowed the Fathers
in this matter which is now in question; so also I cannot but love the zeal
of our brethren, who therefore were out of love with those names, because they
feared, least with the old names, the old ambition also and tyranny should
be called in again, to the ruin of Churches. Thus gravely diuineth that
reverend old Zanchius: with whom I could join many more testimonies (if it
were needful) of the best writers of our time, to confirm this matter: who
are either wholly of our opinion, or very sparingly of the contrary. But for
this time lonely Zanchius shall stand for the rest, least I should ouercharge
this small volume with a multitude of witnesses

Of one Bishop in one Diocese. Chap. XXIIII.
NOw that we have proved that government of the Church to be of God, in the
which Pastors are subject to Pastors, and Elders suppliant to their Bishops: we
are in the sequel of this our discourse, to see and examine, Whether one
Church or diocese is not capiable of two or more Bishops, at the same time, of
the same tipe and authority. True it is, that the Church of Jerusalem had the
twelve Apostles, the seventy two Disciples, with the Prophets, their Bishops:
neither are examples wanting of diverse churches, which have had jointly
together diverse Bishops. Epiphanius writing against the Arrian heresy, falling
into some mention of the Church of Alexandria, seems to intimate thus much;
That in that age there was this custom in diverse Churches, that they might
have two Bishops at once, when as notwithstanding in the church of Alexandria,
he affirms there was no such custom.

To the which, I thus answer: First, that the twelve Apostles, and the rest,
remained at Jerusalem for a certain time, but they were appointed Bishops and
Teachers, not for that one City only, but for the whole world. Now for the
custom of certain Cities, which at one time had their two bishops; what
manner custom that was, how rare and extraordinary it was, we may
sufficiently learn by that one election of Augustine, who was made Bishop,
while Valerius Bishop of Hippon yet lived. The which thing was done, as
extraordinary, so contrary to the decree of the Nicene council. But what rule
so general, that suffers no exception? It is no sin I confess, for one
Church to have many Pastors of equal power, but whether it be convenient it
should be so, experience will teach. Indeed of old, the Bishops being of great
years, sometimes would name their successor, and assume a fellow-laborer in
office with them, and that, partly to prevent the tumults which commonly
infested their elections: and partly also, because sometimes the Bishops being
disabled by age and sickness, were not sufficing to discharge their duties in
their own persons: for which cause it was lawful for the new Elect to supply
the aged his place, and sit together in the same chair. As for Valerius the
Bishop of Hippon, he being moved thereunto by the example of foreine
Churches, got Augustine with much ado to be joined with him: but how
unwillingly he undertook that place, albeit he were importuned thereunto, as
well by the prayers, as by the presidents of others, he expressly testifies
in his 110. Epistle; Wherein are reported what things were done at the
assignement of Eradius Priest, to succeed Augustine in his Bishoprike, as they
were taken by the notarie, the people consenting and confirming the same: to
whom he thus speaks: I know that you know (says he) Eradius to be a fit
man, and worthy of a bishoprike, but I would not there should be that done by
him, that was done to me: but what was done your selves can many of you witness:
they only cannot tell, which either were not as then born, or as yet had not
the capacity to know. While as yet my Father and bishop, Valerius of famous
memory lived in the flesh, I was ordained then bishop, and I sat together with
him, the which thing I then knew not that it was inhibited by the Council of
Nice, neither did he know. Wherefore, that which was reprehended in me, I would
not should be reprehended in my son. And thus says Augustine.

Gregory Nazianzen in an epistle to Gregory Nyssen, writes of this custom
in these words: But if any man contend, that whilst one Bishop is living, an
other ought to be elected, let him know that these things are of no force
against us. For it is manifest and apparent unto all the world, that we are
president, not only at Naziantz, but also at Sosrie, and that (setting apart
the reverence of our ancient Fathers and grave Doctors, and those that
labored the same of us with their urgent prayers) we took upon us that
presidencie as strangers. Thus says Nazianzene. By the which we may
understand, how insolent and extraordinary a thing it was, that one Church
should have two Bishops. Epiphanius also made some small mention of this
custom, that he might show the cause, why Athanasius did not immediately
succeed Alexander, seeing he was deputed thereunto by Alexander; namely, for
that the custom of the Church of Alexandria did not permit, that he should be
chosen Bishop, while their Bishop yet lived. Most true it is indeed, that both
the Bishops and the people were persuaded of this, That one Church did admit
but one Bishop: when it was otherwise, Necessity which has no law did excuse
it. When Constantius, at the request of certain noble Matrons, had called
Bishop Liberius from exile, and would have had him to govern the Church of
Rome together with Foelix, who was then surrogate and substitute in his place:
the people hearing the Emperors letters, and scorning the contents, thundered
together with one voice; One God, one Christ, and one Bishop. Cyprian also
writing of the lawful election of Cornelius: Seeing that after the first
(says he) there cannot be a second; whosoever is made after one (who ought to
be one and alone) he is now no more second, but none at all. like manner
Ignatius, who was in the age before Cyprian, and is accounted the second, or
third Bishop of Antioch, after the Apostles; reducing the gifts of the only
one God, to an unity in the Church, writes thus; There is one flesh of the
Lord Jesus, one blood that was shed for us, also one bread which is broken to
us all, and one cup which is given to us all, there is one Altar for the
whole Church, and there is one bishop with the company of Elders.

The Fathers reason was this: because God would (whose will is a law to us)
that there should be but one high Peiest in the old Testament: with whom (so
long as he lived) no other might be surcharged: unless happily he had defiled
himself with any notorious crime, or by chance had fallen into some unclean
disease, which might make him either unapt, or unable to perform his sacred
duty. The which although it contained in it a secret mystery, of the which
the Church at this day retains no present memory: yet the policy of this
mystery (which by no means is to be divorced from it) ought not to be
controlled of any that profess Christianity.

If any man here suppose, that by this reason the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome may be maintained: to him I say, that he takes the matter amiss: For
there is great ods between a pastoral prefecture over one region, and an
imperial prerogative over the whole world. So ample and augustious is that his
supreme empire and superlatiue degree in the Church, as that it dilateth it
self over all Christian churches wheresoever, throughout the whole world; but
was the whole world at any time demised to any one Apostle? Peter had the sea
Apostolic over the circumcision, and Paul over the uncircumcised: but yet so,
as they excluded not their compeers and copartners in the same power with them.
For James also was the Apostle of the Jews, which lived at Jerusalem, and in
all Judea: but Peter over those which were dispersed among the Gentiles only.
So likewise Paul limited his sea Apostolic among the Greeks of Asia and
Europe, leaving in the mean while other provinces for other Apostles. If in
like manner the Bishop of Rome had contented and contained himself within the
precincts of his own territory, how should any man have accused him of any
impious or usurped tyranny?

Again, for as much as it appears, that the Apostolic tradition (so much as
concerns the regiment of the church and the outward policy thereof) was
taken of our Savior, and afterward also of the Apostles, from out of the old
Testament; (so far forth as the condition of time and place, and the state of
the people and persons might permit) can there be any error in this, if the
Fathers (their successors) seem in like manner to borrowe from the same
foundation, certain politic constitutions, for the edifiyng of the Church?
Upon this occasion Hierome thus writes to Euagrius: And in that we know, that
the Apostolic traditions were taken out of the old Testament: that which Aaron
and his sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, the same are the Bishops,
Elders, and Deacons, in the Church.

I conclude therefore, that over every several province or precinct (which
make as it were one City) they very well and worthily placed several
Bishops; and likewise over every whole cuntry or regio^, either Patriarchs, or
Archbishops, or Primates, or Metrapolitanes (call them as you please) and
moreover that this was done of the antique Councils and Fathers, to singular
purpose, and well consorting with Gods holy ordinance. With the which that I
may at the last determine this controversy: of those things which I have
already declared and concluded, as well of the offices of the Gospel (which
were ordained of the Lord, and left unto the Church by his Apostles) as also of
the uniform consent of the Councels, and continual practice of the Church in
all ages, it shall be easy for all men to know, That that government is not of
man, or from man, in the which the Elders ar subject to their elder Bishops,
and the Bishops to their higher Patriarchs, and Metropolitanes; but
contrariwise, that the same is divine, and ordained of God, and that as well in
the old, as the new Testament.

Of the names of Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Metropolitans. Chap. XXV.
Having laid down my reasons and proofs, by the which I am taught to dissent
from them, unto whom in other things I yield not a little; I take it now time to
answer the cursing and cursed slanders of some, who casting aside the modesty
of civil Christians, and neglecting the mediocritie of all learned writers, do
tear (like mad dogs) and torment the most reverend names and religious
functions of Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs and Metropolitans, as pampred
and proud titles, antichristian and profane. But will you hear the reasons of
unreasonable men? They allege, that the Apostle Paul in recounting the degrees
of the Ministers of the Gospel (in his Epistle to the Ephesians the 4. chap.)
makes no mention of Patriarchs and Archbishops. To the which, before I go
any further, I make them this answer: That those offices are there comprised
and contained in the names of Apostles and Evangelists; and in the 12. to the
Romans verse 8. in the word ((...)) Ruler, (or he that rules;) and in the first
to the Corinthians the 12. chap. and 28. verse, in the word ((...)) governors:
by all which terms and titles, the sacred order of superior Pastors are
understood. But that the aforesaid offices of Apostles and Evangelists are
perpetual, we have already proved, and it may also sufficiently appear by
the sequel of that enumeration of those offices; namely, when he sets down
to what end our Savior gave to the Church, some Apostles, and other
Evangelists. Was it not for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of
the body of Christ? So that, so long as the Church is to be edified, so long
those offices are to be continued in the Church which are there contained. If
the Church could have been edified without them, they should never have been
ordained in the Church. But again, that part of them are thought to be
temporal, and part particular; that thought is ouerthrown by the only end of
that for the which they were ordained; which end is to be sought for
continually of all the faithful even until the coming of the Lord. For are
they not still to edify by these offices, and to grow together into one
mystical body of Christ? Now albeit the office of bishops and archbishops,
primates, and patriarchs, does not extend it self so far as did the office of
the twelve Apostles: (neither are they enriched with the like treasure or
measure of the holy Ghost) yet are we to consider that this difference is in
the quality not in the quidditie of the same function: in the measure, not in
the matter of their commission. And therefore, whom at this day we call Bishops
and Archbishops, Paul the Apostle called Apostles; for that (as we have said)
they are joined in the same combinatio^, and made partakers of that commission.
And for this cause the calling of Archbishops and Patriarchs, has been
always called, and is yet to be accounted Apostolic in all places.

Yet, for as much as these names and titles, do seem in some men's eyes, to be
puffed up with the tumors of pride and ambition, let us take a further view of
those principal objects, and frivolous objections, by the which they are cast
into this no less strange then strong conception. Their first argument is
forced from the composition of the Greek words (...), and (...), which (as they
take it) signifies that principality and power, which is proper to the civil
Magistrate only, impertinent to that modesty and simplicity, which the
doctrine of the Gospel requires of a Pastor. To the which, they also add the
sentence of the Council of Carthage, which forbad any Bishop to be called
Prince of the Priests; The words of the Canon are these: (...). The which
Gratian in his ninety nine distinction translateth thus: The Bishop of the
chief place shall not be called prince of the Priests, or high Priest, or any
other such thing, but only, Bishop of the chief place. Besides all this (say
they) the word Archbishop differs nothing from the Greek word (...) (Prince
of Pastors:) the which name or title, seeing it is only proper to Christ alone
we cannot see, how he should be excused of heinous sacrilege, that does any
way usurp the same. And therefore all such names are to be cast over board, and
utterly to be exiled the Church of Christ. Neither is the arguing of these
names to be taken for trifling, when as they seem so greatly to derogate from
the name of Christ. And last of all those names which Antichrist himself, or
the spirit of Antichrist, has either invented, or invested into the Church,
are to be avoided: but that Antichrist was the forger of these titles, it is a
plain case, and therefore to be avoided.

To that, I answer: That the sense and true meaning of these names and titles
by way of composition, with the word (...), contains nothing in it, either
arrogant for ambition, or for custom insolent. For I will teach them, (if they
be to learn) that the greek word (...), does not only signify
Principality and Magistracy, but also the first, the beginning and original
cause of any thing: and besides this, that in composition it follows the
nature of that word, with the which it is compounded: and so, seeing the name
of a Bishop does signify of it self, and in his own nature nothing that is
insolent or ambitious, take the name Archbishop which way you will, it cannot
any ways sound of any vain or vainglorious sense: as it plainly appears
in other words of like composition, as Architectos, Archiatros,
Architriclinus, Archibubulcus, which signify a Maister-worke-man, a
Arch-phisition, a Gentleman-usher, a chief Herds-man, and such like. By all
which we may manifestly see, that the name of Bishop, being in nature good, the
name of Archbishop cannot be in composition evil: seeing that thereby it
signifies rather the first and chief Bishop, then the Lord and Prince of
Bishops. Albeit I would not, (nor need I) greatly stick with him for the name
of Prince neither, were it in use with us, as in sense it is with the Latins,
only for a chief and principal man. But now seeing that name is advanced to
a more royal and imperial sense, from henceforth, I will either not use it,
or use it very thriftely.

The like may we say of the word (...), that among good Grecians, it does not
always signify a Magistrate, or a man in authority, but many times also it
stands for the first author, or original cause of any thing. So that
Patriarche, does no more signify him which governs in the Magistracy, or
exercises authority over others, then does Heresiarch, who is so called, for
that he is the first brother and brocher of that heresy, not that he
exercises any dominion over the rank kamiel of that poisonous rabble. In very
deed, a Patriark signifies the first parent of any people or offspring: in
which sense also the same word is derived to our use, to signify an
Archbishop; because that he among the other Bishops (which are counted Fathers)
is as it were the Graundfather: and that thereby also we might further
conceive, that the government he has over others, is mere father-like, not
tyrannik So that for modesty sake were they called, rather Archbishops and
Patriarchs, then (...) (Princes of the Priests) that all the world might know,
that their power over their brethren, and fellow-bishoppes, was no other, then
that which Paul had over Titus and Timothy, and they over others. And thus at
the last it may appear at the full, that here is no name given to the Bishop of
the chief place, which was forbidden by the Carthaginian Canon: seeing that a
Patriarch and Archbishop in their proper sense, do signify no other then the
chief Bishop: who if he be called Prince of the Bishops, among them which write
more pure Latin, no man ought to be agreeued therefore: for that (as I have
already noted) the word Prince among them, is no more but as principal and
chief among us. And this is that which Ambrose has written upon the fourth of
the Ephesians. In a Bishop (says he) are all the orders contained, because
he is the chief Priest, that is, the Prince of Priests, and a Prophet, and an
Evangelist.

But now again, that they say, the word Archbishop does signify the same with
(...) in Peter, which signifies the Arch-pastor: I can but greatly wonder, and
yet not sufficiently, that any such thing should proceed from men that would
be accounted learned, and linguists too. I showed but even now, what this
word Archbishop signified, and what might be made of the word (...) and
(...) in composition.

Wherefore, seeing that in the construction of this word (...) (as also in
other words) it may be taken as well for the first and chief Pastor of any
people: as for the chief Lord and Prince of all Pastors: I see no reason, why
that also may not be given to that man, which obtains the chief place among
the Pastors of any place. But when as it signifies Christ, and that for his
supreme government, which he alone has over all Pastors, as the Lord of all,
both people and Pastors, the sense is altered, and the case: so that in that
sense, there are none of our Archbishops, which in any case will suffer
himself to be called Archbishop. Christ is called (...) the Archpastor,
absolutely, above al comparison, beyond all exception, without any limitation:
when as our Archbishoppes are not so called simply and absolutely, but such
and such Archbishops, Archbishoppes of this or that sea, whose Suffraganes and
Sub-bishops of such or such a Province, are sufficiently known: Among whom
only they are accounted the Primates, or principal moderators: and over whom
only, and not over all absolutely, they are called Archbishops.

Wherefore, seeing that by this name, is only signified the chief and
principal Pastor of some one Province, it does no more derogat from the glory
of Christ, then when we call other Elders and Bishops by the name of Pastors
and Doctors: seeing that properly Christ alone is our Master and Teacher, and
indeed that only good Shepherd, which gave his life for us.

In like manner, albeit God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, be also
our Father which is in heaven: yet notwithstanding, we may call men also our
Fathers, and in so doing offer God no wrong at all. And therefore, whosoever
he be, that knows as well as I can tell him, that these names and titles are
in sense manifold, and ambiguous in signification, so that they may be given
to diverse things in diverse respects, and yet holds plea in this sort, he
does but seem to hold himself play in a serious matter, to make an idle
show of his vain wit, and a sinful spoil of the simple reader. For my part,
having resolved upon that which before we have taught: namely, That in the
regiment of the Church, Bishops were placed over Bishops, according unto
God his divine ordinance and institution; I cannot see how that method of
Gods distinct order, could have been expressed in more apt and fit terms
(after the Apostles decease) then by these reverend titles of Patriarks and
Archbishops.

In the which also (setting aside the arrogance and tyranny of those which
have abused their authority, and do abuse) there is not so much state or
pride, as some presume.

I but (will some say,) our Bishops and Archbishops do entertain secular
charges, and invade civil honors, and are imbost with temporal titles: all
the which, how crosly they confront the doctrine of the Apostles, and the good
meaning of their titles, who so blind as may not see it? To this I would
answer, before I proceed any further: but it is not for this place, neither
does this question fall into this treatise. Wherefore, hereafter I will set
down what I think of this matter, when I come to his proper place.

In the mean while (gentle Reader) suppose, I here defend not those which now
live, (who whiles they are in view, are envied) but those faithful servants of
Christ Jesus, who heereto-fore have ruled the church with great fruit, before
the tyranny of Rome abused the Church of God: namely, Gregory Nazianzen,
Gregory Nysen, Basil the great, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Ignatius,
Polycarpus, Ambrose, Augustine, and such like: whose lives as they are further
from our eyes, so from our envy. These cannot I with any good conscience, do
not you of any conceit condemn of pride, ambition, tyranny, or
Anticristianisme, for whom all the world will stand up and witness, that they
were Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs, and governed the churches after a
singular manner, and with an especial power over the rest. If any man think
he have a single gift in these things, and suppose he have the spirit of
discretion, as his familiar (to discern spirits) good leave has he, let him
use it: but let him take heed, his spirit of discretion prove not the spirit of
presumtion. I verily can find no such spirit of Antichrist in those most
christian fathers: I find they were men, and had their errors: and yet in this
argument, their writings are of greater authority with me, then are they which
have written of the same matter in this age, and within our memory.

But now concerning the last exception against their names (I mean of Arch
bishops.) I answer, and deny that they were the inue^tions of Antichrist; this
first, and then also, that whatsoever was invented, (or is usurped either) of
Antichrist is hand over head to be rejected of us; for of necessity (a
necessary policy) he devised, rather then inverted, some good things, that
with them he might ouercast many bad. So does Satan many times transform
himself into an Angel of light, that he may deceive without suspect; he
fayneth holiness; that he may draw into wickedness: he defends the truth, that
he may drive into error. (For he should bewray himself too grossly, if he
should teach nothing but leasings.) But yet, can there be a more witless
conclusion then this, Antichrist taught this, ergo it is false? Antichrist
devised this, ergo it is naught? unless it should be interserted, or at least
understood, that the same is contrary also to the word of God. As for example,
that which Peter was taught of the holy Ghost, he confessed with a lively
faith, namely, That Jesus was the very Christ, and the only son of the
living God. But now, does not Antichrist also confess the same with his mouth?
yea whosoever dare deny the same, he condemns to the faggot. Does he not also
embrace the sacred volumes of Gods holy word? yes and more then that forasmuch
as the Lord has taught us in his word, that we should pray continually, he
has of himself devised, to divide the whole day in matinges and even song.
But now (to come to the point) because he abuses unto superstition both
fasting and prayer, and the holy Bible, and the blessed confession of the son
of God, shall we therefore (all in a fling) renounce these things? Admit it be
his desire that the ministry should be of some reckoning in the world, and that
it should be advanced to no mean degree of honor in the common wealth: And
what then? that we may not be like unto him, shall we requite the Ministers of
Christ with shame for fame, and with slanders for honors? And because he
seeks to magnify them without mean, shall we suffer them to lie subject and
abject among the basest routs of the common meany? If braine-sicke men upon a
quarelous mind may presently gainesay whatsoever the Bishop of Rome has said,
or don: I fear me in the end, they will in their great have ouerrun all
christian religion, and leave it far behind them. Wherefore, whosoever shall
think every thing forthwith to be rejected, for that either the author thereof
abused the same to tyranny, or the Bishop of Rome inuerted the same to
superstition, he is easily to be carried with every shallow stream into any
deep error.

What things soever are in the Church of Rome (that now is) may justly be
distinguished into three parts: Whereof there are some things that well consort
with the word of God; and some, that do flatly contradict the same; but the
most things are such, as there use is; either good, or bad: which things are
called, things indifferent. Now, albeit bad men may make a bad use of good
things, yet can they not inuert the nature thereof. Baptism, the word of God,
or whatsoever else (of that kind) the Romanists have in use, no wise man will
therefore reject, as if they were evil, because they have not used the^ well. As
for things utterly evil, because no man at any time uses them well, they are
utterly to be rejected of us, as is all kind of Idolatry, and whatsoever does
either undermine, or overthrow the sound and substa^tiall doctrine of truth.
But as for things indifferent, seeing they are such as is he that uses them;
they are left in our power to use them, as time and occasion shall require. An
indifferent thing is commonly that, whatsoever is nor condemned, nor commended
in the word of God, and is left free to every man's choice, either to use, or
not use: unless some other thing interchaunce, which alters the use of that
which otherwise was free, by reason of the time or place, or the person, where
the same is in use. For my part, I think things mediat and indifferent might
better be defined thus: if we shall say, those things are indifferent, which
by no law, either Gods law or ma^s law, are bidden, or forbidden. For by the
command of him which has the authority over our persons, the use of a thing,
which otherwise is free, may many ways, and upon many occasions be
restrained, or ouerruled: But of these things, in this place, we are not now to
discourse at large. Only thus much I chiefly note, and would have just notice
taken of it, that indifferent things may be used of us, although the same
things have been abused by the bishop of Rome, or any other Antichrist. Is our
liberty to be prejudiced by an other man's religion? specially, where public
authority has any thing to do in the matter? suppose it either gives us in
charge, or puts us in choice, to use those things which the superstitious
have abused: Wherefore whenever anything shall come in question among us, that
has been used among the Romanists, or other enemies of the truth, it is our
part to examine and consider the matter, as it is in self, not as it was with
them.

There are some in England at this day, who take upon the^ more sowrely, then
severely, against outward vestementes, cap and surples, music and organs, and
such like rites of the Church: the which, because they were of some use in the
Roman Church, now out upon them, they are sacriligious and profane. In like
manner, and with no less modesty, do they proceed against Bishops and
Archbishops, their honors and reuenews; All the which, unless they could be
proved contrary to the word of God, what reason is this they bring (and it is
al they bring) for the abolishing thereof: when they say, the author or
inuentor thereof was Antichrist? No doubt indifferent things which he abused for
his tyranny, may be returned to a better use, for the good of the Church.

Now, as for conte^tious natures and such, in whose breasts this error has
taken fast footing, namely, That the authority of Bishops is a thing pernicious
in itself, and prejudicial to the church; I know this my answer, as it fitteh
not their humors, so it serves not their turns. Neither yet will they
vouchsafe of that, which I have said of the natural signification of words
compound with (...). Wherefore, albeit the plainest interpretation of the names
of Patriarchs and Archbishops like me best, yet notwithstanding I dare say thus
much further, if we should grant (that which they shall never euince) that by
force of composition a kind of principallity were to be inferred: yet does it
not theruppon follow, that it is therefore a title abhorring from the state of
our BB. For let it be lawful for men to urge the signification of every
syllable in this sort, and it shall forthwith be unlawful for any, to be called
a monarch, or to be invested with the title of an Emperor: for why? forsooth,
these names in their proper sense, are common to none, but to God only. These
and such like titles of lawful and necessary use among us, must upon this
quirk be utterly abolished: neither may it be lawful for us from henceforth to
call our Ministers (as the Scripture does) (...) or (...) ( Rectors or Rulers,
Prelates or Presidentes:) nay we shall not be able to avouch the name of
Elders, because this, and these all in sacred Scripture, are proper to
Magistrates and Princes, and the Nobles of sundry provinces, and and yet for
all this we see, that Ministers of the Church are called by these names.

Last of all, if the authority of the Fathers, may be of any preuail, let us
hear what great dainty they make of the name of Prince, in the titles of the
clergy. Origin reprehending the clownishe sourenes of some Bishops, writes
thus; A man may see in some Churches, (especially in the greatest Cities) how
the Princes of the christian people, show no manner affability to any:
esteeming thereof as a thing nothing at all pertaining unto them, etc. And
aftewards again: We speak not these things as if we meant to discharge the
Ecclesiastical Principality. In like manner upon the Epistle to the Romans
the thirteenth Chapter. By the which it appears (says he) that the Judges of
the world do perform the greatest part of Gods law. For all the defaults that
God would have punished, he punishes not by the Prelates and Princes of the
Church, but by the Judges of the world. And upon the twenty seven Chapter of
Numbers, the two and twenty Homily. Let the Princes (says he) of Churches
learn, not to appoint their successors after them, such as are allied unto
them, either in affinity of kindred, or consanguinity of blood, neither that
they ought to make the Principality of Churches hereditary, etc. Ignatius, no
less godly then gravely; My Son (says he) honor God and the King: and I say
further, honor God as the author of al things and the owner; and honor the
Bishop as Prince of the Priests, bearing, the image of God, by reason of his
principality, and the image of Christ, by means of his Priesthood. He that
honoreth the Bishop, shall be honored of God, as also he that dishonoreth him,
shall be punished of God, etc. Besides many other things in the same place to
the same sense. The same man in an other place. Therefore (says he) let all
things be performed among you according to a direct order in Christ: Let Lay
men be subject to Deacons, Deacons to Priests, Priests to Bishops, the Bishop
to Christ, as he is also to the Father. Again to the Church of Antioch. You
Elders feed the flock which is committed unto you, until God manifest him,
which shall reign over you: For I am now sacrificed: that I may gain Christ,
etc. By which words, the holy Martyr has sufficiently testified the authority
of a Bishop over the rest of the Elders.

Doubtless in ancient time, the authority of Bishops was great in the Church,
their reverence great, and their favor great among the people: the which of al
other things made most for the benefit and increase of the Church. Even as in
the common wealth, the favor of the Magistrates and authority is beneficial to
the people, so likewise of Bishops in the Church. And therefore for good cause
thought Hierome, that the welfare of the Church did depend of the honor of the
chief Priest etc. Neither in deed is this the least slight of Satan, when he
laboreth to bring the prelates of the Church into contempt, for by that means
he thinks to imbecil the doctrine of faith, and to bring that into suspect,
that so at the last he might (if possible he could) bring an utter ruin, and a
ruined ouerture to the whole state of the Church. To which purpose whosoever
they be, that make themselves the Devil his stipendaries, under what color so
ever they do it, they discerue but badly, not only of the whole Church, but
also of the common wealth. That which a rebel is in the state, the same is a
scismaticke in the Church.

How just cause the adverse part here in England has, to bring their Bishops
into the obloquy and envy of the people, it smally concerns me: I set not as
arbiter between both parts. But this I say; that the same things which betideth
the Bishops here in England, does usually befall all the best of the Ministry
in Holland also, who are in no less envy with the people there, then our
Bishops are here. How malapartly (and the sacrifice) had men do rail and rave
in their public writing (...) the dear servants of Christ, (and that by
name) their shameful and shameless libels do testify at large. Of which wrongs
seeing I my self (whiles I conuersed with them) bate not the least share, and
yet bear, no wonder to any, if for my part, I like the better of Bishops. For I
am not ignorant of this, that this is but the ordinary condition of al Gods
servants; and that Satan of old and long since, has by all possible and
pestilent means endeavored, to make the presidents of Christ his Church, odious
and infamous among men; that so, their credit especially, being either
altogether cracked, or very sore crased, himself might with more facility and
less iealosie set abroach and cast abroad, all manner hideous and hellish
Heresies. In so much that I am persuaded, if Moses himself, if Peter, if Paul
were resident among us, and were in that honor and esteem, which were fit and
well-beseeming their so honorable a calling, they could not possible escape the
cankred chaps of these foule-mouthed Hell hounds. But so long as the servants
of Christ are in authority in the Church, it is not much that the instruments
of Satan can atchieue: but are they once brought under the hatch? alas, what is
it that the seditious dare not attempt? This matter need no great proof, it
has too much.

Wherefore, of that degree of Honor, which the Prelates of Religion ought to
enjoy in an established christian common wealth, the very vileness of this age
does enforce me to speak more at large. For if base men cannot abide, that
Religion should be in any Honor, and villainous minds endeavor their worst, that
the credit thereof may be none at all, or worse then it is, I think it no
great wonder: but, that religious men (as they would seem) should attempt the
same, and even they, which ought to be patrones and preseruers of the Church
dignities, it is a thing odious, preposterous and too bad absurd. Do they not
yell in vain, and cry out against abuses to no purpose, whose end is not so
much to mittigate the abuse of things, as to abolishe the whole use? If the
governors of the Church, have not so beautified their Ministry with that
integrity of manners, and innocence of life, which reason and the reverence of
Religion does require; I defend them not, but that according to the laws they
may be severely punished, and their betters surrogat into their places: Neither
are they exempt from the jurisdiction of the chief Magistrates, whereby they
may not censure upon them, their lives and their goods, as upon other
citizens. No question, it greatly concerns both Prince and people, that good
men be placed over the Church, and evil men removed their places: So that,
whatsoever crimes are here, or else where objected (and proved) against the
Prelates of Religion, they are staynes to the chief Magistrate, which
tollerateth such Ministers in the Church, or aduanceth such like to be Church
officers.

There is not the like reason of the Romish clergy: For they have their
peculiar Magistrates; nor live they under the common law of other Citizens,
neither yet are they accounted any part of them, (any longer then may stand
with their own commodity.) There the civil Magistrate, chalengeth no right to
convert, nor any power to amend, what so ever they commit. But
notwithstanding, if the Magistrate think best, to wink at these public
slanders, I will complain my self no further; only if the slanderers will so
moderate themselves, as that they only find fault with the fault, not with
the state; and whiles they rate abuses, the honor of the calling may be left
intemerat. Let it be no man's slander, that he is a Bishop, or a Minister.

But of the two-folde order of Elders, according to the Lord his institution,
and the Apostolic tradition, and the perpetual use of the Church (so much as
the state of the argument does require) these things I have said may suffice.
Now it remains that we say some thing also concerning Doctors.

Of Doctors. Chap. XXVI.
WHen the Apostle in the fourth to the Ephesians names Pastors and Doctors, a
man cannot certainly gather from the manner of his speech, whether he would
have the^ diverse in office, or but one and the same, and that, because a
Pastor is necessarily a Doctor or teacher, but not so conuersiuely. Wherefore
the thing it self must help us out: For not every one, whom the Lord has
endewed with learning, and with a sound gift of teaching, has presently withal
received the authority of a Pastor: The knowledge and science of sacred
Scripture, may be given to any man; Kings, Nobles, Knights, may be learned, who
notwithstanding are not fit to be over any Churches. And albeit the
administration of the Sacraments, and governance of the Church are so combined
with the office of teaching, that he cannot be a Pastor, which is not a
teacher; notwithstanding that follows not in good conversion, that every one
who has received the power to teach, should forthwith be an Elder, or Bishop
of the Church: these things are distinct each from other. From among those
which are apt to teach, Elders and Bishops are chosen, and of old, the
Priesthood was never without power to interpret: but yet the gift of prophecy,
and the ability to interpret did not make a Priest. The Priest was of duty an
interpreter of the law, and a Doctor, and a Prophet, but yet every doctor of
the law, or prophet, was not a priest. An Apostle in deed, was both Prophet,
and Doctor, and Pastor, but every Prophet or Doctor, was not an Apostle or
Pastor. Seeing therefore that Doctors are distinguished from Pastors, and the
knowledge of the mysteries of God with the faculty to expound them, is the gift
of the holy spirit: whosoever excel in that gift, and can as well by writing as
word of mouth edify the Church, they are to be reputed for Doctors, of what
estate soever they be: the king shall derogat no more from his royal Majesty,
if for the edifying of Gods people, he compose any godly work, then did David
or Solomon of old, who in there time were no les renowned for their heavenly
wisdom, then for their princely power. Although the Apostle forbid a woman to
speak in the congregation, yet if she be learned, she may write, and
privately instruct her family. Wherefore now, if we will come to the true
understanding of the Apostolic writings: we must with sound judgment put
difference, between Pastors, and Doctors, who besides the teaching and
interpreture of the word, did not otherwise intermedle with any thing in the
church. For albeit in the infa^cy of the church, those first christians, had no
publik professed schools: yet was it always lawful for Prophets and Doctors
to teach publicly in the church; unto whose grave advice, the faithful were
no less bound to obey, then to their Pastors. But all this while, they had not
the power of the Church censure, nor the right to redres whatsoever was amiss.
We read of Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, that they taught in the church
of Corinth: but we find not, that they had there the authority of Bishops
and Elders. And therefore no wonder, though the corruptions and abuses which
reigned among them, were not given them in charge to correct, or that it was
not laid to their charge that they did not correct; for there was no remedy,
they must suffer that they could not remedy, and in the mean while, expect
Paul his coming amongst them. Likewise in the Epistle to Titus, a man might
well wonder, why Paul joined not in like commission with Titus, Zenas and
Apollos, expounders of the law (they being then also in Creat:) except it
were for this, that they were Doctors only: for he was not ignorant, that
they were then also with Titus. Doubtless, had they bin of the same order and
power, they should also have received the same charge. And might it not better
have been performed of three, then of one? But yet we see, that the Apostle
gave the charge of Teaching there to many, the power of Ruling, to one alone.
By the which it appears, that the Doctors and Prophets of those times, were
an aid unto the Pastors, and that they taught under their direction. For
indeed it chiefly concerns the duty of a Bishop, to teach the church
committed to his charge, by himself, and by others.

(...) such things are there in the Apostles writings, (...) we may take no
small view of the beginnings of (...), and of that form of government which was
used of the Apostles, and received of the next immediate ages, and delivered to
Apostolic men, their successors. It is very well ^^^ed of Epiphanius, that
there are certain histories hidden in the Apostles writings: the ignorance
whereof, many times has been the cause of much error in the church. But thus
it came to pass, that the Bishops gave license to teach the scriptures unto
those, which the Grecians call Laymen: The which thing, Eusebius records in
his sixth book, the 13. chapter, concerning Origin. That when as yet he was not
priested, he did notwithstanding set up school at Caesaria, and was there in
treated of the Bishops there abouts, not only to dispute, but to open the
scriptures also: The which thing Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, (Origin his
rival) did greatly reprehend, when as notwithstanding himself was the man,
that had sent him before into Arabia to the same end: neither yet did he
except against him, when he was catechiser in his own church. But when as of
mere envy he cold no longer endure, that the renowned fame of Origin should
daily increase, (seeking all manner occasions to pick a quarrel against him)
he laid blame in the Bishops, that they would seem to license a Layman
publikly to profess the scriptures. To the which, his malicious cauils,
Alexander then Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theodistus Bishop of Caesaria, make
answer in these words. For that you urge in your letters, that it was never
hard of before nor is used as yet, that laymen should dispute, and expound the
Scriptures in the presence of Bishops, In that thing you seem (I know not
how) to avouch a manifest untruth. For where fit and able men are found that
may be any aid to the brethren in the word, they are requested of the holy
Bishops, that they would instruct the people in the same, as was Eusebius of
Nero, at Larandy, Paulinus of Celsus, at Iconium, and Theodorus of Atticus
among the Synadines, all the which were blessed and godly brethren and it is
very likely, (although it be unknown to us) that the same thing is done in
other places. Thus for Eusebius.

Wherefore, albeit the Primative churches had not their university schools,
like unto those we have at this day: yet, that they were not altogether
without schools, Alexandria alone is witness sufficient, which brought out
Doctors before Origin, Pantaeus and Clemens Alexandrinus, and many others:
Neither is it to be doubted, but that custom also was derived from the
Apostles. We know the knowledge of scriptures to be the gift of Gods spirit;
but shall that therefore take away the exercises and the traueils of devoted
students: Amongst the people of God, the Prophets had their Colleges, in the
which Samuel and Elias, and Elizeus and such others were Masters: neither was
it any disparagement for the other Prophets to live under their discipline.
God was never the author of tumultuous confusion, but of order, nor were the
men of God, a company of furious bedlames, but a society of sage and wise men,
of a mild and a moderate spirit. They which at this day hold schools, and
their orders in contempt, are frantic in their own conceit, and ignorant of
al good society and godly civility: nor do they know (nor can they conceive)
what infinite good they only do in all estates. Who can sufficiently commend
the religious purpose of those men, which were the first founders of
Universities? Are they not the fruitful seminaries of all good litterature,
and the wholesome nurses of al honorable virtues? The which being taken away,
all humanity and civil courtesy would languishe together: and not that only,
but within a short space we our selves, now learned and religious, should
strangely degenerate into minds and manners more sauadge and barbarous, then
are any of the nations. But no need I should digress any further into the
praise of our well renowned Universities: only this I say, that the Doctors
and Teachers they send forth into the Church of Christ, and whosoever else, by
their private labors, and diligent traueils in the scriptures have attained to
the knowledge thereof, ought not by any means to take upon them any thing in the
Church, against the good will, or without the good leave of their BB. (...)
why? They are private men, and under their governance. But yet, being
requested, or commanded by them, (as of old, so now) they may profess:
always remembered, that they do it for the good of the church. A degree of the
university, or any other testimony of learning, ought not to impair the
authority of the Pastors, or to disturb the good order of the Church.

That at this day they which are created Doctors, are for the most part Elders:
I do not mislike it; for of old also it was but a very rare and extraordinary
thing, for laymen to profess the word publicly. But time, place, and
necessitye may limite this matter, and prescribe an order thereunto, not to be
ordered by headstrong and desperate temeritie. Young me^ must here take heed,
least they presuming for their learning upon the Universities testimony, they
should therefore think, that they are already adopted into the orders of the
holy ministry; (unless they be otherwise ordained then so:) the which I would
have thought scarce worthy the noting, were it not that I have found some to
far ouershot in this error.

There are also some others at this day, who disclaiming the office of Pastors,
and that ordination which is solemnised by the Bishops, will notwithstanding be
accounted Doctors in the church: but to baptize, to minister the sacraments, to
visit the sick, to bury the dead, to read public prayer in the Church, they
think it stands not with their credit. And why? For sooth because they see
these parts of the ministry performed, sometimes by some not deeply learned.
Again, there are other, which think it no small part of reformation, that
every church should have with their Pastor a Doctor: as if (good men) one
Pastor, (who of duetye is also a Doctor,) could not discharge both parts. Many
such fancies I wittingly omit, and recount them amongst the wel-pleasing dreams
of such as learn to feed themselves: whom verily I cannot so well like of.
For albeit I confess, that certain Doctors publicly professed in the
Church, which were not Pastors: yet I find, how that was used in the Apostles
times of necessity, and afterward very extraordinarily, and only then, when
either the urgent necessity, or the present commodity of the Church did so
require. For the ordinarye Doctors of the church, are the Bishops themselves,
who if they could suffice to perform al duties alone, they needed nor Elders
nor Deacons to join with them. We know how in a small Church one Elder is
enough: And that the greatness, and great increase of Churches, made this
diversity of ministers, both for order and number. But if any man desire to
see more of this argument, he may read the writers of this age: These things
(as I think) may serve for this turn: who purpose not to treat of every thing
exactly, but only to show what I find wanting in some Churches, which would
seem the best reformed. To the which end, I have recounted unto you the diverse
degrees of the ministers of the church, even as they were ordained of the Lord,
and delivered of the Apostles, and received of our first fathers, and Apostolik
predecessors. In whose footsteps we may more safely continue, then by not
containing our selves therein, to entangle our proceedings in some other new and
strange extrauagants.

The second Book. Of the honor which is due unto Prelates and Elders in the
Church.
Chap. I. That by a certain law of Nature among all nations, the Presidents of
Religion were esteemed worthy great honor.
HOw great the dignity and excellency of the Gospel is above all the
unhallowed mysteries of profane nations, and how far it excels the
Leuiticall Priest-hoode of Moses also, and consequently in how great regard of
honor, the same ought to be amongst all that profess Christianity: the time
has been, when it was needless to tell; but now, more then necessary to
prove. For the lewdnes, (I might say the irreligion) of some men in this our
age, does of force compel me somewhat more earnestly to lay to their charge,
the neglect duty of ingrate minds toward Gods Ministers; whom while they
deprive of their due honor, they bring Religion it self into deep disdain,
and withal they bewray that they make no great account of God himself, whose
Legates they deprave. For there be, which think it were not a poinct matter, if
they were not left worth a poinct: and think it never the worse for the
common-welth, if they had no place at all in the commonwealth. Because
(forsooth) it is said of our Savior and his Apostles, that they renounced all
worldly honors; therefore are they thought worthy no honor in the world; any
vile or vulgar esteem (if so be they may have that) is enough for them, least
happily they should be exalted in their own sense, and become proud of
nothing. Thus they think none worthy of honor, that either do not affect
it, or are not infected with it. This error is to be confuted in this
discourse: in the which it shall be showed, that by all rights, both of God
and man, the sacred ministry in a well ordered commonwealth has always
been had in greatest honor and estimation amongst all nations, and, that
Christians (above all others) do owe no less to their Pastors, then did of
old the people of God to their Priests.

Albeit the life of man be inuolued and ouer-cast with dark and thick mistes
of error and ignoriunce, insomuch, that many times it is dazeled at the view
and sight of such things, which of themselves are clear enough:
notwithstanding there are yet some things so clear and so manifest, as in the
which no man (being not senseless or besotted) can plead or pretend any
ignorance. Such are those general notions of sin, which GOD (the author of
nature) has imprinted and imprized in our hearts and minds, as things which
are engendered and congenerate with us: such is Religion toward GOD, love
toward our parents, and reverence toward our progenitors.

And albeit the relic of God his Image, is many ways disteyned in us, since
the attaindour of our first parents, yet is it not altogether destroyed; there
always remained such a resplendent light of that divine nature, as by the
which men might naturally and clearly see, both what was good, and what was
not good; and conceive in some sort also, what was godly, and what was
godless. Indeed the Gentiles aberred from the true knowledge of the Godhead,
and the true worship thereof: yet notwithstanding in this one thing they were
well resolved, that there was a GOD, and that he was to be honored. Their
Religion was depraved by them, yet were not they deprived of Religion: but now,
where it is come to that pass, that men think either that there is no God, or
no worship of God: there the mind may be said, not to err, but to rave:
for they alone offend against that notion of God, which is engraven in the
minds of all men, and which ingrafteth a voluntary Religion, and a religious
inclination, (will they, nill they) in the heart of every man. Nor was there
ever Nation so barbarous, nor was there ever people so savage, which could live
without Religion: take away Religion, and take away all civility from men, all
severity from laws.

There are many parts in a commonwealth, unto the which for great cause,
there are great honors given: especially to prowess Martial: of the which
albeit the use be great, yet is it for no great time: But the use of Religion
is eternal: There may be a state without a Soldiour, not without a Minister:
The use of a Soldiour is far from perpetual, the less, the better; the more
seldom, the more welcome; but Religion is everlasting, and can never be
casseered. But what should I compare the Ministry of Religion with other
mysteries in the commonwealth, which all have their deserved honors? They all
must vnuaile to Religion, whether you respect the excellency, or the
necessity, or the commodity of that mystery. Wherefore, that so notable and
necessary a function to the state, should want honor in the commonwealth, it
wants common reason. All Nations were ever of this mind and opinion that
they thought the Presidents of Religion, were always to be chosen from among
the chief Nobility: or if happily they were not by birth Noble, then they were
to be innobled by the commonwealth. But that the consent of all Nations in
any one thing, is the very law of Nature, it was very well defined by that
excellent and learned Orator Tullie (who could very well define:) against the
which now at the last to strive and storm, under the color of reformation, is
rather an outrage, then an error, to be convicted of frenzy, rather then to
be suspected of folly. Did ever precept of our Savior cross and encounter,
either the law which himself gave unto the Fathers, or the Edict which nature
(God I mean) has given and ingrafted in the secret penitralles of al their
successors?

Chap. II. How great the reverence of Priests has been among all Nations.
I Will therefore remember unto you in how great honor the worshippers of
false Religions have always had their Priests in all places: that their folly
may the rather appear, who (I know not with what religion) would detract due
honor from true religion. For albeit the Caldees, Persians, Egyptians,
Greeks Latins, French, Britons, and all other Nations, have by diverse
errors, and most detestable superstitions, declined from that first and sincere
religion, which our first parents left to their posterity: yet
notwithstanding, there always remained many impressions as yet uncancelled,
and they not concealed; as are these, That the world is governed by the divine
providence of the eternal Godhead, and that the same rules over all earthly
things: that whatsoever is good proceeds from him, and whatsoever is evil
is declined by him: and therefore that he is to be religiously worshipped: and
therefore the sacred symysts of his religion, are especially to be honored.
And thus it came to pass, that among the Assyrians and Babilonians, their
Caldies: among the Medes and Persians, their divines were always of singular
account, and supereminent authority; for why? They were the governors of
religion, and the expositors of the law both sacred and profane. To which end
they were exercised from their youth in all learned and liberal sciences: they
did comprehend the motions of the heavens, and deuined by the errors of the
stars: they read, and learned, and taught Religion, rites, and laws: they were
compeers with kings in their government, so that, nothing was done without
their council and consent. Finally, of so great esteem was the discipline of
the Wisemen among the Medes and Persians, as that he was not thought worthy
the Empire, that was not found skillful in their Arts and Emblemes.

Theseus was the first that put a difference between Nobles (whom he called
Patritians) and husband men, and Artificers: to the Nobles he gave power and
pre-eminence to profess religion, to choose Magistrates of their own company,
and also to moderate and interpret in matters sacred and divine. This law
their posterity, as they received it of their ancestors, so they observed it
very religiously: By which means it came to pass, that great reverence was
always given, both to the sacrifices, and to all other their religious
actions. Neither could their Priests want their due parts of that divine
reverence, whom they always selected out of the noblest families, and who were
ever one in their public Councels. For, as if God himself was present (unto
whom we ought not to think that there is any thing unknown) even so in the
presence of the sacred Priests, did they propound all their more serious
actions; namely, the divines among the Athenians, and the south-sayers sitting
in counsel with the King among the Lacedaemonians.

Strabo in his twelfth book writes of two Temples sacred to Bellona, which
were called Comana: of whom the one was in Capadocia, the other in Pontus, both
alike in all parts: for that indeed they were one made by the other, and had
altogether the same rites and ceremonies common to them both. In those places,
either of the Priests were in greatest regard of honor next unto the King
himself: and albeit they were subject to the prince, yet where the people
suppliant them. They had either of them six thousand servants which were called
Hierodulists, or Church servants, besides no small quantity of land, over the
which they were free Lords. Twice every year did the Prelate were a diadem;
the Prince and Priests, for the most part, being of the same family. Plato in
his book deregno confirms these things, and says, that it becomes all
men to conceive honorably of the Priests and Prophets, and that they ought of
right to be had in great estimation, as well for the greatness of their actions,
as the honor of their office. Wherefore (says he) in Egypt it is not lawful
for that King to sway the scepter, that holds not of the Crosyer. Insomuch,
that if any, either by prowess, or by policy have invaded the kingdom, who is
not of that holy kind, notwithstanding afterward (there is no remedy) he must
be initiated into that mystery. And not there only, but in many places amongst
the Graecians also, a man may find, where the chief sacrifices are committed
to the chief Magistrates. Neither is this which I maintain, less manifest
among your selves: for you also advance the most magnificent rites (especially
the ancient sacrifices) to him, that by lotte is chosen your King. The same
Philosopher in his twelfth Dialogue de legibus, speaks much of that honor,
which then, and of old was given unto Priests, both dead and living, as well
in their public assemblies, as at their solemn funerals.

The Romans and Latins were no whit inferior either to the Greeks, or to the
Egyptians in this behalf: for they also joined the sacred Priesthood with the
royal Majesty. All the first Kings of the Latins and Romans were Priests. The
Emperors also, which afterward succeeded them, would themselves be the high
Priests. But what reverend regard the Romans themselves had of Religion,
Valerius Maximus has left recorded in these words: But such (says he) was the
care our fathers had, not only for the present account, but also for the future
increase of religion, that even then when the City was most flourishing
fortunate, they delivered ten sons, princes of the Senate, to the ten several
provinces and people of Hetruria, only to this end, that they might learn the
sacred discipline of their Religion. But what the authority of divines was at
Rome, we may best hear by a divine. Tullie in his second de legibus writes
thus: The greatest and the worthiest thing in the Commonwealth, is the
privilege and pre-eminence of Divines, joined with the greatest authority:
Neither do I conceive thus, because I my self am a Divine, but because it
becomes us all so to conceive: For indeed, what greater thing is there, (if
we speak according to the equity and right of the thing) then with
authority, either to dismiss the companies, and the councels of chief
Empires and the greatest Potentats, when they are proposed: or to restrain
them, when they are concluded? or what thing can there be more solemn, then to
cease from the affairs we have already in hand, if one Divine alone, do but
say the contrary? What thing can there be more magnificent, then of his
entire power to appoint, that the Consuls should depose themselves from their
Magistracy? Or what thing more religious, then to give leave, or not to give
leave, to deal with the people, or not to deal? And what is it to repeal
laws, not lawfully made? that nothing can be allowed to be done by the
Magistrate, in peace or in war, without their authority? Thus far goes
Cicero, whose authority I could confirm with many examples, if need were. But
what should I speak of the Flamines and Arch-flamines, and other the Priests,
and Arch-priestes of the Romans? It suffiseth, they thought the Imperial
majesty it self to be adorned with the honor of Hie-priest. But that all
the societies of Priests, were in especial honor among the Romans, it might
very well be known, if it were but by this, that all the companies of Priests,
had their places in publik triumphs, and solemn spectacles, (the chief
Priests and the chief Curates:) There set (says Arnobius) fifteen men
crowned with laurel wreathes, and Jupiters Arch-priests with their myters:
there set the Divines, interpretors of the mind and will of God, as do also
the chaste Virgins, nurses, and nourishers of the never dying fire. Of these
things, he that desires greater variety, may seek them in the Roman
history: these things suffice me.

But now I will travel over the Alps, and will set before your
consideration, what religion was of old amongst the French and Britones, and
what honor for religion. And first, it is sufficiently known, that the
Druidists were Priests of the chief nations on this side the Alps: of whom
we read in Caesar his Commentaries, that they were had in great esteem, for
so he writes: In all France there are two sorts of those, which above the
rest are of especial honor and account: The one are the Druidists, the other
are the men at arms. They are conversant in divine service, they attend upon
sacrifices private, and public, they are the expounders of Religion: Unto them
great flocks of youth recourse for their learning, and these have especial
honor among them. For they do determine of all controversies (in a manner)
both private and public: and if there be any crime committed, any murder
attempted, if any controversy, about inheritance, or the bounds of lands, they
also set down their decree, and appoint the penalty.

If any person, either private or public, will not stand to their censure,
they lay the censure of the church upon him, they excommune him the Church:
this is the greatest punishment among them. But who so are thus excommuned,
they are forthwith accounted among the number of the graceless and ungodly:
they are forsaken of all men, al men fly their company and their conference,
least by co^tagion they might take any infection, nor are they to have any law
if they desire it, nor is there any honor to be given them, though they deserve
it. But over all these Druidists, there is one as chief and principal, which
has the chief authority among them, etc. More-ouer, these Druidists use not
to be present in war, neither do they pay any tribute with other men, but
have an exemption from wars, and an immunity from all other incumbraunces.
Thus witnesses Caesar himself. By the which we may see, how all nations
eue^ of that light of nature, which yet glimpseth in the breasts of men, and by
the which they have esteemed, either GOD or Gods to be adored, have likewise
judged according unto the same, that the ancients of religion are worthy to be
consacred with all condign honor and due observance.

CHAP. III. What the honor of the Priest-hoode was among the people of God.
THat this the judgment of all nations, did not proceed of any error of man's
mind, but of a certain feeling of the law of God written in their hearts, the
most sacred histories and the laws which God himself has made, do prove
sufficiently: for do they not al enthronize the Priesthood among the most
principal honors? Among the people of God, the Hie-priest had always the
second place next unto the King. Among the more ancient and antique fathers,
when as yet there was no law written, wheresoever true religion did flowrishe,
the firstborn had always this prerogative of honor in their families above
the rest of their brethren, He was graced with the Priesthood. But if at any
time, the Lord of his absolute authority, did translate the right of the
firstborn unto the younger brother, with all he invested him also into the
same dignity of the Priesthood: so came Jacob to be priested.

And this custom continued with the people of God, even unto the age of Moses,
under whom, by the express commandment of God, the Priest-hoode was
translated from the firstborn in general, unto the tribe of Levy. But now
how careful God himself was of this; That his Priest should be honored, the
process of Moses his history can sufficiently testify: neither is it
needful for me to delate al things at large: it suffices to have noted the
chief grounds Only this is not to be omitted, (besides that our God would have
him represent our hie and thrice honored Priest, Christ Jesus, that the rights
which of duty belong unto God himself: God (as an especial favor) he has
given to his Priests, when as he demised unto them the use of those things
which were offered and brought as presents unto him, and which it was not
lawful for any man to touch and turn unto his own use, that was not the Lords
Hie-priest. Again, his pleasure was, that the right of the tithes and tenthes,
and other honors of especial prerogative, which by the laws of nature did
belong to God only, should be a stipend unto the Priests for their sacred
ministry: besides, first fruits, redemtions of their first borne, head-pence,
subsidies and such like, were by his laws referred to the use and benefit of
the Priests, and tabernacle of the Lord. And last of all, he appointed them
only, the dispensation both of divine and human laws: in honor whereof, he
did by law enact, that the judgment of the Hie-priest should be held sacred and
inviolable in all controversies: unto the which, if any man were so obstinate
as not to supply, his death was the lieu of his contumacie.

Chap. IIII. Of that double honor which is due vno those Elders which rule
well, and the arguments of those that hold the contrary.
THat the Elders which rule well in the Church are worthy of double honor,
(according unto the saying of Saint Paul) all that will be accounted
christians, do confess in words; but when it once comes unto deeds, they
can hardly award them a single (God knows) and a simple honor. But verelie,
if there be a meed, due for every merit, then doubtless there is an
especial duty to be yielded unto the Ministers of the church. Does not the
only regard of honesty decree, that Parents should have of their children, the
merit of their education? Lawyers of their clyents, the fees for their
counsel? Physicians of their patients, the reward for their direction? the
Tutor of his people, the stipend for his instruction? But who so faithfully
administreth unto the faithful servants of God in sacred things, he does
largely contain all these benefits in one; Seeing that God has imposed upon
the Pastors of the Church the persons of all these. For which cause doubtless,
the irreligion and ingratitude of some Magistrates in this age is worthy the
greater dishonor: who while they will seem to be favorites of christian
Religion, defeat the Ministers thereof of their due Honor, and so far are they
from imparting any thing of their own thereunto, that what so ever of old has
been consecrate to sacred uses, they are ready to distract unto profane
Ministeries. These men, that they may seem to have some color for their
craft, will cunningly reason the case thus: That there is not the like regard
to be had of the Ministry of the Gospel in this age, as was of old of the
Priesthood under the law of Moses: That God did cocker them in those Honors he
spared them: but the Ministers of the Gospel are out of that age, they are
past seven, they may shift for themselves, and learn to live in the world,
poor and inglorious. And of this Christ gave them a good example, (and his
followers the Apostles) who of purpose did choose a poor life, and neglected
the honors and pleasures of this world. Besides all this, they preach to us the
contempt of earthly things: why should they not lead the other way them selves,
which they lay out unto others.

This you hear is a popular and plausible speech, well pleasing all greedy and
mis-begetting men, who regard not so much that the Church may be furnished with
godly and learned Ministers, such as Christ requires; as, that under this
color, they them selves may be excused of their irreligious contempt of Gods
servants, and their sacriligious imbecilling of Gods Church. But these men
being obdurate in their base conceit, seem for their fained and interfected
religion, not unlike unto those, who with a counter-contempt of wealth, hunt
current after hid treasure, that so they may make a gain of their beggary, and
a sweet smell of their druggery. The nature of Cynicks is not clean worn out,
together with the name: nor yet the cowherdly affection of those, that think
fryerly beggarlines, to be Apostolic holiness. Do you not see here, how the
same error has put on sundry shapes, least by any means he himself should
appear in it, whom no man likes in his own likeness? In deed the very color
of contemning those things, which commonly al men do admire (as pleasures,
riches, and honors) does bring the simple people into a religious wonderment;
who for the most part worship with greater reverence the bare counterfeit of
virtue, then virtue it self, which cannot counterfeit. But if so be they do
(as they say) so greatly delight in the imitable virtues of Christ and his
Apostles; why do they not also take view of those forward christians in the
Primative Church, and go presently and sell all their lands, and lay the
price at the Apostles feet?

But now I must have a saying also to those other colors, which they lay on,
to countenance this error, least the mind being fore-seasoned with prejudice,
should auerre an approved truth without just trial. For my part, I will not
willingly conceal any of those things, which are laid to our charge by the
patrons of this Hypocrisy. Wherefore (say they) as riches do bring with them
certain prouocations to sin, and administer nourishment to the same: so
poverty is the mother of all virtue, and the stepdame of all vice. For that
brideleth and brings under the untamed wildnes, and wilfullnes of ma^s
sinful nature. And that this is so, the advised sentence of the best
Philosophers confirm the same. For when as they (giving over themselves to the
study of Philosophy) were not ignorant, that worldly wealth would be but their
hinderance, they spared not either to leave them, or to lose them. The
Euangelike precepts subscribe together to this opinion, the which in every
place do incite us to the lothing of riches, to the liking of poverty, and
more then that, they do even thunder out against the rich the woes of all
wretchedness. Contrariwise our Savior promises his bliss to the poor, and
affirms, that it is more easy for a Cammell to dance through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to aspire to the kingdom of Heaven. Did not him
self choose to be borne poor, to live poor, to dye poor? of him self he
said, The birds of the air have nests, and the foxes have holes, but the son
of man has not where to put his head. Also if he entertained any into his
discipline, the first lesson was to sell al they had, and give to the poor.
For that in deed, riches, are but as certain shakels to such as follow Christ,
with which they being entangled, can not possibly keep pace with him. Neither
can the mind surcharged with the burden of externe things, mount up and soar
aloft into the highest Heavens. Moreover to these it is more probably added,
that in the time of Constantine, there was a voice heard from Heaven, which
said, That poison was infused into the Church. The which was thought to be
uttered because of those riches, and that great wealth, with the which the
godly Emperor Constantine, is said to have honored the Pastors, and Bishops of
the Church. But these things you must consider are commonly trikt up and set
forth after the finest fashion, and with the best side outward; and yet how
many absurd things, and absonant from the mind and meaning of our Lord and
Savior do follow out of these, and fall upon heaps.

Chap. V. An answer to the arguments of the former chapter.
But that the truth of the controversy may appear to al, al must learn to
know, that those Gospel precepts, of contemning riches, were not given to a
certain few Apostles, but to all, even as many as would follow Christ.
Wherefore first, that distinction of counsels and precepes* ouerturneth it
self, even in those very words, which go for counsels. For God has set
down one law for all, one rule to live well, and he has laid out one path
to eternal life, as well in the old, as the new Testament. Notwi^^standing if
any man of any private purpose set do^^^ with himself, that he will needs
live in poverty, God forbid, I should be his hindrance. But they which think,
that the forsaking of all things, and the profession of poverty is a thing,
not commanded to all, but given in counsel to some, as a more perfect course
of a godly life; I say, they are in a false belief. Luke. 14.33.
The words of our Savior are these: So likewise, who so ever he be of you
that forsakes not all that he has, can not be my Disciple. Where you shall
understand, that what so ever is commanded as necessarily to be observed of
the Disciple of Christ, may not by any means be omitted: and therefore it is
manifest, that there is no such counsel given in that place by the Lord our
Savior, as that it is left in our own free power to omit the same: but the
precept there is set down more absolute, under the pain of damnation, if it
be omitted.

The cause of this error, was the mis-conceyuing of that place in Matthew, the
nineteenth, and Luke the eighteenth, and Mark the tenth, where there seem to
be two distinct things set down, namely, an ordinary way to eternal life, by
the observance of Gods commandments, and another more perfect and ready way,
by the alienation of all our goods, and the dispensation of them toward the
poor. In Matthew we read how our Savior answered one; If thou will enter into
life, keep the commandments. Who when he had very insolently boasted, that
he had kept them all from his youth up: how far he was from that perfection he
boasted of, our Savior proves, when he brought to light the secret corruption
of a covetous heart, which lay hid within, and made known to him, how far he
was from the entire love of his neighbor, when he commanded him to sell his
possessions, and give to the poor. In the which notwithstanding, our Savior
required of him no new thing, no thing extraordinary, nothing that he was not
bound to do by that same law, which he presumed he had performed: (seeing there
it is commanded that we should love our neighbor as our selves.) For the
force of the precept is this, that we owe not only all outward things to God
and our neighbor, but eue^ our life also, if need does require. Of the which
perfection, how much this stripling wanted, he then bewraied, when as Christ
commanding him to give but his goods to the poor, he seemed to be touched so
near. And yet unless we be at that point with our selves, as that we could
willingly depart from all that we have, for the mere love of God and our
neighbor, we can not enter into the kingdom of God. And therefore Christ did
not propound unto the Pharasie a free thing, the neglect whereof did not
exclude from the kingdom of heaven; but a thing altogether necessary for him
that would enter into it. And therefore when he did perceive him depart away
heavily after this precept, he added. Verily I say unto you, it is hard for
him which is rich to enter into the kingdom of Heaven; again I say unto you,
it is more easy for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. By which words it is most manifest,
that no voluntary thing is propounded, the which if a man did perform, he
should do well, if not, he should not do amiss (as it is to live a single
life) but a thing altogether necessary for him that would be saved.

But what then means our Savior (say they) when he says, If thou will be
perfect, go, sell all thou have, and give to the poor. Seems he not to
grant, that the keeping of the commandments of God are sufficient to eternal
life, but not sufficing to perfection? No verily: For that this was not the
meaning of the Lord, his very words sufficiently declare, but that in deed he
spoke of that perfection which is commanded in the law; of the which the young
man had observed an outward show, when as he wanted the inward substance. For
doubtless, he which is not ready and resolved to lay down all that he has, and
to leave his life blood also for the love of his neighbor, he can not be said
to love his neighbor as himself. And therefore, seeing he would needs know
what he wanted, our Savior very wisely reioined him to the necessary duty of
charity. Wherefore this is the sense of Christ his words. If thou will be a
perfect obseruer of the law in deed, and art desirous to tread that path into
eternal life, which is laid out in the said perfect, and absolute performance
of the law of God, keep those commandments of the love of God, and thy
neighbor: go thy ways, set thy things in an order, that thou may be ready
at all times to give unto the poor.

Now, unless this precept did concern al, to what purpose are these words, It
is more easy for a Camel to enter through the eye of a needle, then for him
that is rich to enter into the kingdom of God. Whosoever therefore will serve
under Christ his colors, is commanded to bid father and mother and all
farewell, how dear so ever they be unto him, yea he must also not spare his
own life; for unto all it is said, Whosoever forsakes not al he has, cannot
be my Disciple. That our Savior here enjoined his Disciples no new or insolent
thing, the example of Abraham may persuade us, who^ God of old also commanded,
to leave his country, his kindred, and all that was precious unto him in
Chaldea, that he might go, whether it pleased the Lord to appoint him. So did
God exercise the father of the faithful; that he might be always at an howrs
warning to surrender his riches, and al other emoluments of his life. In like
manner Christ will have all the true legitimat children of Abraham, to depute all
which they have to his glory, and to benefit their brethren, as the cause, the
time, and the place require. And this is that perfection which God at this day
requires under the Gospel, and which God of old exacted under the law, and
before the law, without the which no man at any time shall enter into the
kingdom of Heaven. In deed it becomes the preachers of the Gospel, to
appear before all others in the contempt of worldly things: but yet there is
no peculiar precept thereof given to them, any otherwise then to all other
christians. As also for the example of Christ which they aledge, they cannot be
ignorant of this, that it is set forth to be imitated, not only of the apostles
and ministers of the gospel, but generally of al christians of what condition
soever. But nor pattern nor precept of Christ, either confounds or
controleth the degrees of honor which are necessary in a common wealth. All men
may lawfully be liberal toward the poor, and be poor themselves also in
spirit, eue^ in the midst of their wealth. Nor Daniel his lieutenancy over the
Babylonians, nor Joseph his jurisdiction over the Aegyptia^s, nor Mardochai,
nor Nehemias their courting among the Persians, were any hinderance to them in
the worship of God: Neither was yet the royal Diadem of David and other godly
Princes any preidiudice unto them, why they might not inherit the kingdom of
Heaven. We have read of the great wealth of Job and Abraham, and other
Patriarchs, who were religious toward God, liberal toward the poor, and
far from all coueteousnes. Neither does penury conclude, neither does plenty
exclude the contempt of riches. If a man have nothing, and yet languishe in a
desire to have, he is covetous; again, if a man have much but yet is not bound
to that which he has, he is the true contemner of all that he has.

The precepts of Christ, concerning the selling of our possessions, are
understood to be observed, not so much in the work it self, as in the
willingness of mind to perform the same, according as time and place does
require. Acts. ^.
Barnabas (one of the seventy) sold no la^d, before he see the necessity of the
brethren to exact the same. So long as the Lord lived (whom also he followed)
he kept possession of all his possessions. In like manner, such times may fall
(and we may fall into those times) in the which christian charity shall require
every christian to do the like: but where there is no such need, it is better
kept, and it shall do more good and upon more occasions, then if all were
sold at once, and afterward want wherewith to relieve other, or themselves,
etc. I dare say, that Abraham, Job, and David followed the precepts of the
Gospel, and good christians are as well to imitat them as Christ, and his
Apostles. Our Savior himself witnesses of Zacheus, that he was the child of
Abraham, in imitation of the faith which was in Abraham n: amely, when as he
undertook to give half of that he had to the poor, and to restore four fould
where he had defrauded. By which words of our Savior, the vanity of that reason
is convinced, which affirms that God cockred the Patriarchs and the
Leuitical Priests, (as a carnal people) in riches and honor, which things the
Lord has denied to christian Pastors.

In deed we will not deny, but some things were given in those times of an
especial and a partial favor, and that God did wink at some things of old,
which at this day he will not ouer-see: For then the common error of al nations,
had in some things invaded the people of God also, (as in their many wives and
often diuorses, etc.) But, that God did not only pamper the Fathers with
things external, and did not erect the minds of the faithful to things
eternal, it cannot be spoken without a mouth of blasphemy against God, and a
slander of injury against the Fathers. There was the same faith of the Fathers,
and us, the same doctrine of both the testaments: the time only is altered,
(such things being fulfilled which fore-shewed of the Messiah) in religion and
manners there is no such alteration. Who will say (and not repent him) that those
most sage and wise Heroicks of that age, were ignorant of the nature of riches,
and the condition of this present life? namely, that they were diffluent and
distrustful, and scarce worthy to be taken for goods; and that man ought to
aspire to a greater and more excellent good, which is certain, and not to be
suspected, and stands upon no die. The very Philosophers knew these things,
and argued very religiously of them: and did the divine Prophets, the servants
of God conceive nothing more noble then these earthly things? nothing can be
said of purpose more absurd. Wherefore let this opinion fly, and let us resolve
upon that which is certain: That there is one way of life prescribed to all
men, and that, the only one way of virtue, constant and to be continued in all
ages: For it was given of God. And again: That we may safely follow the
Fathers, when they cannot be proved to have erred from that course of life,
which was prescribed both to them and to us: and therefore, if it were then
lawful among Gods people, for the Priests and Levites to enjoy riches, and to
be adorned with honors, the same is also lawful at this day for the Ministers
of the Gospel in a christian common wealth.

As for the Philosophers (which as they say) had riches in so light account: I
also say, that the same thing is taught us by Christ, after a more excellent
manner, and that he is not worthy the name of a Christian, that does not excel
the Philosophers in the same thing. For they both erred from the true scope,
and besides a vain and popular applause, they gained nothing by their foolish
and unprofitable loss. Neither has Christ taught us to cast away our goods,
but to give them unto the poor. Goods are received of God, for the use of man;
and they which are rich receive them of God, not to loose, but to lay out: but
they, as if the things themselves had been evil, not of man's corruption, but
of their own condition, cast them clean away. When goods are called the
prouocations of evil, you must understand that they are so called, not that
themselves are in fault, but they only which abuse them. Whatsoever God has
created is good, and has some good use: that therefore one has cast all his
wealth into the Sea, an other having conuaied all his substance into a few
precious stones, crushed them all unto powder, it was an action of vain and
ridiculous applause, of no good use. But the precepts of Christ do direct us to
the love of God and our neighbors, unto whom we owe all that we have.

The contempt which we see in some currish Philosophers, and certain smokie
brethren of this age, is far from the love, either of God, or of man: and it is
well seen, how far it is estranged even from that humanity, and human
ciuility which ought to be in men. But the pouertye of Christ and his
Apostles, was of another kind. Our Savior lead a private life with Joseph and
his mother Mary, and got his living with labor and handy-worke, not with
begging and loytering. He took care for his mother Marie, and also provided
for her according to that poor estate, which he of singular and especial
purpose had chosen. Neither could riches have done him any hurt, if he would
have possessed them: But that the least occasion of suspicion might not be
given to any, that he aspired to any earthly kingdom, his divine purpose was
to live poor, and lie hid for a time: for if the world had known the Lord of
glory, they would never have crucified him: but that which a few wise men did,
no doubt all the world would have done the like: they would have brought
presents unto him from the furthest parts of the world. And what would Tiberius
(think you,) have done amongst the rest: who (in glorious as he was)
canonized Christ amongst the number of Gods, and took order with the Senate,
that the same should be done by public decree?

After thirty years space, he betook himself to preach, and within no great
while, he had no small family: he entertained first twelve Apostles, and
after them seventy other disciples. For all the which he so provided, as that
they never wanted. And yet no small portion could suffice to keep so great a
company, were it to find them but sparingly. By the which (as by the way) we
may geather, how great the bounty and liberality of good and devout men was
toward Christ.

That he makes answer to a certain curious companion, and tells him, That
the birds of the air have nests, and the Foxes holes, but the Son of man
has not where to put his head: the answer must be understood according unto
the conceit of the demaunder, not according to the bare words of the replyer.
He expected some great commodity to be had by the retinue of Christ, and
supposed he could not be without some stately and magnificent receipt. (For we
read in John, that Christ showed his house to a couple of his disciples) But
our Savior would allure no man unto him with such baits, as with the which
most men are entangled, (as are honors and riches and such like,) rather did
he lay before him such things, as with the which most men are most commonly
terrified (as are slanders, and need, and dangers.)

I marie sir (will some say) therefore it beseems not the Prelates of the
church, and other ministers of the gospel, to roost aloft in Princely
palaces, and stately edifies. True indeed, if so be they were in like
condition of time and place, as in the which our Savior lived: that is, if
they lived under a Magistrate estranged from the true religion, who were like
to be jealous over the true Messiah and his Ministers, least they should affect
the kingdom, if he should see them frollike in such things, as by the which
they might make some way unto a kingdom, (as are great riches, stately
palaces, strong towns, and costly retinues:) and besides, if they should
converse amongst a people, which could conceive no other kingdom of Messiah,
but such as should flowrish in all such royal ensigns. But the Lord by this
his mean estate affected two things: First he prevented the Jews cauils, so
that they could not justly accuse him for affecting the kingdom; and besides,
he taught withal, that his kingdom had no inter-common with the kingdoms of
this world: So that by the one, he avoided the envy and jealousy of some, and
with the other he confuted the common error of all, concerning this one
kingdom of the Messiah? If so be there had been no danger of these things,
but the mystery of our redemption might have been wrought as well with the
suspected pomp of externe majesty: no doubt the owner of towns and towers
and al external things, would not himself have refused them. For all the
palaces and Provinces of the world ought of right to have received the King
Christ; when he came into the world, he came into his own; and the true heir
came, not only of his fathers kingdom, but also of the whole world. And
therefore, that the blind and besotted Jews, did not intertaine him with that
honor which beseemed him, their negligence therein is not to be imitated, for
their ungodliness cannot any ways be excused.

I would they could but tell me, with what triumphs, with what courteous and
friendly intertainment our Savior should have been received of the Roman
Emperors and their deputies, if he had been well known of the Hye-priests
of the Jews, and other Princes and governors which ruled the world; (if he
had been well known unto them?)

The people, and so many as believed that he was the promised Messiah, with
what solemn clamors, and triumphant iubelies did they receive him, and convey
him into the holy city? Those honors and others which were given him, our
Savior did not reject them, but rather defended them as he might, against the
envious. And had there been that religion in the Hie-priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, and the rest of the Jews which ought to have been; their duty was
to have thronged together for the receipt of the Savior of the world, and to
have solemnised the intertainement of the promised Messiah, with all honor and
reverence which is due, and might be done by men, not only to a mortal Prince,
but to an immortal God. Wherefore, it is but a bad consequence, to argue from
that which was done of error and ignorance, to that which ought to be done of
right and alegeance. Neither has that any force to bind us, which the Lord
did of especial purpose extraordinarily, where as there remains not now the
like use of that purpose. That his will was to be borne in an out room, and to
be found in a foul stable, and that his own decree was to be crucified of
the Jews: it prescribes no law unto us, unto the which we are bound to obey.
Neither is his example herein to be admitted, but his purpose to be admired.

And that which I say of our Savior, the like do I affirm of his Apostles and
other Ministers, according unto every man's place. For as the estate of our
Lord and Savior, had been after a far other sort, if all men, or the Jews
at the least, with whom he did converse, had but known that he was the Lord
of glory: So likewise do I affirm, that the estate of the Ministry ought to
be much more glorious under a christian Magistrate, where Christ is well known,
then under an Heathenish government estranged from the knowledge of Christ.

As for the estate of poverty, I hold as I have proved, that the same which is
commanded in the Gospel indefinitlie, is enjoined all Christians generally:
Neither are the Prelates of the Church any otherwise bound thereto, then are
the rest. How many soever the Lord in his last judgment shall find upon just
account to have lived rich (against whom he has pronounced the woe of his
eternal curse) they all shall perish everlastingly: and they only which shall
be found among the poor in spirit (unto whom the kingdom does appertain)
shall live eternally. The precept of Euangelike poverty, which Christ
followed, and left in charge to be followed of us, is this; namely, Lowlines of
mind, which is the most peremptory contemner of al visible things. The pore
in spirit is he, which bears not a hautie spirit, neither honereth after
dishonest desires: which lives content with his estate, and commits his
whole life unto God: if he have nothing, or if it be little which he has, he
is not solicited with disquiet cares; but trusts in God his maker, of whom he
hops for his daily bread: Again, if he be rich, his spirit is not exalted by
reason of his riches, but well remembers, that he brought nothing unto this
world, neither shall carry any thing away: he knows, that riches are but
wash, and wax wayward, that they may easily be translated from him, that they
may many ways perish with him: he acknowledges, that he has received them of
the Lord, neither to be kept in ward, nor to be spent in wast. All which parts
of spiritual poverty the Apostle requires in his first to Timothy, the sixth
chapter, where he admonishes Timothy to exhort the rich unto this poverty:
Charge them that are rich (says he) in this world, that they be not high
minded, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God (which
gives us abundantly all things to enjoy) that they do good, and be rich in
good works, ready to distribute. Here have we that poverty which our
Savior requires to be in rich men: which (as you may see) does nothing at all
inuert the use and propriety of earthly things. This I say is that poverty,
the mother of virtue, which all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, with all the
Apostles and first Christians, and last of all, which all the godly have
always observed, and our Savior himself both in word and deed, both in
plenty and poverty, taught to be observed. But is not this the very Atheism
of Julian the recreant, and the only Saracisme of the enemies of Christian
religion, when they have robbed and rifled the Churches of their wealth and
dignities, to insult over the poor Ministers, and to say, they ought to be
poor after the example of Christ and his Apostles? As for that they fetch in
the uncertain sound of a certain voice, heard in the time of Constantine: it
is to be understood (if it be to be believed) of Arrius and his inuenomed
doctrine, not of the forged donations of Constantine.. The wealth and riches
which Constantine vouchsafed, could not be offensive to the Church, seeing
they were neither so great as they make them, nor yet seduced the Bishops and
Elders from their Ecclesiastical functions, as they would have them. But then,
the husbanding and disposing of them was after such a sort, as might easily
clear the Bishops from all suspicion of avarice.

Chap. VI. That the honor which is given to the Pastors of Christ his Church,
is joined with a certain Religion toward God.
THat the Priests and Levites under the old law were exceedingly well provided
for, and that according to Gods own ordinance and institution, it is a thing
better known, then that any man can make any question of it. The same is as
plain a case also for the Ministers of the Gospel under the new Testament, and
that by the same authority, and for the same reasons; were it not for the
sacrilegious impiety of some, who while (as they say) they seek to shun one
occasion of evil in the Church, they bring upon the same many miserable
extreems. Neither is want less to be feared then abundance, to breed the bain
of the church. In what things our Fathers (as we think) offended, we see very
clearly; but where we offend our selves, we will not grope with our hands:
Lynces in other men's faults, Moules in our own. That there is an honor due
unto Parents, Lawyers, Tutors, and physicians, it is most manifest: neither is
there any man, that is not a bad man, that will deny it. How much rather are
all Christians devoted unto the Ministers of the Gospel, seeing they alone do
bear the person and the burden of these all? For they are both Fathers, and
Tutors, and Lawyers, and Physicians: and therefore, how much more they excel in
worthiness, so much more worthy to be preferred in worship. Besides all this,
the reverence which is given to these and such like, is, only of courtesy and
common civility, and respects man only, and our duties to men: but the
honor which is due unto Gods Ministers, respects God himself, and his heavenly
ministry. They are the servants of God, his legates, the dispensers of the
mysteries of God, and are sent of God to discharge an heavenly embassy for God
in the person of Christ: who^, whosoever contemns, contemns the Lord Jesus,
and God the Father, their judge and revenger. The countenance, or contempt of
God his servants, touches God himself very nearely, who is always most
honored or dishonored in his Minister. Wherefore that prerogative in the
Church, with the which not man so much, as God him self is honored, is sacred
and religious, and has the promise of reward not only in this life, but in
the life to come. Matthew the tenth and the fifteenth chap. He which receives
you, receives me; and he which receives me, receives him that sent me. He
which receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward; and he that receives a just man in the name of a just man, shall have a
just man's reward: and whosoever shall give drink to one of these little ones,
even a cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say, unto
you, he shall not lose his reward. The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Philippians, calls those presents which were sent to him, an odor that
smells sweet; a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God. So that in the
poor, whose wants we relieve, Christ is worshipped, but in the Ministers,
whose calling we maintain, Christ is honored.

The Leuitical sacrifices have had their end: but the Euangelical sacrifices
shall have no end, until the worlds end. The Euangelike sacrifices are the
confession of faith, unfeigned thanks giving, and all the trophies of praise,
which we erect and direct unto the glory of God: as also the cheerful
bounty, and charitable good works we show forth unto the comfort of men.
For which cause the Apostle to the Hebrews exhorts all men that they would
continually offer the sacrifice of praise unto God through Christ, that is, the
fruit of the lips which confess his name: and (moreover,) that they would not
forget to do good, and to distribute: for they are the sacrifices (says he)
with the which God is well pleased. Howsoever therefore profane men, make
small account of that honor which is due unto the Elders, notwithstanding,
that the same is sacred, and to be compared with the sacrifices which were
offered of old in the Lords Temple, it is apparently manifest by the manifold
testimonies of Scripture.

CHAP. VII. Certain other reasons confuted, and the truth confirmed by many
testimonies of Scripture.
But it shall not be amiss for us to see in this place, how far out of all
order the frenzy of certain ungodly men will hurrie it self: who will not
only not deigne to contribute of their own to the Ministers, but they hardly
vouchsafe them those honest stipends, which they pay unto them out of the
robberies of their own Churches. Out of that one example of Paul, they think
they may set the Minister to plough and harrow, or whatsoever mannuarie
drudgerie: that by this means, all sacred study might languish, and the
little flock of Christ, being left desolate of learned Pastors, might lie open
to the rapine and torture of foxes, and cater-pillers, and wolves of all
sorts. There is no great need (say they) of any great store of Learning in a
Minister: it is enough, if with a little zeal, and a few good words they can
exhort the people to a certain kind of verbal devotion: and for this, the
Bible is extant in the mother tongue: as for the deepe-sprung-brestes of the
learned Muses, it suffices divines, if they may get but a smacke of them by
the way, or suck them as through an hardle. O divine wisdom, Christ, in thy
Fathers bosom, is not this with that recreant Julian, to envy thy Christian
people the liberal Arts? And that which not? And thou see it.

But let us return to Paul, who in an Epistle to the Corinthians recounteth
of the labor of his hands, by the which he got his own living, as a praise
to himself, and a reproach to the Corinthians; shall it follow of this, that
all Ministers of the Gospel ought to do the like? for so they think. But now
can not I tell, whether I shall rather disclaim the impudency, or disdain the
ignorance of these men: seeing the Apostle himself does plainly resolve, that
he did more in that case then he needed, and less then he might. For had he
not as great right, to put them to as great charges, as did the other Apostles?
But for certain causes he would not, and therefore spared them. But who sees
not here, that this the commemoration of the Apostle, is a certain
exprobation unto the people of that duty they neglected? So long as that
Epistle shall be read among men, that shame will stick fast to the
Corinthians, that they suffered so excellent an Apostle to want, in so
plentiful a City. Doubtless therefore, it is but too too bad dealing both
with Paul, and with us, to urge that which the Apostle was urged to do once
or twice upon occasion of necessity (that he might offend no man, or least any
being offended, should say or think, he preached the Gospel, not so much for
the love of religion, as for the hope of reward:) and to pass over as never
seen the more autentike examples of other Apostles, and of Paul also
himself, who else where openly testifies, that the Churches had abundantly
ministered unto him all things necessary, and that he also freely exacted the
same thing of them, and that of duty: (as in the fourth to the Philippians,
from the tenth verse to the twenty, and to Philemon, from the eight verse to
the nineteen. But what is the reason (may we think) that that one place of
the Corinthes should be so much noted, which makes mention of the labor of
the Apostle his hands, and that notable place of the Acts should be so
little spoken of, where it is reported, that the faithful laid the price of
their possessions at the Apostles feet, and that they left all their substance
in their hands? And why is not that example of Ananias and Saphira as well
quoted, who for detracting somewhat of the price of their own lands, were
severely punished by present death? Ingrating covetousness no doubt, and
irreligious ingratitude has made them there, as quick sighted as Argus, but
here as bleare-eyed as Oules, so that thereat they stare, herein they are
stark blind.

But, that the intoxicate frenzy of these men may appear the more outrageous,
it shall well requite our pains, if in this place we make regard to the
Euangelike precepts of Christ in this cause. In the tenth of Matthew, and the
tenth of Luke, we read, and we may remember, how the Lord, when he had
sent his Apostles to preach the Gospel, gave them authority to feed upon
those things that they found amongst the faithful. The labourer (says he) is
worthy of his reward. And Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, the fifth
chapter: The Elders which rule well (says he) are worthy of double honor,
especially they which labor in the word and doctrine: For the Scripture
says; Thou shall not mussle the mouth of the Ox which treads out the corn.
And in his first Epistle to the Corinthians the ninth chapter, from the fifth
verse to the fifteen, he makes a plain and a plentiful demonstration by
seven several arguments, that they which preach the Gospel, ought to live of
the Gospel.

His first reason is taken from the Soldiour: That no man goes to warre-fare
of his own costs and charges. The second, is drawn from the husbandmen: Who,
if they plant a vine, it is reason that they should eat of the fruit of the
vine. The third is borrowed of the shepherd: Who feed their flocks, and are
fed by their flocks. And that no man should think the Apostle spoke of
affection, he adds: Say I these things according to man? Namely, as a man
moved with avarice, or carried away with covetousness? Nay then he provoke
of his side the law it self, which always enjoined us a certain civility,
and semblable kindness even unto brute beasts; (if they do us any service)
that we may well know, how much rather we ought to perform the same toward
men, I say toward men, which above all men, deserve well of all men. And this
is the fourth argument in that place: which he amplifieth by the similitude of
him which ploweth, and thresheth out the corn, for the commodity thereof. It
is written in the law of Moses (says he) Thou shall not mussle the mouth of
the Ox, that treads out the corn; Does God take care for Oxen? either says
he not this altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt it is written:
that he which eareth, should ear in hope, and that he which thresheth in
hope, should be partaker of his hope.

The fifth argument is drawn from them which sow corn, in hope to make a good
harvest: If we have sown to you (says he) spiritual things, is it a great
thing if we reap your carnal things? There is no proportion at all between
these things; we give you much greater things then we receive of you.

The sixth argument is drawn from the divine institution of God, under the old
Testament; because it was then of the Lord ordained, that the Priests and
Levites, so many as minister at the Altar, should live of the Altar: Do you
not know (says he) that they which minister about holy things, eat of the
things of the Temple? and that they which wait at the Altar, are partakers
with the Altar?

And last of all he shows, that the like institution was ordained of the
Lord, under the new Testament: That they which preach the Gospel, shall also
live of the Gospel. By which reasons it is made as clear as noonday, that
all Christians are bound in duty to honor their Pastors. And how then should
they be excused of ingratitude and ungodliness, which defraud them of their due
honor?

That the contempt of the Minister redoundeth to God their Master, and that no
man so much as God himself is thereby held in scorn, that one place in the
sixth to the Galathians the sixth verse does abundantly declare, which is after
this sort: Let him that is taught in the word communicate with him that taught
him, all his goods. Be not deceived: God is not mocked; For whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap; for he that sows to the flesh, shall reap
corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting. Let him which is instructed (says he) communicate all his
goods. Good Lord (will some say) what means he by this? What he means may
easily be understood by a Synecdoche: by the which he says All his goods, for
part of all his goods. How great a part, it is not prescribed; unto the old
people the tenth part was laid forth; unto the new people no part: seeing they
owe of duty unto Christ their Lord and Savior, not the tenth only, but the
ninth, eight, seventh, sixth, fifth, and even the whole, and all, if the
necessity of the Church requires so much. To this he adds; God is not
mocked: as if he should have said: It is but in vain, that you make so many
vain excuses: for here the question is not of man's mainteinance, but of God
and the Gospels countenance: not what honor you show to man, but what due
regard ye yield unto God: think not you pintch on the Parsons side, when God
himself is the party; you may happily delude them, but God will not be dallyed
withal. Here therefore, if we could but once conceive the least part of that
which all rich men, and Nobles, Barons, Earls, Dukes, and Kings themselves
do owe unto the Ministers of Gods Church; and that the same might once be
freely given, according as Gods laws do command, and the godly duty of a
grateful mind does require: how great might we think would the treasure of
the Church be, in a good Christian commonwealth?

Chap. VIII. That the good examples of our forefathers, prescribe a law to
their successors.
WHen our Forefathers had well considered that there was no certain
prescription set down, as a law unto them for this matter under the Gospel,
which precisely limited what and how much every man was to give: they wisely
and willingly set down a law unto themselves and their successors and they
gave unto the church tithes, oblations, glebes, and yearly revenues from out
their possessions: that thereby the Pastor might be maintained, the poor
relieved, and the youth instructed: The which voluntary donations are now
ratefied unto the Church by the same laws, which make good to every man the
propriety of his own possessions.

Who doubts of the liberality of the Primitive Christians, (which brought the
price of their lands to the Apostles,) but that they might as well have given
them the land it self, if the state of the time and place had been such? But
they which did then expect the subversion of that place and people, and looked
for no better world under those ungodly Priests, then their Lord and Savior
had found before them, they thought good to sell all, and only of their mere
bounty, (no man compelling them thereunto) they committed all the money to be at
the Apostles courtesy. This their example has been well followed by our godly
forefathers, who willingly out of their own wealth have liberally provided for
the church, not for once, but for all ages: the which thing they thought to be
nearly appertaing to their duty.

I am not ignorant that this religious action has degenerated into a
preposterous zeal: for which cause, (courteous reader) I give thee to
understand, that I do not here defend any godles, or superstitious donations,
but only note unto thee the great untowardness of man's nature, which is alwais
more prone to ruin into contrary enormities, then to run on in the way of
harmless mediocrity. We easily stumble from one extreme to another: but yet
their fall is more tolerable, which transgress in excess, then they which
offend in defect: as it is always more easy to deduct from abundance that
which is needless, then to supply in an exigent that which is needful. Happily
some cur-modgen, or cursed Church-robber will scorn at this; who have already
set down this for their rest, either with a gredy mind to rifle the church or
with a galled conscience to retain that they have rifled from the church,
rather then of any godly devotion to pass any thing of their own unto the
welfare thereof. But let him scorn at me, and scorn for me: yet let him
beware he laugh not God to scorn* it suffices me, if he can so satisfy God.

CHAP. IX. That the oblations of Christians, are part of Gods worship.
ALbeit God be not to be wone by gifts (for what needs he, seeing he needs
not any) yet notwithstanding he requires some fruit of our religious thoughts,
and some testimony of our loyal mind, and he will be honored of our earthly
substance: for this is part of that worship which is due unto God, and in the
which we prove and profess our selves thankful, for those benefits we have
received. Do you not know, that God will be so worshipped in spirit and
truth, (that is, in mind and faith) that in the mean while, there be no want of
extearne worship in the honor and homage of our bodies? For he is the maker
and maintainer, both of body and soul, and therefore of right he is to be
worshipped in them both. And are not our bodies the temples of the holy Ghost,
which dwells in us? In like manner, seeing he is also the only doner of all
our wealth and worldly goods, of like right he requires our duty, and his
honor in this behalf. Whereupon our Lord and Savior, being moved in a case
of paying tribute to Caesar, made this answer, That we must give unto God,
that which is Gods, and unto Caesar that which is due unto Caesar: showing
thereby, that there is a tribute due to be paid unto God also, as well as to
Caesar, as a testimony of our loyal subjection to his divine Majesty. And is
not the reason also as great for our heavenly King, as an earthly Caesar?
Solomon in his Proverbs, among many other religious precepts, has given us
this: Honor the Lord in thy riches, and in the first fruits of all thy
increase: and thy barnes shall be filled with abundance, and thy wine presses
shall burst themselves with new wine. For no doubt we owe a tribute to the
Lord, as unto the great King, no otherwise then to an earthly Prince: unto whom
we may pay tribute for two respects: both that he may be able for those
charges he undertakes for the commonwealth, and also, that we may testify
unto him our fealty and subjection, as to our lawful King: the first being for
our use, the second for his honor. But now, the first of these has no place
in God, neither does he require any thing of us in that behalf: but the
latter is so much the more due to God, by how much the more God is greater than
man, and the profession of subjection, is necessary in every faithful
christian. Wherefore, after the Lord had appointed Israel a peculiar people to
himself, forthwith, as Prince and chief Lord over his people, he demanded the
tenth of all their increase, with orher rites and royalties of his supreme
power; And whereas it was always an heinous matter among the Esterne Monarks,
to appear before the King without a present: God required the like honor of his
people; namely for that he was both king and Lord over his people. For which
cause, in the law, where all the males are commanded to appear before the
Lord, they are forbidden to come near without an offering. Moreover, is there
not yet extant in Malachy a shamfull rebuke against the Jews, which practiced
deceit in their first fruits, and in their tithes? That sacrilege the Lord
justly punished in them with the dire of a contagious dearth: the which
notwithstanding, he promises (if they will amend that fault) that he would
open the windows of heaven, and power out upon them a gracious plentye of all
things. The words of the Prophet are these: Will a man spoil his Judges?
but ye have spoiled me, and say, in what what things have we spoiled thee? in
tithes and first fruits. Ye are cursed with cursing it self, for ye the whole
nation have spoiled me. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, and let
there be meat in mine house, and prove me now says the Lord of hosts, if I
will not open unto you the windows of heaven, that I may pour upon you a
blessing, that their may be no end of abundance etc. Among the people of God
it was alwais reputed an special exercise of gods religion, to pay tithes truly
of all that they possessed: which they knew to be given, not so much to a
mortal priest, as to the immortal God. Does not the Pharisie in the gospel
glory in his fidelity of true tything, as in a rare virtue?

CHAP. X. An answer to certain objections: the which it is confirmed by that
the ministers of the gospel are worthy no less honor then were the priests of
old among the people of God.
But it is excepted, that the times are altered: that at this day under the
gospel, the Priesthood is translated into Christ, whose shadow it was: that he
has imposed an end to all outward rites: by which means the right of tything,
is also antiquated with the Priest-hoode, and all that outward glory which
made the antique Priests more honorable is therwithall ecclipsed. Neither is
there any man at this day which can arrogate to himself (without impiety)
those ancient honors of the former priesthood. Is it not regestred among the
chief errors of Antichrist, that he vaunteth and aduanceth himself for
Hic-priest? Because that honor at this day, is proper and peculiar to Christ
alone. In place of the ancient Priesthood, which was accompanied with an
external and a religious majesty, our Savior has substituted the
Ecclesiastical ministry, base and abject, in great disgrace, and clean out of
countenance: And has he not given them their christning also, according to
their calling?

For therefore he gave them the servile names of Apostles, and Ministers, and
Deacons, and Bishops and Pastors, setting aside all titles of Honor and
dignity, as are the names of Fathers, and Doctors, and Lords and such like:
that they might know, what they were to conceive of them selves and their
Ministry, and that the people might likewise learn what reckoning to make of
their pains, and their persons.

Here is a fair tale surely, and well soothed. But what of all this? that the
Pastors and Bishops of Christ his Church, are worthy less Honor in a christian
common wealth, then were of yore the Elder Priests? Why then let us conclude
with all a lya or too: that the leuitical priesthood is more honorable the^
Christ's; and that the ministry of the law is more glorious, then that of the
Gospel, then the which if there can be any assertion more absurd, this
conclusion of theirs shall go for no bad confection. For if the Honor due to
the Minister, be to be measured according to the outward show, we may well
conclude, that Aaron was worthy double reverence, and our Savior the high
Priest thrice sacred, none at all. For why? he was inuestured with no mitre, no
labels, nor did he glister with gold and precious stones. But let us first take
that they give us in good worth; (namely that the Priests of old were to be
honored with no small obsequy) and then let us examine the case, what is to be
deducted thereof from the Euangelique Minister.

You are to understand therefore, that in most parts of the old ceremonies,
many times two things did meet in one, which notwithstanding were diverse and
distinct in them selves: of which the one did contain the shadow and promise
of that which was to be exhibited in Christ, the other did pertayn to some
proper and especial duty in the Church: the shadows are ceased (those things
being performed which in Christ were promised:) but the bond of especial duty
remains as yet not cancelled. For example sake: the commandment of keeping
the Sabbath, has a promise of eternal rest, and a shadow of the rest of our
bodies the seventh day; and besides that, it includes a moral duty of
serving of God, and ceasing from our labors. The other precepts also do
co^tain that duty of external worship, which is due unto God, together with
the rites of that time: the rites being relinguished, the worship of God to be
retained. The like we may say of the Priesthood, in the which there were sundry
respects: Whatsoever was typical, was determined in Christ: but of the other
parts which were moral, (namely such as concerned the instruction of the
people, the ministry of the Sacraments, and the regiment of the church) the
manner is changed, but the kind remains: there is not the like order in
circumstance, but the same ordinance in substance of the office. The chief
parts of the Priests function were these: to teach religion, to interpret the
law, to govern the Church, to administer the Sacraments, to stand between God
and the people, to make sacrifice, and to purge sins. All which parts, albeit
our Lord and Savior has only wholly discharged, and some of them also so
peculiarly improued to himself, as that they cannot be imparted with any
mortal thing besides him self: yet notwithstanding he has made many of them
of that nature, as that without any disparagement to his person they might be
left in common to others. In deed no sinner can be made a sufficient mediator
between God and man. (Neither can he which is not pure from the guilt of sin
him self, expiat with blood the sins of man, or auert by death the wrath of
God.) The ancient Priests bare the figure only of those more then divine
functions, but the thing it self was in Christ alone; And therefore whosoever
at this day shall challenge to himself the one of these, commits blasphemy
against Christ.

But as the Lord did nothing in derogation of his heavenly dignity, when he
gave power unto all christians to offer spiritual sacrifice, namely the
sacrifice of praise, and prayer, etc. (For all they which in a true faith
worship God are made Kings and Priests:) even so likewise, without any
profanation of his peculiar Priesthood, has he committed the other parts
thereof (which I touched before) namely the teaching of religion, the
expounding of the law, the ministering of the Sacraments, the governing of the
Church, and such like, I say he has granted and demised these and such like
parts of his divine Priesthood to his Apostles and Chuch ministers: who in this
respect may participat the honor of the old Priesthood without impiety, and may
also be called Priests without gealosie. The which name although in the first
age of the Church, we do not read that it was given to the Ministers of the
Church, least happily the Ministers of the old Synagogue, and the new Church
might be confounded: (For as yet the old Priesthood remained, or the flesh
memory thereof continued) yet afterward, the Fathers did not amiss, when they
renewed the same again in themselves, the Prophet Esaias being their author, and
the spirit of God their warrant, who diuined long before, that God should raise
to him self Priests and Leuits out of the Gentiles. Neither is there any
danger at all in the name at this day, were it not for the sacrilege of the
Bishop of Rome, who has set up Altar against Altar, and Priesthood against
Priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Mass, against the sacrifice of Christ,
inuading by all means those parts of the Priesthood, which are peculiar to
Christ alone: of which matter we are not to speak in many words at this time
Briefly, this we desire may be made known to all, that we detest the impiety
of the Roman Antichrist, and for so much as pertains to this part of the
Priesthood, we acknowledge no other Priest but the Lord Jesus. In the other
parts (which we have noted) we hold, that the Apostles and other Pastors of
the church, have lawfully undertaken the dignity, as of their legacy, so of the
Priesthood also.

Now then, I join more chosely with them for the issue of their whole
argument, and answer, That whatsoever in the leuiticall Priestood did
fore-shadow the office of Christ, is utterly abolished by the bloodshed of
Christ, of the which no part may be usurped by any mortal man: Again, that
the rites, ceremonies, and outward pomp of the Priesthood, as well in the
ornature of the body, as the ordinance of tithes (as they were then
challe^ged) are together deceased by the same means: but yet, that honor which
was due to the^ in regard of the worthiness of their holy ministry, is by no
means impaired, perished much less. The Priesthood of Aaron being abrogated,
the rights of that Priesthood after their several manner are also abrogated,
and with them the ministry of the Church is translated from the Tribe of Leuy,
to the company of Apostles, and their successors. In whom seeing all things
which merit any Honor, are greater then they which were in the Leuiticall
Priests, does it not necessarily follow, that a christian does owe no less
honor to his Pastor, then the Jew did perform to his Priest? I confess the
duty of tithes and oblations (after that manner and order they were offered
under Moses) are ceased under Christ. Not that christian people should be
less bounteous toward their Pastors, then were the Jewish nation toward
their Priests; but rather, that the free people should exceed the servile, and
that a christian should do that of his own accord, which the Jew did by
constraint. For where as christians have received of the Lord, not only the
like graces, but far greater blessings then the Jews: and seeing the
Ministry of them whom the Lord has set over his church, is in nothing
inferior, or less necessary then the Ministry of the law, of force, if not
rather of duty, there remains as great a necessity of due honor for this, as
for that; at the least no less: seeing that what soever was ceremonious in the
old oblations of tithes and offerings, is so diminished, as that what so ever
was moral therein, reteyneth his force still. Had there been no proportion
between both these Ministeries, and the necessary duties of them both, the
Scripture would never have said, that, As they which minister about holy
things, eat of those things whicb are of the Temple, and they which wait at
the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: So the Lord has ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

That our Savior ordained the Ministry of the Gospel with no ornature of
outward beauty, no magnificence of worldly statelines, as he did of old the
Mosaicall ministry: it was not to this end, that Christians should do less
Honor to their Pastors, then did of old the Israelites; but for that the
worthiness thereof is such, that it needs no outward ornaments: The which
notwithstanding if it may have, it is not magnified therein, if it may not have,
it is not diminished therefore. But where the ministry of the Gospel is
received in a triumph (as it were) of public authority, there al worldly
goods ought to supply to the Honor of our Savior, and the health of his
servants: so that they may be denied where they are proffered, and requested
where they they are denied; according as the cause, the time, the place, and
the people do require. As for the servants of Christ, they ought to be ready
for all assayes: for honor and dishonor, good report and evil report, plenty
and poverty, life and death, for that they are to use this world as not using
it, the fashion whereof passes away.

God under the old Testament framed to him self a peculiar common wealth, the
which although afterward it might receive diverse forms of government, yet
he did always so provide for the honor of the Priesthood, that they always
retained that degree of dignity, which the Lord would have them maintain among
the people of God. God under the Gospel, has impropriated no peculiar people,
neither has he planted any certain form of government: He sent unto all
nations preachers of the Gospel, private men, without any warlike
accutrements. Them he appointed, not to alter any form of government, least
they might seem to be sent, rather for the subversion, then for the conversion
of the Gentiles. And yet this hinders not, but that they may take upon them
a greater state, and better beseeming the worthiness of their calling, where
Religion it self is advanced by public authority, and in wisdom is made
the groundwork both of the laws and the common wealth. In the old law, the
Priests Honor was especially set down, what, how great, after what sort, in
what things it should consist. In the new Testament that limitation could not
be laid forth; because it could not (would they never so feign) be like it
self, or the same, among all people, in all places, at all times. But as good
christians do take unto them selves many other imitable examples out of the
old Testament, and the law of nature, and the orders of nations, by the which
they may the better be brought unto a civil conformity, and a conformable
ciuility of life: so likewise ought we to do in this case.

The minority and vnder-reckoning of the ministry, is not so held in the
judgments of those christians that have their consciences acquainted with
divine causes, but in the sight of carnal professors, and the censure of the
Churches enemies. All indifferent hearts and eyes may see and conceive, that how
much greater Christ is then Moses, and the Gospel more excellent then the law,
so much more honorable is the Euangelike ministry, then the Aaronicall
Priesthood; the which we are abundantly taught by the manifest arguments of the
Apostle Paul, and we may very well learn by the manifold Sermons of our
Savior Christ. Of old among the people of God it was, for good cause, held a
great matter, for any man to be like unto Moses, or Elias. For after the
receite of the law, and his familiar conference with God in the mount, the face
of Moses is said to have been so radiant with passing all wondrous bright some
rays, that the eyes of the amassed Israelites by no means might endure the Sun
bright luster of his resplendent countenance. After him was Elias no less
honored and renowned, as well for his wonderful acts, achieved in the zeal
of God his law, as also for his miraculous end, translated alive into the
Paradise of Heaven. Notwithstanding all this, the Apostle in his latter to the
Corinthians does learnedly maintain, that the Ministry of Moses was of the
letter, and of death, but the Ministry of the Gospel, of the spirit and of
life, and so much the more glorious. As for the rest, our Savior himself
prefers John Baptist alone before all the Prophets, whom he affirms to be
more then a Prophet, and yet he resolves, that the least Minister of the
Church is greater then he. And therefore if Christ may be Judge, the least
Minister of the lowest degree in the Church, is more honorable and to be
honored more in his office, then are any, or all the Priests of the old
Testament.

As for the low titles the Lord gave to his Ministers, for bidding the glorious
insignes of honor, as of Lord, Father, and Doctor: I answer, that it was not
done, that the Ministers should be of less honor among the people, then were
of old the Priests and Leuits, or that they should be debased beneath all
estates, and be of no esteem in a christian common wealth, but rather that they
might retain a lowly and an humble conceit in so lofty and so honorable an
estate. For unless the Lord in wisdom should temper and keep under the
ouer-weaning waiwardnes of man's nature, even in his dearest servants, Such is
the excellency of the Ecclesiastical calling, that the conceit thereof might
easily ouercharge light minds with lofty thoughts, and suddenly ouerturne rash
heads into ruined estates. But as humility is taught them in their inglorious
titles; so is their excellency taught us by their magnificall statues. For are
not these they which are called, the Salt of the earth, the Light of the world,
Stars in the firmament, Angels, and Legates, Stewards and dispensers of the
mysteries of God, Ministers of the spirit of life? what and how great is that
honor and power they have received of the Lord, that they can bind and lose in
earth, what things are bound and losed in Heaven; that they can remit and
retain sins? that they can open and shut the highest Heaven? Can there be any
thing given to men more Honorable in this mortality?

As for the use of those names, Doctor, Lord and Father, we will speak thereof
hereafter. Now, that I may determine this disputation, of those things we have
here set down, I conclude, That christian people are no less devoted to their
Pastors in all duty, then were of old the Israelites to their Priests and
Leuits. And, Where christian religion is publicly authorized, that there the
same degree of honor is to be given to the Ministers in the commonwealth, which
was used to the Priests and Prophets among the people of God. But if so be it
so fall out, that among ungodly people and ungracious Magistrates, there be no
reverend regard had of this honor due to the Minister, that there the
professors be not offended therewith, seeing the worthiness of there Ministry is
such, as that no injury of man can any ways diminish it. For it becomes them
to be at this point with themselves, that if so be the honor due to their
ministry be given them, they may rejoice in the religious godliness of the
faithful toward God: but if it be denied them, they may not grieve thereat,
as if them selves had lost any thing. Neither are they greatly to contend with
the Magistrate for their right, especially at any intempestiue season: but they
are to commit their causes unto God, and with Paul to expect a more convenient
time to expostulate. In the mean while let them pray unto God, that he would
vouchsafe the^ better minds that would be accounted for good christians. The
chief care of a faithful Pastor must be this, to gain many souls unto
Christ, not much riches, or many honors: First let them seek the kingdom of
God, and al these things shall be cast upon them. Wherefore, seeing there are
many parts of that honor which is due to the Minister, I will chiefly
prosecute those, which the civil society of life does require in a christian
common wealth, and that above all others, which consists in the maintenance
of Ministers; a thing never so much in controversy as at this day. Of the
which we will first hear what was the opinion of those fathers which lived in
time next after the Apostles.

CHAP. XI. The judgment of the Fathers concerning the oblations of the
faithful.
I Will first begin with Origin, who lived under Seuerus, about two hundred
years after our Savior: He, upon the eighteenth Chapter of Numbers, in his
eleventh Homily writes thus. It is behooueful, and it is also beneficial,
that first fruits should be offered unto the Priests of the Gospel: For so
has the Lord also ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel, and they which serve at the altar should also be partakers of the
altar. And as this is due and decent so of the contrary part; I account it both
unmeet and indecent, and ungodly also, that he which worshippeth God, and
enters into the Church of God, and knows that the Priests and Ministers do
wait at the altar, and attend either upon the word of God, or the Ministry
of the church, should not offer unto the Priests the first things of those
fruits of the earth, which God has given by bringing forth his Son, and
sending forth his rain: Neither can I think such a mind to be mindful of
God, neither that he thinks or believes, that God has given the fruits he
has received: which he so hordeth together, as if they were none of Gods.
For if he believed they were given him of God, he would also acknowledge, that
in rewarding the Priests, he thereby honored God for his gifts. And moreover,
that these things the better to be observed, may be taught by the word of God,
let us hear what the Lord says in the Gospel. Woe be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, ye hypocrites, which tithe Mint, that is, pay tithe of Mint, and
Cummin, and Ane-seeds, and let pass the greater things of the Law: Hypocrites
these things ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone,
etc. The same author proceeds in the same book. How then does our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if they
dare not taste of the fruits of the earth, before they have offered the first
fruits unto the Priests, and the tithes are set forth for the Leuits: and I,
doing none of these things, do so abuse the fruits of the earth, as that the
Priest knows not of them, the Leuite is ignorant of them, the altar of God
does not taste of them.

Ireneus the Scholar of Polycarpus in his fourth book, the four and thirty
chapter, writes of the sacrifices and oblations of Christians, (the which
thing he also in many other places remembers) whereby the custom and opinion
of the church at that time concerning that matter, may the beter appear. The
words of the holy Father are these: Wherefore, we ought to offer to God the
first fruits of his creaturts, as Moses says, Thou shall not appear empty in
the sight of the Lord thy God: that in what things a man has showed himself
thankful, in those things he which is deputed over him, might thank fully
receive that honor of him. And that kind of oblation is a(...)ain allowed: For
there were oblations there, and there are oblations here also: There were
sacrifices among the old people, there are sacrifices in the Church also: but
the manner of them is only altered; seeing that now these are offered not of
bond slaves, but of freemen. For there is one and the same Lord, but there is
a several form of servile oblations, and a several form of them which are
free, that even by these oblations also there might appear some token of our
liberty. For there is nothing idle or endless with him, without some sign, or
sense.

And for this cause indeed, they did consecrate their tenthes: but they which
have obtained their liberty, do dedicate to the Lords use, al things that
they have, cheerfully and freely giving those things which are of less
account, having indeed a greater hope, that widow and poor woman casting in
here all her substance into the Lord his treasury, etc. Afterward in the
same chapter, he adds this. Wherefore, seeing the church offers with
singlenes; for just cause is the gift thereof accepted as a pure sacrifice
before God: Even as Paul also writes unto the Philippians: I was even filled,
after that I had received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odor
which smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant unto GOD. For we
ought to offer oblations unto God, and in all things to be found thankful
unto God our maker, offering the first-lings of those his creatures, in a pure
mind and faith without hypocrisy, in a ferme hope and fervent love. And this
oblation, the church only does present pure unto the Creator, offering unto
him of his own creatures with thanksgiving, etc. And again in the same
chapter, But we offer unto him, not as he needed our offerings, but to show
our selves thankful unto him for his bounty, and to sanctify his creatures:
For as God has no need of those th ngs which come from us, so we have need to
offer some thing unto God.

Irenaeus calls Alms and oblations good actions, as also Cyprian calls
them good works: Paul being their Author, who calls them good deeds and
distributions, and good works, 1. Tim. 6.18. Tit. 3.14. Heb. 13.16.
and Sacrifices, with the which God is well pleased.

Many other things of the like import, might be cited out of the same
Author: But let us attend unto that of Cyprian in the like sense, the words
somewhat altered, who in his four and thirty Epistle writes thus, of the
Readers whom he had ordained. Now you shall understand, that we have
appointed for them the honor of an Elder, that they should be honored with
the same fees that the Elders are, and that they should divide the allowaunce
for every month in equal portions. The fees which were divided every month
unto the Priests, he calls the honor of the Presbytery. But out of his
sixty Epistle, we may also make some estimate, of what wealth the Church of
Carthage was: namely, by a certain contribution made by the Clergy and
layitie of that place. For there were collected no less then an hundred
sestercees, which they sent to the Bishops of Mauritania to redeem captives:
being also ready to send more, if need were. The words of Cyprian are these.

We have sent unto you an hundred sestercees, That is 2500. ducates at the
least, or unless that may seem to great a sum for that time 2500000
which were gathered here in the Church, over the which I am president by the
favor of God: the contribution beeng made by the Clergy, and people that are
amongst us: the which you shall dispose there, according unto your best
endeavors. And in his sixty six Epistle, he writes thus: The tribe of Levy
which attended upon the Temple and Altar for divine service, might receive no
portion of that devotion, but while the rest did husband the earth, they should
honor the Lord only, and therefore for their living and allowance, they were to
receive tenthes of the eleven Tribes, of those fruits which did increase.

The which reason and order is now observed amongst the Clergy at this day,
that they which in the Church of the Lord, are promoted unto any
Ecclesiastical dignity, should by no means be called away from their divine
function, neither should be entangled with troubles and worldly affairs, but
according unto the honor of the maintained brethren, as they which receive
tenthes of fruits, should not depart from the Altar and the sacrifices, but
day and night should attend upon heavenly and spiritual business, etc. About
the same time, there were maintained at Rome under Cornelius the Bishop, six
and forty Priests, seven Deacons, Eusebius lib 6.25.
so many Subdeacons, as also two and forty Servant, Exorcists, Readers and
Doore-keepers, all together two and fifty.

The number of the whole Clergy was an hundred fifty and five men, all the
which no doubt, for the most part had their proper families: and yet besides al
these, the widows and other which were afflicted, either with poverty or
infirmity, were a thousand and five hundred: all the which, as Cornelius
himself does witness in an Epistle to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, the grace and
bounty of the Lord did abundantly relieve: and least any man should think
that this was done penuriously or sparingly, he adds, that so great a number
of Ministers, so great a multitude of poor, by the providence of God were made
rich, and abounding in all plenteousnes.

The history of Laurence, deacon of Rome, is sufficiently known: whom the
tyrants of that time held in suspicion, that he had the custody of the church
treasure. And their suspicion was true in part, for the church had treasure;
and in part it was false, for that it was not the manner of the church to lay
up, but to lay out the treasure they had. By the which means, Phillips
oblations also and donations to the church were repealed all to late: for the
ministry of the Deacons by the hands of the poor, had there laid them up,
where neither rust nor moath, nor any caterpiller of the Church, could break
through and steal. Neither was this the least praise of the churches of that
age, that as they were privately poor, so were they commonly rich, after the
example of the church at Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII. That the church had no small revenues, and certain places in the
which they did celebrate their assemblies, before the time of Constantine.
THat professed Christians had farms and possessions, the increase whereof they
distributed to the clergy, and poverty of the Church, the edicts of
Constantine the great do sufficiently testify. True it is, that under
Dioclesian, the christians were spoiled of al they possessed, either privately,
or in common: but the godly and cristia^ Emperor gives in charge to the
presidentes of the province, that those places in the which Christians did
celebrate their assemblies, and all other things whatsoever they possessed, or
any ways pertained to the right of their society, should again be restored
unto them. Enead. 7. 8.
Sabellicus makes mention of one Lucina, a noble and rich matrone, that was
exiled by Maxentius, for that she had named the Church of Rome to be her heir.

Indeed it is to be acknowledged, that from the time of Constantine, the state
of the Church was no ways impaired, (neither do I speak of the false and
fained donations of Constantine) but this is a thing most certain, that he was
a bountiful Prince toward the Church, and worthily renowned for his bounty.
Sozomenus reports of Constantine his honorable liberality toward the Church
of Christ; Lib. 1.8.
that of those grounds which in every City were tributarie, he reserved a
certain pension, which accustomably was wont to be paid into the Exchequer,
and distributed the same unto the Churches and the Clergy; the which his
great and gracious larges, he afterward ratified by law to stand good for
ever. De vita Constant. li. 4. 28
Eusebius in the life of Costantine witnesses the same.

That therefore all men may understand what the wealth of the Church was in
those times, I will produce a few presidentes of that age, and begin with that
which Augustine has left in record concerning his own Church at Hippon. (For
he was himself also of an honorable house, and of great wealth.) I (says
he) according to the common conceit of many, Epist. 225.
which compare themselves with themselves, seem not to have come from wealth,
but to have come to wealth; for my fathers inheritance can hardly be reckoned
the twentieth part, in comparison of the churches revenues, the which now I am
accounted to possess as chief Lord. Whence that Church had that great wealth,
it is to be seen in the same Epistle.

Prosper in his book De vitae contemplatiua, reports of Hilarie Bishop of
Arelat, to his everlasting praise, that he had, did not only retain those
things which the church then but that he did also enlarge the same, by the
manifold heritages of the faithful which he received. Among Basil his epistles
there is one whole one, which testifies, that there were many at that time
which used to leave by testament a great part of their inheritance unto the
Church, and some sometimes which did make free gift of all. But what need I to
stand upon the manifold reports of such things? The laws of the Emperors,
concerning this whole matter, are sufficiently known. Nay this one thing I
would admonish the Reader, least at any time he be deceived, when as many
times he may read in the Fathers, that the goods of the Church, are not only
the goods of the Bishops, and the goods of the Priests, but the goods of
the poor also: I say, there he shall but note, how the ancient custom of
the Church has been disordered, through avarice and hypocrisy. When all the
Church goods of every Diocese were in common unto all the Churchmen of the
same territory, to be divided to every Churchman according to the
discretion of the Bishop; then was that saying in force: The goods of the
Church are the goods of the poor: Not that the whole substance of the Church
was to be consumed upon the poor, but because the fourth part thereof was
their due by right. For the first part was for the Bishop himself: the second,
for the other Churchmen: the third, for the Church works: the fourth, for
releeuing the poor, and redeeming the captive.

But when as by reason of the manifold inconveniences, which did daily arise
by means of this community, and the great multitude of Churches which now
began to be every where erected and set up throughout the country, and
endowed with peculiar commodities, they began to depart from this community,
by a secret consent (as it were) of the whole world, and so, that certain
portions were designed for the Bishops allowance; others also, for the other
Priests and Ecclesiastical persons which were in ordinary residence in every
Cathedral Church; and last of all other, Priests also were ordained by the
Bishops every where through the cuntrie* over parish Churches with standing
titles, who were by that means called to a particular part of the common
charge with the Bishop (least that which was to be cared for by all, should
be neglected of every one) (as it commonly comes to pass) there is no
doubt (had none of the Church goods been taken from the Clergy) but by this
means the poor and needy should have been much better provided for by the
several Cleargie-men of every particular territory, then when the fourth part
of the remains of the Church goods were employed to their use in common; and
that also with more ease, and much less murmr. But the trumperie, not the
poverty of the Church, Munkes and Nuns, and such others, which were called
religious persons, purloyning that fourth part under the title of Euangelike
poverty, which they professed, have utterly robbed both the Clergy and the
poverty, and have brought in a strange and wonderful disorder into the
ancient ordering of Church goods; so that, that part which of old was due
unto the poor, is now in the winding up deuolued to the rich: that I may omit
the manifold abuses of Impropriations, and Commendams, and such other shifting
sacrilegious titles.

Ambrose in his thirty and one Epistle, the fifth book: The possessions (says
he) of the Clergy, are the provisions of the needy: and therefore let the
Churches keep reckoning of this, how many captives they have redeemed, how
many poor they have refreshed, how many exiles they have harbored. For the
Church has gold, not to purse, but to disburse, and to relieve the
necessities of the needy. What profit is it to keep that which profits
not? Augustine also in his treatise upon John, the one and twentieth chapter,
disputes of that right which the Apostles and Ministers have by the word of
GOD, to receive carnal things of them, unto whom they minister spiritual
things: They give gold (says he) and they receive grass. And in his tenth
Tome, there is extant no less then a whole Homily, concerning the paying of
tithes as of duty.

Hierome also in his third chapter upon Malachie, amongst other things which
concern this opinion, has these words: That which we say of tithes and first
fruits, which of old were given of the people to the Priests and Levites,
understand ye also to concern the people of the Church, who are commanded
not only to pay tithes and first fruits, but also to sell all that they have,
and give to the poor, and to follow the Lord. The which so great a matter if
we will not perform, yet at the least lets us imitate the beginnings of the
Jews, that we may give part of all unto the poor, and afford the Priests
and Levites their due honor. For which cause the Apostle says; Honor the
widows, which are true widows: And, That the Elder is to be honored with
double honor, especially he which labors in word and doctrine: the which
duty who so now will not perform, he is proved thereby to defraude and
supplant God himself, and he is cursed therefore of God in the penury of all
things: so that he which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he which
sows liberally, shall reap liberally, etc. Many other things of like sort
may we read in that place to this sense. But if I should repute unto you
whatsoever the Fathers have written of this argument; I should but repeat the
same things, and be tedious to the Reader in a matter of no controversy.

Chap. XIII. A distinction of Church goods.
THe goods of the Church are not all of one fort: for there are some which
consist in the oblations of the people; some, in proper possessions; some, in
rents and revenues; some, in lawful fees and ancient roialties. All the which
are commonly distinguished into two several kinds: whereof some are called
Spiritual, and some accounted Temporal. But seeing these terms do neither
so fitly, nor yet so fully express the nature of these things, more proper
words were to be devised by more perfect Ciuilians. For unto that which is
Temporal, there is nothing in nature opposite, but that which is Eternal: and
to that which is Spiritual, nothing is contrary, but that which is Carnal or
corporal. They therefore speak more aptly of these things, who for the word
Temporal, use the words Civil and humane: and for Spiritual, the words Sacred
holy, and divine. Now albeit, that ought generally to be accounted holy and
sacred, whatsoever is consecrated to God, and his Ministry: yet
notwithstanding, they call oblations (because they more nearely concern God and
his service) more properly sacred and divine things; not so much for
distinction sake, as for that the condition and propriety thereof is such. But
humane and civil goods, they account the fields and possessions of the Church;
for that in nature and condition they are not unlike unto those, which other
Citizens possess, and are therefore given unto the Clergy, that not only in
the Church, but also in the commonwealth, they may be of good estate, and well
able to maintain the credit of the place and person they sustain: the which
by no good means they can be able to uphold, if in worldly wealth they be so
curtold, and kept so threadbare, as that they cannot be in case to be as
bountiful as other men. Great matters are looked for at the hands of the
Clergy; as hospitality, releeuing the poor, and such other things, which
Christ himself not only taught, but in person performed in some good sort.
And is it not a shame for a Bishop to exhort others unto charity toward the
poor and needy, and himself neither to put the same in practice, nor yet to
be able?

But least any man should think, that this distinction came out of the Popes
Mint, and therefore to be rejected; he shall understand by those things we have
now cited, that it is the Fathers, the autentike Fathers. Ambrose in his
Epistle de tradendis basilicis, makes mention of the collations of the people,
and the fields which the Church possessed. Wherefore the gifts and oblations of
the faithful, which they offer of their own accord, are to be accounted holy
goods, go^^s sacred and divine: because in that case the chief respect is not
of man, but of God. Under this kind we comprise the payment of tenthes and
tithes also: albeit there be great difference between those tithes, which
either now the people pay of their own voluntary, not constrained, or have of
old religiously undertaken by a law imposed upon themselves and their
posterity, to pay unto the Ministers; and those tithes which Princes gave unto
them, and laid out for them by their Injunctions. For we must understand thus
much also, that tenthes have been paid of old, not only to the Priests,
but unto the chief Magistrate also. Have we not heard of certain tributes
wont to be paid to the common treasury, which afterward were given by the
Emperor Constantine unto the Churches? Namely, for that albeit the
superstition of the Gentiles were in many places put down by public
authority; yet the Nobles and richer sort, with the greater part of the
people, having not forthwith received the faith of Christ, the bare oblations
of the faithful, (although bountiful) were not sufficing to relieve the poor,
and to maintain the state of their Pastors. So that unless I quite lose mine
aim, those tributes were either tenthes or tithes.

For there is nothing better known, then that the Romans imposed the paiments
of tenthes, upon those provinces they conquered: and what proportion could they
more fitly give unto professed Churches, then the tenthes of those they
conquered? This example did Charles the great follow, who having overcome the
Saxons, and having put to flight their King Windekind, he commanded tenthes
to be paid unto him: part whereof the Bishops and other Pastors of the Church
had, and part the Kings officers also received.

As for the conjecture of Crantz in his Metropolis, who thinks that tenthes
were given unto Nobles in fee, by the Bishops, I cannot for my part allow
thereof: seeing it so evidently appears out of the approved Annalies, that
those tenthes were received of the Kings Officers before there were any
Bishops, and whereas yet there were none. But whereas tithes seemed not to
suffice the state of the Clergy, the godly Prince, of a religious and wise
purpose, added glebes and lands unto the use of the Church. For indeed that
wild Nation, tamed only by force and arms, received the Christian Religion
for fear, but in affection were so estraunged from it, that they would sooner
suffer the Bishops, and those preachers which the Emperor sent unto them,
rather to sterue among then, then to thrive by them.

But who so desires to read more of this matter, may read Crantz his
Metropolis, and the Saxon Chronicles. In the mean while, we have thus
learned, that those tenthes and tithes, which no religion of the Christian
people, but the liberality of the religious Magistrate has given unto the
Church, were properly to be accounted among the Churches, Civil goods. But
when as at this day they are so intermingled, that the manner of their first
donations is not known, for good cause they are now called by the more certain
and the more singular part of them, and are therefore accounted among those
Church goods, which are not civil, but sacred and divine.

As for those goods of the Church which we distinguish by the name of civil
goods and humane, they may be distinguished into the possession of such fearms
and rents, which the Church had even under heathen Emperors before Constantine;
and into the possession of such fees and manors, which under the Christian
Magistrate have annexed unto them some civil jurisdiction. The which, because
some contend that no Ecclesiastical person ought to enjoy, we are in like
manner to examine that matter, the rather, for that there are some which
think, they ought rather to live of other men's Alms.

Chap. XIII That the Pastors of churches are not maintained of alms, but of
the due reward of their labors.
SOme have been of opinion (you will very hardly believe it) (neither do I
their opinion) that our blessed Lord and his Apostles did not only live very
bare, but very beggars: and therefore that the Ministers of the Church ought
to live of mere alms, according unto their godly example. But the law of God
defieth this error, and forbids the whole trade of begging among his
people. Neither do we read, that the Lord at any time repealed this law; and
sure we are, that there have been always extant among us certain laws of
the Emperors also against upright beggars.

Alms are given for pity sake to help and cheer the needy: but whatsoever
is given as a testimony of any virtue, is either a stipend for certain pains
taken, or a present for a certain reverence conceived (albeit the party be
poor unto whom it is performed.) When the Lord therefore sent forth his
Disciples to preach, he gave them a commission to take up their mainteinance
of them to whom they preached: and he therefore compared them to laborers,
and their stipend to a reward, not to an alms; which being due, is to be
charged, and discharged as of right. Whereby the nature of those things which
the godly did contribute unto the Lord his use, and his Apostles, is easily
understood to be of the condition, not of alms, but of fees. Even as the
offerings, and certain parts of the sacrifices were allotted to the Priests,
not as free alms, but as the fruits of their labors: so the godly Pastors
do receive of the faithful people, not a doale, but a duty; the one being
of right, the other of mere pity. If any man urge, that the sense of this
word Alms, does extend it self more largely amongst learned Divines, and
that it is taken for all kind of benevolence which is showed for Gods cause
unto the benefit of our neighbor: How truly they so affirm, I leave that to
them which are but meanly seen in the Greek tongue.

In the mean while, I will not stick with them for so much as this comes
to, that in such a sense, those things which are given to the Church for the
benefit of the Ministers, may be called Alms also: this always reserved,
that they still differ white and black from those alms, with the which the
poor are relieved. For what have they deserved? You remember where I said,
that there is no other law imposed upon the Minister by the Lord, then unto the
rest of the faithful (excepting only the condition of their function.)
Neither does any man doubt, that the faithful are forbidden by any religion,
to become the free tenaunts of their Princes.

But as for the laws and conditions which perticularlie concern the estate of
Ministers, there is not any one which inhibiteth them to use the benefit of
Princes, and to be devoted to them, as far as other Citizens. Over and besides
all this, the Euangelique precepts are in no case an excuse unto the right of
nations, or the equity of Moses law: but they all (and all the world shall
witness the same) have appointed for the Priests and sacred Ministers, both
fields and farms and other civil estates. And can they by any law, or equity
be sequestered from the general privileges of all citizens, which are to live
now among citizens, and to sustain under the same Magistrate the same burdens
of the commonwelth with other Citizens?

And has not God himself commanded by his law, that there should be given
unto the Priests and Levites, not only tithes and offerings, but Cities also,
with their towns and teritories? Or had they any less authority over these
their towns and Cities, then had the other Tribes over their Cities and
fields which fell unto them by lot? The Gospel being received by public
authority, the Lord has no where forbidden the Ministers of the Gospel to
possess fields and farms after the same manner, neither has he inhibited
that any such realties should be given them to possess. But is it possible
there should be any so base, and bad minded toward religion, that he could
once wish the Ministers thereof to be of worse estate in a christian society,
then were of old the Priests and Levites in the Commonwealth of Israel? It
is well known, that Ministers having to converse in a civil society, had
need also of those helps which are requisite in a civil society, and may
reconcile them into favor, and maintain them in authority with the common
people, as wisdom and wealth especially: Seeing that whosoever he be that
neglects either of these, can by no means live, and live well in a civil
society.

The wise man in his Ecclesiastes the seventh chapter, has very well noted
the practice of this: For wisdom is good (says he) with an inheritance, and
the excellency of them which see the Sun, because that man shall rest in the
shadow of wisdom, and the shadow of silver: And indeed, upon these two
pillars does rest the chief strength and stay of a civil life. There is one
kind of life which is public, and in the common prospect of men, and has
necessarily to do with men of all sorts: and there is an other kind of
private and privy life, under an heathen Magistrate, full of danger; so that,
there he is to deal as well with Magistrates as with private men: here, he
may well deal with none at all. I say in this case there is no comparison to
be made of these two kinds between themselves, that without distinction we
should make the like condition of the Ministers life in all places, and subject
unto the like conditions.

Chap. XV. Of those Lands which are held in fee, and have annexed with them
any civil authority and jurisdiction.
AND that which makes all the doubt for those Lands which are held in fee by
the Church, is this, that many times they have annexed with them some Civil
jurisdiction and Knights service. The which thing is forbidden the Pastors of
the Church by the laws of the Church; unto whom also the power of the sword
seems to be forbidden by the Lord himself.

The ancient Canons, which are accounted the Apostles, allow not a Bishop to
be busied in the service of war, or any civil function. The sixth Canon
stands thus. A Bishop Priest, or Deacon, shall not take upon him any
worldly cares, neither shall he defile himself with such. Cyprian also in an
Epistle unto the Priests of Furnam, writes against one Victor, for that he
made one Geminus Faustinus ouer-seer of his last will, and forbids them that
there should be any oblation made amongst them for his death: His words are
these. The Bishops our predecessors, religiously considering, and
prouidentlie fore-casting of things, enacted, that no brother departing this
life, should appoint any Clearke to be his guardian or supra-visor: and if
any so did, there should be no offering for him, neither should any
Sacrifice be celebrated for his departure: Neither indeed does he deserve to
be once named in the prayer of the Priests, at the Altar of God, who sought
by all means possible to withdraw the Priests and Ministers from the Altar of
God.

These decrees of the reverend Fathers, are confirmed by that example of the
Apostles, who sequestered themselves from the ouer-sight of the poor, which
notwithstanding is a godly and a religious action, and resigned that charge
unto other godly men, least themselves should be with-drawen from the
ministry of the word, which thing chiefly was imposed upon them by the
Lord. Moreover, for so much as pertains unto Knights service, or any other
civil function, the foure-score and second of the Canons, which are called the
Apostles; decrees thus: The Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, that gives himself
unto war-fare, and will occupy himself, both in the Roman regiment, and
also in the Ecclesiastical government: let him be diuested. Give unto Caesar,
those things which are Caesar's, and unto God those things which are Gods.

The council of Chalcidon in the seventh Canon the fifteenth action, has laid
a curse also upon those that dare presume to do these things. The words of
the Canon are these.

We do decree, that those which are once ordained in the Clergy, (as also
all Monks) shall neither come unto any military service, or to any secular
promotion. But they which dare do these things, and do not with repentance
return to that, of the which they made their first choice for Gods cause; they
are accursed. To these Canons we may add the conditions of the fees
themselves, the which are such, as by them all manner free-tenure is taken away
from the Clergy, and company of Moonks: For a fee is defined by the Lawyers,
to be a Military service. but seeing the laws of the Church do forbid
Churchmen and Moonkes, to exercise any Military service, they cannot by any
right, either receive, or retain the benefit of the service.

Chap. XVI. That Bishops and other Pastors of the Church, are not forbidden to
be Lords of fees, and sometimes to undertake secular and civil charges.
TO the former objections I first answer, according to that I have already
proved* as well by the laws of the first christians, as by the testimony of
the ancient fathers, that the Church long before Constantine his time had both
fields and farms, the commons and commodities pertaining to the same. But is
there now any other reason, why Ecclesiastical persons may not also hold the
same in fee (if they be given in fee) as well as did of old these Priests and
Leuits, those Towns and Cittyes which they received of their brethren? As for
those Canons before cited, I answer and affirm, that we allow, nor Elder nor
Bishop to be detained, or withdrawn with secular cares from their spiritual
function any further, then may be beneficial to the Church and common wealth,
or may satisfy the necessity of our christian neighbor. That the charge of
domestique secular affairs is here forbidden by any Cano^, that a man should
neglect his own family, unto whom he is bound by the right of alyaunce or
affinity; nor godly charity, nor christian faith, will suffer us so to think:
But that the charge of a Lordship or Mayrolty or such like, that a Bishop
should be Consul in the field, Mayor of a Town, Clarke of the market,
Chamberlain to the King, or Factor for the state, and such like, we hold them
to be forbidden by that sixth Canon, and we utterly renounce the same.

To the fourscore and second Canon, I answer and affirm, that service of war
is forbidden by the same, not that which is necessary, but that which is
voluntary. Upon which ground I hold this for a sure principle, that that
Priesthood or Bishop does both against the honor and the honesty of the sacred
ministry, whosoever without command of supreme authority, or constraint of
extreme necessity, shall take upon him any service of war, either as leader or
as soldier. But when such time and places betide, as shall exact this at our
hands, we are unwillingly to yield to unwelcome necessity.

Theodoret in his second Book the third chapter, writes of one James Bishop
of the City of Nisib, (which of some is called Antioche Migdon) that he was
upon occasion both Bishop and Captain of the same his City, the which by the
help of God he manfully defended against Sapor King of Persia, and delivered
the same as well with his prowes, as his prayers. The same Theodoret, in his
fourth book the twelfth Chapter, records as much and much more, of the
warlike power and prowes of Eusebius Bishop of Samosis, who mannaging himself
with all manner warlike abilements, ranged along throughout Syria, Phenicia,
and Palestine, where he erected Priests and Deacons, and performed such other
Eccesiasticall pensions. Neither did I ever read of any that found himself
offended with this action, or thought his action offended against that Canon. I
do not so think (nor will I say so much) of Theophilus and Cyrillus Bishops
of Alexandria, who took upon them a secular principality over that City, the
Emperor not noting it, but not commanding it.

As for the Canon which Cyprian cites, I must needs confess that I cannot
attain unto the reason thereof, only this I am assured of, that it was but a
particular and a provincial decree, serving only for that time and that
place. For no doubt, to take charge of Widows and Orphans, is an especial
work of piety, and commanded of God in every place of his Law: and so, that
they incur no small blame, that defer to take upon them not the patrimony,
but the patrociny of such.

For good cause therefore was the old custom continued in the Chuch, that
Bishops should be the patrons of Widows, and the Fathers of Orphans, and that
they especially before all others, were to take charge of them without any
shame to their calling, without any breach of the Canons. You shall hear how
the Council of Sardis does allow and recommend the same in plain words. For
this is the speech which Osiris, then Bishop there, made. Much importunity and
too much confluence, with unlawful suits, has brought the matter to this
pass, that we have not so much either favor, or credit committed unto us;
whiles there are some, which cease not to repayr to the Court of the Bishop,
(and especially they of Africa) who (as we know) reject and contemn the
wholesome directions of our most holy brother and fellow Bishop Gratus. Who do
not only present diverse and sundry matters not material to the Church, (as
many times it comes to pass) that widows, orphans, and the poor might be
succored, but they do further crave for certain secular dignities, and
civil offices. This bad order therefore stirs up not only much muttering,
but many offenses also. Notwithstanding, this is a commendable thing, that
Bishops should be a means for those which are oppressed with wrongful
violence, (as if so be a widow be molested or an orphan defrauded) and yet so,
that these parties have some just cause of complaint, and some honest petition
to praesent. Wherefore, if it so please you (my beloved brethren) let this be a
decree, that Bishops come not to the Court, except happily they, whom the
Religious Emperor shall by his letters inuit. But because often times it
comes to pass, that they which suffer wrong, fly to the Church for succor,
and they also which do wrong, and are adjudged therefore to some i will, or
exile, or in deed what sentence of judgment soever they receive, they ought
here to be relieved, and without al doubt their pardon to be craved: Therefore
if it so please you, as I have said, so let it be decreed. They all gave a
placet, and let it be enacted. This Canon contains a certain exposition of
the sixth Canon of the Apostles, and it teaches us what secular cares a Bishop,
or a Priest may undertake, and what not. The Bishops in this point were
imitators of their Fathers the Prophets, which always gave their helping hand
to widows, orphans, and other afflicted people. Do we not read how fatherly
and friendly the Prophet Elizeus greeteth the Sunamite after his entertainment?
2. Reg. 4.
What would thou that I should do for thee? is there any thing to he
spoken for you to the King, or to the Captain of the host? Nor need this seem
to any man any such a strange duty of religion, that Bishops (or other
Ministers) should repair to Princes, to entreat for the distressed.

Ambrose undertaking an honorable Embassee for Valentinian the Emperor (being
yet a child) to Maximus the tyrant, spoke thus in his case (as himself
reports to Valentinian in an Epistle) Whom (says he) ought Bishops rather
to defend, then orphans? For it is written, Judge the cause of the
fatherless, and defend the widow, and deliver him that suffers wrong: and in
an other place: Ye Judges of widows, and fathers of fatherless. As for that
which is urged from the example of the Apostles, there is no child so simple so
to conceive thereof, as if when the Apostles had once chosen Deacons, the care
of the poor and the widow did no more pertayne to them. I noted before, how
the necessity of the poor was commended to Paul and Barnabas after that and we
read how Paul also carried the benevolence of the Corinthians and other
Churches, to Jerusalem. Wherefore, to conclude, if it be lawful (as it is)
for bishops and Pastors, and that according to the rules of charity, to
imploye their labor in outward affairs, and to detract some what from that
time, which otherwise were to be spent in reading of holy writ, and other
sacred travels, and that only for our private necessities, or our neighbors:
what labor shall we think too much, or what pains not to be performed in the
commendable affairs of the King or common wealth, for a public necessity,
and a greater commodity?

Chap. XVII. What a fee is, and what are the conditions thereof.
NOw it remains that I make answer for those Church goods which are held in
Fee, of which term before the irruption of the more barbarous nations into
into the Romain Empire, there was no where any mention: that phrase taking his
original from the Goths, Vandals, and Longobards, What may be the etimology
thereof, and what is signified thereby, the learned at large discourse, and
discuss: whose judgments and opinions it were now too long to repeat. But
for our purpose this is enough, and this is a clear case, that a Fee with the
Lombards, does signify a privilege or an especial benefit with the Latins:
so that a Fendotarye with them is the same that a free Tenant is with us, who
holds by fealty and homage only.

But a Fee is defined among the Lawyers diverse ways: First, that it is a
military service imposed and undertaken upon this condition, that the tenant
for the benefit received perform his service in war, and therein show his
fealty and fidelity to his patron and his benefactor. (By which we may
understand, what was the original of tenures in Fee.) Notwihstanding, for as
much as there are some fees which are not military, neither stand upon knights
service, this may serve for a more general definition, that, a Fee is a
benefit, or a privilege given unto some man upon this condition, that he
which receives the benefit, shall in lieu thereof perform some duty or
service, as a testimony of his thankefulnes. But here there are three things of
necessity to be observed: the Persons, the Things, and the Right. The Persons
are the Lord, and the Vasall (that I may so speak with the Feudist) between
whom the service is contracted: The which for the most part in deed is
military or knights service; I say, for the most part, because of the
Ecclesiastike or church service. But the Thing is the matter and substance of
the benefit received, as fields, fermes, jurisdictions, immunities, courts, or
whatsoever else is held in Fee. But last of all, the Right accrueth from these
both: For the Fee in respect of the Lord, is a benefit given to the Vasall,
upon that condition that he should recognize the author thereof in some kind of
service; but in respect of the Vasall, the Fee is the right of using and
manuring another man's thing, upon that condition, that some service of duty,
and testimony of his fealty be due for the said thing. But now is there any of
these three, more cross of contrary to the calling and condition of Ministers,
then of other Christians? But that it may the more plainly appear what is the
nature of the whole matter, and what therein is repugnant to the state of a
Minister, we will more diligently examine the particulars of these pretended
Fees.

Chap. XVIII. A distinction of Fees.
THis title of Fees is many ways divided: but that which makes for the
present purpose is this. Of Fees some are mere Civil, some are Military. The
civil Fee is again sub-deuided into an Ecclesiastical or Church Fee, or a
temporal or Lay Fee. In the nature of Ecclesiastical or Church Fees, are our
Parsonages, our Bishoprics, Archbishoprickes, Abbeys, and such like, which
are given to hold in free tenure by the Princes Scepter. In the manner and
nature of Civil Lay Fees, are those secular dignities and civil offices of
the common wealth, as Lieutenancies, Mairolties, Consulships, and such like: of
the which we do not purpose in this place to make any particular discourse. It
suffices for this time, that we have noted, how all Fees are not given for
military duties, neither do all hold upon Knights service. Moreover this
also is most manifest, that the laws of Fees have often times altered, and the
nature with the laws, so that there is nothing more variable then that title:
And, that the whole matter depends upon certain customs, and the
uncertain pleasures of the Lords, who upon any condition, or without any
condition (if it please them) may freely give the things they have, to be held
and used.

In deed the first occasion of Fees was Knights service: that the Prince might
always have a sufficient host, and Captains competent for the defense of the
common wealth: So that Fees no doubt in the beginning were no other thing, but
stipe^ds for war, not hereditary but temporary, and not unlike to Princes
annual pensions at this day. And then no question, neither young children, nor
youths under the age of fourteen were capiable of those Fees, nor generally
any, whosoever was not apt and able for service of war; and yet we see
afterward how they were made Hereditary also, so that in many places they now
differ little or nothing, from ordinary inheritance. Whereby we may see, that
those laws and conditions of Fees, which determine that a Clerk is no hable
person to hold in Fee, are to be understood no otherwise the^ of knights Fee.
In the which notwitstanding, if it seem good to the Lord of the Fee, to alter
the law thereof (as he justly may by his absolute authority) he may also grant
the same Fee upon any condition, unto the Church in general, or to any of
the clergy in particular. In the mean while, those Laws which serve to
restrain clergy men from these Fees, do in like manner by the same reason
exclude women and children, and young men, and old men, and all men that are
not fit for military service: Who when as at this day they are notwithstanding
admitted; what reason, that Clergy men alone, should be excepted? For they also
may perform by an other man, or supply with another duty, that duty of
Chieualry (if it be a duty) as well as women and boys: wherefore, seeing that at
this day the Pastors and Prelates of the church, do live under the same
Magistrate, and the same laws, neither do challenge unto themselves any
peculiar immunity from the burdens of the common wealth, any otherwise then
other Citizens; surely to deprive them of the like benefits, or to depose them
from the like privileges with other citizens, is an action no less odious to
al, then injurious to the^. But as of old for good cause it seemed necessary to
them which had the chief place in the common wealth, to give lands and
Lordships in Fee to their Nobles and noble warriors for military attendance,
and the peaceable continuance of the common wealth: so also did they take it no
less necessary, and as great reason for them to give unto Pastors and Bishops
in the like name and nature of Fees both towns and towers, and parkes, and
woods, and pooles, and fishings, and fermes, and fields, and tenths, and
tithes, for the sacred ministry of Gods Church, and the reverend
administration of things sacred, thereby to advance the honor, and support the
worthiness of that most honorable and heavenly calling.

As for those things which the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons in
England, do hold in Fee, they are for the most part of that nature, as that
they require no military service: for they are given in Frank almoigne (as
they term it) and yet notwitstanding, all ancient Bishoprics have freely
granted many Fees and such like tenures, unto their Tenants in fee, to hold in
Knights service: Who by this means do perform unto the kings of England, as
well military, as other necessary services in the Bishops behalf: by the which
the Bishops are enlarged and set free from them.

Chap. XIX. An answer to the objection, That civil jurisdiction, outward
pomp and honors which are annexed with these fees, do not agree with the
simplicity of the Euangelike ministry.
IF any man object, that these tenures in fee, are accompanied with certain
Royalties, civil jurisdictions, secular titles, honors and retinewes, in which
things, the ancient Nobility are an ornament unto the King and the Country:
and therefore not agreeable unto the simplicity of the ministry: which thing
the Lord him self taught, as well by express doctrine, as especial example:
Because indeed such things they do but entangle a man in extearne vanities,
and solicit their hearts with the cares of this world, in the which it
becomes a Bishop to be secure.

And furthermore, for that the Lord himself being requested to sit but as
arbiter between two brethren, denied the same. And again, when the Apostles
made the question, which of them should be the greatest, he made answer and
said: The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they which bear rule over
them are called gracious Lords: but ye shall not be so, but he that is
greatest amongst you, let him be as the least, and he which is Prince, as he
which ministers. By which, the words and examples of our Savior we are
taught, that the Ministry of the Gospel has nothing common with the
Commonwealth.

It may suffice for an answer unto this objection, which we have before
noted: namely, that all this they talk of, has his place in that estate, in
the which, our Savior and his Apostles lived, not in that commonwealth, in
the which the chief Magistrates acknowledge Christ Jesus their chief Lord,
and sovereign King. For as the Magistrate is of an other calling now in the
Church, then before he had: so is it reason, also that the servant of the
Lord should be of better estate in the Commonwealth, then before they were.

The Magistrate, which before was an enemy and a persecutour: (according unto
the prophecy of Esaias) is become a Foster-father of the Church, and a
religious worshipper of the Lord Christ: under whom, were it not an absurd
thing, that the servant of Christ should have no more honor, then under a
persecutor? But because it is not set down expreslie in the Scripture, what,
of what sort, and how great the same ought to be, many men's minds are here
at a maze, and some are of mind so to leave it, as at a dead loss; and yet
notwitstanding, the thing it self is not so hard to find out, and it is in his
own nature well enough known, and that both by the written law of God, and
the universal censure of all nations: were it not for the awkewarde
interpretation of those scriptures which I have now cited.

Out of the which notwithstanding, there is nothing else directie concluded, but
that it is not any part of the Ecclesiastical function, to intermedle in civil
affairs, the which indeed is out of all controversy. Neither is that the
question: but whether the same man that is a Pastor, may not together with the
ministry of the Gospel, be lawfully employed in politic affairs, for the
benefit of the Church, and good of the Commonwealth. For when as the Minister
of the church, is citizen also of the commonwealth, he ought not think any
thing not pertaining to him, that pertains to the Commonwealth: so that
being lawfully called, he may not undertake some part of the civil estate.
As for that which I lately cited concerning our Savior, who refused to be an
arbiter, it is nothing to this question. For the spirit of Christ in the mouth
of Paul does plainly teach us, that the meanest of the church, are good enough
to judge of earthly causes, for that one day they shall judge the world, yea,
the Angels themselves; (a judgment far greater then this.) The which, seeing
the Apostle affirms of any Christian: is it to be thought, that only Christ
alone was no fit man to take up a small matter between two brethren, if they
both had been content to stand unto his judgment? We cannot therefore
imagine, that our Savior Christ simplye refused the office of an arbiter, but
that he denied himself to be that judge, which might command both parties to
stand unto his arbiterment.

And is not this then a slight testimony, for to prove it not lawful for a
Bishop, (who is both a Citizen, and a subject) to exercise any civil
jurisdiction, the Magistrate so commanding him? or to execute some other
pension of the Commonwealth, (not abhorring altogether from his profession)
being furnished with sufficient authority to discharge it?

That the foure-score and second Canon commands him to be disordered, who
undertakes both Provinces (the Ecclesiastical power, and the secular
principality,) for my part, I say not against it: if so be that it bring no
inconvenience unto the Bishops of the Church, and that it may be done with
the good leave of the Prince, and without any great hurt to the Church and
Common wealth. And thereupon we are also bold to say, that Theophilus and
Cyrill, Bishops of Alexandria, transgressed that Canon: of whom Socrates
reports, that of themselves they took unto themselves the principality of
that city. In like manner do the Bishops of Rome, when as they improoue unto
themselves those things which are Caesar's. For when as they are the vassals and
subjects of the Emperor, they have notwithstanding extolled themselves above
their Lords, and advanced the sheepheardes croysier above the royal scepter.
But for those Bishops which veil their bonnet to their Sovereign, and obey
their Princes in honest and godly things, there is not the like reason. And
many things many times are done in the Commonwealth extraordinarilye, so that
there can no law be published or made, which it is not lawful for to
gainsay at some time or other, for the good of the Commonwealth.

Neither is the other example that they urge, of any force. For had our
Savior meant to have inthronized himself in that earthly kingdom, (which he
never meant) yet would he have refused that tumultuous course: For what power
had that part of the people to anoint him King?

CHAP. XX That it is lawful for Bishops to hear civil causes, and to
determine upon them.
THat Bishops had to deal in civil causes, when as the parties submitted
themselves to their judgment, it is sufficiently known by the writings of the
Fathers, and the works of Justinian. The which, although it were a matter of no
small trouble unto the godly Bishops: yet the iniquity many times of secular
Judges, their delays, demurs and cauils in law were such, as that the Bishops
of mere charity were moved unto this labor. Neither are they therein to be so
censured, as if they usurped the place of the civil Magistrate: for he did it
by the consent of the chief Magistrate: as it appears in the writings of
Justinian in his first book de Episcopali audientia, the fourth title, where
he commands, that there should be that reverence given unto their
judgment, which is due unto the hiest powers: (from whom it is not lawful to
appeal) and more-ouer he commands that the execution of their judgments, be
done by his civil judges.

By reason of the statute of Praemunire (as they call it) (against the which,
whosoever offend, they are punished with is a matter of very great danger in
England, for Churchmen to invade the office of the civil Magistrates: and
therefore, there is kept a most circumspeact distinction between the affairs
of the Civil, and the Ecclesiastical Court. If at any time any of the Bishops
(or any other of the clergy) are thought meet men to undertake any civil
charge, they do it not by the especial commandment and commission of the
King, under the broad seal of England. But those charges are always
accompanied with some honor, so that they may be accounted rather a help, then
a hurt to the proceedings of the Gospel: (as are the offices and dignities of
a privy Counselor, a Commissioner, a Justice of peace, and such like.)
Neither (as I do think) will any man of sound judgment say, that those
charges are either imposed upon any Citizen without the chief Magistrate, or
if they be so imposed, that they can of any man be deposed, or laid aside.

If any man except, that this is more abhorring from the office of a Bishop,
then was of old the charge of the poor, from the which notwithstanding the
Apostles did abdicate themselves, because they could not attend upon that, and
their own charge too: and therefore urge, that it is not possible for Bishops,
that they should discharge both charges well; for which cause they ought to
sequester themselves from the one: I answer, first, that the Apostles did not
so far forth discharge themselves of the poor man's box, that that they
thought it not appertaining to them to have any further care thereof: for they
always continued patrons of the poor, as do the Bishops also, whom we will
not so entangle with civil causes, that they forsake their own; but that, (as
it especially concerns their office) upright dealing, and sincere charity
may be maintained among them, whose souls health is committed unto them. But
how much a godly and diligent Bishop may do in this matter, Austine alone may
serve for many examples, who wrote so many excellent volumes, when as yet he
employed no small part of his time in these troublesome affairs. Whose words I
will here infer, for that they enforce a sufficient confutation of this their
cavil: I call the Lord Jesus witness to my soul (says he) in whose name I
boldly speak these things, that for so much as concerns my commodity, I
had rather work every day with my hand (as it is used in well ordered
Monasteries) and reserve the other hours free to read, and to pray, and to
exercise my self in the Scriptures, then to sustain the tumultuous
perplexities of other causes, in determining secular controversies by
judgment, or in taking them up by arbitrament. To the which troubles the same
Apostle has appointed us, not of his own will, but of his that spoke in him.
The which notwithstanding we read not that he himself sustained; for indeed
the course of his Apostleship stood not with it. Neither did he say, If
therefore you have any secular controversies, bring them before us, or appoint
us to give judgment of them, but those which are least esteemed in the Church,
set them up (says he.) And I speak to your shame, is it so, that there is not
any wiseman among you, which can judge between his brother, but the brother
goes to law with the brother, and that before infidels? Wherefore, those wise
men which were resiant in some certain place, being faithful and godly (not
those which discoursed this way and that way for the Gospel sake) I say, such
would he have to be the examiners of those matters. For which cause it is no
where written of him, that he at any time attended upon any such business, from
the which notwithstanding we cannot be excused, albeit we be of the number
of those which are least esteemed, because he would have those also set up (if
wise men were wanting) rather then that the controversies should be brought
into the open and ordinary Court. The which labor notwithstanding we
undertake, not without comfort in the Lord, for the hope of eternal life,
that we may bring forth fruit with patience. Thus says Augustine; whose
reasons in my judgment may satisfy any reasonable man, verily they satisfy
me, neither can I find any thing to mislike in this action of his.

This is one general maxim in the rules of Christianity, That whatsoever we
read in the word of God, either forbidden, being not evil of his own
nature; or commanded, being of it self not good; in those things Christian
charity dispenses, and disposes of the matter, as the time, the place, and
the cause does require. Unto the which, whosoever does refuse to subscribe, he
does it of stubborn and froward hypocrisy, not of any religion or devotion he
has of the precept.

Neither is the Divines rule unknown, concerning those things which are bidden,
or forbidden in the word of God; namely, That some things are forbidden,
because they are evil; and some things are evil, because they are forbidden,
(suppose for some especial purpose.) And again on the contrary part, That
there are some things commanded, because they are good; and some things
therefore to be accounted good, because they are commanded by God, who
requires such things of men for some especial causes.

Now those things which are of the first sort and section, are under a constant
and perpetual law, and not to be changed by any means: but there is not the
like condition of the other sort, neither do they bind any man any further,
then the reason and occasion of the law does require. Examples of this matter
we have in the observation of the Sabbath, and the use of the Shewbread, of
the which it was not lawful for any man to eat, but the Priests only:
besides many other things of like nature, which we read to be either
commanded, or condemned. In this our case; it is no crime to be a King, nor to
be a Magistrate, a capital sin. And therefore the reason of the commandment
abating the thing it self abides free; and it remains lawful for Princes,
and other Magistrates, to be of power to command the Bishops of the Church in a
Christian commonwealth, those things, which would rather be an aid and an
ornament, then any hurt or impediment to their holy calling: I speak of
calling in general, not of any one man's calling (which happily may be hindered,
and shall have need of others which may help him) but of all theirs, which
are in the same calling, unto whom there arises any honor and authority
from the rest. So that if all things be thoroughly examined, and all commodities
with all discommodities compared together, which may any ways accrue unto the
Church and common wealth: I doubt not, but that which wants in one part,
shall be requited in the other with advantage.

Chap. XXI. An exposition of that place of Luke, in the two and twentieth
chapter.
NOw I come to that place of Luke, the two and twentieth chapter: where it is
recorded, that there was some question made amongst the Apostles, which of them
should seem the greater: the which for that it arose of a certain persuasion
of honor and rule, our Lord and Savior (the great Master of humility)
repressed the same, and confuted their misconceite, when as he forbad them to
imitate the proceedings of heathen Princes, and made himself an example of his
manner of government. For albeit he had called them indeed to a singular kind
of dignity, notwithstanding he would have them understand that the same
differed heaven and earth, from that which is usual in imperial kingdoms.
For as the kingdom of God is diverse from the kingdoms of the earth, even so
it becomes the Ministers of that his kingdom, to be of diverse conditions
also.

Indeed it is the fashion of the Court, to sewe pillowes under the elbowes even
of most vile men: and commonly they which grind the faces of the people with
bloud-thirstie tyranny, and practice upon them all kind of cruelty, are
notwithstanding called most merciful and most gracious Lords. Wherefore our
Savior especially here taxed the manifest misdemeanors of them, which then did
domineer over the people of God, noting withal the manifold abuses of other
ungracious Tyrants, which by force and arms had inthralled mighty kingdoms
under their dominion, unto whom the grace of Gratiousnes was given even by
them, whom they oppressed most vngratiously.

Moreover, there was settled in the minds of the Apostles a certain conceit,
that the kingdom of the Lord should be earthly, as they did see that of the
Romans to be, and as they had heard that of David and Solomon to have been.
Higher then this could not they advance their conceits: for alas they were as
yet but mere infants in Christ, and did but learn as then to go by ground.
Whereupon it came to pass, that they imagined very strongly, that they could
be made no other by the Lord, then Lords Lieutenantes at the least: from the
which their childish ouer-weening, our Savior does in this place take them
down a little. But that it may be made yet more apparent unto all, what might
be the Lord his very meaning in that his saying, I will yet sound into the
cause a little deeper.

The Apostles seem to make a very plain question, demanding no more but
this; Who should be the greatest among them: but in what things he should be
the greatest, that is not there expressed. No doubt a man may be accounted
greatest for sundry causes: as greatest in age, in experience greatest,
greatest in learning, in eloquence greatest, greatest in wisdom, in wealth,
in nobility of birth, in authority and power, and such like. But now, the
Apostles were private men, in nothing singular, which commonly makes men's
minds ambitious, and causes men's thoughts to ouer-reach. As for age,
experience, wealth, wisdom, nobility, and such like, they openly bewray
themselves in whom soever they are the greatest, so that there is seldom any
question about those things.

It remains therefore, that the question between them was for honor and
authority: the which also may seem a ridiculous thing among the poor
fraternity of the twelve Apostles, unless happily a man would judge them
ambitious, rather for their desire, then for their honor. But far be it from
me, that I should rashly condemn those good men of any sacrilegious ambition,
seeing the Lord himself did not so much correct them, as direct them in their
demand. It appears rather by that the Lord answered, the^ by any thing the
Apostles propounded, that they did not regard the present state of things, as
they were then, but that they had an eye to that rather which they hoped to see
shortly under Christ. They knew, that the kingdom of GOD was now at hand,
about the proclaiming whereof they chiefly were sent; neither were they
ignorant how honorably the Prophets had written thereof; namely, that it should
be, as a most mighty, so a most ample kingdom* not to be bordered, but with
the compass of the whole earth; that all nations should come and acknowledge
their fealty, and do due homage thereunto: and that, albeit they expected
many enemies and adversaries, both tyrants and traitors, yet notwithstanding,
the rebellious of the people should be appeased at the last.

Wherefore, when as they were of belief, that this kingdom should be restored
unto Israel out of hand, their question is, who should be next unto Christ in
that kingdom. For as the Israelites had borne a long time the heavy yoke of
some tyrannous Empires; so they were persuaded, that all Nations should now
yield to the just consequence of their renewed title. And they did see indeed,
that their present number did well agree with the twelve Princes of the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and that the seventy two Disciples did as well resemble the
graund Senate of Gods people. Whereby as they knew, that amongst them of old,
there were diverse degrees of dignity under King David, and other Princes, so
they persuaded themselves, that the like distinction of orders and honors
ought to be continued amongst them. Neither could they so soon forget that
honorable speech of their Lord, when he promised them, that one day they should
sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

These conceits (I should conceive) the Apostles had then in their heads,
being made as yet, and not thoroughly exercised in the censure of heavenly
things: and these I think rather to have proceeded in them, of a certain weak
ignorance, and erroneous misconceiuing, then of any sacrilegious pride, or
ambitious ouer-weening. But the Lord, perceiving their thoughts, corrects
their misconceite, and teaches them, That he had not called them to sway an
earthly scepter, but to seek a spiritual Empire: in the which,
notwithstanding the power they should receive of him, they should still
continue, and content themselves, not Princes, but private men. Wherefore,
albeit they should be the chief and principal of the new people of God, yet
their principality should not be any thing more magnificent then the estate
of other private men, and therefore in the form of that government he had
appointed for his Church, the first and principal ought to imitate his
example, who lived among them as a servant and a Minister, when as yet they
called him (as indeed he was) both Lord and Master. And this is the plainest
exposition of Christ his words.

Where we see, that our Savior, because he would not stir up any headstrong
innovation in the common welths and kingdoms unto whom he sent his Apostles,
of especial purpose he sent them private and impotent, without either warlike
complement, or civil regiment; namely, to convert souls, not to inuert states:
least if he should have erected here any earthly kingdom, they might have
supposed, that there had been no other kingdom to be expected. No doubt the
calling and state of the Apostolic function was for just cause great and
honorable, and their authority in the spiritual kingdom autentike and
inpregnable: and yet all that did not advance them above the state of private
men in the commonwealth; and being private, he would not have them president
therein. And verily these things were thus ordained of GOD, in a very prudent
manner, and upon a very especial purpose. For why should any occasion be
given for the heathen to cavil at the doctrine of the Gospel, as a thing
seditious to the government, and pernicious to the commonwealth? The Lord
without doubt did in great wisdom foresee, that the wicked would be ready to
pick many quarrels at the doctrine of the Gospel; when as notwithstanding all
this, there is no politic Philosophy, no imperial constitution, that does
more strictly bind the consciences of men unto subjection and obedience, then
the doctrine of the Gospel does. The principles of Philosophy, and the laws
of Nations do permit many things against Tyrants, which the Religion of
Christ does flatly inhibite.

But the prudent advise of this precept of Christ will more manifestly appear,
if we shall for a time but imagine the contrary: namely, that the Apostles
had followed that error, in the which they were found: and then let us admit,
that the whole world had been won and wasted by them with war and
robbery: (for they must of force have followed that forcible course, which
that renowned thief Mahomet kept: a course far differing from the means and
manners of our Savior Christ.) But should not thus the Jews have been
confirmed in their error? And should not by these means just cause have been
given to the Kings of the earth, to have armed themselves against Christ and
his Gospel? After the subversion of Jerusalem, there was a diligent
inquisition made by the especial commandment of Vespasian, if any could be
found that were of the stock of David. For the Jews, notwithstanding their
overthrow, gave not over their hope, still expecting their Messiah: They did
see that the times which David had foretold, were then fulfilled; and thereupon
they did argue, that the Messiah was borne, and that the time was now at hand,
in the which the Roman Empire should impair, and themselves prevail: The
which thing gave the occasion, that so great and cruel a persecution was
afterward raised against the same Nation.

The like we read of Domitian, who had the posterity of David in no small
jealousy. For casting the worst, and fearing least some new Messiah should
arise, and break the scepter of their Roman Empire, he caused inquiry to be
made after all that were of that kindred. Whereupon one Iocatus by name, brought
before him the nephews of Judas (who was the Lord his brother according to the
flesh) who did not only draw their pedigree from David, but were thought to be
very nearely allied to the Lord himself. But when they were examined, what
possessions they had, and of what wealth they were, and were found to be of
very mean estate, (the hardness of their skins warranting the labor of their
hands,) and when they further understood how they believed, that the kingdom
of Christ should not be an earthly Monarchy, but an heavenly Hierarchy;
neither yet, that he should come before the consummation of the world, to
judge the quick and the dead: They were foorth-with rejected base and simple
men, and were without suspicion set at liberty.

In like manner (no question) the private estate of the first Apostles, was both
a testimony unto them of their innocence, and a safe conduct among the nations
for their security. But what would not the Roman Caesar's and other like
Magistrates have done, if the Ministers of the Gospel had been sent and set
forth with power of war, and other abiliments of like power?

These the precepts of our Savior, may therefore worthily be alleged against
the tyrannique Bishop of Rome, who chalengeth the right of all Empires, and
holds the Roman Empire, as his proper fee: but they cannot be alleged
against those Bishops, which live subject unto laws and Magistrates, and keep
themselves in a proportionable order with other Citizens. Wherefore, where the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is honorably received by public authority, how
should this abatement of our Savior be wrested against all Bishops? that they
should not be in that reverend account under a Christian Magistrate, which the
laws of all nations, and even the very law of nature it self, and the
written law of God also does expressly award them? As for those places of
scripture, about the which we now contend, this only may be gathered: That the
Pastors of churches, in respect of their ministry, have no power over the
bodies, or goods of Christians; Neither that they can challenge unto themselves
those rights, which God has placed in the power of the Magistrate only. But
that the same Magistrate in no place, at no time, for no cause, may commit no
portion of the Commonwealth unto the Bishops of the Church, it is not as yet
proved, neither can be, (if I be not deceived.)

Chap. XXII. That the Pastors of the Church, for the necessity of the
Commonwealth, may attend some times upon worldly affairs.
IF it be allowable, to detract some part of that time, which otherwise were
to be employed in the study of the Scriptures, that the Minister of the Church
may the better provide for the private good of his own family: much more may
the same be converted to the good of the Commonwealth, the man being able to
assist the same, either by his aid, or his advice.

Where either the want, or the unwillingness of any Church is such, that
either it cannot, or will not afforde the Minister his due honor, it is lawful
for him to have recourse unto the labor of his hands: Whereupon the
Elibertine council, oftentimes pretermitted Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
to traffic for their better maintenance: The which thing, is also allowed by
diverse other Canons, which I suppose superfluous to rehearse, seeing that one
instaunce of Paul may suffice for all. But now, if so be that private
necessity may priuelege the detenee of the Ministry, what may public
necessity do? And yet if at any time, the Minister be exercised (for his
private commodity) in base and wretched business, thereis no man greatly
offended with it: But if he be employed in any honest and honorable affairs
of the Commonwealth, now a days there is no man that does not inuie it and
inuey against it: And whence for Gods-sake is this of devotion? from love, or
from envy.

I say not these things, as if I thought that Bishops, or other Pastors, were
rashly to be incombred in their holy course: But where the necessity, or
greater commodity of the Church, or Commonwealth does require the same,
there is nor reason, nor religion against it. Are not Bishops Citizens also,
and subject to Laws and Magistrates, as well as other men? Or may they not be
commanded (if they cannot be entreated) by them unto whom they are subject,
to do good to the Church or Commonwealth?

Neither is that of Paul to Timothy, any thing at all against this assertion.
(No man that warreth, intangleth himself in the affairs of this life:) For
the affairs of this life are those, with the which we get things needful for
this present life: not those things which appertain to the public estate of
the Prince or Commonwealth. War-fare it self is one of the public affairs
of the Commonwealth, unto the which whosoever is levied, must leave his
domestical affairs: so that if a man would urge the similitude thoroughly, He
which warreth unto God, must leave all his domestical affairs: against that
example of Paul; of whom no man will doubt, but that he discharged his
Pastoral duty faithfully, and yet notwithstanding entangled himself in the
affairs of this life, when necessity constrained him, to get his living with
his handie labor, and to spend that time in the affairs of this life, which
other-wise he might better have employed, either in prayer, or in Preaching:
Being ready, no doubt, to have done the like in public affairs which he did
in private, had the Magistrates commanded, and the good of the people required
the same. Wherefore, the sense of the similitude is this, that we must abstain
from those things, which do so hinder the War, to the which we are called,
as that they force us to for-sake the same.

That the use of certain things, which do perteine unto the Commonwealth, as
to have a Civil jurisdiction in certain Cities or towns, which a man may
discharge by another; to be of the Kings council in certain causes; to be
present at the publik assemblies of the kingdom; to deliver his judgment in
things concerning the state; to undertake and discharge a royal Embassee; at
certain times of the year, to be present at sessions, and assizes, and to
undertake all these by the Kings especial commandment, or general
commission, that these things I say, and such like are of that wicked nature,
that whosoever uses them, cannot be a Bishop, or a Minister, this I say should
have been proved: and this also, that the Minister which intermedleth in any
of these things for a public commodity, being thereunto called and
commanded by the Magistrate, does commit a wicked thing, and unworthy his
calling.

CHAP. XXIII. That diverse functions are not confounded, albeit undertaken of
one man.
THAT which is commonly said of the state Ecclesiastique, (that it is distinct
from the Civil estate,) is altogether impertinent to this question: seeing both
callings become not one, though one man be called to them both. Are not the
parts of of a Lawyer diverse, and the parts of a Physicion diverse? yet the
same party may play both parts, and prove as good a Lawyer as a Physicion. In
like manner, the same man may be both Physicion and Divine, and cure the body,
as a leach, and comfort the soul, as a spiritual Father. Spiridion was a
husband man, and got his living by graizing: yet was he a Bishop of the
Church, and a Pastor of souls; shall we think that he confounded both these
functions? I, but a Bishop requires the whole man, neither yet is one man
sufficing for more charges. I, but this indefinite censure is vncertainelie
true, and certainly false: and there are many presidentes to the contrary,
both in the old Testament, and in other antique histories.

First, I would know whether Spiridion both Pastor of sheep and of souls, were
not a man able for both these charges? No man as yet (so far as I can learn)
has envied him his ferme with his Bishopric: No man has dared to condemn
that holy men, but all men have worthily admired both his simplicity and his
sanctimony: and yet might he have been more greedy of graizing, then of
gaining souls, had his mind ben set upon coueteousnes. But why then might
not the same man have been both Bishop, and the kings Counselor as well? No
doubt the greatness of every charge is chiefly to be considered, and then
also, the supply of necessary aid, which a man may have in either charge,
whereby he may well discharge the same. There are some Churches more great then
other some; and some have more business, some less, in so much that the Pastor
may have much time sometime, to spare from his ordinary charge. And in a great
Church, where the Bishop has many and great affairs, it may be, he has many
and great helps. Had these two functions been so adverse and contrary the one
to the other, that they could never be exercised together by the same man,
Moses would never have been both Prince, and Priest over the people of God.

But I fear me, some silly shrewd fellow will have his action against me, for
that I have called Moses a Priest: And yet I would have him first to
understand, that after he had created Aaron, himself still continued both
Prophet and Pastor, as he was before. But that Ely and Samuel were both Judges
and Priests together, it cannot be denied. You will say, that was a thing
extraordinary: and I say, that I do not speak of any ordinary thing, neither of
all the Pastors of the Church: only I urge what may lawfully be done, where
the welfare of the Church or common wealth requires the same, and in the mean
while, these examples shall prove, that the same thing has been done.

But if so be you would have a view of a civil authority, which was also
ordinary: may it please you consider those forty eight Cities of the Levites,
and the government thereof. (For they could not be governed without a
Magistrate and ordinary Judges) shall we say that they chose them Magistrates
out of other Tribes, to determine their controversies, when as themselves were
ordinary Lawyers, and not only present, but president at ordinary Judgments?
Deutronomy the one and twenty Chapter, and first verse, every question and
controversy is determined according to their censure. And is there not the
like reason of those royalties which are given to clergy men in a christian
common wealth, with those Cities and suburbs the old Israelites gave the
Priests and Levites by the commandment of God?

Chap. XXIIII. That David and Solomon used the aid of Priests and Leuits in
civil affairs.
ANd as the most renowned and religious Princes David, Solomon and others, used
the Priests and Levites at their command (as other subjects) in civil
government, so likewise may christian kings use the aid of Bishops and other
Pastors of the church, if there be any among them which may stand, either them,
or the common wealth in any stead. In the first of the Cronicles the three and
twenty Chapter, at the commandment of David, there is a survey made of all the
Levites, from thirty years of age and upwards: and there were found eight and
thirty thousand. Of the which, four and twenty were appointed to be overseers
of the works for the house of the Lord, and six thousand were ordained Rulers
and Judges in all Israel. And least any man should think that they were
Judges only in Ecclesiastical causes, (as some now a days would hold men in
hand) (forcing the Scriptures to that form of government they see in some
Churches) let the six and twenty Chapter of the same Book be well read, and
advisedly perused, and he shall find, that the Isharites, Chenanas and his
brethren, men of might, were deputed officers and Judges for the business
without, over Israel. Of the Hebronits, Hesabias and his brethren, men of
might, a thousand and seven hundred, were appointed Officers for Israel beyond
Jordan westward, in all the business of the Lord, and for the service of the
King. And in the same Chapter it is said, that David appointed the kinse-men of
Iedijas, men of might, two thousand and seven hundred, Princes of families,
over the Rubenites and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses for every
matter pertaining to God and the King.

To these I may add, that which I read (in the nineteenth of the 2. of the
Chronicles) of king Iehosophat, who intending the restoration of Gods worship,
and the reformation of the common wealth, appointed Judges, Leuits and Priests,
and Princes of the families of Israel, for the judgment and cause of the
Lord. And where as some think by that in the last verse of this Chapter: That
the Priests and Levites were only deputed over Ecclesiastical causes, because
it is there written, Behold Amarias the Priest shall be the chief over you in
all matters of the Lord: and Zebadias the son of Ismaell, a ruler of the
house of Judah shall be for all the Kings affairs, etc. As if he had there put
some difference between matters civil and Ecclesiastitall; It is an error,
grown (as I have said) of a certain fore-seasoned opinion of that
government, which we see now in the Church or Rome, and some other reformed
churches. For who sees not, that in this place, the kings affairs, and in the
six and twenty of the former book, the service of the King, does not signify
al one with civil matters, and politic affairs: but what so ever pertayned
to the Kings right. (Such as were first described by Samuel, and afterward
either imitated, or augmented by the consent of the people, (as it often
comes to pass;) of the which there was nothing prescribed by Moses.) But
what the business of the Lord was, the tenth verse going before, declares by
particulars. For the Priests were interpreters of the law, as well civil as
ceremonial, and the King so appointing, they were also the ordinary Judges
thereof.

These things I do therefore remember, that all men may know, what is lawful
for the Ministers of the Gospel (who succeed the Leuiticall Ministry) in
civil causes, under a christian Magistrate; (not that I would wish them
entangled therewith any otherwise, then the necessity of time and causes may
require) and, that we may also know, that those precepts of our Savior were
given to no other end, then that (as I have said) that misconceite of his
kingdom should not be strengthened in the minds of his Disciples. Least they
should think the power which was given them were annexed with such authority,
as that they might alter at their pleasure, and innouate public estates by
their peculiar power.

Chap. XXV. Their error confuted, that think no civil affairs of the common
wealth ought to be committed to the Bishops and Pastors of the Church.
NOw a days this common error has invaded the minds not only of the common
sort, but of some part of the learned also: so that there are many of that
side very strongly opinionate, that the civil affairs of the common wealth,
do nothing at all appertain to Bishops and Ministers, no more then if they
were neither citizens, nor any suppliment of the common wealth. Curriers,
Diers, Weauers, Beere-brewers, Smithes, Fullers, Merchants and Pedlers,
furnish the common house, and give their voice in things concerning the common
wealth: (neither can I dissalow the same in a common wealth) but that the
Pastors of Churches should stand excommunicate out of their general
assemblies, it is a thing utterly against the equal right of al Citizens.
Seeing they live under the same laws, obey the same Magistrate, bear the same
burdens of the common wealth: Seeing in such public assemblies, they do
consult as well of their lives and goods, and what so ever else, upon the which
not only their own estate, but the public good of their Churches also does
depend, seeing I say, they do consult of these no less then of cloth, and
wool, and fish and felles, and importing and transporting any other
commodities, is there any light of reason, or light reason, why godly Ministers
ought to have less care of the common wealth, then common Burgomaisters? If
they can allege no reason, what color can they set upon their misshapen
ground? Why they above all others should be excluded the civil assemblies, or
Parliaments prouincial, whom it chiefly concerns to see, least the flock
committed to their charge be laid open to Wolves. In those things which
concern the safety of their souls? nay but in those things also which touch
the security of their bodies. Are they not appointed of God watchmen and
overseers (as it were in a hie tower, or heedeful centrenel) as they which are
to see from far, what mischiefs are like to ensue, that they may admonish as
well the people as the Magistrates themselves of such things as are to be
avoided? The which in deed they cannot do, so long as they are kept fasting
from the conscience and conference of such things, as are done in the common
wealth.

If the Church could stand safe, though the common wealth fell to decay, or if
the one might rise by the ruins of the other, I had the less to say: but when
as Church and common wealth are embarked in the same vessel, and sail
together in the same danger: how should the devout minister be less solicited
for the safety of the common state, then are the common Burgesses, who for the
most part judge one thing commodious for the Church, an other for the common
wealth, and another for themselves and their own estate: These are in office
but for a year, they never forsake their charges: These may provide many ways
for themselves and their own estate with the detriment of the Church, and
danger of the common wealth; they can by no means preserve themselves or
theirs, unless both Church and common wealth together be preserved: These
consult that the common wealth sustain no damage in corn and cattle, in
wares and marchaundise, least themselves at any time should want their sweet
return: They do not a little regard these things: but besides these, their
especial care is that justice, faith, godliness, and true religion decay not in
the common wealth, least at any time the kingdom of Christ should want his due
increase. But do learned BB. understand less what belongs to the good of the
common wealth, then illiterat Burgreeues, and rank chapmen? Very unprofitably
have they consumed themselves in their head-paine vigils, and heart breaking
studies, if they have learned nothing whereby they may benefit the common
wealth.

I, but Ministers are of private estate, Burgreeues are Magistrates: It is not
convenient that the same man should undertake both an Ecclesiastique, and a
politic office.

Truth it is, neither do I know any ignorant (except them selves) what is
decent in this matter, and what is not. But to be present at the sacred
Parliaments, to give a voice, and to give advice, is not to be a Magistrate.
The books of the Prophets are plentiful in the precepts of peace, in the
policies of war, and in the best counsels for all things which concern the
common wealth: and sacred histories do record of purpose, how the people of
God never adventured upon any action of weight and moment, before they had
well consulted with the Priests and the Prophets. Such was the custom also of
other countries, wheresoever there was any religion or reverence of God. What
need I now again put you in mind of the Chaldees and their Wise men, the
Egyptians and their Priests, the Grecians and their Prophets, the Romans and
their Sooth-saiers, the French with their Druidists, without whose more sage
advice, it was always thought a thing ominous, once to attempt any notable
thing in the common wealth. Neither were they deceived in their opinion: For
was the neglect of God ever left without revenge? Yea the opinion of false gods
contemned, has found the true God a sharp reue^ger: wherefore al antiquity
thought well, that nothing could go well in the common wealth, without due
reverence done to Religion: they began their wars with Religion, they ended
their wars with Religion.

But whence in Gods name (if it can be in Gods name) is this error sprung up
among those which glory in the true religion, that they disdayn in their
counsels to take counsel of religion? Verily where God is banished public
asse^blies, and religion is made but a scorn to the wicked, and the common
wealth a private gain to every varlet; happy Bishops, happy Ministers of the
Church which are farthest off from such Godless and irreligious conuenticles.
Blessed is that man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, and
has not stood in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the chair of the
scornful.

The time has been under our Lord Christ, when Bishops thought it not agreeable
with their honor, to sit in the counsels of Emperors: whether it were of any
superstitious error of themselves, or of any contagious misdemeanor of the
consistorians, I cannot well tell; but this I am sure of, that it is no
indecorum for the servant of Christ, to be seen in the congregations of God.
God stands in the congregation of Gods, the judges among Gods. But it there,
the counsels were held for private gain, or privy deceit, for wicked treasons,
or bloody murders, no wonder though the godly BB. were ashamed to stand in the
ungodly assemblies: For albeit God be there also, as judge and revenger, yet
the devil is there present, as President of the counsel: otherwise there was no
reason, why it might not be a thing decent and conueuient too, for a B. to
stand in the consistory, (Admit him) as a Doctor to give advice according to
the word, as Legate for the Prince or the estate, as a Solicitor for the widow
and the orphan, for the poor and the oppressed, for the traduced and
condemned. This was then also a religious custom among the most ancient and
best conceived Bishops.

What Ambrose did, and what he thought in this case, himself witnesses of
himself in his first Book the 27. Epistle: who even then when as he excused
himself to the Emperor Valentinian, for that he would not dispute with
Auxe^tius the Arria^ B. in his Palace, yet even there also he acknowledges his
duty in that behalf, saing: Wherefore take it in good worth (gracious Emperor)
that I can not now come to the Consistory: For I have not acquainted my self
to stand in the Consistory, but on your behalf: Neither can I willingly
contend within the compass of your Court, who nor know, nor seek to know the
the secrets of the Court. So that albeit Ambrose thought it not beseeming the
dignity of a Bishop, to stand as an ordinary man in the throng of the
consistorians, yet he thought it pertaining to his duty, to be there present
in the Princes causes, and the affairs of the commonwealth. Wherefore,
whencesoeuer this persuasion sprung, and whosoever they be, which think it
either an unlawful, or an unseemly thing, for any Minister to intermedle in
civil causes, they do greatly wrong the honor of religion, the welfare of
Princes, and the public state, whom they envy the good use, grave advice,
and loving fidelity of so necessary Citizens and subjects of the common wealth.

If the honest examples of ancient Bishops might be of any authority at this
day, I would reckon up many honorable Legacies undertaken by most reverend
Bishops in civil causes: but there are two presidents which may sufficiently
serve for our purpose. The first is that of Ambrose who was twice Ambassador
for the Emperor Valentinian, to the Tirant Maximus; and that, not without great
success: the other is that of Marutha Bishop of Mesapotamia, whom the Roman
Emperor sent Ambassador to the king of Persia, as Socrates records in his
seventh book of Ecclesiastical histories: the which his one Embassee was
abundantly beneficial, both to the Church, and also to the Emperor himself.
By these reasons and examples I am drawn to this conclusion, that it is both
lawful and requisite for Princes, to demise certain civil causes and affairs to
the ancients of the Clergy; and that it is but the error of them which lust to
go alone though they go awrye, that think, that the Minister ought to be
sequestered from all civil affairs, in a christian common wealth. As for those
words of our Savior, and the tradition of the Apostles, they teach us no
other thing then this; That no public civil authority is joined with the
Eccesiasticall Ministry, as any part thereof. But the state of the Church
being altered; where the Church is the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth the
Church, there the state of the Euangelique Ministers, may lawfully be the
same, which was of old in the Priests and Levites among the people of God.

CHAP. XXVI. Where the Church is the Commonwealth, the same man as Bishop, may
take charge of the Church for the Lord Jesus, and render fealty and obeisance
to the King, as one that holds by faith and homage.
SOme there be which think, that the Church is in the Commonwealth, as a
certain part thereof, and that the whole Commonwealth it self is not the
Church. But this distinction has no place in a Christian people. In times
past, when christians were mingled with the heathen, as at this day they are
among the Mahometists, it was then of force a part by it self, and it might be
said, the Church is in the Common-welth, as the people of Israel were
sometimes in Egypt, or at Babylon. I touch not now that state of a
Common-welth, in the which the headstrong people are distracted into diverse
factions, and the headless Churches are dismembered under the same Magistrate.
That is a weighty matter indeed, and such as requires a proper treatise of it
self. But where the whole nation has given their names unto Christ, and there
is no man which is not sprinkled in his Baptism, there doubtless the Church is
the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth the visible Church: under the which
who so supplieth, whether in respect of the one only, or in regard of both
names (the order appointed by God being kept, and those things remaining
diverse, which in nature are distinct) there is nothing in the Gospel that
forbids the same.

In that a man is Pastor of the people, or Bishop of the Church, he holds of
Christ: in that he is a subject and a tenant to the Commonwealth, he
holds of the Prince: that he may perform his duty to both these, he is not
constrained to give over either of these: the same man may give unto Caesar
those things which are Caesar's, and nevertheless, perform that unto God which
is due unto God. A Bishop, as he is a Pastor, does owe unto Christ a vigilant
care over the flock committed unto his charge; and as he is a subject and
free Citizen, he owes unto his Prince faithful obedience, dutiful homage,
and all other kinds of lawful service.

If it should so fall out at this day, (as it has done full often and full
well) that some nobleman holding in fee of the King, should be called unto
the Ministry, (as one which has sufficient learning, and no less devotion)
the doctrine of the Gospel does not prohibit, that such a man should be made a
Bishop, and yet retain his free hold and the royalties belonging there-unto.
(Always to be considered, that the laws of the Commonwealth permit the
same.) Neither is there any cause, why any man should think, that this Bishop
would be carried away with his secular affairs from his pastoral charge: For
if there be any fear of God in him, and if he have any care of the Church, he
will honestly, and may easily provide, that such things be discharged by his
servants, and will govern his Church himself. We see that noblemen have the
surplusage of as much time from their secular affairs, to dispend in idle
repasts, as might well suffice a Pastoral charge. And therefore it is not the
possessions of the Kings farms and fees, which do so alienate a man, as that he
cannot be both Lord of them, and a good Bishop too. And therefore, if any
christian King shall think it behooful, either for the honor of his estate, or
the stay of the Commonwealth, that certain BB. of the church should hold in fee
either manors or honors by their privilege, I cannot find that either he is
forbidden to grant and demise; or that they are commanded not to receive, and
enjoy the same. And that which I read not to be prohibited, I understand to be
permitted, nether can that be prejudicial to the Church, which is beneficial to
the commonwealth; especially when the Church is the Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXVII. An other argument against the donation of fees confuted.
IF so be any man urge us any further, and say, that the oblations which are
made in the Church, with the which, as well God himself as his servants are
honored, are utterly opposite to the nature of fees: because they are offered to
testify the grateful memory of some benefit received: But contrariwise, a
fee is granted by the Lord thereof upon that condition, that the tenant in
fee acknowledge the doner in some kind of duty for a benefit bestowed. And
therefore, seeing these two are opposite between themselves, and in condition
cross each other, it seems that Bishops and Pastors are not rightfully
endued with the title of fees: and this also is made good upon them by this
reason. Those things which are given to the Pastors of the Church, in regard
of their ministry, are in the nature of certain presents, and are reputed
amongst the holy actions of religion, which are to be rewarded of God only:
And therefore, to require in lieu of them any temporal recompense, or civil
obsequie, is a thing no less preposterous, then irreligious: but fees are
granted upon that condition that the feudatory recognize his Patron in some
kind of personal (or proportionable) duty: and therefore our ancestors have
not well done, to honor the Church with their indowments of fees. The
distinction of Church-goods which before I remembered, does contain a very
easy and plain answer to all this: namely, that the goods of the Church, are
partly sacred and divine, partly civil and human. For fees are civil goods,
and therefore not to be numbered among oblations, but donations: neither were
those Cities and suburbs which were given by the people of God to Priests and
Leuits, at any time recounted among their offeringes. Besides this, there is a
difference between these things, to offer some thing to God, and to give any
thing to the church.

Things mooueable, which do perish together with their very use, are said to
be offered unto God, when they are given to his Ministers, or to his poor
members for Gods-sake, (albeit the one has the name of a gift, the other of an
Alms.) The which thing, for that the benefit thereof has the nature of an
oblation, or sacrifice, (for neither are they given for any reward, nor
received upon any condition,) therefore, in nature they are nothing alike unto
the donation of fees, as themselves very well confess. I admit they also
oblige a man to a grateful memory of that they have received: yet are they
not given upon that condition, that there-vpon some duty should be performed.

Wherefore, seeing that the donation of fees, are neither in use, nor in sense
like unto the religion of oblations, why should they be confounded with them? Or
how should a man honestly argue from thence, that the Ministers of the church
may not be endewed there with? Are they not Citizens and subjects, and live
under the same law, and obey the same Magistrate, and bear the same burdens
of the Commonwealth? By what equity then can they be abridged the possessions
of civil goods, by the benefit of the Prince and commonwealth?

Besides, seeing it is thought but equal by the consent of the holy Fathers,
that the fields and farms of the Church, should yield a tribute under the
most Christian Princes; that the increase and benefit of those fees, should
serve for the good, partly of the Church, partly of the Prince, and partly of
the Commonwealth, it is not repugnant to the state of the Church, or stay of
religion. And indeed, why should not the same thing betide their fields, which
befall the persons themselves? who albeit they are dedicate to God, and
mancipate to his service, yet they commit nothing unworthy their function, or
not beseeming their calling, when as according unto the dignity of their place,
they perform due service to their Prince, and other duties to the
commonwealth.

That which is added of the pension, or stipend of Ministers, is easily
answered by the same reason: for it differs not from the other. Wherefore as a
man may consecrate him self and his labors to God and the Church, and yet
reserve his due obsequie to his Prince and the commonwealth: so likewise may
the Church enjoy both fields, and fearms, and fees in the commonwealth, and
yet make no claim to any extraordinary immunity from service, nor ever think
much of any ordinary fealty, due to the patro^s thereof. The Bishop and every
other Minister of the Church, is subject to the laws and Magistrate of the
commonwealth: and seeing he owes homage to the Prince, as to the common
parent of the people: there is no absurdity committed, if by the access of
some especial benefit he become more nearly bound unto him, then the common
sort.

How many and how bloody wars the Bishops of Rome have made upon the
Emperors, and other Christian Princes, even for the only inuestiture of those
fees which they challenge unto themselves as consecrate to God, and therefore
(as they persuaded themselves) free from all civil service, all histories can
well witness. Wherefore those Magistrates at this day do show themselves very
ingrate, (I may say ungodly) to the present Ministry; who, when as by
defending the authority of the civil Magistrate, which the Bishop of Rome had
impaired, they have now at the length brought to pass, that they have
recovered the same by their means, do now notwithstanding envy them their
poor estate in the Church, and their small authority in the commonwealth.
May not that of the Apostle (2. Cor. 11.19.) be truly said of this people? They
suffered those gladly which brought them into bondage, which took of their
goods, which exalted themselves, which smote them on the face; I more, which
afflicted them with fire and sword, and made them run through Purgatory,
glad that they might get to Hell. But the faithful servants of Christ, which
set them free from the captivity of the Pope, and gave them that liberty
which they now abuse against the Church, those they do not only not reward
with that honor they well deserved, but they deprive them of those dignities
they once possessed: They lay baits for the bane for some, and set snares for
the lives of others, and contriue plots for the deposing and disparaging of
all. Is this the thanks they give to their Pastors? And is this the reward for
so many benefits received by their preaching? O God forgive them this sin, if
it be possible. But thou will one day judge between them and us, and revenge
this infamy done unto thy self.

Chap. XXVIII. Of the honorable titles which are given unto Bishops.
NOw we have spoken of fees, and of that civil jurisdiction which is annexed
unto them, it remains that we speak somewhat also of their titles of
honor. Neither will I seek into all, but will show you unto a few of them,
and comprise in one or two all the rest, which either the custom of the time
and place, or the courtesy of Kings and Princes, do give unto the chief
states of the kingdom. With the which here are some in England, which find
themselves not a little offended, and would hold others in hand (though they
dare not hold their hand) that such titles are not to be given to the greatest
Bishops.

The first that displeases them, is the title of Lord, which yet at this day
is used to be given rather for honor sake, then for homage. The proper
signification thereof is sufficiently known, to have relation to the possession
and propriety of a thing: In which sense, every man is Lord of that he has.
It has a secondary relation also to a Servant: in which sense the Roman
Emperors would not be called Lords, or Masters. Suetonius reports of
Octauius, that he abhorred the name of Lord and Master, as curse, and a
slander. Indeed the Barbarians acknowledge no other distinction of persons,
but of Masters and Servants: and therefore their Kings also do domineer over
their subjects, as masters over their servants; and the fathers of families
have the same authority over their wives and children, as over their servants.
This would seem (and might well) a very unreasonable thing to us, being not (as
they are) a people base and servile. And yet the Moschouites rule at this day
after this manner; neither is the Empire of the Turks much unlike the same.
And generally, all the Eastern kingdoms were once of this government, and kept
this foul rule over the nations where they conquered. (Whether the Kings
kindred had any privilege besides the rest, it is to be doubted, and so I leave
it.) But these a man might truly call Dominos, Lords, or Masters: in which
sense our Kings themselves will not be so called: nor will they take it in good
part to be so slandered; for their subjects are not their slaves, or servants,
neither do they so use them. They hold it their chiefest glory to have a free
people subject unto them; and think it more honorable, to command over a free
then a servile nation.

And albeit the King may truly be called Lord, and indeed the only chief Lord
in his own kingdom (referring the signification of that title, either to the
subjection of the whole people, or the propriety of his own kingdom) yet
contenting himself with the royal title of King, (which glory he will
communicate with no subject) he enuieth not his subjects the name of Lords, but
who^ he thinks worthy, he honors with that title. Neither do inferior
persons only call superior personages Lords, but they also which are Nobles of
equal authority do so salute their peers. And does not the King himself
vouchsafe to greet the Honors of his land by the names of Lords? The name of
Lord is of many significations, and is (as I have said) a title rather of
honor and of favor, then of rule and of Empire: the which argues the no small
malice, or otherwise the great ignorance of them, which hold the title of Lord
to be of so great authority, as that it is not conuenable to the calling of
Bishops. And yet at this day among the best Latinistes, the same name
ordinarily is given to any man of any ordinary esteem. So does the
signification of this title vary, according to the diversity of regions, and
persons, and proprieties.

They which in England do make the same a signification of greater honor, then
that it may any ways agree with their Bishops do ground that their error
upon an other, by the which they are persuaded that it is a thing insolent and
absurd, for Bishops to be taken for peers of the land. But herein they seem
to bewray themselves in like passion with the sons of Jacob, when they enuyed
their own brother, for that he was made more honorable then themselves; who
ought rather to have thought themselves honored in their brother. It is utterly
against the nature of a well ordered commonwealth, that the order of religion
should not be accounted among the chief states of the land: the which honor
seeing it cannot be given to all that are in the same order, it is wisely and
worthily provided by the chief Magistrate, that the whole order should be
honored in a few of them. The which thing seeing it is agreeable to the law of
God, and the custom of the ancient people of God, and the practice of al
Nations under the Sun; may it not seem a wonder greater then their error, that
any learned men should be found in any wilderness of the world so ouergrown with
moss, (the melancholy of their distempered brains) as once to oppose
themselves in any civil society against the same?

But let us hear yet, with what reasons they are moved so far beyond all
reason. Those proud titles (say they) of dominion, are the inventions of
Antichrist: and our Savior answered his Apostles contending about the
primacie, That the kings of nations rule over them, and they which exercise
authority upon them are called gracious Lords; but it shall not be so with
you. And in the 23. of Matthew: You shall call no man your father upon earth,
for there is one your father which is in heaven: be not called Doctors, for
one is your Doctor, even Christ. Whatsoever else is alleged is of small worth:
and these words of our Savior being honestly interteined, the rest will
willingly yield themselves.

First therefore I affirm, that the titles of dominion were invented, before
Antichrist himself was hatched, he being the author thereof, who is the
author of dominion. Neither is there any thing arrogant in the titles, but in
the impotent and usurped aspirement of such, which often times rejecting their
commendable titles affect the contrary, and call themselves servants of
servants, which think themselves Lords of Lords: and name themselves with the
less and the least, which will be accounted the greater and the greatest,
that if for nothing else, yet for that they are so named. But the Lord his
meaning was not to abolish the use of these titles, Lord, Doctor, and Father,
but to teach us only by these his precepts, to beware of two dangerous
perrils: The first is, the vain swelling or swelling vein with the which
Hypocrites are commonly puffed up by reason of these titles: the other is, the
preposterous confidence which the simple people commonly have in their elected
Doctors, or Fathers: upon which advantage the popular professors distract the
name of Christ, so that some hold of Paul, some of Ap^llo, and some of Cephas,
and every man best fancieth the Doctor himself has chosen: when as no man
ought to build upon any Doctors words, but on his alone which cannot err (the
Lord Christ.) Neither was it the Lord his intent to inhibit us, that we should
not call those by their names, unto whom the Lord has given the names of
Doctors and Fathers in the Church, or that children should not call them Fathers
upon earth, that begot them into the world; or that Disciples should not call
them Doctors in the City, that instructed them in the University; or that
Christian servants should not call them Lords and Masters, which have
entertained them into their families. No doubt Onesimus both might and ought to
call and recognize Philemon for his Master: And did not Paul also (a most
perfect imitater of Christ) call himself the Doctor of the Gentiles? And why may
not we also call him, as well a Doctor as an Apostle? In the first to the
Corinthians, chap. 4. he calls himself their Father. Although (says he)
you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers; for
I have begotten you through the Gospel. The like we read in many other
places: by the which we are given to understand, that not the condition, but
the ambition only of those names was forbidden, with the singling out of some
especial Doctor, or Teacher, by the which we will show our selves to be
singular: For that indeed that knowledge of the truth, which we would seem to
experience in some especial men, is only to be expected in that Doctor alone,
who with the Spirit is able to lead us into all truth.

But now, what shall we say of the name and title of Lords? First I say, it is
no where written; Be ye not called Lords: And again I say, that although it
were written, it could bear no other sense, or have any other interpretation,
then those other titles which before are noted. That dominion over the Lords
heritage is forbidden by the Lord, there is no man that doubts: and did the
word Lord always implie a Dominion, it were some thing they said. But we have
heard of the diverse significations of these words. As for that the Lord said
unto his Apostles, It shall not be so with you; what sober man will interpret
him, as if he had said, Ye shall not be called Lords? If the Kings and Princes
of the commonwealth, will have you to sit in the assemblies of great men, and
will hear your judgment concerning the state of the Church, and will consult
together with you concerning the affairs of the commonwealth, and in regard
of my name, and in reverence of your calling, will have you reputed among the
peers of the land, take heed, beware of that, and suffer not your selves to
be called Lords: this is a proud title, and that is a foul matter. From
hence no doubt did arise that odious hypocrisy in the Church of Rome, which
under the baseness of mean titles, exercises the sharpnes of no mean tyranny,
and under the name of Servant of servants, usurps dominion over Masters and
Servants. And hence it is also, that his champions do glory in this, to be
called Friars (Minorites) the less, or the least: as if forsooth there were,
nor pride, nor tyranny lurking under these their lubarly names: or as if the
name of Lord only, were to be attended with pride and tyranny.

Wherefore, the meaning of our Savior in those words, was not to forbid his
disciples those ordinary terms of honor, which are given them by the favor of
the Prince, and consent of the people: only his intent was to teach the^, that
the Gospel was no prince-like Ministry, or royal seigniory. By the which it
neither is, nor can be concluded, that Princes may by no means use the
assistance of Ministers, nor grace the learned Pastors with certain principal
degrees of honor. Has Christ by any law diminished the Princes power? or has
he by any counsel advised them to withdraw their bounty from his servants?
or that they should have no regard of those duties they have performed? or not
to grace with titles of honor their honest demerits, of whose truth and wisdom
they have made great use, and had great experience? Nabuchadnezer preferred
Daniel amongst the Babilonians; Darius advanced Mardocheus among the Persians;
and shall it not be lawful for a Christian King to honor the servants of
Christ for their religion? and that upon a certain religion forsooth? That the
mean may be exceeded, no man doubts; namely, when as divine honors are given
to mortal men; or where immoderate dignities are ambitiously affected of them,
who ought to be the patterns of modesty, and the Doctors of humility: but
yet, that civil honor cannot be thought immoderate (but of immoderate men)
which according to the custom of the Cuntry, is given for just causes by the
advised Prince to his approved Subjects.

How many most holy men, whose lives were only private, (yet publikly renowned)
which have suffered themselves to be called Lords? witness the two Testaments.
3. Reg. 18.
Did not Abdias the servant of K. Achab, meeting with Elias, salute him by the
name of Lord? 4. Reg. 4.
Was not Elizeus honored of the Sunamite by the name of Lord? Did not the
keeper of the prison call Paul and Barnabas by the name of Lords? Acts. 16.
And yet the modesty of their minds notwithstanding was no less, then that
of Peter, who would not suffer himself to be honored of Cornelius above
measure. We read of Paul and Barnabas, how they rent their clothes, and ran
into the throng, and repealed the divine honors which Jupiters Priest, with the
people, would have done unto them; and verily, if so be in the name of Lord,
there had been any such eminent honor, or imminent danger, as some think, they
would have refused that. I conclude therefore, that in a Christian
commonwealth, which is the Church of Christ, all externe things, as wealth,
riches, preferment, and civil honors, may be referred of all and every the
faithful, of any calling or condition whatsoever, to the glory of GOD, and
the good of the Church, and the benefit of the commonwealth. (For so indeed
they ought to be referred.) With the which I include this also, that the
servants of Christ ought so to prepare themselves, both for honor and
ignominy, both for wealth and want, as that they may use all things aright,
to the honor of God, and edifiyng of his Church.

Chap. XXIX. Of the Bishop family and retinue.
BEsides all this, the Bishops retinue and ordinary attendants, are no small
motes in the eyes of some, that cannot without envy behold the same. For do
they not therein imitate the peers and potentates of the land? Not Christ (I
warrant you) not Peter, not Paul, were ever thus guarded. But alas poor
popular, and child-pleasing speech: simple are the men, whom these fair words
make feign: for I dare be bold to say, that the retinue of Christ and his
Apostles was as honorable as it might be, in respect of the time, and the thing
for the which he came into the world; and much more honorable should have
been, if God had meant to restore mankind after an other sort then he did. And
yet as it was, our Lord and Savior was not without above fourscore men in his
family, which waited upon him whither he went, or went before him whither he
was to come.

I, but there were no gallant Gentlemen to brave it in their chains of gold,
there were no barbed steeds to praunce it in their silver studded raynes: In
that solemn pomp, when Christ would show his glory unto the City, he was
well mounted upon a sorry Ass, attended with the simple company of his weak
Disciples. I, but this again is but a popular persuasion, in the which there is
nor pith nor rind against the thing in question. Will they never learn, that
our Savior after that manner provided for that season, least either he should
incur the suspicion of affecting an earthly kingdom, or other-wise might
have hindered the work of our redemption? Doubtless, had he been known in his
kind to Herod, to Pilate, and to the chief Priests: that which the people did
of a good zeal, they would have done for their own advancement; but then would
they never have crucified the Lord of glory: Neither would he which took in
good worth the honor of that ointment which was powered upon him, and received
royal presents of the wise men, (gold, myrhe, and frankincense,) have ever
refused that honor which was due unto him from all earthly Princes, might it
have stood with the salvation of mankind. But is not this a worthy kind of
arguing (which is used as well against the Papists as against us) to reason from
the times and actions of a faithles people, to the times and duties of a
christian nation? neither do I commend in our Bishops, either pride or riot,
or any superfluous excess; but this I say, that that retinue is not to be
disalowed, which the received and continued custom of the country requires.

It was an ancient custom in the Church, that a Bishop should never walk
forth alone, or be alone: he had records and eie-witnesses of al his actions.
Now they which are more indifferent to Bishops, had rather they should be
attended with gown-me^: the which I also had rather. But let us weigh the
matter in an even ballaunce: for they which would have the Bishops retinue to
be men of his own quality, seem to say somewhat, and to stand to the
examples of the ancient Fathers. But it is well known that our BB. are never
without such also. Wherefore, the question is now of the number: which cannot
be prescribed to all alike, for that their revenues are not all alike. But go
too: let us once again allow Bishops their ancient attendants. The more there
is of them, the greater is his family, and so a greater number of servants, and
so a greater retenue by ods, then is as this day: and shall not their envy also
increase with the company for company?

But the serving men's swords, and the Gentlemen's chains do gall them at the
heart, and pain them in their eyes, as if (good men) it were a thing
misbeseming the calling of christians, that a Bishop should be attended by
Gentlemen, whether old or young? That young Gentlemen and well nurtered, should
be preferred to some godly BB. that they may attend his person, and mark his
manners, and thereby become the better, and better learned: there no is no man
without an envious eye, that can mislike the same. Bishops houses have been
always Colliges of learned men, and schools of al virtue; and what hinders
that they may not now be? But least I should seem to have taken upon me the
patrociny, rather of BB. then of their calling, I may not seem to set forth
the virtues of any, which at this day do govern the Church of England. And yet,
neither the zeal of my duty, nor the conscience of their demerits will suffer
me, to pass over in thankles silence the sacred memory of that most reverend
Father, John, L. Archbishop of Canterbury, with that godly Diocessan William,
L. Bishop of Couentry, mine own Ordinary. As for the rest, they are all known
to me alike. I knew sometimes, (neither shall they ever be unknown) that
most reverend L. and Father Edward Grindall, (the memory of which man is
renowned in all the Churches of Christ:) and two other BB. no less famous for
their learning and religion, Jewel L. Bishop of Salisburie; and Horn, L.
Bishop of Winchester: whose religious godliness and rare knowledge, I could wish
that all the BB. euil-pleased emulists had among them, every man his part. What
other Bishops and Archbishops happy. England has bred within our memory,
their learned works declame in our studies, and their inflamed blood does yet
speak in the book of Martyrs. That they were men both of sincere life and
singular learning, what man, (if a man) that will deny it? I testify
therefore, that I do not defend Bishops (if there be any evil,) but the
calling of Bishops, which in my conscience I judge before God (who shall judge
my conscience) to be godly, christian, ancient, Apostolic, profitable, and
necessary. As for the crimes and abuses, with the which the evil spirits charge
our Bishops, they touch their person, not their function. The tyranny of Rome
being surprised, and the authority of Princes restored to their right places,
wherein so-euer any Bishop offends (if indeed he offends) it may easily be
corrected: and it chiefly concerns the chief Magistrate to see, that godly
men, well noted for their virtues, (such as the word of God does commend) be
set over the churches: If the Princes neglect this, let the people know, that
scisme is a remedy worse then the malady: for what sedicion is in the
Common-welth, the same is scisme in the Church of Christ.

And albeit these things do little concern those churches which are committed
to your charge (reverend Brethren,) where there are no Bishops, or rather where
they are all Bishops: notwithstanding, I have more largely dilated of these
things, that the whole matter may be made manifest unto al you, and that you
all may understand, that the honor which is given unto Bishops, is both an aid
and an advancement to the Church or christian Commonwealth; and that you may
take aim by this, how far wide they are, which inuey them this honor, and
desire to make them, or to make no more of them, then of ordinary men. That
which I am persuaded, Satan with a certain wile has procured, that so he may
bring down all the Pastors into contempt together, that so the whole
authority of religion being little or naught worth, himself might freely cast
forth al manner contumelies and blasphemies against Christ. For who are they
(which durst, oppose, or could prevail against the enterprises of his more
mighty accomplices? I know what I speak, neither can you (beloved) be ignorant
thereof. But I have said enough of this matter for this time: and will one day
(if God will) speak more plainly of that which remains.

CHAP. XXX. Whether it be better for Ministers to live of the stipends of the
Magistrate, or of the oblations of the faithful.
AL they which think, that the Ministers of the Gospel may live of the
Gospel, are not of one judgment: For there be some which hold, that
Ministers ought to live of the tithes and oblations only of Christians,
renouncing all temporal goods, and surrendering them to the Prince and people.
Other are of opinion, that they ought so to live, for so long only as the
Magistrate is an enemy to christianity: who so soon as he has received the
Gospel, ought to provide, that Ministers may be allotted their sufficient
stipends: the which thing when he has once performed, from thence forth,
there ought to be no more oblations.

For my part I am of a contrary opinion, for that I am taught by the word of
God, that oblations ought to continue in the Church: and that, because they are
the exercises and testimonies of our religion toward God and his servants, by
the which we not only pay our vows to the Almighty, but therewith also the
Pastors to the people, and the people to the Pastors are mutually devoted the
one to the other. For (I know not how) a man does not only bind with his
bounty, but is bound himself also, after a secret manner: And as the
benefactor makes him his own of whom he does deserve, so likewise himself
becomes his, and they both, (if so be there be a free and an ingenious
disposition in both) rejoice in the same benefit, as well he which gives, as he
which receives. Now therefore, me thinks their reasons are too too politic
and profane, by the which oblations are abrogat in some Churches. For albeit
religion ought not to be measured by allowance, yet is it not to be without a
reward. As for that they so hotly allege of the many and manifold abuses
thereof, it is to no purpose: unless we should say, that the ceremonies also
which were commanded, were to be abrogated even then while they were
commanded, and all other sacred rites which God has ordained, were together to
be abolished, because Hypocrites have and do wickedly abuse the same. For what
is there so sacred, which the impiety of men will not profane? Wherefore, we
are rather to inquire, what God has commanded, not what this or that man
thinks most commodious.

If any man object, that oblations are antiquated, as are also tithes, and all
other sacrifices and ceremonies of the old law; I would have him to know (if
he be yet to learn) that they are not exacted at this day in that manner,
neither were so exacted of our Fathers (as it may appear by those their
testimonies which I have before noted) but that they are only required, as
testimonies of a thankful mind toward God, and a propensiue devotion toward
his Church. But this kind of duty has no temporal prescription, it is
perpetual, and binds the faithful to the worlds end.

It is also objected, that where the Pastors are abundantly provided for, by
the ample reuenews of the Church, or other set and certain stipends, there
oblations ought to cease. I answer, that the oblations may be the less or
not so often, as otherwise they ought to be, where the Church has no fermes,
or receives no annual increase of their fields: but not, that there ought to
be none. The end of oblations, is not only the necessary relief of the
Ministers, but our dutiful devotion toward God. And hence is it, that the
wise man says in the third of his Proverbs, Honor the Lord with thy riches,
and with the first fruits of thine increase, etc. He does not say Honor the
Priest, (who notwithstanding was to be honored, and was honored) but honor the
Lord. And Paul to the Philippians the fourth Chapter, tells them, that he
desired not a gift, but the fruit which might abound for their rejoicing, not
for his. So then they which take away oblations deprave the faithful of this
fruit of their Religion, Tit. 3.14.
and consequently of that Communion of their goods, which good christians ought
to exercise between themselves. Wherefore, as we have proved, that it is
lawful for Pastors to live of the possessions which are given unto Churches,
the like do we say of oblations.

Chap. XXXI. The stipendaries called to account and confuted.
NOw let us call their reasons to an even reckoning, which appoint Ministers
their maintenance by the Magistrate his allowance. For now a days this is
thought a better devise, then the ancient received use of offerings and glebes.
And reason too: for by this means, many inconveniences may be avoided, which
man's infirmity brings with it. But their reasons and arguments are of a new
mold, and not known to the Fathers, or not thought worthy, for the which
oblations should be deposed from their former state. Their first reason is
this. That by this means an occasion might be taken away, so that men could not
so readily make merchandise of the word of God, which otherwise might be easy
for them to do, who employing their whole Ministry to gain and usury, would
apply themselves unto the^ most, of whom they hoped to receive most.

I answer, that the contrary may rather seem more likely, seeing that the
very couenanting for a stipend, is in the next degree to a flat bargayn
(unless we would judge bargaining by giving and taking, and measure the same
by the minds of men rather then the matter.) For what other thing is it to
merchandise, then to sell any then for lucre sake? But when the Magistrate
sets down a certain price for the Ministers labor, or the Minister himself
requires the same, albeit in plain terms there is no bargain made of either
side, yet notwithstanding of both, these may seem rather to buy and sell the
word, then they which live by the oblations of the faithful, or the increase
of their fields. Oblations are not certain, and they have in them a certain
kind of Religion: but stipends are certain, and are in their nature more
civil, religious not at all. Now whether, I pray you, may be said rather to
sell? He which in respect of his holy Ministry receives the free gifts of his
people, or he which rateth his labor at a certain set stipend? Our
forefathers in wisdom thought, that this religious merchandise of religion
could by no means be better avoided, then if on both parts they made a
religion in that very action of offering and receiving. I conclude therefore,
that this mischief which some are afraid of, namely that the whole Ministry
should be given to gain and usury, can never by this means be avoided in
coueteous men: their minds being so affected (or infected rather) as that they
would make a gain of any thing, and being always ready to convey themselves
thither, where the greatest wages might be had.

Again (say they) that liberty of speech which is necessary in a Minister, may
thus be better performed: For of who^ they shall daily receive somewhat, they
either could not tax their vice, or else they must do it with loss to
themselves: but now where no man gives any thing of his own, they may
admonish all degrees of men, with more boldness and less danger.

This reason partly confuteth it self, and may easily be retorted, and partly
falls in his own strength, and can no ways be relieved. For is it not to be
feared also, that the Ministers should speak in favor of them, of whom they
take wages? These men for the most part have greater faults then the most part;
and yet if the Pastor chance but to stir their humor, their stipend is in
hazard. Let a Preacher with his liberty offend a whole multitude, he shall not
endanger either himself, or his estate so much, as if he displease but one
Magistrate. As for liberty of speech, it is generally a very popular and
plausible thing, with the which while a few are offended, many are well
pleased, and the evil will of a few gotten by this means, procures the good
will of a great many. Besides, our Savior provided but badlye for his
Disciples, (if this reason be of any force) when as in the old law he
commanded the Priests and Levites to live of the oblations of the people, as
also in the new Testament, he would have his Apostles and their successors to
live of the Gospel, If the danger be such, that therefore they may not tax
vice. But it seems, these men have either not attained to the knowledge of
oblations, or regard but a little what is read in the most ancient Divines,
concerning the same. First he which thinks, that by this means the suspicion
of flattery is taken away, greatly deceyueth himself, and rashly condemns
the ancient Fathers. But go to: let us confer the Sermons of the Fathers
which lived by oblations, and the severity of Ecclesiastical discipline used
in those days, with the Sermons and proceedings of our Preachers of this age.
Shall we not be ashamed (if we blush not) of our selves and our times, in the
which all vice are so rise, and all discipline so slack? doubtless, that
liberty of our Fathers in reprehending sins of old, does even now reprehend us.
Again let the Pastors Sermons, where they live of the devotion of the people,
be compared with those, where they stand to the stipend of the Magistrate, and
it will easily appear whether of them do best perform their duty in this
behalf. But last of all, what need they depend upon the voluntary devotion of
the people, where besides their ordinary oblations, there are fair glebes and
sufficient lands provided for the use of the Church? To the which we may also
add, that it is the duty of a christian Magistrate, to cause the people to
perform their duty toward their Pastors: so that it is altogether a
needelesse fear which is here alleged. And whereas they think that the
suspicion of flattery is by this means avoided (as if they were in danger to
be smothed in their sins, which are rich, and give with a full hand) it is
but a foolish conceit, arising from that error, that christians are not bound
to their oblations; or else of this nicety, that it is unseemly (forsooth) and
superstitious to bring them to the Church, or otherwise to gather them. By the
which in deed they have made themselves the patrons of the sacrilege of this
age, which has left nothing for the Ministers worthy the gathering up: so that
if there be any want in oblations, there want must be supplied else where.

But by certain stipends (say they) the modesty of Ministers, and the honesty
of their family are provided for. For what ingenious man would willingly make
his need known to every man? and with what face can they of the familye go
door by door to gather things necessary? verily their credit is endangered,
and their modesty.

But did you ever hear, that the Ministers of the Church were brought to such
an exigent, as that of force they must gather their relief from door to door,
among their own people? In deed, there was such a custom in the time of Popery
for mendicant Friars, brought up among them of a certain superstition, without
any precedent president of the ancient Fathers. But is there no other way to
gather christian oblations, but so? and are they not either brought by the
faithful of their own voluntary, or collected by some of the honest neighbors
appointed for that purpose? But of the other side, by the certain stipends
which depend upon the uncertain pleasures of the Magistrates, it is very
badly provided, both for the necessity of the family, and the modesty of the
Ministers, where either so small wages are allowed, or their allowance so
slenderly paid, that the poor Pastors (pitiful complaining) for mere
poverty are constrained to give over their trade, and to forsake their
Ministry. Where the people are persuaded, that they owe nothing to their
Pastors, and that it pertains to the Magistrate only to provide for the
Ministers (alack poor Pastors) I am ashamed to report, how both people and
Magistrate bear themselves toward them.

But furthermore they dispute,, that in these stipends the Ministers can use no
deceit, when it shall be sufficiently known, how much they receive: when as
otherwise, a covetous Minister may pretend, that either he receives less then
he receives, or not so much as suffices.

To this I answer, that the oblations, of the which we argue the case, are
not so secretly given, or so closely kept, but that it is commonly known how
much they are, and what the Minister receives. But to what purpose is all this?
or to what end should al know how much the minister either receives, or has?
or who can prescribe a mean for that matter? The Pastor lays out as well as
he takes in: and must that also needs be known? That which they add, of the
coueteous Minister, who may pretend that he receives less, then either he
receives, or may well suffice, it proceeds of the same error. I have known
many Ministers in my time, among whom there is not one, whose wealth is not
commonly known, and what he ordinarily receives every year; so that there is
no other means for them to lie here, then there, unless you would lie for
them. But to what end are these reasons? or how, think they, did the ancient
Bishops of the Church live? Ignatius, Ireneus, Cornelius, Cyprian, and such
like, whose memorial will continue with their glory to the worlds end? A man
shall never prevent the cauels of malicious men, whether the Ministers live of
tithes and oblations, or whether they stick to their certain allowance: both
here, and there, whatsoever is received will be thought too much of some. A
Flemishe florence or gilderne, is 2. shillings sterling.
I have often times heard the Boores groyn and grunt to this effect, that a
stipend of two, three or four hundred Flemish Florences was great wages. I
(said they) can keep my family for less: Neither do I receive so much of all
the gain that I can make; thus unequally comparing not them selves with them
selves, but their styes with the state of they Ministers. As if there were no
difference between a private man of the basest rout, and a public Minister
at the hie Altar: And yet two or three years wages will scarce serve to buy him
books, and bsides, of duty he ought to be bou^tifull and intertainable to the
needy.

But now they say, that by this means it is well provided for the subjects, who
for the most part are but poor, and live hardly in their Villages: For how
should they maintain the Minister, who are themselves to be maintained?

Here in deed is the error of our age to be noted, which in some places give to
the civil Magistrate the goods of the Church, and permits them to gather up
tithes, which are due to the Minister. But to the purpose. In villages, the
poor which have nothing, give nothing, if it be little which a man has, he
gives little: every man pays his tith according to his wealth, and according
to the greatness of his increase, whether the commodity lie in tillage, or in
herbage. And in deed the poor could no ways better be provided for, that they
should not relieve their Pastors, themselves being to be relieved, then thus;
for by this means the Pastors are mainetayned by them which have much, and they
maintain them which have nothing. The increase of their fields, for the most
part, keep a certain scantline, and evermore the number of them is greater,
which receive, then of the poor which want the same. But these their reasons
are too blame, that both poor and Pastors are so badly provided for, as they
are: for by the^ the goods, which are consecrate to holy uses, are betrayed to
profane wretches, of whom themselves must now go beg their allowance, and be
glad to serve and flatter in most slavish sort for their just reward.

But yet again they argue, that men will seek occasion to discharge their
Minister, when they shall see that they must give often, and shall hear their
vices inueighed against; and so will fain causes with greater authority and
contention to thrust him out.

But who sees not here, how weakly this argument is grounded even upon an
evil grounded government of the Church, who leave in the peoples hands, to
place and displace their Pastors at their pleasure; and yet, if it so falls
out at any time (as it falls out, so often as they fall out) the christian
Magistrate must be but an idle auditor in this injury, and have no authority at
all to compel the wicked in this case to their duty. But let Cornelius Bishop
of Rome an holy Martyr answer this, who being destitute of the aid of the
christian Magistrate, and being infested by Nouatus his faction so far forth,
as that he was not far from giving up his hold, and yielding to the wicked; yet
did he ever want of those his ordinary oblations, even in the midst of so much
evil will, and so many dissentions, so that he could not maintain therewith his
500. and 50. clerks, and a 1000. 500. poor people? Neither were any of the
Fathers, which lived of oblations, ever fearful of the wicked, but were ever
fearful to the wicked, and were feared.

Of no greater force is that which they say, that evil men being reprehended,
will give nothing, but will rather suffer their Minister to famish for hunger.
As if that were not rather to be feared least it should be done, (as we have
experience of the doing) by the Magistrate which pays them wages, when so ever
a good Minister shall displease a bad Magistrate, But it seldom falls out,
that Pastors have only evil men in their parishes; the Lords flock is mixed of
good and bad. The good do love that which the wicked do hate, whom to
displease is a great praise among good men; who will not suffer the faithful
Minister to suffer loss for his well doing, but will themselves supply that,
which they shall see wanting on the part of the wicked.

But there is commonly alleged an other commodity of these stipends, namely
this, for that the Ministers may not seem to take any thing of them of whom
they ought not, as are the notorious ungodly, and noted Heretics, with whom a
man ought not to have any thing to do: as also of the good and godly, being
poor and needy, to whom a man ought rather to give: as are widows, orphans,
the sick and needy, whom to pill and pole is a point of cruel Religion. But I
pray you, where does the Magistate receive, or of whom does he contract those
things, by the which the Ministers are paid their stipends? Of their own
goods, or out of the public treasury? but is not that confusedly gathered of
the wicked together with the godly, of the poor together with the rich? This
is indeed a strange religion, that it shall not be lawful for Pastors to take
of them, of whom the Magistrate takes that he gives them. All men pay
subsidy, and other tributes of the commonwealth, without respect of person,
every man according to the moity of his substance: Of them which have nothing,
they take nothing.

But this their religion is like unto that of the Franciscanes, who when they
make great dainty to handle any money with their proper fingers, they have
other to do it for the^. I admit, it is a thing not beseeming a godly Pastor,
to take of all comers: but as the voluntary oblations of wicked rich men are
not to be received, so the free offerings of godly poor men are not to be
refused (so that they exceed not the ability of the giver) For although it be
little which is given, yet seeing it is the fruit of godliness, it ought neither
to be contemned of the Pastor, nor yet suppressed in the faithful. But be it
remembered, that I said, the voluntary oblations of the wicked: for no doubt, a
Minister of the Gospel may take tithes even of infidels also, if they be due to
the Minister by the law and custom of the Country: neither is religion any
more violated in so doing, then when the rents of farms are paid, or received
of husbandmen our tenants, that are heretics.

As for the argument they draw from the vain ostentation of the contributors,
who because they could not be unknown, contention might arise among them, who
should exceed the rest; it is an argument none at all: unless by the same
reason, we will have Christians to abstain from good works, to avoid
ostentation. But no man is to be diswaded from bounteous beneficency, least he
should fall into the affectation of vainglory. And that contention and
emulation is good, when one man strives to excel another in weldoing: as for
the hearts and minds of men, let us leave them for God to judge.

But their last argument is this, that there is no commandment, that Ministers
of the Church should be maintained by the oblations of the people: by the which
it may be concluded, that it is not necessary that the same manner of
maintaining the Ministry should be maintained alike in all places, and at all
times: but that all things ought to be referred to good order, that they may be
done to edification.

I answer, that albeit the Minister of the Church be not commanded to live of
the oblations of the people: (for he may live of his own, and for certain
causes spare the people for a time:) yet notwithstanding, in the mean while
the commandment abides, by the which the people are bound to honor their
Pastor, and by the liberal participation of their goods, to testify their
grateful and godly devotion toward God, and him. Neither is the question so
much for the Ministers maintenance, as for the godly regards and grateful
minds of the faithful toward God, who is always most honored, or dishonored
in his servants. For my part, I know not as yet the customs of all nations
and countries: Neither am I he, that will prescribe to any man in this matter.

In the mean while, I speak of those things which I have learned by great use
and long experience; and it greueth me, that in many things of like nature, we
abolish old things, and suborne worse. True it is, that parishes under the
Pope, had their privileges, their glebes, their rents and their tithes, by
which their Pastors were well maintained; and now, because some abuses be crept
in, shall the whole use of them be taken away? Me thinks these are but cold
reasons I have now confuted: with the which it were to be wondered, that any
man should be carried away, were it not that the hatred of Popery did hurry
men headlong into vain contrarieties in such things as are, or have been used
among them.

Chap. XXXII. Certain reasons why Stipendaries are disprooued.
WHere as the Apostles rule commands us, that all things be done in good
order, and to edifiyng, it will be a labor worth the pains to see, whether
that may better be done, by paying Ministers their stipends, or rather by that
ancient manner delivered by the Apostles, and received by the Fathers, which
gives to Pastors their tithes and their offerings.

First, I do not think that wisdom is grown up with us, that we should
dispose of things better then our Fathers have done. Besides, there is no man
that desires to be clear from the adversaries cautels, that ought at this day
to make any innovation in the Church of Christ, without the approved example of
former ages. But this is a nouel kind of honoring the Pastors of the Church,
not read of in the scriptures, not known of unto the Fathers, nor ever heard
of before these our days (the common brokers of all news) that the Church had
their Stipendary Ministers.

Notwithstanding, when I say, that Stipends taken out of the Exchequer, (or
other-wise collected,) do blast the fruits of religion, and deprive the
people of the comforts thereof: I would not so be taken, as if I thought it
unlawful for the Magistrate to contribute out of the treasury to the Church:
But this I say, that the Christian people ought notwithstanding continually to
be devoted unto their Pastors, in the bonds of a religious affinity, and
religiously to honor their Ministers with the testimonies of their grateful
memory: the which when it is hindered by the one part, it must needs be, that
charity should wax very cold on both parts.

Saint Paul (as we have said before) gave it in commandment, that he which
is taught, should communicate in all his goods with him that taught him: from
the which duty no stipe^d ought to excuse the able auditory, no excuse to
dispense with an expense of duty. For that communication of their goods, is not
so much to relieve the others necessity, as to approve their own duty. The
poor Christian brother is honored for his want; but the holy Minister of God,
for the worthiness of his office.

Besides this, the good will of the Magistrate is variable, who being once
offended with the Ministers, whether right or wrong, they shall be sure to
leap short of their stipends. But whenever the common treasury shall shrink
(as by many means it may be brought to a low eb) then alack pore Ministers,
needs must your state be most miserable. The people not accustomed to pass any
thing to their Pastors, will think it perteines nothing to them wheather they
sincke or swim: and most men are of that boorish nature, as that they will
rather leave the Pastor destitute, then they will seem to contribute: and so,
he being forsaken of his flock, of force must needs forsake his flock, (as
at this day it is come to pass in many places of Holland.)

But how wretched the estate of the Ministry is in that country, by reason of
the baseness of their stipends, and the badnes of their paiments, they know
best that smart for it: when as (poor souls) they are constrained to trudge
no small iorneis to beg their wages of their good masters: of whom many
times, they being entertained with disdain, are sent away with a mischief,
and bring nothing home with them but night, (besides the wearines of their
lims, the loss of their time, the expense of their money, and anguishe of
their relenting souls.)

To these miseries we may add this also, that the Magistrate, accustomed to
pay the Ministers their wages out of the common treasury, begins to take
them for civil officers, and towne-seruants: so that base men will not stick
sometimes, after they are once out of office, (as Curriers, Tinkers,
Carpenters, Pedlers, and such like) to insult over their Pastors with a
villainous mind, and in a shameless manner, and to say, What, sir-priests? you
are our servants, we are your good masters, we pay you wages: I would be
ashamed (so God me help) so disdainefully to shake up the veriest page or
basest drudge in my Lords kitchen, and as soon I should be called to mine
answer for it.

I remember, in a solemn banquet made at Gaunt, to the Prince of Orange, it
was my hap to sit over against a cople of jolly Burgo-maisters: who when they
once began to be somewhat warm in their liquor, and were now come from never a
word, to never a wise word; at last they spied me busy in talk with another,
and thinking I marked not what they said, they began to speak their pleasure,
and by chance I over heard thus much of their good talk. We must take heed
(said they) least these busy Ministers become more combersome unto us, then
were ever our corne-fed Papists: we must therefore keep them under least they
grow too lusty, and creep too far in favor with the people, and so become a
terror to the Magistrates: but especially we must look to this, that their
wages be not too great: He that brings up his servant delicately, at length
shall find him maister-full.

These men (a Gods name) would seem the patrons and pillars of Christ his
Church: but they (be it spoken without any prejudice to any other) did
afterward bewray the venom they fostered in their hearts, when not long after
they both became traitors to God and their country. Whether Holland harbor any
more such mates, let them look to it unto whom it belongs: but the like
effects give a shrewd guess of the like affects. In the mean while we see,
how this disdainefull dealing against Gods Ministers comes of this, because
they are so brag that they pay them their stipends; being indeed no other
thing, then that which they have before purloined from the church, and crambd
into their guilty coffers. Wherefore, let no man wonder, if I like but a
little of this manner honoring of the Ministry: for small is the honor that is
braued with contumely. And therefore in the name of God, let that manner of
honoring Gods Ministers be continued in the Church, which was appointed by the
better wisdom of the Lord, as well in the old, as in the new Testament, I say
let it be continued in that manner as it was well conceived, and worthily
received by the ancient Fathers: Neither let the prerogative of our own
conceits any longer deceive us, as if we were the only men that could devise a
better. Let abuses be corrected; but so, that the lawful use be either
retained, or restored. Nor let the iniquity of those men which have defiled
things sacred and profane, so far prevail with us, that we should
therefore confound things secular and sacred, or that we should take away that
distinction in things, which nature, reason, and religion has set down.

The third Book. Of Sacrilege, and the punishment thereof.
Chap. I. That donations are made firm to Churches by the same laws, by
virtue whereof other Citizens hold their possessions.
THE study and bounty of our forefathers in enriching the Church are
sufficiently known; in whom, it may seem no small wonder, that every where,
always, and at all seasons; they should so far mistake the matter, that is,
so childishly to deal in this matter, and that their posterity should now at
the last see more and conceive better then they, who in the same cause take a
clean contrary course to them, and that without any command of God, any
example of former age. No doubt, as to stand upon the examples of our Fathers
in their offenses, is foolish and unreasonable; so rashly to condemn the same
where justly they cannot be convinced, is utterly godless and irreligious.

True it is: we are all prone to evil, Fathers, and Fathers children; but to
whether of these may we be more easily persuaded, judge you: to give of our
own, or to take away other men's? Our Elders gave, (which no man can deny) of
no evil mind: our vpstarts take away that our Elders gave; with what mind, the
thing it self does show. Our Fathers gave according to law: our nouices take
away contrary to law. Wherefore seeing the indowments made to the Church have
their strength and assurance from the very same laws, by the which other
Citizens possess their goods, is there any man that would not judge it a
tyrannous act, if any Mastrate (showing no cause) should thrust any subject out
of his possessions?

Wherefore, the Churchmen ought to have been first heard, and just cause should
have been brought in against them, why they were not any longer to be
suffered to enjoy the possessions of the Church in a Christian commonwealth.
They also ought to have been heard which were to succeed the Masse-Priestes in
pastoral charge, whom it chiefly did concern what was to be done with those
goods. But what need all this? without any just knowledge, or further trial of
the cause, a quick course must be taken; and the Chequer (if it were the
Chequer) swopt at al. But if the Churchmen were found ready to renounce all
Popery, and to receive the true profession of Christ his religion what cause
was there left, or what occasion might be found, why Bishops and Pastors
should be expelled their parishes and possessions? unless happily they did
reckon the Church goods among the other heresies? which error is already
confuted. But where now shall I lay the blame? upon the ignorance of the
Ministers? or the avarice of certain Officers? No doubt, they were both in
great fault. But certain crafty and ungodly men, who not in the zeal of
godliness, but for the desire of goods (presuming of a pardon for the contempt
of all religion) joined themselves unto us; and while they would seem the more
serious favorites of the Gospel they became the most sacrilegious instruments
of this mischief: so that the same which of some was thought to be done of
error or ignorance, in these was brought to pass of a malicious wickedness. For
who can excuse them of most heinous sacrilege, who under color of reformation
in some parts of Germany, and the Low Countries, have made a pray of
whatsoever was given for holy and necessary uses, to the Church and Church
Ministers? With due reverence I acknowledge the chief Magistrates, as the
chief patrons of religion: and I hold it always lawful for them, according
to their royal right, to make laws for the Church and Church goods; always
provided, that they so take not the matter upon themselves, that they take al
unto themselves. For it is not the part of a patron to spoil his clyent;
neither was it ever heard of, before these days, that any Christian Magistrate
brought into his Chequer all the Church goods, and made no bones thereof. They
which upon occasion rifled the Church, only of some small part thereof, and
that when the Chequer was in some great consumption, are but evil spoken of for
their labor in all histories. What then may we judge of the^, who have set the
cards, and drawn the Church of every penny? I name none; But I mean them, who
by their example have given the hint to their neighbors, and set them a
pattern of an holy robbery. Lord, how like are these rank professors to
Julian the recreant, or the Turkish tyrant, which make no difference between
things sacred and prophene? how unlike to any Christian Magistrate, (so far as
I know) either of this age, or our forefathers? But is it a foul matter for
sacrilege to be objected to a Christian Magistrate? a more filthy thing is it
to be committed.

Chap. II. What Sacrilegeis.
THere are some found now adays (not far to seek) who think that no sacrilege
can now be committed, because the, difference between sacred and profane in
externe things, was taken away by the death of our Savior; which seems to
me not the judgment of a Divine, but the opinion of an Atheist. For albeit to
the holy all things are holy, and to the profane all things profane; yet that
distinction of things is not taken away, which they have in their appointed
use. There was always among all nations a great difference put, between those
things which were dedicated unto divine service, and those things which serve
men for their common uses. Things for the most part take their denomination
from their end for the which they were ordained. So private men have their
treasure; and the commonwealth her treasure: If you do respect the matter,
they are both of one nature; namely, gold and silver, and whatsoever else is of
any price: but if you respect either the end, or the possessor, you shall find
a great difference between them. The end of a private man his treasury, is
the commodity of a family; but the end of the public treasure, is the
benefit of the Prince and the whole Country. In like manner the treasure which
is given or gatheted to the worship of God, it has his proper end, diverse and
distinct from both those before mentioned: the which end seeing it is sacred,
it gives the name also to the treasure, and it is called sacred.

Furthermore, because the inuiry is greater which is committed against a
Prince, or a public state, then if the same be done against a private man's
person, or his estate; therefore the robbing of a private treasure, is called
plain Theft; but of the common treasure, a Robbery of the commonwelth. So
likewise how much the more horrible the offense is which is committed against
God, then against man, so much more detestable is the direption of the sacred
treasury, then common theft, or the robbing of the common treasury. For which
cause they call that also by his proper name Sacrilege, which is commonly
defined, to be the theft of a thing sacred. The deformity of which theft is
so much the more notorious, by how much the more sharper punishments God
himself, as also the laws of al nations have devised against the same. Albeit
the definition co^teineth, not only things sacred to the worship of the true
God, but of false gods also: for that it is the conscience that makes the
sacrilege, and an opinion of the holy godhead contemned. But how all those
goods the Romish Clergy did possess (under the title of the poor, and the
Church) have been translated to private and profane uses, I need not tell, for
it is too manifest.

Chap. III. The reasons with the which they commonly excuse their Sacrilege.
But sacrilegious persons and their patrons, will not only maintain
themselves with their theft, but they will maintain their theft; that is was
well and worthily done, for the ouerture of the Pope, and the inuestiture of
the true Church. Their reasons are these. That the goods of the Church did
serve to Idolatry, and profane uses, the which being taken away, they could
by law deuolue no man, but only to the common treasury, of the which the
Christian Magistrate has the care and custody. And as the godly Emperors
Constantinus, Theodosius, Honorius, and Areadius, having by their laws put
down the Idolatry of the Gentiles, had the places and revenues of their
temples and their prebends in their own power, to dispose of them as they
thought best, and that without any sin of Sacrilege: so likewise at this day,
the Papacy being exiled, the goods and annuities of Munks, Nuns, and
Mass Priests, may be challenged by the same right to the Christian Magistrate.
But that wast goods pertain to the common treasury by way of excheate, it is
a known point in the law, and a common case.

Neither were the Bishops of old of this opinion, that the Church had nay
right to those goods which were destinate unto the service of Idols: so that it
may seem a very strange thing to us, that at this day there should be found
any faithful Minister of the Gospel, which should once presume to make
challenge to the goods of the Popish Church, to the use and behalf of reformed
Churches. In the first of the Codices de paganis and sacrificijs, the 14.
title, there is an imperial decree extant, the words whereof are these: We will
and command, that all places which in the old time of error were deputed to
sacred uses, be joined to our substance. But what so ever by that right, either
the liberality of former Princes, or our Majesty, would have come to the
hands of any particular persons her soever. let that remain in their
inheritance, with an everlasting assurance: but those things which by many
decrees our pleasure is should appetaine to the hly Church, Christian religion
shall challenge that unto it self. Given the 3. of the Calend. of September, at
Rauenna. Honorius 10. and Theodosius 6. A A. Coss. By which decree it is
manifest, that it was always in the power and right of the Emperor to give
those things which were wast by the abolishing of Idolatry, unto whom it
pleased them. And Dig. the 23. books, ^. title, Da vsu and vsu fructu Legalis.
Leg. 16. Legatum. We read of Legacies given to the setting forth of Pageants,
which might not beset forth; the which, changing but the name of Pageantes
into the name of Popish-Masse, are all alike: the words are these: A Legacy is
left to a City, that of the yearly neuenewes thereof a Pageant might be
solemnized in that City, for the sacred memory of the deceased, which thing
it is not lawful to celebrated. I ask therefore what you think of that
Legacy? Modestinus makes answer; Seeing the testator his will was, that a
Pageant should be set forth, but such as was not lawful there to be set
forth, that it is no reason, such a quantity of money, which the deceased
bequeathed to the show, should return the benefit of the heir. And therefore
the heirs of the deceased, and the chief of the City being gathered
together, they are to consider unto what use the thing commised to their trust,
may be converted, that the memory of him that made the testament, may be
solemnized in another, and more lawful kind. These things siath Mode inus in
the ninth of his answers. By which law any man may see, what is to be though
of such behestes, as are bequeated to the celebrating of unlawful Masses.

To these things it may be added, that the avarice of Churchmen was
insatiable, procuring to themselves infinite donations, both superstitious and
superfluous. Yea when liberality waxed cold, they purchased of themselves,
both fields and fearms, and many times whole countries, so that at last they
would have incroached upon all Christendom, had not the laws of advised
Kings and Emperors limited them, who did perceive that their ouer-thriuing
was to the ouer-turning of the Commonwealth. And therefore every wise
Magistrate had need to take heed, that they dash not their feet against the
same stone.

Chap. IIII. An answer to the arguments of the former chapter.
I May answer, that we have no less need to beware least while like wise men
we plie us to run from one fault, we rush like fools into another. Have not
our fore fathers kept a mean? Why then let their error be a warning unto us.
For we are men also; and it is a more ordinary thing among us, to slide into a
contrary vice, then to keep a commendable mean: and therefore it may also
come to pass, that too much niggard-lines may carry us whither we ought not.
But to admit the utmost, that the Clergy would have raked together their
wealth, to the ruin of the Commonwealth; and that of old, donations were
made, partly superstitious, and partly superfluous; yet of all this it
follows not, that there were none lawful, none religious, none acceptable
unto GOD, and a greeable unto his word, and profitable unto his Church. But
was there any thing in their goods superfluous? it might have been cut off:
was there any thing in his use superstitious? it might have been taken away,
or turned to better use.

That they say it was done, for the ouer-ture of the Popes tyranny, and the
inuestiture of true christianity, it is but a mere color, and that but a bad
one neither. Crafty men abused the preaching of the Gospel, and the
simplicity of godly men (whom it was easy to hold so in hand) that so
themselves might gourmandize the goods of the Church, as a fat pray that hung
fit for their lips. That it was so, the thing it self preaches unto us.
Neither will I any longer stay therein, least this sink being stirred, should
exhale a vapor too filthy and unsavory.

But that which is aleged for the defense of sacrilege, may not so pass,
unexamined. The first is, That the church goods served to idolatrous and
profane uses: which being taken away, could by no law deuolue to any but to
the public treasury. Now that the fallacy of this proposition may the better
appear: I assume that to me which themselves cannot deny me, namely, that there
is a difference to be found between those things which are dedicated to
idolatry and excess, and those things which are abused to idolatry and
excess. There is nothing so holy which the wicked may not abuse: and yet the
abuse of a good thing does not inuert the nature thereof. As for the wealth of
the Romish Clergy, it was not all given to idolatrous and ungodly uses: for
there were many things given of old, to the use of the poor, and Pastors of
the Church. The which albeit the Popish Clergy have abused, yet the nature of
the donation is not thereby altered. Of the donations which were made to
Churches, some were before the corruption of the Church, and some after. (For I
showed before, that the oblations and donations of the faithful, had their
beginning even with the Apostles.) But that these, which were made before the
corruption, are sacred to God, no godly man will deny the same. Now, the Bishop
of Rome and other heretical Pastors, found the churches founded by the
Apostles, and furnished (according to those times) with sufficient riches: to
the which, albeit they added much by much naughtines, yet the same is not to be
esteemed of alike, but so to be accounted of as the rest was. No question, in
the Church of Rome, and other heretic Churches, there are diverse and sundry
things, the which if they be taken in their proper kind, are very christian,
and commanded by God himself: (such is the sacred Ministry of the Church,
and holy care of the poor:) So that whatsoever was bequeathed to either of
these, or unto them both, has a godly end, and may have a godly use. As for
the profanation of things, it ought not so much to move us, as the nature of
things: against the which there is no little to be gained, either by prescription
of time, or abuse of the thing. But if it so fall out, that the profane use be
abolished, they ought to be reuersed unto their lawful use, for the which they
first served. The Ark of the Lord was taken of the Philistines and profaned;
but it did not therefore cease to be sacred to God, and being received again
from the Philistines, it was no less to be esteemed, then it was before. The
vessels and ornaments of Solomon's temple, were translated by Nabucadnezar to
Babylon; the which things being laid up in the Temple of his Gods, after his
manner he used them religiously. But Babylon being conquered, Cyrus in the
right of a conqueror, might have prayed upon them: yet when he once knew, that
they afore-times pertained to the holy worship of the most holy in the temple
of Solomon, he abstained from them, and commanded that they should be restored
to their former use again. More wisely or more religiously done? least hapiy
he might have incurred the same crime of cursed sacrilege, for the which the
Lord had justly punished profane Balthazar his predecessor. By the which it
may appear, that what things are once destined to the use of the Church, are
sacred unto God for ever; not is it lawful at any time to distract them to
foraine uses.

CHAP. V. A distinction of those Church-goods, which the Church of Rome
possesses at this day.
But when as all the goods which we see in the Church of Rome, are not of the
same kind, we cannot give the same judgment of them al. There is therefore a
threfold difference of them always to be remembered: In the first order I place
those, which our godly Fathers gave to the Church, for the maintenance of the
Pastors, and the relief of the poor. In the second order I place those, which
were granted to the church for superstitious uses; as for Masses, Dirges, Monks
and Nuns, and morrow Mass Priests. And in the last order I place those infinite
donations, pernicious to the Common-welth, which were either rashly made by
Kings and Emperors, or wrongfully extorted from them, by force or fraud: of
which kind are the inuestiture of those Ecclesiastical fees, which were given
by godly Princes to the churches; the which when as by that title they do
pertain to them of right; yet the BB. of Rome does challenge the whole right
thereof to himself But these things, seeing that by the laws both of God and
man, they pertain to Kings alone, that which is Caesar's is to be given to
Caesar. The Lord has forbidden ministers to be Kings over their churches: and
therefore, in the 22. of Luke, he purges that humor in the heads of his
Apostles with this Aloes. The Kings of nations rule over them, and they which
have power over them are called bountiful, but it shall not be so with you:
that is, you shall not be Kings: with which magnificent titles of bountiful
and gracious, they flatter them which have small cause, bearing the heavy yoke
of their cruel dominion. Wherefore in this case, christian Kings may lawefully
reuerse, what-soeuer the Bishop of Rome has unlawfully raked to himself, by
fraud or by force.

But here I require discretion and moderation to be used, that Caesar do not
so reuerse those things which are Caesar's, that together he fall to rifle those
things which are Gods. Indeed the clergy of Rome has ravished them both; but
they are not worthy whom the christian Magistrate should imitate: neither is he a
man of worth, that will punish theft with sacrilege. What things the error of
our fathers gave to superstitious uses, they are void I confess, (supestition
and idolatry being taken away,) and the godly Magistrate may dispose of such
goods, as he shall think good: neither has the church any right to challenge
in these. And yet, if the authority of the former law aleadged, and the counsel
of the learned father Augustine be of any worth, those legacies which were
given for the celebrating of masses, and the nourishing of Monks may be
converted to some better use, by the which, the memory of the testator may be
solemnized in another and a more lawful kind. In the 16. of Numb. the censors
with the which, the 250. rebels offered up incense, as Priests in sin and
ungodliness, were notwithstanding hallowed before God: and therefore, that in no
wise they might afterward be employed in any common uses, he commanded them to
be drawn into broad plates for a covering to the altar. So were the instruments
which the irreligious abused converted to a sacred and a religious use. The
which commandment indeed, although it be not general, yet it contains therein
an especial instruction, by the which we are taught, what ought to be done in
such a case. Augustine in his 154. Epistle to Publicola, is of opinion, that
the Idols, Idol-temples, and groves which were put down, were not to be
diuerted to any private use, but to be converted into public services, and
the honor of the true God; that the like thing may be done by them, which is
done in the men themselves, who are converted from a sacrilegious and impious
people, to the true religion of the living God: Least otherwise it might seem
to be done, not of conscience, but for covetousness. But seeing the law of God
prescribes nothing in this matter, and whatsoever Moses has written thereof,
concerns the people of Israel in particular, I make it no matter of religion
why the Magistrate may not determine herein as it shall seem best to his godly
wisdom. Nor do I disauow the decree of the Emperors Honorius and
Theodosius, but I advise al Princes and other chief Magistrates, who have
erst reformed Churches, or shall here-after, that this one thing be alwais well
considered of them, namely, that Churches were but robbed of their rights by
Monestaries, when they gleaned to themselves the duty of tithes and oblations:
which things christian Princes and people have consecrated of old, to the honor
of their Pastors, and the comfort of the poor. For they preposterouslie take
upon them the government of Churches, contrary unto the order of the ancient
Church, and under the title of voluntary poverty, these gathered that to
themselves, which was given to the poor for necessity.

CHAP. VI That the goods of Monks are not all of one kind.
AS in those goods which the Pastors and rectors of the Church possess, I have
showed that there is great difference: so neither are we to think, that the
goods of Monks are all of one sort. It were to long to repeat, how they came to
so great wealth, neither is it needful; only this I wuld have well noted, that
whatsoever the Monks possessed, which of right was due to the Pastors of the
church, that all that did pertain to the first order of church-goods (which I
before noted:) the which indeed after the subversion of Monasteries are not to
be taken for wast, so long as there is any Church remaining. Whereupon I
infer, that all popish idolatry being put down, only those things which
maintained, either tyranny, or idolatry, do deuolue by right to the Chequer:
the rest, which had nor cause nor end erroneous, was to be testored the Church
again.

If so be in any place, all is come to the common treasury, whatsoever the
Monkish professors had in possession, and that, not so much with the consent,
as by the counsel of those, who^ the matter it self did concern, and ought
rather to have intercessed, and taught the Magistrate the contrary, let them
bear the blame for that part themselves, worthy also to bear the burden. We
know that the profanation and abuse of Church goods could not be such, as that
they could inuert the nature of things given, or infring the virtue of the
donation it self. That which the Ark of God was, was it not still, even among
the Philistines? Neither were the vessels of the Lord his Temple unhallowed,
though they were in the midst of Babylon. That the Pope of Rome with his clergy
have abused, and do abuse the true and lawful goods of the Church, it ought
not to be any prejudice to the godly Ministers of the Church: Seeing the
possessors thereof are not Lords, but stewards only, who have the use,
benefit, and bestowing of the Church goods, not the propriety.

As for that they say, that the Bishops of old thought, that the Church had no
right to those things which were dedicated to the service of the Heathen gods:
it makes nothing at all against the truth of our position: For neither do we
hold, that the Church has any right to those things which are immediately
destinate to ungodly uses: I have already confessed, that those things are in
the second order of Church goods: and therefore in the power and at the pleasure
of the christian Magistrate. I remember that I said, that I did not dislike the
decree of Honorius and Theodosius, and other godly Emperors: whose better
examples, if they had imitated, whose error has urged me to write thus much,
there had been no need of this discourse.

Chap. VII. That it is an other thing to come from Paganism to Christianity,
then to come from Popery, or some other heresy.
Moreover this also is not to be omitted, that it is one thing for a people to
be converted from Paganism to Christianity, and an other thing to come from
Popery, that is from Heresy to true Christianity. The difference which is
between Paganism and Christianity is much greater, then that which is between
Christianity and Popery. Paganism has nothing in common with Christianity:
Popery is Christianity, Christianity alayed; alaied, or rather rackt with foul
Idolatry, and (that I may so speak) it is a certain medley, or a kind of
mongrel and motley Christianity. For the sacred Scripture both of the old and
new Testament, the covenant of God, the Baptism of Christ, the remission of
sins, and the name of a christian, with many other things of the same
profession are there, peculiar to the Church, which are notes of christianity,
and are no where to be found out of the Church: Not in Paganism, not in
Iudaisme, not in Nahumetisme. So that the Heresies and Superstition which being
subtracted, are added to the Romish Church, the remainder is mere
Christianity. Very Popery is but a botch of the Church, not the very Church:
but that which the foul Leprosy is, or any other deadly contagion in the body
of man, the same is Popery in the body of the Church. So that, to forsake
Popery is not to forsake the Church, but to fly from the infection of the
church. Now then; when an Ethnicke becomes a Christian; an Alyen and a
stranger, is received and inserted into the new people, and then begins he
to be a member of the Church. But in the reformation of any erroneous or
straggling Church, an adulterous Church becomes a chaste spouse, and base
christians are made lawful, (the wife being reconciled to her husband:) and
therefore, what things so ever the adulterous Church usurped of the goods of
her husband, the lawful Church (as true spouse) does challenge the same to her
self by his right. In Theodosius Records the sixteenth Book and the four and
forty title, against the Donatistes, thus it goes. But those places, in the
which cursed superstition as yet remains, let them be joined to the holy
Catholic Church, so that their Flamines and Priests, their Prelates and all
their Ministers, be spoiled of all their goods, and exiled into diverse Isles
and sundry provinces. There also in the fourth Book, we read of a decree from
the same Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, against the Montanists, in these
words. If there now remains any proper edifices, which ought to be called
rather dens then Churches, let them be awarded to the holy Churches of the
Orthodoctike sect, with all their indowmentes.

Before our times there have been not a few alterations in the Church. In the
which when godly Emperors put down the Heretics, they robbed not the
Churches of their possessions, but restored them to the true professors. Of the
which thing Saint Austine in his fifty Epistle to Boneface a certain
Captain, writes thus. What so ever was possessed of the Donatistes part in
the name of their Churches, christian Emperors by their religious laws have
commuanded, that they come with the Churches them selves to the catholic
Church. Thus says Austine: And were it not as he says, I would confirm the
same with many witnesses.

Wherefore, that I may now comprise those things I have said: Those Church
goods which were gotten, either by fraud or by force, and usurped without
right; or else if they were freely given, but to a superstitious end, are in
the power of the chief Magistrate. But those things which are lawfully
granted and received of the Church, (to no such end, by no such means) are
consecrate to GOD, neither can they be any ways transuersed without sinful
Sacrilege. Saint Austine, in his Treatise upon Saint John the twelfth
Chapter. Behold Judas (says he) is among the holy men, and that you shall not
need to contemn him, a Sacrilegious Church-robber, not a petty Lassoner: he
was a thief of the Tresure, but the Lords Treasure; of the Treasure, but the
sacred Treasure. And if crimes are distinguished in the Court, whether it be
theft, or public robbery, (for public robbery is said to be a theft from
the common Treasury) how much more sharply is a Sacriligious thief to be
judged, which presumes to steal, not from every place, but from the holy
Church? Doubtless he that takes from the Church, may be compared to Judas
the wretch. So says good Father Austine.

Chap. VIII. How gracious and in^^^^ble the sin of sacrilege is.
PLato, being to set down a law against Church-robbers, begins the matter
with a large preface, and first concludes, that the sin of Sacrilege is
incurable, and that he which is infected with any such wretched couetise, is
not moved thereunto either for Gods evil, or for man's, so much as for his
own, and that by reason of some other old and odious sin, not yet punished,
nor ever to be expiat. And therefore he exhorts those, upon whom this
deadly desire grows, that they would use to sacrifice for the same, and
humbly to fly to the Temple of the Gods; to frequent the company of good men,
to hear their godly conference, and to endeavor themselves to do and to
speak those things which are honest and just. But if so be, that infirmity will
not so depart, death for such a wretch were better then life. Wherefore he
enacteth this Law. Whosoever is aprehended for Sacrilege, De legib. Dialog. 9.
(if he be a servant, or a foreyner) his fault being written in his forehead,
and his hands, and being well whipped with so many stripes as the Judge shall
award, let him be thrust naked out of the borders of the land: For happily by
this punishment, being brought to shame, he may amend his manners. For no
punishment is appointed for any man's hurt; but of two things it commonly
effects the one, it makes him either much better, or not so bad, that
sustaineth the punishment. But if it be a Citizen which shall be found to have
committed any such thing against the Gods, or to have done some great and
graceless wrong to his parents, or his country, let the judge so censure of
him, as of one which is incurable, considering this with himself, what honest
instruction and education he has had of a child, and yet has not absteyned
from the most heinous sins. Wherefore let this man's punishment be death, the
least of all evils. So shall he profit others by his example, while he is made
infamous among all, and is put to death beyond the borders of his own country.

The laws of the twelve tables provide thus against the same sin. Who so
steals or pilfereth any holy thing, or committed to the holy place, let him
be held and handled as a murderer of his Father. But what need I recite the
severity of Laws in this behalf? it is a thing well enough known, if it were
but half so much feared. But even they also which escape the laws and
judgments of men, because they are either too mighty, or too crafty, yet can
they not escape the vengeance of God. For it is one of the most detested sins,
after the which the wrath of God yearneth, till it be revenged. The examples
whereof are to be seen in Histories both sacred and profane.

Chap. IX. Certain examples of Gods vengeance against Sacrilege.
THe first example of Sacrilege, may be that which we read of Achan, in the 7.
of Joshua, who took of the excommunicate things of Hierico, a Babylonish
garment, two hundred sickles of silver, and a wedge of gold. For this offense
of one wretched fellow, did not all Israel feel the heavy wrath of God, till
satisfaction was made by the death of that accursed party, and his whole
family? To this I may add an other, committed by the Priests, and no less
severely punished of God, then was that of Achan. In the first of Samuel, the
second Chapter, we read of a certain man of God, who came to Ely the chief
Priest, and said unto him. Thus says the Lord, did not I plainly appear to
the house of thy Father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaos house? and I chose
him out of all the tribes of Israel to he my Priest, to offer upon mine
Altar, and to burn incense, and to wear an Ephode before me, I gave to the
house of thy Father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel.
Wherefore have you kicked against my sacrifice and against mine offerings,
which I comanded in my tabernacle, and honor thy children above me, to make
your selves fat of the first fruits of all the offerings of Israel my people?
Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said that thy house and the house
of thy Father should walk before me, but now the Lord says, it shall not be
so: for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
despised. Behold the days come that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of
thy Fathers house, and there shall not be an old man in thy house. And thou
shall see thine enemy in the habitation of the Lord in all things wherein God
blesses Israel, and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever.
Never the less, I will not destroy every one of thine from mine Altar, to
make thine eyes to fail, and to make thine heart sorrowful: And all the
multitude of thine house shall dye when they be men. And this shall be a sign
unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons Hophny and Phinees: In one day
shall they die both. And I will stir me up a faithful Priest, that shall do
according to mine heart and according to my mind: And I will build him a sure
house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever is left in thy house, shall come and bow down to him for a
piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, and shall say, appoint me I pray thee to
one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a morsel of bread, etc. Thus says
the man of God: al which things, as he foreshewed, came to pass not long
after. For the sons of Ely were slain in battle; the Arc of the covenant
was taken of profane men: And Ely hearing the doleful messenger of these
wretched news, fell from his seat backward, and brake his neck: his
daughter in law the wife of Phinees died in childebed: the holy mount Sylo was
forsaken of the Lord, neither was the Ark of the Lord ever brought thither
again. And after all this, 80. and 5. men, Priests, of the house of Ely were
slain under Saul. I need not speak of the calamities which befell that whole
family, for the Sacrilege of two men only. And albeit the profane Philistines
did honorably use the sacred Arc after their manner: Yet notwithstanding God
plagued them also for their profanation, neither was it forgiven the^, that
they once handled so holy a matter.

But I omit the Sacrileges committed from that time, to the captivity of
Babylon. Where the infamous act of Balthazar, may be a notable example of Gods
justice against al Sacrilegers. He in a bravery commanded those holy vessels
which his father Nabuchadnezar had stolen from Jerusalem, to be set forth for
a cupbord of plate in sumptuous banquet, that out of them, both he and his
cup-mates might carouse a full despite to the dishonor of God. But the wrath of
God found the sot in the deed doing, and brought him in a sharp reckoning,
with an heavy up shot in the miraculous motion of a hand writing. And here
Daniel called before the king to read and expound the heavenly drawn writ, in
stead of a taking away, takes him up, and among many other things bordeth him
thus. Thou have lift up thy self against the lord of heaven, and they have
brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou and thy Princes, thy
wives and thy co^cubins have dro^k wine in them, and thou have praised the Gods
of silver and gold, of bras, iron, wood, and stone, which neither see, neither
hear nor understand, and the God in whose hand thy breath is and al thy ways,
him have thou not glorified: Then was the palm of the hand sent from him, and
has written this writing. MEAN, MEAN, THEKEL, VPHARSIN. This is the
interpretation of the speech: MEAN, God has nu^bred thy kingdom, and has
finished it. THEKEL, thou art weighed in the balance, and thou art found too
light. VPHARSIN, thy kingdom is divided, and it is given to the Meeds and
Persians. After this manner did Daniel salute him. But the same night was
Balthazar slain, and the Empire of the Chaldees and Assyrians, which continued
an hundred and thirty years, was now finished, and theruppon given away by God
to the Meedes and Persians.

But I pass on to the time of the Grecians, under whom the Jews suffered much
sorrow, as well by their own nation, as by the Grecians. Among the rest the
devilish enterprise of Alsimus hie priest of the Jews, attempting the
overthrow of the Temple, was not left unpunished: For he was struck with a
dead Palsy, and ended his life in great misery. In like manner Heliodorus, sent
by king Seleucus to Jerusalem for no other end, the^ to ransanck the temple
(which he understood to be the guardian of great treasure) felt in himself the
revenging hand of God, neither had he escaped present death, had not Onias the
Priest intercessed for him. But he being glad he had so escaped, delivered to
the king. That God was the ouerseer of that temple, and the great guard of that
treasury: yet notwithstanding, if the king had any man he would gladly do a
spite, he might send him thither. The robbing of that Temple, cost Marcus
Crassus Roman Emperor full dear. Did not God revenge his Sacrilege by his
enemies the Persians? They infused molten gold into his head being dead,
because he thirsted after ill gotten good in his life. But Judas the Traitor
is worthy to have the first place among this holy rabble: Whose Sacrilegious
covetousness bread such a monster in his breast, that for base lucre he spared
not his own Master, his conscience ever yelling, that he betrayed the
innocent. Wherefore afterward, he being his own accuser, and judge, and
tormentor, set down his due punishment, and in desperate manner took it of
himself.

Much of this making were that holy couple Ananias and Saphyra, whom God took
in the manner, and took down with sudden death, only for that they
adventured to conceal and keep back some part of that their own treasure,
which them selves of their own accord had dedicated to the Lord. The fact no
doubt might better have been excused in their own, then in another man's
treasure, and yet we see the direful censure of God in this case, to the
terror of all other.

How Julian the Emperor was paid home at the last, as well for his Sacrilege,
as his Apostasy, the fame of al histories has made a just record. This is he,
that in a mockery of Christ and christianity, when he had libde the Church, and
left it never a good thing, said: He had well provided of their souls health:
For to be poor is one of the privy Counsels of the Gospel. I may join with
this Julian, Julian his Uncle, one caterpiller with an other. This Gentleman,
when he had well ransackt the Church, and raked together their most precious
vessels and sumptuous Monuments at Antioch in Syria, and had cast them upon
the ground all upon one heap, he began very gamesomely to play upon Christ,
and to wanton at his pleasure; and to increase the disgrace of that holy spoil
of the Church, at last he uncased his postherne parts, and sat him down upon
the same: But now, see if God could see the same, and not revenge it? Nay; but
presently thereuppon, his privy disgraceful parts, and those poores which
nature had there placed for necessary uses, were straungely benumbed, in so much
that the canckred flesh about those unseemly parts continually putrified and
turned into worms; but last of all, the ugly disease grew on so far, that it
passed far the Art of Physic. For the greedy vermin, having once entered the
inner parts, still scrawled to the quick and sound flesh, nor imight they
ever cease their restless gnawing, till he had yelled out his cursed soul.

Many more instances might be remembered of christian Princes, were it not to
tedious a thing for me to repeat them: as also, for that there are some things
regestred for wicked sacrileges, which if they had bin done without the
contempt of God, might very well have been excused. For no doubt, it had bin
sacrilege in David, when he eat the Shewbread, were it not that necessity did
excuse it. And therefore, sacrilege is to be measured according to the man's
irreligion, which is bewrayed as well in the contempt of false Gods, as the
neglect of true: namely, whenever that is contemned by us, which is
worshipped by other men, and we do it not of any true devotion toward God,
but of a certain irreligion in our selves. Generally so greatly is it to be
regarded, with what mind a thing be done, as that to destroy the groves and
temples of false Gods, of a certain religion toward the true God, is to be
accounted for great godliness in the true worshippers: The same thing, if it be
done of the worshippers themselves of false Gods, or of some other Atheist and
contemner of all the gods, it is to be taken for godles impiety, and wretched
sacrilege.

If any man ask the question, how he should be said to contemn God, that
thinks there is no God: I answer, that that only thing it self, that he
thinks there is none, proceeds of a contempt, and so consequently of him
which is. And therefore it need not seem strange to any man, that the wrath of
the true God has been so enraged, not only against sacrilegious idolatours,
but even in the sacrilege of idol Gods. Of which judgment, seeing profane
histories afford us infinite copy, we will take view of a few of that company.
Nor Brennus nor Xerxes could violate the temple of Delphos, and not taste the
cup of gods vengeance for it. As for the sacrilege of the Tholosian gold
(from whence the adage grew) I shall not need to speak of it being so
generally known. But the soldiers of Cambyses, sent to spoil the Temple of
Ammon, were overwhelmed quick in vengeable heaps of heavy sand: and their
master a scorner of the Egyptian religion, albeit superstitious: yet because
he did it irreligiously; not long after he had slain Apus, was slain himself
by his own sword. And how present was the vengeance of God in the revenge of
Pyrrhus? He ravished at his pleasure the Lucresian Proserpina: but when he would
have sailed away full fraught with his nefarious pray, he wracked with his
whole navy upon the next shore: there was he left to the rage of the seas, but
the treasure was found, and brought home to the Goddess. To these I add the
like example (but the eue^t unlike) of Dionysius the Syracusan tirant. It is
the rather to be remembered for their sakes, whose gretest sport among their
secret companions, is, when they have made a pray of the church, to play upon
God, as if they would laugh him but of heaven, for his loss in the church.
This Dionysius, as I suppose, has set up school among our religious Atheists
of these days. Wherefore, you have here the words of Tully concerning this
Dionysius, as they are set down by Valerius maximus. Dionysius borne at
Syracusa, counted it in part of his greatest sport, to set forth with gibing
terms, his so many sacrileges as we now repeat. For having ransacked the
temple of Proserpina at Locris, when he had passed the seas with a prosperous
gale, geering to his followers, do you see (says he) how fortunate a cut
those very Gods have given us, whom we have robbed? Having taken away from the
Olympian Jupiter a golden vestment of great weight, with the which King Hiero
had honored him among the Carthagenian Gods, and having cast him into a new
livery of Mockado, he said; that a golden coat was to heavy for summer, and to
cold for winter, but his Lincie-wolsie would fit him for both seasons. The
same also at Epidaurus, commanded Aesculapius his golden beard to be barbd,
because (as he said) it was not fit that Apollo his father should be
beardlesse, and he thus ouer-barbed. Moreover he seized upon their silver and
golden tables in the Temples, and whereas according to the custom of Greece,
it was written upon them, These are the good Gods, he said, he was very well
content to accept the goodness of the Gods. Again, he took away the golden
wreathes, and boles, and garlands, which were held out at arms end by the
images, and in so doing, he said, he did receive them, not deceive them:
arguing, that it were a mere folly, seeing that we ask good things of the
Gods, not to take them, when they proffer them. But this man, albeit he was
not punished, as he deserved, yet when as he died, for very shame of his
untoward son, he received that punishment by his death, which he escaped
in his life. For the wrath of God proceeds but an easy pase to revenge
himself: but in the end he requiteth the slownes of his patience, with the
sharpnes of their punishments.

Thus far goes Valerius: who albeit he say somewhat, yet that is much more
which the same Tullie noted: namely, that tyrants are stoong with a continual
disquiet of conscience, the villainies they have committed never suffering them
to rest, but wringing their minds with incessant torture, no other-wise then a
hang man does a condemned person. Wherefore Dionysius laghters in so many
sacrileges were but so many girnings: neither could he, being condemned in
himself of so many misdeeds, be without a miserable and mangled conscience. I
suppose, in the opinion of men, he might outwardly seem a happy man, but yet
within, he knew himself how wretched he was, and he felt the same. For this
cause he suffered Damocles to make just trial thereof, (being desirous to
try) he sat him down in a golden throne, environed of al sides with a consort
of well tuned pleasures, every note provoking him to a sweet relishe of this
desired happiness: But when he perceived a glittering sword hang over his head,
strong with a slender hair point de-uice: his heart was done, and all the
sport was dashed: Damocles swear, he would no more be happy, desiring the
Tyrant to forgive him his felicity. But how much more tortured were the
brains of the tyrant himself, who had not the sword pendant over his most
wicked head, but felt it always ready braundished in his wide wounded heart?

But now what shall I say to the Satyricall Poet: Yea, but tell Prelates, what
good gold does in a Temple? Albeit there is small reason (that I may put in
an answer for the priests of the heathen) why you of all other should be made
privy to this: yet notwithstanding, thus much dare I say in defense thereof,
that that gold what-soeuer it was, was hollowed, even unto the most impious and
idolatrous Priests. But for that which was kept in the Temple of GOD, we may
learn, by that which Onias the Hie-Priest said to Heliodorus, what use it had:
namely to releive the poor widows, and maintain the more needful ophanes.

And as for that which concerns the treasure of the Church, when it had any,
it was neither idle I assure you, nor evil occupied, but as occasion served
it, it served the necessities of the distressed: and we may say with Saint
Ambrose, The Church has gold, not to lay up, but to lay out. For that indeed,
to feed the poor, relieve the needy, and defend the opressed, were the actions
and exercises, for the which the BB. of old have been worthily commended. And
to that end also, because the christian people, would have BB. above all other
to be bountiful, they did abundantly provide, that they might so be with the
best. But now this is the only drift of policy in some, of simplicity in many,
that by all means the state of our BB. might be brought to begers estate: they
may teach charity (good leave have they) and preach liberality, (there is no
man against it) but practice it they may not; they are not forbidden, but they
are not allowed. I know they will object the avarice of fom, and the riotousnes
of many BB. in the goods of the Church, that by one means or other, they
imbecil that part, which of right pertains to the pore. But to admit, that
the pore man's part were in the BB. purse: (of the which notwithstanding they
have had their quietus est) with what strange reason, or with what new religion
do they go about to excuse sacrilege with sacrilege? as if the BB. error could
qualify their rage. But I perceive, least the Pastors of the Church should be
the only sacrilegers, they which have got the church-goods into their hands,
had rather be found of both, the greater church-robbers. For who sees not,
that whatsoever is once taken from the church under this color, the poor
never lick their lips after it? yea, the pore are in far worse case at this
day, then ever they were before; who have found poor churchmen more liberal
of old, then they can find rich gentlemen now, or any other, which at this day
by wrong and robbery usurp the goods of the Church. The tyranny of the Romish
Prelates being dissolved, might not the pore more easily have obtained their due
of the godly Pastors, then of the^ which now have crept into their possessions?
But to concluded, I affirm, and you shall find it true, that whosoever they
be, that wrongfully lurch the Church of their good, or by any means abuse
the^, let them be of what title they may, or let them do it under what title
they will, they cannot be excused of sacrilege, nor their sacrilege excused,
when God shall visit with a vengeance.

FINIS.

