SACRED HYMNS. CONSISTING OF FIFTI SELECT PSALMS OF DAVID and others,
Paraphrastically turned into English Verse. And by ROBERT TAILOVR, set to be
sung in Five parts, as also to the Viole, and Lute or Orph-arion. Published for
the use of such as delight in the exercise of MVSIC in her original honor.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham, by the assignment of the Company of
Stationers. 1615.

(...)
IN thee, we live; moove, Lord, by thee:
From thee pure mynds thee-knoweing light derive.
How then, save through thy grace, may we
That honor high to sing thy bliss atchieve?
Then thou draw up my low desire:
And love of thee let noble thoughts inspire.
ETernal God! whose boundles time, not led by circling sky,
Then former day, now later leves; whence we some prime descry,
Whence first, time began his coorse; thus parts which may arrange:
But thy blessed time unmooving stands, ay perfect, void of change,
With thee eternal, present all, unknoweing first or last,
Deziring nothing yet to com, regretting nothing past.
Thou infinite, (great Self-beeing Lord,) first, highest, pure, unmixt:
Unbounded sole, to all thy woorks wel-mezured bounds have fixed.
That glorious Sun, fair Moon, and Stars, finite since we do know;
Nor Gods themselfs, and made by thee, more glorious Light, may show.
And dread we yet, who serve this Lord, have proved his helpful might,
Man's, Feends assalts? May earth with power above-celestial fight?
But He, though world conteins and fills, comprended though of none;
Yet gracious, to his chozen train, his vieu in supreme throne
(Their eyes with light of glori' encleerd,) pure blessedness, prezents.
Abiss of joy! that thought exceeds; yet words fresh thought prevents.
For thou, Perfection o entire, perfections all containst:
No good, not in thee; 'above thee, none; whole Good, pure Bliss remainst.
What Beauties ey, what mind delight; what Sweetness drawth desire;
What Majesty's we high revere; what Glorious states admire;
What Wisdom richly vests the mind, and makes it All possess,
Redoubling all by right-drawn shapes; what Goodness things does bless,
Diffuzing round it self; from thence what Virtues noble spring
By woorthi acts to cheer the world, and better age to bring;
What Happi life our thoughts conceive; (for ah how small a mite
Of happi life we here enjoy?) what Joy, what deer delight,
What flagrant Pleasures, full, and mere, in blessed state are found;
In thee, great Fountain of them all, united all abound.
From thee, as beams from beauteous Sun, what ever is goodli seen
In heaven or earth; what rich, what fair, what ever we loveli deem,
And pleazed will alures; from thee, high Cause of All, derived;
By thyn aspect is all maintaind; yea dead, by thee revived.
That all thy creatures, supreme Lord, thee Goodness high define:
Themselfs from thee agnize; to thee their praises all resign.
And dote we still on creatures mean; in their perfections dwell:
Nor raize our loves toward Him, who them must thousand folds excel?
For as the matchles Sun, though one, imbued with virtue high
From richnes thyn, in glorious walk brought round the broad-spred sky,
And lustring earth; (how poor a clod?) with beams and influence sweet
Of spirit sublime, does various life's (each graced with beauties meet)
Through land and sea disperse; hence beasts, hence fish, each crauling thing,
Birds, trees, herbs, flours, fruits, spices rare, yea metals deep respring:
All whose perfections, great and mean, in thousand kynds renewed
Whom thousand graces deck, and yet with virtues more endued,
In Sun himself, thy master-woork, Cause whence they all proceed,
Must needs excel; not being as here, (not so have thou decreed,)
By matter course, embas^d; empaird, by distance great; by site
Oblique, alaied; diversified, (repugnant that they fight,)
By mixtures of ten thousand forms; but there they all refine;
Unite in one; one uniform, high, rich perfection shine:
So (glorious Cause of all,) in thee; what lifeful Light in Sun;
What Greatness fair in Heavens does shine; through Orbs what Beauties run;
What Powers, what Virtues nobly rich, Intelligence what clear,
What Wisdom, Freedom, Goodness sweet, in Angels blessed appear;
What flagrant Loves, what glorious Ioys, Celestial Coorts embless;
In thee unite; do all in one eternally possess,
In infinite perfection more, so sort in more sublime.
O pureness high, whereto not man's, nor Angels thoughts can clime!
For thou, who Being art it self; do Beeings all contain:
Perfections all, thence o derived, more perfect there remain.
Then Lord, from thee since all proceed; to thee in just desire
They bend: at thee, whence first they came, Content they last require.
For thou, First Cause; Great End of all. What ever true rest affects,
Perfection his what e're does seek, what happi state expects;
Thee, Lord, o thee it still pursues: some beam of bliss divine,
As due from bounti thyn it craves. Even senseles creatures thyn,
Through natures force inclined by thee, woork out their Being best,
And place preserving seek. But man, with understanding blessed,
And Spirits celestial, strive to know thee: 'who known, do Love alure.
(Grow Knowledge; Love will grow.) True love, does woorthi hearts procure
Thy will to woork, thy Laws to keep: which kept, thou do requite
With high Reward, with God himself. Here blessed with glorious sight,
They thee enjoy; to thee with love (Eternal Bliss) adhere.
O sourse of ioys! Toward which our hope (unwoorthi though) we rear;
And thee, ah thee pursue. Thou Lord, in mortal life below,
(Where hundred snares our souls beset, where sin does all oreflowe,)
Conduct us with thy grace; and safe to life immortal bring:
With Angels, where triumphant we shall ay thy praises sing.
SACRED HYMNS.
PSALM 1.
A description of the Righteous, and their Feliciti: also of the Ungodli, and
their Ruin, in the day of Judgment.

OBLESSED wight! whose pure desires to stain
Th'ungodli crew in vain their counseils bend;
In vain do sinners ways his absence plain;
And scorners chairs in vain their poison spend:
Th'Eternals law has rapt his whole delight;
The Eternal law he muzeth day and night.
AS precious plant; whom iuiceful veins do fat,
Due fruits enrich, unfading leafs do grace;
(The Masters joy, fair honor of the plat:)
So righteous man; whom blessings round embrace.
While wicked imps, as rootles fruitles chaf;
Which whirled round, the wynd seems cauze to laugh.
THEREFORE when soverain Judge of heavens and land
By final doom shall destin to'each his place:
The just shall shine, and glorious senate stand;
When damned rout shall fly his dreadful face.
For righteous path th'alrighteous Lord advows:
But track perverse toward dire destruction bows.
PSALM 2.
The Prophet King DAVID (though not here in the title, yet elsewhere in holy
scripture, named author of this Psalm,) foresheweth the vain conspiraci of the
Princes of the world, against Christ and his Kingdom, proclaimed by God, and
establisbed over all the world: And advizeth them therefore, for their own
everlasting good, to assubiect themselves to him, and it.

WHAT graceles fears, strange hates, may Nations so affright,
Infuriate so; against God with mad attempts to fight?
Against God, and against his Christ, earths Kings and Peers shall band,
To force ioyn fraud, (ah fools!) Heavens kingdom to withstand.
Fond, earthi mynds! ye hate your bliss: Gods gracious hests,
Free laws, as thrauling tys, your lawles life detests.
BUT He in heavens that sits, whose ey their thoughts divides;
Their wicked mind abhors; their vain attempts derides.
He then in wrath shall speak; in wrath which sore shall vex,
And with distracted thoughts their troubled mynds perplex,
And then shall glorious voice from heavenli throne proceed;
Lo here my Son, a King to sacred Sion decreed.
THEN this decree I Will show: God spoke it first to Me;
My Son thou art: this day have I begotten thee,
Thy kingdom shall increase: Ask me; and Gentile lands;
Yea utmost ends of earth, I Will render to thy hands.
Whom thou, obdur'd in sin, with rod of iron shall bruze:
As earthen pot shall crash, while they thy laws refuze.
THEN o, advize ye kings; and ye instruction take
Who Judges are of earth, your judgments right to make.
Serve God with fear: (with fear best wisdom is begone:)
With dread your ioys asseazon. Then homage to his Son
With kiss prezent: So so his kindling ire prevent,
Which them and all their ways, against whom least spark is bent,
With horror dire consumes. But blessed ay the wight
Who trusts in him; to him who sacred faith has plight.
PSALM 8.
The Prophet DAVID admireth Gods graciousnes toward Man: particularly in the
future humiliation of Christ; and in the exaltation of Man's nature, in him, and
by him, ensuing. Where together with the supernatural dominion of Manintimated,
the restoration also of the natural is expressed. By the way the Childrens
acclamation to our Savior, at his solemn entri into the Temple, and the
powerful effect thereof, are pointedat.

ETERNAL Lord; th'illustrous fame
That sounds through world thy glorious name!
Whose greatness fair transcends the skys;
Whose goodness earth does not despize.
Even tender lips of infants young
Thy grace inspires with praiseful song:
Whose force thy foes revengeful rage
All danted strangely does assuage.
WHEN up my wondering eyes I raize
Toward higher coorts which preach thypraise;
The heavens so huge, the stars so bright,
That Prince of day, this Queen of night;
All which do thee their maker know,
Of peerles hand the matchles show:
Lord, what is man, poor clot of mold,
That him in mind thou still should hold;
Or son of man, defiled worm,
Thy gracious thoughts toward him to turn!
A LITTLE thou will man abbase,
Beneath thy blisful Angels place:
Then ay shall man remain renound,
With prime of glory princely cround.
To him as King thy creatures bow,
And dueti pressed shall joyful vow:
What e're against his scepter swell,
His powrful foot thou down make quell.
THE cattle myld his service bear:
Yea beasts most wyld his frounds do fear:
What flying wing the air divides,
What swimming fin through water glides,
What creeping thing in sea or land,
Have all subjected to his hand.
O Lord, our Lord; what glorious fame
Resounds through world thy gracious name!
TREBLE.
^ Eternal Lord; th'illustrous fame, Thatsounds ^ through world thy glorious
name! Whose greatness fair transcends the ^ skys; Whose goodness earth does not
de- spize. Even tender lips ^ of infants young Thy grace inspires with praiseful
song: Whose force ^ thy foes revengeful rage All danted strangely does as-
swage.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 15.
The moral furniture of a true member of Gods Church, set out by King DAVID.

LORD: who shall in thy roial tent reside?
Whom shall thy sacred mount his dweller claim?
The man whose feet in paths direct abide;
Whose lips at truth, whose hands at justice aim.
NO wronging tale his tongue has twynd; no deed
Of his has neighbor harmd; yea slander vile
Against neighbor raiz'd, which itching ears does feed,
With stern rebuke his righteous ears exile.
THE godles wretch, from heavenli coort rejected,
As foe, he shuns; as outcast base, despizeth:
The godli wight, by grace divine elected,
As friend, he loves; as precious, highly prizeth.
HIS word as oath, his oath as sacred vow,
He firm observes; though harm he thence endure:
Usurious trade, the idles biting plow,
Ne gain nor ease can him to hold alure.
THE upright cause, sole object of his sight,
No bribe can hurt, no present needs to mend:
So he the man, whom naught shall shake or fright;
Whom sacred place, and blisful ioys attend.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
PSALM 16.
The Prophet DAVID in this Psalm, noted with a mark of excellenci, declares
that (being first prepared in soul, by betaking himself wholly to the service
and protection of God,) he had received supernatural infusion, of Divine
Wisdom: By virtue whereof with much joy and exultation he foreprophecieth the
speedi Resurrection of our Holy Savior from death, (the ground of man's hope
and comfort;) and the happiness of the Life to com in the vision of God.

THEN thou preserve me, Lord, thou anchor of my mind;
My wandering thoughts no rest save in thy favor find.
Thee, thee my soul has chozen, thee vowed her Lord to be:
Though service mine I know can nothing ad to thee.
Yet to thy servants may; in whom thy gifts excel;
Terrestrial Saints; midst whom my high delights do dwell.
BUT sorroes them befall, yea heaped plaugs oppress;
Who gifts from thee to dum or damned gods address.
Their murdring sacrifice shall never soil my face:
Their Gods accursed names my lips shall never grace.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THOU art my God, my Lord; the portion I love best;
My health, and wealth; my joy; my bliss, and glorious rest.
And thou my earthli lot, in place both rich and pure,
A goodli seat, shall long to me and mine secure.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THE Lord with thankful praise my humble mind adores,
Who me with counseil deep in nightli muzing stores.
For him before me ay my faithful eyes engrave:
He at my right hand stands, from falling me to save.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
WHEREFORE my heart with joy, my spirit exults in praise:
And soul her dying flesh in hopeful rest doun-lays.
For not my soul beneath exiled thou wilt leave from thee:
Ne let thyn HOLY ONE impure corruption see.
But paths of life wilt show, which to thy presence bring;
Where fullest ioys for ay, and purest pleasures spring.
TREBLE.
^ THen thou preserve me Lord, thou anchor ^ of my mind: My wandering thoughts
no rest, save in thy favor find. ^ Thee, thee my soul has chozen, thee vowed
her Lord to be: ^ Though service mine I know can nothing ad to thee: Yet to ^
thy servants may, in whom thy gifts excel; Terrestrial Saints, ^ midst whom my
high delights do dwell.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 17.
DAVID grounding upon the innocenci of his own life and conscience, appealeth
to God for relief against the oppression and cruelti of his unjust enemies: who
men of the world, place their happiness wholly in the corporal pleasures of this
life. whereas his Feliciti consists in enjoying Gods favor in his righteous
life here, and in the glorious vision of God in the life after the
Resurrection. This Psalm seems to have been made, upon occasion of the second
expedition which Saul made against David, at the first instigation of the
Ziphites: at which time David flying from the Desert of Ziph to that of Maon,
was in a plain there between the mountains enclosed by Saul. But by reason of a
sudden message that the Philistims did invade the land, Saul left foloing of
David; who so escaped.

HIGH Judge of world, cast down thy righteous eyes;
Attentive hear, while right for justice humbly cries.
Not causeles fear, nor sleight of faining lips,
Or needles douts prezents, or plot disguised uprips:
Just grief appeals; and sentence from thy face,
Of thee craves due redress: thou then just plea embrace.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THOU often my soul, yea often in night did vieu;
When thoughts in silent rest prezent appearance true:
And often my heart with firi storms have seen
Dissolved; and trial made what dross therein has been.
Naught counterfeit, no palliate thing have found:
What secret mind does think, that mouth does truly sound.
All as my words, so deeds toward men do frame:
Thy sacred word my rule: the violent wrongers blame,
I see, and shun. O still my feet contain
In righteous paths; still hands from acts not just restrain.
THEE Lord I call: for sure thou will me hear:
Ah then receive the plaint which faithful soul does rear.
Divide thy acts: display thy mercies free,
(Thou Savior of thy Saints from those who them and thee
With wicked hate attempt): as light of ey
Me fenced, under, Lord, thy shadoing wing let fly.
There let me rest; there safe from impious crew,
My deadli foes, protect: who circling rage renew,
My strength to wast, my life to earth to bring;
Engrosd with fat; and proud, out thundering threats do ring.
AS Lion fierce, with ireful hunger whet,
Flings out his prey to seek; which ioious having met,
Stands foming rage: or else as Lions whelp,
Who coucheth close in cave, his strength with slight to help,
Nor bold, nor yet afraid: so Lord my foes,
Now round with ramping troops our ways and walks enclose,
Prezenting death: and now with spiteful ey,
Doun-cast, dissembling leer, advantage to espy.
THEN Lord arize, and with encounter swift
Affront their savage looks: and blood since is their drift,
Midst wicked troops, that blood may blood repay,
To save us by thy hand, with sword mow down thy way.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
SO Lord from men, my grieving soul enfree,
From men of baser world: who here we beast-like see
In fading life their portion all possess;
And panches vile, their God, from thy rich storehouse bless.
Like sire, like son: same coorse their offspring runs;
Full gorge themselves; what is left, that to their infants comes.
BUT I, by faith, in righteous life, shall vieu
Thy gracious face. And when thy power shall death subdue;
Awakened, Lord, eternal glorious sight
Of semblance thyn, me like, shall fill with pure delight.
PSALM 19.
The Almighti Lord being made known to the World by his glorious woorks,
(amongst which the Sun for beauti and power is eminent;) and moreover being
attained to by menes of his Law and gracious Word, the virtues and happi
effects whereof are mani and memorable: DAVID prays as well for remission of
secret, as for preservation from presumptuous transgressions of that divine
Law; that so, secured from final defection, himself and his devotions may be
accepted of God his Redeemer.

THE heavens declare the glori' of God; that worlds great arch foorth-tels,
"His handi woork we are himself who thousand heavens excels.
Both day to day resounds these words, and night to night inures
This knowelege high; which vieuing ey to muzing mind assures.
No speech, no language under sky, which has not heard their voice:
Their words through earth to ends of world run ruled with glorious noise.
HE here the Sun in bour has placed: the Sun, like bridegroom brave
Who coming forth, like Giant stout to run his race does crave.
His course from utmost end of heaven he takes, and round amain
By mighti compass to' utmost end of heaven returns again.
His glistering rays all guild the world: no less his quicning heat,
What earth, what air, what sea containth, cheers up with comfort great.
GODS law is perfect; souls to him restoring it betakes:
His testimoni' is sure in woork; and wise even children makes.
Gods iustifyings are sound and straight; to raize the heart with joy:
His mandates clear; from clouded eyes to chase their dark annoy.
The fear of God is pure; and keeps from dire corruption free:
His judgments all as true and just, of heavens adored be:
More worth desire then treasures huge of pearl and finest gold;
More sweet then sweetest food which Be in curious cells does hold.
THEN Lord, behold, thy servant warned, to keep thy law dezires:
Dezires thy law to keep; which kept, to high reward aspires.
Then thou inspire thy grace: and Lord, (for who his falts can know?)
To clenze my stains through sins unknown thy gracious merci show.
But strange presumptuous sins keep off, that those may never reign:
So from the great defecting sin I clear shall ay remain.
And so my words from humble lips, my thoughts from thankful heart,
Thou shall accept; O Lord, my strength, redeemer mine that art.
TREBLE.
^ THe heavens de- clare the glory of God, that ^ worlds greatarch forth-
tells, His handi woork we are him- self, ^ who thousand heavens ex- cells. Both
day to day re- sounds ^ these words, and night to night in- ures This
knowelege high; which ^ vieuing ey to muzing mind as- sures. No speech, no
language under ^ sky, which has not heard their voice: Their words through
earth to ends ^ of world run ruled with glorious noise.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 20.
The prayer of the faithful people of God, for the safeti and victori of their
King going forth unto war; recorded by King DAVID himself.

IN day of trouble, o woorthi king;
God cheer thee; thence high valor spring:
And mighti name of Jacobs Lord,
Protect from stroke of hostile sword.
That day from sacred throne to thee
On Angels wings aid heavenli flee:
And strength, by prostrate Church implored,
From Sion^ great Ark be fresh restored.
THY prayer still pierce his gracious ears,
As pious soul it humbly rears:
Thy gifts his eyes benign receave;
And offerings burnt all cinders leave.
His light illustrate so thy face;
So favor his thy ways entrace;
That wish of heart, that woork of brain,
Succesful end still blessed attain.
THVS we, enfreed from feared annoy,
For s^feti thyn, our dearest joy,
All thankful shall Gods praises sing;
And glorious name to heavens upring.
Yea when thy prayers his power performs,
And thee victorious (o) returns:
We banners, ensigns of his praise,
And trophes to' his great name will raize.
O FAITH assured; inspyrd from high!
Now know I, God, even God drawth nigh:
Our King, the Lords anointed deer,
Celestial sanctuari does hear.
There see I, aid divine decreed,
To save his person in hours of need:
There Victori, by Gods right hand,
By power against which no power can stand:
SOME charrets make their strength and grace:
In horses some proud glory place.
Fond joy, false strength! at thundering call,
Horse, charrets, men, to ground do fall.
We then to heavens address our ey,
Where surer trust faiths eyes descry:
A trust, which, whilst they down are brought,
Our standing strength and triumph has wrought.
Then hear us, Lord: let heavens great king.
Our king on earth home safely bring.
^ALM. 21.
King DAVID yields solemn Thanks unto God, at his return with Uictori over
Gods enemies: and farther foresheweth their utter extermination.

THE King, (Lord,) toward thy glorious face
Victorious eyes does joyful rear:
His strength, thy spirit; his health, thy grace;
With doubled triumphs his soul does cheer.
What heart could wish, what lips did crave;
Thy bounteous hand him strangely gave.
YEA whether his thoughts had never aspyr'd,
Thy blessing roial him prevents:
Of purest gold croun undesyr'd
To humble head rich hand prezents.
Then lire he asked: thou long to live
Yea life eternal did him give.
WHAT maiesti on earth can shine;
What woorship mortal man may grace;
What glory, only not divine;
Thy goodness all on him does place.
That him all ages, pattern rare
Of matchles bliss, shall ay declare.
THEN joy his thankful heart has fraught;
Which from thy face serene derives:
Which firm affiance has likewise wrought:
Which joy again still fresh revives.
For since the King in The Highest does trust;
You Are safe; o King; o Highest, you are just.
FOR as on thyn thy love is signed:
So powrful hand those monsters dire,
Which hate the soverain good, shall find;
And found, confound in day of ire.
As firi furnace they shall fume;
Which kindled once does self consume.
WITH cursed sires, corrupted seed,
From face of earth thou shall destroy.
For spite against thee their brains do breed:
Vain spite, which woorks but self-annoy.
As mark, their faces thou shall lay;
On which thy winged shafts may play.
OTHOW, who everlasting reins
Of world almighti Guide do sway;
Advance thy strength; and proud disdains
Of miscreants vyld great Lord repay.
So we thy power shall sing and praize;
Which foes does quell, thy servants raize.
TREBLE.
^ THe King (Lord) toward thy glorious face Victorious ^ eyes does ioy-ful
rear; His strength, thy spirit; his health, ^ thy grace; With doubled triumphs
his soul does cheer. What heart could ^ wish, what lips did crave, Thy
bounteous hand him strangely gave.

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

BASE.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 22.
Our Saviors complaint upon the Cross, thanks giving for deliverance, and
propheci touching the great increase and perpetuiti of his Church, foretold by
DAVID.

MY God, my God: why do thou me forsake?
Why to my plaints thyn ear a stranger make?
By day I cry, but thou far off art gone:
By night, deer Lord; but audience find I none.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
YET Holy Lord, thou same do still endure;
Thyn Isreal's joy; their song of praises pure.
Our Fathers, Lord, in thee did faithful trust;
On thee they hoped: Thou to their hopes were just.
They cried; and tears did not shour down in vain:
Their cries thou heard'st; and freedst them from their pain.
BVTI, a worm; not man; but man's reproach:
Where abiects vyld their basest scornings broach.
What ey me vieuth, same ey does me deride:
They wag proud heads; false lips they wryth aside;
He trusts in God; Let God from heaven above
Make good this trust, and now declare his love.
TRVETH, Lord; my hope from mothers breast thou wast:
Then hopes sure ground, thy gracious promise past.
From mothers womb I rest bequeathd to thee:
Thence me receiv'dst; my Savior (Lord) to be.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THEN saving Lord, since trouble does press so near,
(Ah trouble vntryd,) and no where help appear:
Be thou not far: See Lord, what bulls are met;
Huge bulls of Basan round have me beset:
With gaping iaws, much lion-like they play,
Which ramps to seize, and roars to rend his pray.
SEE, vital juice to watri stream distild:
My bones disioint: my heart, with anguish filled,
Like melting wax consumes: as fire-burnt clay
My spirits being dryd, life's vigours all decay.
Yea withering tongue to parched chops does cleve:
Thus me, my Lord, in dust of death do leve.
FOR dogs have me* besieged: A savage rout
Of vyld malfactors; me environ about.
Hands, Feet, they'ue pierced: my bones may all be told:
Which gazing ey^ from flinted hearts behold.
My robe vnript amongst them they divide:
And seamles cote by chancing lot decide.
BUT thou, my Lord, in weakest state my strength,
My hope in death; look down, release at length
From heavens award: my life from sword discharge;
From power of dog my desolate soul enlarge.
From lions mouth; from unicorns horns, with speed,
Now hear, o save, in souls extremest need.
THY glorious name I Will preach to brethren deer:
And faithful Church, in midst, thy praise shall hear
From thankful voice resound. Ye sons of grace,
Who fear your Lord; and thou great Isreal's race,
Loved Jacobs seed; your reverend ioys enhance:
His praise through earth, his name to heavens advance.
FOR not with scorning mind, or loathing ey,
The Afflicted wight he careless passed by:
Ne helpful face from rueful sight did hide:
But gracious ear to just complaint applyd.
Then vows I Will pay before them which thee fear:
And sacred praise assembli great shall hear.
THE spirits myld, whom dews celestial bless,
Shall fruits of earth in plenteous rest possess.
Their gracious zele Gods glorious praise shall sing:
Your ended life shall life unending bring.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
YEA, nations all which earths great globe do fill,
Even kindreds which her bounds extremest till,
At length themselves remember shall, and mourn,
Till whom they left, to him again they turn.
To mighti king, whose word whole world does wield,
Thus worship due shall world united yield.
FOR him all states shall serve: On earths great store
The rich shall feed, and heavens great Lord adore:
And poorest wretch, who down in dust does ly,
To him shall bow; and dying, death defy;
This course great ages run: Their posterous race
In worlds clear vieu his service shall embrace:
And so transmit, that childrens children ay
His justice learn, his sacred will obey.
PSALM 25.
DAVID (as it seems) upon his last farewell and flight from the Coort of Saul,
understanding perhaps of the great levi of forces to pursue him; and entering in
that distress of state, as well into a revieu of sins of his coortli life past,
as into a forevieu of troubles which in this banishment he must endure: wholly
casts himself upon the merci and favor of God. Whom he prays for
Protection from his wrongful enemies, for Remission of his sins, and for
Direction in the best coorse of life. Withal he celebrateth Gods graciousnes
toward his faithful servants; and concludes with a petition in behalf also of
the people.

TO THEE his faithful soul thy servant, Lord, does rear:
My God, my trust: o dain her humblest suits to hear.
And let not black disgrace my life's pure light obscure;
And frustrate hope proud foes insulting ioys alure.
Let none who thee attend, abasing shame depress:
Depress it those, thy law who causeles ah transgress.
INLIGHTEN Lord my soul so with thy guiding grace,
That I thy truth may find, and found may firm embrace,
Revele thy paths divine: o thou my Savior deer:
To thee perennal hope, eternal love adhere.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THOSE gracious mercies, Lord, which from thy goodness spring*
And ay thy woorks orespred, to myndful presence bring.
And from thy sight remoove, the wyldnes of my youth,
The sins age more mature with sad remorse presueth.
O thou who goodness art! even for that goodness sake,
With merci me behold, so souls just grief asslake.
MOST righteous gracious Lord! He sinners shew'th his way;
To humble mynds, myld spirits, his justice will display.
All truth, yea merci all, his paths to them remain,
His witnest will who seek, and covenant great maintain.
Then for thy gracious name, propitious me behold:
My sin (ah Lord, how great?) in merci great upfold.
THRICE happi man, whose heart Gods sacred fear endues:
For him shall grace direct, to bliss right way to chooze.
And here his soul at ease midst blessings rich shall sit:
And goods well got, secure, to childrens seed transmit.
These heavenli leaug partake: yea mysteries high, conceald
From worldli wits, to them from heaven shall be reveald.
O THEN my waiting eyes, on God still fixed be:
For he from snaring net my feet will righteous free.
Turn then at length thy face, in bliss who sitst on high;
Since poor abandond wretch to only thee does fly.
Ah Lord; as wave does wave, so woe does woe pursue:
As day does day, fresh griefs so griefs forepast renew.
But thou, my streits, my pain, my labors, Lord, respect:
And on my sins, their cause, ah merci, Lord, reflect.
BEHOLD my raging foes; how thick their musters grow,
Whose poisened gals, uncausd, with bitterest hate oreflowe.
But thou, Preserver great, my soul from force unjust,
My face from shame protect: who live my only trust!
My only trust, and hope! on safeguard none I build,
Save what mine upright cause, and goodness thyn shall yield.
These then my gardians stand. And thou, benign, with me,
Thyn Israel deer, great Lord, from pressures all enfree.
PSALM 32.
DAVID here, out of the sense of his own experience, teaches that he is
happi, to whom God in merci imputes not his sins: which merci is obtained, by
seazonable confessing them; must be continued, by thankfully reforming our
life's; which shall be accompanied with true joy of spirit.

THE blessed man; whom spring of boundles grace
With mercies ey a Father-iudge does vieu;
Whose crimes and guilt with pardon free efface;
Foul stains orehele; so pristin shape renew.
Yea thrice he blessed; whom, who Creator kind
All perfect framed, declynd does not forsake:
Does not his sins impute; and darkened mind,
Discharged of guile, to justice does awake.
I WHILST my sin in silent breast conceald,
Benumbd, ashamed; at length with sicnes scurged,
My bones consumed; and roars sharp grief reveald,
Which tiring pain, my strength now tired, urged.
Thy grievous hand still presd me day and night;
Nor Sun could cheer, nor darkness rest prezent:
On faded face deaths name seemd palenes write;
So native juice unnative heat had spent.
ADVISED, I then to thee my sins confesd,
In vain conceald; bade idle vail adieu:
I said, Be now to God my falts expresd;
Who guilt from soul, strait plague from corpse withdrew.
OGRACIOVS Lord, therefore our hopes abound:
And godli men, excited by these fruits,
In time accepted, when thou may be found,
With faithful hearts shall bring their needful suits.
And thou benign, from worlds tempestuous seas
Wilt them remoove: and me, (my hiding place,)
Preserved from wrack, discharged of streit unease,
Withioious cries of freedom round embrace.
THEN I, who e're Gods service do profess,
Will make thee scient, what paths thou must ascend;
What dounfals shun; how errors to redress:
And guiding ey thy carriage shall attend.
BUT men by kind, transform not into guise
Of sturdi horse, or more unthankful mule;
Whose brutish breasts no mutual duties prize;
Sole sharpest bits their mouths from mischief rule.
THE wicked heart, whole swarms of woes shall seize;
Of help without, within of rest deprived;
While faithful soul, who gracious Lord shall pleaze,
With mercies fenced, with ioys shall be revived.
THEN righteous mynds, divorce your careful fear;
Gods word who trust, shout out with sounds of joy;
His ways who walk, your hopeful heads vprear:
Your light appears, sad darkness to destroy.
PSALM 34.
The Prophet DAVID, to escape the cruel hands of King Saul, being forced to
fly to a neighbor King of the Philistims; where the qualiti and worth of his
person being to his great danger discovered, he counterfeited himself
distract; and so was driven from thence, and closely returned to the confines
of his countri; whether his friends and other distressed persons assembled to
him: here he yields to God solemn thanks for this strange deliveri;
encouraging withal and instructing his associats to serve God; who never
fails to protect his Righteous servants from mischief, neither yet to destroy
their persecutours. By the way is interlaced a proph^ci of the not breaking of
any one Bone of our Saviors: who was the very pattern and perfection of
Righteousness.

THE Lord for ever with humblest joy my thankfulst thoughts shalbless;
In him my soul triumph; my mouth his glorious praise express.
Let myld and righteous mynds, earths Saints, with gladness hear this praise:
Yea all unite, hearts, spirits, and sounds, to heavens his name to raize.
When chased from home, in strangers land, midst Hethen crew, I moornd,
And sought my God; my sighs he heard, and safely me returned.
That me his Saints example great shall cheerful ay recite;
This poor man cried, the Lord him heard, and freed from hostile spite.
O THOUGHT-surmounting grace! to earth from heavenli host descends
Gods Angel great, and servants his as rampire round defends.
Then taste, and see, how good the Lord; how sweet his merci flows;
How blessed the man who trusts in him, on him vowed love bestows.
And ye, Gods Saints, his fear maintain: when lions through hunger wast;
Yet scarsenes none, of no thing good sour want, his servants taste.
O COM deer children; listen well, while Gods true fear I teach;
How life to win; how length of days in happiest state to reach.
Thy tongue from venomed words refrain; thy lips let shun deceit:
Decline from evil; do good: seek peace; this this be thy retreit.
The eyes of God with pleazing vieu the righteous race behold;
Their suits his gracious ears attend; full deer their life's are sold:
But countenance stern the mighti Lord against proud malfactors bends;
And cursed names, corrupted seed, from earths fair bosom rends.
TRUE servants plaints ^ust Lord does hear; their tears and fears dicharge;
Their contrite hearts, enanguisht spi^its, from pressures streit enlarge.
Afflictions great, it is true, full often most righteous Man endures:
God rids them all: and in their midst his bones from brack assures.
No bone of His shall broken be. But those who hate the just,
Shall perish all: the wicked hearts own malice grynds to dust.
Their own desires them plague. But God shall righteous souls redeem;
And none shall quail, to him that trust, who him their life esteem.
PSALM 36.
DAVID here entitled the servant of God, having described first the reprobate
sense of the wicked; breaks out into admiration of the divine infinitnes in
all perfections; in the participation and fruition of which consists the
final beatitude of Gods true Servants; when the rebellious shall ly under
everlasting destruction.

THE bestial mind, forsaking God, resolved to joy in sin;
To shun remorse, first natures light t'extinguish does begin:
Then cheers himself in blyndest ways; no vyld desire refrains;
Til, in my heart, no dread of God before his eyes remains.
At length even glories in his shame: and ioith (ah wretched state!)
Inventing ill; which well adviz'd his trembling soul would hate.
DEFYLD, distuned soul! His lips, which ought Gods praises sound,
And world with truth assist; in lewd, and lying words abound.
His mind, of understanding pure, good thoughts, it self deprives,
And naught but mischief, fraud, and wrong, on silent bed contrives.
In sum, estranged from goodness all, enthralled to ill; he bends
His steps toward death: where vengeance due rebellious souls attends.
O LORD, what highth, what depth, what breadth, thy greatness may profess?
What heart can goodness thyn conceive? what tongue thy praise express?
Thy bounteous grace from heavens to earth thy creatures all comprends:
Thy justice mountains huge surmounts: thy truth yond clouds extends:
A deep abiss thy judgments rest: O thou do all protect;
Thou man do save; ne simplest beast in needful things neglect.
BUT o, how precious toward mankind thy mercies Lord redound?
Whence servants thyn thy shadoing wings their sure retrait have found.
And when at last, through ended toils, they at thyn House arrive;
There pleasantst food, there sweetest streams, ay pure delights revive.
For thou, o fountain great of life, their life do still refresh:
And beams from thee derived, their eyes with sight al-glorious bless.
THEN Lord, hold on thy kyndnes deer, toward those that know thy name:
And justice thyn array the souls, whom sacred loves inflame.
And let not proud oppressing foot my gracious ways deface:
Nor sinning hand misdraw my soul thoughts sinful to embrace.
Lo, sinners proud, defecting souls, thrown down in dreadful guise,
In dead destruction ay involved, to life shall never rize.
PSALM. 37.
King DAVID, now full of years and experience, remooueth here those great and
difficult scandals of wicked men's prosperiti, and good men's afflictions. He
shows that the godli, who delight in the law of God, and exercize themselves
in heavenli wisdom; live always in the favor of God, and under divine
protection: that God makes them partakers even of the temporal blessings of
this life; though not always in the largest, yet in a sufficient and
conten^ful proportion, and such as is for their greatest good: which blessings
are to them also more constant and permanent: and that Gods holy hand, both
delivers them from the malignant practices of the wicked; and preserves them
in times of public plagues and calamities; furnishing them with abiliti to be
helpful also to others: yea, that though they fall, he raizeth them up again;
and what troubles soever they pass thorough in this life, that their end yet is
assured peace. Wherein they have also this pleazing comfort, that God will
continue his blessings even to their seed and posteriti. Contrarily he
intermixeth a discoveri of the truly calamitous state of the wicked: who being
the enemies of God, and deprived of his protection; though they flourish for a
while, ye^ have no stabiliti, but are suddenly cut off: yea in the midst of
their wealth and pomp, they are not only uncontent and restles, but endure also
much want through inordinate desires and misgovernment: As for their attempts
against the good, they return upon themselves, beaten back upon them to their
own confusion: And lastly, their end is assured destruction, involving with it
often the ruin of their unblest posteriti. Upon these grounds and reasons, he
exhorts the good, not to fret at the wickeds so false and fading prosperiti:
but to be careful to avoid sin; to delight in God; and to employ themselves
wholly in doing that which is good. So trusting in God, and waiting patiently
upon him, committing also their ways unto him; they shall be both safe under his
protection, and happi by his blessing.

LET not unpleazing vieu of bad men's flouring state,
Through indignation sour, thy ioious thoughts abate.
For down, like withering grass, they quicly shall be mowne:
As bloom of tenderst herb, their flour away be blown.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
BUT thou Gods servant true, on him thy Lord rely;
In him delight: and thoughts to righteous woorks apply.
Inhabit then the land: thou by thy land shall live:
Yea God thy godli heart his full desires shall give.
IF troubles thee assail; to God thy ways commit;
And trust to him; who them to happiest end shall fit.
No shame shall thee attaint: thy iustnes, fair as light;
And clear as shining noon, he shall produce thy right.
THEN rest on God: his will with patient hope attend.
And let not woorthles man, who brings lewd thoughts to end,
And prospers in his coorse, thy discontent imbreed.
Shun wrath, fierce choler rein: great sins from rage proceed.
For proud misdooer shall rot: while root they lasting take
Who humbly wait on God; his law their mirror make.
BUT yet a while; and lo, the wicked shall not be:
His stateli seat, no place for him or his shall see.
When as the myld with joy shall pleasant land possess:
Where length of plenteous peace shall thankful joy rebless.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
I'TS true, the righteous man, whose life ill life's reprooves;
His sight alone ill mynds to deep distemper mooves.
That him as public foe, the godles crues beset:
And practice vyld apply, to wrap in snaring net:
Yea teeth through felnes gnash. But God shall them deride:
Who sees their day approach, black night to all their pride.
Let swoords be drawn, bend bows, the poor and just to kill:
Bent bows shall break; drawn swoords the drawers best blood shall spill.
AND though some just be poor, th'uniust with plenti swell:
Yet in that one poor house more true content does dwell,
Then all their pomps can yield. For God shall him maintain:
When pride and power unjust with shivered arms remain.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
OUR gracious Lord fit times for all his servants knows:
And now he more, now less, but still their best bestows.
Continuance is their bliss: In perilous time, from wrack;
In plague, them shields from death; in famine bare, from lack.
While even as tenderst fa^ mere force of smoke consumes:
So impious wretch, Gods foe, soon spent to vapor fumes.
FOR though th'uniust, by fraud, by force, have much purloind;
Yet nothing thrives: (lewd gain, has vain expense adioin'd:)
That still a borroer bare, on neighbors goods he feeds;
And none repays. The just, still rich in virtuous deeds,
From less, but better store, with pitying helpful hand,
His wanting neighbor frames Gods goodness t'understand.
For where Gods blessing rests, possessions long shall last:
As curse divine, at once, bud, branch, and root, does wast.
WHERE God man's way does pleaze, man's steps he stable makes:
Yea fallen, with succoring hand from ground unbruzed takes.
I have been young, am old; yet never knew the just
Forsaken quite; never saw his seed in lothed dust
Sit craving food: but still his courteous nature lends;
And God his blessing deer to children all extends.
THEN thus thy thoughts conclude: thyn heart see first be pure;
Fly sin; good deeds apply: so so dwell ay secure.
For righteous Lord loves right: he free from wavering change,
From Saints beloved does never his eyes serene estrange.
But safe through his defense; while impious houses fall;
They ancient land possess, there dwell for ever shall.
THE righteous man, whose mind, called up from earthli thought,
Erect on high, with love of heavenli law is fraught;
From hearts abundance speaks: His mouth with wisdom flows;
In talk of judgment grave glad time his tongue bestows.
He never shall slip. For though th'uniust maligner watch
Both words and ways, his life in deadli snare to catch:
Yet shall not righteous Lord him leve in wicked hand;
Ne when his judgment coms, condemned let him stand.
SO thou, o virtuous soul, thy patient mind retain;
And heavenli ways insist: in heaven thy hopes remain.
Thy God shall thee exalt: the land shall rest thyn own;
When undermining wretch thyn ey shall see orethrowne.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THESE eyes of mine have seen, th'uniust, like self-sprung tree;
With arms all gay disspred, in flourishing beauti glee.
But see the end: he past; and lo, away was gone:
The vanished man I sought; but nues returned none.
Now vieu the upright man, observe his sweet increase:
His small in more, his war still ends in endless peace.
Not so defectours proud; who marks of heavenli ire,
At once destroyed, shall never to end dezired aspire.
BUT from the righteous Lord still saving grace descends,
Which servants his from wrack in needful hours defends.
For God shall them protect, protect from hate unjust;
He save them, since in him they chooze to place their trust.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
PSALM 40.
The Prophet DAVID, an Ancester and Type of Christ, in his thankful meditations
of Gods former merci toward him; passes from thence into a profound admiration
of the divine grace; whereby the imperfection of the legal sacrifices being
abolished, Christ their perfection was to succeed, a true accomplisher and
teacher of righteousness. So returns to crave the continuance of Gods merci in
his present miseri: drawn on or renewed by menes of Saul's persecution, (as it
seems,) not yet determined.

LONG patient hope Gods pleasure did attend:
At length he ear to grievous cry did bend;
And wretch forlorn, who help now no where knew,
From miri clay of yelling hole updrew.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
UPDRAWN, my feet on stateli rock he placed;
My steps made firm: so now with nue song graced,
Praise, praise to our God my thankful glory sounds;
Which echoing voice with thundering joy rebounds.
For thousands, who revieu my late distress,
Which reverent trust, toward God cheerd hearts address.
THEN blessed he, the Lord who makes his trust:
Nor glorious pride, (whom self-loves charming lust
Misdraws from God,) which fauning ey respects;
Nor thoughts on liers fond failing hopes reflects.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
O LORD, my God; thy gracious thoughts toward man,
Are wondrous deep: I would, but no way can,
Or thankful them to thee in ray prezent,
Or count to men their store and vast extent.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
WISDOMS abiss! thyn own ordained rites,
Now sacrifice, now offering, no delights
To thee can yield: mine ears has nuer law
So pierced that thoughts toward nobler object draw.
Not sinles beast, nor mene-esteemed life
In flames consumed, may ere compose the strife
Wherein man's sin Justice divine persueth;
Not so thy grace, not so man's bliss renueth.
WEAK shades give place. Then said I, Lo I com:
Here Lord: On me thy blessed will be done;
Since sacred roll of everlasting book,
For me has taught worlds waiting eyes to look.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THY blessed will, sole scope of prudent thought,
Just actions rule, my pleazing cares have sought
To know, and do: thy law in faithful heart
Entresured lies; thence never shall depart.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
NOT silent lips, nor yet unthankful breast,
Thy goodness, Lord, thou know, have e're suppressed.
Thy truth, my talk; thy saving grace, my song:
Thy bounties rich, my not conceling tongue
Has loud proclaimed: thy justice, mercies deer,
Assemblies great from faithful teacher hear.
THEN, Lord, o then thy kyndnes not withhold:
(Thy truth my stay:) in merci still infold
Distressed soul; whose eyes lift up on high,
Thee, only thee their comfort can descry.
Thrung numberles of evils me wretch embrace:
My sins and pains so grasp my frighted face;
That failing heart their vieu can not endure:
Who thick as hair, ten thousand griefs procure.
PLEAZE Lord at length my thralled life to free:
Relieve the soul, who succor sole from thee
Awaits: make speed: And blushing shame confound
All those, whose hate me seeks with mortal wound
On earth to lay: yea, put to shameful flight,
Them in my ill who place their deer delight;
Who laugh my tears, take pleasure in my pain.
Ah, dire decay their shames reward remain.
BUT comfort sweet, and sacred joy refill
Them all, whose mynds, conformd to heavenli will,
Thy mercies seek, salvation thyn dezire:
High spirit them ay t'extol thy name inspire.
NOW I a poor, throwne-doun, afflicted wight;
Yet hope on God, protector of my right:
And know on me my Lord will one day think.
Ah, cease delay; least heart in sorroes sink.
PSALM 42.
The Psalmist (it seems David under Saul's persecution) bewaileth with much
passion his constrained absence from Gods presence in his Ark and Tabernacle:
and after a sharp combat of soul with mani deiecting afflictions, in fine
gets above them by the strength of his faith and hope in God.

AS chased Heart, with drouth enraged first,
Then ioid with hope, toward watri streams does bray:
So Lord, my soul, my panting soul does thirst,
At life's high spring her restles love to stay.
AH life of life's! when shall that ioying sight
Of presence thyn rejoice my ioyles ey?
Whom now salt tears are food to day and night,
"While chasing foes, Where Is now thy God? still cry.
SWEET-sour revieu my heart through eyes distills,
How erst high ioys midst marching troop I broacht:
And sacred House, whom beauteous presence fills,
With songs and praise in festivest guise approacht.
WHY then, o why, my sad dejected mind,
Should troubled thoughts thee restles now torment?
Ah thankful wait: still gracious Lord shall find,
In bands of woes release who al-times sent.
YET Lord my soul behold still dampt with grief:
While Iordans reeds, while Hermons rocs she hants;
While Iuri mounts afford their poor relief:
Remembrance thyn where melting heart redants.
SEE gulf of woes, nue gulf still duly calls:
Thy thunders roar; thy fires com streaming down:
And raging storm, from cloudi spouts which falls
With shouring fluds my pining soul does droun.
YET gracious Lord still succoring hand does reach.
His face serene returned joy shall bring:
And gladsom day shall thankful evening teach,
With praiseful hymn th'alglorious name to sing.
MEAN while to God thy chased life betake;
And doleful tune exiled wretch renew:
My God, my strength; why do thou me forsake?
Why moorning soul does murdrous foe pursue?
O THOU who sole sustein'st my wearied life,
My wearied life, whom power of right bereves;
Yet judge that cry, among braiding foes so rife,
"Where Is now thy God? My bones it swoord-like cleves.
BUT why, o why, my sad dejected mind,
Should troubled thoughts thee restles still torment?
Com grateful hope. My gracious God, I find
In throng of woes still swift relief has sent.
TREBLE.
A

^ S cha- sed Heart, with drouth enra- ged

^ first, Then ioid with hope toward wa- tri stream does bray: So Lord my

^ soul, my panting soul does thrist: At life's high spring her

^ restles love to stay. Ah life of life's, when shall that joy- ing

^ sight of presence thyn, re- ioice my joy- les ey? Whom

^ now salt tears are food to day and night, While cha- sing

^ foes, Where Is now thy God? still cry.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 44.
The faithful people of Israel, vanquished now and dispersed by their Hethen
enemies, (it seems the Philistims,) in their thraldom also persecuted and
martired for Gods true religion; in complaining sort prezent to the high throne
of grace their present condition, being oppressed by the enemies of God, and
yet persisting in Gods true woorship; and with great vehemenci implore his
favor and succor, who to their Ancesters had showed himself so miraculously
benign and helpful.

OUR pleazed ears, renoumed Lord, have heard
The ioious tongs of reverend elders tell;
What acts of thyn their state of old had reard;
Did cursed seed from chozen soil expel.
Thy powrful hand, them rac^h'd up, ours did plant:
Made them nor woe, nor blessing ours to want.
NOT mortal arm, extermind Giants race;
Nor sword terrene, dezired land possesd.
Thy arm divine, thy right hand, lightsom face,
In favor deer, from heaven their armies blesd.
Thou self same God, my King do still remain:
Command great King thy Jacobs strength again.
SOLE thou command; revived strength our foes
With horn should push, with feet shall trample down.
Not sword, not bow; hopes failing: thou disclose
That aid, which foes in hates own shame did droun.
Thy loveli name much joy did then confess:
Much joy same name in praise shall ay express.
THUS once we lived: but now in life we die;
Cast off, debased; no more our armies head:
Hearts grief to speak; vile foes us force to fly;
And preying troops in dust our glories tread.
Thus scattered lo midst Hethen lands we live:
Where food to foes flock loved once do give.
AH once beloved! now sold, and not for gain.
Thy wealth had yet our thralled life's encreasd,
Less grief had been: but scorn we now remain
To neighbors round; whose hate our shames appeasd.
Derided heard have made a proverb grow;
Which scoffing Hethen with wagging heads outcrowe.
WEAK comforts fade: strong woes still fresh renew.
My grief within, without my shame torments.
Confusions, ah, confusions round accrue:
And soul disgrace still lothed face prezents.
Reproaching voice, blasphemous mouth, and ire
Of hostile eyes, dire anguish still enfire.
ALL this on us is com: yet have not we
Forgot thee Lord, or false thy leaug profaned.
Nor hearts repining writhe their loves from thee:
Nor feet decline from sacred ways ashamed.
Yea though us ruind in Dragons wastes do place:
And shade of death make weari life's embrace.
IF blessed name, unbleft we have forgot;
Disloial hands if stretched, in strangers guise,
To Gods, no Gods: and should our Lord it not
Search out, whose ey hearts secretst thoughts espys?
Ah love of thee lo tyrants hate procures:
For thee we die; as knife fat sheep endures.
AH daily slain! At length yet look; arize;
Why sleeps our Lord? awake; and not bereve
Thyn of thy face; nor pressures their despize,
Whose souls to dust, dead breasts to ground do cleve.
Stand up, great Lord; and for thy mercies sake,
Oh servants thyn to thy redemption take.
PSALM 45.
A song of honor to the spiritual Marriage of Christ with his Church,
for^described under the shado of the marriage (as it seems) of King Solomon
with the Daughter of Pharao: yet so, that some circumstances are verified only
in the figure, and some other things only in the divine mysteri figured.

A NOBLE act, of Kings dezired;
Makes gladsom heart, with high conceits inspired,
Boil over; and tongue stream loveli sound;
Which echoing pen through world shall ay rebound.
Of peerles King my song I frame.
And to that King, give, consecrate, the same.
NOT mortal beauti decks thy face;
Ne humane sounds those princeli lips engrace:
That hieu divine, those heavenli words,
Nor race of man, nor bliss of earth affoords.
Sure heavens, fair wight, thee God has blessed:
So blessed, in bliss eternal shall thou rest.
THEN on; but first gird sword to thigh,
Thou puisant Prince; advance with glory high;
Ride stately forth, in comli sight:
Still prosper, still prevail, brave Lord, in fight.
So word of truth through world disspred;
Give laws; fierce mynds in love to justice wed:
With justice myldnes still reside;
And striking arm, let heart of merci guide.
BUT foes, whom goodness none can win,
Shall lightning hand with terrors dire begin
To fright; then shafts, as thundered darts,
Sharp shafts shall pierce their blunt unpliant hearts.
Thus to our King shall Nations bend:
And arm victorious wide his rule extend.
THY throne, o God, for ever endures:
Thy scepter, right through all thy state procures:
Thou justice love; hate lawles ways:
Therefore does God, thy God, thy glory raize
Yond all thy troop; whose faithful love,
Thee serves, by thee partakes same grace above.
BUT thou bove all, with sacred oil,
With oils of joy, (that earths unpleazing toil
Alay,) imbued; drawst odor sweet:
Mir, aloe, cassia, in thy garments meet.
Thus do from ivorie rooms proceed;
Whose pleasures deer still ioying thoughts refeed.
STRAIT bevi fair prezents sweet vieu;
Kings daughters chief, and lead the noble crew:
Bove all the Queen; whom loveli bride
Thou ioious setst on right hand by thy side.
With gold her breasts, with gold her head
Embellisht, best rich Ophir which had bred.
FAIR daughter, now a while attend
To sage advise; thou happi ear shall lend:
Thy contries rites, thy peoples guise,
Yea fathers house forget: fix sole thyn eyes
On him, who then that beauteous sight
Shall deerly love, possess with pure delight.
He now thy Lord: with pleazing grace
Bow, fair, to him: so love sweet love embrace.
LO neighbor Tire, great Queen of seas,
With curious gift ey finest strives to pleaze:
With homebred purple, far-fet gold,
Will studious seek thy favoring grace to hold.
Yea nobles rich, with prezents great,
Shall pleazd aspect of countenance thyn entreat.
NOW vieu this Princess, branch of Kings:
See noble birth what generose presence brings:
All gorgeous, all with grace performd;
While wealth has art, and art has wealth adornd.
Yet beauteous robes fair face exceeds:
But fairest mind within chief glory breeds.
THUS happi King, thy spouse to thee,
Dezired spouse is led: and Virgin she,
With virgin troop, her sociates deer,
Attended, all to pleazed eyes appear.
With signs, with sounds of joy they com;
Where roial palace yields them grateful room.
AND thou, great King, in fathers place
Shall children raize, endued with fathers grace:
Whom zealous justice to maintain,
Shall Princes high through all thy Lands ordain.
AND I thy name shall make renoumd,
While heaven leads time, where ever fair earth her ground
Extends; yea whilst both worlds endure,
My verse thy praise from peoples shall alure.
PSALM 49.
The Psalmist taking vieu of his old age and death approaching; enters into
consideration of the vaniti of worldli mynds, who plot for a perpetuiti of
greatness here, where death and time devour and consume all things: and
contrariwise comfort himself by faith in God; who in the morning of the
renewed world, wherein righteous men shall bear dominion, shall redeem him from
the power of the grave and death; and translate him to his own everlasting
habitation: when as worldli men shall be remooved from their graves to hell, to
be consumed, as beasts, with death everlasting.

YE sons of men, wherever over earths great globe dispersed;
Both ye of noble race, and ye, whom fathers unrehearst
In menenes have obscured; ye rich, and poor, attend:
My mouth shall wisdom stream; which heart from muzings deep does send.
My thoughts on sentence grave, on parable profound
Defixt, at length my matter dark to harp shall clearly sound.
WHY should unpleazing fears my sadded mind torment,
When evil days approach, sweet years of pleasure when are spent;
When sin with death at heels my wasting life persues?
See mighti man, whose ey his wealth with glorying trust revieus:
No one e're brother deer from thralling death redeems;
Can God the ransom pay: who price too high of souls esteems
For mortal power to reach: that cease may vain attempt,
Man's life in line still on to draw, from iaws of grave exempt.
HE sees great sages die; even so the brutish fool:
And leve their wealth th'untimeli thirst of thankles heirs to cool.
In inward thoughts then count, their houses yet secure;
Their stateli seats shall undevourd through ages all endure;
And lands shall bear their names. But man in honor placed,
Like beasts falls down; his house, his seat, his name, from earth effaced.
LO ways of fool-wise men: which yet their worldli race,
As proiects high of wisdom deep with much applause embrace.
But they in grave do ly, like sheep in narroed holds:
Where death, as wolf, devoured flesh in gnawing panch infolds.
There dead, they die. And when worlds morning fair renues,
Their yelling cries shall judging Saints with lordli doom refuze.
From grave then hell shall seize, and seaz'd their shapes consume.
When God, my soul, me, shall from both to him redeemd resume.
THEN fear not, grieve not thou, when godles person thrives;
His house when glorious mounts. For not when death of life deprives,
He all shall hence transport; ne glory train to grave:
Though foolish mouth often cursed soul in life fair blessings gave:
And though men praize thy mind still foloing worlds delight.
He hence to fathers race shall pack, ay shut from heavenli light
O man, great woork of price! of wisdom if bereft,
If beast-like lives, like beast he dys, in dark destruction left.
PSALM 50.
This Psalm, being made by ASAPH, that Master of Music, (who was also a
Composer of sacred hymns, and a Prophet;) introduces God revealing himself to
the world, by his Creatures, by his Oracles, and by his Judgments. Then
falling to debate matters with his chozen people, God shows that it is not
their sacrifices wherein he takes pleasure; being a service to him, neither
proper of it self, and which in fine should cease: but in the spiritual
sacrifices of praise, thankful vows, and invocation. And he reprooveth those
hypocrites, that durst talk of the word of God, denying him and it in their
life's and manners: whose end, unless they repented, should be helples
destruction.

THE mighti God, our Lord, from heavens first glorious voice has sent,
To call earths whole from rizing sun to sun declynd extent.
And then from Sion, (a complete world of beauties all refined,)
By oracle, by sacred word, more clear to his has shined.
To judgment rests our God proceed. In judgments he does com,
To teach, reproove; afflict, raize up: then then comes final doom.
Before the Judge a purging fire corruption shall devour:
And hideous tempest round about from gloomi clouds shall shour.
BUT now with his peculiar folk to sweet debate he falls:
And heavens fair eyes, and earths rich womb, as conscious witness calls.
"Assemble me my chozen race, taken up from world forlorn:
"Who law; who sacred leaug with me through sacrifice have sworn.
(O righteous Judge! thy justice bright the heavens great host proclaims:
Thou fountain whence all justice flows, thy self more just remains.)
"HEAR, o my people; I will speak: thou Israel; for with thee
I will contest: Thou know me God, yea thy true God to be.
That sacrifices rare to me thy scanti hands have brought,
And sacred fire on altar often in vain burnt-hosts has sought;
Nor charge I thee: nor bull from stall, or goats from fold, will take.
Who world of wealth enioys, think he penurious stores should rake?
NOT so: for midst the spacious woods what beast untamed does breed,
What cattle sparst through thousand mounts on budding shrubs do feed,
What bird the hills, what savage fierce the desert plains does ply;
Are all mine own; and in my vieu; at will, serve; live, and die.
If hunger frail (unwoorthi thought) could me assail, would I
Who world and worlds rich store possess, to thee forfood apply?
Or when thy sacrifice thou kilst, can thou so fondly think,
Base flesh of bulls that I should eat, or goats foul blood should drink?
NAY: if thyn humble thankful heart with sacrifice dezire
The power divine to pleaze, and give what God does most require:
Pure sacrifice of praises bring; the sacred tribute due
From creature blessed to King of bliss: and of thy vows be true.
Then in thy troubled state, toward heaven thy soul perplexed raize:
Crave help of me: thy suit I Will hear: thou me eftsoon shall praize.
BUT unto th'impious, thus says God: How dare thou, wretch, presume
To teach my Law; my gracious leaug in graceles lips t'assume?
Thy life for thereunto to frame, through hate thou standst aghast:
And word divine, thy speech promotes, thy facts behynd thee cast.
A thief thy greedi ey has seen; thy hand with him conspires:
Adultrous crew; with them lewd heart combines in foul desires.
Malicious mouth addict'st to rail: sly tongue to forge deceit:
And envious lips own mothers son to closely slander wait.
THUS slave to passions vyld thou live: and I have silent been:
Whence, yet more impious, like thy self even me thou did esteem.
But I, not like to thee, at length thy just reproof have sent:
And ougli sins to fearful eyes will all array prezent.
Consider this, o ye who God, and Gods pure law neglect:
Least unrepenting hearts I rend; when none can them protect.
Who incense sweet of thankful praise sends up, me right adores:
And righteous life who leads, from fall to bliss my grace restores.
PSALM 51.
King DAVID, reprooved from God by the Prophet Nathan for his grievous sin with
Bathsheba, leaves in this Psalm an excellent pattern of an heart truly
repentant; returning to the service of God, and care of his people.

MY sinful soul, arraind of twofold gilt;
Of Spouse-bed wronged, of blood ah foully spilt;
With saddest grief in tears imbrynd repents:
And wailed crimes at mercies feet prezents.
O sourse of grace, whence seas of mercies flow,
Release my gilt; and love returning show.
MY gilt releasd, then clenze my soul from stain;
From stain, which sin behynd still makes remain,
And nue sin breeds. But since my pensive sight,
Sin, gilt, and stain, still wound, by day, by night;
With sour remorse since them I, Lord, deplore;
Ah cure them, Lord, and righteous grace restore.
NO mortal law does me transgressour make:
Thy law divine, whose justice heavens does shake;
Thee supreme Judge, sole thee, my sin offends;
Whose piercing vieu to secretst thoughts extends*
Ah evil I, Lord, in thy pure eyes have done:
So just reproof, so judgment right is com.
WHAT shall I plead, of sin defiled mass;
From sin who com, through sin to death must pass?
From mould deformd lo form I first received:
And mother frail in sin warm life conceived.
But thou in souls thyn own true form dezirest:
And wisdom deep it to restore inspirest.
AND thus I stood: but now orethrowne by sin,
Deformd, defyld; ah Lord, let grace begin
Recure to woork: with spring, with hysop thyn;
So scour this soul, more white then snow to shyn:
And comfort, Lord; o joy now make me hear:
That bruzed bones returning strength may cheer.
REMOOVE my sins from thy offended ey:
And cancel all my falts. Hear once my cry:
Clean heart create; right spirit in me renew:
Then wavering mind with heavenli stay endue.
Ah cast not off grieved breaker of thy law:
Nor HOLY SPIRiT souls soverain life withdraw.
Restore the joy of thy sweet saving grace:
And sins bond power with thy free spirit displace.
THEN erring souls my thankful zele shall burn
Thy ways to teach: who glad to thee shall turn.
And then my song, (but blood keep, Lord, away,
My saving Lord,) thy justice shall display.
Sole thou my lips once open, Lord, again:
And ioiful mouth shall sacred praise proclaim.
IF sacrifice thy power divine might please,
If offerings burnt thy burning wrath appeaze;
What would I spare? but naught in heaven obtains
Beasts life, in man while beastlike mind remains.
Man's own grieved spirit, is Gods best sacrifice:
His sighs, his tears, do never, just Lord, despize.
THEN o return: o bless still Sion deer:
Ierusalems still lingering walls uprear.
With cleared hearts then we, in legal rites,
Just sacrifice, wherein great God delights,
Shall bring: young bulls at altars side shall bleed:
And offerings burnt th'undying flames refeed.
PSALM 67.
A prayer of the Church unto God, to be gracious unto mankind, and to enlarge
his blessed Kingdom over all the world; whence happiness both earthli and
celestial shall ensue: as has been fulfilled by the coming of Christ.

BE gracious Lord: Let clearly shine
The beauties of thy blisful face:
That earth may see thy ways divine,
And nations all thy saving grace.
Let people bless thy sacred name:
Let people all renoum the same.
ALL woe exiled, let joy return:
For thou who right do still protect,
Shall judge them who for justice moorn;
And erring nations here direct.
Let people praize thy glorious name:
Let people all adore the same.
THEN shall the earth, as filled with love,
Her gifts in great abundance pour:
And God, our God, from heaven above
His choicest blessings richly shoure.
God shall us bless: and utmost lands
Shall all submit them to his hands.
PSALM 68.
King DAVID, having assembled the flour of all Israel to conduct the Ark of God
with solemniti to mount Sion, the chozen place of rest; (which was the
occasion, and is the argument of this Psalm;) begins his march with those
sacred words, uzed by Moses always at the remooving of the Ark in the
wilderness. Then with great exultation, celebrateth both the Maiesti, and the
Goodness of God, as toward mankind in general, so especially toward his
peculiarly elected race, drawn from servitude, and placed in great prosperiti.
Afterward prosecuting the occasion, he sets forth the great honor of Sion,
thus chozen to be the only seat of Gods aspectable presence amongst his people:
And upon the consideration of this triumphant ascending of Gods Ark, being his
Sanctuari upon earth; he breaks out into a prophetical description of the
Ascension of our Savior, the Lord of that Ark, into the celestial Sanctuari,
whereof that terrestrial was a shado and figure; from thence to pour blessings
of deliveri from death and of salvation upon mankind, to subdue all his
enemies, and once again to reduce that selected people from dispersion and
miseri. Lastly (touching by the way the manner of the marching of the Ark,) he
concludes with a prayer to God for the preserving of his people, and
repressing of their enemies; that so forain lands may assubiect also themselfs
to God: whom finally he exhorts all the kingdoms of the world to woorship.

LET pleaze our God to arize, that enemies his disband,
And hating foes in hated flight be chased by mighti hand.
As smoke strong wynds do drive; as fire does wax consume,
So shall thou sweep them from thy face; so wast them all to fume.
Then shall the righteous mynds, whose hopes on God depend
Rejoice in him; and thankful shouts to heavens high coort upsend.
SING, o sing praise to God; advance that glorious name,
The Eternal, Selfbeeing, Lord; who mounts on heavens high arched frame.
Prepare, make plain his way; who over alpestrious place
Coms marching toward his seat elect: triumph before his face.
Not he, neglecting man, despizing mortal care,
In sacred throne resides; not so: but child of parents bare,
Him Father fynds; him wido, Judge: he prisoner, frees;
To sole, an house; to rebel race, dry parched soil decrees.
WHEN Captain thou, o God, thy troops from Pharaos thrall
Victorious ledst; through deserts wyld when march'dst before them all*
The mooving sea stood still; th'unmooving earth it shaked;
The heavens at presence thyn dropped sweat; fore thee mount Sinai quaked.
All Isreal's God did dread. Thou then with bounteous rain,
Did chozen land enrich, did strength exhaust repair again.
HERE thou a seat for thyn, thy poor despized bands,
A seat preparedst; where ioious dwell, and rule should neighbor lands.
Thus did thy goodness shine: thy goodness, which their foes
With conquerous arm subduing round, large matter did discloze
For damsels at return with ioying note to sound;
Kings armies fly, they fly; and spoils we home-left souls have found.
FOR though in servile state, like scullions, among the pots,
With soot ye long have lain begrymd: yet now your happier lots
As dove shall make you shine; who with her lustring wings,
Now silveri hieu, now golden light, to ey delighted brings.
For when th'Almighti Lord those Kinglets strawd on ground;
Like snow on Salmon black, dark woes bright joy so then had cround.
NOW Sion draws mine eyes: whom Bashans peer account:
Nor Bashans soil, nor stateli clifts, fair Sions praise surmount.
For why should worldli hills, the earths huge towers so rize
And vant their might; why hill of God with surli brows despize?
Here Gods dezired rest; thus ay shall it excel:
Celestial squadrons here attend; here Sinais glories dwell.
Twice thousands ten, and more, brave host of heavenli Knights,
Gods will observe; received, perform: he midst, their love requites.
BUT thou, victorious Lord, ascended art on high,
In triumph great; lead'st thraldom thrald: and there, great gest of sky,
Have gifts of grace received; among men which do divide;
Yea race rebellious so do win with thyn to thyn abide.
Be blessed then Lord, our God. With saving graces he
Us daily loads. For God's the God that brings salvation free,
Has issuing ways from death: but enemies head shall smite,
Yea hairi scalp of him in sin who still shall take delight.
BUT to his people says; I them will bring again,
From tyrants yoke, from strangers coasts, from land, and Sea, amain:
As once from Aegypts rod, from deapth of sea, and pride
Of Bashans Giant, I them reduce'd made ancient fields divide.
That thou thy foot may dip, thy dog his tongue embrue.
In smoking streams of fomi blood, which enemies breasts out-spue.
AND now Gods march proceeds; thy march, o God my King,
Who in thy Sanctuari residest; there blessings man do^st bring.
A ^ight of joy: Before, the singers hold their way;
Them instruments ensue; in midst young maids on timbrels play.
All cry with joy, Bless God; Praize in assembli high,
Ye Isreal's stream, the Lord. Here first small Benjamin stands nigh,
Late Prince; here Iudahs Lords, their troops; and here appear
Naphthalian Lords from far; with Lords who Zebulons honor rear.
AND now since gracious Lord commanded has our strength;
Maintain from sacred house, placed over Jerusalem at length,
What thou great God for us, what have for fathers wrought:
So from subjected Kings to thee shall prezents due be brought.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
RATE down the reed-shafts beast; the bulls and herds so bold;
With peoples calf-like Lords, who vain in silver plates have rold.
So woork thy peoples peace, secured from Hethen spite:
O thou who scattrest them on war who set their fierce delight.
And then Egyptian peers, then Ethiopian lands,
Soon humbly shall with gifts to thee stretch forth their suppliant hands.
YE kings, and kingdoms all, over earths fair face disspred;
With songs and sounds of joy adore, your God, and supreme head,
Whence all your powers derive. He then on the heavens rides,
On heavens of heavens of old, and rocks with thundering voice divides.
Ascribe all might to God, whose glorious beauti shines,
On Isreal's head; whose peerles strength, the matchles sky designs.
O God, thyn Isreal's strength! what venerable fear
Thy sanctuaries strike? Be blessed. Our souls to thee we rear.
PSALM 69.
The Prophet King DAVID, in the time of Absaloms rebellion (for then it should
seem this Psalm was made,) by injurious persecution of his enemies, being
reduced to extreme distress and miseri; though happi that he was therein a type
of our Savior, who was then also in him, as a Son in his Ancester; together
with the historical narration of his own wrongs and griefs; prophetically also
describes, and that more fully and properly, the passions of Christ, through
the envi and malice of the Iues; who cruelly constrained him to pay at a deer
ransom the price of that whereof himself in his own person was not gilti. Thus
oppressed reproached and scorned by his enemies, and by his nearest friends
abandoned, for no other crime then for his zele toward the service and glory of
God; he flies by a most fervent and argumentative prayer to God for succor;
devoteth his enemies, (amongst whom first Achitophel, then Judas had their
parts,) to utter destruction; and lastly in his deliveri, shows his own
particular thankfulness; the great comfort of Gods people; and a general
propension of all the creatures of God, to praise him for his goodness toward
his chozen Church, consisting of all his loving and faithful servants.

HELP Lord, and save, a poor distressed wight;
Not tossed with waves, (though seas against me fight,
And beat my soul;) but sinking in the mud,
Where bottom none; and where the surging flud
With furious stream beres down and whelms my life.
Ah save me, Lord, and end my bootles strife.
I strive, though spent; I cry, when voice is quailed;
For God I look, when eyes have looking failed.
TH'iniurious spirits, my not-deserved foes,
Who hunt my life; with numbers me encloze
That pass mine hair; and rizing still in strength,
Press on, til me (o wrong!) they force at length
What never I took, as taken, to restore.
Ah thee my falts, my folies ly before.
BUT not for me, Eternal Lord of hosts,
Great Isreal's God, let those, whose humble boasts
Of thee have been, confounded rest in mind;
Nor shame in face, when him forlorn they find,
Who thee with them in patient hope has sought.
For thy sake, Lord, to this I lo am brought:
For thee, I scorns, and sour rebuke endure.
May service thyn, great Lord, such shame procure?
WHAT should I speak of friends unfrendli face?
My brethren deer, same mothers home-born race,
A stranger me, an alien mere esteem.
And why? The zele, of which I worthi deem,
Thy sacred hests, thy House, and glorious name;
(Which godles crues, still grieving me, profane;)
Has eaten me up: Reproaches thrown at thee
From mouths infernal, light have all on me.
IN grief, I wept; and fasting, fed on care;
My ioyles lims, rough sacweb clothed on bare:
My weed, they proverb; mocks, on fasting pour;
And laugh the tears, which vexed heart does shour.
In judgment place, against me the ancients spoke.
Yea balads base, vyld drunkards of me make.
AND I, my Lord, to thee now praying bend;
In needfulst time: Let o my cries ascend,
And time accepted find. O God, my trust;
If right thou see; and if my plaints be just;
In plenteous merci, 'and for thy saving truth,
Send o that help, which life in death renueth.
OH free me, Lord, from sinking in this mire,
This groundles mire; and from their fierce desire,
Whose hate my life persueth. Draw from these waves
The orewhelmed soul, thy hand who drouning craves,
And prays; Forbid this gulf my life to inglut;
Devouring pit on me her mouth to shut.
HEAR Lord, with speed; and tender ey reflect,
Thou Goodness pure: thy servants not neglect,
In case extreme who mercies hand implore.
O spring of grace, I mercies those adore.
Then, Lord, be near: yea for my' insulting foes,
To free my soul once heavenli aid discloze.
AH see, and judge: thou know my sad reproach;
Fore thee my foes, my shames who shameless broach,
Stand all in sight. Their wrongs have worn my heart.
Full charged with grief; I looked if yet some part
My friends would bear; no friend condoling found:
If comfort speak; but none least comfort sound.
For strengthening meat, yea poizoning gall they sent:
And vinegar tart, my thirst to quench prezent.
THEREFORE just Lord, their own them home repay:
Their pleazing board, where ioys before them play,
Let turn a snare, to catch them in their words:
And (that which foli' as lot to fools affoords,)
Their wishes, hurt; good fortunes, be their bane:
Mynds sight obscure; their loins rough valor lame.
AND as in furi, man laith lode of blows:
So let revenge, which from thyn anger flows,
Ad stripe to stripe; and seize with raging ire
Their hated heads which mischief sole dezire.
Void stand their castles: dweller none be found
To grace the tents where graceles facts abound.
FOR thou whom, Lord, with hand severe have smit,
They fierce pursue; and inhumanely sit,
With grievous words to increase thy woundeds pain.
Let sin, so sin; so plague, to plague enchain:
Thy righteousness that still they wretched miss;
Nor way e're find that leads to heavenli bliss.
Devowd to death, from book of life efface:
Ne write their names, where just men's names have place.
NOW I still poor, sole rich in griefs remain.
Help, saving Lord, and raize me once again:
That raiz'd, thy grace my song may thankful praize;
And blisful name to heavens fair arches raize.
This sacrifice more pleazing God shall be,
Then cleft-hoov'd steer at Altars horns to see.
THE myld of mind, great comfort hence shall take;
This sight shall joy them. O let hearts awake,
To seek the Lord; and so your hearts shall live.
Nor wynds, nor seas, can from his anchor drive.
For ey of care who toward man's wants reflects,
His prisoners cries sure never at need neglects.
THEN heavens, and earth, then seas, and all your gests
Which spatiate there, conform to supreme hests,
Ay laud our King: who Sion fair will save;
And Iudahs touns repair. There shall they have
A seat, and lasting state. Thus God shall bless
His folks true seed, who love toward him address.
PSALM 79.
This Psalm, (which seems to have been compozed in the time of Antiochus the
persecutour, by some descendant of the famous ASAPH, and who bare also his name,
which in that Tribe was frequent,) contains a most lamentable complaint unto
God, of the ruins of Jerusalem, the defilements of the Temple, and massacre of
Gods faithful servants. Then praying first for propitiation for the sins of the
people, (the true cause of that calamiti;) he presses on with most fervent
suit, for speedi deliverance, and large revenge upon their Hethen enemies.

THE Hethen, o God, who fear not, no nor know
Thy glorious name; into thy land are com:
And in thyn House, whence blessings pure did flow,
With hands impure polluting facts have done.
DEFYLD thy sacred seat; thy rites profaned;
Thy treasures robbed; thy Citti set on fire.
Jerusalem, earths joy which erst was named,
Thrown down on heaps, sits now in lothed mire.
THY servants slain for loial love to thee:
Their bodies dead heavens fouls cast out to feed:
And flesh of Saints, whose faith thyn eyes did see,
To earths wyld beasts ingluvious throats decreed.
THEIR blood, as torrent, streams about the walls
Of sad Jerusalem: no burrier found.
Opprobrious scorn, us grievous lot befalls;
And laughings proud in neighbors mouths abound;
HOW long, o Lord? shall ever flame thyn ire?
Can no distress once moove to pitti take?
Thy jealous wrath, and shall it rage, like fire
Which water none, no tears, may e're asslake?
AH turn it first, against those, who nor invoke
Thy name, great Lord; nor know, or seek thy face:
Against Hethen kingdoms; who with mortal stroke
Thy Jacob wound; lay wast h s resting place.
REDUCE not, Lord, to thyn offended eyes,
Those falts forepast, which, still unthankful, we,
And fathers our, have done: let grace arize,
Our souls from gilt of sorroed sins to free.
AND thou arize; and with thy mercies deer,
Prevent our instant deaths. Ah, case extreme
Denis delay. Help, source of goodness mere;
And save us thou, whence safeties all do stream.
RESPECT, great Lord, the glory of thy name;
Which we revere; our enemies proud despize,
Insulting Hethen: to say they do not shame,
"Where Is now the God on whom their hope relys?
BUT let our God make noble, in our sight,
To Hethen eyes, his high revenging hand;
That giltles blood, pourd out, and not in fight,
Of servants thyn, may full revenged stand.
AND let the sighs and moornings of thy Saints,
Who groan in chains, to thee access obtain:
And mighti arm, excited by their plaints,
Them rescue 'who now to death consignd remain.
THUS neighbors scorns, wherewith they thee reproach,
Sevenfold to them in bosom, Lord, restore.
We then thy folk, and flock, thyn acts shall broach;
With thanks and praise will ever our God adore.
PSALM 73.
The Prophet ASAPH, by the sense of his own afflictions, and by contrari vieu
of the exulting prosperiti of godles persons, who pass on a pleasant time,
blaspheming God, and oppressing his servants; having endured (like as other of
the people of God,) a sore temptation of calling into question the very
Omniscience of God, and his government over this loweer world: at length
getting the victori by Gods especial assistance, he shows that out of the
Sanctuari of God, where his Oracles were delivered, he had learned that it was
not the condition of this transitori life, but the end it self, whereby the
state of the good and bad was to be esteemed. Seeing then the end of the wicked
to be utter destruction, and everlasting happiness to attend the righteous; he
betaketh himself wholly to the conduct of divine direction; with great assurance
to be guided by Gods counseil in this life, and afterward to be received by God
into eternal glory. In expectance whereof his soul repozeth.

YET surely God benign to Israel stands;
To pure in heart. But I was sore declynd.
Grieved vieu of fools, of wicked prospering hands,
Had welnigh sapt my weak unwari mind.
FROM bands of death, by sicnes, force, or snare,
They free pass on: live lusti; puffed with joy:
With humane toils and cares untroubled are:
Yea public plagues them least and last annoy.
THIS makes with pride, their out-stretcht necks, like chein;
With violence fierce, as robe, they lims attire.
Their plenteous fare red strouting eyes proclaim:
While heaping wealth surmounts even hearts desire.
FROM poizoning filth their lothsom talk they change
Oppressions proud with lofti style to sound.
Their tongs through earth in wronging men do range:
And hellish mouths against heaven dead curse upbound.
THESE sights Gods folk to grievous thoughts reduce:
(To whom full cups of mingled bitter geer
"Are wringd:) Does Heaven, say they, know earths abuse?
"Or mortals coorse does power immortal steer?
"But vieu these men; the heavenli leaug who shun,
"Earths shame, man's wrong: see how in calmest peace,
"Devoid of storm, here lengthned race they run:
"They health still keep; still wealth and power increase.
IN vain then I, ah all in vain have sought,
With careful thoughts my heart from stain to clear:
In vain my hands, in worthiest actions wrought,
Themselves to God in pureness washed do rear.
For as stern sires their sons of sweet of life
With sour reproofs, and bitter strokes bereve:
With me so griefs, so blows are daily rife;
Ne joy sharp fits of mornli chastment leve.
BUT o my God, should I these thoughts embrace;
Should mazed soul illusions these entrance:
Lo, impious wrong, against thee, against happiest race
Of children thyn, I faithles should advance.
PERPLEXED I, then sought this dout t'untwine:
But ah in vain; still tangled stood my wit.
At length I pierced the Sanctuari divine:
There learnd men's ends: then then the knot unknit.
SURE wicked men aloft on slipperi brows
Thy hand does place, with greater noise to fall.
Down headlong rush they: vain fly faithles vows.
How soon, how sore, thy frights their ioys appall?
MUCH like as dream unguided fanci fills
With shapes untrue; which wakened all are gone:
So when thou stirst, their image Lord it spils;
Their pompous shows despiz'd from world are flowne.
THUS whilst my soul on bitter grief did bite;
While thorni thoughts my fuming heart did wound:
As brutified, my mind had lost her light;
Yea grovelling beast I in thyn eyes was found.
YET still was thyn: and thyn shall ay abide:
By right hand taken thou staidst me with thy grace:
Thy counseil me in beauteous way shall guide:
And lastly safe in happiest glory place.
FOR whom can heaven, whom earth save thee display,
In whom or joy, or rest, my soul might find?
O spring of life! when flesh, when heart decay,
Tower, partage thou eternal standst assignd.
LO Creatures stranged, to thee, Creator great,
Alegiance due who faithles souls deny,
Shall fail; who thee of spouzed love defeat,
Adultring hearts, in ireful vengeance die.
THAT good for me, estranged from pleazing sin,
With God sole spring of pure delights to dwell;
There fixed to rest. My trust then joy in him:
His gracious woorks my thankful heart foorth-tell.
PSALM 82.
ASAPH vieuing the corruption and insufficienci of Judges in his time,
admonishes them that God is present in their assemblies, whose office they
execute; counseleth, reprooveth, and puts them in mind of their ends. And
seeing the Land by their falt was now all out of frame, he prays God to
exercize his right of judging the whole world himself.

THE Soverain Lord, whence justice all derives;
Who mesured power to earthli Lords divides;
His Senate of his presence never deprives:
The Immortal Judge among mortal Gods resides.
Since iudgement's his; how dare ye justice wynd,
To scurge the good, while miscreants favor find?
THE poor ye should, the weak, the orphane free,
From wicked strength still bending to oppress:
But ignorance, (ah, not for high degree,)
And vainest thoughts your darkened mynds possess.
Thus ruled coorse of all things turned awry,
Makes trembling earth to heavens for justice cry.
ISTYL'D you Gods, who Gods earth-ruling place
As glorious sons of supreme Lord do hold:
But die ye shall, as men of menest race,
As foregone Princes now resolved to mold.
And rize, great Lord; thy judging right resume
Over nations all, whom tyrants wrongs consume.
PSALM 84.
King David, (who in great likelihood was author of this Psalm, and at such
time as he was either driven from Sion by Absalom, or withheld by the necessiti
of some war far off;) displaieth here his great longing love, toward the Temple,
and solemn service of God there performed; accounts them happiest, who
always reside in Gods house to praise him; them happi also, who at the state
times, according to the law, held their voiages thither, through what
difficulties of way so ever. So, earnestly praying God to be returned to that
place of joy; he ioineth with them in spirit, who profess their true life,
safeti, and happiness, to be placed in God.

THE fair aspect of Tabernacles thyn,
Great Lord of hosts, how loveli to'absent ey
It self prezents? my longing soul does pine,
And pining faint, til she thy Coorts descry.
Nor earth, nor heaven; sole thou life's glorious spring,
To heart, to flesh, reviving joy do bring.
AH, absent I: when yet poor sparro may,
When swalo wyld, her house, her nestlet cling
Near Altars thyn, and there her yonglings lay:
Yet absent I, from thee, my God, and King.
Twice blessed be they, who in thy house reside:
Thy praise with them, their loves with thee abide.
AND blessed he, far off who, cheerd in thee,
On causies thinks which to thy mountain guide.
Dry vales they pass: sweet springs by art yet see:
And gracious rain fore-drouth of pools does hide.
From wasting strength, by strength they walk renewed;
To Sion fair, where God of Gods is vieued.
THEN Lord of hosts, then Jacobs God, our shield;
Ah, ey the face, with favors thyn endued,
With sacred oil perfuzed. Hear Lord, and yield
Those longed Coorts; where one sole day accrued,
Whole thousand stains. With me Gods doors excel
The stateliest tents, with impious pride that swell.
OUR sun, our shield; whence life, whence light derives;
Whence sure defense, whence strength proud foes to quell:
He righteous mynds of nothing good deprives;
They here in grace, in glori'above shall dwell.
That earth, that heaven, Lord God of hosts may cry;
Thrice blessed the man, whose hopes on thee rely.
TREBLE.
T

^ He fair as- pect of Ta- berna- cles thyn,

^ Great Lord of hosts; how loue-li t'absent ey it self pre-

^ zents? My long-ing soul does pine, And pining faint,

^ til she thy coorts des- cry. Nor earth, nor heaven; sole thou life's glorious

^ spring, To heart, to flesh, re- viving joy do

^ bring.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 90.
MOSES here entitled the man of God, being in his charge of conducting the
Israelites in the wilderness; where for their increduliti and murmuring, the
divine indignation brake oftentimes out upon them, til in fine an irrevocable
sentence of death was pronounced against that whole generation, from twenti
years old upward, which had seen Gods miracles in Egypt, (two only excepted,)
to be executed in that wilderness before their entrance into the dezired land:
in this Psalm discovers his extreme grief of heart for that miserable estate;
the Peoples sins provoking God. and Gods punishments consuming them; unto whom
God in all former ages had been a stay and protection. Therefore prezenting unto
God the remembrance of his former graciousnes; the confideration of his own
Eterniti, and of humane mortaliti in general (whose life groweing shorter by
sundri degrees, was now at length reduced to a period of about seventi or
fourscore years ordinarily:) he beseeches God to have particular compassion
upon this his chozen people, sore wasted with the punishments which their sins
had called down upon them; to make them wise by his grace; to comfort them with
his returning favor; and lastly so to frame the coorse of their labors, that
his promise continuing clear and hopeful to them, might at length yet in their
children have a glorious accomplishment.

IN pilgrim life, our rest; in thrald estate, our stay;
From age to age thou Lord have been, and saved us from decay.
Thy self, ere birth to hills, to earth ere form did give,
Ere world had framed; from ay to ay alglorious God do live.
But man thy creature fallen, thy justice does pursue
"To dust: and says, Ye Adams sons, return whence first ye grew.
WHEN thousand years we lived, those thousand in thy sight
Not more appeard then one day past, then watch in shortest night.
Yet soon increasing sin those years much shorter makes;
While vengeance due desiled world to drouning flud betakes.
Since when, our dreamlike life, as weakest herb, soon dys;
Which morn makes flour, hot noon bids fade, sad eeuen mowes down and drys.
AH men unblest! thy wrath our wearied life consumes:
Thy terrors great our souls affright: so sore thyn anger fumes.
Our sins, our foul revolts, before thy face have set:
And secretst falts to cleerest light or eyes displeazed are fet.
What have our toils atchieu'd? through anger thyn, our day
Black night devours: our fruitles years as thought fly vain away.
MAN'S shortened life, as now, sole seventi years does bide:
Great strength to fourscore may attain. Of these even flour, and pride,
What is it but toil, and grief; but vain pursuits, and sin?
Which spent, we hence to dusti home away to post begin.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
OH who does duly weigh the power of heavenli ire?
As terrors thyn, so is thy wrath; o thou consuming fire!
Then teach us so our days, our wasting years to count;
That wisdom true our thoughts toward thee our endless end may mount.
Return, o Lord: (how long?) at length appeazd, forgive
Thy folk: let favor shour in time, that dying hearts may live.
AND comfort, cheer us, Lord: as chastised long by thee
Much evil our woeful eyes have seen; like joy so cauze us see.
This joy with life shall last. Then let thy woork grow clear
Toward servants thyn: on children their thy glory make appear.
And let Gods pleazed face us with his beauties bless:
And form our woorks; o thou, our woorks to happiest end address.
TREBLE.
I

^ N pilgrim life our rest, in thrald e- state

^ our stay, From age to age thou Lord have been, and saved us from decay.

^ Thy self ere birth to hills, to earth ere form did give, Ere world

^ had framed; from ay to ay al- glorious God do live. But

^ man thy creaturefallen, thy justice does pursue To dust, and says,

^ Ye Adams sons, re- turn whence first ye grew.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 92.
This Psalm (consecrated to the Sabbath, as fit for an holy assembli;)
exhorts to praize by voice and musical instruments, Gods goodness and justice;
apparent in the final destruction of the wicked, now miserably flourishing; and
in his constant favor to the faithful inhabiters of his Church; prosecuted
even in old age with comli grace, and fruitfulnes.

A GOOD, a gracious act it is,
To praize the Lord, to celebrate his bliss:
Thy name, o Highest, to renoum,
With hymns, which earth with heavens high honor croun.
Thy bounteous grace, let springing day;
Let silent night, thy faithful truth display.
Let ten-stringd lute, with viole sweet,
Melodious harp in sacred consort meet.
Since joy to me thy woork does bring;
Thy woorks, great Lord, my thankful joy shall sing.
O LORD, thy woorks how glorious great;
How deep thy thoughts, thoughts shalo to defeat?
The floting brain of brutish man,
Not once observes, not once it fadom can;
That when as grass the wicked grow;
When sinners proud, do sprout, do bud, and blow;
In flouring state they shall be mowne;
And all for ay to sad destruction thrown.
While thou, o Lord, most high, most just,
Ay happi live, whole worlds sole endless trust.
FOR lo, thyn impious foes, o Lord,
Thyn impious foes, of heavens and earth abhord,
From earth and heavens lo chased away,
In darkness dire their damned heads shall lay.
My strength but thou, like stateli horn
Of Unicorn stout, with dread and beauti born,
Wilt long advance: Oil fresh renewed
On me shall stream with gladness sweet imbued.
And ey shall see, ioid ear shall hear,
Chance wicked foes, what gilti hearts did fear.
THE just mean while, as fenced palm,
Shall flourish fair, (no storms shall him uncalm:)
As cedar tall, mount Libans praize,
His lofti top toward heavens high valt shall raize.
Men planted midst Gods sacred place,
In sacred coorts shall spring: yea through his grace,
In age extreme still fruit shall give;
Still iuiceful, still with greeni boughs shall live.
To show that God, my strength, and light,
Ay just persists, ay pure from all unright.
PSALM 94.
The Author of this Psalm, living in time of ungodli tyranni, under which
himself did also greatly suffer; prezenteth the state of the Land unto the vieu
of Almighti God; whom he calls on to be an Avenger against those Tyrants, who
oppressing Gods people, atheistically scorned his future judgments; the veriti
of which he establishes by invincible argument. Then he comfort the better
sort, by assuring them that this chasticement should turn finally to their
good; and judgment should once again return to true Justice: and encourages
them to make a stand of defense against the wicked: who in wrong-dooing and
oppression might execute their own power, but could not derive such authoriti
from God: unto whose gracious protection he in fin^ betakes himself; with
assurance of his own safeti, and of his enemies destruction. This Psalm is
coniectured to have been made by David, at what time he was persecuted by King
Saul and his Coortiers: and then, seems most fitly to fall into the time,
when after that most cruel massacre of Gods Priests, their wifes, children,
servants, and very cattle, in hate of David, he began to think of standing upon
his own defense (being anointed by God for successor in the Kingdom;) yet
without any purpose of attempt against Saul, in his person, peace, authoriti,
or digniti.

A VENGER great; who man's presumptuous sin,
Earth righteous Judge, with plagues to chastize do not lin:
At length shine out, o spring of purest light;
Rize up; pay home the proud in worlds apparent sight.
How long, great Lord, how long shall godles sect,
Shall wicked crew triumph, who heavenli laws neglect?
Shall tyrants fierce, impunely foam their shames;
And grievous wrongs contrive; then vant their hateful names?
THY servants, Lord, with iron teeth they grynd;
Th'elected race oppress: no plea to barbarous mind,
Nor widoes eyes, nor orphans palms can make,
Nor humbled strangers knees, their murdering rage to slake:
That done, thus say; Can this to God be told?
Or Jacobs Lord will he from heaven our facts behold?
O blinded souls! against God ye cloze your eyes:
Look up: why natures light do brutish mynds despize?
CAN soverain cause, whence all perfections flow,
Himself not know; on man yet knoweing powers bestow?
Who plants the ear; shall he unhearing be?
Who ey with sight endues; himself (ye fools) not see?
Round world who rules; who nations all does rein;
To check, to scurge lewd life's, may careless he remain?
Yeas God does see; the eternal light does know:
Yea knows in heart of man how vain conceits do grow,
O BLESSED that man, whom thou do Lord correct;
And by correcting teach toward sacred laws respect.
Midst days of evil in rest he safe abides;
For wicked wretch dead pit while vengeance due provides.
For sure our Lord his folk will not forsake:
Will not peculiar flock t*abandon e^re betake.
For judgment shall to justice pure return:
And draw all upright hearts, which now for justice moorn.
AH who for me dare against malfactors rize;
What courage take my part? If thou thy gracious eyes,
If succoring hand, deer Lord, did not extend;
My life toward death, my soul toward silent place did bend.
But when I cried; My foot, ah Lord, does shake:
Thy pitying grace did me to staid protection take.
In swarms of cares, midst sad perplexed thought,
Yet comforts thyn delight in troubled soul have wrought.
MAY violent throne, from thee, Lord, powers derive,
That lusts for laws ordein, and griefs for ease contrive?
By troops they range, the righteous soul to kill:
Yea judgment seats abuze, ungilti blood to spill.
But God my tower, my high retreit has been;
My Lord, my rock assured in worlds fair vieu was seen.
He he their wrongs, their spite shall them restore:
Yea God our Lord their pride hew down for evermore.
TREBLE.
A

^ Venger great, who man's presumptuous sin,

^ Earths righteous judge, with plagues to chastize do not lin; At

^ length shine out, o spring of pu-rest light; Rize

^ up; pay home the proud, in worlds apparent sight. How long,

^ great Lord, how long shall god-les sect, shall wicked crew

^ triumph, who heavenli laws neglect? Shall Tyrants fierce impuneli foam their

^ shames; And grievous wrongs contrive, then vant their hateful names?

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 100.
An Invitation to all Nations, to prezent themselves cheerfully in the Coorts
of God, with exclaming thanks and praises, for his constant goodness and merci
toward mankind; whom he has made and framed peculiarly to be his.

WITH raized voice, and cheerful grace,
Approach, ye Nations all, our king:
On bended knees prezent his face
With hymn of bliss, which Angels sing.
For know, He formd us, (God, not we,)
His flock, his folk, yea sons to be.
O THANKFUL enter then his gate;
His coorts high praises make exclame:
Resound his acts, and glorious state;
And prostrate bless his sacred name.
Whose goodness, great; and favor, sure;
Whose truth, like heavens unchanged does dure.
PSALM 101.
DAVID'S vow unto God, touching the well governing of Himself, his Coort, and
Kingdom: made it seems a little before his actual coming to the Croun.

OF Judgments, Lord, to thee I Will sing;
Where Justice Merci shall embrace.
Such thoughts shall righteous use make spring,
Toward me against pleazest to bend thy face.
MINE house an upright heart shall guide;
Which vice shall check, which goodness grace.
No pleazing sin shall train aside
Those eyes, which thee before them place.
WHO thee forsake, from me I Will shake;
Their woorks and them I Will ay detest.
Nor perverse imp there root shall take,
Where evil all shall be suppressed.
THAT sly deceit, the slanderous tongue,
Which just men heedles may beguile;
That secret seed of neighbors wrong,
Severe reproof shall strait exile.
THOSE hauti looks of swelling mind,
Which Thee neglect, and equals scorn;
That self-love, hatred mine shall find;
I Will soon pull down their lofti horn.
WHAT woorthi person through the Land
Mine ey can vieu, what faithful wight:
He graced in my Coort shall stand;
His upright service my delight.
BUT false, dissembling, flattering mates,
With lying tricks that plot their own;
No harbor get within my gates;
Their tricks and They shall out be thrown.
MY kingdom then I will begin
From foul corruptions clean to pare:
To hunt the wicked to their gin,
Shall be my daili earliest care.
SO shall Gods City brightly shine;
So shall his people flourish ay:
When damned crues exiled pine;
And lawles folk are swept away.
PSALM 103.
King DAVID with great thankfulness, and high joy of spirit, celebrateth here
the excelling graciousnes of God, toward himself in particular; the race of
Israel in especial; and in general toward all men who fear him and keep his
covenant. Where at large he expresses the goodness of our heavenli Father, full
of compassion and merci; prone to reclaim and forgivo mankind offending; and
contrariwise slow in punishing. In fine he exciteth the happi Angels of God,
with all his loial hosts and ereatures, to bless their great King, who has
placed his throne in the heavens, embracing them all with his supreme dominion.
And himself lastly conioineth with them in lauding God.

PURE light of soul, thou high-bred mind,
Derived from God, and God to praize assignd;
Adore thy Lord; his beauties bless;
And glorious acts in praiseful hymns express.
Bless still my soul with all thy powers,
That sacred name whence bliss so richly shours.
No tract of time o e're efface,
From thankful heart sweet vieu of bounteous grace.
OF GRACE, which all thy sins remits;
And all thy griefs, sins pay, with cures befits:
Thy life from grave which does redeem;
Redeemd does round with deer compassions steem:
With healthiest food thy mouth which fills;
That egle-like youths strength through age distills.
HE supreme judge, whence justice springs,
To wronged on earth from heaven just judgment brings.
He ways divine to Moses shown,
By Moses made to Isreal's offspring known.
Same Isreal's race with joy has seen
Those Acts, to foes which terror dire have been.
THE algracious Lord with pitti'is fraught;
(How slow to wrath, how soon to merci wrought?)
Nor strive, nor chide will always he;
Ne let his ire, though just, unending be.
Not like our flats, his strokes were found:
Sin wrath provoked; grace merci made abound.
FOR look how high earth heaven transcends;
How far from East to West huge space extends:
So great his grace toward servants prooves;
So far our sins deer Lord from souls remooves.
As father tendreth feeble son:
With sonli fear like kyndnes his is won.
FOR well he knows our brittle state:
Remembering whom of clay he did create.
As earth-sprung grass, as flour of field;
So flouring man; to earth whose days must yield:
When wynd sweeps over, fair flour is gone;
The place erst brave, inglorious stands alone.
BUT ay benign, still God the same,
Toward them persists, who fear, who love his name:
Yea righteous truth, to fathers sworn,
With race observes of childrens children born:
Sole that his covenant they attend;
And loial hearts toward sacred mandates bend.
THE Lord in heaven his throne has placed:
With kingli rule, heavens, earth, and seas, embraced.
Ye Angels then, heavens happi gests,
Excelling strengths, obsequious to his hests;
Ay bless the Lord, adore our King;
Whose word ye serve, whose will to men ye bring.
YEA all his hosts, through world arranged,
Industrious troops, servants of faith unchanged,
Bless ay his name; whose glorious will,
Your severed ways, united woorks, fulfill.
In sum his creatures great and small,
Where ever dispersed throughout his empire all;
Bless, bless our Lord: bless thankful mind,
Thy blessed Lord, whom thou so good do find.
TREBLE.
P

^ Ure light of soul, thou high- bred mind, Derived

^ from God, and God to praize assigned; Adore thy Lord; his beauties

^ bless; And glorious acts in prais- full hymns ex- press.

^ Bless still my soul with all thy powers, That sacred name whence

^ No tract of time o e're of- face, From thankful heart sweet

^ bliss so rich- ly shours.

^ vieu of boun- teous grace.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 104.
A Psalm of Bliss and Glory, prezented unto God, as well in contemplation of
his glorious estate, as also of the round world, and all the furniture and
gests thereof; being created, governed, and constantly preserved, by the
magnificent power, wisdom, and goodness of God. A petition is annexed, to
consume utterly the wicked and sweep them out of the world, being the cause of
all the dishonor and calamities thereof.

MAgnanimous, mighti, glorious Lord; my soul shall sing thy praise:
Whose Greatness greatest heavens surmounts; whose Beauti dims their rays.
Thee, King, imperial Glories croun; thee Majesty's dread attire:
Magnificence thyn whole world refils; high Bliss transcends desire.
Great Lord, my God; eternal Life; Perfection; purest Light;
Unbounded Goodness; robest thy self with beams of glorious sight.
CREATOR high, first cause of all: He being to all things gave:
He Heavens like courtains fair disspreds, with stars bespangled brave:
Grand Lights as lamps illuster all. Those lighter Waters, see,
As chambers how midst air he rears: thick Clouds his charriots be:
On wings of Wynds he swiftly walks: Often wynds as Angels makes;
And service dire to flying flames of high-bred Fire betakes.
THE Earth midst air has rarely hanged: yet hanged by rule so sure,
As never to moove, while light in sun, while stars in skys endure.
It first with cristal robe had heled: all Sea, no land was seen;
Deep floods surrounding highest mounts: no seat for man had been.
But strait at thy rebuke they fly; them thundering voice does chase,
Up hill, down vale, by shortest coorse, to their commanded place:
Vast deep their foming streams receives. Here bounds their surges find,
Proud waves to break; here laws from thee their roaring rage to bynd.
THUS land from sea ay free remains. Then Springs to land does send,
Tween hills which run; fair vales enrich; encreasd to seas descend.
Hence moisture sweet draw flouri medes: hence drink myld cattle take:
Here beasts of field do quench their thirst; wyld ass dry heat asslake.
By these wingd birds, sweet gests of air, on native arbours mount;
And pleazing notes among greeni leafs in cooling shade recount.
THE mountains from his raized lofts with sweet concocted Rain
He watreth so, that rich in fruits all parts of earth remain.
Pure fatnes drops: strait pregnant earth in various robe arraid,
Sees Grass for beasts, sees Herbs for man, as tribute duly paid.
Man thus sustaind, assisted thus; by art derived from high,
By gift of thyn, the earths rich womb t'improove does soon apply.
Here Corn, here Vines, there Olives plants; with bread his heart to cheer;
With wine his drooping spirits to glad; with oil his face to clear.
THE Trees of God like blessing draw: the Cedars, which his hand,
Not care of man, on Liban plants; there ages long do stand.
Here Birds their curious nests do build: the Storks midst lofti boughs
Of stateli Fir with parted love themselves half strangers houze.
Naught useles stands: to Mountains steep, the Shamois make retreit;
The craggi Rocks, weak Connies shield; thick Woods, give Deer receipt.
LOOK up eftsoons; see changing Moon made changing seazons to show:
The Sun his certain race does run; his nightli settings know.
Strait darkness black bids light withdraw: withdrawn, the forest mooves:
Wyld beasts in woods that lurk, creep forth; seek food what each behooves,
Young Lions rage and roar for prey; from God their meat require:
And fed, at suns return to dens their cooching lims retire.
Then forth goes Man, their Lord by thee: he at his daili toil,
Deserving so, til eevening bides; and earth in earth does moil.
O LORD, how manifold are thy woorks? high wisdom all did frame:
Thy goods, which earth, which sea do store, no tongue, no thought can name.
The Sea, a place of vast extent, where cralling things abound;
Where swimming beasts both great and small past number all are found:
Here walk the Ships; which worlds whole wealth dispersd by trade unite:
Stands wondering Whale, there made to play; himself more wondrous sight.
THESE creatures all thy care attend, meet food in seazon to have.
Thou scattring, they it spars'd colect; larg'd hand, gives all they crave.
If gracious face thou once avert; they troubled all do moorn:
Their spirit withdraw; they breath gasp out, and to their dust return.
If spirit of life thy grace send forth, which world with being endues;
Thou recreatst his wasted store; so face of earth renues.
BE then, o glori'ay be to God: Thou praiz'd from thankful voice,
Receive due tribute, gracious Lord: So in thy woorks rejoice.
Repair at length worlds great defects; o thou whose ires consume:
Whose stern aspect shakes trembling earth; whose touch makes mountains fume.
I whilst my life, while being does last, shall still thy praises sing:
Sweet joy shall thoughts of thee imbue; o thou my blisful King.
Let sinners foul, who earth defile, defiled have made abhord;
Consumed from earth pay vengeance due. Soul mine, praize thou the Lord.
Allelu-ia.
PSALM 107.
A Celebration of the gracious providence of God, and of his merci toward
mankind, in relieving them who in any extreme distress wholly cast themselfs
upon him in prayer. Which is particularized in the examples of the Israelites
in those times, (being times of exile and great calamiti:) whereof some in
their return, lost their way in wyld deserts: other in not foloing the advice
of God, became prisoners in chains and dungeons: A third sort by their wicked
and lascivious life, fell into the usual punishment of grievous diseases: And a
fourth, endured sore tempests at sea. All whom having had unexpected
deliverance by God, he exhorts to be therefore grateful, and in solemn
assembli of Gods people before the senators to profess their thankfulness. An
advise foloed by the Iues even at this day in those four cases. Lastly he
shows that the calamities which fall generally upon Nations, be it by
barrennes of the earth; by oppression of Tyrants; by contempt grown upon a
land in their Nobles and Governors, (whence much mischief ensues;) or by any
other evil or sorro whatsoever; are all brought upon them by their sins and
that odious unthankfulnes to God: who yet even in public miseries preserves
and prospers his humble servants: and when Nations apply themselfs faithfully
to his service, pours upon them all blessings opposite to those former
punishments. Which things wise men will consider and make use of; especially so
as to know and acknowledge the Creatours goodness.

YE woorthi mynds, in whom Gods gifts excel;
Whose persons walk on earth, high thoughts in heavens do dwell;
Renoum our Lord, ring forth his glorious name;
Whose goodness no time fails, sweet mercies still the same.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
OBLAZE his acts, ye now at rest that stand,
From hostile power redeemd, redeemd from strangers land:
Ye late dispersd, now gathered by his grace;
From East, from West, from North, yea from great Oceans place.
In deserts wyld, through uncouth invious ways,
All tired, all forlorn, they wandered nights and days,
With fainting spirits, through thirst and hunger pined;
And no relief, no steps toward cultived place could find.
IN need extreme when lo to God they cry:
He gracious hears their moan: and help from heaven makes fly.
So strength renues; so straying feet directs
To peopled walls; and safe from perils all protects.
O thankful then to God his grace confess:
His merveilous woork to men with ioious tongs express.
Who thirsting soul with waters sweet refreshd;
The empti filled; and pace toward longed home addresd.
IN darkness sad, in shade of grisli death,
With iron and anguish bound, who sighd their servile breath;
(Il-ruled mynds, that this and more deserved,
That Highests word despysd, from Gods advise that swarv'd:)
When hart-burst clean, they grovelling rold in pain;
Ne hope of better saw, nor place for worse remain:
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
IN need extreme to God their suit they bent;
Who pitying rueful plight, from heaven sweet comfort sent.
He darkness dire, grim shade of death dispels:
he cords from hands, from feet he fetters burst repels.
O thankful then to God his grace confess:
His wondrous act to men with ioious tongs express.
Who brazen gates made all to fragments flee:
Brake bars of iron, strong Lord, and prisoners did enfree.
UNGOVERND fools, transported by their lust
From virtuous ways to vice; when God severely just,
Their wicked ioys afflicts, such sicnes sends,
That soul abhorring meat, at deaths pale door attends:
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
IN hour extreme to God then lo they cry;
Who gracious hears their groans, and ease from heaven bids hy.
Down comes his word, the perishing soul to save;
And hasting life retracts from near approached grave.
O thankful then to God his grace confess:
His mercies great to men with ioious tongs express.
And clensd in heart, just sacrifice of praise
Let grateful hands yield up; renoum him all your days.
TO Seas in ships, who (Arts chief woork) descend,
Adventrous hearts, by trade penurious state to mend;
Or spacious lakes who pass; what wondrous sight,
Strange woorks of God in deep, their staring looks affright?
Lo strait his word tempestuous wynd does rear;
And roughest frouns on seas late smiling face appear:
Anon toward heavens on back of arched wave
They mount; dismount in trise toward hels unloveli cave.
As drunk they reel; then melting hearts gin fail;
Naught toil, naught careful coorse of Masters skill avail.
IN case extreme when lo to God they cry:
Who gracious hears grieved voice, and help from heaven bids hy.
Strait wynds repose; smooth hieu calmd seas regain:
Hearts joy; woorks cheer; til safe they long longd haven attain.
Then thankful o to God his grace confess:
His merveils great to men with ioious tongs express.
And let Gods Church, let faithful people hear
Vowed praise: in senate grave his mercies rare endeer.
HE bubling springs chokes up with thirsti sand:
Yea rivers rich, accursd, dry desert makes to stand.
And fertile soil, in plague of owners sin,
To saltnes damns; whence fruit nor skill nor toil can win.
AGAIN his grace dry desert stores with pools:
Sends springs, and bare burnt earth with fruitful moisture cools.
There hungri souls their citti sets to place:
Who sow their grains; plant vines; years sweet return embrace.
Abounding food then blessed with restful peace;
To numbers huge themselves, their flocks and herds increase.
BUT hearts puffed up, soon spurning heavenli law,
(Ah fools,) in chains of sin enchained tortures draw.
Oppression foul, sad days, unthriving care;
Their ioyles mynds abase; their branching numbers bare.
He vyld contempt on woorthles Nobles pours;
And wayles wastes makes walk, chased out from lordli towers.
Yet godli poor, raizd up from pressing need,
As tree makes branch, as flock his branched race to breed.
THESE things the just with reverend joy shall see:
And wicked mynds and mouths appald and stopped shall be.
Who then is wise, these sights to heart to lay?
Gods goodness they shall learn; Gods praises they display.
PSALM 110.
The Prophet DAVID foresheweth the everlasting Kingdom and Priesthood of
Christ: who after his Ascension, sitting at the Right hand of God, should send
out his forces from Sion and Jerusalem, to reduce the world unto him. Which
spiritual warfare should take so wonderful effect, that not only at the very
beginning infinite multitudes should adioin themselfs to the Church: but in
short time also the Empire of Rome it self, (then Head of mani Nations,) with
other great kingdoms, should be conquered and subdued unto the obedience of
Christ and his law. The proof whereof to the later ages did manifestly appear.

THE Lord said to my Lord; Thou at my right hand sit;
While foes their necks I to thy feet as footstool make submit.
From Sion, seat of Grace, the Lord thy scepters might
Through world shall send: midst all thy foes bear rule thou Prince of light.
What day thy warli ranks shall high exploit begin;
The people pressed, with cheerful strife, to serve thee shall com in.
Anon, as prime of morn with silveri perls of dew
Al-spreds the world; like troops thy youth in sacred house shall show.
THE Lord, who will not change, has sworn fair Prince to thee;
A Priest thou art, Melchisedek like, and ay that Priest shall be.
This Prince, who 'on thy right hand, great King of heaven, thus shines;
Each earthli King in ire shall crush, that against his rule repines.
He Hethen with sword shall judge; fields, streets with corpse shall straw;
Imperial Head whom Nations serve, assubiect to his law.
As lightning, swift shall run; in way of torrent drink:
Thus glorious head triumphant raize; while danted foes do shrink.
PSALM III.
The Psalmist here sings the praises of God, both for his glorious woorks, and
for his gracious acts toward the Israelites, in mercifully conducting them from
the serviliti of Egypt, to the happi land of Canaan; and therein chiefly for
establishing to their everlasting good his sacred Law and Covenant. In
observance whereof true wisdom consists.

ALLELV-IA.
MY heart does heavenli heat inflame,
To sound high praise to glorious name:
Th'alglorious Lord, midst righteous press,
In sacred senate shall I bless.
Great are Gods woorks; and bless their sight
Whose mynds in knowelege high delight:
His gracious hand all good has formd,
All beauteous, all with grace adornd.
Over all Gods Justice glorious raigns:
Which righteous ay, unswaid remains.
HIS acts which wondering Fathers saw,
So live, enrold, as guiding law;
That ages all with joy recount
Those graces, thoughts which all surmount.
He gracious Lord, with merci fraught,
His race elect, from thraldom brought,
In desert bare, in hungers reign,
With food celestial did sustain.
He, who his covenant still remynds,
Where righteous fear, true faith he fynds;
To Israel deer his power expresd,
Which them of Hethens land possesd.
THUS all his woorks are truth and right;
Prints of his hand, sparks of his light:
His sacred precepts faithful all;
And dying man to life recall:
Unchanging rule; unerring guide:
So Lord and Law still same abide.
For when he first redemption sent,
And feet late thrald at freedom went:
He law, he leaug with them ordaind,
Eternal both from heaven proclaimd.
That man should awful thereto frame:
Since holi' and dreadful lives his name,
PRIME entrance unto wisdom true,
Gods greatness is to fear. O you,
Sole you right understandings bless,
Who tremble' his mandates to transgress.
^Adore him then; whose praises pure,
As sun, illustrous ay endure.
^:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
PSALM 112.
A mixed description, as well of the virtuous, as also of the prosperous life of
a good man: being an hart-grief to the wicked; whose desires all perish.

ALLELV-IA.
O HAPPI man; with humblest fears,
And purest loves toward God who bends:
With sweet delight Gods law he hears;
And heard, through actions all extends.
O HAPPI man! thy ioys are true:
Thy house with plenteous wealth abounds:
Thy justice yields, and reaps, her due;
Her fruit to thee still blessed redounds.
HIS offspring, noble in their race,
By noblest virtues so endure:
Long hold on earth great powerful place:
And world of blessings round alure.
YEA even in time of darkest woe,
To him does cheerful light arize:
To righteous man; who no man fo,
Still merciful, still merci trys.
HE helpful, bounteous, lends, and gives;
Reward from Gods sole grace expects:
In choicest thoughts still blessed lives;
Which prudence rightly still directs.
THEREFORE he stable ay shall stand;
Nor storm, nor engine, throw him down.
Yea gracious woorks of virtuous hand,
With fame immortal shall him croun.
HIS settled mind on God relys;
No troublous nues can him affright:
Firm stands his heart, and fears defys;
Which on his enemies pates shall light.
THUS spends the just, thus ends his hours:
Dispersing hand the needi feeds:
Down glorious blessing on him shours:
Reaps endless prize of ended deeds.
THE wicked this shall see, and vex;
Shall grynd their teeth, and pine to naught:
Sad fears shall duly them perplex;
Their deer desires to nothing brought.
^ ALlelu-ia, ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. O happi man; with humblest fears, And pu- rest

^ loves toward God who bends: With sweet de- light Gods law he

^ hears; And heard, through actions all ex- tends.

^ O happi man; thy ioys are true; Thy house with plenteous wealth

^ abounds: Thy justice yields, and reaps her due; Her fruit to

^ thee still blessed re- dounds.

2. TREBLE.
^ Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^ Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.

TENOR.
^ Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.

BASE.
^

^ Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.

^ ij. ij.

LUTE.
^

Allelu-ia,

^

PSALM 118.
This Psalm is with great reason coniectured to have been made by King David,
and at his first coming to the possession of the kingdom of Judah. It contains
first his inward great thankfulness to God for deliveri by divine hand from so
mani strong attempts against him: admonishing no assurance to be like unto
trust in God. Secondly it recites the verse which the People had taken up to
magnifi God with, for this victori as it were achieved in advancing David
above his enemies. And lastly it sets forth the dueti of a truly noble and
religious King, in the example of this King David; who besides his private
thankfulness, makes here a solemn entri into the Coorts of God; there
prostrateth himself publicly in thanks and prayer to the Almighti: which done,
he is blessed of the Priests of God, and received as being sent to them from God
to be their Governor. In fine, legal sacrifices are slain and offered up, with
sound of triumphing praises, to the eternal Lord and King. In the person of
King David, his Son our Savior is here prefigured: who being refuzed by the
Archbuilders, the Prelates and Potentates of his time; yet became by Gods grace
the head-stone of the corner, whereupon the spiritual Church is builded, and
wherein the Iues and Gentiles were united: being received of the true Israel,
as sent unto them from God.

SING, o, sound out Gods woorthi praise,
Who goodness pure, still grace displays.
Let Isreal's race agnize the same:
And thankful now renoum his name.
Great Aarons house, thou blessed to bless,
Same goodness, same sweet grace confess.
Yea, all who fear our glorious King,
His rich, his endless merci sing.
IN streit distress the Lord I sought;
Who gracious, fair enlargement brought.
That since my God does me assist;
Since aiders mine his aid has blist:
Nor fear I man, do man his woorst;
Nor faun on fo, with rancour burst.
Much better o in God to trust,
Then ground on man, whose ground is dust:
On God yea better to rely,
Then Princes; lo, even Princes die.
ME nations all encloz'd, as toil;
But Gods great help all put to foil:
As circle, they did me surround;
But Gods great help bare all to ground.
Yea even as cloud of Bees they swarmd,
With ireful stings against me armd*
As cracling fire of thorns soon spent,
By Gods great help to smoke they went.
THOU sore at me, my fo, have thrust;
My wrongful fo: but God, God just,
With succoring hand me staid from fall;
Thy plots, thyn hopes defeated all.
He, he my strength, my verse of praise;
Sole health, sole joy for ending days.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
HARK: voice of joy, triumphing sound,
Fills righteous tents, with safeti cround:
Sing, God, our God, this fight has wrought;
Whose right hand valiant acts has sought:
Advanced stands that powrful hand;
And powers terrene makes all disband.
IT IS true, God me did sore correct:
Yet still from death my soul protect.
Then live I shall; (where is death thy sting?)
O God, thy woorks, thy praise to sing.
NOW toward th'Eternals glorious place,
With reverence bend we joyful pace.
Ye sacred Priests, to heavens great King,
Who vows, who prayers, sweet praises sing;
Uncloze your gates: give praise access,
At gates which praises all possess.
Hence crew profane: Gods gates are pure;
Sole righteous mynds, clean thoughts endure.
"O KING of Kings; who ear did bend
"To just requests; and safeti send:
"Lo prostrate here thy servant true,
"Yields thanks, brings praise, great Lord thy due.
"What stone the Archbuilders did reject;
"Their foloers scorn; the world neglect;
"Same stone now angles fronted head,
"Thy peoples strength and rest has bred.
"O GRACIOUS Lord, thyn act it is;
"Great act of merci, act of bliss:
"Our ravished thoughts, our wondering eyes,
"Thy woork makes mortal woorks despize.
"This day thy grace has made us see:
"Which ay to joy shall sacred be.
"Then still, great King, thy goodness reign:
"Still safeti, still this joy maintain.
O blessed thou, whom God has sent;
And here does King in grace prezent.
We Priests of God, Gods merci seat
Who ay atend, ay God entreat
Appeaz'd his people deer to bless;
We bless you: Long Gods bliss possess.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
He the only God, this light has raiz'd,
This ioying light: He sole be praiz'd.
To altars horns beasts festive bynd:
Let sacred blood seal faithful mind.
THOU art my God; I Will bless thy name:
Our Lord; to heavens we will raize thy fame.
Sing then, sound out Gods glorious praise:
Who goodness pure, still grace displays.
PSALM 119.
This Psalm, conceived to be David's, and after a long time of persecution under
King Saul, for that God had declared David for his successor; is a treasuri of
mani excellent parts of devotion, mani choice things for instruction: each
Section being not incoherent within it self for matter, though not so in form
of speech, by reason of tying the verse to an alphabetical order; (vzed also in
some other Psalm^, but in differing manner;) either in assistance of memori, or
to make the matter more remarkable. David then first lays here the ground of
true blessedness to consist in converting our hearts to God, by seeking to know
him in his word, and by bending to serve him in observing his commandments:
which infer an aversion from their contraries, namely lying ways and sin. He
shows (and often by his own example) the excellenci, and blessed effects of
Gods Law and Word. Gods word is a light of heavenlitrueth: It illuminateth
the understanding: and brings life unto man; conducting him thereunto, as a
lamp or star, through the pilgrimage of this cloudi world, wherein we are
strangers. The Law also of God comprised in this word, is a law everlasting; a
law of perfect righteousness, continuing when all worldli perfections shall
perish. Wonderful are the treasures of Wisdom, Virtue, and Joy, wrapped up in
this word and law of God: and which being unfolded, bring understanding to
the simple: and are directions even for the young. They advance man in wisdom,
above the wit of his enemies, the science of the learned, the experience of the
aged. In cases doutful, they are counselers; in dangers, they are hopes; in
disgraces, countenancers; in afflicted estate, comforters; in calm meditations,
most pure delights and ioys, far exceeding the ioys of wealth and worldli
prosperiti. Lastly they place their foloers in so great repose of soul, that
no offense from the world can subvert or interrupt it. Contrariwise we being
all the woork of Gods hands, who has made the whole world and all parts
thereof to serve him, even as at this day they continue; and seeing also our
waysly open to the sight of God: what can the proud despizers of Gods Law
expect, but the curse of divine vengeance persuing them by diverse judgments to
everlasting d^struction, til as dross they be consumed from off Gods earth? For
although it be true that the mercies of God are great, yea and that the whole
earth is replenished with them; yet far is salvation from the obduredly wicked.
The horror of whose ends reprezented to prudent mynds, breeds in them a fear
of the judgments of God; and makes them more resolvedly to hate the vain
inventions of godles persons, whose trics and falsehoods are but deceivings of
themselves; as also more carefully to consider their own coorses, and choozing
the way of truth, to make have to serve God, refraining from everi evil and
unapprooved way which might to his divine Maiesti be displeasing. But David now
applying these generals to his own particular, discovers an extraordinari
spirit and admirable desire, toward God, his word, his law, and judgments:
professing they were his studi, meditation, delight, yea and matter of his
speech: that he dezired nothing so much, as to have his heart, and ways so
addressed toward God, as to know him, and keep his laws. Seven times a day,
did he praize God for his justice: His prayers to God for assisting grace and
protection, were earlier then the dawning of the toilsom day: his meditation on
the word of God and heavenli mysteries, prevented the nightli watches: yea all
the day long, his loving and longing thoughts, ran wholly upon the law of God:
And at midnight also, when other men were at their natural rest, and slept; he
wakening roze up to give thanks unto God in contemplation of his righteous
judgments. These were his trust, hope, comfort, and joy. Love of these bred an
hatred in him of all lying and false ways: a care to refrain from transgressing
their rules in any thing: a lothing of the very compani of ungodli persons: an
endeavor to make his companions of them who feared God and kept his precepts: a
zele that even consumed him with bitterness of grief, to see his enimes not
forget only and viclate the law of God, but with wicked desires and the pride
of an high hand attempt utterly to displace it; which called on God himself to
take his quarrel in hand. Lastly this love of Gods word and law, cauzed him to
speak boldly thereof before Kings. And though Princes traduced him in
unprinceli manner; yea and persecuted him without a cause: though the pride of
his enemies sought maliciously and wrongfully, to bereave and deprive him, of
his goods, by robbing him; of his good name and reputation, by forging lys and
dispersing reproaches against him; and lastly of life it self, by lying in
ambush to surprise him: yet his heart being held in aw by the word of God, he
forbear to repay wrong with wrong, sin with sin: but in silent sorro, even with
streams of tears, bewailed their offenses, and ensuing punishment. And for
himself he confesses this affliction was for his good; that God sent it him in
very faithfulness, to reform his straying coorses; which effect it had wrought:
and that his delight in the law of God, and hope in his word, did both
preserve and comfort him in all those troubles. This being David's estate and
disposition of soul, his prayers are suitable. He prays God, that looking
upon him, and considering he was his, and a lover of his law; he would
vouchsafe to teach him it, by inlightning his understanding, and by induing him
with good sense and judgment: that he would give him a sound heart; and so
enlarge and quicken it with heavenli joy and cheerfulnes, as redily to run the
way of Gods commandments: That having inclined him to the way of righteousness,
he would disturn his eyes, from regarding vaniti; his heart, from being caught
with covetousnes: that he would deliver him from lying ways; and preserve him
in such strength of virtue, that no iniquiti might get any dominion over him.
And where it had pleazed God, by private message, to cauze David to be anointed
King over Israel; and on that promise to rely; for which his proud enemies did
deride and pursue him: he prays God to be myndful and confirm that word;
that having how to answer the reproaching him with that trust; the shame might
redound upon his scorning adversaries. From whose oppression also he prays
now at length to be delivered: that walking at liberti, he might freely apply
and exercise the law of God: and good men might freely also associate
themselves unto him. And for observance of the divine law for the time to com,
he makes here a solemn vow unto God: whom he humbly withal prays to accept
that and other free offerings of his mouth, vows, prayers, and praises, being
all he could offer. Finally he concludes with the sum of his suit, the gift of
understanding, and freedom from his enemies: that his life being continued, he
might praize the goodness of God: who now being chased out by Saul, and
wandering up and down like a sheep that had straied, yet did not, ne could
forget Gods commandments; whose favor he again imploreth, to give end to that
extremiti. This Psalm (for the woorthines thus largely abridged) remains a
clear mirror of the godli heart of David: which cauzed him to be a man after
the heart of God, and to wear the honor of that incomparable title.

ALEPH.
O BLESSED they; who men upright in mind and way,
In Gods pure law delight, his sacred will obey.
Yea blessed, who embrace his word that witness true:
And God their soverain good with flaming hearts pursue.
Such men sure sin decline; in paths divine proceed:
Them careful hold: which held, have high reward decreed.
O THEN, fith thou so strait thy hests to keep have charged;
My ways were so addresd, my feet so, Lord, enlarged,
As free thy steps to trace: no blot shall me distain,
No shame confound; on thee while fixed mine eyes remain.
Right heart thy praise shall sound, for law of justice taught:
Which learnd, I Will keep: at length reduce me o to thought.
BETH.
WHEREWITH may careless youth his falti paths amend?
If heedful by thy word he them to guide attend.
Ah Lord, with heart entire I thee have truly sought:
O let not straying soul with trains of vice be caught.
Long I thy precious laws have treasured in my heart,
To purge out sin: Blessed Lord, still teach that sacred art.
REMEMBER Lord, my lips, and not unthankful tongue,
How free thy word have taught, how glad thy praise have song:
How deer delight I take in way from heaven declared:
Vain ioys breeds world of wealth, with these true ioys compared.
With muzing mind I vieu, and still thy law admire:
Nor sight gives end to search; nor search to sweet desire.
GIMEL.
THIS gift, this favor, Lord, on servant thyn bestow;
That live I may; and live, thy saving grace to know,
Yea sacred word to keep. Then thou mine eyes unsele;
And wonders of thy law to groping mind revele.
I stranger rome on earth; my seat with thee abides:
O hide not heavenli way which to thy presence guids.
DESIRE my soul consumes, still muzing on that path:
Which pride derides; dead pride, devowd to firi wrath.
But thou repel their scorns. Ah zele to sacred law,
From Princes seats did grieved unprinceli censures draw.
Yet still, I still thy word in studious thoughts renew:
Sole solace in my griefs, in douts adviser true.
DALETH.
MY humbled soul to dust, prostrate on earth, does cleve;
Remynd thy word; and up revived servant heve.
My heart, my state, and ways, to thee I did unfold:
Thou heard'st with grace: then still me precepts thyn, enrold
In faithful breast, direct. Discloze thy beauteous way:
And moorning soul recheerd thy merveils let display:
REMOOVE bypath of lys: thy truth has been my choice;
Thy law my mirror. O, make clear thy gracious voice:
And foloer of thy words grant through that favor high,
Be nor ashamed to live, nor Lord afraid to die.
Yea when my narroed heart shall noble grace enlarge;
Base lets despiz'd, I Will run what race thy mandates charge.
HE.
GREAT Guide of men, my feet address in righteous way:
My feet; by thee addressed, which never from thee shall stray.
Recleer my dimmed mind, sweet beauti of thy laws
To vieu: which vieud, from heart like love abundant draws.
Thus heart deiect erect, thy rizing paths to clime;
Thy word, my high delight, in raized thoughts to shrine.
BUT from unwoorthi gain; from vain aspects, which fire
Unwari breasts; disturn mine eyes and frail desire.
And quicken me in thy way. Ah to thy servant true,
Devoted to thy fear, thy roial word renew.
So feared reproach discharge: with judgments just recheer
The fainting soul which longs thy statutes to endeer.
VAV.
LET then thy mercies deer, salvation, favors high,
Foretold by gracious word, at length great Lord draw nigh.
That those who me reproach depending thus on thee;
Confounded quite, their scorns my glory high may see.
Mean while let word so true toward him not wholly sleep,
Who trusts in thy decree, still still thy law will keep.
AND keeping thus thy law, abroad I Will boldly walk:
And of thy word fore kings undanted freely talk.
O King of kings, thou thou my love and sole delight:
Thy hests my joy; on them I still defix my sight;
Toward them my hands I Will raize, to act what they require;
Who sole possess my thoughts, command my chief desire.
ZAIIN.
THEN myndful of thy speech, thou Lord still true and just,
Shine forth; since in that word have causd thy servant trust.
Sole this to grieved mind sweet comfort still derives;
This pressed state supports; this dulled sprites revives.
The proud both it and me with scorns profane deride:
Nor pride, nor scorns profane, from thee can me divide.
FOR judgments thyn of old my muzing thoughts revieu:
Which me secure: but ah still horror then renew,
When ends of lawles men my pitying mind foresees.
But I, in pilgrim life, still singing thy decrees;
In silent night, with joy revolving Lord thy name;
Thy statutes keep; which kept, these ioys in me enframe.
CHETH.
MY portion, Lord, art thou: my thankful mind, resolved
Thy words to keep, her cares on thee has all devolved.
And heart with fervent suit thy gracious face has sought:
Let then those mercies shine which gracious word has taught.
For strait my earthli ways, with vieu unpartial eyd,
Delay cut off, I glad to heavenli coorse applyd.
THIS worldlings hate procures; whose troops make me their prey.
Nor hate of world, nor wrongs, me from thy paths can fray.
Thou witness, Night; whose midst with thanks me rize does hear
Gods judgments just to bless: thou Day; which God who fear,
His laws who love, my deer companions all do see.
Thou then, whose grace earth fills, thou, Lord, my leader be.
TET.
I MUST confess, my Lord, that graciously with me,
As was thy word, have dealt: o grant, from passions free,
With sense and science right, thy servant still esteem.
For even afflictions all I now thy favors deem:
Which straying soul reduced; who since believes thy law.
Thou good, and good who do; still me to goodness draw,
THE proud with conscious gilt have lys against me devized:
I careful kept thy word; that kept, their lys despized.
Their hearts has tallo' obdured: thy hests are my delight.
And since thy chastning hand my humbled soul aright
In wisdoms school has framed; more deer thy laws I hold,
Then streams of silver fine, then hills of purest gold.
IOD.
THY hands me made, and formd: reform thy servant, Lord;
And understanding give, which sin may make abhorred.
Thy judgments all are just: I know, in faithful truth,
And for my good, thy love, thus scurged has my youth.
But now let promised grace, with comfort shine: that they
Who fear thee, knoweing my case, thy praise may glad display.
YEA let thy mercies shour, and wearied soul refresh:
That withering heart revived may life from thee confess.
Let pride ashamed remain to seek my causeles bane:
Whose harmles thoughts thy law their sole delight do frame.
Let zelers of thy hests to me themselves adioin:
And clenze my heart; that shames sad scandal none eloin.
CAPH.
MY long erected soul, still looking for thy grace,
Thy word still trusting, now bends down her fainting face.
Consumed are my spirits; consumed my waiting eyes:
Like bottle parched with smoke, my self now self despize.
Yet still believe thy word; thy precepts still apply.
How mani rest my days? when draw thy comforts nigh?
AND when shall I my Lord see sword of justice draw,
Against proud persuing foes; who pits, (not so thy law,)
For righteous steps have delved? Ah hate the most unjust!
Thou then whose hests are truth, my life near trod to dust,
If still thy law I love, if mercies thyn attend,
In merci keep; which kept, I Will in thy service spend.
LAMED.
THY word forever, great Lord, in heavens enthroned remains:
Thy word, which all did make, and all things made sustains.
Thy trueths through age to age with steadfast coorse proceed.
Stands peized earth, ne mooves, by thee so Lord decreed.
Thus lo, as thou ordainedst, they all this day persist;
Thy servants all, to act what e're thy judgments list.
MY woes had me consumed, had solace in thy law
Not cheerd that heart, which naught can e're from thence withdraw.
For thyn I am: o thyn preserve from wicked sword,
Which dogs my life; who live in studying Lord thy word,
In tracing Lord thy ways. O ways of widening ioys!
When else perfections all see fretting time destroys.
MEM.
WHAT, Lord, what heat my soul with sacred love inspires
Of law divine? what power thus rapts my strong desires?
All day to quicned cares, to pozed thoughts at night,
It self prezents: still shines high mynds admired light.
A light, whose rays infuzed, more scient me make and sage;
Then teachers, books; wit, foes; or gray experience, age.
O LAW, my thoughts delight! desire those mandates pure,
Lawgiver great, to pleaze, does wari feet inure,
All sinful ways to shun, thy words high paths to hold;
Makes judgments thyn observe, which sacred rols have told.
Yea sweetest juice my taste not so with sweetness feeds:
As word, which wisdom true, vyld falsehoods hate, imbreeds.
NVN.
THY word, a lamp divine, fair star that leads the day,
To paths obscure does shine; and guids to heavenli way.
And I by sacred vow, a vow in heavens enrold,
Stand bound, and rest resolved that words just rules to hold.
Afflictions me extreme bear down: let promised grace,
Revive me:' o then, I pray, poor lips frank gifts embrace.
MY soul see still in hand stands pressed away to fly;
Such snares my life beset: yet still thy hests I ey;
Can not thy Law forget. O teach me Lord thy ways:
Thy word since all my state, sole joy my heart to raize;
And thou my soverain good; since soul entire I bend
Thy will to do, in this life's breath extreme to spend.
SAMECH.
THY Law I deerly love; man's vain conceits despize;
Thou refuge mine, and shield; whose word my waiting eyes
Still holds in hope. Avaunt, avaunt then crew profane;
Gods mandates just I Will keep: sole thou my hope from shame,
(The hope thy speech has raiz'd,) with life persued, defend.
Saved life's so whole delight I Will in thy statutes spend.
AND lo transgressors proud, whose fraud shall self deceive,
Thyn earths inutil load, of grace whom do bereave;
As basest mire down trod, as dross with purging fire
Consumed, shall sole remain sad marks of heavenli ire.
Therefore thy word I love: in love, yet quake with fear,
When judgments thyn I vieu; yea hair dire horrors rear.
HAIIN.
IRIGHT and just have wrought; thy law has been my guide.
Abandon then me not t'uniust oppressing pride.
But intercede with help, my sureti' and witness true:
And failing eyes with strength of righteous speech renew.
Thy servant, I: deer Lord, thy servant not forsake:
Give science, thy hests me teach; and to thy favor take.
THUS I thy will shall know. But time for thee, great Lord,
For thee to woork: whose laws, of lawles mynds abhord,
Quite now they would displace. I, Lord, so much the more
Bove finest gold them prize; thee fountain just adore;
Their virtues high admire, in all things always right:
And falsehoods ways perverse all spurn with just despite.
PE.
SO merveilous shines thy word, in power, in wisdom high,
In goodness; that my soul with wingd desire does fly,
And pant, it to attain. Lo then thy sacred light
I folo Lord with joy: since understanding bright
Disclozed even simple mynds it gives. Thou me with grace
Aspect, as those who thee in highth of loves do place.
AND first my steps so guide in path of heavenli word,
That sins dark power decay. Then me with Justice sword
From man's oppression free: free man thy ways I Will trace:
O thou thy servant teach. And with thy gracious face
Cheer up my grieved eyes: whence streaming tears do thrill,
To see unthankful man neglect thy saving will.
TZADE.
HIGH Judge of worlds, from whom pure Justice down does flow;
Whose law, worlds perfect rule; whose word, hid truth makes know;
And judgments all are right: thou these with charge severe
Have man enioind to keep: that me grieved zele does wear,
To see my foes forget thy speech proclaimed above;
Thy speech, which pure as heavens, drawth up thy servants love.
I SMALL, and am despized: thy precepts yet apply:
Which mirror true of thee; which rule derived from high
Of justice firmly pitched, of never changing right;
In toils, in grasping griefs, still yield me sweet delight.
Sole thou my dazeling mind, (pure lights eternal spring,)
Illuminate: which light shall life eternal bring.
KOPH.
PROSTRATE with ardent heart, with tear-distilling eyes,
I call, I cry: o thou who just complaints despize
Nor do, nor can, thou hear; and save him, who thy hests,
And witnest will will keep: if undefiled requests
Morns dawning often; if often my waking thoughts prevent
Nights watches, toward thy word, their hope, in muzing bent.
LO, fainting voice to thee my still unfainting heart
Sends up: send down thy strength: and Prince of grace who art,
Revive me' as is thy wont. See, near toward me they draw,
Who mischief dire pursue; far they from (Lord) thy law.
But thou art near: whose hests for never-changing truth
Long since thy teaching word assured my learning youth.
RESCH.
AT length let pitying ey respect afflicted wight.
And thou, man's heart who see, art conscious of my right,
And pressing fo observest; plead thou my cause; and free
Soul cheered through thy word, addicted whole to thee.
Thy mercies Lord are wide: yet far from godles crew;
Who seek not thee, nor way to bliss that leads pursue.
BUT me thy doom revive: whom now persuing foes,
Not faithles to thy word, with swarming troops encloze.
O grief! mine ey to see men break thy righteous law;
Despize celestial bliss: in lines of love which draw
Thy servants soul: see Lord; and quicken them with thy grace,
Who just, eternal word, trueths sum, with joy embrace
SCHIN.
WITH causeles hate, o Lord, and not unwronging sword,
Have Princes me persued: yet aw of heavenli word
My heart restraind from sin. O word, whose ioys more draw,
My ly-detesting mind, and mind that loves thy law,
Then joy which Princes gifts, or foes rich spoils can bring!
Seven times yea daily I thy righteous judgments sing.
IN throng of worldli waves, which sweet of life devour,
Their mynds still calm abide, no scandal there has power,
Where love of thee directs. Lo then thy saving grace
My hoping eyes attend: sole thou his love embrace,
Whose pure affection seeks thy pleasure to fulfill.
I fain not, Lord: my ways, yea heart, thou vieust at will.
THAV.
THEN let at length approach, o Lord, my fainting cry;
Vouchsafe my suit access: sole understanding I,
And riddance from my foes, (which promized have,) require.
Thus taught thy will, and free; toward thee my quick desire
Shall spring; my lips thy praise, glad tongue thy word shall sound,
Where truth, where wisdom pure, where statutes just abound.
LET then thy hand now help; if not with cold pursuit
Salvation thyn I seek. Vouchsafe me Lord this fruit
Of making thee my hope, thy law my choice delight;
O let my soul yet live, preserved from tyrants might;
And it shall praize thy name. Seek then thy straying sheep,
Who wandering now, as lost, yet strives thy law to keep.
PSALM 122.
King DAVID having reduced the three parts of Jerusalem, that of Judah, that of
Benjamin, and the Mount held by the Iebusites, into one entire Citi; and there
in Sion seated the Ark of God: having also according to the Law, established
there supreme Coorts iuridical, for administration of Justice to all Gods
people: taking a vieu of this woork performed by divine grace; and of the
peoples alacriti in frequenting Gods service: he expresses in this Psalm his
religious joy for the same: and blessing Jerusalem, and all them that bless
her; concludes with a promise on his own behalf, both for the peoples sake,
(his brethren in race and religion,) and espeally for the Temples sake of God,
to procure studiously the good of that chozen Citi.

MY longing heart deer joy assaid,
As gracious sound struck grateful ear:
Religious mynds! Each neighbor praid,
In Gods fair house let us all appear.
Jerusalem, our peaceful feet
Now frequent in thy gates shall meet.
JERUSALEM, the earths delight;
A City, three compact in one:
To thee the Tribes, in legal rite,
Gods chozen Tribes ascend alone.
Sole here shines out heavens glorious King:
Here Israel all his praises ring.
RELIGION Justice does embrace;
Who doubled bliss through land derive:
For judgment thrones here hold their place;
And wronged right with aid revive.
Judicial thrones, the Kingdoms power;
Of David's croun most glorious flour.
O THEN Jerusalem respect;
Her peace with vows to heaven commend.
Jerusalem! who thee affect,
Them joy, them bliss, still pressed attend.
O peace ay in thy towers reside:
In houses plenti ay abide.
I FOR my friends, my brethrens sake,
Whom race, whom rites, in love combine;
Shall always pray; Earths peace partake;
And heavens rich light upon thee shine.
For Gods fair house, my joy, I Will sure
Still studious, still thy good procure.
PSALM 128.
The prosperous and happi estate, both public and private, of the man, who
fearing God, leads a life full of integriti.

OBLESSED they, whose humble hearts
True fear of power divine endues:
Religious soul, that never departs
From way which blisful life renues.
O BLESSED man! thy ioys abound:
Thyn house thy cheerful hands shall rear:
And labors just, with blessing cround,
Shall feeding fruit still plenteous bear.
THY wife, a vine on wall disspred,
In fruitful love have ioious met:
Thy children sweet, in virtue bred,
Fair olive plants, thy board beset.
LO thus Gods fear thus graced shall be:
From Sion deer thee God shall bless:
And quiet home shall plenti see;
And life contented long possess.
THAT all thy days delighted ey
Ierusalems great weal may vieu:
And wasting life it self espy
In childrens children to renew.
O THANKFUL then Gods love alure;
Still righteous life with care maintain:
So happi long may thou endure;
So peace with Israel long remain.
PSALM 130.
The Psalmist in the continuance of some great public calamiti, wherein he had
his part, (not unlikeli in the wearisom captiviti of Babylon) sends up his
humble cry^ unto almighti God, not to call their falts to a strict account,
which the frailti of humane nature is not able to endure; but to express now at
length that merci of his, which draws men to fear and serve him with comfort.
So professing his hope in God; and exercizing his patience in that hope; yet
continuing still his fervent desire in this patience: he exhorts all Israel
to persevere in like attending trust, assuring them that God would redeem them
from all their sins and afflictions.

OUT from the deep, to thee o Lord I cry:
From place far off; yet thou good Lord be nigh.
Lord hear my voice, and with attentive ear
Receive the plaints which humbled soul does rear.
IF strictly Lord transgressions thou shall ey;
Lord who shall stand? in sad despair we die.
But Justice thyn still mercies thoughts displays:
That Greatness, fear; and Goodness love may raize.
WITH patience then on God my soul attend:
(His word, my trust:) He Will give thee joyful end.
As morning rays rere sentinal desires:
So so, and more, toward thee my soul aspires.
And patient o await him Israel deer:
His great redemption now will soon appear.
He merci is: His merci from their thrall,
Yea from their sins, shall ransom Israel all.
TREBLE.
O

^ Ut from the deep, to thee, o Lord, I

^ cry: From place far off; yet thou good Lord be nigh.

^ Lord hear my voice, and with attentive ear Re-ceiue the

^ plaints, which humbled soul does rear. If strictly Lord transgres-

But justice thyn still mer-

^ sions thou shall ey; Lord, who shall stand? in sad

^ cies thoughts dis- plays: That great- nes, fear; and Gooddes

^ pair we die.

^ nes, love may raize.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 137.
The people of Judah, and especially the sacred Quires of the House of God,
after that great overthrowe of Jerusalem and the Temple by the Chaldeans,
being now in captiviti within the dominions of Babylon; and having carried
their instruments of Music with them: are required in scorn by their insolent
conquerers, to make them merri with some song of Sion. Which they refuzing to
profane in that sort: make a vow, with execration against themselfs, if ought
before Jerusalem, and hope of her restoration, ascend at any time to any
highth of joy in their now most woeful mynds. And conclude with betaking unto
divine revenge, the insulting malice of the unnatural Edomites, and the cruelti
of the Babilonians, in that heavi day of Jerusalem.

BY Babel streams, exiled from Contri deer,
As down we sat, a sad dismayed crew;
Ah, Sions wrongs to pensive mynds appear,
Sions, whom now our eyes no more should vieu.
We wept: and trees that saw our tears abound,
Hanged up those harps which wont our ioys resound.
THEN scornful Lords, who Sions towrs had fired,
Gods Temple razed, and us to thraldom seaz'd;
In anguish, mirth; in tears, a song required;
And with some Hymn of Sion must be pleaz'd.
Should hymns divine to ears profane be song?
Can Sions Psalms to Babels coasts belong?
O SION fair! and Gods elected seat,
(Where envi erst, but piti now may ground;)
Jerusalem! If thee I e're forget,
If in my ioys thou chiefest be not found:
Let parched tongue to withering palate grow;
And skilful hand no more his science know.
BUT thou, o Lord, whose right-esteeming ey
Ierusalems last traveils did behold;
Let Edoms malice never covered ly,
Which cruel mouths did strangely then unfold.
Their cursed cry record in heavenli ear;
Raze, raze her clean; till loweest stone appear.
AND Babel, thou, who Sions bane have wrought;
Ne sacred Temple spar'dst with fire to burn;
Shall see thy self to same destruction brought;
And blessed they, who thee the like return.
Yea blessed they, who take thy cursed seed,
With dasht-out brains the crying stones to feed.
TREBLE.
B

^ Y Babel streams, exiled from

^ contri dear, As down we sat, a sad dismai- ed crew; Ah

^ Sions wrongs to pensive mynds ap-pear; Sions, whom now our eyes no

^ more should vieu. We wept: and trees that saw our tears a-

^ bound, Hanged up those harps which wont our ioys re- sound.

BASE.
^

MEAN.
^

COVNTERTENOR.
^

TENOR.
^

LUTE.
^

PSALM 139.
DAVID in this divine meditation, addressed to God, acknowelegeth at large Gods
knowelege of all things, even before they have being; and in particular of all
the thoughts and ways of man: renders a reason of this Omniscience, from the
creation of all, and particularly from the merveilous fabric of man: which
ravisheth his mind into such admiration, that breaking into most affectionate
praises of the manifold woorks and ways of God; he professes also that his
thoughts are no sooner after sleep awakened but they first are seazoned with
this sweet contemplation. Contrarily falling into extreme detestation yea and
imprecation against those wicked ones, who blasphemous toward God, vainly extol
Gods enemies: he concludes with fervent prayer, that himself may be purified
by the grace of God, and so conducted through the ways of this world, as to
attain finally his everlasting rest.

ETERNAL Light; against whose al-seeing ey,
Man's thoughts, his cares, and ways, do all transparent ly:
Lo here my soul; which thou with piercing vieu,
Have searched, and do know; so live her witness true.
Great Judge of hearts; who secret pleights unfold'st;
Who past with future things all present ay behold'st:
Thou know my coorse, when down I sit, when rize;
Yea thoughts unborn far off thy foresight strange descrys.
BY day my walks, at night my silent rest
Thou do environ, with skill to all my paths addressed.
Observest my tongue: no word unwaigh'd do leve:
Yea, lips ere words produce, or thoughts hid speech conceve.
And grasp'st me so with thy al-guiding hand,
Behynd, before, as pressed at pleasure thyn to stand.
Science profound; of strange transcending law!
That man nor it can sound, nor self from it withdraw.
FOR whether go, how should I bend my flight,
Thy spirit Lord to balk, or cloud me from thy sight?
If sore toward heavens; in heaven thy throne resides:
If flag longst earth; lo earth thy footstool low abides:
If stoop to hell, and iaws which ghastly gape;
Nor hell thy vieu, nor feends thy thundering stroke escape.
If Eastern steeds, and Mornings crimson wings
I timely mount, which round to utmost Ocean brings;
Thou Easts great coorse, and Morns fair wings do guide;
Nor utmost Oceans gulfs from thyn aspect can hide.
PERHAPS might say, yet darkness me may hele;
She with her sable robe from searchingst ey concele.
And can once think, weak shade which Sun dispels,
Should Light of lights eclipse, who thousand Suns excels?
Fond, base conceit! To thee, o Light divine,
Both dark and bright are like; grim night as day does shine.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
FOR just and right, that thou Creator high,
Who all have framed, thy frame should naked all descry:
And who my heart, my reins in womb did form;
With lims support; attire with skin, with sense adorn;
Should heart and thoughts, should sense and ways posses.
Stupendous woork! which ay great Architect shall bless.
A little world; yet world of wonders great:
Which well my mind conceits, and tongue of it shall treat.
MY bones in weak, in place obscure my sight,
In earth beneath my mind, fair spark of heavenli light,
Thou did produce: embroidering every part
With woork so rare, that use with beauti strives in art.
And dout we yet if thou thy woork did know?
Or can our tongs forbear thy glorious praise to show?
Yea, tender mass, while formles it remaind,
And day by day nue shape through virtue thyn aggaind:
Thyn ey saw all, enrold in book divine;
Where all thy woorks to com, as present, clearly shine.
BE blessed, great Lord: thy wisdoms beauteous ways
How precious, deerly sweet, to thee my soul do raize?
In skill, man's wit; in count, they pass the sands:
That still my wakened mind, with thee first present stands;
Admiring all thy woorks. O righteous King;
At length then pleaze thy world ^o first estate to bring.
Extermin race defiled. Ye men of blood,
Whose base flagitious mynds despize the eternal Good;
Who grace his foes; of him profanely prate;
Avaunt from me; your selfs, and damned ways I hate.
AH soverain Judge, to thee my soul appeals,
My witness true; whose spirit man's secretst thoughts reveals.
That love of thee, against them grieved hatred breeds,
Whose venomous hate against thee breaks out in hostile deeds.
Thy foes are mine: with them I leaug forsake:
And firm in perfect hate to vengeance just betake.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
THEN thou, my Lord, to whom I stand, or fall;
Who righteous mynds approov'st, yet none can perfect call:
Revieu my heart, explore my thoughts again;
And weigh what grieving coorse does in my life remain.
^ Refine my soul: purge out corrupted use:
And safe through worldli waves to thy sweet rest conduce.
^:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
PSALM 141.
This Psalm of DAVID seems by the matter thereof to have been made, upon some
occasion of an accident happened out in Saul's third expedition against David:
when persuing him with three thousand of his choicest men up in the rocks of
Engedi: and having there withdrawn himself a side into a cave, he had a skirt
of his robe secretly cut off by David, without offer of any violence to his
person. At which time Saul in show reconciling himself to righteous David, yet
afterward renewed sharp persuit against him: hoping (how vainly, and from how
blind desire?) at some time or other to effect his destruction, whom God had
declared successor in the kingdom. David therefore in this Psalm, prezenting
his humble prayers as a sacrifice to Almighti God, beseeches him to preserve
him in word thought and deed from sin: preferring the severe reproofs of a
just man, before the delicacies and pleasures of the wicked. Then closely
intimating how kyndly he had dealt with Saul; and how cruelly he was requited:
he prays God to continue still his gracious protector; and that the snares
laid by his enemies, might entrap their own gilti selfs, whilst he with his
innocenci did happily escape them.

TO thee, o Lord, to thee my humbled mind,
Her humblest voice prezents: o let me favor find:
And have my God; let ear benign be lent,
To pitious cry, to suit, from grieffull heart upsent.
O let my prayer, perfumed with heavenli grace,
So stand, and sweetly smoke, before thy pleazed face;
As incense pure midst holiest altars fire;
And hands let stretched, to thee like eevenings gift aspire.
MY speech so, Lord, my thoughts, and deeds compoze,
That nothing thee offend. A watch assign, to cloze
My mouth on words unmeet; the gate to heed,
That two-leafd gate of lips, whence life and death proceed.
Retire my heart from poizoned baits of sin:
Renforce my mind, that no provokements me may win,
Untrue to thee, with men that mischief breed
To ioin; their coorse to run; on dainties their to feed.
LET just man's zele me yea severely beat;
I kyndnes shall it deem: let his religious heat
Reproove my life; as precious balm, my head,
Not break, it shall perfume: And thankful heart imbred,
When change of times with sorroes him may press,
For comfort his to thee shall fervent suit address.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
NOW these men's Judges, who with chozen bands
My harmles life pursue; withdrawn, were left in hands
Of horrent rock: where terror none from me,
But pleazing words they heard, from dout their souls to free.
BUT not they so requite. When we again
Into their claws are light, naught cruel they refrain.
But as in woods, when stateli trees to ground
Are hewed; the chips, and stics ly sparst on all sides round:
So bones of men, devoured by their ire,
At graves sad mouth ly strawd, and earths first womb dezire.
NOW then, o Lord, mine eyes since look to thee;
In thee I trust alone; and succor none else see;
My God, my Lord; o not my suit reject;
Nor bare my soul of shield that sole can it protect.
My chased life from snaring net withdraw;
Which men who love their lusts, not love thy sacred law,
For it have pitched: destroy deceiptful grin,
Which men compact of fraud have set t'entrap me in.
AND thou just Judge, whose ey our mortal ways
With right esteem beholds; and snare with snare repays;
Let impious heads own tangling nets infold:
While I with mine break through, of thee who safeti hold.
PSALM 145.
King DAVID now flourishing as it seems with prosperiti, applies most
woorthily his thankful soul to sound out the high praises of the Author
thereof. He celebrateth therefore most excellently in this Psalm, the
incomprehensible Greatness, and glorious Maiesti of the Eternal King. Then he
sings Gods Goodness, his Justice, and Merci, embracing all his woorks with all
favorable benigniti. All which therefore he exciteth to return praise to their
Lord and Maker: And chiefly the true servants and Saints of God, that by their
menes the glory of the kingdom of God, may be made known over all the world.
Himself then in example, describes the boundles extent and amplitude of Gods
everlasting kingdom: his assistance where need is: his fatherls providence,
ministering food duly to all things whose life's are thereby sustained: his
justice, and holiness, in all his ways and actions; especially in his gracious
attentivenes to the just petitions of his servants, ever saving all those that
love him; as contrarily in his provoked severitie toward the wicked,
retributing to them their just and deserved destruction. For which he inviteth
all men to ioin with him in ever praizing God.

GREAT Lord, my God, and glorious King;
My soul triumphs thy bliss to sing:
While heavens shall last, with grateful praise
Bove heaven of heavens thy name I Will raize.
When Sun with Eastern rays up-springs;
And when down West his flames he brings;
In toils of day, at nightli rest,
Ay praiz'd, and ay shall thou be blessed.
THY Greatness first my mind admires;
(Whose right like praises great requires;)
Thy boundles being: which gulf to thought,
In bounds each creature fit has wrought.
Thy woorks each age with praise recounts;
And power, which puisance all surmounts:
And I, with wondrous acts, that light
Of glorious state will glad indite.
They prowes and valures strange confess:
I beauteous Maiesti would express.
THY Goodness next prezents sweet vieu:
Where bounties rich still gifts renew.
Glad hands receive: and thankful tongs
Shall sound what praise such grace belongs.
Here who thy Justice can forget;
Where hymns, where ioys are sweetly met:
Thy justice fair, with merci cround;
Of glorious bliss th'al-gracious ground?
O LORD benign, of best desires,
To piti* ay prone, unprone to ires,
Toward all, thou good, thou full of grace;
Thy Mercies all thy woorks embrace.
THEREFORE Great Sire, shall all thy woorks,
In heaven what shines, midst earth what lurks,
What e're dispersed through worlds great frame,
Ay blaze, ay bless thy gracious name.
THEY chief, who deer of thee esteemd,
Live Saints on earth, from earth redeemd:
Thy kingdoms glories they shall teach;
Thy peerles strength they fearles preach.
That power magnificent, bliss divine,
And beauties there which glorious shine,
May sons of men, to all made known,
All win to love and serve thy throne.
THY Kingdom, Lord, naught Kingles leves;
Nor mesure of things, nor times receives:
Dominion boundles; everi place,
Each time, all things, does round embrace.
Here reigns our Lord, our bliss to breed;
Still true of word, still just of deed:
Who gracious, fallen man erects;
The sliding stays, the staid protects.
HERE eyes of all thy care attend;
Thy care, due food which still does send:
Thou plenteous hand over world do spread;
Whence each thing living rests largely fed.
Thus all thy pleasure, Lord, partake;
Thy pleasure, still to good awake:
In righteous ways thus ay do reign;
Ay kind in all thy woorks remain.
AND lastly, Lord, thou dwell on high;
Yet still to just requests art nigh:
Thy servants suits find gracious ear;
Their safeti shewth thy aid is near.
For impious race wilt all destroy:
And all who love thee seat in joy.
Wherefore my mouth incessant praise
To thee shall pour: and all my days
My tongue excite all humane flesh
Ay ay that sacred name to bless.
PSALM 146.
The Psalmist ^owing perpetual praises to God, advizeth not to fix our trusts
or hopes on perishing Princes; but upon the unchanging truth and fideliti of
God, the Creator of all things: who is the Protector and reliever of all that
are in distress; the overthrower of the wicked with all their ways and
counseils; and the King of his Church for ever.

ALLELV-IA.
MY soul, with joy thy self address,
The mighti Lord, thy God to praize:
My tongue his sacred name shall bless;
My heart toward him I Will always raize.
While life does last, the glorious King,
Yea whilst I am, his praise I Will sing.
NO Towers of hopes on Princes raize.
What aid can mortal man perform?
Whose breath departs; and ended days
From dust derived to dust return.
His thoughts and proiects die withal:
Your towering hopes to ground do fall.
BUT blessed they who chooze his name,
Whose hopes and helps with him abide,
Who heavens and earth and seas did frame,
And world of gests which there reside.
His thoughts no wavering can assail:
His words are deeds, and never fail.
THEN thee our Lord and God we sing;
Thou Jacobs God still blessed be:
Who justice to the wronged do bring;
The hungri feed, the prisoner free.
Who blind with ioious fight do cheer;
And curbed lims do upright rear.
THE just he loves; the stranger gards;
He wido shields, and orphane guids:
But mischief dire just wrath awards
To wretch who righteous way derides.
The Lord eternal King shall reign;
And Sions God ay so remain.
Allelu-ia.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
PSALM. 1. O Blessed wight! To the 12. tune. or to the 6. PSALM. 2. What
graceles fears, To the 2. tune. PSALM. 8. Eternal Lord, The FIRST tune. PSALM.
15. Lord: who shall To the 5. tune. PSALM. 16. Then thou preserve me, The SECOND
tune. PSALM. 17. High Judge of world, To the 8. tune. PSALM. 19. The Heavens
declare The THIRD tune. PSALM. 20. In day of trouble, To the 1. tune. PSALM.
21. The King (Lord) The FOVRTH tune. PSALM. 22. My God, my God; To the 11.
tune. PSALM. 25. To thee his faithful soul To the 2. tune. PSALM. 32. The
blessed man! To the 5. tune. PSALM. 34. The Lord for ever To the 3. tune:
PSALM. 36. The bestial mind, To the 3. tune. PSALM. 37. Let not unpleazing vieu
To the 2. tune. PSALM. 40. Long patient hope To the 11. tune. PSALM. 42. As
chased Heart, The FIFTH tune. PSALM. 44. Our pleazed ears, To the 12. tune.
PSALM. 45. A noble act, To the 9. tune. PSALM. 49. Ye sons of men, To the 7.
tune. PSALM. 50. The mighti God, To the 3. tune. PSALM. 51. My sinful soul, To
the 11. tune. PSALM. 67. Be gracious, Lord, To the 4. tune. PSALM. 68. Let
pleaze our God To the 7. tune. PSALM. 69. Help Lord, and save, To the 11, tune.
PSALM. 73. Yet surely God To the 5. tune. PSALM. 79. The Hethen, o God, To the
5. tune. PSALM. 82. The soverain Lord, To the 12. tune. PSALM. 84. The fair
aspect The SIXTH tune. PSALM. 90. In pilgrim life, The SEVENTH tune. PSALM. 92.
A good, a gracious act To the 9. tune. PSALM. 94. Avenger great, The EIGHT
tune. PSALM. 100. With raized voice, To the 4. tune. PSALM. 101. Of Judgments,
Lord, To the 10. tune. PSALM. 103. Pure light of soul, The NINTH tune* PSALM.
104. Magnanimous, To the 3. tune, PSALM. 107. Ye woorthi mynds, To the 8. tune.
PSALM. 110. The Lord said To the 7. tune. PSALM. 111. My heart does To the 1.
tune. PSALM. 112. O happi man; The TENTH tune. PSALM. 118. Sing, o, sound out
To the 1. tune. PSALM. 119. O blessed they; who men To the 2. tune. PSALM. 122.
My longing heart. To the 4. tune. PSALM. 128. O blessed they, whose To the 10.
tune. PSALM. 130. Out from the deep The ELEVENTH tune. PSALM. 137. By Babel
streams, The TWELVTH tune. PSALM. 139. Eternal light, To the 8. tune. PSALM.
141. To thee, o Lord, To the 8. tune. PSALM. 145. Great Lord, my God, To the 1.
tune. PSALM. 146. My soul, with joy To the 4. tune.
THE Music being applied (as was sit) to serve the matter; and the matter
being divided into his several parts by beginning with a word in Capital
Letters: it foloeth that in the same place the Music does also begin again.
Howbeit where the length of Music did conveniently extend it self to two
branches of matter, by reason of their breviti: it is signified in the margent
by this mark {. Where a branch of matter continues on beyond the length of the
Music, whereby some strains of the Music are to be repeated: the verses on which
that repetition does fall, are noted by a mark of the same fashion, but larger
size. And lastly, where the matter ends before the Music, it is expressed by
these prict lines ^ at which the Music is to break off: and begins (as from
the head) at the verse ensuing. And it has been so provided in composing the
Music, that the same may be done without disgrace unto it. Some other small
varieties are not difficult to be perceived.

Falts escaped.
PAge 2. line 15. perplex, read perplex. l. 19. thee, r. thee. p. 3. l. 26.
renound r. renoumd p. 9. l. 13. plaugs r. plagues p. 26. l. 6. Inone r. I none
l. 36. malfactours; r. malfactours p. 27. l. 35. run: r. run. p. 28. l. 16.
embrace, r. embrace. p. 32. l. 32. dicharge r. discharge p. 33. l. 13.
deprives, r. depriues: p. 35. l. 7. I'TS r. IT IS p. 37. l. 12. graced. r.
graced, l. 19. which r. with p. 38. l. 4. Entresured r. Entreasured. p. 39. l.
25. SEE r. SEE, l. 27. falls r. falls, l. 43. find r. find, p. 40. l. 2. stream
r. streams. p. 44. l. 11. razch'd r. rach'd l. 31. beloved r. beloved p. 46. l.
9. frame. r. frame: p. 51. l. 19. extends r. extends. p. 54. l. 23. depend r.
depend, p. 55. l. 33. embrue. r. embrue, p. 60. l. 31 hs. r. his p. 65. l. 32.
swell r. swell. p. 70. l. 29. even r. eeven p. 76. l. 18. fadom r. fathom p.
77. l. 18. Earth r. Earths p. 80. l. 1. shall wicked r. Shall wicked p. 92. l.
27. glory r. glori' p. 108. l. 5. O blessed r. O BLESSED l. 11. He r. HE p.
111. l. 38. perfue r. pursue p. 113. l. 20. draw r. draw. p. 122. l. 3. des
pair r. des- pair p. 125. l. 36. brought; r. brought: p. 131. l. 30. reveals.
r. reveals:

FINIS.

