A BRIEF collection of the Church, and of certain Ceremonies thereof,
gathered by Thomas Sampson.

LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton, for George Bishop.

ANNO 1581.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Francis Hastinges, Sheriff of Leicestershire.
IN the French history, which you did leave with me, I did find the whole
history of the Colloquie had at Poissie much more largely written in French,
than ever I did see it in Latin. At this Colloquie the Cardinal of Loraine,
being the chief, and captain on the part of the Papists, made an oration
more glorious in show, tha^ sound in truth. The which to do, he had both the advice, and prompting of the papists assembled under him; as of that subtle
Sorbonist Despense, and of that little fury Xaintes, with their mates. Thus
being underpropped, this Cardinal made an oration touching two points; The
one was of the Church; the other of the Sacrament, which with the^ is called
the Sacrament of the Altar. This later point by him handled after his sort, did
so please our Papists, that some of them did both translate, and publishe it
in English, being as it were taken hott out of the Cardinals mouth. The
second part touching the Church he handled like a Cardinal, painting Rome so
cunningly as he could; underpropping it with the holow, and rotten posts of
Visibilitie, of personal succession, and ordinary calling, (as they call it,)
and such like stuff. And therewith did he drive with might and maine to deface
the true Church of Christ, into which it has pleased God to call us, to whom
he has given grace to profess his holy gospel. Our Church he would deface,
because we have not those rotten pillars of visibilitie, personal succession,
and ordinary calling, in such sort as he claims them for Rome. I found in
your book a very short, but a pithie answer made to this latter part of the
Cardinals oration touching the Church; the which, because I had not read it
before, did easily hold me in it. I liked it well, and so (I think) will you.
I have not the skill to be a perfect translator out of the French tongue;
neither do I take upon me so to do; But yet I have truly set down in
English the whole matter contained in the answer. That little, which I have
added to that which is in the French, is not from the purpose, I trust. This I
give to you now, as I did before, A brief confession of ye christian faith,
which I found in that book; And one thing more by the grace of God I intend
to give hereafter, if I may see the other volumes according to your promise.
This little scrappe taken out of the large French book I send to you; not
that you need it, for you do understand the French tongue much better than I;
but I give it to you, to the end that it may remain with you, as a testimony
of my duty of thankfulness to you, for your great good will always borne
toward me; and that by these Englished scraps, you may be provoked at your
leisure to read the whole book your self; and in the mean time, you may
communicate in English, some part of that good, which is in the French book,
to such as you think good. Accept my poor labor in good part, I pray you. I
shall endeavor to do more, God of his goodness ayding me; to whose goodness, and
direction I do commend you.

Yours in Christ T. S.

A BRIEF COLlection of the Church, Gathered by T.S.
THE name of the church is in greek (...), which word is also taken out of
an other Greek word (...), which signifies to call a man from one place, or
state of life to another. And we do find in the holy scriptures that there
are two kinds of calling. God does justify them, whom he has called. Romans 8.
the Lord Jesus spoke, saying, Many are called, but few are chosen. This name
Church, Matt. 20.
therefore, in the cause which we have in hand, does signify the company of
them which are called, and gathered together by the voice of God, who does by
his own word call them. In the which company we do see two sorts of men. For,
taking ye word Church generally to comprehend all them which are called, and
do make an outward profession to obey the voice of God, whereby they are
called, doubtless among them many hypocrites are to be found, and reprobates;
as both the holy scripture speaks of the Church, and experience does declare
to be true. But if you will take this word Church more properly, and straightly,
as oftentime it is to be taken; then we must say, that it signifies only the
assembly of the elect of God, and of those his children, whom God has
predestinate to life everlasting.

This church is called, and is the body of Christ, members of his body, bone
of his bones, and flesh of his flesh. In which number the reprobate cannot be
contained; For they are the members of the devil. It is impossible for one to
be a member of Christ, and a member of the devil at one time; as Augustine well
notes. Lib. 2. cont. Cresc. ca. 21.


This distinction of the name of the church the same father uses, writing
upon the threescore and fourth Psalm, when he says, that the Church, which
is signified by Jerusalem, had the beginning in Abel; and that which is
signified by Babylon, did begin in Cain. And yet in his book written of
baptism against the Donatistes, Lib. 1. ca. 16.
taking this word Church in the more general signification, he says, that it
is it, which engendered Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and ye Prophets; and also
that it engendered Cain, Ismael, Dathan, and such other like to them. To
conclude this matter, let us take that which Augustine writes in that same
treatise; Lib. 7. ca. 19.
and that other place which is taken out of Hierome, and is cited in the
decrees 24. Q. 1. Omnibus consideratis; where it is said, that there are two
sorts, or manners of men in the Church: One sort are the members of Christ,
and the very true Church; and are in such sort of the house of God, that they
are the house of god it self: whereby it may be gathered that the other sort
are in the house of God, but are not of it at all; They are as chafe mingled
with the Wheat, until they be fanned out of it. Hereof now will arise this
question; Visibilitie of the Church.
that is, whether the church be visible, or not. Truly God alone does know
the^, which are his elect; and we do profess that we do believe the holy
Church. But a man is not said properly to believe that, which he sees. For
belief is of things not seen, but of such things as God has promised,
though they be not seen with the bodily eye. Now of visibilitie I say, that
as Christ Jesus our Lord, being in the world to work the work of our
salvation, was visible in the glory, and majesty of the true Messiah; so is
his true Church visible in the world. John. 17.
For as he was in the world, so are they which are his; that is, his true
Church, in the world; so seen, and visible, that the children of God, the
very elect of God, are both illuminate to see it, and to ioyn themselves to
it; as Simeon, Anna, Zachary, and other, did see, and join themselves to the
person of Messiah. So did that blind man, which was cured, as we do read in
the gospel. John. 9.
John. 4.
Likewise did ye simple woman who^ Christ Jesus did vouchsafe to teach in the
same Gospel, see more of the glory, and majesty of the true Messiah in the
person of Jesus, than did all the bishops, priests, Scribes, and Pharisees,
which carried the countenance, and credit of the Church among me^. And as
Obadiah did see, 1. Reg. 18.
and join himself to the true Church of God, in the dark days of Achab: It
is also so visible, that satan is suffered to epsy it, and by his members to
persecute it; even as he did the person of our Lord Jesus, who is the head
of his true Church. If men will not content themselves with this sight, but will
have their sight satisfied after their fancy, with a visible, and worldly
glory of a church in this world, more visible than Christ himself was, whose
Church in this world shall have, and be in the same condition that himself
had in it; let these men take heed that they do not fall into the lap of
the whore of Babylon, and take her for the church of Christ. For ye whore of
Babylon has her glorious visibilitie in the world; she is visible, and that
in great worldly pomp, and glory. Now the^ some will say, to what company,
or church the^ shall I ioyn my self? how shall I know, and find that church, in
which I may hear, and receive the doctrine of salvation? yea, if the church be
invisible, so yt we cannot see it, we cannot hear the doctrine thereof, we shall
not come to the true knowledge of GOD to worship him, nor yet of our duty to
our king, nor our rulers; nor yet how we are bownde to obey them. I answer
that though the church be invisible in that respect yt I have spoken off, yet
when it comes in question to what company or church we should ioyn our selves,
we have certain sure marks to direct us rightly in this doubt. These marks
are, The open, Marks.
and true preaching of the word of God; and The sound administration of the
holy Sacraments; which marks are plain and apparent. Wheresoever these marks
are, without doubt we are bound to believe that there the true Church is: and
that company we ought to esteem to be the faithful Church, which does
profess the religion of the Lord our God, as it is taught in his holy word.
Thus the Apostle does call the company dwelling in Corinth; and the
Galathians, faithful, and Saints; and gives unto them the name of the
Church in general; although there were among them great faults, as well in
ignorance of doctrine, as corruption of life. Which thing also he taught, 1.
Cor. 3.
when he said that all they, which did hold the foundation, did not always
build upon it gold, or silver, or precious stones, but also stubble, and hay.
Thus we speak of the Church in sound, and substantial truth.

We do not make of it a fantastical thing, conceived only by imagination;
neither are we carried away in the fond conceits of the Donatistes, or
Catharians; nor in the furious frensies of the Anabaptists. Let me therefore
now speak somewhat of the marks, and witnesses of ye Church; which ought well
to be known, and marked, because by them we may be directed rightly to that
Church, in which salvation is to be had. Neither is there any one thing, by
which Satan our old enemy does labor more to deceive men, then by the
title, and wrong opinion of the Church. There are two marks, (as I said) most
certain, and infallible, by which the true Church is known, and discerned
from all other conuenticles, and assemblies of men. these some have joined the
true discipline, and the fruit of obedience to the gospel preached. And in
truth there ought to be such a christian policy for the government of the
church, as the lord of the church, Christ Jesus has ordained; and such
obedience showed to the gospel, as it commands. But because the abounding
and force of our sins are such, that often times these two last things do not
so fully apeare in their majesty, and excellency, as they ought to do;
therefore we do rest our selves upon the two first named marks. The preaching
of the word is a most sure, and certain mark, and token of ye true church of
Christ; And therefore the preaching of the gospel is compared to the seed
sown; Matt. 13.
and by the preaching of ye gospel, it is said, 1. Cor. 4.
that the Corinthians were begotten unto God. For this cause also is the
preaching of the gospel called the pasture, in which the children of God do
feed; It is the nurriture, with which they are nourished; And Christ Jesus
says, My sheep do hear my voice: Joan. 10.
and that they do not hear the voice of a stranger. Yea Christ teaches us how
by hearing, and not hearing the word of God, we shall know them which are of
God: For he says, Joan. 8.
He that is of God, hears Gods words. Ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God. They which are of God, do hear, receive, and obey his word;
they are his true church. They which do not hear, nor receive his word, are
not of God, are not his true church. other senses bodily. And therefore he
ordained that his sacraments should be certain witnesses, and visible seals of
the union of his children with him self, and of one of them with another. And
this was one cause, why it was said to ye people of God, Genesis 17.
that he that was uncircumcised, should be rooted out from among ye people of
god. To this end also did all ye heads of households apere at ye least three
times in ye year before the Lord in Jerusalem, to testify by their
sacrifices their union in faith and religion. Now after ye wall of separation
was broken down, which was between the Jews and the Gentiles; they both, the
Jews (I say) and the Gentiles, are brought into one body, not only by the
preaching of ye one gospel of Jesus to them both, but also by administering to
them the Sacraments, which the lord Jesus has ordained; that is, Baptism, and
the sacrament of his body and blood.

Jesus said to his Apostles: Matthew. 28
Go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father, the son,
and of the holy Ghost. Here is enjoined both the teaching of the gospel of
Jesus, and also the ministering of the sacrament of Baptism. And with the
ministry of baptism, is the administration of that other sacrament to be
joined, which S. Paul did also join in his ministry, 1. Cor. 11
when he did so deliver ye holy supper, as he had received the same of the
Lord. Thus is the church grounded upon the foundation of the Prophets, and
Apostles; that is, even upon Jesus Christ him self, who is the very substance
of the doctrine Prophetical, and Apostolical. And this is it that S. Paul
teaches, when he says that the Church is the pillar of the truth. For the
word of God, 1. Tim. 3
which is the truth, as Christ says, Joan. 17
does sustain, and uphold the Church, as Chrysostom expounds that place.

And to this purpose serves that, which old father Irene writes: Iren. lib 3
cap. 11.
Columna, and firmamentu^ Ecclesiae est Euangelium, and spiritus vitae: The
pillar, and the buttresse of the church, is the gospel, and the spirit of
life. The gospel is the ground, on which the true church is planted and set.
Likewise the church does stay it self only upon the word of God, and is
stayed by it; without which word the church could neither be a true church of
Christ, nor be stayed in him. By the ministry of the church the truth is
spread abroad upon the earth among men. The true church of Christ does truly
teach, and publish the gospel of Christ, which is ye truth. The truth and
word of God is placed in the church, as in a sure and well known place. For
God does by it show his power to save al them which do believe. Romans 1.
These are therefore the true, and infallible marks of the church; which is
for this cause called the mother of the believers, which are engendered, and
nourished in it by this true, and uncorrupted pasture, and food. Now if there
be the said preaching of the word of God, and sincere administration of the
holy sacraments, it must needs follow, that there are also pastors, and
teachers, to whom this charge of teaching and administration is committed. And
this is the cause, why some have added to these marks this, as a third mark of
the church; that is, the ordinary succession of these pastors and ministers,
from the time of the Apostles till now. In deed such a succession is greatly
to be liked, regarded, and embraced; but so, that this succession be rightly
considered, examined, explicated, and applied to the purpose. And so did many
of the ancient fathers aid them selves much against the heretics, which did
start up in their days; as Irene, Tertullian, and Augustine did against the
Marcionites, Manichees, and Donatistes. But because some men do use this matter
of succession as a weapon against us, as though we were new heretics, and
deuisers of new doctrines; therefore you shall know what we do think,
touching this matter of succession. Succession.
We say that there are two kinds of succession; and godly life; yet it may be
through some ignorance, that a pastor may fail in some such point of doctrine,
as is not a substantial point of the doctrine perteining to our salvation,
whom we will, that notwithstanding, account as a true pastor, so that he hold
the foundation sure, and soundly. Likewise, though he do fail in some point
of manners, and do become faulty, yet we will esteem him as a pastor, and
teacher, if he do teach soundly.

We are taught thus to do by the saying of our savior Jesus Christ, who
teaches us to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.
which do sit in Moses chair. We must do that which they teach; but we
must not do that which they do. Which sentence, Tract. 46
Augustine writing upon the gospel of Saint John, opens thus; That it is to
be understood of hyrelings, which do teach sound doctrine; and that it is
not to be understood of false teachers. For of them, Christ said: Beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees. They which do sit in Moses chair (says Augustine)
do teach the law of God; and God does teach the people by them: But if they
will teach their own doctrines, hear them not, do not as they teach. The
same thing does Augustine in an other place handle; that is, De verbis Domini,
Sermon. 49. Because false teachers may succeed the true in the teaching place,
and so the wolves may succeed good sheapheardes; we do not therefore receive and
allow all personal succession. For this kind of succession may give a cloak
to falshod, if the succession of doctrine be not joined to it, as the foundation
thereof. Moreover those men, which will hold the succession personal, simply,
and of it self alone, to be a true, and infallible mark of the true church;
these men must show us some promise of God, by which he has promised to
bind his grace to those certain seats, places, and countries, that in them
should be such a sure, and continual succession of holy men, and Bishops
succeeding one an other.

This promise we find not in the new Testament. We learn there that Christ
will always have his christian, catholic, and universal church; the
particular members, and parts whereof are dispersed, and scatered abroad
throughout the whole universal world; as it pleases God to exercise his
judgments upon them, whom either he cutteth off for ever, or on them whom
he does chastise, and afflict for a time, and to enlarge his mercies upon them,
who^ he leads from good to better; or that he does call some of them anewe
to the true knowledge of himself. For sometimes the Lord God showing forth
his just vengeance, does so cast down, and cut of all, that he will not
leave so much as a trace of his true church in a place; as sometimes he did in
Jury; and is in our time come to pass in Barbary. In some other place he
does so destroy, that yet he leaves there some little trace, and token of a
church; as now we may see in all Graecia, and in some other places also more
near to us. Antioche, in which Samosatenus an evil heretic did through
corruption and oversight succeed good fathers going before him. Alexandria may
give us an example; out of which, when good Athanasius was banished, Arians did
succeed. The like is to be seen also in more other churches, by him that will
mark the histories of the church. Such a cutting off, and breaking of
personal succession was even in the church of Rome, more than once or twice;
As when Honorius the first of that name, being Pope, and Bishop there, was
condemned for partaking with the horrible heresy of Eutiches, about the year
of our Lord 623. And when John, the xxii. of that name, was by a general
counsel condemned for heresy. Likewise was the personal succession cut off in
Rome, when yt woman Pope, Anno Do. 854.
whom in her popedom, they called John, who before was called Agnes, was
Bishop of Rome; as Ioannes Chemensis Episcopus does report in his book
entitled Onus Ecclesiae. So was it cut off also in the person of Siluester
the second; and of Gregory the seventh; and in a number of such
necromanticall Popes. Likewise it was cut off in the times of the romish
schisms; and when schismatic Popes, who were in those schisms, held the
helm, and did sit (as they say) in Peter's chair; when Pope was against Pope,
even in Rome; and one Pope cursing an other Pope; chalenging to each of them
Peter's chair, and that for the space of many years. And sometimes they all,
that thus challenged, were turned out of the seat of Rome, and that by decree of
a general council; As at Constance three Popes were vnpoped at once; and at
Basil one. This proves sufficiently the of cutting of the personal
succession in the Popes, and Bishops of Rome. To this also may be added the
tragedies, which Pope played against Pope, from the time of pope Formosus,
which was about the year 893. until the time of Pope Leo, the viii. of that
name. The wise reader shall easily perceive how Pope sought to cut off Pope,
both in person and proceedings; one condemning that which an other had decreed;
besides cruelties exercised on the bodies of some of them being dead. This
schism in the church of Rome is noted have been very long, and therewith most
cruel. So that if there were want of other helps, the Popes themselves have
helped us plentifully, to see how the personal succession in the church of
Rome has been cut off by Popes themselves. The cruel, and popelike tragedies
in Rome do so displease the Papists themselves, that one of them, Fascicul.
temp.
writing the history of this time, bursteth out into this exclamation: O most
cursed times! Nauclet. to. 2.
And one other has it in horror, to report how many things were wickedly done
by no fewer tha^ 28. popes, one succeeding an other. Let the godly reader also
wey what cutting of there was of this personal succession, when by ye pott of
poison, Pope after pope was cut off by that cunning poysoner Brazutus; which
yet at the length, made some stay in one of the worst yt ever did sit at Rome,
Gregory the seventh; as no less man of credit than a Cardinal does write.
Beno.
So that, if either cutting off persons, or cutting off the doctrines, and
degres of popes, may be taken to be a cutting off the personal succession in
Rome, then was it cut off many years since. Therefore without looking to this
personal succession, which does often, and by many occasions fail, a godly
christian may full well know the true church of Christ. And so shall he do, if
he will observe when, and where the true doctrine of God is taught, and the
sincere administration of the holy Sacraments is observed. They are to be
taken for the successors of the Apostles, which being lawefully called to this
ministry, do build upon the foundation of the Apostles, and do enter into
their labors; whether they have among the^ a personal succession in
perpetuity, or yt it has been cut off for a time; or that themselves be the
first that preach the Gospel in the place to which they are called to exercise
the office of a true minister of Christ's church. And on ye contrary part,
those pastors in place, which do not preach the gospel of God at all; or
which, in stead of preaching the doctrine of the Apostles, do preach their own
doctrine by themselves invented; though they do allege a thousand of their
predecessors, which followed one an other in personal succession, yet are they
not to be taken for true pastors, but are wolves, and so to be taken; neither
are they, nor can they be reputed, nor taken to be the true pastors of Christ's
church, how largly soever they account of personal succession. His word is
not in their mouths; neither are the congregations, which are misseled with
such wolves, to be taken to be the true church of Christ. For the true church
of Christ does not hear the voice of a stranger. But this misseled church
does both hear, and receive the voice of a stranger, and strange doctrines;
They have not the word of Christ taught; They will not hear it, neither will
they have his holy Sacraments syncerely administered to them. If any man will
ask whether it be lawful for every man yt will, of his own private authority
to preach the gospel, and to minister the holy sacraments; I answer, no
truly: For all things in the house of God must be done in good and comely
order, as the Apostle does teach us. 1. Cor. 14.
Who then (will you say) are the very true pastors, and teachers? Even they,
which are lawfully called to that office, and do it faithfully. Now then we
must know, what a lawful calling is. There is a form, Of calling
or manner of calling ordinary: There is also a form or manner of calling
extraordinary. That is rightly ordinary, in which that order is observed,
which God has established in his word and church. Mathias chosen, So were ye
Deacons chosen: And hereto do those rules serve, which S. Paul does give in his
Epistles written to Timothy and to Titus, touching the admission of church
ministers. You see now what the ordinary calling is; out of which we may
easily gather, what the extraordinary calling, or vocation is; which having an
authority from God is lawful, notwithstanding that one, or two points,
appertayning to an ordinary calling, be wanting in it. The Lord has
oftentimes used the service of men called to the ministry of the word, by
such an extraordinary calling, as appears by the holy scriptures. Moses had
no ordinary calling by men. Iirmiah, Jonas had none. Daniel, Amos, and diverse
other of the Prophets, had no ordinary calling by men; and yet the Lord God
called these men, and such like, to the ministry of ye word; when they which
kept the place of the ordinary calling, did abuse ye same. The^ (I say) then
God used to lay to his hand extraordinarily to the work, which they that had
their ordinary calling, did not only neglecte, but bring into ruin. Thus the
Lord god himself did; and yet he did not bring any disorder, or confusion into
his house by this mean: But thus did he to correct, and reform, that
confusion and disorder, which was brought into his house, by them, which, under
the color of ordinary succession, did overthrow all good order, and
perverted it. This does the writings of the prophets witness, in which the
priests are chiefly reproved. If you will say that the men, whom the Lord
did thus call extraordinarily, had yet some outward, and miraculous testimony
of this their heavenly calling; It is so in deed of some; but it was not so in
all. I do not find that many of the Prophets did come of the race of Aaron;
nor that the ordinary imposition of hands was laid upon them; Nor that they
testified their vocation, and calling, by working straung signs, and miracles.
If you will say that these prophets, and teachers, which had this
extraordinary calling, did content themselves with that part of the church
office, which is to teach, and to reprove; but they did not meddle with the
sacrifices; This is not altogether true. For Samuel who was not of the stock of
Aaron, 1. Sam. 7.
did sacrifice in Mizpah, as it is written. And Eliah being a Galaadite, did
sacrifice in Carmel. 1. Reg. 18.
Again, it is no marvel, if the prophets of that time did not extend their
commission of their extraordinary calling, to circumcise, and sacrifice; for
that was the charge, and privilege then expressly committed to ye stock of
Leui for that time. Thus you hear what is the church, and what be the marks
thereof, and what is to be thought of the vocation, or calling of the Pastors
and teachers of the church. And thus do we at this present approve our
christian church, and the ministers thereof by the rule of Gods word. Tom. 4.
fol. 160.
And in this behalf does that make for us, which Augustine writes in his
book of 65. questions, and in the last question; where he teaches, that we
shall know that he is sent of God, who is not chosen by ye flattery of a few
men; but he, who^ life, good manners, and the doing of the Apostolic Priests
do commend; who seeks not to be aloft, but to be profitable to others. Of the
authority of the church
Now let us come to the authority of the church, and speak a little thereof.
It does appear by that which is said before, yt we do not take away any thing
of those high, and glorious titles, which the holy ghost does give unto it.
We say, that it is the body of Christ; but so, that part thereof is yet in
pilgrimage, looking for the full inioying of the head Jesus Christ.

This is the house of God, which he does daily build, so that it grows still
more and more. It is governed by the spirit of God, still fighting against the
flesh. It is purified, but so that it is by little and little brought toward
that perfection of beauty, in which is neither blemish nor I pot. It knows
God truly, but yet in part. In which kind of speeches, I do use the very
words of the holy scripture. Out of this Church is no salvation: For life and
salvation is no where else but in Christ Jesus alone, and only; neither does
the Lord Jesus power forth his quickening power, and grace, but only upon his
own members. The union and assembling of them together in their head Jesus, is
called, and is ye true church of Christ. If you ask me whether this church
being in this world, can err; and whether it be in authority above the holy
scripture, or else it be subject to the holy word of God; How the Church may
err.
To the first I answer that it is out of doubt, that the members of the
church, counting each one by himself in particular, may err; And yt there are
of them, which do err in doctrine and manners of life. For they know but in
part, 1. Cor. 13.
as S. Paul says. And John says, 1. John. 1.
If we do say that we have no sin, we do deceive our selves: And in this
number we may, and do reckon the old doctors. For many faults are to be
found in them; and therefore they are not to be received in all things without
exception. Thus do we think of the members of the church in particular; whose
imperfections do not so prevail, but that of them knitte together in truth,
is made a true church. For they do by little and little grow, and go forward
in the knowledge of God, and of his truth, and holiness of life. But if we
will consider the parts of the Church more generally, as it is divided into
diverse Diocesses, and Provinces, we say plainly that it may err. Card. Lotha.
It is also confessed by one of the chief capitaines standing for the Pope his
Lord, that particular churches, and provincial Synodes may err, and have
oftentimes erred. Which thing long experience has proved true. Let us then
consider the church in the universality thereof, which is (as some say)
considered in that it is in a general council represented. There is no cause
why we should think yt all the power, and gifts which the holy ghost does
bestow upon the universal church, should be restrained to a certain number
of prelates, gathered together in a general council, which are not always
the best learned, nor the best men which are in the whole chuch, although they
do there represent the whole multitude of them, which did send them thither.
For it falls out often times that a simple man shall be found to have better
understanding than the greatest man in the whole assembly. Panormitan.
Which caused one famous Canonist to write upon the chapter Significasti, tit.
de Electionibus, that sometime more credit is to be given to one private man,
being a faithful man, and who has on his side better authority and reason,
than is to be given to the whole Council, or to the Pope him self. And in
that great, and first Council of Nice, it was long of one poor Paphnutius that
ye law of sole life, which since yt time has brought much filthiness into
the church, was not then established. Again, when shall there so general a
Council be assembled, in which a great number of learned, and holy men, are
not left out of the Council? And who can assure us, but that they, which are
absent, may not sometime have more understanding of a truth, than they all,
which are present at the Council? It is also well known how long time now an
horrible confusion has reigned in ye church, and that chiefly in the greatest
dignity of the prelacie. So that ye greatest desolation in ye house of god
has been, and is, by the means of them, by whom it should have been best
furnished. Which has caused some bishops and churchmen to cast forth many
grievous sighs, and complaints, most clear, and so loud, that we do yet
hear the sound of them. It is known also that complaints hereof have passed
the pen of the Pope himself at sometimes, Pope Hadrian. 6.
and have slipped out of the mouths of Popish Bishops at many times; as ye
books of the Councels do testify. Bernard also in his books of
Consideration, and in his sermon, which he made upon the conversion of saint
Paul, speaks both openly and truly; Alas Lord (says he) they, which do
love the first, and chief places in the church, and to bear the chief rule
in it, are the first which do persecute thee. They have taken the Arc of Sion;
they have taken the castle, and afterward have set the whole city on fire. By
this we may see that they which then had the highest, and most principal
places in the church, were far out of order. The same men do hold and will
hold the same places still. Now surely the general Councels at ye time, which
were, and have been gathered of such persons, so evil qualified, have not ben
so conducted by ye holy ghost, but that they might err. And even so the whole
university of Paris did think, and judge of the Council holde^ at Rome by
Pope Leo the tenth of ye name; and therefore they apealed from him, and his said
Council. Again, if a general Council has received this privilege, that it
can not err in doctrine, let us know of what date this privilege is, and
when it was given. There was yet never but one true faith; But there have been
many errors. For even in the church, which was in the old testament, the
Prophets do tell us plainly, and the histories of that time do prove, that
there were errors, and foul faults among them, which should have been the
teachers of the truth. Isay. 56.10
All their watchmen (says the Prophet I say) are blind; they know not
thing; Iirm. 6.13
they are all dumme dogs. The Prophet Iirmiah says, From the Prophet to the
Priest, all do deal falsely.

And because these reproves should not be restrained to the particular lives
and manners of men, he says plainly, Iir. 14.14.
They do prophecy false things, and a lying vision. Isai 29.14
Again, Isay says, that the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the
understanding of the proud shall vanish: and that God will stop the eyes of
the Prophets, even of the chief of them. The Prophet Ezechiel says, Ezech. 7.
that the law shall perish through the Priest; that is, through the fault of
the Priest. And in deed who did condemn the true Prophets, and servants of
the living God Iirmiah, Micheah, and other; yea, even the very son of God
him self, and after him his Apostles? who did this, but the assemblies, and
Councels of the prelates, which were in those days? If you will say, These
things happened in the old Testament; that cannot warrant our times. 2. Pet. 2.
For first the time of the new Testament is not privileged from having of
such false teachers. Saint Peter tells us plainly that, as there were false
Prophets in the old time, so there should be in the time after him.

Furthermore of the time of the new Testament S. Paul speaks plainly, Act.
20.
that, even in our time of the new Testament, Wolves shall come out of the
midst of the pastors. And in another place, That the child of perdition shall
sit in the temple of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And in conferring the Councelles together, the one with the other, we shall
find such contrarieties in them, that it will easily appear, that they did
not always hear, and obey the holy ghost; but that Satan transforming him
self into the form of an Angel of light, has ruled, and ouerruled in some
general Councels: Aug. lib. 2. de baptis. contra Donatist. cap. 31.
Augustine says, that the Epistles of particular Bishops are corrected by
provincial Councels; and that provincial Councels are corrected by the
general, The former amended by the later; when as by more experience had of
things, that, which was before secret, and unknown, is made more known; and
that which was hidden, is brought to light. Neither is this rule to be
restrained to such exterior things as may be altered, and changed, as the
necessity of the time does require. This word (Emendari) which Augustine
does use, presupposes a fault committed, and afterward amended, be it in
doctrine or manners. And Augustine does not speak there of any external
policy, but of a point of doctrine; that is of the opinion of Ciprian, and of
the Council of Afrique, touching rebaptising. If you will say, that our Savior
Jesus has promised to be in ye midst of two, or three, which are gathered
together in his name; therefore he will be in the midst of a general Council;
This may well be presumed; but there is a difference between a presumption, and
a necessary conclusion. For since the malice of men proceeds so far often
times, even to abuse the most holy name of God to fortify falshod; such me^
may have God in their mouth, which are his enemies in their hearts.

The weakness of ye understanding of men is such, that it is often seen how
corrupt affections do blind their eyes, and minds, so that he which has
none other foundation, but the advice of men, is more often in danger to be
deceived, than otherwise. Is then the doctrine of the church uncertain? (will
ye say) or can the church err? Of the erring of the church I have already
spoken, therefore unto the first question I answer thus. The doctrine which the
Lord our God has delivered to be the doctrine of his church, is most
certain and sure. But because men do yet know but in part, as Saint Paul
says; in this respect sometime error is mingled with the truth in the
knowledge of men. This is true, that the Lord our God will not suffer that the
substantial points of truth, touching our salvation, shall always be buried
in the whole church; but the Lord will have always some number in it, sometime
little, sometime great, which shall understand that, which they ought to
understand; and follow that, which they ought to follow. So did it come to
pass in the time of the Prophet Eliah in Israel; and in the captivity of
Babylon; and also in the time of the coming of our savior Christ. For even
then was found a number, though but a little number of them, whose hearts were
touched with the knowledge and taste of truth; as Zachary, Elizabeth, John
the Baptist, Joseph, the virgin Marie, Simeon, Anna. These did know, and had
the right, and sure understanding of the certain fulfilling of the prophecies
of the coming of the promised Savior. And yet they lived in the midst of the
corruptions of the Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, and priests. Such
interruptions of open professing the truth, happen in the church of God,
proceeding of the iniquity of men, as a thick mist, which after vanishes away
by the heat of the Sun of the doctrine; I mean of the word of God; when it
pleases God, according to his secret ordinance, judgment, and wisdom, to
suffer ye same Sun of his word to shine forth with power, and majesty,
then truth is seen, embraced, and professed of the elect children of God.
Think you now yt we will, or that we do reject all the old Councels? Nay
verily; but this I say, that, if all the rules given in the eldest and best of
them, were put in execution at this day, they would make a greater change in
the popish or Romish church (called catholic) than they would or could do in
the church, which is now reformed by the gospel of Jesus. But let the holy
word of God be the touchestone, to try and examine all that is said, or done
in the church, and then it will be easily seen where the true church is. Count
not this a strange thing that I require; For it is an old saying, received
before our times, of the most catholic doctors.

Augustine writing to Maximinus the Arrian, Li. 2. ca. 14
Is there any general Council more allowed or approved than that first
Council, which was holden at Nice? I trow not (says he.) And what is yt
Council which was holden at Ariminum? It was a Council rejected, and
condemned for good cause. Augustine there handles a principal point of our
Christian faith; that is, the divinity of Christ our Lord, and Savior; And
yet Augustine says yt for his part, he will not be bound to ye Nicene council;
neither will he have ye Aria^ bound to the Council holden at Ariminum; but he
will have ye matter tried by the holy scriptures, which are the meetest
witnesses for both parts. It may be that these Romish me^, which do run
away from the scriptures, will say that there is great darkness in the holy
scripture. I answer that it is most true, which saint Paul says, that the
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God. 2. Cor. 2.
It is true also that saint Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.
that no prophecy in the scripture is of any private interpretation. But yet
this obscurity is not so great, but that the scriptures can expound them
selves. And therefore does our Lord, and chief master Jesus, send us to the
scriptures, and to nothing else but to the scriptures. Search you the
scriptures (says he. Joan. 5. Luc. 16.
) Abraham being required by the damned rich man to send some one from the
dead, to admonish his brethren, which yet lived in his old house, answered
thus, They have (says Abraham) Moses, and the Prophets; If they will not
believe them, they will not believe any that shall come to them from the dead.
And how did all those most ancient and godly Christians before us, which had
among them only the scriptures of the Prophets, and Apostles, before that any
commentary, or explication was written upon any of them by the old writers?
did they not then fetch all their light of the holy scripture only? A Romish
man will here draw us to receive the traditions Apostolical for a most sure
interpretation of the holy scripture; Traditions.
And by Apostolical traditions, he will mean that, which has been always
received in the church; But now who can assure us, that these three points
are to be found in any of these traditions, which they do call Apostolical
traditions? I do not know who can do it. There is great diversity to be
found in the books, and writings of the ancient fathers; and that in some
points touching faith. And again, touching these words (always) and (of
all) let the Romish men tell us, at what time we shall begin the account of
this (always.) If we will do well, we must fetch the beginning of this time
even at the church Apostolic. And who shall be the first in this account?
verily the Apostles them selves must be the first that shall begin this account;
the history of whom is faithfully written by S. Luke; and by their own
writings we must take knowledge of them, their doctrine and their doings? All
truth comes of God; And God has chosen his Prophets, and Apostles to speak
in his name unto us all that truth, which does appertain to our salvation.
Therefore we must always have, and make our recourse to the holy scriptures.
And yet we do not utterly cast away the advice of Councels, nor of the
ancient fathers. We do prove that, which they do say, by the holy
scriptures. The which holy scriptures (as Augustine does say truly) are so
tempered by the holy spirit of God, that that, which is obscurely spoken in
one place, is clearly expressed in another place of them.

Some of the Romish rout have said, that the whole will of God, touching all
that, which does appertain to our salvation, is not all written by the
Apostles and Evangelists. By this wicked, and false saying, they make an open
way to bring in all that falsehood, error, and untruth, which men list to
devise. And it is the way, by which, Satan has entered to destroy the vineyard
of the Lord, to sow therein his darnell of damnation, and cockle, choking
true doctrine, and Christian faith.

I grant that before the time of Moses, God governed his church by heavenly
visions, inspirations, and revelations; But the Apostles planted the churches
of God by his holy word written. And the malice of men growing with the number
of them; and the better sort of men decaying together with goodness, it was ye
good pleasure of the Lord our God, that this doctrine should be written in a
tongue common, and known, by which plain truth, Gods children might receive
all that doctrine, which concerns salvation, and might also withstand all
subtilties creeping in under the color of traditions, or revelations, or
custom, or other device of man whatsoever. Now if the doctrine of our
salvation were written but in part; how shall we do for ye rest which is
wanting? Saint John does not speak so scantly of the holy scriptures, as these
Romish me^ do. For he says that the things, Joan. 20.
which he has written, are written to this end, that we believing them,
might have life; that is, salvation, for that is life indeed. Then is there no
other doctrine necessary to salvation, but that, which is written in ye holy
scriptures; And that which is written in the holy scriptures, suffiseth unto
salvation. Saint Paul teaching us what the use of the scripture is; teaching us
all (I say) in the person of his scholar Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
says that they do make the man of God (not only every faithful minister and
Pastor, but every faithful man) perfect and fully perfited. Then a man needs
not any unwritten verity, or tradition (as they are called) Apostolic. Yet I
do not deny but that there have been always unwritten traditions, touching
order, and manner of doing in the church; but not so in points of doctrine
touching faith and salvation. Now because men have long time abused the name
of tradition, we must learn to know which are traditions to be allowed, and
received; and which are not to be allowed. This is easy to be done, if we will
set before us some points, and by them frame our judgment. First we must put
a just difference between doctrine, and matter of rites, and orders of the
church. In doctrine the Apostles delivered, in the word by them written,
only, and wholly all that which they had rceiued of the Lord. To this then I
add, that if the traditions offered to us, be agreeable to the word of God;
and are meet, and fit for edifying, then are they to be received. For this is
a thing assured, that niether the Apostles, nor the true Pastors, did appoint
any orders, or manners of doing, which were either directly, or indirectly
contrary to the doctrine of the gospel; nor such as should turn any man
never so little from ye service of God, which is spiritual. This being observed
of us, it shall be easy for us to discern the doctrine from traditions, and the
false traditions from the true. It was accounted with ye old father. Tertullian
a very strange thing, that any man should say that he had omitted to teach any
thing (either by word of mouth, or by writing) of yt which does apertain to our
salvation. I will say further, yt all that, which ye Apostles did deliver as
traditions, in matter of order, rites, and manners of doing, are not to be kept
perpetually. For according to the rule of charity they ordained touching the
strangled, and not to eat blood; Act. 15.29.
conforming their tradition herein to ye infirmity of the Jews. Some like
thing may be noted in the doings of S. Paul in the person of Timothy; Act 16.3.
Act. 18.18
yea and in him self also; which things can have no place at this day, but
only in this, that the general rule must be observed, that we must apply
ourselves to the commodity, and profit of our neighbor, in those things
which are indifferent. The like things may be gathered touching the
traditions and manners of doing, which they applied to their time; As where he
speaks of kissing; and of having the head uncovered in sign of authority;
1. Cor. 16. 1. Cor. 11.
which are things contrary to the manner of doings in these days in many
countries, where men would count it very strange, that men should kiss one
an other; or that a man should kiss any woman, other than his own wife. And
also to speak at this day with the head bare, and uncovered, is a sign, and
token of subjection and not of authority. All these things are well to be
considered, before we do receive any custom, or tradition as Apostolic. For
the name of the Apostles is not to be abused to trouble the Church in any
thing; as it was abused in the controversy about the keeping of the day of the
Pasque, which we call Easter; And likewise when some abused the name of the
Apostles, and the authority of the Church of Jerusalem, Acts. 15.
laboring under this pretense to mingle Iudaisme with Christianisme, as it is
written in the Acts of the Apostles: There it was ordained that the
consciences of men should not be charged with any such yoke. We can not
think therefore that the Apostles did invent so many ceremonies, as are now
used; in the observation of which is set the forgiveness of sins, and merits.
For they have plainly protested the contrary; neither would they give place
to the ceremonies of Moses, of which God him self was the author. Long ago
did Augustine complain of the multitude of ceremonies, Ep. ad Ianuarium.
and humayne traditions brought into the Church. But what would he have said,
if he had lived in such a time as ours is? To be short therefore, we do
require that the holy scriptures, which are in this point most plain and
clear, may guide us to discern between the traditions which are good, and
which are badd; holy, and profane; hurtful, and profitable; necessary, and
superfluous. These things being decided, it shall be easy to determine this
question touching traditions; and so we may come to touch a second question,
which is dropped down to us from Rome; Whether the church be above the
scriptures.
that is, whether the church be above the scriptures; which is as unhandsome a
question, as if one should ask, whether the child be above the father; the
scholar above the schole-master; the wife above the husband, or man above God.
But indeed the true church of Christ will not in this matter make any quarrel
against god. For if it should, it should fall in the quarrel, and be
condemned. It is to no purpose, to say that ye church was before the
scriptures. For though it were so, yet the word of God is more ancient than
the church. For by the word the Church is conceived, engendered, made, and
named ye church. That which does engender, is before the thing that is
engendered; as the father, and mother are, and have their being before the
child. Some will allege, the saying of Augustine, I should not believe the
scriptures, if the authority of the Church did not move me. In that place
Augustine speaks of himself, as he was when he was a Manichee. When two
contrary parts shall fall into debate touching the truth of an Instrument, or
writing, to who^ shall they have recourse, but to the Notarie, which keeps
the record? But yet it will not be said that the writing is grounded upon
the authority of the Notarie, for that the record is true, although no man
living do bear witness thereof. So I answer them, which do think that
the holy scripture is not otherwise founded, but upon the determination of the
church. This verily were a feeble, and a slender ground. For we shall find ye
determinations of counsels, which are called the church representative, one
contrary to an other; as by conference of them together it will appear.
Hereunto I will add this reason, Jesus Christ is he, whom all the true
Prophets honored (for as their Lord he did send the^) and yet they are not
above him, but he above them, notwithstanding he does approve his doctrine by
their testimonies. S. Paul suffers ye Bereites to do ye like with his
doctrine. Act. 17.
S. Peter prayseth greatly this kind of doing. 2. Pet. 1.19.
Therefore they, which do call themselves the Vicars of Jesus Christ, and the
successors of Saint Peter, and Paul, may not refuse this condition. To this
purpose serves that, which Hierome writes; We must not (says he) follow the
errors of fathers, nor of ancestors; But we must follow the authorite of
the holy scriptures. And Chrysostom writing upon the 14. Lib. 2. in lir. cap.
9.
chapter of the gospel of Saint Mathewe, says: That he, which will know
which is the true Church of Christ, when things are in confusion through
likelihoode, he must know it by the scriptures. And in the same place upon
these words: Hom. 49.
(Let them, which are in Jury, flee unto the mountains) he says, Let them,
which are in the christianity, retire, and draw them selves to the holy
scriptures. For when the time is such, that heresy does possess the Churches
so, that one cannot have by; or in the church, any sure or certain trial, to
prove which is true christianity, there can be no other refuge to such
christians, as are desirous of the christian faith, but only to the scriptures.
whosoever then will not know which is the true church of Christ, how shall he
know it, but only by the holy scriptures? (says this ancient father.) Again
he says, The Lord knowing that great confusion should come in the later days,
does command that the christians, which do desire to take some hold of true
faith, should have their refuge to nothing, but to the holy scriptures. For
otherwise if they will have regard to other things, they shall be offended,
and perish, not understanding which is the true church; and so shall fall into
the abomination of desolation, which will hold it self in the holy place of the
Church. An other old greek writer ( Basil I do mean) in the nienth Sum of
his moralls, Cap. 22.
says, If all that which is not of faith, be sin (as the Apostle says) and
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God then all that which is
out of the divine, and holy scripture, is sin. Again in a Sermon, which he
makes of the confession of faith, If God be faithful in all his purposes, and
his co^mandementes be sure for ever, being done in truth and right, it is
manifestly to turn from the faith, and a sin of pride, to throw any thing
away of that which is written, or to bring in any thing, which is not written.
Thus much in answer to that, which our Romish rufflers do bellowe for their
church, the power, and glory thereof; And to show what a christian may and
ought safely to think of the church, and how to give humble credit to the holy
scriptures, and to give to them their due authority.

To this Oration made, and pronounced in yt Colloquie had at Poyssi, by that
singular instrument, and servant of God Theodore Beza, ye Papists and their
captain the Cardinal did not reply. For I think they had not the hearts to
withstand the truth. Yea they were so far from denying of it, that even then,
and there, their chief doctor Despense was, in approbation thereof, content to
say, that he did allow that in general, which was said in this Oration of
the church; and said that he had always taken this for a wicked blasphemy
that some do say, that The church is above the holy scriptures. But touching
that, which was in this oration said of the ordinary succession of Pastors,
he was not yet fully satisfied. He added that he did not take the pastors of
the Churches reformed by the Gospel to be lawful ministers, because they had
not the hands laid on them by the Bishops. To this the doctor was answered
then, Impositio^ of hands.
and thus; That there are marks of the lawful calling of Pastors; of which
some are substantial, and may not be omitted; others may. Substantial things
not to be omitted are these; Hierome writing against the Luciferians, says
expressly, that the imposition of hands is not of necessity prescribed by
the law; but it is a certain honor done to the priesthood. Eliah, and Samuel
did both of them sacrifice; and yet did not any of the ordinary priests lay
their hands on them. It may be further said in answer, that if the romish
masters now will needs have us to receive impositio^ of hands of them, or else
they will not take us to be lawful ministers, they must show first that them
selves are right, and lawful ministers of the gospel of Jesus. But that they
cannot do. For touching their institution, it is as strange, and unknown to
the gospel, as was the institution of the priests of Ieroboams calves strange
to law of God. For the Romish priests are instituted to have authority to
offer sacrifice to God, and to say mass for the quick and the dead, as the
Popes Pontifical bears record, and that in ye name of the lord (say they.)
But the Popish Pontifical does herein greatly abuse the name of the Lord. For
the Lord God does not in the whole new Testament ordeyne any such kind of
sacrifizing, or massing Priests. And therefore the order of the Popish
priesthood is as far wide from the gospel, as the calves of Jeroboam were
from the law of God; and his priests from the Lords priests. Now in the
execution of that office, which the Priests in popery pretend to have, and
to exercise, they do likewise depart from the truth. For they preach not the
gospel of Jesus, but the devises of men, contrary to the doctrine of Jesus.
They do not administer his holy sacraments according to Christ's holy
ordinance, but they do, forasmuch as in the^ lies, corrupt the sacrament of
baptism, and the administration thereof with their manifold, and very gross
ceremonies, though they leave ye substance of it vncha^ged. And they do take
upon them boldly to change, (as they say) both the substance of the other
sacrament; that is, of the body and blood of Christ our Savior, and also the
end why it was ordained; so that they do not leave us of this holy sacrament
neither the doctrine in truth, nor ye substance of it, nor the end, and use of
it; as their devises of the Transubstantiation, and sacrifice of their mass do
declare to all the world. Therefore the imposition of the hands of Popish
Bishops, being them selves strangers to the gospel, is utterly unmeet for
them which are called to do the office of a minister of the gospel. The old
true Priests in the old Testament did not receive imposition of hands of any
of the Priests of Baal, or other Idolatrous priests. In the Ecclesiastical
history we do read of diverse godly fathers, and Pastors, which would not
receive the imposition of hands of such Bishops as were heretics. Neither
truly ought the ministers of the gospel of Jesus seek to have any
imposition of hands of the popish priests, or bastardly Bishops of Popery,
which are both Idolaters and heretics. Surely this is not necessary, neither
were it comely. The ministers and preachers of the gospel, they have this good
testimony of their vocation. of their calling. They need not oil; no not ye
consecrated oil, to which the Popish Bishops do attribute a marvelous virtue
of consecrating, and blessing. They need not the blind blessing of any of the
popish Bishops; no more than they need ye shearing, or shauing of their
crowns, which toys are the cognizance of the sworn soldiers of those Bishops
which are the tried peticaptaines of the Pope, the very priests of Baal. Those
two horned beasts do, among them of Rome, take on them only the authority to
lay on hands. Let them, if they will, lay their hands on them in their popish
priesthood, which are like to them selves. On the ministers of the gospel,
which have nothing like to them in the ministry of it, their hands are not
to be laid. Esr. 4.2.
The restorers of Jerusalem would not receive the offered help of their
neighbors, which were mockers of their labors, and enemies to it. And shall
we then seek your help, (o you Papists) or receive your proffered service to
help us forward in the work of the Lord committed to us? No, no; ye are
deadly enemies to the work of the Lord, and mockers of it. Therefore we will
not admit your hands to be laid on us. If the Lord of his mercy shall turn
the hearts of any of the popish clergy, and give them grace to loath their
order, and give them a desire to serve the Lord Jesus in the ministry of his
holy gospel, and the church shall need their service, let them come to us to
be tried, and examined of us, and if they be found meet, and the church have
need of their service; they shall receive of us imposition of hands.

And where is that commission given, whereby the popish Bishops alone do claim
the authority to lay on their unholy hands upon the hoministers of the
gospel? Truly, neither can we find it in the old, nor in the new
Testament. And in his time Hierome did write to one Euagrius, that the
imposition of hands by the Bishop, as it was then used, was no ordinance of
God, but only a custom. Let the trial of a true minister then not rest upon
custom, or encroching under the cover of ceremonies; but let it rest in the
true substance of the ministry; which is in doctrine, and doing the office of
an Evangelical minister. The Romish rulers will drive us to prove our calling
either by doctrine, or by miracle. Touching doctrine, the word of God approves
our ministry sufficiently: We need not to auow the working of miracles; For
the believers of the doctrine, which is preached by us, do prove it for us, in
that their unfeigned conversion to God is miraculously wrought in the^ by the
power of his word. This does show forth the lawful, faithful, and
fruitful labor, to which we are called by the grace, and blessing of God.
This is no strange matter, if you consider that, which Saint Paul says to the
Corinthians, that they by his preaching of the Gospel, and his ministry in
it, being called, and converted from idolatry, to know and worship the lord
God in truth; from wickedness to holiness of life, were (as he says) the
seals of his Apostleship in the Lord. 1. Cor. 9.
And by what authority can they of Rome, who are most of all men out of rule,
lay this law upon the Lord our God, that he cannot, or shall not
extraordinarily call at his pleasure any meet man to the ministry of his
holy word, unless the same man do first pass under their bastardly hands,
and be approved of them, who are most meet to be reproved of all other; as
both by their institution, and execution it is proved. Therefore amend your
selves (o you hollow hypocrites of Rome) and leave your unjust carping of us.
Turn your wallet, and pull out the beam, that sticks in your own eyes. The
Lord amend you, if it be his holy will, and prosper the preaching of his holy
gospel, by the ministry of the ministers of the gospel for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

