The supper of our Lord SET FORTH ACCORding to the truth of the Gospel and
Catholic faith. By Nicolas Saunder, Doctor of Divinity.

with a confutation of such false doctrine as the Apology of the Church of
England, M. Nowels challenge, or M. Iuels Reply have uttered, touching the
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

MANHV?

What is this?

The figure. Exodus 16. This is the bread which our Lord has given you to eat.

The prophecy. Proverb. 9. Come eat my bread, and drink yt wine which Ihaue
mixed for you.

The promise. Joan. 6. The bread which I will give, is my flesh for the life of
the world.

The performance. Matt. 26. Luc. 22. He gave, sayi^g: take, eat, this is my
body which is given for you.

The doctrine of the Apostles. 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is ye
co^municati^g of our Lords body.

The belefe of the Church. Hilar. lib. 8. de Trinit. Both our Lord has
professed, and we believe it to be flesh in deed.

The custom of Heretics. Tertul. de Resur. car. The contrary part reiseth up
trouble by presence of figures.

LOVANII. Anno domini 1566.

CVm Regiae Maiestatis priuilegio sub 20. m^sis Augusti anni 1565. permissum
esset Nicolao Saundero Anglo sacrae Theologiae Doctori, vt (...) in scriptum,
The supper of our Lord set forth according to the truth of the Gospel etc.
imprimere posset: posteaquam prodiisset liber quida^ a duersus Catholica^ fide^
(qu^m D. Nicolaus defendisset) anglice conscriptus, quem etiam confutandum
sumpsit renouato Priuilegio concessum est eidem Nicolao, vt ei vna cum
confutatione contrariae doctrinae, suum librum typis mandare ac impune
distrahere liceat. Datum Bruxellis 22. Decembris. Anno Christi 1565.

S. de la Torre. Approbatio sex priorum librorum.

AVthor ipse huius voluminis Nicolaus Sau^der sacrae Theologiae Professor eius
est apud nos fidei, vt sine aliquo metu tuto posset euulgari: estque praetera a
multis Anglici idiomatis and sacrae Theologiae peritissimis perlectum, qui
illud merito plurimum co^mendarunt.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti Petri Louan^. 7. August. Anno. 1565.

TO THE BODY AND BLOOD OF ou^ Savior Jesus Christ under the foormes of bread
and wine all honor praisc and thanks be given for ^uer.
IF he that mainteneth a right good cause, yet partly for fear of the deceits
and suttiltie of his adversaries, partly for mistrust of his own knowledge and
memoric, dare not appear in judgment without his advocate or pro^tour with
(...): seeing y^ sending forth of a book into y^ light of y^ world is y^
dangering to have it su^moned to so many courts, as it shall be brought into
howses, and y^ appering before so many judges, as be readers thereof: what
aduocat and proctour, yea rather what Doctor and Patron am I constrained to
seek, who do not only set forth mie book to be readen of whatsoever English
man, but also write of such a matter, as being of most weight, is most
diligently examined in these our days? and wherein I am sure to find as well
the Lutherans as the Zuinglians, (though utterly dissagreing between
themselves) yet against me not only agreing to be severe judges in the reading,
but also to be cruel adversaries in their judgment. Which seeing it is so, let
noman wonder, that I, not mistrusting any whit the universal cause of the
Catholics, but misdoubting mine own wit, and the shameless shifts of our
adversaries, have chosen to dedicate this work to y^ mysteri of thy glorious
body and blood (Lord Jesus Christ,) to (...), those that now take upon them to
misiudge y^ manifest and effectual words of thy blessing and thanksgeuing,
pronounced by th^o in thy last supper, making a figurative speech of a proper:
and, whereas thy true body and blood itself worthy of all honor, is through
thy godhead made really present, teaching not withstanding for their part, the
substance of bread and wine still to remain, and therefore an idol to be
falsely ^et up and worshipped by the Catholics: to th'inte^t, I say, those
false teachers may either through thy grace be converted from th^r misbelefe,
(whereof I most humbly beseech the) or else if they will stubb^nly persist in
their detestable opinion, may even presently be confounded with the majesty
of thy name whose glory they opp^gne.

For what can be more dishonorable to thy goodness, then if it may be truly
reported, that the wisdom of god did institute his chief Sacrament in such
words, ye which either being true and not believed, should b^rden our
consciences with infidelity, or being earnestly believed, and yet not concea^ed
in proper speech, should bring us into manifest da^nger of idolatry? since no
faithful man believing this to be thy body (as thou have said it is) can
ab^teine Mat. 26. Psalm. 98.
from the singular worshipping of that singular fotestole of God. Now soever it
be with other men, I adore thee my God and lord really present under the forms
of bread and wine after cousecration dewly made. Beseeching thee of pardon for
my sins by the same propitiatory sacrifice of thy body and blood, which
being made once with bloodsheding upon the cross, causes the Heb. 10. Malac.
1.
fruits thereof to be daily applied in that clean and unbloody sacrifice of the
mass. To this great mystery of thy real presence I dedicate these my pains,
as to the most undoubted fountain, cause, and supporter of them. In this faith
I was baptized and made a member of thy mystical body, in the hope to maintain
this (...) mi^ parents and frinds did set me to schole, in the vehement love
and affection thereof I have written this rude and simple work. And to whom
should I refer the praise and thanks for it, but unto the alone? Or of whom
should I crave the protection thereof, but of thee? seeing thou only art a meet
patron for the defense of any book, which only art always present,
wheresoever and whenever it shall be examined. To the honor therefore of thy
body and blood I offer this poor mite of my simple understanding (thy
merciful gift, whatsoever it be) trusting thou will not suffer, neither the
truth of thy gospel to be long vnrestored in the desolate I Will of pitiful
England, nor me thy poor servant through (...) or naughty living to perish
everlastingly.

AMEN.
The Contents of the first Book.
1. The preface to the Reader. 2. Notes concerning the translation of holy
scripture in this argument. 3. The state of the question. 4. What the supper of
our lords is according to the belefe of the Catholics. 5. What it is according
to the doctrine of our adversaries. 6. A special error of Calvin, concerning
the words of Christ's supper, is confuted.
The preface to the Christian Reader.
WHo so will avoid the danger of pride, of schism and of hearesie, he has no
greater help thereunto in this Prou. 3.
world, then to mystrust his own judgment, and to follow the authority of
greater wisdom. Which thing he August. de Baptis. co^^a Dona^st lib 2. Cap.
^. 1. (...). 3.
must do, not only by preferring the holy scriptures before the wrytinges of
whatsoever men, but also by expo^ding the same, according to the greatest
authority that may be found in that kind.

The greatest authority among me^ must needs be in the whole Catholic Church
of Christ, the pillar and establishment of truth, whose consent in the
interpretation of Gods word, because we can not know by the handwryting of
every particular 1. Cor. 8.
member (for knowledge is not in all persons) we therefore must not so much
seek after the books, as after the works, and practice of all faithful
nations, to know by what means they expounded Christ's Gospel. For as the
holy Ghost instructed Hebr. 10.
always their hearts, writing his laws in them: so by their conformable
deeds we learn, what he inspired to their hearts. As therefore it is most
necessary to confer one part of holy scripture with an other, for the right
understanding of both places: even so it behooves to join with that
conference, the August. ad^anua. Epist 118 Matt. 28.
use and custom of the people of God.

To make this matter the playner by an example, the Apostles are wille^ to
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost. Now shall The Anabaptists.
this precept be understood? For some think that teaching before baptism is
so necessary, that no creature ought to be baptized, which is not first
taught. Others think both necessary, The Catholics.
but yet teaching to belong first to such as are able to be taught, and
baptizing first to such, as are able to be baptized, and not yet ready to be
taught. And because infautes may be baptized before they can be taught, they
think that Christ meant, to have teaching go before baptism in men of
discretion, and baptism before teaching in children, whose parents The
practice of the whole Church (...) a good interpreta tion of scripture
ask baptism for them. Which later understanding is proved to be more
agreeable to the meaning of Christ, not by the order of his words, but by the
use and consent of all nations, which are the spouse of Christ. For in every
age and country of Christendom, children are brought to be baptized by their
frindes: and the Bishops or Priests of those countries have always baptized
them.

So that we have two great and necessary points expounded, in the precept of
baptism, by the custom of the Church. The one is, that children may be
christened before they are taught their belief: the other, that such children
oulie may be Christened, whose parents or frindes ask baptism for them. But
if any Jew or Gentil do live among us, who will not have his child Christened,
the Apostles by that fame (...) of Christ, have no authority to baptize such
a child. Which thing is proved, because the Church of God has no such
custom. ^. Cor. 11


The same strength which the practice of Christian men is now seen to have in
baptism, is also found to be no less in other Sacraments. For likewise al
faithful countries have asked the Sacrament of consirmation for their baptized
children, and all Bishops have given it, oynting and confirming them in the
name of the (...) with (...), thereby declaring, how the holy Ghost is given
to the late baptized by the imposition Act. 8.
of hands of the Apostles. (...) all faithful (...) (...) adored the body and
blood of Christ under the forms of bread and wine after consecration. They
have desired that holy sacrifice to be made and offered for them, and all
Priests, Bishops, and Primates have said mass, and allowed that devotion of
the layemen. Whereby it is proved that those words of Christ: This is mie
body, and: This is my blood, are to be taken properly, Matt. 26.
and not figuratively, in so much as the holy Ghost, by the use of all the
people of God, has expounded the whole meany^ge of Christ.

Therefore whosoever teaches a figurative understanding of those words, he
goethe syrst from the authority of the gospel, where yt is (...) said: This
is my body. Next he (...) from the (...) of the whole Church, which so
earnestly believed these words, and th^effecte of them, that she adored the
body of Christ present, under the form of bread, and acknowledged yt to be
offered to God vnbloodely, for the obteyuinge of the sruites of Christ's death.
Thirdly he must needs (...) concluded singular and proud, who had rather lean
to his own The (...) of a (...) must not be trusted.
judgment, or to the judgment of a few like him self, then to trust either
God, or his whole Church.

And whereas certain men are wont to say, that the holy Fathers and faithful
people of the first six hundred years after Christ, did understand the words
of his supper otherwise: It is (Good Reader) to to palpable, and to much
assected a blindness not to ponder and w^igh, how vnsensibly that is spoken.

All men of never so mean wit judge things uncertain by (...) be (...) by
(...).
those that are most certain, not contrariwise leauinge that which they
evidently know, and measuringe yt by a rule clean obscure or throwghly
withowt the compass of their reach. Christ in that dreadful night wherein he
was betrayed, (...) now 1. Cor. 11
(...) the mystery of owr redemption, after bread taken and blessing, (...),
and gave, and said, This is my body. Hereof 1. Scriptu^. Matt. 26. Marci. 14 l.
(...). 22. 1. Cor. 11.
S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. (...) bear witness. Neither may auie
man dowt thereof, who looks for salvation by (...).

Again whosoever is of lawful age, and has but the use o^ his eyes and
ears, can tell that in the Catholic Church all men 2. The (...) of god.
(...) the real body of Christ under the (...) of that bread, which was blessed
by the Priest. These two principals no man alive may deny. (...) no man is
able to deny that (...) three hundred and fifty (...) paste it was decreed by
4. 70. Bishops in the great Council of (...) kept at (...), that the body, and
blood of Christ are truly contained under the 3. General Councels
(...) of bread and wine, the substance of bread and wine being changed into
the body and blood of Christ by the power of God. The same thing is in effect
tawght in the Counsels kept afterward at (...), at Constance, at (...), at
Trent. Fowrthly before those Counsels, (...) was condemned by three 4. (...)
re^.
other Counsels, and by the preachers and learned men of that age, wherein he
(...), and therefore he (...) the same (...), which now (...) mayntayned in
England. No point of these (...), nor may be (...) denied.

We have then the words of the gospel plain, the worshipping and adoration
of the Christians plain, the authority of diverse general Counsels exceeding
plain. These all be things so known and certain, that our adversaries
cannot say, they are not so, Albeyt they say, they should not be so. Well, they
yet grant we have the words of the gospel, the use of the Church these nine
hundred years, and the authority of general Councels, of whom I (...) on the
other side, what gospel, what Church, what Councels they have. 1. (...).


First they can bring no gospel where yt is written. This is (...) figure of
my body. Secundarily they can bring no Church, 2. No use of (...) Church of
God.
where the body of Christ was not confessed, worshipped and (...). Thirdly
they have no general (...), where it was ever said, that the words of Christ
are (...), and work not his body present. Thereunto they will straight take
exception, affirming 3. No general Coun (...).
that all y^ first six hundred years cook the words of Christ's supper to be
figurative, and needs they must say so much, for (...) they should say
nothing at all. But what (...) we to that saying of theirs?

Uerily we (...), that it is a mayn lie, an impudent assertion, a fond
imagination, as the which has no ground at all in the The first 600. years
(...) not for the (...).
first six hundred years. Which thing although yt may be proved many ways, yet
in (...) it is most inuincibly declared by three (...). The former is, in so
much as diverse holy Fathers (...) us most instantly to believe the words
wherein 1.
Christ said: This is my body, and: This is my blood, although they seem to be
against natural reason and sense. and yet no wise man will requier us to believe
figurative words. The second is, 2.
because the same Fathers teach expressly the adoration of that (...) and blood
of Christ, which is in the holy mysteries, which (...) on the altar and table,
which is taken into the hands mouths, and bodies of Christian men. The third
reason is, 3.
because the holy Fathers teach, that we are made naturally and corporally one
flesh with the flesh of Christ, in the worthy recenuing of the blessed
Sacrament of his supper. All these things shall be declared, God willing, in
their places. We have therefore just cause, not to grant our adversaries the
first six hundred years.

And although we had not so just cause to show the first six houdred to stand
so playnlie for us, yet how is yt possible, that they or any man alive can be
sure of the opinion of that age? The scriptures that should teach them, what
they owght to ^ue, sound an other way* The practice of the Church, which
has derived to us their custom and use, does inform us of a contrary
meaning. By what means then come our adversaries to assure them selves of the
first six hundred years? It is cle^ely impossible that any man should have any
sufficient ground, whereby to know, that the first six hundred years were of
the (...) or Sacramentarie judgment. For the wrytinges of the Fathers (which
only they pretend) cannot inform them of any such their mind, for so much
as none of them all writes so favorably for them, that he has gone about
once to prove, that the body of Christ is not under that which the Priest
blesses, or has warned the people to beware of idolatry, or has used such
words in that behalf, as the Sacramentaries of our time do use. And yet
suerlie a like faith would hau^ browght forth a like doctrine.

Now where they call the Sacrament a figure and holy sign: that does not
withstand the real presence any whit, but rather proves it, to him, who
considers the sign, we speak of, not to be a sign made by men, whose
tokens do signify the The signs of Christ's (...) the signified (...).
truth absent, but institued by Christ, who makes real truth in every
Sacrament, under a holy sign thereof. To be short, there is nothing to be
seen or readen in the ancient Fathers concerning the matter of the Sacrament,
but the same has been always acknowleged of the Catholics for good and sound
doctrine, even continually all thies nine hundred years, when, if they had
thought otherwise, they might withowt reprouffe of any man, before Bere^garius,
or after his time, have condemned what book they lysted. But no Papist, were
he never so much addicted to the real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, did find fault with any Catholic Father of the first six hundred
(...): Undowtedlie, because he never saw word in them against his own
opinion. Or tell me, does S. Thomas, does S^otus, does Nicolaus de Lira, does
Dionysius Larthusianus accuse any Father of the first six hundred years, as
not thynkinge well of the Sacrament? No suerlie. And that is because they neue^
found in them but the same docteine, which them selves believed and tawght. And
yet as soon as Berengarius began his new doctrine, every learned man found
fault with yt. Likewise with (...), with ^uinglins, and with John Calvin.

It is therefore evident, saying no Catholic another has been before Luters
time, nor is now offended with the old Fathers doctrine concerning the real
presence of Christ's body, and yet every of them is offended with the
Sacramentaries doctrine: that the Sacramentaries teach not, as the old
Fathers did, and again that the Sacramentaries cannot be suer, that their
doctrine is found in the old Fathers. For if yt were there to he found, why
should not Catholics find yt there as well as they: Or what one word can be
brought sorthe of them so plainly denyinge the real presence of Christ's body,
under the form of bread, as we are able to bring forth certain hundred
places, wherein the said real presence is earnestly affirmed? Admit the
Fathers doctrine were uncertain, were dowtfull and obscure, yet cowld our
adversaries never be sure thereby, that the first six hundred years were with
them. Admit some of them seemed rather to favor their side then owrs
(which is utterly false) yet the plain word of God, the plain general
Councelles, the faith of all nations by the space of nine hundred years owght
The (...) mentaries are fam t^ (...) y^ Fathers of y^ first 600* years (...)
^ye.
to prevail, before the probable and apparent sayenges of a few men.

But now saying the Fathers of the first six hundred years are so clerelie for
us, that our adversaries are forced to excuse the express witnesses of S.
(...), S. Chrysostom, S. (...) alleged for the real presence of Christ's
body, as spoken by plain hyperbole which (in them that profess to teach the
Catholic faith) is no less to say, then yt these Fathers make rhetorical
lies in writing of the blessed ^ucharist, seeing they are constrained to deuie
certain works of the very most ancient, as of Dionysius Areopagita, of S.
Ignatius, of S. Polycarpus, of Abdias, of S. Clement, of Anacletus, of (...) of
(...), yea of S. Ambrose, and of such like (because their sayings are to (...)
against them) seeing all, that dispute now a days with the (...), press them
with nothing more customably then with the authority of the ancient Fathers.

Now to say they lea^e to the first six hundred years, when the holy
scriptures, and ancient Fathers, general Counceils, and (...) tradition
makes against them, he that lists to consider how (...), how vilely, how
impudently it is pretended, may in all other assertions mistrust them, as men
for great sins given over unto their own lewd fantasy, withowt they Roma.
1.
repent and call again to the holy Ghost for more grace and better
understanding.

M. Nowel in the preface prefixed before the reprouf of M. Nowell in his pre^.
Dormans prouf, seems to have small confidence in the first six hundred years,
and therefore finds fault with M. Iuell, because he gave us that most large
scope of all Doctors of the Church, who have written for the space of six
hundred years after our Savior Christ's being here in earth, and of a^l
Counsels kept in the said continuance of time: Whereas M. Nowel would have had
him tie us straightly to the trial of the scriptures, the certain and only
judges (says M. Nowell) in controversies of religion. Wherein he affirms, we
can say nothing at all.

The holy scriptures, M. Nowell, are so certain and vpryght ^udges, that if
they cowld speak, they would remove out of their The Scri ptures would never
abyd him that sh^ld say: This is not my body.
co^rtes all such (...) tongues as say, This is not Christ's body. This, I
say, which is made at y^ holy table of Christ's supper. This* which after
blessing and the words of consecration spoken, is broken and delivered. This,
which at the hands of the Priest is taken and eaten. If scriptures might be
heard, should he leave one hour, that seeing a thing so exa^ly taken and pointed
unto, and hearing the same with so many circumstances (all tendinge to the
making a new mystery of the new testament) affirmed to be the body of Christ,
which is given Luce. 22.
for us, yet would neither care sor the word nor the deed, but stowtly, (...),
that this which is seen and taken, is not by the words of Christ made his
own real body? And yet have we nothing at all to say in the holy scriptures?

Some others grant we have somewhat to say in this question of the real
presence, but not in any other. Whom I beseech to suspend their judgment,
until they know what they say. For not if they understand not how scriptures
belong to us in other questions, we do therefore lack scriptures. From the
highest The Catholics lack no Scriptures.
question of the sacrifice of the mass, to the most abject (in our adversaries
reputation) of indulgences and pardons, the Catholic Church never lacked, nor
shall at any time lack plenty of holy scriptures, as yt shall appear when
particular occasion serves.

In the mean time because I am not able to bring forth at once, what may be
said out of holy scriptures, for all the con^ of our age, I have beg^ne first
with the chief of all, which is concerning the real presence of Christ's body
and blood under the (...) of bread and wine. Beseching God I may have grace and
time, to bring in other questions other like 1.
scriptures. I have examined y^ words of Christ's supper, I have 2.
noted the ci^cumstances of things done and said there: I ha^ (...).
conferred the holy scriptures of one place, with them that in the same matter
are written in other places, as well of the old as of the new testament: I have
joined the Fathers of the first six hundred 4.
years, to show, they thought as the Catholics now do, whom they call
Papists. But what circumsta^ce, what conference of holy scripture can help
owre adversaries? The (...) cannot confer scri ptures in this matter.


Before they can join one place of scripture with an other, they must have
some one clear and plain, by which the other, that is more dark and obs^re,
may be interpreted and expounded. But what plain place can that be in the
supper of Christ? For if the words and deeds, that make the supper, be
obscure, if they that sulfill the prophecies and promyses goinge before, be
dark and figurative: where is it possible to find a prophecy, a If the
words of the supper be figurative, none other can be plain.
figure, a psalm, a promise more e^ident, then the perfo^mance thereof was?
Does not the death of Christ as fulfill, so make plain and open all the law
and prophets? Even so whatsoever is browght apperteininge to the purpose of
Christ's supper, must needs be more uncertain and less evident, then the
supper it self, which is the end and perfourmance, and therefore the openinge
and interpretation of all the rest. Who so therefore makes the words of
Christ's supper figurative or uncertain, much more he makes al other places,
that belong to that argument, obscure and hard to be understood.

What certentie then can their belefe have, who neither have an evident faith
coming from their ancestoures to them, nor any manifest place of scripture,
by which they may judge and try other such scriptures, as they bring for
their figurative doctrine?

As they imagine withowt any prouf at all, that they have the faith of the
first six hundred years: so I think they imagine a gospel, where it is
w^tten, This is not my body: or, This is the figure of my body. But as with
thine eyes thou may read it distinctly written in four places of the the
(...), This is my body: so if thou be of any good years, thou (...) ^ember the
time, when noman professed the belese that they now do prosesse. And farther,
if god grant the to leave but twenty years more, thou shall see many a
thousand of their own fellowship believe the contrary of that, which in many
articles is now professed by the (...) them selves. For heresy can not stay,
until 1. Tim. 3.
yt come at the length to infidelity.

But, as I said, thou art sure of the gospel, where it is said: This is my
body, and sure of the Church, where ^t both was, and is believed, to be
Christ's body after consecration: so can they never be sure, where yt is
written, this is the figure of my body, nor yet can they be sure that ever yt
was believed in the first six hundred yer^s, to have ^ene a figure, without the
real truth of Christ's s^bstance under the form of bread.

Tell me masters, I beseech you, since before your ^ies the words of Christ
lie sownding against your opinion, and in your knowledge and experience you
have seen al Christian people prof^sse a (...) faith unto yours, by what
evidence, by what invincible authority can you prove, that the first six
hundred years agreed with you? Is yt written in the gospel? It say^th 1.
the contrary in these words, This is my body. Is it come to 2.
your hands by tradition? All tradition makes against you, whereby we are
tawght the body of Christ to be made by Christ's words under the form of
bread. Did all nations and faithsull 3.
people bear wytnes to your opinion? It is clean contrary. For you can name
no people where your opinion was professed before these fifty years, albeit a
few have in corners now and then (...) yt, as now some or other always (...)
the blessed Trinity. Did general Councils teach you, to think as yo^ 4.
dor? They are clean on the other (...), as which profess an unbloody Con.
Ni. Co^. Lat.
sacrisice, and a (...) of Christ upon the altar, and (...)? Do the auucieut
Fathers tell you, that them 5.
(...) believed so? They tell you clean contrary, as who forbid you to (...) of
Christ's words, and bid us adore his flesh in the mysteries. Where is then
this faith of six hundred years proved: Admit you had a word or two, that
seemed to favor your part. Is that enough to buyld your consciences upon,
against the plain scripture, universal tradition, consent of nations, de^ of
general Councels, and so undoubted witnesses, as are in Ephesians. 4.
the a^cient Fathers? are you so slenderly buylt upon Christ, that every blast
of (...), ^inglius, or Caluins mouth is able to remove you from the scriptures,
tradition, Councels, Fathers, and (...) belefe of all Christendom?

I speak not this (God is my witness) to upbraid you of your (...), but to
warn you of the miserable state, that your (...) se^ses have carried you to. I
now requier not any other thing of you, then that you deeply ponder, and all
part set a side (calling for the grace of God) earnestly examine, what was the
sirst motion that made you doubt of Christ's The reas^s that (...) our faith.
(...) and blood under the forms of bread and wine. Was it not your senses?
Did not your sensual man say, how can this white round cake be ye body of
Christ? How can this bald shoren Priest make God? How can Christ sitting at
the right hand of his Father, he also present in a thousand places at once?
Tell not me, but tell your ghostly fathers, whether these reasons chefely mo^ed
you not, to discredit this high mystery? If those or such like where the
beginning of your departing from the Catholic ^aith, remember that God is
almighty, that Christ is God, that he said: This is my body, do and make this
thing: and all Luce. 22.
those thoughts of infidelity are straight driven away.

But if now ye reply that there was in deed the beginning, but afterward you
found more strong arguments, I tell you, the arguments also be daily the
stronger, because your faith is daily the weaker. But for so much as I am not
with every of you, face to face, where I may show the weakness of your
arguments, I have answered in this book such as I found in the Apology of
the Church of England, beseching you most heartily to take my pains in good
worth. If any where I seem to charge my adversaries with malice or any like
fault, take not that spoken to you, but to him that is guilty of it. If my
labor like you in this argument, it shall be ready to serve in any other to my
best ability. Fare well and pray for me, as I beseech God of his grace that I
may pray especially for all them, that read my book. To th'entent it may
offend none, but the desperate, help some that be not incurable, comfort
others that desire comfort of God, to whom be all honor and glory.

Amen.
Certain notes about the use and translation of holy scripture to be remembered
of him that shall read this book.
IN alleging the holy scriptures although I have had always dew regard unto
the tongues, wherein they were first written, yet I have specially kept that
text, which has been above these thousand years generally received throughowt
all the weast Church, and therefore is expounded best, and best known to the
Latyns. Concerning the number of the Psalms, I have followed the seventy
interpretours, whom universally the whole Church has followed from the
Apostles time, namely in the distinction of the Psalms.

Concerning the english bible, I have almost never used the words thereof,
partly because I am not bound thereunto, but specially because it almost
never translateth any text well, whereof any controversy is in these our
days. And to omit for this present other falsified places to the number of a
great many hundreds, these that follow, are found not to be well translated in
the only matter of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

Christ says: (...). Operamini Joan. 6.
cibum permanentem. The true English were: work the meat which tarieth. The
translation appointed to be read in the Churches turns (Operamini) labor
for. Whereby the Cert^in places not weltranslated.
sense of the place is corrupted. We labor for that, which we seek, and have
not, we work that stuff, which is present with us, and must needs be present,
before we can work it. I suppose there is a difference, whether a carpenter
work a piece of timber, or labor for a piece of timber. He that woorketh it,
has it present, he that labors for it, seeks it absent. Christ bad the ^
Jews not labor for a meat, which should be absent, when they came to work,
but he bad them work the meat, which taryeth to life everlasting, which the
son of man will give them. The son of man (which is Christ) will make the
meat present, and the Jews are willed to work the said meat being first
made present, and given to them.

It is not therefore the commandment of Christ, that they should labourfor it,
as if it were to be sought out by their diligence (for they should labor in
vain, as never being able to find of them selves so preciouse a thing) But
Christ means that they should work, by faith and mouth, by soul and body, by
soul in believing, by body in eating, that meat, which the son of man does
promise to give them. That is the true meaning of the word, Operamini, work ye:
as the words that follow to the end of the Chapter do plainly declare.

But because the Sacramentaries do not believe the meat that Why the Sacrain^
taries have corrupted the text.
tarieth (which is afterward showed to be the flesh of Christ eaten in deed,
whereby he tarieth in us and we in him for ever) to be made really present, so
that we may work it by faith and body: therefore they have changed working into
laboring for, as thowgh in the supper of Christ we labored for his body, and
did dot rather work his body.

Again, Christ says: (...) 2. Joan. 6.
Qui manducat me and ipse viuet propter me. The true English is, He that eats
me, he also shall live for me, The English Bible teadeth, He that eats me,
shall live by the means of me. There is a similitude made in that place, that
as Christ being sent of the Father lives for the Father: so he that eats
Christ lives for Christ. The Greek word is (...) in both places. It is
construed with an accusative case in both places, it is latined by propter in
both places. yet in the former place it is englished in the common Bible, for
the Father: in the later, not (for me) as it owght, but by the means of me:
Whereas Christ would prove, that as him self does live for his Father (with whom
he is one nature and Godhead by eterna! generation) so we do live for him,
with whom we are one flesh and manhod by eating him worthily. As therefore the
Godhead of the Father is really present in the whole substance thereof with
Christ: so is Christ really present with us in his whole substance, when we
eat him in the Sacrament, of which kind of eating he speaks in that place by
the way of promise, as I have proved upon S. Ihon. What hon^sty can be here
pretended in one sentence to turn one word di^ersly, even when Christ ^seth
the self same word to show thereby the similitude of y^ matter? Is propter
Patrem, for the Father? and yet is propter me, not, for me, but, by the means
of me? A man may live by his means that is abs^t, whom also he never saw. But
he can not live for him, who is not with him, yea so with him, that his whole
life is maintained through him. For here Christ means, by living for me, such
a kind of life as men have by living for, and because of the meat which they
(...). As therefore noman is able to live through that meat which is absent,
and as when the meat causes us to live, it is truly and really in us: even so
when Christ says, He that eats me, shall live for me, he means him self,
to be really eaten of him who lives through that he eats Christ. This help
toward the Catholic faith the Sacramentaries thought to make nothing, by
sa^ifying the holy scripture.

Thirdly Christ says: (...). (...).
Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. The true English were. He that
eats this bread, shall live for ever. The Bible does English it, He that
eats of this bread. It is true to say, he that earcth of this bread shall
live for ever, and it was said before of Christ. But though it be true in his
place, yet it is not the true sense of this place. For here Christ speaks (by
the way of promise) of sacramental eating, and he is so eaten in the
Sacrament, that we both eat him, and of him. We eat him, because he is bodi^y
pr^sent under the foorm of bread. We eat of him, because we take virtue and
increase of li^e of him, and he yet tarieth whole. Of him we may eat also,
without the Sacrament, by believing in him, and keeping his commaund^ments. But
himself we properly eat only under the foorm of bread, of which eating Christ
now spoke.

But because the Sacramentaries would have no difference between eating Christ,
and eating of Christ, (as who believe Christ really never to be eaten under the
form of bread) therefore they have corrup^ed the text, putting, of this bread,
where they should have left out, of, and have said: He y^ eats this bread.
this bread, I say, which before Christ called his own ^lesh and his own self.
He that eats this bread shall live for ever. Other small faults in translating
S. John I will not now stand about. Let us pass unto the supper of Christ.

S. ^athew writes: (...). Cu^accepisset Jesus pane^, et gratias egisset,
fregit, et dedit discipulis, et ait. The true english is Jesus having taken
bread, and given thanks (or blessed) bra^e, and gave to the disciples and said.
The common Bible reads: Jesus tok^ bread, and when ^e had given thanks he
brake it, and gave it to the disc^ples. The holy scripture says not that Je^us
brake (it) neither that he gave (it) but that he brake and gave. For Jesus took
in deed wheaten bread. but having (...) and g^uen thanks, and said the words
of consecration, This is my body, he made from of the (...) of bread the
subs^ance of his body, because he said, This is my body, and he is not wont to
say (...). Thi^ (...), which when Jes^s took, was bread, is, after the words
prono^ced, the body of Christ, and consequently that which was taken is made
his body, whi^s it is changed by the power of God in to his body and therefore
the substance of bread is no more present. For which cause the scripture said
not, fregit eum, and dedit eum, as the English Bible has, he brake it, and
gave it, but he brake, and gave, withowt, it, for he brake the form of bread
which remained, and he gave his body which by his word he made.

The words of S. Matthew do not all stand in order, as it shall be showed
hereafter: in so much as Christ said the words of consecration, as it is more
like, before he brake the Sacrament or gave to his Disciples.

But the Sacramentaries who would the word of Christ (when he said: This is my
body) to be void, to be figurative, to be a word of promising and not of
performing, do say falsely that it is not in deed the body of Christ, but
bread still as it was before, and to maintein that heresy they corrupt the
text, sayng: Jesus took bread Matt. 26. Marc. 14 Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
and brake (it) and gave (it) Again, in S. Mark (say they) he brake (it) and in
S. Luke, he brake (it) last of all in S. Paul, he brake (it) (...) times
putting the particle (it) which is neither in the Break nor in the Latin ^ble.

S. Luke and S. Paul after the consecration of the body of Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
Christ, witness that Christ said: (...). Hoc facite. The trewest English
were, Make this thing* The sullest, do and make this thing. The common Bible
reads in S. Luke, This do. (...) S. Paul, This do ye. And that which is most
abominable of all, in the second tome of yowr ho^lies, in the homily of the
Sacrament Fol. 213.
of Christ's body, it is translated, Do ye thus.

So that in two words three faults be committed: the one, tha^ facere is here
Englished, to do, whereas it stands not for that only, but also to make,
which is y^ cheefer meaning of y^ twain as I prove hereafter. And therefore
either both significatio^s of doing and making, or the more principal which is,
of making, owght to ^aue be^ expressed. Moreover, hoc, this thing, is turned
(this) only without adding thereunto the name of thing, and that to th^nd noman
should think y^ a substa^tial thing were wi^ to be made, but only that a
quality were d^d. For they would have the words of Christ, to mean: Do as
(...), (...) so, do this. Whereas he means, Make this thing, wh^ I have m^:
This thing, I say, whereof you heard me say: This is my body: as though he
(...), make this my body.

But the Sacramentaries, without all (...), have corrupted y^ gespell, because
noman should think of (...) any thing, least by asking what thing it were, he
should (...) that the body of Christ is commanded to be made. In so much that
in those homilies Tom. 2. Fol. 213.
where they pretend to teach the word of ^d, they report the command^ of
Christ, saying: Do ye thus. ^a what (...) do ye thus. (...) bread and (...) it,
and (...) it, and make no more a do, but do ye thus. O trusty go (...), O
blasphemouse tongs. Did Christ say, (...) ye thue? He say^: Do and make this
thing: Hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis datur, hoc sacite. This is my ^ody,
which is given ^or you, do^ and make this thing. ^tt us go forward.

It (...) in S. Luke, and in S. Paul, (...). Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
In meam comme morationem. The true English were, for the remembrance of me, or
to the end I may be remembered. The common Bible turns In the remembrance of
me. A thing may be done best in the remembrance of a man, when the man is first
remembered, and afterward the thing is done in the remembrance of him. But
Christ means not so, he means to have this thing (to wit) his body made to
this effect, that his death may be remembered, and so his words do sound: Do
and m^e this thing for the remembrance of me, to bring men into the remembrance
of me. For when my body is made by the Priest, and listed up to be adored, and
all the people taught to bow down to the body of Christ, and to come with pure
consciences to receive it, then Christ is remembered by reason of his body made,
and so the scripture is fulfilled which says: Do and make this thing for the
remembrance of me.

But the Sacramentaries would have nothing made in Christ's supper. But they
would have bread eaten, and wine drunken, which is not able to make Christ to
be remembered so effectually, and with such contrition, confession and
satisfaction, as he requires to be remembered withal. For he seeks not (as
the Zuinglia^s imagine) a remembrance in words alone, but much more in deeds.
The remembrance of him is the following of his Cross and death by penance, by
humility, by confessing our sins to his ministers, and taking absolution of
them: and all this kind of remembrance arises by the making of Christ's body,
whiles men are persuaded, they may not come to so preciouse a thing, without
confoorming of them selves to the death of Christ.

In translating S. Paul there are other faults not of so great 1. Cor. 10
weight, as these others, but yet which should have been more diligently
translated: as where the Greek reads, (...). Co^municatio sanguinis Christi,
co^municatio corporis. There the common Bible turns: The partaking of y^
blood of Christ, the partaking of y^ body. Whereas it should be translated, the
communicating of the blood of Christ, and the communicating of the body.
Communicating is more then partaking, albeit the old Latin text in the later
place does read, participatio, partaking. But that excuses not the
Sacramentaries, who pretend to correct it allwaies by the Greek. and now
whereas the Greek reads twice, (...), and the Latin once communicatio, the
English agreing thoroughly with neither o^ both, turns twice, partaking.

The communicating of Christ's body and blood is, when it self and all thing
that is in it, is made common. Partaking is, when part thereof is taken. But
because after his resurrection Christ can be no more divided, the partaking of
his blood is the communicating of it, not by the force of the mean, but by the
dependence of the thing. For as he that has any part of God, must needs have
all God, because God is a nature whole every where without any parts thereof: so
he that has any piece of Christ's body and blood, has the whole body and
blood, because it is unmortal and can no more die. Yet if it might be divided,
it might also bye, so that although partaking must in this argument (...) stand
for communicating, yet the Sacrame^taries have showed their spite against S.
Paul, in translating it after the worst manner they could.

(...) after S. Paul says: we being many are one bread, because we all
partake, (...), it should be Englished, of the one bread. For such strength
has y^ (...) article, (...). and so^time the common Bible turns the Greek
article into, that. But here it was not for the purpose of the Sacramentaries,
that it should be meaned so. S. Paul means one certain bread of li^e whereof
we partake, and to show that, he said, (...), of the one Joan. 6.
bread (to wit) of the bread which has no fellows, of that bread who said:
I am the bread of life, and the bread which I will give, is me flesh.

If so many faults be found without curiouse serching (which I have not used)
in so sinal rome, judge (good Reader) in what case their souls be, who take
the word of God at these men's hands, judge whose Gospel they have delivered
to the simple people in English. Uerily their own, and not the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

The state of the question between the Lutherans, Zuinglians, (...), and
Catholics, concerning the Sacr^ment of the altar.
TO th'inthent thou may good Reader the better understand, to what point and
mark the whole disputation shall be (...): I will briefly declare how diversely
the doctrine of the blessed Sacrament of the altar has be^ set forth in our
days.

From the beginning of y^ Christian Church until y^ year of our Lord 1517.
all y^ on the earth professed openly Christ's Catholic All the Church (...) y^
(...) presence of Christ's body.
faith, did believe, as well in the Break as in the Latin Church, the real
presence of Chris^es body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, after
consecration dewly made. This faith of theirs was preserved by the delyuery
from hand to hand of that doc^rine even since the beginning of Christ's
Church, and was maintained by the preaching and writing of the learned Fathers,
and protested by the godly honor, which all Christen people gave to the said
Sacrament at the time of mass or otherwise.

Well it might be that some one in his heart thought amiss of that hely myst^,
and that some (...) in corners also conspired Noman denied openly the (...)
presence of Christ's body.
against the truth thereof, as (...) and some other like: as now ^ull many
may be suspected to think that Christ is not the savior of mankind. (...) as
^o Christian this day teaches openly and in express (...), that (...) is not
y^ (...) of the world: so did no man in open (...), with the authority or
toleration of any (...), preach, write or profess, that the body of Christ
was not present in the Sacrament of the altar, if the Priest had once (...) the
solemn benediction, which our lord Jesus Luc. 22.
commanded.

On the other side, if in the first six hundred years, the Christians had
believed, as the Lutherans or Zuinglians now do, he that had first begun to
have taught y^ real presence of Christ's body The opi^ of ye real presence
(...) ye first six hundred years.
and blood under the forms of bread and wine, must have been at yt time noted
and reputed for an (...), he must have been convinced by some general or
proninciall Council kept either in the (...) Church, or in the west, the
Preachers and Doctors of that age should have written against him.

It is not possible, that all the whole Church, which to that day had believed
the mysteries, that be consecrated upon the altar, to be ^more but holy bread
and wine, to be only tokens of Christ's body absent in substance, to be neither
a sacrifice (...), nor the real body and blood of Christ: should (...) through
all nations change the Catholic and universal belefe without ^ (...) that had
(...) six hundred years, could not (...) sod^nly changed, without great tumulte.
any trouble or tumult at all, without any contradiction, or disputation, yea
without any man at all known or ever heard of, that should first commend unto
them this new opinion of nine hundred years old.

Is it credible, that so many thousand millions of Christen men, as were in the
Church at the end of the first six hundred years, believing the one year those
hallowed things upon the altar to be still bread and wine, should the next year
after, altogether in all countr^es and languages fall (...) prostrate or
(...), or at the least bow to the very same things, as to the true body of
their maker and savior, which before they had been taught to have been
unreasonable and insensible creatures^ And did they all this thing without any
guide or preacher, who might will them so to do? Or did all the Preachers in
(...) at on^ moment change No history makes (...) of any change of y^ faith
after y^ first six hundred (...).
their mind, and (...) the (...) so? Or did some few go through the sower parts
of the world, and without resistance of any man preach that new (...)? Were
all the pens of all the writers of histories so tied, that (...) of them all
was able once to write any one man's name, who after the six hundred years (...)
taught first, second or third, or at any time that change of belefe through out
Christendom? Was that hereti^ke alone so almighty, that noman durst write his
name, neither whiles he lived, nor when he was departed out of this life? If
the man were unknown, at the No (...) can be pa^, because none (...).
least why has the sect no special name? Was there not one learned man in the
whole Church of God either willing or able, to resist that fury of new doctrine
in the matter of Christ's supper?

If none were learned enough to conquer it by preaching, or disputing, or
writing, at the least wise would none do bis best to set (...) a bare history
of that tragedy? Or who ever has written that the whole Church changed her
says in this matter? So many Counsels have been kept in all ages and
countries, so many he^ names and opinions, who were but in privy corners, have
Euthimius, In panoplia Libro. 2. Bernardus. Council. Vie^nen.
ben of late (...) left written to us, as Bogomili, Waldensis, Petrobusiani,
Pseudoapostoli, Begardi, Beguinae, with such like, and could this main heresy
of Christ's real preseuce ouerrunne the whole Church so far, that fifty years
past and upwards no small chapel can be named in the wide world, where
Christ's supper was made without adoration of his body and blood as present
under forms of bread and wine, and yet (...) noman upon the earth be found, in
the space of eight hundred and fifty years, to leave in momuments of
histories, when that heresy began, or by whom it was promulgated, or what name
was given to it?

Did Satan in those eight hundred years so strongly oppress Marc. 1. Matt. 16.
Joan. 16.
Christ, that his gospel was clean darkened and his kingdom lost? Did hell
gates avail against the whole Church? Did the rock it self (...)? Did y^ holy
Ghost (...) to teach y^ people of God all (...)? I think it will be said, that
the Bishops of Rome did preach, commend, set forth and maintain that (...).
But they must show which Bishop first began, and who writes it of him, and by
what means he was so (...) obeyed, that no resistance in the world is read to
have been any where made against him. And yet surely he never lacked e^emies in
the cast Church.

The truth is, that all the Bishops of Rome, yea all the Catholic Bishops of
the whole world, learned of Christ, this to be his real body, and this to be
his blood. And this faith dured from the last supper of Christ in all faithful
men without any denying or direct (...) thereof, until Berengarius began to
teach otherwise. It was in deed (...) indirectly by Marcion Valentinus,
Manichaeus, and all those, that thought Christ to have had no true body of his
own. Again by Arrius and Nestorius, who taught the body of Christ to be the
body of a man. Arrius, because Christ was not equal in substance with his
father but a creature only: Nestorius, because he had two persons, one of God,
an Cyrillus in Anathematis mo. 11.
other, man, therefore seeing this was his humane body, Nestorius would it not to
be the body of y^ son of God. But directly y^ real presence of Christ in
this blessed Sacrament was not impugned, until Berengarius, about five hundred
years past, began to sow in the field of the Church the corrupt sede of false
doctrine, concerning that question. But his own (...), and the three Councels
gathered straight against him at Uercelles, Tours, and Rome, Three cou^ cells
kept against Berenga rius (...) his life time.
do rather show what, and how constant the Catholic (...) was of old time in
that behalf, then any thing help and (...) the opinion of those men, who now
adays endeavor to establish a new invention of their own.

The Church therefore, as I said, believing most (...), that Christ gave his
own real flesh and blood in the mysteries of his last supper, taught
consequently, the mean of making present The mea^ (...) Chri (...) presence.
that blessed body, to be (not the coming down of Christ from heaven) but the
changing of the substance of bread and wine into the substance of his (...) and
blood, by the almighty power of (...) word spoken by a Priest, with such mind
and (...), as that solemn (...) required.

This ^hange, wherein the wh^le subs^ance of br^ad and wine should by the (...)
of Christ be so mightily converted into that (...) which (...) for us, and into
that holy blood which Luc. 22.
was shed for us on the ^rosse, must of (...) be a dreadful and propitiatory
sacrifice, as well by reason of the body of Christ sacrifi^ed once to death
(which is now made (...)) as for the cause and final end, why it is made
present. For Christ said at his (...), This is my Lody, which is given for you,
do and make Luc. 22.
this thing for the remembrance of me. If it be at the time of The (...) of y^
(...).
consecration given for us (...) by the commandment of Christ, who can deny
but it is a sacrifice, and that we take great profit and advantage by that
gift?

Upon this ground, the Christen people were taught to esteem this holy
sacri^ice, about all other external ^inds of worshipping God in this life.
Thence came so goodly bi^ding of so many Churches, so rich decking of altars,
so great foundations of ^hanteries, in (...), so much estimation of Mass, that
some came to the holy order of Priesthod not for (...), but for wealth. And The
faults of the (...).
some other went into monasteries rather for case, then for (...) to serve God.
All which became, through over much ease, and lack of the fear of God,
negligent in their office, dissolute in their behavior, ignorant in good
lerning, and (which in that vocation is most filthy of all) (...), (...),
cou^touse. And the more that in such sort vnworth^ly presumed to those holy
prosessions, the greater anger of God the^ sinful doing provoked against them
selves.

The people on the other side seeing the dishonest li^e of certain The (...) of
the (...).
religiouse persons and Priests, and how vnre^erently they handled the divine
service, sell in hatred not so much with their faults, as with the office it
self, imputing the vices of evil men to a most holy vocation and ministry,
against the commandment Matt. 23.
of Christ. They withdrew unjustly their tithes and oblations, they envied the
riches of the clergy, and in every alehouse d^couered the (...) of their
spiritual fathers.

When these great enormities were comme to the highest, so that the cockle
began to ouergrow and hide the good corn, and now time required that judgment
should begin at the house of God, and those that in deed were good and
faithful should be 1. Pet. 4.
disseuered from the evil, Martin Luther a Friar of S. Augustines order in
Saxonic, was permitted like a proud ^ing of Babylon to comme out of the north,
and to make spiritual bataile to Ierem. 1.
the holy City of Jerusalem, because her Citezens did not worship Christ in
such purity of good life, as they ought to have done. Whereby it came to
light, who were ye cha^e, which is with every (...) of windecaried up and
down, and who were the true wheat, which lies (...) against all tentations,
and perseuereth in the Church of God. For those that were light and evil
disposed, Who were me^e to re ceaue (...) doctrine.
when they understood they might keep their liuinges, though they did not
dischardge the office belonging thereunto, seeing they came to the office only
to have the living, those, I say, embraced with all their endeavor the new
religion of Martin Luther. And that, whether they were Monks and religious
men, or secular Priests only. Make them sure of good (...), and they will
assure the Prince to give up their Abbeys and monasteries. And good reason why.
For they never loved neither the cote nor the vow, but only the ^ase and
filling of their bellies.

Then God made it evident unto the world, which were those who had standered in
deed the holy order of Priesthod. Who they were that having (...) kept women,
said afterward they were their wives, and who they were that (...) their (...)
more them their vows made to God. I shall need name no man. But I think there
are few men above forty years old in all England, but they can of their own
knowledge reckon up diverse (...) and (...), who before the preaching of Luther,
shamed with their vnhouest behavior the clergy of the realm. And the same men
showed themselves, when broching time came, not to have been of the Church, but
of that religion whatsoever should be set foor^ most carual.

This good then Luther has do^e, that whereas the evil were The profit which
y^ Church takes of (...).
in profession mingled among the good, now it should be no more so. For two
bodies are made, ou^ of Catholics, an other of the Protestants. And the
Church of God remains (...) purged from that wicked generation of men. Not
that Catho^kes lack their great (...), or can be justified in the sighe of God
as no sinners. But it skilleth much whether a man do syn with fear of (...)
and with desire of repentance, or else whether he desend his syn, and make a
doctrine of his euildoing.

The (...) and Priest says, he does not sin in marying, though he (...),
not to marie. Yea to amend the matter, he says, no man ought to vow
chastity, condemning in that doctrine, beside an infinite number of holy
professed virgins, the blessed mother of God, who wo^dered how she might have a
child Luce. 1.
(...) she knew not any man. Whereunto her own reason mig^t (...) have replied,
that hereafter she might know a man, except she had vowed her self not to know
at all any man. Now Luther was permitted to discover such sinners, as were most
desperate and of least purpose to repent.

This Luther has shaken the walls of more Chapels, Churches, Monasteries, then
ever any king of Syria did shake (...), Castles or houses in the land of the
twelve tribes of Israel and ^uda. He began with less matters, but as the
Prince of the (...) throwing (...) and conquering such small fortes as lay in
his way, always made have to besiege Jerusalem itselse the chief City of
the land of Jury: so Luther having his eye upon the highest mystery of all our
faith, (as him selse (...)) (...) In epist. ad argen to ratenses.
to overthrow the great reverence which all good men gave to the blessed
Sacrament of the altar. He went about to be persuaded, In Sacramento praeter
panem and vinum esse nihil, that nothing was in the Sacrament besides bread and
wine. For these are his own words. But sinding the scriptures to plain (as
himself also (...)) and the says and consent of (...) doctors and people to
strong, he (...) gave over tha^ (...), and contented himself with (...) the
sacred ^ower of (...). He taught, that bread and wine were not in ^. The (...)
of (...) there.
their substance changed into the body of Christ, (...) withal the (...)
presence of our Saviors flesh and blood. Whose (...) o^ce being spread in
Germany, a great multitude of (...) Rutters voluntarily followed his (...).

But when the Catholics had evidently showed, that two diverse natures al^ready
exta^t in the world (as Christ and (...) bread or wine) could never without a
maruelouse union be made one, and be incorporated together: the which union,
between Christ and material bread and wine, neither is expre^y acknowledged by
the holy Gospel, neither gathered thence by general Councels or learned
Fathers (^or who ever heard, De Christo impanato, of Christ imbreaded) moreover
when the Catholics declared their belefe of (...) to be conformable to the
Scriptures, and expressly allowed by the holy spirit of God in general Councels,
and in the books of ancient Doctors: (...) In the great Con^ s^l of (...).
etc.
(...) his Capitain Luther neither to be able to withstand the reasons brought
against him, neither yet willing to give over the opinion which him self had
chosen, he much misliked with Luther, and within four years after began to
publish at zurich in z^cherland, that the real substance of Christ's flesh 2.
The opi^on o^ zum^. Decolam^.
and blood was not in the Sacrament of the altar, as Luther had said, but only
was named and signified to be there. To whom Decolam^s a renegate out of S.
Brigittes Cloister joined him self, stoutly defending that figuratine
doctrine, both against the Catholics and against Martin Luther.

The Catholics out of hand showed how much against the words and works of
Christ that opinion is, how absurd, unseemly and incredible it were, that
Christ, who is the truth it self, Joan. 1. Luc. 24.
and by whom truth is made, and who came to fulfill all figures, should leave
in his own supper, contrary to the meaning of his own sayings, nothing but
figures and shadows.

Satan therefore understanding this doctrine of zuinglius to be much better
impugned by the Catholics, then by Decolam^dins defended, fearing y^ onerthrow
of the whole army, spedily 3. The opi^ of Calvin.
sent in a fresh band under y^ conduct and governance of John Calvin. who
restoring y^ fight, protested y^ he neither thought nor taught a bare figure to
be given at y^ supper of Christ, as zuinglius did seem to teach. In deed (quod
he) a figure it is, but a strong stout effectual figure, joined with words of
promise, stirring up the heart of him, that hears the promise and worthily
r^aueth the pledge thereof, to mount into heaven, and there by faith to feed in
spirit upon Christ's own body and blood, as he in earth corporally feeds
upon bread and wine. For Calvin teaches bread and wine to be the figures and
signs of Christ's body, and those words, This is my body, to be words of
preaching, or of promising Christ's body, to them that do believe.

O pitiful tossing and tearing of Gods holy mysteries. Are those words, which
make and show the body of Christ present, words of promise? But hereof, I will
speak more hereafter. Now concerning that he wills us to go into heaven by
faith, know ye not that, because our nature was not able to (...) ^y to the
seat of God in heaven, therefore y^ (...) o^ God came (...) from heaven to
earth, to lead and list us up to the ^ition o^ his Father? Know ye not, that
because our body more quickly ^weth Sapie^. 9.
our soul dounward, then our spirit is able to draw our body upward, therefore
Christ (...) not only y^ soul, but also the body of man, giving us in his last
supper that body of his, to th'inthent our bodies taking hold in the Sacrament
of the altar of his body, might be carried into heaven to have the sight of God?
And because faith without th'incarnation of Christ cannot lift up our bodies,
therefore Christ fulfilled ^aith with truth, and having taken of the virgin
our nature, gave his body in deed to our bodies The flesh of Christ was sent
down to lift (...) up.
and souls, y^ we again might in body and soul be lifted up with it.

As a man that is cast into a deep pit, calls by the mean of his tongue for
help, but when a cord is let down to him for the aid and (...) of him, it is
not then sufficient to use his tongue still, and to let his hands alone: even so
our faith called for Christ to come from heaven to help us, to let down the
cord of his humanity, and of his flesh and blood. And shall we now when it is
let down to be fastened in our bodies, and in the bottom of our hearts, by
eating it really, shall we now refuse it, and say, we will go into heaven
by faith ourselves, and there take hold of Christ, whereby we may be saved
and delivered out of the deep vale of misery? As though the cord should have
neded to have been let down, if we could have fastened our bodies to any thing
in heaven, and yet our bodies are they which weigh down our souls Sapie^. 9.
ch^ely.

But what mean I to reason in this place of that point, whereof in all the
book following, by Gods grace, I will fully entreat? For as it happens, they
are the scholars of Calnin, with whom specially we must have to do at this
time. Of whose lerning and pr^ncie* I most crue^y crave this favor, that none
of them all The Author inten death not to speak against the person of the Sacra
me^taries.
thin^ me to speak against their persons, but only against their opinions, and
so to speak against them, as I am instructed by the holy Scriptures, not
granting, that either they love more intierly, or study more carefully, or
reverence more heartily the word of God, then my Fathers, brethren, and I my
self do in the Catholic Church of Jesus Christ. Only about the meaning of
it, I rather would trust the common iudge^ent of ancient Doctors, and
practice of the whole Church, theu mine own private election and fantasy, or
the devise of a newly planted congregation.

A Catholic man must keep the most ancient path, and most Ierem. 6. Matt. 24.
commonly trodden high way. Privy bypathes carry m^n a side to the (...)
dens of (...). My purpose is to prove out of the The intent of the w^ ter.
word of God, specially against zuinglius and Calvin, that Christ gives in his
last supper the true substance of his flesh and blood, not only to our souls
by words of promise, but also to our bodies under the forms of bread and wine.
And for as much as the present Church of England, in the Apology thereof, has
set forth to the world an other doctrine contrary to that wce re^ued of our
fore Fathers: I will first disprove and confute the words and reasons o^ the
Apology: and afterward will by the grace of God prove the Catholic faith, out
of the holy Scriptures and ancient Fathers.

But first of all I must declare what we Catholics, and what the Protestants
and Sacramentaries believe the supper of Christ to be. That seeing I make the
Title of my book, Of the supper of our Lord, it may straight appear whose
(...) is more worthy to be instituted of Christ, that which we through his word
believe, or that which they assign him, against y^ (...) truth of his own
words.

what the supper of Christ is, according to the bel^e of the Catholics.
BEcause my purpose is to entreat of the blessed supper of our Lord, I thought
it best to declare before hand, what we take that supper to be, showing withal
how the Sacramentaries, under the pretense of refoorming the abuses thereof,
have taken away the whole supper of Christ, and given us a bare drinking of
their own (...). And whence may that be more truly and soundly proved, then
chi^fly out of the word of God, and next out of the monuments of the a a^cient
Fathers?

The word of God is a most faithful witness o^ the institution of Christ, the
monuments and writings of ancient Fathers do show the right understanding of
the word of God. which thing I speak not, as though the Catholic Doctors of
this later tyire had not the self same holy Ghost which the first had, but
seeing our adversaries refuse Albereus magnus, Thomas of Aquine, Bonauenture,
Alexander of ^ales, Diony^ns the Carthusian, Nicolaus de Lyra, Gabriel Biel,
and such other men of excellent virtue, wit, and lerning, (who not withstanding
by a rule that S. Augu^stine Augustinus in sine libr. 2. co^tra Iulianu^
Pelagianu^.
gives, ought to be of credit, in so much as all they lived before this
question rose be^wene the Sacramentaries and us, and therefore can not bear nor
show more affection to the one side then to the other) but seeing our
adversaries refuse them for (...), and yet follow men of later (...), as
Luther, zuinglius, (...): we are content to put all the matter into the hands
of the old Doctors.

And to begin (as we promised) with the word of God, thus writes S. Paul in
his first (...) to the Corinthians: Conuenientibus vobis in vnum, iam non est
dominicam coenam manducare, 1. Cor. 11.
vnusquisque enim suam coenam praesumit ad manducandu^. when you come together,
now there is no eating of our Lords supper. For every man takes (...) his own
supper to eat. By the name of supper, in the old time, that one meal was
meant, Oecume nius in. 1. Cor. 11
which ordinarily was made after noon, and it served for diner and supper. The
Corinthians coming together to y^ holy communion, tarried not one for the other,
but every man as he was most rich so he made have to take his own meal,
neglecting to call other poor men to it. S. Paul mislyking this custom in
them, shows, that Christ did other wise, who communicated his supper to all
his Apostles equally. For as S. Cyprian says: Aequa omnibus Cyprianus de caena
Do mini. Hiero. li. 2. aduersus Iouinian. Theodo ritus in 1. Cor. 11 Matt 26.
Marc. 14 (...). 22. 1. Cor. 11
portio datur. An equal portion is given to all men. And S. Hieroine says:
Christi corpus aequaliter accipimus. We take the body of Christ equally. And
Theodorite says: All men are indifferently partakers of our Lords supper.

At this time we chiefly consider that Christ has a supper of his own, as y^
Corinthians had one of theirs. And it is our question, what Christ's supper
was. If we shall believe ye holy scriptures: (...) took bread and wine, and when
he had given thanks, he said: This is my body, which is given for you, and
this chalice is the new testament in my blood. By which words we are informed,
ye supper of Christ to be his own body and blood, given under y^ signs of y^
bread and wine, wh^re upon he gave thanks, turning by his almighty power the
substance of bread and wine, into the substance of his body and blood. The
Sacramentaries take the words of Christ to be spoken figuratively, and
therefore they put bread and wine to remain in their old substance, sayng, we
are (...) by faith with the body and blood of Christ.

Leaving other arguments for other places, we now only de^, whether the name
and nature of a supper be more agreeable to our belefe, or to their meaning?
Whether is more like, that Christ made his (...) supper to his Apostles of the
substance of common bread and wine, or of his own real body and blood?

When a man departs from his friends taking his leave with a banquet, it is
like that his banquet shall be, according to his ability, full of deinty dishes
and costly cates, specially if it be published before and long time looked for,
as Christ's banquet was. The which Melchisedech had prefigured more then two
thousand Genesis 14. Sapie^. 16. Psalm. 22. Prou. 9.
years before. (...) had foreshewed it should contein all that might be
delectable to the taste. David had called it a table provided by God. Solomon a
table set forth by the wisdom of God, whereunto poor men in spirit and the
fools of the world were 3. Reg. 17
called. Elias lying hidden at the Torrent of Laryth was sed by crows that
brought him bread and flesh every evening.

Christ in a parable describing the great supper made at the Matt. 2^. Luce. 14.
marriage of the kings son which him self was, tells of oxen and other
satlings killed and made ready for that purpose. And now shall we suppose, that
the son of the king of heaven making Galat. 2.
a parting supper unto his best beloved and the pillours of all his Church,
does give them ou^wardly at his farewell none other de^uties besides common
bread and wine sanctified in use only, and not (...) in substance?

A (...) before, he had (...) with the same Apostles the paschall lamb, and
rising from that table (as being the table of Moses Joan. 13. Matt. 26.
rather then of Christ) he (...) his Apostles feere to make them meet ^or a
greater mystery. And sitting down again he took bread and wine, not as the
dishes of his banquet, but as matter and stuff whereof he would make his own
supper. For it is to be well weighed, that this banquet is called our Lords
supper, that 1. Cor. 11.
is to say, made, and ministered, and ^ornished by Christ himself. He now did
not send S. John and S. Peter to prepare his supper Luce. 22.
(as he sent them to make ready the Paschall lamb) Christ in his own supper
is the prouider and maker of it. He takes bread and wi^e into his holy hands,
inte^ding like a most conning workman, of simple and little stuff to make the
greatest and finest feast that ever was hard of.

It is a great glory in the profession of cookery, to be able to make of one
kind of stuff (as for example of eggs alone) sixtene or twenty diverse dishes.
But to do that feate, much labor, many spices and sauces, great compositions
and mixtures are required. Christ instead of all those shyfts used blessing,
and working words Marc 14.
of thanks giving, which were so sure to work their intent, that some men
have doubted, whether he gave thanks first, because he forsaw the whole purpose
out of hand should be obtained as him self wished, or else (which is more
probable) whether the very What the blessing of Christ was.
working of the feate were not the self thanks giving for the work. For his
blessing and thanks giving was the sayng over the bread, This is my body: and
over the wine, This is my blood. By the virtue of which words his body and
blood being made of the creatures of bread and wine, as well were a thankful
sacri^ice them selves to God even under ye form of bread and wine, as Christ
also in his visible foorm having wrought this work, did praise and thank his
Father for such an excellent effect. The which body and blood his Apos^les
eating and drinking were made partakers of ye greatest ba^ket, that ever was
made in earth.

For the better understanding whereof it may please the reader to repete in his
mind, how God in the beginning adorned this world, first with angels and
heavenly spirits. Secondly with the Gene. 1.
heavens them selves. Thirdly with the elements of fire, air, water and ^arth.
And as the angels occupy the highest place, so do the heavens with the lights
and stars in them occupy the second place, and the four elements are beneth
them. When (...) were come after this sort from the highest order of (...) to
the earth, which is the lowest element of all, then it pleased the wy^edome of
God to make as it were a revolt of all things, and to return his creatures
from the bottom of the earth upward From the ^owest grow upward again.
again toward him self. He therefore made the ^arth to bring sorth grene
grass with all such kind of things as have animam vegetatiuam, that is to
say, as live and are quick by the strength which they have in them selves to
grow and encreace, of which kind all herbs, springs and trees be. Above those
in a higher degree were birds, fishes and beasts, which have a life sensitive,
being able (those that be perfect) to move from place to place.

Last of all God made man, who has not only the vegetative Man is y^ bri^f and
sum of all creatures.
power and sensitive in his soul, but also reason and understanding. In whose
body are the virtues of the four elements, with the (...) of the heau^ns, in
whose soul is free will and power to govern, agreeable to the nature of angels
and of heavenly spirits. For which cause this creature has been worthily
called, even of the Christ^n Philosophers, (...), a little world, for that he
alone has in him all the degrees of creatures both living and without life,
both sensible and reasonable, and therefore he is Marc. 16. Exodus 8.
called in holy scripture, Omnis creatura, ^ll creatures.

Now when the son of God taking pity, that this little world the work of his
great power was by the devil seduced, came down and took flesh of the virgyn
Mary, being true God and Luce. 1.
true man in one person. At that time were all things briefly brought again to
God, whence they first were created and brought forth. Christ above is all in
one. In his Godhed, he is all that is Christ alone is all. Ierem. 23 Psalm. 98.
above the heavens, and that fylleth the world. In his manhod which is the
(...) of God, he is all that is in, or under the heavens. In this manhod are
all creatures most perfectly compiled, without all blemmysh of nature, of mind
or of body. So that seeing this body of Christ, (wherein also the fullnes of
Godhed Coloss. 2.
dwells) is given and eaten at a banquet, there is no doubt but the same is
such a banquet, as can not be made with all the creatures of heaven and earth
gathered together. In this one dysh is a composition most delicate of angels,
heavens, elements, of herbs, fysshes, byrds, beasts, of reasonable men, and of
God him self. No kind of salit, meat, sauce, sruyts, confection, no kind of
wine, aqua vite, aqua composita, liquors, syrops can be found in nature, made
by art, devised by wit, but it is all set upon this table, and that in a
small rome, where it cloyeth not with the abundance, ue annoyeth with the
unclean handling, it sylleth without lothsomues, it provoke the appetite
without danger of surfcating. To be short, were it not a banquet provided by
the son of God, no man would think it possible, to have any such feast made in
the desert of this wicked world.

Thus, good reader, do the Latholyks teach of the supper of our Lord, and
believe it agreeable to his word, and worthy his worship. This banquet fedeth the
whole man, there is a reasonable soul to feed our reason, a natural substance
of flesh to feed and nourysh our flesh, there is the spirit of God which
quyckeneth both soul and flesh to life everlasting. This is the Sap. 16.
true Manna, which conteyneth the taste of all swetenes, and has in it self
all manner of pleasant refection. This is the fode of life, Joan. 6.
the which who so eats worthily he shall live for ever. This is the feast
whereof Salomo^ speaks: Hoc itaque visum est mihi bonu^ Eccle. 3. 5. and. 7.
vt comedat quis and bibat, and fruatur laetitia ex labor suo. This therefore
seems good to me, that a man should eat and drink and enjoy mirth of his
traualic. Which words. S. Augustine allegeth and expounds after this sort.
Vbi ait: Non est bonu^ homini Augustinus. De ciuit. Libr. 17. Capi. 20.
nisi quod manducabit and bibet, quid credibilius dicere intelligitur, quam
quod ad participationem mensae huius pertinet, quam Sacerdos ipse, mediator
testamentinoui, perhibet secundum ordinem Melchisedech de corpore and sanguine
sue? when Solomon says, There is no good thing to a man, but that which he
shall eat and drink: what is he more credibly thought to mean, then the
thing which belongs to the partaking of this table, y^ which table y^ Priest
him self, who is mediator of the new testament, does furnish according to y^
order of Melchisedech with his own body and blood?

If then the Prophet have affirmed the greatest good that man has in this
life, to be eating and drinking, and that eating and drinking belong to the
supper of Christ: we may perceive right well, that the matter and substance of
Christ's supper consists not in bread and wine (for then we might be better
occupied then in eating and drinking it) but in the real flesh and blood of
Jesus Christ, wherein all goodness spiritual and corporal is collected into
one heap, and given to us under the form of bread and wine. For so God has
appoi^ted, Instaurare omnia in Christo quae Ephesians. 1.
in caelis, and quae in terra sunt, in ipso. Briefly to renew all things in
Christ, which are in heaven, and which are in earth in him.

The Breek word, (...), imports such a brief gathering to one certain head
and sum, that not only heaven and earth, but all things that are in them are
brought into Christ, and in him as it were begun again and renewed. The which
comes to pass by the taking of his flesh, and giving it to death upon the
cross sor man, in whom all things were both briefly collected, and pitiously
corrupted. Now when Christ gave to us in his banquet that flesh which he took of
his mother, and that blood which he did shed on the cross, bidding us make and
eat that thing for the Luc. 22.
remembrance of him, then was the head, the flower, the chief composition of
all meats, drinks, and iunkets in the world given us in his last fupper.

S. Cyprian consydering the great deinties of this feast, says: De caena Domin.
Vident haec. Sacramenta pauperes spiritu, and hoc vno contenti ferculo, omnes
mundi huius delicias aspernantur, and possidentes Chri stum, aliquam huius
mundi possidere supellectilem dedignantur. The poor in spirit see these
Sacraments, and contenting them selves with this one dishe, they despise all
the delicates of this world, and possessing Christ, they disdain to possess
any stuff of this world. Contrariwise the wise men of this world, abhorring (as
the same Cyprian says) the commandment of this religion, even to this day go
backward (he alludeth to the Capharnaits, who through the doctrine this
Sacrament forsook Christ) and a secretis diuinis, omnium intra se mysteriorum
continentibus summam, diffugiunt and recedunt. And they flee and depart from
the divine secrets, which contain within them the brief or sum of all
mysteries. A great deal more is found in S. Cyprian after the same sense, in
so much he calls the supper of our Lord, Omni^ consummationis sinem, the end
of all perfection. All which praises only rise upon this ground, because these
mysteries truly and really contein within them the body and blood of Christ.
when S. Cyprian De coena Domi ni.
says within them (intra se) he means within the compass or soormes of
bread and wine. For those only are the things that we can point unto within or
without. Other meat or drink we see not.

S. Chrysostom has so much in the praise of this feast, that it would make a
great volume to bring all he says thereof. I will con tent myself at this time
with one place. Quando corpus Christi In 1. cor. Hom. 24
tibi propositum fuerit, dic tecum: Propter hoc corpus, and so forth. When the
body of Christ is set before thee, sai^ with thyselfe: For this bodies sake, I
am no more earth and ashes. For this, I hope to receive heaven and the good
things which are in heaven, immortal life, the seat of Angels, the cumpanie of
Christ. The very table is the strength of our soul, the bond of trust, the
foundation, our hope, salvation, life. If we go hence pure with this
sacrifice, with most great confidence we shall ascend to the holy porche, or
entry, as it were compassed round about with golden garments. But what rehearse
I things to come? Dum in hac vita sumus, vt nobis terra caelum sit, facit hoc
mysterium. Whiles we are in this life, this mystery causes, that the earth is
heaven to us.

By the judgment of Chrysostom, the fame body of Christ which is our salvation
and life, is set besore us upon the very table, to the intent whiles we live,
the earth should be heaven to us, and when we departed heuce, carrying that body
with us, we should be safe conveyed unto heaven it self. When he says the
earth is heaven to us through this mystery, he means nolesse to be set upon
the table it self or altar, then is at the right hand of God the Father. And
this is the supper of our Lord, which the Catholics believe, and not an empty
dish of faith, which although it be much worth when truth is absent, yet as in
heaven where clear vision is, no faith abides: even so when earth is through
1. Cor. 13
this mystery made heaven to us, we receive and eat the body of Christ, not
only by faith from heaven, but also in truth from the very altar and table.
For as there is a truth less of our bodies, then of our souls, and as the
souls of the faithful never lacked God whom they might feed on by faith and
spirit: so Christ therefore took flesh, that our bodies also might have a
banquet made to them, and so the whole man might be no^rished to life
everlasting. Oportuit enim certe (says Cyrillus) vt non solum anima In Joan.
Libro. 4. c. 14.
per spiritum sanctum in beatam vitam alcenderet, verum etiam vt rude atque
terrestre hoc corpus cognato sibi gustu, tactu and cibo, ad immortalitatem
reduceretur. For it behooved truly, that not only y^ soul should ascend by the
holy Ghost into the blessed life, but also that this rude and earthly body
should be brought to immortality by tasting, touching and eating the meat
which were of alliance or kynred with it, that is to say, of the same nature
and substance whereof our bodies are.

Thus in the C^tholik banquet of Christ's supper not only the soul but even the
body eats, tastes, and touches such meat as is of the same blood and kynred
with it. That is to say: our flesh eats Christ's flesh, our body his body. It
was flesh that made us all borne in original sin, it is flesh that makes us
all rege^erate in Christ. Our soul was sp^tted, by the entrance into that
flesh which was spotted. Thereiore our soul is made clean by the wasshing of
that our flesh, which was bor^ in syn. The flesh, Tertulli. De resur rectione
(...).
says T^rtullian, is washed that the soul may be cleansed. The flesh is
oynted, that the soul may be consecrated. The ^esh is sigued, that the soul
may be defenced. The flesh is shadowed with imposition of hand, that the soul
also may be defenced. The flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ, that
the soul may also be made sat of God. Non possunt ergo separari in mercede
quas opera coniung it. They cannot therefore be parted in reward, whom work
ioy^eth. Hitherto has Tertullian commended to us the great privileges which
God gives to our flesh. The greatest of all which, is the eating and drinking
of the body and blood of Christ. As therefore we Catholics believe most
undoubtedly, not only that our souls be (...) and redeemed of Christ, but even
that our flesh is the creature of God, made with his own hands, redeemed by
Christ, and shall (...) again at the later day really, and Gene. 1. 1. Cor. 15
live for ever with the soul of the just man: even so we believe and profess,
that not only our souls, but even y^ same flesh receaueth ^to it the benefits
of Chri^s pa^on, the Sacraments which he left to us, eating and drai^ing really
under the forms of bread and wine the true substance of Christ's body and
blood. This is the last supper of Christ, which we Catholics believe and
prosesse.

wh^t the supper of Christ is according to the doctrine of the Protestants and
Sacramentaries, with a confutation thereof.
NOw let us consider on the other side, what kind of banquet our new brethern
teach. They say: Christ gives to the body bread and wine, but to the soul
he ge^eth him self by faith, spirit and understanding. This opinion shall by
Gods grace be straight ways proved faul^ye and erroneous.

In deed before that Christ was made man, such a banquet as Genesis 14.
they speak of had been much worth, and was kept of Melchisedech and Abraham,
of the children of Israel eating Manna, of Exo. 16.
the priests eating the bread and cakes, which was offered according Leuit. ^.
to the law. For then with an earthly banquet of bread, of flesh, and of wine,
the joining of a spiritual eating by faith and understanding was the highest
banquet that could be made. For as the spirit and faith was virtuously occupied
in lifting up it self to God: So was the body occupied in making a figure and
sign of the true banquet of Christ, which was to come. But when Christ had
taken flesh of the virgyn Marye, tunc (...) Joan. 1.
Christum facta est, then the truth was made by Christ. Truth perfoormed
outwardly in fulfilling the corporal figures, does add much unto faith and
spirit.

In the faith of good men and in the spirit of God Christ was Christ (...) by
faith ^ly.
ever man, but not ever man in truth of nature. Whil^s Christ was only a spirit
and only God, so long ye feast or banquet, which Christ eaten ty faith only.
was given for him, had no better thing in it then the faith and spirit of the
eaters and drinckers, for that was the highest gift that God as yet had given
to man. But all those eatings and drinkings which were in nature and in ye law
of Moses though they had corporal meat with faith and spirit, are so far
behind the supper of Christ (after his manhod really ass^pted) as the Christ
really man.
faith of Christ's incarnation is behind the incarnation it felf^.

Mark the point (good reader) and thou shall not be deceived by false doctrine.
As Christ by his incarnation did give a real truth to the faith of the old
fathers, and not a new spirit: so in his last supper, he gives the same
spiritual gift to us that he gave to Abel, Noe, Abraham, Moses, David,
Daniell, and such others: but he gives us an other kind of truth then ever he
Christ really eaten ^ his own supper.
gave them. The truth made by Christ is the true flesh and blood which he
took of his mother, and the giving of that truth to be eaten, is the ge^ing of
that flesh and blood under the forms of bread and wine. Therefore they that
now say: Christ gives bread and wine with spiritual gyfts, wherein our soul
eats and drinks Christ's flesh and blood, they grant a good thing one way,
but an other way they take away the greatest goodness that ever was given to man.

Their spiritual eating is not evil, but it lacks some truth. A true ea
ti^g is to ea te (...) thing both with body and soul.
How so? because the whole man is not fed. For faith feeds bue the soul, and
yet the name of feeding is proper to the body, and thence is transferred to the
soul. that feeding therefore is not fully true, which eats not that in the
mouth, which it eats in the heart, whereas the true supper of Christ, is meat
in deed, and drink in deed, and must be the eating of that in our body, which
Joan. 6.
our mind and soul does eat. So said Leo the great of Christ's supper: Hoc
enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur. For that is Ser. 6. de ieiunio. 7. men.
taken in the mouth, which is believed in faith. The real flesh of Christ is
believed in faith, therefore the same real flesh must be eaten with mouth. And
what other cause can be devised, why allways from the beginning of the world to
this day, eating by mouth has be^e joined to the highest sacrifices and chief
kind of worshipping of God that ever was used: what means the ^ating of the
Paschall la^be, of Man^, of show bread, wheate^ Exo. 12. Exo. 16. Leuit. 2. and
24.
meal, and all such offerings as were in the law? Could not God have inueuted
an other way to have occupied his people in serving him, but only by eating
and drinking?

Surely the meaning of all those diners, and suppers, and feasts, were to show,
that in time to come the same Messiah, that they looked for, (...) in whom they
believed, should so truly come for our sakes into the earth, that he should come
also into our bodies to dwell (by his flesh caten) in us, that we might dwell
in him. Neither Joan. 6.
let this seem a laughing matter to thee (good Reader) For since Christ was born
to us, and given to us (as Esaie says) he Esai. 9.
sought not his own commodity but ours, and perceauing that in paradyse the
whole nature of man was overcome of the devil, specially by cating with mouth
of the fruit, which was forbidden 1. The devil Eua.
him: As against the devil persuading Eua to disobaye God, he sent the
ar^hangell Babriell to persuade the blessed virgin Marie 2. Gabriel. Maria.
to consent to his will: as against that appletree, he planted the cross of
our redemption: as for y^ disobedience of Adam, him self 3. The ap^. The
cross.
came to be obedient even to death: right so for the apple of the forbidden
tree (...) eaten, he gave him self the fruit and apple of the cross, which is
the tree of grace, lawfully and medefully to 4. Ada^. Christ.
be eaten, and his blood to be drunken. Bibimus (says S. Cyprian) 5. The apple
eaten. The flesh of Christ eaten. Cyprianus de Coena Domini.
de sanguine Christi, ipso iub e^te, vitae aeternae cum ipso and per ipsum
participes, animalis vitae peccata quasi sanguinem impurum horrentes, and
fatentes nos per peccati gustum a beatitudine priuatos and damnatos, nisi nos
Christi clementia ad societatem vitae aeternae suo sanguine reduxisset. We
drink of the blood of Christ, him self commanding, being partakers of
everlasting life with him, and by him, abhorring ye sins of bare natural life
as vnpure blood, and granting ourselves to have been deprived from bliss, and
damned through the taste of sin, except the clemency of Christ had brought
us again to the fellowship of everlasting life by his blood. S. Cyprian sets
the drinking of Christ's blood against the taste of syn, which man fell into,
by tasting unlawfully the apple which was forbidden to be tasted of.

The like phrase also Prosper Aquitanicus has used. who first declares our
fall by eating and drinking, and afterward our arising again by eating the
body, and drinking the blood of Christ. Concerning our fall thus he writes:
Liberum ergo arbitrium, id est, rei sibi placitae spontaneus appetitus vbi vsum
bonorum quae Prosper Aquitan. contra Collato.
acceperat fastidiuit, and vilescentibus sibi felicitatis suae praesidijs
insanam cupiditatem ad experientiam praeuaricationis intendit, bibit omnium
vitiorum venenum, and totam naturam hominis intemperantiae suae ebrietate
madefecit. Free will therefore, that is to say y^ volu^tarie appetite of the
thing which pleased it, being ones 10thsome of ye good things which it had
taken, and without regard we were poisoned in Adam.
or care had to the aids of his own blessedness, having bent his impote^t
gredines to the trial and experience of disobedience and preuarication, drank
in the poison of all vices, and drowned the whole nature of man with the
drunke^nes of his intemperance.

Thus was poison drunk in. Let us now consider whence health may be recovered.
Inde, priusquam edendo carnem filij hominis, and bibendo sanguiuem eius,
lethalem digerat cruditatem, labitur memoria, errat iuditio, nutat incessu,
neque vllo modo idoneus est ad illud bonum eligendum* and concupiscendum quo se
sponte priuauit. Thence it comes, that man fails in memory, erreth in
judgment, wauereth in his going, neither is he by any means mete to choose
and desire that good thing, whereof he deprived himself of his own accord,
before that by eating the flesh of the we digest our surfeit (...) Christ.
son of man and by drinking his blood, he digest the deadly sur^et which he
took.

As therefore ye apple that Adam did really eat against the commandment of
God, does make us all, y^ were in his body at that time, gilty of disobedience,
and the children of wrath: so the real eating of Christ's flesh, according to
the worthy eating thereof, which Christ commanded, does make us all free from
the pain of everlasting death, and the children of grace and glory.

But as every man did not eat the prohibited apple in his own person and by
his own act, but by the act of our father and mother, and as being in them, and
of them: so it is not needful that every man in his own person eat the flesh
of Christ, which is It is not (...) eueri child eat really y^ flesh of Christ.
given us in the Sacrament to be eaten, but it is absolutely needful that some
or other eat it as really, as ever the apple was eaten, that all the rest, who
by baptism enter into the same body, may be one perfitly with Christ, whiles
they are one mystically with them, who really eat the substance of Christ's
flesh, being the substance of our true sacrifice, truly roasted upon the cross,
and truly rising from death, to the intent it might be truly eaten of us without
any corruption or perishing thereof.

Thus we find, that the supper of Christ can not in any wise consist of eating
the flesh of Christ, by faith and spirit alone. But we (that is to say) some
of the mystical body that are of lawful age, must eat it to salvation, as ye
apple was eaten to damnation. And because before Christ was incarnat, we had no
apple to damnation, he took flesh, and went of his own accord to death, that
thence we The flesh of Christ is y^ wood of life.
might pluck ye apple of life and the fruit of the wood of life which
preserves us to everlasting joys. For as Gregorius Bishop of Nyssa brother to
S. Basil does teach, the medicine must be according to the poison which we are
infected withal. His discourse is to long to write it all in this place, so
much as apperteineth to my purpose, I will translate into English.

Quemadmodum qui per insidias venenum hauserunt, and caetera. As those that by
(...) have drunk in poison, do by an other (...) Orat. (...).
medicine put out the strength thereof, and like as the poison so the medicine
must go into the bowels, that by mean of them help may be spread throughout
the whole body: even so is it to be don of us. That seeing we have tasted poison
where with our Poison tasted.
nature is dissolved, we may receive a medicine whereby that nature of ours is
gathered together, that the infection of the poison may be expelled by the
contrary and wholesome strength of the medicine. What medicine is this? None
other beside that body, The (...) of Christ is the medicine.
which is declared to be above death, and the cause of our salvation. For as a
little leaven (says the Apostle) makes the whole lump of dow like to it self:
so that body, which is made immortal of God, entering into our body does
transfer and change the whole into it self. For as if a pestilent thing be
mixed with a holsom thing it makes it hurtful: so the immortal body makes
all that, wherein The body of Christ enters into our body. The medecyne must
needs enter into our bodies.
it is received, of the like nature and immortal. But it can not enter into the
body, except it be mingled with the bowels by meat and drink: Itaque
necessarium est, vt natura nostra, quoad eius fieri potest, vim salutarem intra
corpus admittat. Therefore it is necessary, that our nature (as much as lies
in it) do receive yt healthful strength within the body. And seeing none other
thing, beside that divine body (of Christ) has received such grace (to heal
our sickness) and seeing it has been showed, it can not be, our bodies should
attein to immortality, unless they be joined with the immortal body, and so
obtein incorruption, it is to be considered how it may be brought to pass,
whereas that one body continually through the whole world is given to so many
thousands of faithful men, the whole may become every man's for his part, and
(...) tarry whole in it felf.

Consequently Gregorius goes forward to show, how that (...) be: and he
shows it to be brought to pass whiles bread and wine (wherewith Christ was
nourished in this mortal life, and the How Christ's* body to ge uen really to
many and yet re mayneth whole. Transubst a^ttation.
which by the power of altering and (...) were daily turned into his flesh and
blood) be now also in his holy Sacraments turned by the consecration of his
blessing and by his words, into his own body and blood. For by that means he
proves it possible, that Christ's whole body should both be given to every man
a part, and yet remain whole in it self. But hereof we shall speak an other
time.

All that apperteined to my present purpose, was to declare Gregorius an. D.
370.
out of S. Bregorie of Nyssa, who lived about twelve hundred years past, that
sith Christ has made his body and blood, in the blessed Sacrament of the
altar, a medicine against that poison, which Ada^ first, and in him all we
took by tasting the apple against the commandment of God: it is not only
profitable but (...), that as the poisoned apple entered in at Adams mouth, and
was not only received by faith, spirit, and understanding, but by hand, tongue,
jaws, and was digested into his bowels, and so poisoned all his flesh and
blood, whereby the flesh that we took of Adam, was also (...) and poisoned,
and our souls united Driginall syn.
to that infected flesh were also infected: even so y^ medicine (which is the
body and blood of Christ made of bread and wine) must not only be received by
faith, spirit and understanding, neither only the figure of it must be received
in at our mouths and so be (...) into our bowels, but the body of Christ it
self must come to our bodies, and it must be received as really into them by
our mouths, as ever the apple came into the mouth of Adam.

Who ever heard that when a man's body was really poisoned, The (...) re of a me
(...) hea leth not.
it should be sufficient to think upon a certain true medicine, and to receive
withal the figure or sign thereof into his body, not at all touching and
receiving really ye medicine it self? And yet surely they that teach the body
of Christ, to be (...) into our bodies only by bread and wine the figures
thereof, and into our souls by faith and spirit, do^ manifestly tell him that
is bodily poisoned, that it is enough for him to think in his mind upon
mithrida^icum or some other medicine, and to receive the token thereof into his
body. Such is the physike and y^ divinity of the Caluinists.

Before that Adam had tasted of the apple, he was g^tie of death in the sight
of God concerning his own person and soul, in so much as in his heart he
consented to taste thereof at his wyfes Genesis 3.
request. For he did not taste it so hastily, but that he first intended so to
do: yea S. Augustine says it is not to be thought, y^ devil August. de Genesis
ad lit. li. 11. cap. 5.
should have thrown down Adam, except a certain pride had been first in his
mind. But when he took the apple into his mouth (to the eating whereof his
heart had already yielded) then had he brought the inward disobedience into the
outward act, so that he was inexcusable not only before God, but in the sight
of angels, of his wife, and of all creatures, his hands, his eyes, his mouth,
his throat and stomach was now wytnes against him. Thence came the dreadful
necessity of death to all the children of Adam, it was the tasting of his
flesh which made all our flesh so far gilty. That polluted body could not
beget innocent children Iod. 14.
with unclean sede.

Well. Christ is the second Adam which takes away this obligation 1. Cor. 15
and bond of death that lay on our necks. and he takes it away, not by force
but by i^stice, changing and recompensing To* 5*
all that was before done amysse. For the corrupt generation which we have by
the sede of Adam, he gives us a new birth in the Sa crament of water and
renewing of ye holy Ghost, in which baptism Tit. 3.
our soul only is not cleansed, but our body also is washed. For the fruit of
death which Adam did ^ate as well in mouth as heart, he has given the apple of
life, as well to be eaten in our mouths as in ou^ ha^tes, so that as the old
Adam carried a wytnes of damnation for him and his posterity in all his
members, so does the new Adam with his children carry the witness of life in all
their members. They have God and man not in heart alone, 1. Cor. 10
but also in a Sacrament, yea in their ^ands, in their mouths, in their
bodies, and become one with the flesh of Christ which they eat, as the apple,
which Adam did eat, became one with his flesh.

This was the supper that Christ came to make: not to g^ue bread and wine, not
to make figures and shadows, not to give us a drinking instead of a solemn
feast. In comparyson of this banquet all faith is impe^t. For we eat the end
of our belefe. Spirit^ gifts are not here reproved, but Chr^l is ^fered before
them all. Ephesians. 4
All understanding fails, in so much as more is in our mouth then we are able
to comprehend in our wit or mind. All spiritual gyfts are in^erlour, because
the flesh is present which triumphs over death, and ascending into heaven
sytteth at the right hand of God, thence distributing gyfts unto men. We have
the cause of all (...) present, and letting it go, shall we chiefly commend the
feast for ^ertayn spiritual effects?

In respect of Christ's real substance, thy supper O Caluyn is but a mere
savor of sweet meats. Give me the flesh of Christ, and take thou the savor
of it. But alas the savor has already 2. Cor. 2. Calvin sets forth the
king^om of y^ deui^, and abaseth y^ kingd^ gifts of God.
k^lled thee* so much the less I wonder, if thou art weary of the flesh it
self. In setting forth our damnation in old Adam thou lackest neither
diligence nor eloquence, thou have therein set forth the lump of perdition,
the severe doctrine of induration, the impotent weakness of the wounded man, to
help forward his own destruction. But when thou come to Christ the new
Adam, he has a s^ly pore unknown and unseen cumpanie, few children, a cold
supper, small offering of sufficient grace, his baptism is (with thee) like a
mark set upon sheep that shows somewhat and works nothing, his Church has
no externa^ sacrifice, no priesthod, no one chief shepherd in earth, no
authority to make laws, no communion of Sa^ts (by the way of praying to them
or for y^ souls departed) no real joining and v^iting with Christ's flesh and
blood in the holy mysteries. What is this but to prefer evil before good, the
devil before God, shadows before truth, vice before virtue, and the power of
darkness before the kingdom of light? It is no eating now (as S. Paul 1. Cor. 11
says) of our Lords supper, for every heretyke takes a supper of his own
before hand, making Christ's supper to give place to him.

And that I may speak nothing of so great change of communions Luthers supper.
as has been in England, Luther says: that Christ's words be proper, and that
his supper is bread and flesh, wine and blood, as though the immortal flesh of
Christ must be eaten with material bread. How do mortal things agree with
immortal in one banquet?

Carolstadius supposes that Christ's words be proper, but Corolstadius supper.
that he touching him self on the breast, said: Take bread and wine, this is my
body, which I touch as though it were a supper mete for Christ's making, if he
only showed his body to his Apostles which ever was in their sight, not
suffering them to eat thereof.

Zuinglius said, the bread and wine were only figures of Christ's Zuinglius
supper.
body and blood, given to our bodies to represent to our hearts the death of
Christ. And that the words of Christ's supper were figuratine only, by which
reason the supper of the Paschall lamb was better then the supper of Christ,
because the dead flesh of an unspotted lamb was more apt then bread and wine,
to show the death of Christ's innocent flesh, which is the lamb of God, Joan. 1.
that takes away the sins of the world.

Cal^in added to Zuinglius bare figures, an efficacy of feeding Caluins supper.
by faith, and taught the words of Christ, not so much to be figurative, as
words of promise, which being heard with faith, cause that the mind by faith
eats of Christ sitting in heaven. a mete supper for such a deviser, who
setting the men that should be fed upon earth, keeps the meat, whereof they
should be filled, in heaven, promising them, who consist also of bodies mortal
and corruptible, that they shall feed upon immortal meat in their souls. such
an eating were good for Angels, I deny not. but it is not the supper that
Christ made to corporal men for his farewell, when he said: Take and eat,
this is my body, and, Drink Matt. 26.
ye all of this, for this is my blood. Taking with our bodies is more then
believing in our souls, eating y^ body of Christ is more then signifying the
eating of his body. The meat is the body of Christ, the drink is the blood of
Christ. Believe and thou have it in heart, before thou come to the table. But
come to the blessed Sacrament of the altar, and thou have it in thy mouth and
body. Matthew. 3.
Both is better then one, Christ has (...) and fullfilled all manner of
justice, he made both body and soul, redemeth both, fedeth both, rayseth both,
crowns both. He does not now divide the hand from the heart, the mouth from
the mind, the figure from the thing, the token from the truth. That he says,
he does, that thou beleuest in heaven, thou receyuest at his table in earth.
yea earth is heaven to thee (says Chrysostom) through this mystery,
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
make his gift no less then he names it, lest for unthankfulness thou be
guilty of judgment. He that believes his plain words is on the surer side.

The Corinthians fault concerning the supper of our Lord was The first fault of
y^ Corinthians.
partly for that they came to it after they had eaten their own supper, and
vndoutebly so do heretyks. They first devise with them se^ues what supper they
will allow to Christ, and then they come to his supper entending to conform it
to their forme^ devise. Partly the (...) were reproved of S. Paul for The'r
seeo^d fault.
eating and drinking alone, without making their meat common to the poor.
Even so the heretics eat and drink alone, teaching that every man eats
Christ only by ye measure of his own faith, which has diverse degrees in every
man, and therefore it makes Rom 12. Ephesians. 4
every man eat Christ after his own faith only. Whereas the supper of Christ
is equal and common to all, as S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, and Theodorite
witnessed before. wherein he gives o^e (...), one blood, one person to all
that come, without any respect Hieroni mus li. 2. aduersus Iouinianum.
concerning the meat and substance of the supper, although not without
discerning the diverse merits of the geastes. It is the honor of him that
makes the feast, to have the meat most bou^tifull and most real, howsoever
the weak stomaks of evil men are able to bear it.

Will thou yet see more plainly, how liberal Christ is in his supper? All that
he has he gives, for he gives his own self indifferently to every man that
sits at his table, be the nian rich or poor, good or bad. The (...) of
this feast at his table is the maker of the feast him self. Who says so?
Uerily he that cannot lie. Who after that he said: My flesh is meat in deed,
douted not to Joan. 6.
add moreover, He that eats me, shall live for me, doing (...) to understand,
that by eating his flesh we eat himself.

The same thing teaches S. Hierom, a man worthy to be credi ted as well for
his own great learning, as for yt time wherein he lived, and the faith whereof
in his writing he witnesses. S. Hierome, I say, expounding these words of
(...) the Prophet, Hiero. in Ozeam. Capit. 11.
Declinaui ad eum vt vesceretur, I bowed down or turned in to him that he
might eat, writes thus, in Christ's person: Declinaui ad eos deserens regna
coelorum, vt cum eis vescerer assumpta forma hominis: sieve, dedi eis esum
corporis mei, ipse and cibus and (...). Forsaking the kingdom of heaven I
bowed down or turned in to them, that the shape of man being taken, I might
eat with them: or else, I gave them the meat of my body, I my self Hieron.
ad Hedib. 2.
being both the meat and the banketer or feaster. And yet he speaks in an
other place more plainly: Nec Moses, etc. Neither Moses has given us the
true bread, but our lord Jesus him self the feaster and the feast, himself the
eater and he that is eaten.

Behold Christ's supper. it may worthily be called his (...), for never any man
made any such before him, he bids geasts and fedeth them with his own
flesh. He is at the table, as he was at the altar of his cross. For these two
things are in most points agreeable. For this table is the (...) and real
remembrance of that cross. As therefore upon the cross Christ Augustinus. De
Trinit. Libro. 4. Cap. 14. Esaie. 63
was the priest, who made the sacrifice, Christ the host that was killed,
Christ the God to whom it was offered, Christ the head of that body of his
Church for whom it was offered, and Christ alone played all parts, and non
fuit de gentibus vir cum illo, and of all nations no man was with him: so
likewise in the last supper, Christ (...) the geastes, telling them (...) year
before of his ban (...) at Capharnaum, and the hour being come, Christ gives
Joan. 13. Cyprianus De (...) Domini.
water not only to their hands, but even to their feet, Christ is the panter,
Christ is the butler, as S. Cyprian also has written: Christ is the meat,
Christ is the drink, and what creature should have part with him in his
supper? Are bread and wine mete ban ketting dishes for his table? They are in
deed mete by their owtward show to signify the supper of Christ, but not mete
to be a substancial part thereof. He that is Lord of heaven and earth, will he
borow the substance of his creatures to make up his feast? As though he lacked
bread of his own, or as though his flesh which is the true (...) containing al
swetnesse in it, lacked the swetnesse of wheaten bread or of material wine, as
though Christ had not better bread and meat of his (...), and better drink of
his own then the grape makes? and who shall have them if he be without them?

A great shame it is that either any thing should challenge part in Christ's
supper besides Christ himself, or that he should (...) the table with bare
odours of spiritual grace, hauiug at Colos. 2.
commandment the substance of flesh and blood, wherein the fullnes of Godhed
dwells corporally. Think of Christ's supper according to the worship of him
that made it, leave bread and wine for Lutrish tables, believe thou that Christ
gave no less to his geasts then he had to give. for verily all that he took,
he took it to give for us and to us: for us, upon the cross, and to us, in
his (...). 22.
last supper. Both which he expressed manifestly, when he (...) saing: Take,
eat, this is my body, which is given for you. that body was given bloodily for
us in the form of man, because he died for man. the same is vnbloodily given
to us in the form of bread, because man lives by bread. But earthly bread is
to maintein life to earthly men. Heavenly men eat the bread which came down
from heaven, which is the son of God assumpting the flesh of man. For the
bread which Christ promised to give, is his flesh for Joan. 6.
the life of the world. His flesh is meat in deed, and his blood is brink in
deed.

Therefore who so teaches the body and blood of Christ to be now received by
faith and spirit only, he denies the supper of our Lord, where the body was
given by the hands of Christ, received with Matt. 26.
the hands of the Apostles, eaten with their corporal mouths, and the blood
drunken out of the chalice of blessing, the which Christ 1. Cor. 10
delivered by their hands to their mouths and hearts, by that means feeding the
whole man with his whole substance.

A special (...) of Calvin is con^ed, who taught this is my body, which is
given for you, to be words of promise in the way of preaching at Christ's
supper, whereas they are words of perfoormance in the way of working.
THe special authority that Calvin has gotten through his scholars in
England, moves me specially to coufute, I can not tell whether I shall name
it, his more false or more foolish opinion. Who perceauing the Catholics wholly
to stick to the most proper and most effectual words of Christ's supper, Matt.
26
and thereupon to build the belefe of the real presence of his body and blood:
thought best to inuegle the strength of those words, as much as might (...),
and to bring them from doing to saying, from making to speaking, from
perfoorming to promising. and therefore among many other words of the same
argument, thus he writes. Atqui non panem alloquitur Christus, vt corpus suum
fiat, sed discipulos iubet manducare, atque illis corporis and sanguinis sui
communicationem pollicetur, and caet. But Christ speaks The words of (...) in
his institutions De coena Do.
not to the bread, that it might be made his body, but he commands his
disciples to eat, and he promises them the communicating of his body and
(...). And afterward: Let us understand those words to be a lively preaching,
which may edify the hearers, etc. which in the fulfilling of that it
promises, may bring forth his efficacy. Hitherto Calvin. whose worthy
scholars have consecrated that insensible devise of his in the book of their
The words of the (...) the leaf 213. page (...)
English homilies. Where after an exhortation made that men should come them
selves to communion, it is said: To this Christ's commandment forces us,
saying, do ye thus. to this, his promise enticeth us, this is my body which is
given for you, this is my blood which is shed for you.

This fault I find with my countriemen. There can not be a foolish saying in all
Germany or ^uicherland which they must The (...) of the English new preachers.
not allow, follow, preach to their audience, and set forth in print. And
therefore if every man might have his will, so many schismatical Churches as
they had se^e beyond the seas, so many orders of communion they would have
embraced. Men that never brought forth of them selves any thing worthy name,
and yet never saw in other places so apish a toye, which they did not wonder
at, and gredeily practice. Wherein they are both most like their master Calvin,
for so much as they specially follow his peuish inventions: and most unlike
him, because he followed none other man in his doctrine, but himself invented a
new religion of his own making.

What say we then? This is my body which is given for you, are they words of
promise, or no? I answer. Words of promise Words of promise are of two sorts.
Gala. 4.
may be taken for such as make a promise, or else for such as have a promise
made concerning them. Those who believe in God (as Isaac did) are named in holy
scripture the children of promise, not of that promise which themselves make to
God, but because through the grace of God which he promised before to Abraham
in his blessed sede (Jesus Christ) they are made his chil Genesis 18. 20. 22.
Galat. 3.
dren. And in that sense This is my body which is given for you, may be called
words of promise, in so much as they fulfill at Christ's supper the promise made
before at Capharnau^, When Christ said: work the meat which the son of man
will give you, and Joan. 6.
the bread which I will give is my flesh.

Again these words which is given for you, at the time of Chri stes supper
might stand to signify, which shall be given for you, and so the old Fathers did
read them, and the Latin copies of S. Paul have so at this day. But the^ the
promise was to be (...). Cor. 11
considered concerning the death of Christ, which was to come, and not
concerning his supper which was present.

Calvin speaking of Christ's supper as it is a supper, says How Call uin takes
the name of promise De Coena Dom.
(this is my body which is given for you) be words of promise, and that, not
because they are justified concerning a former promise made at Capharnaum,
neither concerning the death which is now past: but because they make a promise
of Christ's body to be spiritually eaten at his supper. For he says, those
words were not spoken to the bread and wine, but unto the disciples, to whom
Christ (pollicetur) promises the communicating of his body and blood. Also he
says, the promises are offered to the faithful together with bread and wine.
Moreover, let us understand (says he) these words to be a lively preaching,
which may show his efficacy in the accomplishement of that it promises.
First these words be a brief collation or sermon. Secondly they promise the
communicating of Christ's ^ody. Thirdly they being received of the faithful,
bring forth in them that effectual eating of Christ which they promise. Last of
al he says, Take, eat, is the commandment like unto Inuoca me, call upon me.
This is my body, is the promise like unto Exaudiam te, I will hear the. I am
the longer in showing his mind, because I feared it might be thought of wise
men a great slander to feign so folish an opinion upon a man taken for wise
and learned. For it seems an extreme madness, to affirm that those words,
which show a thing really present, and bid us take the same, are
notwithstanding Matt. 17.
words of promise. At the transfiguration of Christ, it was said, this is my
derebeloued son, in whom I have delighted, hear him. But who was ever so mad
as to think, that Christ was promised in those words, and not rather showed
present? Likewise Matthew. 9.
when Christ said to him that had the palsy, take a good heart son, thy
sins are forgeuen thee, we believe his sins were presently forgeuen him, and
not only a promise made that hereafter they should be forgeuen. The diffe rence
between a promise and a perfoormance.


A promise lacks many conditions, which the performance has. A promise
begins the bargain, the perfoormance ends at the least some part of it. A
promise consists in bare words, the perfoormance beside words has deeds also
joined. A pr^ mise belongs to the time to come, the performance to the time
present. A promise may be differred to a certain day, or suspended with
conditions, the perfoormance must ^edes be altogether without delay. And how
can, these words, Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you, be words
of promise, which neither speak of the time to come, but of the present:
neither begin, but end the covenant: nor consist in bare talk, but also in
real deeds, nor have any condition or delay annexed, but have all things
presently said, signified, made and delivered?

If, this is my body, make to y^ hearers a promise of a spiritual
communicating, then seeing those words were spoken to Judas Matt. 26. Luc. 22.
one of the twelve, and are daily spoken to evil men without any condition or
exception: it may seem that a spiritual communicating is promised to them,
which possibly can not be so. For how can light and darkness agree? But if
Calvin say these words promise the body of Christ only to the faithful, I
ask whether those words be written in the supper of Christ, or no? If they be
not written, how dares Calvin supply them? It is not said, this is my body to
you only that be faithful (as Calvin uses falsely Joan. 6. 1. Cor. 11 Matt.
26.
to interpret those words) But it is absolutely said, This is my body,
whosoever take it, and eat it, whether he take it by faith, to his comfort and
to everlasting life, or in deadely sin, to his judgment and death. For as
God the Father said, This is my Matthew. 3.
derebeloued son, and as thereof it follows, that the person then showed and
pointed unto by y^ voice, was y^ son of God in deed, whether evil men had to
do with him (to whom he was y^ 2. Cor. 2.
savor of death) or good men (to whom he was ye savor of life) right so, this
is my body was said of one certain thing then blessed, be ye man y^ comes to
eat it, good or bad. And as this is my derebeloued ^ne are no words of promise
but of a divine witness ^oward Christ: even so this is my body, promise not, but
witness and make presently the thing showed to be in deed Christ's body.

If this is my body, do promise the body of Christ, and yet (this) must needs
show where the thing is whereunto it points: the This, ^inteth to (...) thing.
body of Christ which is promised, is also pointed unto. and the sense is, I
will give you this thing to eat, which is my body: and by that means the
eating is promised, and the body is pointed to, but the pointing can be
directed to none other sensible thing, but unto that which seems bread.
therefore that is affirmed to be Christ's body, and is promised to be given us
as meat. bu^ bread is not naturally the body of Christ, therefore it is made his
body. And consequently Calvin who will have these words to promise the ^ing of
Christ's body by faith, must needs confess that they make the same body in
deed, to th'^nd the promise of eating yt body, which is so directly pointed
unto, may be fulfilled. Howbeit Christ said not, I will give you my body, but
presently giving, said, take, eat, this is my body.

But seeing Calvin teaches, this, that is pointed unto, still to remain bread,
I see not how those words which (as he says) point unto bread, can withal
promise the body of Christ. For the proposition is simple, and affirms but
one thing, and that thing does concern the substance, as we believe, of
Christ's body, as he says, of bread, so that none other thing can (...)
inferred upon those words, then what thing this is (as we say) or what thing
this bread does signify, as the Sacramentaries teach.

Admit now it were expressly said, this bread is the sign of Christ's body,
(which sense is salsely ascribed to those words by the Zuinglians) yet it would
not follow thereupon, that the body of Christ is promised to our souls, but
only that by this bread we are brought to remember Christ. Now as for eating it
is commanded, and not promised,

Calvin had the chief property of an heretic, which was to be singular. And
therein he delighted so much, that albeit he was determined not to tarry in the
faith wherein he was Christened, Calvin would ^des set up a new religion.
yet he would neither go to Luther (who first withdrew himself from us) nor to
Zuinglius (whose sect he favored rather) but he would make a religion of his
own. And therefore he devised a new sense of Christ's words. Affirming This is
my body, not to be spoken to the bread (as both Catholics, Lutherans and
Zuinglians after diverse meanings do confess) but to be words of preaching,
made unto the people that stand about the Priest, and that these words promise
the body of Christ to all that believe his death and resurrection, as verily as
that bread is really eaten into their bodies, and yet neither be the words
concei^ed in the manner of promising, neither do they speak of faith, or
death, or of the resurrection of Christ, or of eating bread. Is not this a
strange sense, to pick out of these words: This is my body? as if it were said:
Masters, believe that Christ is dead and risen again, and then, as this bread is
eaten of your bodies, so certainly shall you feed of his body in faith and
spirit. Did ^uer any man hear of such a (...)? Hoc, This, does signify and
show to Calvin the bread which must be eaten at the supper of Christ, and
points also to a spiritual food which is promised. Est, Is, does stand both
properly for the present time, in y^ it is a sign of Christ's body at ye time
of speaking, and also improperly for the time to come, in that it is a promise
of his body to be eaten spiritually. Corpus meum, My body does signify to him,
the sign of my body taken by mouth, and the strength or virtue ther^of that
shall be taken by faith and spirit. Put together: This bread which you bodily
eat, is the sign, and this thing which I promise that your souls shall eat,
shallbe the strength or efficacy of my body (and yet he adds farther of his
own) to them that believe Christ's death and resurrection.

This is the sermon which Calvin says was made at Christ's supper. Wherein
every word must signify at once two or three things. and one verb in one tense
must signify two times. and the same word body, must signify two proprieties,
and yet neither of them both properly. For whether body stand for sign of body
(as he would have it taken in respect of bread) it stands improperly, or
whether i^ stand for efficacy of body (as he would have it taken in respect of
the communicants) it stands improperly: whereas the proper signification
thereof is to signify the substance of Christ's body. If we press him out of
S. Paul and 1. Cor. 11
out of the Fathers, that evil men eat the body of Christ, then he will
answer they eat the sign of his body, without promise or efficacy. If we
say, that good men eat the body of Christ, he expounds it in such sense,
that they first have it promised them, and ^ate both a certain pledge bodily,
and in their souls a spiritual efficacy thereof. O crafty deviser.

If thou can thus deceive a sort of miserable, and either unlearned or
ungracious men, think thou to deceive God or to escape his terrible
judgment? Agree at the last, how every word shall be so taken, that thy
interpretation may be like it self. Let not the same word be now a sign, now
a pledge, now a promise, now an efficacy, and now again no efficacy, no
promise, no pledge but only a sign. We believe that every word stands
properly. And that both evil and good receive one and the same substance The
Catholic interpreta tion o^ Christ's words.
of Christ's body. But as one medicine received of two diverse complexions
works not one effect: so the good men have a good effect by eating worthily
the body of Christ, the evil have condemnation by eating it unworthily. Thus
we take the word body, for the real substance of the body. the verb, est is,
we take properly, because it is in deed Christ's body, when the words are
spoken. This, we say, does finally point to the substance of Christ's body as
then pr^ently made under the foorm of bread. In our interpretation there is no
inconstancy, no impropriety, no changing of significations in the same words,
no bare promising of a thing to come, b^t a present perfoormance. If any man
ask by what scriptures I convince Calvin, I would first ^now by what scriptures
he proves his lewed interpretation. Shall he speak a thing without scripture
beside all truth and reason, and shall not we be credited, unless we convince
him by scripture? Howbeit let us forgive that injury, and confute his fond
^pinio^ by the word of God.

Calvin says, This is my body, be words of promise, against which saing thus I
reason. S. Paul intending to show that God was not bound to the carnal Jews,
because they were the childern of Abraham by flesh, but that rather he would
reward them who were the children of Abraham by faith and spirit, declares
Isaac to have been the child of promise, because the Angel said to Abraham,
Secundum hoc tempus veniam, and erit Sarae filius: I will come according to
this time, and a son shall be unto Sara. out of which words S. Paul proves a
promise. How so? Promissionis Romans 9.
enim hoc verbum est. For this word or saing, is a word of promise. which word
is that? Veniam, I will com, and filius ^rit, a son shall be, as if S. Paul
said, will, and, shall, be words of promise. For when a speech is conceived for
the time to come with (...) circumstance that it may appear the speaker meant
to warrant the thing spoken, it makes a promise. If, I will come, and (...)
son shall be, are words of promise: I am come and a son is, be words of
perfoormance. and that is also con^irmed out os the word of God. Where it is
writ^n, the Lord visited Sara, as he had (...). 21.
promised, and fulfilled the things which he spoke. and she conceived, and
brought forth a son at y^ time wherein god had fore^old (...), that which
was before in S. Paul named a promise is ^ow called also a foretelling or
prediction. For albeit every prediction A promi^ is a prediction.
be not a promise, yet every promise is a prediction and a telling before hand.
so that we have in the word of God, that a promise tells a thing before hand,
yea that a promise is conceived for the time to come. For it could not be told
before hand, if it were not to come in respect of him to whom it is told. But
these words, This is my b^dy, do not tell a thing before hand. they do not
belong to the time to come, but unto the time present. therefore they be not
words of promise. they do not say this shall be my body, but this is my body.

Who knows not yt there are three differences of time, one pa^, an other
present, and the third to come? out of question a promise i^ self is of a thing
to come. therefore ye words of promising must needs be words that may belong to
ye time to come. For the nature of the time is applied to ye nature of the
thig. except they be such words as being invented principally to signify y^
present bond of yt thing to come, do contein at once each strength in them. as
when we say polliceor, spondeo, promitto: I promise. and then it is all one to
say* I promise to ge^e, or, I will give. which thig is proved by y^ custom of
all nations which speak so, and by the authority of the ancient ciuilians who
when they bound men most str^ightly to words and terms, yet they gave them
leave to say, any of these following, as being all of equal power: Spondes?
spondeo. Promittis? In (...), de verb. oblig.
promitto. Fideiubes? (...). Dabis? dabo. Facies? faciam. Where these words are
put for words of like meaning and sense, do thou promise, or will thou give,
or will thou do? al which induce and make both a promise and an obligation of
words. Whereby we lern y^ words of promise either must be uttered by expressing
the name of promise, as if Christ should say: I p^omise him the eating of my
body, who (...) eats with says this bread: or ^ls must be (...) in the f^ure
tense, as if it were said: Take, cate, this shall be my body to you: but seeing
neither of both is don, it is a vain folly to say that words of present
affirmation, words o^ working and consecrating, be words of promise or of
preaching.

Yea but God speaks not to the bread (says Calvin) that it should be made
his body. But he commands his Disciples to eat, and he promises them the
communicating of his body and blood.

In deed God says to his Disciples, take, and eat. But that is a
commandment, and no promise. He says farther, this is my body. and that is
the making of the meat which must be eaten, and the showing of it, but no
promise. For Christ makes his supper ready by deed alone, or by his word and
deed together. by deed alone in taking bread: by his word and deed together in
blessing and saying, this is my body. which words turn the substance of bread
into his body. so that these words do not promise any thing, but they perfoorm
an old promise made before at Capharnaum.

What say we then to (...) words, who affirms, that Christ spoke not to the
bread, that it should be made his body, but that he spoke to his Disciples? I
answer, he spoke y^ words, eat and take, to his Disciples, but he spoke these
words (this is my body) to the bread, or (as the Catholics rather use to
speak) over the dread, and upon the bread. But yet we might say very well and
truly, that Christ spoke to the bread, even as he is rea^ to have commanded the
winds, and they cessed, and to have Matthew. 8 Matt 21. Matt. 17.
spoken to the figtree, when he said let sruite never spring more of the. And
as he said, the Apostles having faith should speak to any certain hill, Transi
hine illuc, and transibit, pass from this place to that, and it shall pass
from hence. The speaking of God or of his ministers to any creature, whether it
be a reasonable a sensible or a divine creature, is the signisying that his will
is don always upon every creature, according as it pleases him. neither ^oth
it skyll in what foorm of words he speaks, seeing that sometime he is readen to
say, Volo, I will, Mundare, ^e thou cleanied. Matt. 8.
Sometime he says: Sicut credidisti ^iat tibi, be it don to the as thou (...)
believed. Sometime he cures by touching alone without Matt. 9.
words. Sometime he says in the present tense: Remitta^tur tibi pec (...) tua,
thy sins are forgiven thee. And thereu^to these words of his supper are like.
For when he took bread and having ble^d, Matt. 26.
said: This is my body: His word at that instant made his body of that bread
which was taken, even as these words, thy sins are forgeuen thee, made a just
man of a sinner.

The speaking therefore of God unto creatures is the showing Job 38.
of his will to be don upon them. In so much that in Job God confesses himself
only to dispose, order, and command all creatures. he se^deth lightings and
they go, and returning they say to him, adsumus, here we are. which thing
they could not say, except they heard his voice. Therefore it is not well said
of Calvin, to make it an absurd thing for bread to hear the words of Christ,
seeing they do not only hear, but also answer in so much that an (...). (...).
other Prophet says, the stars were called, and they said: Adsumus, we are
at haud. To be short, S. Paul says, that God calls Romans 4.
things that be not, as things that be. Meaning, that it is no less easy to
God by his calling or naming to make a thing to be which was not at all, or else
to be that which before it was not, then it is to call a thing by his old name.
It is all one to God to say to Joan. 2.
us, this is water which before was water, and to say of water, thi^ is wine.
for at his word it is made wine as who cannot possibly (...). and seeing
experience teaches us, that all creature^ will go against their own particular
nature, rather then the order which God has appointed in y^ whole world, shall
in any ^oint fail, seeing when a quill is put into any liquour, and the air
thereof drawn up with his breath that sucketh it, y^ heavy (...) of water will
rather against his nature go upward, then any void or empty place should be.
shall we yet wonder that Gods will is don every where even at y^ speaking of
his word shall not his visible (...) make faith of his invisible and mystical
doings, Roma. 1.
so that all which will not believe, shall be inexcusab^e?

Calvin says, Christ spoke not to the bread. I tell him, he spoke to the
bread, not as to a thing that should tarry bread, but as to that which should
be changed into his body: for he called the bread his body. will Calvin grant
me that, or no? If he will not, I bring forth Tertullian, one that is nere
hand fourtene hundred Tertull. aduersus Marcionem. Libr. 4.
years old, who says that Christ called the bread his body. Panem corpus suum
appellat. He calls the bread his body. But we can not call a thing, except we
speak unto it. Therefore when Christ called the bread his body, he spoke unto
the bread, as if he had said to the bread, be thou my body. For as it is all
one in Christ to say, let thy sins be forgeuen, and thy sins are forgeuen:
so it is Matthew. 9.
one to say concerning a certain bread which was taken: Let this be my body,
or this is my body. with whatsoever words the mind of Christ be uttered, out of
question it is allwaies fullfilled. But among all kind of vttera^ce, none is
more plain to us, then when a thing is clearly a^rmed to be this or that: for
then it is made plain to us, not only that God would have it so, or wishes it
to be so, but that really and in deed it is so. Christ calls bread his body:
Therefore Calvin says fals^, when he affirms that Christ speaks not to the
bread to the end it might be made his body.

You will say, calling is not making. yeas for fout^, in God, in Christ, in
those whom Christ wills to call one thing, and make thereof an other thing,
in all them calling is making. Men call a thing by the name of the former
nature, but God in calling any The cal^ of Go^.
thing, or in willing it to be called by a new name changes the former nature,
and makes it to be as he called it. And therefore when the Prophet (...) would
signify that the gentiles and panims should be turned to the faith, how does he
utter Ozee. 2.
that matter? Says he not in the person of God: Dicam non populo meo, populus
meus es tu? I will say to that which is not my people, thou art my people?
Dicam. I will say it. And trow ye, his saying is not don? Yes it solloweth
immediately. Et ipse dicet: Deus meus es tu. And the people it self shall say,
thou art my God. which thing the people could not say, except in deed it were
converted and made the people of God from the people of infidelity. And
therefore S. Paul him self expounds this place of Osoe, by the word of
calling, and Roma. 9.
(...) Vocabo non plebem meam, plebem meam. I will call that, which is not my
people, my people: and erit in loco vbi dictum Ozee. 1. Roma. 9.
est eis, non plebs mea vos, ibi vocabuntur filij Dei. And it shall come to
pass in the plate, where it has been said to them, ye are not my people, there
they shall be called the sons God. After which sort when Christ having taken
bread and blessed, said: This is my body: That saying was the calling of that
which was before, Non corpus Christi, not the body of Christ. Corpus Christi,
the body of Christ.

In this sense S. Ambroise says: Ante benedictionem verborum De ijs qui init.
myster. Capit. 9.
coeles^m alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus significatur. Ipse
dicit sanguinem suum ante consecrationem aliud dicitur, post consecrationem
sanguis nuncupatur. Et tu dicis, Amen, hoc est, verum est. quod os loquitur,
men's interna fateatur. Quod sermo sonat, affectus sentiat. Before the blessing
of the heavenly words it is named an other kind, after consecration the body is
signified. himself says (or names) his blood. Before consecration it is named
(or said) an other thing. after consecration it is called blood. and thou
(...), Amen, (...) is to say, it is true. That which the mouth speaks, let
the inward mind cousesse, that which the speech sounds, let the har^ think.

Here we lern by S. Ambrose, that the naming, signisying, or calling bread and
wine the body and blood of Christ, is both (...) ^uident sign, that Christ
spoke to bread and wine (otherwis^ then Calvin said) and also the making of
them to be in deed so ^s they are called and signified. also he shows y^
custom of y^ primative Church to have been, that immediately before communion
when y^ Priest said, the body of Christ, the people used, to answer: Amen, it
is true: it is in deed his body. And as the word body sounds, and as our
confirmation thereof sounds: so he requires us to believe confess and think.
certainly there is none other thing sounding to our ears beside the name of
body. Likewise Tertullian having witnessed that Christ called the bread his
body, Tertull. aduers. Marcio^ lib. 4.
witnesses also that he made the bread which was taken and distributed to the
Disciples, his body. Fecit panem corpus suum. He made the bread his body, in
saying, This is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body. But neither
calling nor naming, no^ saying, nor the being of a figure, stops any thing
y^ real truth^ of Christ's body. the Sacrament is the figure of Christ's body,
because it shows his death until he come, as S. Paul says. But as Christ is
the figure, or print and form of his Fathers substance, 1. Cor. 11
and yet also his substance in deed: even so the Sacrament Hebr. 1.
is a figure of Christ, and Christ in deed. Christ, as an other person beside
his Father, so is he the figure of his substance. But otherwise in truth he is
thoroughly the same substance. even so, as the Sacrament is another manner of
Christ's presence, so it is a figure either of his visible body, or of his
death. But concerning the truth of substance, all is one. Thus without all
controversy the (...) of (...) ^ords stands upright. And his naming,
signifying, figuring, calling, is the making of a thing to be that which it is
named by him, signified, figured, or called. He has said Psalm. 14^
and the things are made. There can be none more gross, more vile, more
blasphemous opinion, then to think y^ Christ is a bare man* that his word is
like our word, or his figures and Sacraments like our figures, or like the
figures of the old law. Look what odds is between God and man, so much believe
thou to be also between his naming, or his figures of the new Testament, and all
other figures. His figures contein the self same substance which they express
in figure, sign, or name, whereof God wylling I will entreat more hereafter.

It is at this time to be co^sydered, y^ seeing the Sacrament of Chri Lucae. 2^.
1. Cor. (...)
stes supper, is ye remembrance of yt great sacri^ice made by his death upon y^
cross: It self also must needs partake that nature, whereof it is the
remembrance, and consequently it must be certainly believed to be a true
sacrifice, as that of ye cross was. In every public sa^ there is a thing
offered and vowed unto God, and the act which offers and voweth it,
apperteiueth as well to the thing (...) (by the mean of doing sumwhat about it)
as unto God, to whom the oblation is theifly dedicated. As therefore when a
lamb is sacrificed, Leuiti* 1. Math. 21.
hands are laid upon the lambs head, the lamb is killed, burnt or eaten, and
all that while God in the lamb is honored, prayed unto, blessed, thanked and
praised: even so when the bread is taken, the words (which are the instrument
to make our sacrifice) are spoken to the bread i^ the way of vowing and
dedicating it unto Christ, into whose flesh it is turned by his almighty word
in such sort, that God is withal the last end of the whole offering, to whom
this th^nkful sacrifice is made. For S. Ireneus Ireneus. Libro. 5. aduersus
haereses.
has witnessed, that when the mixed chalice and the bread broken percipit
verbum Dei, takes the word of God, the Eucharist of the blood and body of
Christ is made. Ireneus says, the (...) takes the word of God. Calvin
affirms that Christ speaks not unto the bread. As though the bread could
take that word, which is not directed unto it. Bread is the matter of the
Eucharist, to wit, of the most thankful sacrifice of Christ's supper. Words
are the instrument which the word of God uses in working and consecrating the
bread. When the words come unto the bread, or (as S. Ireneus speaks) when the
bread takes, and re ceaueth, or hears y^ word of God, y^ Eucharist of
Christ's body and blood is made. Is a thing made of bread by words, and yet
does not Christ speak those words unto y^ bread? How ca^ words work or make
any thing, but by speaking?

In an other place likewise S. Ireneus says: panis percipiens Ireneus a^uersus
haeres. li. 3 Cap. 34.
vocationem Dei, bread receiving the calling of God is not now common bread,
but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, one earthly, an other heavenly.
The earthly thing is y^ old soorm o^ bread, y^ heavenly is y^ body of Christ
newly made under yt (...)* And yet does not Christ speak unto bread, to (...)
it should be made his body?

Justinius Martyr entreating of the self same sacrifice, writes Justinius
Martyr* In apolog. 2.
thus: Cibum qui per verbum precationis, quod ab eo accepimus, consecratus est,
Jesus Christi carnem and sanguinem esse accepimus. We have learned yt sood which
is consecrated by y^ word of prayer (which we took of him) to be y^ flesh and
blood of Jesus Christ.

Th^re is a kind of meat or food consecrated. by what means? by the word of
prayer, which we took of Christ. What word can yt be I pray you, but only, This
is my body? Calvin thought they had been words of preaching, but Justinius
scholar unto y^ Apostles, calls them words of prayer, because he that
speaks them minds by yt speaking, to make a sacrifice unto God, which is y^
highest kind of prayer and of worshipping God y^ (...) be. Of which kind Christ
said: my house shall be called yt house of prayer. Preaching Math. 21.
is principally directed unto ye people, prayer only to God. But among all
prayers, yt which is most peculiar to public sacri fice, is most proper unto
God. For he that offers sacrifice to any other thing beside to God alone, is
most properly an idolatour.

Now seeing Calvin is content yt y^ word of prayer and sacrifice, which we
received of Christ, shall be so principally directed to the people, y^ it shall
not in ye like degree appertein to ye bread (which Calvin is showed to be an
idolatour.
is yt matter of our sacrifice,) I say he is content, yt* sacrifice by nature
dew to God alone, be offered unto mortal men. and because instead of God (to
whom these words are chiefly directed) he has placed y^ ticklish ears of y^
rude multitude, he has committed mayn idolatry. As chosing to speak these
words (This is my body) altogether to the men standing about him, whereas they
are dew finally to God aloue, and by ye way of sacrificing, appertein to ye
bread, which is changed into Christ's body. As therefore if a man Acto. 14.
should kill an ox or a Calf, referrig ye last end thereof unto yt people which
stands by, he should undoubtedly be an idolatour: even so when he affirms
y^ those words (which by y^ appointment of Christ, make y^ Eucharist and
sacri^ice of thanksgeuing unto God) ought to be spoken to ye people, as for ye
chief use where unto they were created, he not only commits, but also
defends mayn idolatry. Which is (...) most gross fault yt ever was don by so
spiritual a worshipper of Christ, as Calvin will seem to be. Ad Pres by teroru^
preces (says S. Hierom) Christi corpus sanguisque consicitur: Hierony mus ad
(...) to. 2.
The body and blood of Christ is made at the prayers of the Priests. Doutlesse
at none other prayers, then wherein they say (...) y^ mind of sacrificing,
(...) bread, This is my body, and over wine this is my blood. (...) speaking of
these words y^ body and blood Augustinus in Psalm. 39.
of Christ be (...), (...) these words promise nothing. For as S. Augustine
(...). (...) abstulit verba promitte^tia, The (...) or the perfienesse of the
th^igs promised, ha^ taken away the promising words. And again. Tam diu quisque
promissor est donec det, cum dederit, mutat verba, non dicit adhuc dabo, quod
se daturum dicebat, sed dicit, dedi, mutauit verbum. So long every man is one
that pro^iseth, until he give. When he has given, he changes the words. He
says not still: I will give, of y^ which he said he would give: but he says, I
hau^ given. He has changed the word. S. Augustine puts a difference between
a g^er and a promiser. Between words, and deeds, between sayings and doings. He
accompteth dabo, I will geu^ for a word of promise, but dedi, I have given for a
word of per^ance. Seeing therefore Christ in his supper did not say^ he would
give his body to the faithful, but said expressly take, eat, thi^ is my body,
and seeing the Evangelist says of that fact, dedit Discipulis, he has given to
his Disciples, out of question y^ words which are joined with a real gift, be
not verba promissiua, sed completiua: as S. Augustine names them, they are not
words which promise, but which accomplish and fulfill the former promise. And
now to return to the for^er talk of sacrif^ce, they are such words as fulfill
the act of the sacrifice, and therefore they are called of Justinius Martyr,
(...). Orationis aut voti verbu^. Justinius in apol. 2 Augusti^us. ^pist 59 ^.
Tim. 2.
the word of prayer or of vow. ^or (as S. Augustine has well noted in
expounding the words of S. (...) to Timothe,) ea proprie intelligenda est
oration, quam facimus ad votum. That is properly understood to be prayer which
is made at vowing, that is to say, which we make with a special ^owing and
re^ring unto God of our selves, or of some (...) thing where by we pro (...)
our faith.

So that the word of prayer in the Eucharist, is the word which voweth and
dedicateth unto God the substance of y^ bread and wine, which is taken to be
consecrated. Vouentur autem The obla tion of the (...) to (...).
omnia que offeruntur Deo, maxim sancti altaris oblatio. Truly all things are
vowed (says S. Augustine) which are offered unto God, specially the oblation
of the holy altar. We bring bread and wine to the altar to offer them. That
offering is a vowing of them to God. When are they vowed? When the word of
vowing or of prayer is spoken. When is that prayer made? S. Augustine shows
in the same place: Orationes accipimus dictas, cum illud Epist. 59
(quod est in Domini mensa) benedicitur and sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum
comminuitur. We take prayers to be said, when that which is on the table of our
Lord, is blessed and sanctified, and broken to be distributed.

Mark whether S. Augustine speak like Calvin or no. that S. Augu (...) reth
(...) words, this is ^y body to ^ upon y^ table, and not unto the audience.
which is on the table is blessed, that is sanctified, that is broken, that is
distributed, that blessing and sanctifying is made by prayer, that prayer is
the vowing to God, of that which is brought to the table, which was bread and
wine. The word of vowing is to say over it, This is my body. For the sense of
these words is, that Christ so ^estly offers, so thoroughly voweth the
substance of bread and wine to the honor of God, that he makes them by his
almighty power the same flesh and blood of Christ, which is united to the son
of God in one person. This only is the offering and vowing of an outward thing,
which came to that perfection Genesis 14. Psalm. 109.
whereunto in the (...) of (...) it was destenied. Because the Priest (who
offered it according to the order of (...)) is God as well as man. The
instrument of this great sacrifice, the word of this prayer, ye execution of
this vow, are the Marci. 14
words of Christ, who said in the way of blessing, of tha^ksgeuing, o^
praying, and of vowing or of offering to God, This is my body, which is given
for you, do and make this thing for the remembrance Lucae. 22.
of me.

Calvin would neither have prayer nor vow, nor any sacrifice made unto God in
these words, but has with sweet poisoned talk, made of them a promise and
apreaching to the people, giving to man the (...) of sacrifice dew (...) God
only. But S. Ireneus Lib. 4. cap. 32.
witnesses, that Christ having taken bread, and given thanks, said, This is my
body, and confe^ the chalice to be his blood. Et noui testamenti nouam docuit
oblationem, and he taught a new oblation of the new testament. Which also he
proves out o^ Malac. 1.
Malachie the Prophet.

Calvin would the words to be spoken without working any thing upon the brend:
as who should say, the bread could be offered according to the state of any law
or testament, and yet no change of substance be made therein. Calvin would the
working to be only in the minds of y^ hearers, whereas y^ gospel teache^ that
Christ having taken bread, said: This is my body. But Calvin imagines, that he
spoke not to the bread, but said to the people, this bread is a witness that
you shall ca^e my body, whereas the bread it self was by those words made
Christ's body, and so made, that it was his body, as soon as the word was
spoken. So says Bregorius Nyssenus, who writes that the bread is changed In
Orat. (...).
into the body of Christ, statim vt dictum est ^ verbo: Hoc est corpus meum,
straight as soon as it is said of the word (of God) thi^ is my body. S.
Chrysostom shows the words to be spoken by Chryso. hom. de prod^io ne Iud^.
to. 3. Ambros. de Sacra. lib. 4 c. 5
the Priests mouth: who says, This is my body. Hoc verbo prop^ sita
consecrantur. With this word the things set forth are consecrated. S. Ambrose
says: Vbi verba Christi operata fuerint, sanguis efficitur, qui plebem red^it.
When y^ words of Christ haus wrought, the blood is made which has (...) the
people.

Is it not a great madness to resist the^e witnesses? Or can the things set
forth, which are (...) and wine be consecrate^, be chan^d, ^e made the body
and (...) of Christ, and not be (...)

I might bring against Calvin whatsoever the Catholics teach or say of the
real presence of Christ's body and blood, of (...), and of the sacrifice. For
(...) word destroys this foolish invention of promising and preaching. It
shall be now sufficient to show, that the whole East and West Church by diverse
means yet conformably destroy that erroneouse opinion of Calvin.

In the East Church the words of consecration, This is my body The custom of y^
East Church at consecration.
which is given for you: and likewise of the blood, are spoken with so loud
avoice, that the whole Church may here the Priest pronouncing them. And
immediately after each of the words the quere and people cried out Amen. Which
does signific, as S. Ambrose De iis qui init. cap. 9.
has expounded it, Verum est, it is true. Whereby all those Churches did
signify, that the body and blood of Christ was presently made, when the people
affirmed it to be true, and yet noman had at that time received the communion.
Therefore th^se words, This is my body, which is given for you, and, this is my
blood, which is shed for you, Which Calvin calls words of promise made to the
receauers, are witnessed by y^ whole Church to be true presently, and so to be
perfoormed, l^g before any man receive cither kind.

On the other side in the West Church the same words are spoken The cnstom of
the west church in consecrating.
secretly over the bread and the wine, and immediately after the pronouncing of
each words, the body and blood of Christ is adored of all the people, because
it is really contained under the foormes of bread and wine. Which ancient
custom of secretly pronouncing these words, This is my body, show they are
neither words of promise nor of preaching. If they were words of promise or of
preaching, they should be spoken to the people out of the chair, or pulpit, or
some like place. But now they are spok^n at the al^ar of God, and not at all
directed to the people, as the which (...) to yt office of (...) Priesthod,
whereunto y^ people is not called. For as the high Bishop among the Jews went
Hebr. 9.
alone, and that but one day in the whole year into ye Holy of Holies in the
temple of Solomon: right so when the Priest goes to consecrate the Holy of all
Holies (which is the body and blood of Christ) it is most conneniently
ordained, that he alone enter (...). And this custom is in that West Church
which S. Peter and S. Paul planted with their preaching, and watered with
their blood. This is the Church which S. Ambrose honored so (...), that albeit
himself in many points followed in his service the (...) rite and manner, yet
he openly praised the good and laudable custom of the Roman Church, saying:
In omnibus De Sacra. lib. 3. cap. 1.
cupio sequi Ecclesiam Romanam. In all points I covet to follow the Roman
Church.

But now let us bring a practice of ye whole primative Church, as well in the
East as in the West, which so evidently does confute the (...) opinion of
Calvin, that he is sain to condemn the Apostles them (...) to avoid that
argument. For so had he rather do, yea to deny all the whole Bible, then once
to remove the breadth of a (...) from his derebeloued pha^tasy. such is the
stubburnesse of heretics.

The holy Bishop and Martyr S. (...) does witness (as (...) allegeth him) that
the Bishops of Rome before the ^useb. li. 5. c. 24
time of Pope Uictor, to wit, Soter, Anicetus, Pius, Higinius, Telesphorus,
Xistus, did all keep Easterday always upon the sunday, and yet withal kept
peace with ohter Churches, which did otherwise. For a demonstration of that
peace, (...) allegeth The Eucharist was sent (...) in the pri^ Church.
generally, that all the Priests which were before Uictor, (which were in
number, from S. Peter's time, twelve at the least) used solemnly to send
Eucharistiam, the Eucharist (which is the Sacrament of Christ's supper) to
such Priests who came out of those quarters, where Easter was kept otherwise,
then it was at Rome. By that sending of the Sacrament from the Pope to other
Priests and Bishops, Jreneus concludes all those to have communicated together.

To our purpose, I note, that there is a certain thing so ^crated in Christ's
supper, that it has in it the whole virtue of y^ s^pper. And it is a torporall
and real thing which may be ^ued, carried, sent up and down, and so at the last
received. Mark well the History. All the Bisshops of Rome used to send to
strange Bishops coming to Rome the holy Eucharist, in token that they were al
of one communion, of one Church, and one religion. This Eucharist was the
Sacrament of Christ's supper, this Sa crament was first made, and then kept for
strangers, and sent unto them when they came. Which they received as the bond
of peace and love. The consecration of that Eucharist could consist in none
other thing so essentially, as in the pronouncing over bread, these words, This
is my body.

Now remember, I beseech you, what Calvin judges of our Lords supper. He
teaches those words to be words of promise, and of preaching, Which being
heard of the faithful stir up their hearts to receive Christ by faith. But the
custom of the primative Church, even of the first hundred years after Christ's
death, manifestly reproves his opinion. For the Eucharist was made then The
custom of y^ (...) Church is against y^ doctri^e of Calvin.
and sent afterward to those who were not present at the making thereof. Who
neither heard any preaching, nor took hold of any promise, but came like
strangers to Rome, and so had the blessed body of Christ delivered them.
wherefore his body was not only consecrated in the hearts of men, but also in a
corporal thing which might be seen, touched, carried, delivered and r^ceaued.
The consecration was fulfilled in that external thing, which was called the
Eucharist. And so it is proved without any escape, that when bread was taken
and blessed, these words, This is my body, were said to the bread and over it,
and changed it into the substance of Christ's body. And by that means the body
of Christ was contained under the foorm of bread, and so carried unto the
faithful Prelates which came to Rome: The Eucharist it self was carried. The
body of Christ was sent from one Bishop to an other.

The words which Calvin dreameth to be words of promise, were not such: but in
deed were word^ working the real presence of Christ's body. And truly when
Christ gave his Apostles authori^ie Luc. 22.
to make his last supper: He ^ad them not make a promise of any thing. But he
said: Hoc facite, Do and make this thing. A certain external thing was made
and don by Christ, which he will Christ ^ad not his Apostles make a promise of a
thing but make the thing it self.
led his Apostles to do and make. He said not to them, preach th^s, nor say
thus, nor do thus (albeit the homilies corrupt the gospel after that sort) but
he said: do this thing, make this thing, to wit, make my body with the same
words of blessing, which you heard me use when I took bread, and having g^uen
thanks said thereof: This is my body, make this thing.

Which thing the Apostles and their successors have always made, not in
pulpits, (as Calvin, who would have them words of promise, and of preaching,
must needs allow best) But they have made the body and blood of Christ upon the
blessed altars and holy tables, where they o^ered vnblody sacrifice, and
sanctified the holy mysteries with yt mind o^ celebrating, of daing and making,
but not with the mind of promising or preaching. Neither only was this the
custom of Rome, to send the Eucharist already consecrated unto other Bisshops,
but wise and learned men think ye like use to have been in every other Church.

And certainly Iusti^us Martyr, of sufficient antiquity to them that care for
Apostolical doctri^ or tradition, does witness that the Eucharist was made in
the assembles of the (...), and afterward sent by the Deacons to those that
were absent: by Deacons, The (...) charist was carried by (...) to y^ (...) per^
without words of pr^ mising. Hieron. Euagri. to. 2. Iustinu^ Marty^ in apolog.
2.
I say, who could in no wise them selves either consecrate or iterate again the
words of consecration already spoken. For as S. Hierom writes, Priests differ
from Deacons, because at the prayer of Priests the body and blood of Christ is
made. Which thing the Deacons can not do. They on'y can minister unto the
people the body and b^od already consecrated and made by the Priests.

And therefore Justinius Martyr writes thus of them, and of the whole making of
the mysteries. Panis vinumque and aqua afferuntur, tumque is qui primum locum
tenet eodem modo preces gra tiarumque actionem pro virili mittit, populusque
acclamat dicens, Amen. Et ijs, quae cum gratiarum action consecrata sunt,
vnusquisque participat. Eademque ad eos qui absunt, Diaconis dantur perferenda.
Bread, wine, and water are brought. And then he which is chief prays and
gives thanks to the uttermost of his power, after the same manner (which was
described before) and yt people reioysingly cries, Amen And every man
partaketh those things which are consecrated with thanksgeuing. And the same
things are given to the Deacons to be carried to these which are absent.

What can be more plainly spoken? Bread, wine, and water are consecrated by the
words of prayer which we took of Christ. those words are, This is my body, and,
this is my blood. After which consecration the people cried, Amen. And the
consecrated things, to wit, the body and blood which are made by the
consecration of bread, wine, and water, the body and blood, I say, are
delivered by the (...) to them first which are present. And when they have
communicated, to others also which are absent.

Therefore the holiness rested in y^ things that were consecrated and was not
made by (...) in the ears and (...) of y^ people but the consecrated mysteries
were given and carried: given to y^ present, carried to the absent. given by
hands, not by words, given to their hands or mouths, and not to their ears.
they were carried to the absent, as having real virtue made in them by the words
of Christ. what says Calvin to these practices of the primative Church? what
spirit will he in this point show to us? whether will he show the spirit of
humility in wondering at, and in following those Fathers which learned all their
service and orders of the Apostles them selves? If Calvin had that spirit, he
were far from hearesy. But now see what spirit Calvin has. Thus he writes in
this matter. Immediately after the words which I rehearsed in ye (...) of this
chapter, thus he writes.

His rationibus constat, repositionem Sacramenti, etc. It is The words of
Calvin. De Coen. Domini.
evident (says Calvin) by those reasons, the reservation of the Sacrament
(which some men press, to th end it may be distributed extraordinarily to the
sick,) to be unprofitable. For either the sick shall receive it without
rehersall of the institution of Christ, or the minister together with the sign
will join the true explication of the mystery. If the institution of Christ
be not spoken of, it is an abuse, and a fault. If the promises be rehearsed and
the mystery be declared, so that they who shall receive, may receive with
fruit, we n^de not dowt, this to be ye true consecration. To what purpose then
is the other, whose strength reaches not so far as to come to the sick? But
you will say, they that do so (to wit, that reserve the Sacrament) have the
example of the old Church. Fateor. I grant but in so weighty a matter, and
wherein error is not committed without great danger, nothing is more safe then
to follow the truth it self.

Hitherto Calvin has reasoned, who puts the whole strength of the Sacrament
of Christ's supper in promising and preaching. therefore if any where preaching
and promising be not used in the giving of the Sacrament, he calls it an
abuse and fault.

And seeing the primative Church, even whiles ye Apostles were ^liue, did by the
witness of (...) reserve the Sacrament so long after consecration, as to send
it to such Bishops, which might come to strange dioceses out of an other
province: and seeing the deacous used to carry it in the time of Justinius Martyr
(who lived within a hundred years of Christ's death) to those which were
absent: Calvin, I say, perceauing the use of all Apostolical Calvin re
proves ye (...) Church.
Churchs to stand against him, will seem to con^ute them all with this fond
reason. Either the sick and absent persons (for all is one concerning this
matter) shall receive that which was consecrated in the Church without a new
rehersall of these words, This is my body, And then, it is an abuse, says
Calvin, and a fault: (and he calls it an abuse, which the scholars of the
Apostles used) or ^ls (says he) the words shall be joined with the sign, and it
is a true consecration. And then, says he, the first consecration made at the
Church was in vain concerning the sick and absent men. But the second is good,
which is made by preaching and rehearsing the words of promise to the sick
persons.

I have most faithfully behersed the opinion of Calvin. But let us now examine,
why it is an abuse and fault to deliver to the sick or to the absent persons
the holy host which was consecrated in the Churches, without a new rehersall
of Christ's words. why is that an abuse? who told Calvin it was an abuse or a
fault. Calvin brings no reason for his (...) re^ of the Apo^ ^lers.
For south his own mind gave him so, his wisdom thought so, his gravity said
so, his blasphemonse penue wrote so. But other cause, reason, or scripture he
brings none for it. ^e first (...) that the consecration of Christ's supper
consists in saying to the people, This is my body which is given for you: And
proneth it not at all. but grant him once his dream, and consequently he
infers that if such an host whereupon the words of consecration were once
dewly pronounced, be afterward given to him that hea^d not those words of
promise, because he was sick or absent, if the ^ost, I say, he given without a
new rehersall of the words, it follows that it is an abuse. Yea but some
Papist will say, the old Church did so. For now he calls the primati^e
Church the old Church. I grant, says Calvin. But it is better yet to follow
the truth it self. Why (...) do thou only know, what the truth it self is?
we allege the old Church, to pro^e, that the truth (...) Christ's gospel does
stand for us: and to prove that consecration is not made by preaching and by
the hearing of the people, but by the virtue of Gods word, which spoken over
the elements of bread and wine, says by the one: This is my body, making it
so. And by the other: This is my blood, making it so.

We say these words make the body of Christ under the form of bread, and his
blood under the form of wine. For our saying we bring the gospel, where ^t is
written, this is, and, this is. When other (...) the gospel, we show that the
Apostles and Matt. 26.
their successors practiced this which we believe. For they all understood, by
these words directed to brcad and wine, that the body and blood of Christ was
really made, under the forms of them. How prove we that? Because if once the
words had been spoken by a Priest upon those elements, the things consecrated
were afterward kept and carried as a most holy sacrifice to men ab^ent. as the
which things contained really within them the body and blood of Christ. Why else
should they be carried to others that were absent? A (...) may say, that when
they came to the absent persons, the words were again rehearsed. First that
appears not in Justinius, or in Ireneus, of whom the one says, the (...) was
sent to strangers: the other says, that the things consecrated, which were
received of the present Christians, the same were carried to the absent. How is
the Eucharist sent, if it be Nothing known to be co^secra ted may be (...)
teo again.
no Eucharist until it come to the stranger, and then be made a new? Or is it
(...) to iterate the consecration of any Sacrament? Has Calvin learned so far?
Did the first consecration lack ^ertue, so that an other must be made, or the
first be repeted?

Last of all the Deacons carried the Eucharist, who possibly could not rehearse
the words of consecration, This is my body, and, this is my blood. And yet if
they were words of promise and preaching, the Deacon, who may (...) and in
preaching may (...) y^ spiritual seeding of our souls, might also rehearse
those words. But from the Apostles time to this day it was never heard, that ^
Deacon might consecrate the body and blood of Christ. For noman Hebr. 5. A
Deaco^ cannot co^ secrate the holy my^.
is able to do any more, then whereunto he is lawfully called. But no Deacon
has the power to consecrate given him. And that his name shows, which is to
say, a (...), or a waiter on. For he waits upon the Priest at Mass, and is
not as yet promoted to the office of (...).

Seeing then the Deacons carried the Eucharist, and they could not say the words
of consecration, doub^lesse they that received it of their hands, received
neither words of promise, nor of preaching, but they received that blessed body
and blood of Christ which was consecrated before, under the foormes of bread
and wine. This faith will stand sound when Calvin and all his scholars be out of
memory. This practice did the Apostles leave to their successors and
scholars, as Justinius the Martyr, Ireneus and Eusebi^s witness.

Now consider what an intolerable spirit of arrogance was The intolerable pride
of (...).
in Calvin, who dares oppose him self against the first hundred years after
Christ. He dares affirm, that all the Priests and Bisshops of Rome before
(...) committed an abuse, in sending the Eucharist to strangers. That all Asia
and Brece committed an abuse, in sending the Eucharist by Deacons to men that
were absent, who heard not the words of promise.

If thou look to be saved (good Reader) beware of that arrogant spirit.
Learning thou shall not find in Calvin, and much less honesty. Only he has a
sort of smothe words, which are poy soned with pride and ignorance. If any of
his scholars will take upon him to defend his error, I will by Gods grace
discover more ignorance of that arrogant Master of theirs. In the mean time I
will content my self with these reasons, which I have presently brought against
him out of the word of God, and out of the sayings and doings of the whole
primative Church.

The preface of the second Book.
FOr so much as contraric things, one being set against the other, are both
made the more clear and plain: it seemed best I should not only confirm the
Catholic faith, but also con fute the contrary doctrine, which is allowed for
good and laudable in the Apology of the Church of England, to the intent the
Reader might judge, whether the Catholics or Protestauts do more oftallege,
more syncerely interpret, and more thoroughly believe the word of God. I fear
me he shall find nothing, beside the name of the gospel, to be among the
Protestants. But the true meaning and use thereof only to remain in yt
Catholic Church of Christ. Let the thing it self speak: I ask but an upright
and indifferent judge.

Neither let any man be now shamed to hear that his new chosen opinion, is a
great deal worse then his old faith was. For if he blushed not to forsake the
faith of the Catholic Church vowed at the font of Baptism, and to embrace a
truth lately espied (as he thought) in the gospel: Much less ought he to
account it any reproach, to read further in the same gospel, and there to
lern, his old profession, made at the time of his Christendom, to have been not
only the received belefe of all Christians, but also to have been grounded in
the true word of God, and practiced of the Apostles and their Successors from
the beginning.

The Chapiters of the second Book.
1. The Catholics require their cause to be uprightly tried by the holy
scriptures, which they have always studied and reverenced. 2. It is proved by
the word of God, that evil men receive the body of Christ in his supper. 3.
The ancient Fathers teach, that evil men receive truly the body of Christ.
4. What is the true deliverance of Christ's body and blood. 5. What it is which
nourishes us in ye supp of Christ. 6. The real presence is proved by ye union
which is consessed to be made in the supper of Christ. 7. That the Apology
speaking of the Lords supper, goes clean from the word of God. 8. That S.
Ambrose and S. Augustine taught more then two Sacraments. 9. That the supper of
our Lord is the chief Sacrament of all, but not acknouledged of the Apology
according to the word of God. 10. That the supper of our Lord is both the sign
of Christ's body, and also his true body, even as it is a Sacrament. 11. What
sign must chiefly be respected in ye Sacrament of Christ's supper, and what a
Sacrament is. 12. Which argument is more agreeable to the word of God: It is a
token of the body made by Christ, and therefore not the body: or else, therefore
the true body of Christ. 13. The words of Christ's supper are not figurative,
nor his token a common kind of token. 14. That the supper of our Lord is no
Sacrament at all, if these words of Christ, This is my body, and this is my
blood, be figurative. 15. There all presence of Christ's body is that, which
sets his death and life before us. 16. Our thanksgeuing and remembrance of
Christ's death, is altogether by the real presence of his body. 17. The true
resurrection of our bodies comes by eating that body of Christ, which is both
true, and truly in us. 18. Nothing is wrought in the supper of Christ,
according to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries. 19. The real presence of
Christ's flesh is proved by the express naming of flesh, blood, and body,
which are names of his humane nature. 20. It is a cold supper which the
Sacramentaries assign to Christ in comparison of his true supper. 21. By
eating we touch the body of Christ, as it may be touched under the form of
bread. 22. The Sacramentaries have neither understanding, nor faith, nor
spirit, nor devotion to receive Christ withal. 23. The real presence of
Christ's body is proved by the confession of the Apology. 24. The contrariety
of the apology is showed, and that the lifting up of our hearts to heaven, is
no good cause, why we should lift the body of Christ from the altar. 25. What
be gross imaginations concerning the supper of Christ. 26. What the first
Council of Nice has taught concerning Christ's supper. 27. That the Catholics
have the table of Egles; and the Sacramentaries the table of Iayes. 28. The
bread which is ye meat of the mind, and not of the belly, can be no wheaten
bread, but only the bread of life, which is the body of Christ. 29.
Sacramental eating differs from eating by faith alone, whereof only S.
Augustine speaks in the place alleged by the Apology.
The Catholics require their cause to be vprightlye tried by the holy
Scriptures, which they have always studied and reverenced.
THe Apology of the Church of England boasting it self, The first Chapter.
partly of the word of God, partly of the primative Church, requires that we
call the new gospellers no more by the name of heretykes, neither account our
selves hereafter Catholics, except we co^ince them out of the holy Scriptures,
as the old Catholic Fathers did use to convince the old stubburne heretics.

If we be heretics (says the Apology) and they (as they would The worcester des of
the Apology. Fol. 14. b vi. page 1.
gladly be called) be Catholics, why do they not, as they see the Fathers,
which were Catholic men, have done always? Why do they not convince and
master us by the di^e Scriptures? Why do they not call us again to be tried
by them? Why do they not lay before us, how we have gone away from Christ? From
the Prophets? From the Apostles? and from the holy Fathers? Why stick they to
do it? Why are they afraid of it? It is Gods cause, why doubt they to commit
it to the trial of Gods word?

To this proud brag of the Apology, thus I answer. To The answer.
the holy scriptures, and to the holy Fathers ye have appealed: By the holy
Scriptures and Fathers your doctrine shall be tried* The Catholics never feared
to be tried by the holy Scriptures, but they always feared to abuse them. For
we y^ know in deed what holy Scripture is, are so careful how to behave
ourselves reverently and semely about the same, that we lightly use not to
allege any part thereof to prove any rare and hard matter, unless we show
some ancient Fathers or Council to have expounded that piece of Scripture
before us, in such sort and sense, as we, by the witness thereof, desire to
persuade and confirm.

But otherwise, the Catholics never refused the trial of the ^oly Scriptures,
as y^ which they always both studied and loved. Do not the writings of S.
Beruard in manner wholly consist of S. Bernard. Petrus Lombarbus. Tho. de
Aquino. Lyranus Dionysius. Bur gensis. Caietanus.
continual testimonies taken out of holy Scripture? Did not Pet^ ^ombardus
lernedly comment the Psalms, the Epis^s of S. Paul, and other parcels of Gods
word* Did not S. Thomas of Aquin write so upon Job, Esaias, Ieremias, S.
Matthew, S. John, S. Paul, the Canonical epistles, and the Apocalips, that he
uses to expound one hard place by an other, as nighe as the thing will suffer?
Did not Nicolaus de Lyra, Dionysius the Carthusian, Paulus Burgensis, Caietanus
the Cardinal, with diverse other expound the whole Bible, or make notes upon
it? would they have don so, except they had been specially delighted with the
word of God? More over when heresies arose in our days, Did not Contarenus,
Sadoletus, Polus, ^osius, (...), Gropper, Tapper, Eckius, Pighius, Petrus and
Dominicus of Soto, Miranda, Uillegagnon, Ioannes a Louanio, with diverse other
co^ince those heresies by the holy Scriptures and Fathers? And yet as though we
brought nothing at all for defense of the Catholic faith out of the word of
God or primitive Church, so does the penner of this Apology, more to his
discredit then to ours, falsely and unhonestly report. But now to show the
better his falsehood and dishonestie, I thought good for my part to set soorth
such holy Scriptures, and such witnesses of the primitive Church, as plainly
confirm the Catholic belefe concerning the chief matter, which at this day is
in controuer^e betwixt us and them.

The chief question is about the blessed Sacrament of the altar. The (...)
question of our age.
Our belefe is, that after consecration duly made, the body and blood of
Christ is really present under the forms of bread and wine. The Apology
teaches other wise, as now it shall appear. But whereas there are many
questions in this behalf, as of the real presence, of transubstantiation, of
the sacrifice of the mass, of communion under one kind, of receiving alone, of
r^tion of the Sacrament, and of such other: I will begin (...) with the
matter of real presence, which i^ the ground of all the rest, not despayring
to have (at other times) more leisure to handle also the other questions.

So much therefore as in the Apology belongs to the real presence of
Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar, I will faithfully set
forth, and try the truth of that doctrine by Gods word, and by the holy
Fathers. Neither let any man be offended, if I seem to keep no good order, in
so much as I make no new method of mine own, but follow the order of the
Apology, which suddenly and abruptly thus intreth in to y^ question.

It is proved by the word of God, that evil men receive The second Chapter.
the body of Christ in his supper.
WE do expressly pronounce, that in the supper (unto The Apo logie. Fol. 24. c.
8. pa. 1. The answer.
such as believe) there is truly given the body and blood of the Lord.

This doctrine being called to y^ word of God, and to y^ judgment of holy
Fathers for his trial, will appear false and forged. Because the holy
scripture teaches the body and blood of Evil men (...) y^ body of Christ.
Tit. 1. Joan. 6. Leo. de passione Domini Sermo. 1 The body of Christ was
delivered to Judas.
Christ to be truly delivered not only to such as do believe, but even to wicked
men, who in their works have deuied their faith howsoever they keep it, or
give it over in heart. Judas one whole year before the last supper, was called a
de^ll, for so much as Christ knew that he would betray and sell him unto y^
Jews. Which it is not to be thought yt Judas would have don, if he had been of
the true belefe, that Christ was the Son of God, and God him self. And yet
the body and blood of Christ was truly delivered unto him. Who although he had
believed the divine power of Christ, yet he had not believed as we now take
believing, for the fulfilling and perfoorming of all that which belongs to the
Belief is taken ^tune for ye ^hole state of the gospel. Joan. 3. Galat. 5.
state and law of the new Testament. According as it is written, Vt omnis qui
credit in eum non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam. That every man which
believes in him, may not perish but have everlasting life. Such a belefe
worki^g by charity, Judas had not. And yet he received the body and blood of
Christ. For albeit some ancient Fathers thought, that Judas went out before
the supper of Christ, yet far the greater part teach otherwise. And Hilarious
in Matt.
it is much more agreeable to the word of God. How prove I that?

S. Mark writes that Christ came with the twelve. S. Matthew Matt. 26. Marc. 14
says, Christ sat down with the twelve, and whiles they were eating he gave
his body and blood. S. Luke agrees upon the very same number, and upon the
same gift. Among ye twelve Matt. 10. Marc. 3. Luc. 6. Joan. 6. Matt. 26.
Judas is rekoned in S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John. And whiles they
were at supper (which they beside the twelve?) Jesus took bread and blessed
(and gave thanks) and brake and gave to them. To which them I pray you, but
unto the twelve that came with him, and sat with him? to y^ twelve therefore
he gave and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And taking the chalice, he gave
thanks, and gave them saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of
the new Testament, Which is (or shall be) shed, ^or the remission of sins. Et
biberunt ex illo omnes. Marc. 14
And all drank of it. Which all, if not the twelve?

Judas therefore being one of the twelve, had the body and blood Judas drank y^
which the other Apostles did. Matt. 26.
of Christ delivered to him. For Christ said: Take, eat, and drink ye all of
this. And as they drank all, so is there no doubt, but they all did take and
eat: therefore Judas took that, which Christ delivered. But Christ witnessed
himself to deliver his own body, saying, Take, and eat, this is my body: And
drink ye all of this, for this is my blood: Therefore the body and blood of
Christ was delivered unto Judas. And since Judas did not believe: Judas did not
be leave well.
the body and blood of Christ was truly delivered to some such, as did not
believe.

We now call these defenders to be tried by the holy Scriptures. We make it
appear y^ they have severed them selves from Christ, from the Prophets, from
the Apostles, we stagger not, we flee not, it is Gods cause, we doubt not to
commit it to Gods word. And that no man may suspect we take the words of the
Apology to short, that we expound them to hardly, that we seek advantage upon
small occasion: I will bring forth their own words, which they have more
fully written in an other place of the same Apology concerning this matter.

We do affirm with the most ancient Fathers, that the body The (...) logie.
Fol. 90. m. ij. pagin. 2.
of Christ is eaten of none other, but of godly and of faithful men, and such
as are endued with the spirit of Christ. These fellows do teach, that the very
body of Christ may in very deed, and as they term it really, and
substantially, be eaten not only of wicked and unfaithful men, but also (it is
horrible to speak it) of mise and dogs.

Whether mise and dogs may in some sense eat the body of (...) answ^re.
Victor persecutionis vand. li. 1. cap. 3. Optatus lib. 6. de schisma. Donat.
Christ or no, it is not worth while to discuss, for so much as the Catholics
keep the body of Christ so warely, that neither mouse nor dog may come nigh
to it. But as y^ Arrians threw down the body and blood of Christ, and trod
thereon with their filthy feet, and as the Donatists brake the chalices,
which as Optatus says, carried the blood of Christ: so the Sacramentaries of
England have taken out of the holy pixes, and trodden under their profane fecte
the blessed body of Christ, they have sold, broken and abused to filthy
ministeries the chalices which have holden Christ's blood. If the wicked men be
able to pollute, to tread on, and to defile, (as much as lies in them) the
body of Christ, (...) men are worse the^ dogs, Heb. 10. The Fathers teach that
Judas did eat ye body of Christ. 1. Cypri. de coena Domini. 2. Hiero. Li. 2.
ad uers. Io. 3. Theodorit. in 3. Cor. 11 4. Chrysostom. Ho. deprodit 5.
Augustinus in Ioa. tractat. 50. 6. Leo in Ser. 1. de passione. 7. Sedul. in
Carm. Paschali. 8. Beda in Ioa. 6. 9. Theophil. in Matt. 26. 10. Euthi mius. 64
in Matt.
A think that to be worse, then if mise and dogs did eat it. Not that the
immortal body of Christ can take any harm at all. But yet a terrible
damnation is reserved to them, who being able to do it no hurt, show not
withstanding their insatiable malice against the highest mystery of our
redemption, tredding under foot the son of God, and counting the blood of
the new testament profane and unholy.

Leaving therefore this question, we return to the principal matter,
confessing our selves to teach, yt ye w^ked men ^ate in deed and really ye
body of Christ in our Lords supper. Thus we teach, not only because the greater
part of the Fathers have delivered so unto us, but also because thus we learned
of Christ. Who after bread taken having blessed, gave to Judas one of the
twelve bidding him take and eat, saying, This is my body. A worse man then
Judas, I think, is not lightly heard of. Which among other things causes us to
believe, that be the man never so evil, yet if he take and eat after
consecration and benediction, he takes and eats really and in deed the body
of Christ. Which unworthy receiving of so precious a thing, although it mislike
Christ (as all sin does) yet as he permits sin for the goodness which he
works by the occasion thereof: so he thought it less evil that evil men
should eat his body, then that his Sacraments by any our infidelity should be
made void, or that the gift of his grace should be uncertain.

For Christ in the institution of his Sacraments depends not upon our faith
or virtue, but upon his own mercy and truth. Wherefore when so ever by a
lawful Priest intending to execute the ministry commanded by Christ, it is
d^ely said over bread and wine, This is my body, and, This is my blood, Christ
would it so to be as the words declare, and who so ever receaueth that kind of
food, receaueth the body of Christ. whether well or ^uill, that depends upon
his worthy or unworthy eating.

If any man eat unworthily, then will Christ complain of him, as he
complained of Judas. For straight after the delivery of the blood, he said (as
S. Luke does witness, and S. Augustine Lucae. 22. S. Augustine. de verb. do.
sermon. 22. so expounds it.
has noted the same to pertain to the Sacrament) Veruntamen ecce manus
tradentis me, mecum est in mensa. But yet see, y^ hand of him y^ betrayeth me,
is with me on the table. As if he had said: You see what love I show to you by
giving mine own body to be eaten, mine own blood to be drunken in this my
last supper, this only greueth me, that a very devil does eat and drink
these preciouse gifts together with me and you. Except our new brethren will
say Judas to have been a good faithful man, I see not but they must confess,
that evil men may have the body and blood of Christ delivered to them.

Which thing S. Paul most evidently confirms of all evil 1. Cor. 1^
Christians, saying: Therefore who so ever shall eat this bread, or drink the
chalice of our Lord unworthily, he shallbe gilty of the body and blood of our
Lord. Does not he that speaks of un Unworthy eating presupposes (...) eating.
worthy eating, confess a true eating? True, I say, in nature of the thing
eaten, but unworthy concerning ye effect of grace ensewing. And yet do not
evil men, who receive the body of Christ unworthily, eat really the same body?

It is written in the book of the Machabees, that King Antiochus Machab. li.
2. ca. 5.
having slain four score thousand, within three days, entered also into ye
holy Temple. Et scelestis manibus sumens sancta vasa, contrectabat indigne and
contaminabat. And taking in his ^andling (...) the (...) handling.
wicked hands the holy vessels, he handled or touched them unworthily and
defiled them. I ask whether it does not follow: Antiochus touched unworthily
the holy vessels, therefore he tou ched the holy vessels? If that argument be
good, it is like to say; an evil man does eat the body of Christ unworthily,
therefore he does eat y^ body of Christ. Or did not Adam and (...) eat of the
^uit of the tree, because they did eat the same against the commandment
Gene. 3.
of God? For these defenders seem to make an unworthy eating no eating. Whereas
if it were no eating, it were An unworthy ea ^ng is an (...).
not an unworthy eating.

Perhaps they will say, S. Paul writes not yt sinners and wicked men eat ye
body of Christ unworthily, but yt they eat this bread unworthily. Uerily S.
Paul speaks not of bakers bread in y^ place. But having showed yt Christ
taking bread after thanks given, 1. Cor. 11
said: This is my body, straight he infers that, as often as this bread is
eaten, the death of Christ is showed, and therefore who so eats this bread
unworthily, he shall be gilty of the body of our Lord. This bread is one certain
kind of meat or food (for so Bread is tak^ in holy scripture for all y^
which is eaten.
bread in the holy scripture does signify) which food before was declared to
be the body of Christ.

And S. Paul does so warely describe this kind of bread, that he puts both
an article and a pronoune to it, saying. (...). As if it were said in English,
who so eats unworthily The grek article and y^ pronoun make plam the words of
S. Paul Matt. 26.
this certain kind of bread: For so the article (...) betokens ^ certain
bread spoken of before. But then follows besides (...) which most vehemently
restrains that certain bread to this kind of bread and food which Christ gave
at his last supper, saying, take and eat, this is my body. So that S. Paul by
(bread) means a thing eaten: By (the bread) a certain known thing eaten: By
(this bread) one certain kind of thing eaten, which alitle before was declared
to be the body of Christ. Who so ever eatet^ this kind of bread unworthily, he
is gilty of the body of Christ. Why so? Because he eats the body of Christ
unworthily. oth^wise by eating he can not be gilty of that body, which he does
not eat. But hereof we shall say more upon S. Paul.

Thus now I reason out of the holy gospel. That thing where of Christ said to
the twelve; take and eat, and drink, was taken This, can not be spoken of two
things.
and eaten and drunken of all y^ twelve, yt was one thing only co^ceruing y^
eating, and one thing only concerning y^ drinking, yt is to say, the body of
Christ, and y^ blood of Christ. For he said, This is my body. (This) truly is
but one thing, which Peter, John, James, and likewise August. in loan. tracta.
50 Peter and Judas to ke of one bread. Lucae. 22.
Judas did eat. If Judas did not eat this, he did eat nothing of Christ's
supper. But Christ co^plaineth at his own last supper, that his betrayer had
his hand on the table with him. He did therefore eat somewhat: And
consequently this one thing, which was only at Christ's supper given to be
eaten. But this (one thing) is my body (says Christ) therefore Judas did eat
Christ's body. This, can mean but one thing, which all the ^postles did take a
^ke


If that argument be not plain enough, take an other. Judas and John did eat
one thing. Each of them that food, whereof Christ said, This is my body, But
S. John, by the confession of the Apology did truly eat Christ's body,
because, I suppose, the Apology does take S. John for a faithful man:
Therefore Judas did truly eat the same body. As truly, as really, did Judas
eat the body of Christ, as S. John, but not so worthily. Or made Christ in his
supper two gifts? Did he deliver one thing Christ made but one gift of his
^ody.
to S. John, an other to Judas? What gospel teaches that? said not Christ,
This? Is not This the singular number? Is it not one certain thing? (This) was
delivered to all twelve, and to every of them. (This) was eaten of all twelve,
and of every of them. Therefore seeing (this) was to S. John the body of Christ,
(as the Apology confesses it was, as also to all others yt do believe)
likewise (this) was to Judas y^ body of Christ, and to all others that receive
at Christ's table. If Judas did not eat ye body, neither any o there co^ld eat
it.


What Iuglers be these, yt of one certain thing whereof Christ said, This is my
body, do make the true body to John, and not the true body to Judas? If they
say, that (this) does nor point to the body of Christ, but to Bakers bread:
then how does S. John by eating this, eat the body of Christ? S. John eats
that same thing which Christ delivers to Judas. But you say Christ delivers
Bakers bread, and none other thing to Judas: Therefore S. John though he believe
never so well, yet by eating (this) he does not eat any thing beside Bakers
bread, and so he does not eat the body of Christ.

More then Christ delivers him, he can not eat at the supper of our Lord.
But Christ giving (this) delivers bread to Judas, and not his body, as you
say. Then how can S. Ihon by eating (this) eat the body of Christ? You will
say: S. Ihon may eat it by faith. Yea Sir, but that is not the eating (this)
whereof Christ spoke. Here again I press you with y^ word of God.

The eating whereof Christ spoke in his supper, was an eating The eating in
Christ's supper was bodily.
by body. It was such an eating as agreed with the giving of Christ, and with
the taking of y^ Disciples. But Christ gave with his hands, they took with
their hands, and they did eat by the mean of their tongues, teeth, and
mouths. Therefore the eating and drinking whereof Christ said: take and eat
and drink, was an eating and drinking by body, albeit y^ end of that banquet
was to feed also y^ soul by that bodily food. The end, I say, intended on
Christ's part. But you can not out of that outward precept of eating and
drinking, deduce an eating and drinking of y^ body and blood an other way, that
is to wit, by faith and spirit only. If you can, it must needs follow, that
Judas did eat and drink the body and blood of Christ by faith and spirit also.

For as it is said: Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this: so Mat. 26*
Mar. 14.
it is said, Biberu^t ex illo omnes, they all drank of that. If the precept be
fulfilled: such as the precept is, such the fulfilling is. If Christ by saying,
drink, did will them to drink wine in their mouths, and his blood in spirit
only: Then they whom y^ gospel ^heweth to have drunken, did also drink wine
in their mouths and his blood in spirit. Or will you take in the history of
y^ same drink (...) all of this and they all drank must needs be said of one
thing.
supper Bibite otherwise, then biberunt? Is not drink ye, said of the same
thing, whereof it is said, They drank? Now then either Ihon drank not truly
(according to the precept given in the supper) the blood of Christ, or Judas
drank also the blood of Christ. For (this) whereof Christ said: drink ye all
of this, came as well to Judas, as to S. Ihon. Christ said to all: drink ye of
this, and they all drank of that.

Lo, that which S. Ihon drank, also Judas drank, concerning, I say, the
drinking of the supper. And the drinking of that thing, which is the substance
of the Sacrament of the altar, Ihon truly drank, as ye confess: Judas truly
drank, as the Gospel teaches. Wherefore Judas drank the same blood, that S.
Ihon Judas drank y^ samethig, but not to the same merit. 1. Cor. 10
did. Had Judas then as great merit by drinking, as S. Ihon? God forbid. But
Judas drank the same thing, as all ye children of Israel did eat one, and the
same Manna, but not to one and the same merit, as S. Paul has declared. The
merit rises not of drinking, but of worthy drinking. As Manna tasted better
to Sap. 16.
the good Israelites, then to the bad: so S. Ihon drank worthily, Judas
unworthily. S. Ihon had by drinking life everlasting, Augusti. tractat. 50. in
Io. Peter took to life, Judas to death.
Judas had by drinking damnation. S. Ihon drank by body and by faith working
by charity. Judas drank by body alone, with a maliciouse intent to betraye
Christ.

The good faith of S. Ihon was not the thing, whereby he drank the blood
according to the outward precept of Christ in his last supper, but it was the
thing whereby and wherewith he Faith was nessa ry not to y^ drinking but to the
worthy drinking.
worthily drank the blood. Did not then Christ will and command his Disciples
to come worthily to his supper? Yeas forsooth, he not only willed them to come
worthily, but for his part he offered them grace to come worthily. He not only
for his part was ready to ^euse their souls, but in token thereof washed also
Joan. 13.
their bodies: Saying, they were all clean except one, which was Iuda^.

The preparing to have a good faith, to have a good charity, to 1. Cor. 11
examine him self, goes before the supper: eating by faith and Eating by
faith is a (...) to worthy (...) of y^ sacramt^.
spirit is a thing required to come worthily to the supper. But when we once
come thither, we all eat one thing, one meat, one food, one body, whether we
come worthily or unworthily, even as all that are sprinkled with water in the
name of the Trinity, are baptized in one, and the same Sacrament of baptim,
whether It is one bap^e to good and evil.
they be good men as Cornelius was, or ^uill men as Simon Magus was.

For Simon Magus was baptized of Philip y^ deacon. But as it may appear by yt
is told in the scriptures, and gathered by the Acto. 2. Simon Magus was bapti
^ed as well as Cornelius, but not so meritoriously Ephesians. 4.
Break and Latin Fathers, he came not worthily to that Sacrament, but
faynedly, as one that hoped to make gain of his faith. And yet he had that
baptism, which (as S. Paul says) is but one. But he had not the virtue of
that one baptism, which is the remission of sins.

I trust by this time the defenders need not boast of their doctrine, neither
vpbraid us of ours, because they teach, that only Tit. 3. Acto. 2*
good men have y^ body of Christ delivered to them. And we teach that evil men
also eat really the true body of Christ. We have, I suppose, declared the word
of God to stand in our side. and seeing their doctrine must be tried by the word
of God, I tell them it is tried and sound to be false and forged, except they
can prove Judas to have been an honest man. For surely that he received the
body of Christ, it is the mind of S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Chryso^om, S.
Augustine, S. Leo, S. Bid, Theodoritus, Sedulius, (...), Euthymius. yea it is
so far the common opinion of all men, that upon that example this* conclusion
is grounded, that we can not remove (...) evil man from the commu C. Si
Sacerd. de off. Iudi. ordinar. Chryso. hom. 83. in Mat.
nion, excepthy order of law we may convince him, Quia nec Christus Iudam a
communione remouit: Because Christ did not remove Judas from communion.

Howbeit we stand not in this doctrine upon the person of Judas only, but also
upon the general doctrine of S. Paul, who teaches every evil man to be
gilty of the body of Christ, for eating that bread unworthily.

The ancient Fathers teach, that evil men receive The third chapter.
truly the body of Christ.
YEa but (say they) we do affirm with the most ancient The Apo logie.
Fathers, that the body of Christ is eaten of none other, but of Godly and
faithful men.

Seeing the holy scriptures are proved to stand on our The ans^e.
side, it were great marvel if the ancient Fathers did make for you. They
are not wont to be contrary to the word of God. But what a misery is this,
what a seducing of the people? The word of God is pretended, the ancient
Fathers be named, and not one syllable brought forth out of either both,
concerning this question. But as before we brought holy scriptures, so let us
now allege the ancient Fathers.

Origin says: Those who come to the Eucharist without examining Origines in
Psalm. 37. Hom. 2.
and cleansing them selves, are like to men sick of an ague, who presuming to
eat sanorum cibos the meats of whole men, do hurt them selves. Whereby we
may perceive, he judges the meat of Christ's supper, which is pro^ded only
for whole men, yet to be truly, but not profitab^y, eaten of them, who are
burdened with great sins.

Basile asks, what a man shall say of him, qui otiose et inutiliter Basil. de
Bapt. (...)* (...) ca. vlt.
edere audet corpus, et bibere sanguinem Domini nostri Jesus Christi? Who dares
in vain and unprofitably eat the body and drink the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ? If a man eat in vain and to his disprofit, yet he eats in deed, and
as S. Basile says, he eats the body of Christ. Chrysostom. in Joan. Ho. 45.


Chrysostom writes thus: If those which spotte the Kings purple be no less
punished, then those that cut it, what wonder is it, if those who take the
body of Christ with an unclean conscience, have the same punishment which they
have, who pierced him with nails? Behold as it is one purple still, whether it
be spotted or cut, so is it the same body still, whether it be pierced with
nails (as the Jews haudled it) or taken with an unclean conscience, as evil
Christians order it.

S. Cyprian in manner of purpose answers those objections Cyprianus de Coena
Domini.
which might move any man to doubt, how evil men may and do receive so good a
thing, as Christ's own body is. The Sacraments (says he) for their part can
not be without their proper virtue. Neither does Gods majesty by any means
absent it self from the mysteries. But albeit the Sacraments permit them
Evil me^ receive y^ Sacraments but not the holiness of them.
selves to be taken or touched of unworthy men, yet those men can not be
partakers of the spirit, whose infidelity or unworthiness withstandeth such
holiness.

If, by the mind of S. Ciprian, the Sacraments can not lack their own proper
virtue, come good men or evil to them, one substance is always given. but the
evil can not receive ye spirit or grace thereof, because they are unworthy of
such a benefit.

S. Hierome: Opponis mihi Gomor Mannae vnam mensuram: Et nos Christi corpus
aequaliter accipimus. Thou laiest unto me the one measure of Manna called
Gomor, and we take the body of Christ equally. One as well takes it as an
other, but as it there follows: Pro accipientiu^ meritis diuersum fit, quod
vnum est. According to the merits of them that receive, that which is one, is
made diverse. The Sacrament is one in it self, yet to one it is made y^ cause
of goodness when he takes it worthily, to an other the cause of evil, when he
takes it unworthily. There also S. Hierome says, that Judas drank of the
same cup, whereof the other Apostles drank, but yet that he was not of the
same merit.

S. Augustine says: Tolerat ipse Dominus Iudam, Diabolu^, in Epist. 162.
furem, and venditorem suum sinit accipere inter innocents Discipulos, quod
norunt fideles, precium nostrum. Our Lord him self bears with Judas, he
su^th a devil, a thief, and the seller of him self to receive among the
innocent Disciples, our price, Judas did eat our price, which is y^ real body
of Christ.
which the faithful know. If any thing, besides yt body of Christ, may be our
price, then S. Augustine might mean that evil men receive an other thing. But
if our price be undoubtedly that body of Christ which by death redeemed us,
Judas receiving our price received the very true body and substance of Christ.

In an other place he writes: Eundem cibu^ sanctu^ alios manducare Contra
Crescor. li. (...). ca. 25
digne, alios indigne. Some eat worthily, some unworthily the same holy meat.
Behold the meat is the same, Whether the evil receive it or the good. And
because the Apology (though it name no Father at all) yet it may have some
pretense of certain words which are in S Augustine, it is to be weighed
diligently, Christ has both a natural, and a mystical body.
that Christ has as well a mystical body, as a true natural body. The
mystical body of Christ, are his members which are incorporated by grace, and
joined to him being their head. This incorporation is wrought by the grace of
baptism in one degr^, and finis^ed by the Sacrament of the altar in a higher
degree, whereof we shall speak hereafter more at large. The natural body of
Christis that, which he took of the virgin and gave to death for us. Now
Christ in his last supper gave y^ substance of his natural body to be ^aten of
his disciples, to the intent they should be made one mystical body, even by
eating his flesh and blood.

Seeing then the natural body of Christ is given to th^end we may be nerer
knitte in the mystical body, (according as S. Paul says, The bread which we
break is the communicating of our 1. Cor, 10
Lords body, because we being many, are one bread, one body, all that partake
of one bread: Seeing I say, we communicate the natural body, to be made a
mystical body in a greater unity then we had in baptism, any man of
discretion may perceive, that in some Evil men receive not ye vnio^ which is in
ye mystical body. August. ^ Joan. tra ctat. 26.
sense evil men receive not the thing or the effect of the body of Christ,
understanding by the effect of body, the unity of the mysti call body, the
obteining whereof is the end of the eating. Which unity S. Augustine sometime
calls Rem ipsam: The thing it self, that is to say, the last effect and
benefit which arises to us by worthy eating of the Sacrament of the altar.

After which sort S. Augustine says, evil men are not to be said August. de
ciuita te Dei. li. 21. c. 25
to eat the body of Christ, adding thereunto this reason, Quonia^ nec in
membris computandi sunt Christi: Because they are not to be rekoned among the
members of Christ. So that evil men eat the substance of the natural body,
but not the thing for which yt substance was given, which is the unite of the
body mystical, because they eat not worthily. Whereas worthy eating only
makes them to obtain the unity of the mystical body, which is to abide in
Christ, and to have Christ abiding in them. Therefore Joan. 6.
S. Augustine him self says, Non quocunque modo quisquam De verb. Domini.
Sermon. 22.
manducauerit carnem Christi, and biberit sanguinem Christi, manet in Christo,
and in illo Christus, sed certo quodam modo. Not how so ever a man eats the
flesh of Christ, and drinks ye blood of Christ, he abides in Christ, and
Christ in him, but by a certain kind of way. As though S. Augustine said: Every
way ye flesh and blood of Christ is received in the supper of our Lord, But
not every way it is so received, that we may dwell in Christ, and Christ in us.

S. Bregorse says by evil men: Salutis fructu^ non percipiunt Grego. in prim.
reg. li. 2. Cap. 1.
in comestione salutaris hostiae. They receive not y^ fruit of salvation in y^
eating of y^ healthful sacrifice. They eat y^ healthful sacrifice, which
surely is nothing else but ye natural body of Christ, but the fruit they
receive not, as many men take an healthful medicine, but because their bodies
be evil affected, it proves not healthful to them. Beda in Lucae. ca. 22.


S. Bid, co^pareth him to Judas, who with his sinful members presumes to
violate, Illud inestimabile and inuiolabile Domini corpus, That inestimable and
inviolable body of our Lord. And how could he violate it with his members, if
with no part Arnobius. 1. Cor. 11
of his body he touched it? I omit Arnobius upon yt Psalm. 74. S. Ambrose,
Theodorite, Decumenius, Haimo, Theophilact, Anselme upon S. Paul, who agree
with the rest of the Fathers Every Sacrament has a substance and an ^ffect.
Evil men receive ye substance of Christ's body, but; ^ not y^ effect. What com
parisons y^ Fathers use in showing, y^ good and evil (...) re ceaue one (...)
in ye Sacraments.
that there is in every mystery the substance of the Sacrament and the effect
thereof. As well the evil as the good receive the substance, which (in our
Lords supper) is the body and blood of Christ. But only ye good receive
the effect, Which is ye grace of spiritual nourishment to life everlasting, and
ye union with Christ.

Now as we have showed by the holy Scriptures, even so have we proved out of ye
holy Fathers, that evil men rec^aue the body and blood of Christ as really, as
the purple is one still whether it be spotted or cut: as really, as one meat
is eaten of some to their hurt, of others to their health: as really, as good
and evil Jews had all one measure of Manna, but not all one swetenes in ye
^ast thereof: as really as Judas did kiss traitorously the same body of Christ
which him self (as all evil men) traitorously received at Christ's supper. If
now the Apology has neither Scriptures nor Fathers, it may leave those
boasting vpbraidinges, as though the Catholics fled ye tria^ of b^th
Scriptures and Fathers. It is Gods cause, we have committed it to Gods word.
The Fathers when they agree in any one article, are known to have y^ spirit
of Christ, and they bear witness that we have rightly expounded the holy
scriptures. He that lists to see more of the same argument, (...) read that
which I have written upon yt saying of S. Paul: He that eats this bread
unworthily, shall be gilty of the body and blood of our Lord.

What is the true deliverance of Christ's body The fourth Chapter.
and blood.
IN the supper there is truly delivered ye body and blood of the The Apo logie.
Fol. 24.
Lord, the flesh of the son of God quickening our souls, The food of
immortality, grace, truth, life.

In these words no evil doctrine is contained, but all sound The answer.
and Catholic. In so much a man would wonder, to what purpose these things are
now brought, being extreme contrary to y^ which the Caluinists defend, saing,
they would seem to speak as the holy scriptures and primitive Church has
spoken. Seeing therefore these words contain true doctrine, I will reason
briefly out of them, against their opinion that wrote them. You say, The body
and blood of the Lord is truly delivered in the su^per. If it be so, it is
truly present. And seeing none other thing can be warrauted The Apo logie by his
own confession defends the real presence.
to have been delivered in the supper, beside that which Christ gave with his
own hands, which seemed bread, whereof he said: This is my body, and beside that
which seemed wine, where of he said: This is my blood, by the doctrine of the
Apology it will follow, that Chris^es body was delivered truly under that,
which seemed bread, and his blood was delivered truly under that which seemed
wine.

Or tell me: Can (...) any man prove out of the word of God, that any other
thing was delivered in the supper of Christ, beside two kinds, the one being
bread, until Christ had said: This is my body, The other being the cup of
wine, until Christ had said: This is my blood? Is there mention made of any
other thing truly exhibited, offered, or delivered to the Apostles? Or does the
supper of Christ consist of four kinds? of bread and body, of wine and blood?
In what gospel read we of bread and wine delivered? Bread and wine were
taken, but body and blood were Matt. 26.
only delivered. For Christ said: Take, this is my body. Drink, this is my
blood. This, can be but one thing. Therefore Christ delivering that, whereof he
said: This and this, delivered at each time but one thing, in all but two
things. He delivered his body and blood as him self said, and you co^fes^e he
truly delivered them, whereupon I conclude, that he delivered neither bread nor
wine, and consequently that the bread taken was changed in to ye body of
Christ, and the wine was changed into his blood.

For seeing Christ took both bread and wine, and delivered truly his body and
blood, and yet delivered but one thing at each time, and that also keeping the
form of bread and wine, it must needs be granted, that the substance of bread
and wine which was truly taken, and not truly delivered (because an other thing
was truly delivered) was in the mean time truly changed into that body and
blood, which was truly delivered. O masters, truth is strong, and by the
adversaries own weapon gets the victory.

Again, remember that the name of body and the name of blood A work belonging
(...) ye (...) of Christ must have a truth ac cording to the manhod. The (...)
heresic.
are names belonging to the manhod of Christ, to which manhod when you adioyne
any act or work which may truly be verisied thereof, it must be meant according
to that truth, which properly belongs to the nature of the manhod. When we
say, Christ was truly scurged, nailed to the Cross, bound, and buried, it is
not here to be understood, that these things were don in figure, in spirit,
in faith: But that his body suffered, according to the f^esh, all these things.
And he that says the contrary is an (...) which heresy would the manhod of
Christ to be changed into his divine nature.

If then the body and blood of Christ be truly d^red, you must not vuderstand a
figure only to be d^red, neither a spiritual d^ only. For if the body of Christ
be delivered truly, and yet by spirit only: then the truth of his body is by
these men brought unto the truth of a spirit, and the flesh of Christ has losi
his true nature and prop^.

Mark well the reason: when the body of Christ is truly delivered, it is
delivered according to the truth of his own nature. The nature of a body is to
be d^d after some bodily manner, verily by hands, or by some other corporail
action. And they to The deli^ of a corporal t^ing must have some ^t of the
body.
whom it is del^red, likewise receive it by some part or sense of their body.
For so requires the true nature of flesh and blood, not immediately to be given
to the spirit and soul, but to come to it by mean of the body. Whereof it is
inferred, that the body and blood of Christ, which are truly delivered in the
supper, are bodily delivered and bodily received. But from the body of Christ
who made the d^ance unto the bodies of the Apo^es, who received the things
delivered, none other thing can ^syde that which seemed bread and wine:
therefore under that foormes the body and blood of Christ were truly cont^ined,
and by y^ means truly delivered, and truly received.

Thirdly when you say, the ^sh of God quickens our souls, you should have
said also, that it quickens our bodies, as in other places I have proved out
of the sixth of S. (...), an^ out of S. Jreneus, ^tullian, Cyrillus, and other
ancient Fathers.

what it is which nourishes us in the supper of The fifth Chapter.
Christ*
ANd that the same supper is the co^ion of the body The (...). Fol. 24.
and blood of Christ, by the partaking whereof we are q^ned, we are (...) and
sed (...).

That which (...) and ^th can not be (...) from The ^swere.
them whom it nourishes, and when it is cut of their reach, they can not have
it before it be given. If then we have in (...) y^ body (...) is by (...) r^y
pre^.
and blood of Christ, we received it by his gift at his supper. And surely it
was the thing whereof he said: Eat, and whereof he said, Drink. Other food
was not delivered in Christ's supper, be^ his body and blood: Nor possibly can
we have the food of his supper at any other man's table, then at his.

Well. If we be nourished by the meat which Christ gave us Christ gave with
(...) h^s y^ which nour^sheth.
when he said: Eat, and yet we be nourished by his body and blood: undoubtedly
he said: Eat, of that which he gave with his hands, and which the Apostles
took into their mouths, and that was bread to see unto, therefore under that
^orme of bread we take the nourishment whereby we are sed to immortality.
Otherwise, what warrant have we to come by this food, which is clean out of
our reach, until God give it saying, Eat, this is my body: Drink, this is my
blood? By those words o^ ^ate and one liquour only is given, which also ^deth
us to immortality, as y^ Apology co^h. But none other food that man may
receive bodily, can feed us to immortality, beside the real substance of
Christ. therefore that substance is received, and nourishes us when Christ
said: Eat, this is my body: Drink, this is my blood.

The union, which is made by eating Christ's The sixth (...).
real flesh, must n^s be a natural union, ^ore it be a mystical.
ANd by the which we are coupled, we are united, and grafted The Apo (...).
into the body of Christ, that we might ^well in hin^, and he in us.

Christ's ^sh is delivered to the end we should be nourished therewith. And the
end of nourishing is to make one thing of y^ The aun^.
which is eaten, and of him that eats it. The flesh delivered to nourishe us,
is not any mystical flesh, but only the natural flesh of Christ, neither can
it be any other food. For none other thing that co^th in at the mouth of man,
is able to seed him to immortality, beside the substance of Christ's flesh and
blood.

If then it be the natural flesh which feeds, and the union do come by
seeding: the union must of neces^ty be made with the natural flesh of Christ.
And because that is such a flesh, as Joan. 1.
being united to God, has power to give life and ^mortality: out of the
natural union which is made with it by eating, an other spiritual and mystical
union flows, which makes all the members of Christ to be one mystical body.

So that we have now fi^e degrees. First, the slesh of Christ is The de^s o^ re
^ing Christ in (...) supper.
delivered to us in his supper. Next, we eat the same flesh. Thirdly, we are
fed by it, if we eat it worthily. Fourthly, of y^ feeding conuneth a real and
natural union and joining with Christ's flesh, as S. Hilarie teaches, and
other ancient Fathers. Of that natural union proceeds a spiritual union
with Hilarious de trinit. li. 8.
the whole body of the Church. Because being made one with Christ's flesh, we
are united thereby to his spirit and Godhead, living for him, as he ^th for his
Father: whereof I will speak Joan. 6
more hereafter.

The Apology acknowledges a joining with Christ by eating. But it surely
means the last spiritual joining, which arises of the other natural union.
Whereas that spiritual joining does ^ude the other natural, as every effect
presupposes the necessary cause thereof. We are coupled to Christ by eating
that flesh of his, which he delivers to us. But Christ delivers it not only
spiritually, but also with his hands, saying: Take, eat, this is Math 26
my body. As therefore y^ delivery is real and not only spiritual, so is the
eating real, and the coupling real. I have proved this thing in other places
following. Here it is (...) to say this much against the bare words of the
Apology.

That the Apology speaking of the Lords supper, The seven th chapter
goes clean from the word of God.
WE do acknowledge the Eucharist or the Lords supper The Apo log^.
to be a Sacrament, y^ is to say, an (...) of the body and blood of Christ.

Besides the former va^t of the word of God already brought The answer.
forth to the reproach of the Catholics, also the Apology a^tle before these
words witnessed, that y^ auctours and ab^tours thereof gave thanks to God for
the light of the Gospel raised to them, The ^or des of the Aplogie.
which they might always have before their eyes, as a most certain rule, to
which all doctrine of y^ Church ought to be called for his trial. And within
less than (...) lines after, the same Apology comes to deny our Lords
supper, calling it a Sacrament, that is to say, an (...) token of the body and
blood of Christ. The scrip (...) call not y^ supper of (...) a (...). Joan. 6.
The na^ of (...)


What m^ers? Hau^ you in the holy Scriptures, that the supper of our Lord is a
Sacrament or a sign of y^ body and blood of Christ? From the beginning of
(...) to the later end of tho ^ocalips, you find ^t our Lords supper so
called. Christ in S. (...) calls it y^ m^e which (...) not, but (...) into
l^e (...). He says, y^ bread which he will (...), (...) which he will (...)
^or y^ ^se of y^ world. He (...) it the (...) and the blood of the son of
man, meat in deed, and drink in deed, his flesh and his blood, the eating of
him, the bread which who so eats shall live for ever. In S. Matthew, and in S.
Mark, Matt 26. Marc. 14 Lucae. 22. 1. Cor, 10
his body and his blood of the new testament. In S. Luke, his body which is
given for us, and the chalice which is the new testament in his blood, which
is shed for us. In S. Paul, ye bread which we break is the communicating of
our Lords body, the chalice of blessing which we bless, which is the
communicating (or partaking) of Christ's blood; the one bread, y^ table of our
Lord, and the chalice of our Lord, the body which is broken for us, the chalice
which is the new Testament of his blood, the eating of 1. Cor. 11
this bread, and drinking of this chalice.

So many names are given in so many places of holy scripture to this blessed
Sacrament, and it being no where called a sign or token, yet the Apology
which thanketh God for y^ holy scriptures, and will try all doctrine by them,
in the chief question of The Apo logie goes quite from the scriptures
our age, goes quite from all holy scriptures and says, the Eucharist or the
Lords supper is an evident token of the body and blood of Christ.

What is the matter that in words you make so much of holy scripture, and in
deed so little? What Apostle, what Evangelist, what Prophet, or Patriarch
taught our Lords supper to be a sign or token?

S. Paul threateneth damnation to him, who unworthily eats 1. Cor. 11.
it, and he calls unworthy eating, not only the contempt thereof or lack of
faith, but even the omitting to prove or examine What unworthy ea ting to in S.
Paul
him self, before he eat our Lords body. And that because he makes no
difference betwixt it and common meats. And come you with a new doctrine,
affirming yt we receive not our Lords body into our bodies, but an evident
sign and token thereof?

you (...) no authority, no rule, no trial of matters belonging to faith, but
only the holy Scriptures. and immediately ye break The Apo logie break^th (...)
own rule.
your own rule, in so much as the holy scriptures call the supper of our Lord,
his body and blood, and you teach it to be an evident token of his body and
blood. If you keep not your own rule, whom can you bind to keep the ^aine?

Ye will ask me perhaps, whether the Lords supper be not a Sacrament? if a
Sacrament, then also a sign and token. I answer, ye that prescribe rules of
believing to the world, ye that will have all things judged and proved by yt
touchestone of Gods word, ye that for pretense of following the gospel, have
stirred up so great strife through all Christendom, must not talk with us
with if, with and, with conditions and peraduentures. But ye must bring forth
the word of God for that ye say.

Although the supper of our Lord were never so much a Sacrament, The s^pper of
our Lord to ^res is no ^acramet.
surely to you it were none, because ye cannot prove out of the word of God,
where it is so named.

To us it is both a Sacrament and a sacrifice. A Sacrament, because we are so
taught by tradiction from the Apostles: A sacrifice because Malachie the
prophet in ye person of God expressly says In omni loco sacrificatur and
offertur nomini meo oblatio munda* Malac. 1.
quia magnum est nomen meum in ge^tibus. In every place a clean oblation is
sacrificed and offered to mie name, because my name is The supper of Christ is
a ^acrifice.
great among the gentiles. There is absolutely no pure and clean oblation
besides the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, which was offered to death
not in every place, but without the gate of Jerusalem alone, and the same is
at this day vnbloodily offered Heb. 13.
in the mass in every place, where so ever among the gentiles the name of God
is (...) called upon.

Thus both we and you may prove the ^upper of our Lord to be a sacrifice, but
that it is a (...)* we can prove, because our forefathers delivered such a
doctrine to us: You can not It is a tradition unwritten that our Lords su^per is
a Sacrament. The Apo logie. Fol. 24. ^a. 8. pa. 1
prove the same, seeing you will not be bound to follow unwritten traditions.

If you flee to the Church for naming it a Sacrament, the church has seven
Sacraments. But ye in this present Apology acknowledge only two, properly to
be rekoned under y^ name. for so many (say you) do we find delivered and
sanctified by Christ, and allowed of the old fathers Ambrose and Augustine.
Concerning the delivery of Sacraments by Christ, ye might have found in the
word of God Confirmation. Actor. 8. Penance, Ioa^. 20. Extreme unction, Jacob.
5. Priesthod. Luke 22. Matrimony, Ephesians. 5. And not only Baptim and the
Eucharist. But what kind of talk is this, to say, that S. Ambrose and S.
Augustine allow yt works of Christ? was not the delivery and consecration of
Christ of suffic^ent authority, except Ambrose and Augustine had approved it? I
tho^ght Ambrose and Augustine should have been allowed by the scripture, and
not the scripture by them.

I stand with you upon the authority of the word of God. prove Nor baptim nor
y^ supper is called a sacrament in y^ scriptures.
me thence, that these two are Sacraments alone, yea prove, that they are so
named at all. what gospel calls baptism a Sacrament? What holy write names
the supper of our Lord a Sacrament? dare you give these things a name, which is
not in the word of God? What warrant have you for that deed? you will say,
Ambrose and Augustine call them so. I reply, Peter and Paul do not call them
so. At other times and with other men, I will stay upon the authority of
Ambrose and Augustine', whom as I ought to do, I reverence for men of excellent
virtue and learning. But yet they were men (as you are wont to say) they might
err, they might be deceived.

At this time we have appealed chiefly to y^ holy scriptures, and out of them
we must ground all our talk, and next unto them, we will hear what the
Fathers say.

I say, that neither the old testament, nor the new calls the supper of our
lord, a Sacrament. Therefore the Apology that so calls it, goes from the
assurance of the word of God, to the good and ^audable inventions and
traditions of me^, which them seiues (...), when they lilte.

And yet the said Apology so calls it a Sacrament, that upon The worcester de
Sacrament is y^ ground o^ (...) y^ ^ro testars ^o (...) in our Lords supper.
that only word the auctors thereof ground all their doctrine. Thence it has
to be a sign, to be a token, to be a badge, a seal, a pattern, a counterpa^e.
Thence all the figurative doctrine ryseth. Thence it comes, that the real
body and blood of Christ is denied to be under the forms of bread and wine.

Shall now so much as Christ has plainly spoken of his body and blood, so
much as his Apostles and disciples have preached and written in that behalf,
shall now all this be overthrown The Apo logie flees from y^ written wor^ to
ye (...).
by an unwritten verity? Are these the men o^ God who f^ee from S. Matthew, S.
Mark, S. Luke, S. John, S. Paul, to Augustine and Ambrose? Will the Apology
allow that deed? If it will not, why has it done so it self?

If none but prophets and Apostles had written, where had they found two
Sacraments? where had they readen, that the supper of our Lord is a sign and
token? They make much a do about the word of God, till they have gotten credit
among the ignorant, and then they quite lead the^ from all the word of God. To
you I speak, good Christen readers, yt have the true love of the word of God
(...) in your hearts, to you I speak. give not over S. Ma^hew, S. John, S.
Paul, for Ambro^e and Augus^ine. (...) not over Christ, who is God and man, to
have the opinion of what s^ ever ^ottor and Father in causes of belefe. Some
men in comparison of others be of great authority. But in comparison o^ God,
all men be nothing at all.

God says, this is my body. Now what so ever man or angel No man is to be
heard who says: This is not the body of Christ. Gal. 5. Ephe 5.
from heaven tell you, this is not the body of Christ but only a figure of it,
believe him not, but let him be ^cursed to you. Shall we not be well occupied, if
we leave y^ plain word of God and come to see whether Ambrose and Augustine
teach two Sacraments, or mo then twain? S. Paul teaches Matrimony to be a
Sacrament. And yet shall we go from him to Ambrose and Augustine, to see
whether it be one or no?

Was ever such a vile practice heard of, as to brag of scriptures, to boast of
holy write, to cry upon us for coming to the word of God, and now that we
are come thither, to call us from all Prophets and Apostles, yea from Christ
him self, to Ambrose and The Apo logi^ brin g^th v^ from y^ holy Scripture to
the Fathers.
Augustine? Is this the way to the holy scriptures? Can this fault be excused?
Can this hypocrisy be tolerated?

To win to you the itching ears of the inconstant multitude, to get you ye
applause of licencious libertines in y^ pulpit, you call to y^ word of God, and
when you have gotten them within your nets, you teach them out of Ambrose and
Augustine. Yea, would God ye did so at the least. And although it be alitle out
of mie way, (if to detect falshod can ever be out of a man's way) yet what if
now we prove that ye deceive them also, by fathering that upon Ambrose and
Augustine, which they never wrote (...) thought?

That S. Ambrose and S. Augustine taught more The eigth chapter.
then two Sacraments.
Do they teach but two Sacraments only? What if they taught two especially,
yet if they do not deny the other, your proof is none. But let us see. Do they
approve no more then twain? What if besides these twain which you have named,
I bring within the compass of one chapter. two more out of S. Augustine as
plainly named of him, as possibly can be? Where then will this Apology re^t?

Bonum igitur nuptiarum per omnes gentes atque omnes homines Aug. d^ bono co^
iugal. ca. 24.
in causa generandi est, and in fide castitatis. quod autem ad populum Dei
pertinet, etiam in sancti tate Sacramenti, and caet. The good (says S.
Augustine) which rises of marriage through all nations, and all men, consists
in y^ cause of begetting (children) and in the faith of chastity. And in so
much as appertains to y^ Marriage among Christians is a Sacrament.
people of God, it consists also in the holiness of the Sacrament, through
which it is unlawful (yea though divorce come between) to marie an other,
whiles her husband lives, not so much as for the very cause of bringing forth
of children, which though alone it be the cause why marriages are made, yet the
band of marriage is not loosed (unless the husband die) albeit y^ thing follow
not, for which the marriage is made. Much like, as if to bring the people
Priesth^ is a Sacrament.
together, some of the clergy should be ordered (or consecrated with holy
orders) for although the meeting of the people do not insewe, yet Sacramentum
ordinationis, the Sacrament of giving orders abides, in them that be ordered.
And if for any fault The substance of y^ Sacrament tarieth in an e^ill priest
removed from his office.
any man be removed from the office, he shall not lack the Sacrament of our
Lord, which is once put upon him, although it remain to his damnation.

In these words S. Augustine has showed, that among Christian men there are
two other Sacraments, of Priesthod and of Matrimony, besides baptism and the
Eucharist. And each of them so great and so strong, that they can not be
loosed and taken away but only by death of the party, although the chief
cause ^asse why the Sacrament was given.

I could bring if need were an other notable place out of S. Augu. eo^ tra Don.
li. 5. c. 20 Ambros. lib. 1. de Paenit. cap. 7.
Augustine, where he names together, the water of baptim, oil, the Eucharist,
and the imposition of hands.

S. Ambrose like wise confesses more Sacraments then Baptim and the Eucharist:
Cur baptizatis, si per hominem peccata dimitti non licet? In baptismo vtique
remissio peccatorum omniu^ est. Quid interest vtrum per paenitentiam, an per
lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum sacerdotes vendicent? Vnum in vtroque mysterium
est. Sed dices, quia in lauacro operatur mysteriorum gratia. Quid in
paenitentia? Nonne Dei nomen operatur? Why art thou baptized if it be not
lawful sins to be forgeuen by man? Truly in Baptim there is forgiveness of
all sins. What skilleth it whether Priests challenge this right (of forgeuing
sins) to be given them by penance, or by baptim? The mystery or Sacrament is
one in both. But thou will say: that in Baptim the grace o^ y^ mysteries
works. What in Penance? does not the name of God work? Here is the same
virtue and name of a mystery or Sacra meant given to Penance, which is given to
Baptim. Whereby S. Ambrose taught as well that there was a Sacrament of Penance,
as the Apology grants one of Baptim.

But to stand about the proof of all the seven Sacraments it Seven Sa cram^ts
were pro^ (...) y^ Greeks and Latins in y^ Counsel of F^ore^ce
needs not, since in that most notable general Council gathered both of
Greeks and Latins at Florence, all the seven Sacraments were according to the
word of God confessed, proved, declared and expounded, as in the end thereof
it may appear. But neither S. Ambrose, nor S. Augustine had the charge
committed to them, to rekon up how many Sacraments there are.

I brought these few places out of S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose to show as it
were to the eyes of all them that will not wilfully blind them selves, how
these defenders cry out upon the word of God, until they have with sweet
words won ^anour Heretics e^eme nei there scriptures nor Fathe^s.
among the miserable number ^f those unstable me^, that always harken for
news. But when they have them fast, then is the word of God clean forgotten,
and in siede of it, Ambrose and Augusti^e are captiously and falsely alleged.
For the truth is, they that set naught by the word of God, can not long es^me
Ambrose and Augustine, who with all their hearts embraced the word of God, and
expounded the same according to the ancient tradition of holy Church.

To what end then does this Apology run? Truly to set The Apo logie
pretends scriptures til it may set up an idol of his own.
up an Idol of their own making, in place of the word of God. To set up, I
say, a fantastical religion of their own devising. But if they should cry to
the people: Come, come, bow down to the Idol that we have devised for you:
the people would not come, as being feared with y^ infamouse name of an Idol.
Therefore they say, come to the word of God, come to the holy Scriptures, come
to the true gospel of Jesus Christ. well Sir, you say herein exceeding well, we
are come. Teach us the word of God, the Scriptures, the gospel. Say on a Gods
name.

That the supper of our Lord is the chief Sacrament The nynthe chapter.
of all, but not acknowledged of the Apology, according to the word of God.
WE say, that Eucharistia, the supper of the Lord, is a The Apo logie.
Sacrament, that is to wit, an evident token of ye body and blood of Christ.

It is most true, that the supper of our Lord is a Sacrament, The answer. The
supper of our Lord is a sacrament Dion. de Ec. Hier. cap. 3. Maxim. in schol.
Graecis.
yea it is the chief Sacrament of all Sacraments. (...). Est enim, secundu^
clarissimi praeceptoris nostri sententiam, Sacramentoru^ Sacramentum. The most
holy Eucharist (which Dyonisius named so a little before) according to the mind
of our renowned master, is the Sacrament of Sacraments.

Although Dionysius had S. Paul to his master, yet he means at this time (as
upon him Maximus has noted, and by other places of his work it may well
appear to be true) Hierotheus an holy Father and Disciple of Christ, who in his
talk which he was wont to have with Dyonisius, did use to call the holy
E^charist of all the Sacraments the chief Sacrament. Surely i^ there had been
but two Sacraments, both Hierotheus and Dyonisius ^sius acknowledges more
Sacraments then twain.
had abused their words. For where two things only are of one degree, there one
may be worthier then the other, but neither of the twaiue may justly be called
the chief of the others.

If in all there be only two Sacraments, baptism and the Eucharist, how is
the Eucharist the Sacrament of Sacraments? since when one is taken away, there
does remain but one more, to which relation may be made. The opinion therefore
of this Apology standing, the Eucharist may be y^ more chief Sacrament of the
twain, but not the Sacrament of more Sacraments.

But what need we stand hereupon, seeing Dionysius has at Ca. 4. 5. 6. de
Ecclesiast. Hierar^hia.
large prosecuted more Sacraments then baptism and the Eucharist, as it is
easy to see in his works?

Seeing then the supper of our Lord is a Sacrament, and yet not found so to be
named in holy Scripture, the Apology is constrained to believe it self, and to
teach others somewhat which is The Apo logie is co^ strained to believe many
very ties unwritten.
not readen in holy Scripture.

Again that every Sacrament is a sign and token, it is also true, but not
readen in holy Scripture.

Thirdly the Sacrament of ye altar is an evident token of y^ body and blood of
Christ. But so much is not expressed in holy Scripture.

Last of all, the supper of our Lord is the real body and blood of Joan. 6.
Matt. 26. Mark. 14 Luke 22. 1. Cor. 10. and. 11.
Christ him self. And that truth is very plainly, very often, very earnestly
said, taught, repeted in holy Scripture.

Four things are now verified of the supper of our Lord. It is a Sacrament,
it is consequently a holy sign. It is an evident token of the body and blood
of Christ. It is the truth and substance of the body and blood of Christ. Of
the four truths, the last only is expressed in holy scriptures because it is
the ground of all the other. The three first are taught by the Church not
contrary to the scripture, but over and besides it. Now mark well whether these
defenders lead us to the word of God or no.

In describing the supper of our Lord, they put the three first verities, of
which never a one is named in the scripture. And the last verity which is
expressly named in all the four Evangelists and in S. Paul (as before I have
declared) that they utterly The apology skippeth the written ve^.
(...) and leave out: As if they should say, we make much a^ to pretend y^ holy
scriptures, but we will be sure to bring any thing sooner then the holy
scriptures.

Mark this Apology who shall, he never lightly saw any book written in so many
matters of divinity, wherein so little scripture The Apo logie is full o^
gloses but not of scriptures.
has been alleged. It is full of gloses, but the text it has very seldom.
And why? They love not in deed the scriptures, they know not the scriptures
according to the mind of the holy Ghost, but only make a show of them to
entangle the sunple in their snares.

The supper of our Lord is a sacrament, a holy sign, an evident token of the
body and blood of Christ. hitherto they teach without Math. 26 Heretics love
not the gospel.
scriptures. It is the body and blood it self of Jesus Christ. Hereof speak
they at this time never a word, because it is in the Gospel which they love
not.

If this last truth can not stand with the first, what doubt is there, but the
word of God must overcome, and the doctrine of men g^ue place? If therefore
the supper of our Lord ma^e both be the sign of the body, and the body it
self, it is well, we are thoroughly agreed, for all sc^iptures call it the
body, and some doctors call it a sign, But if these things can not both be
true together, awase with signs, away with tokens, let the word of Matt. 26.
God be heard, which says: This is m^ body, This is my blood.

Is it reason we obeie men, or God? If both stand in one degree, Actor. 5.
men keeping them selves under God, let both be obeyed. But if men draw from
God, he is more worth alone, then all the men of the world.

What (...) we now? Will the sig^e of the body and the body it self stand
together or no? If not, let the sign of the body (which is not in scripture)
give place, let the body it self which is often times found there, tarry still.

If the sign and the truth can not stand together, the Sacramentaries must
needs be condemned, who deny the truth which is in the scripture, and prefer
the sign before it, which is not in the scripture.

If the sign and truth do both stand together, y^ Sacramentaries Every way
the Sacrame^ (...) be (...).
(unless they repent) be condemned, because they deny the one part of y^
twain. For they deny the true presence of Christ's body and blood under the
forms of bread and wine.

In what case stand these defenders, which still be in state of damnation,
whatsoever be concluded true.

We verily teach and believe the figure and the truth to stand together: the
supper of our Lord to be the sign of Christ's body, and to be his own body.
The weaker part is the sign, the greater The fig^re and y^ truth (...).
is the truth. But both do not only stand together in one Sacrament, but
farther more, the true nature of every Sacrament of Christ is to have both:
that is ^aie, to have oue certain truth, and one certain sign of the same
truth.

The truth is hidden under the sign, the sign is witness of the truth. Which
thing once being declared, you shall see the vain doctrine of this Apology,
and with what kind of worthy School^ the English Church is now governed, to
the great (...) and destruction of Christian souls. Pardon me, good reader,
if I stand somewhat long upon the name of a Sacrament, for in that word lies
hidden all the poison of the Sacramentarie doctrine.

That the supper of our Lord is both the sign of The. x. Chapter.
Christ's body, and also his true body, even as it is a Sacrament.
Give diligent care (good Reader) to the doctrine following. Because as it is
most true and profitable, so is it somewhat hard. I will show that such a
sign as belongs to Christ's institution, must needs have the same truth
present, whereof it is the Sacrament, or holy sign. Joan. 1. Christ has two
natures in one person. Galat. 3. 1. Tim. 2.


The natural son of God took natural flesh of the virgin Marie, to
the intent he being o^e person and there in having his humane nature common
with men, and his divine common with God, might by that means reconcile man to
God again. His divine person stayed in it the nature of man, his manhod
partly covered the divine nature, from the eyes of mortal men: partly by
marvelous signs and works showed the same to the faith 1. Ioa^. 5. and. 10.
of (...) men.

Li^ewise man consists of two parts, of a soul invisible, and Man consists
of two parts
of a visible body. The soul rules and governs the body. And the body
shows to others by outward tokens, what the soul thinks and inwardly
works.

Christ therefore intending to leave certain holy mysteries unto his Church,
thereby to (...) to her the fruit of his passion and death: as well for regard
of his own self, in whose person The Sacraments consist of (...) parts.
two natures were united, as for regard of us who co^siste of body and soul,
made the said holy Sacraments to be of a dubble sort and nature, so that the
one part thereof might appear to the senses, the other should lie privy and
only be seen by faith.

But as the outward works and doctrine of Christ were undoubted testimonies of
the inward Godhed really present, so ye outward sign, which is in the
Sacraments, is a most evident witness of the inward grace which they work
really present in them. After this sort Christ instituted ye Sacrament of
Baptism, Joan. 3.
that we might be newly borne and regenerated of water and of the holy Ghost,
as him self said to (...). For ye outward wasshing of the body in the name of
the Trinity, is an evident Mat. 28.
sign that the holy Ghost at the same instant by the mean of the word and
water, inwardly wassheth y^ soul from sin. Therefore S. Paul says: God
has saved us by the wasshing of water, Tit. 3.
and of the renewing of the holy Ghost. The which holy scriptures S. Augustine
embracing, says: Aqua exhibens forinsecus In ep. 23. ad Bonifacium.
Sacramentum gratiae, and spiritus operans intrinsecus beneficium gratiae
regenerat hominem in vno Christo, ex vno Adam generatum. Water giving outwardly
the Sacrament (or holy sign) of grace, and the holy Ghost working inwardly the
benefit of grace, begets man again in one Christ, which was begotten of
one Adam.

Water is the outward sign. Grace is y^ inward benefit. The outward water
which wassheth the body, is the sign of the inward grace which is wrought upon
the sou^e. Here thou see, good Reader, the sign of a thing, and the thing it
self to agree so The sign and thing signified stand toge there.
well, that the one is always depending of the other. Much less does one of
them hinder the other. Except any man will say, that Christ was not God in
deed, because his works were tokens and signs of his Godhead, which were a
detestable saying.

Likewise the supper of Christ is both a sign of his body, and also his true
body, A sign outwardly and ye true body inwardly. A sign by y^ sound of words
when it is first made, and a truth by ye inward working of ye holy Ghost, by ye
means of ye words of ye censecration. For as when ye Priest sp^inkleth or
dippeth ye child in water, Mat. 28.
saying: (...) wass he the, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost: At ye same moment ye holy Ghost wassheth the soul of the
person baptized: Right so, when Christ, or any lawful Priest in his name,
taking bread, and bles^ing duly says: Mat. 26* Marc 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
This is my body, making in those words an evident token of his body ^eally
present, at the same instant the holy Ghost works inwardly the true substance
of Jesus Christ really present under the form of bread. The outward
pronouncing of the words over bread and wine, is the Sacrament or holy sign
that makes and shows Christ's body, and the inward (...) ning of the
substance of bread into Christ's real body, is the grace which is at the same
time inuis^bly wrought.

Thus in holy Scripture the sign of body, and the true body stand so wel^
together, that both are true, because one is true. The which doctrine S.
Chrisostom confessing, writes: Sacerdotis Homil. de Iudae proditio ne.
oreverba proferuntur: Et Dei virtute proposita consecrantur and gratia. Hoc
est (ait) corpus meum, hoc verbo proposita consecrantur. The words are
pronounced by the Priests mouth. And the things set forth are consecrated by
the virtue and grace of God. This (says he) is my body. With this word the
things which are set forth are consecrated.

Who sees not here the visible Sacrament, and the thing or in^isible grace of
the Sacrament? The Sacrament is the due pronouncing of the words over bread o^
wine. As for example, taking bread, I say, in Christ's person, This is my body.
The words naturally have their known signification as other words of other
things have. Which who so hea^eth spoken or perceaueth to be spoken, can tell
what they mean and signify. Neither can it be denied but they betoken the
being or substance of Christ's body. That natural betokening of theirs alone
without the matter of bread and wine present, should not be a Sacrament, that
is to say, an evident sign and token of a holy thing. But when those words are
spoken over bread by a Priest (as Christ appointed them to be spoken) then by
his institution they are a Sacrament, to wit, an evident token of a holy thing.

Now as God and Christ can not lie, so they do not institute Christ c^ not
insti^ a false sign.
a false sign and token. If the token be true, and it be the token of Christ's
body present, that thing which it betokens by the institution of Christ, must
needs be not only true, but also present, if it be so betokened.

What sign must chiefly be respected in the Sacrament The. xi. chapter.
of Christ's supper. And what a Sacrament is.
IAm not ignorant that in the Sacrament of the altar, diverse Diverse sign^s
are in y^ Eu^.
kinds of signs and tokens are found. 1.
some be tokens of the making and consecrating the Eucharist: 2.
others of it being now consecrated and made, until the outward signs be
consumed: 3.
a signification also of the Church of Christ is gathered out (...) it now made
and consecrated. 4.
Yea the very eating is again a sign of a marvelous banquet in the life to come.

1.
The first sign of all is ye sign of consecrating our Lords sup per, and it
is the words duly spoken by a Priest over bread and The Words of ^tion ar^ y^
first sign.
(...), which both betoken the making of Christ's body and blood, and make it
in deed.

2.
The sign of the Eucharist now made, is the form of bread and wine. But this
later sign presupposes the first sign and token. For except it had been said
over the bread and wine: This is my body, and this is my blood, the forms of
bread and wine could not betoken the real body and blood of Christ under them.
For not wheresoever we see such forms, we do there believe the body and blood
to be, except we think the words of consecration to have been spoken over them.

We now speak of that first sign and token, which both signifies and makes
the Sacrament. Wherein Christ would that to be wrought inuisibly, which the
words do signify to our cares, and which, the doing shows to our eyes.

A man is able to institute a token of the truth, but not always able to make
present the truth of the token: As when he leaves a ring in token of him
himsel^e, not being able to leave his own substance in the same ring, or under
the form of it.

But Christ as he is both God and man, so he leans both an Christ's took has
in it, the truth (...).
outward token according to his hu^ane nature, and works an inward truth of
the same token, according to his divine allnughtynes. The outward token is
called the Sacrament, the truth thereof is called the thing of the Sacrament.

Christ intending to show to the people that his Father allways hears him,
says: Father I thank the because thou have Joan. 11.
heard me. These words betoken a thanksull heart. Wheresore if in ^ede the heart
be thankful, they are a Sacrament or holy sign because they betoken a most
holy sacrifice of thankigeuing. But if in deed the heart give no thanks, they
are a false token, and therefore 1. Ioa^. 5.
please not God, who is truth and loves nothing but truth.

Upon this ground of holy scriptures and of learned Fathers, What a Sa^rament is.
the definition of a Sacrament is agre^d upon by all diuin^s, taken specially
ont of S. Augustine, as (...) does (...), in these words. Sacramentum est (...)
gratiae, visi^ilis forma. De co^secratione (...). 2. cap* Sa^.
A Sacrament is the visible form of (...) grace. whereby (...) may perceive a
Sacrament to (...) o^ two parts. the one is ap prehended by faith, whiles the
other is outwardly showed to the senses. If we see one baptized in the name of
the Trinity, we say, a Christen man was made to day. How prove we that?
because y^ Sacrament, which we saw, tells us what was wrought inwardly.

Therefore seeing Christ has will^d us to say at his holy table Luc. 22.
over bread and (...) (This is my body and this is my blood) there is no doubt
but the very naming of body and blood sole^nly commanded, is the comma^udement
to make a holy sign, which is as much to say, as to make a Sacrament. Whereof
it follows, that the same thing is inuisibly wrought, which is outwardly
signified. Otherwise a Sacrament may be false, it may be of one part alone, it
may lack the operation of the holy Ghost. And to be short, it may be made
void and of none (...). The token and sign says, when bread is present: Hoc
est corpus meum, This is my body. The pro^ne Hoc (This) and the verb (est, is)
betoken a thing present. The thing spoken of, is the body of Christ. If the bo
die be not made the words make a fall se token. Psalm. 58.
If this (whereof I speak it) be not made my body here presently, I signify
and betoken a false thing. No false signification can be a Sacrament, because
rather it is an execration or cursing, wherein au untruth is betokened, from
which God abhors.

The Apology confe^eth the supper of our Lord to be a Sacrament, and whereas
every Sacrament (...) of words and things, of which twain the words are the
more plain token of the holy thing which is made: seeing the words of Christ's
supper are, This is my body, and This is my blood, of necessity there must be
a truth of that thing which these words do signify. And for as much as they
signify the presence of Christ's body, his body must needs be present, where
they do signify it to be present.

I will exemplify it in an other Sacrament also. Christ at his Facere is to
do and make.
last supper having said, This is my body which is given for you, said to his
Apostles, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Do, and make this thing for the
remembrance of me. In these words Christ betokened somewhat, surely that they
should make and do the thing he spoke of. I ask now, whether he gave in deed
power to the Apostles to make and do that thing for the remembrance of him, or
no? If in deed he gave them no power, the signification of his words was false,
and the toke^ which they make to our ears, untrue.

On the otherside if in deed by that precept Priests have power to make that
thing, whereof Christ spoke, then the token was true, and the outward
signification of the words agrees with the inward effect and working of them.
For which cause we say, that When the order of Priestho^ was give to the
Apostles.
Christ in those words instituted a Sacrament of holy orders. For he gave unto
his Apostles at that time by those words the order of Priesthod. The holy sign
of this Sacrament is, the pronouncing of these words. Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Make and do this thing for the remembrance of me. The
invisible grace wrought therein, is the power which the Apostles took to make
the body of Christ.

Even so: As soon as these words This is my body, and this is my blood are
duly spoken, straight the body and blood is made present. If indeed it be not
present, here is no Sacrament at all. Note well what I say, here is no true
sign at all, but an hipocriticall and fond Imagination of a thing, the truth
whereof is not so as the word sounds, and therefore the sig^e is false.

Neither will it help any thing at all, if one say that Christ spoke
figuratively. For a figurative speech can not be an evident token of any
thing, except it be such a figure, as through the custom of speech has now
obtained some easy and known (...) among all men that use the same language as
when by the name of a cup, we mean the drink in it, or by the keys of
Lucae. 22. Matt. 16.
the Kingdom of heaven we mean authority to bring men to Christ and God, or
by opening the mouth we mean speaking, which kind of speech though it be
called figurative for some respect, yet in deed it is all one with proper
speech, because use and custom makes every speech propre. Otherwise a very
figurative A figurative speech does not signify till it be understood.
speech signifies no certain thing, until it be plainly understood. And
consequently no figurative speech can be a Sacrament or a holy sign of an
other thing. For a sign is ever plain evident and able to instruct, as being
according to the judgment of S. Augustine the thing which besides the show it
makes to August. de doctr. Christ. li. 2. ca. 1.
our senses, causes an other thing to come to our knowledge. But a figure not
made common by use, is obscure, dark, uncertain, as all ridles be until they
are opened.

So that if Christ saying, This is my body, had meant (this does signify my
body, and in deed is not so,) truly no Sacrament had been made (as I will show
hereafter) because no evident token had been given of any thing. It can not be
called an evident token, when I may more truly veryfie the contradictorie then
that which is spoken. For if the Sacramentaries teach well, it is a truer token
to say, This is not my body: then to say, This is my body. But this is my body,
ca^ never signify to me by any figure of ^hetorike, this is not my body. For
doubtless as long as I am not driven to think this is not my body, or to
think of an other thing as of trees, stones, water, bread, wine, or any like
thing which is clean diverse in nature from Christ's body (which to do after
the name of body once heard out of Christ's This is my body either does signi
fie nothing or it signifies the body of Christ.
mouth is almost impossible) so long it may still be a sign to me that it is
Christ's body.

And seeing it can never come to pass that I hearing Christ say, This is my
body, can exclude the thought of his body from my understanding, will I or nill
I, (This) will be to me either a falshod, or it will be the Sacrament or sign
of his body. If it be so, then seeing the Sacrament and holy sign must needs be
true, the body must likewise be truly present, for so the token does report. If
when I hear Christ say This is my body, I must stand musing and diuising, how
(is) may be taken improperly, and signify a certain betokening without a true
being, surely because all ignorant men, (study they never so long) are able to
conclude no Simple men can not under stand how the sig^e may ^e called ^y y^
name o^ the thin^.
such thing, for that no such example comes to their mind, and they are not
exercised in scriptures as divines be, thereby it will follow, that Christ's
words shall signify one thing, to one man, and an other to an other.

To some learned men after some conference they may signify by the way of
conjecture the betokening of his body. To others who conjecture that Christ
pointed to his own person when he said so, they will sound otherwise. But to
the simple and ignorant who can not so put matters together, they will signify
allways The Apo stles were simple men.
the real presence of his body. Uerily the twelve Ap^tles were very simple,
ignorant and (as the scriptures call them) (...) without lerning, neither was
their mind opened to understand the scriptures at y^ time. And yet I dare say
they knew Actor. 4.
what they did receive: wherefore they took the words of Christ literally as
they sounded to them.

Now seeing these words (This is my body) signified the body of Christ, it will
insewe, that seeing Christ makes allways a true sign, to them it was the truth
of Christ's body. Marye to Ihon Calvin who is more deeply learned, and who
studieth full sore to If Christ's words have not their first meaning they must
sound to diuer^e me^ diversely.
make and prove Christ a liar, it may well be they will sound otherwise. O
Lord to what case are these signs and Sacraments brought, if according to
some men they shall sound one way, and to others an other way. And yet the
truth of them stands chiefly and wholly depends upon the sign which they
make. As though all other men being able to make their last wills with words
plain enough, thou Lord alone had neither utterance, nor wit, nor mind,
nor remembrance to make a token of thy invisible work.

And yet the Apology says that the Eucharist is an evident token of the body
and blood. If the token be evident all men do The Apo logie is co^ futed by his
own saying^.
quickly understand it, why then strive we upon an evident matter? Call women
and children to ask of them what token y^ words of Christ make: I warrant you,
they will not say, that (is) does stand to betoken, nor (body) for figure of
body. That kind of tokens is not very evident to them. But in deed the token of
Christ's body is evident by his own words, and therefore the truth which he
does betoken to be present, is really present, for as his token is most
evident, so is it most true.

Christ after his resurrection gave power to his Apostles to forgive and
retain sins. This thing was the institution of the Sacrament of Peuance. Let
us there see the Sacrament or holy sign of this gi^t. whose sins ye forgive
(says he) they Joan. 20.
are foregeuen them. And whose ye retain, they are retained. (...) in those
words a sign of remission of sins be instituted, su^ely when that sign is
made by a Priest du^ly absoluing the penitent, his sins are in deed remitted.
For look how much the words words must be taken as they commonly sound.
do signify to men of common understanding, so much is given by them. How
prove I that* because so much is signified to be given.

And seeing the gift of God which might have been secret, is now so made that
the sign and token of it goes together with the truth thereof, it could give
from it self no other token then it has nature of his own. The token of
Christ shows power of forgeuing and reteyning sins to be given to the
Apostles. Therefore that power is in deed given.

I am not ignorant that the Apology (as it denies this Sacrament of Penance)
so it falsefieth the words of Christ, saying The Apo logie falsifieth the words
of Christ.
that the words whose sins ye forgive they are forgeuen, are meant, whose
sins ye declare to be forgeuen, but thereof we may by Gods grace, dispute an
other time. Now it is enough to show that the word (forgeuing) does not importe
evidently and at the first sight a declaration of forgiveness, but an actual
forgiveness in deed, and a sign thereof. Even as these words This is my body,
do importe both a sign, and work a true being of the body, and not a sign
without a truth.

Briefly, it is one thing to consider, what words any other where may signify,
and an other thing, to consider what they may signify in a Sacrament. For many
words may signify improperly The chief words of a Sacrament must not be
improper.
in other places, but the principal words of a Sacrament can not be improper.
For the nature of y^ thing does ly^itte the interpretation of the words.

When Christ makes a Sacrament, he makes a thing of a dubble nature, to wit,
a holy thing, and the sign of a holy thing. But the whole is to us known by
the sign. For the thing we see not, neither in Baptisine nor in confirmation,
nor in the Eucharist, nor in Penance, nor in extreme unction, nor in
Priesthod, nor in Matrimony. The thing, the truth, the grace, the inward
operation is hid from our eyes, from our ears, and feeling. The sign thereof
is sensible and apperteineth to the eyes and ears. Now to say that a plain
sign is not made outwardly, it is as much to say, as a plain grace or truth
is not made inwardly.

Again, if it be not a plain sign, it is dark and obscure, it is doubtful
and in controversy. Wherefore it will be inferred that An obscure saying is no
sensible sign
it rather confounds our understanding, then teaches it. Which being so, it
is no visible sign of invisible grace. For surely, be the inward grace what so
ever it pleases God it shall be, yet one certain being, nature, substance,
condition and state it has, whereof no man is certainly warned, if y^ words y^
warn us of it, be not plain. And therefore we have found a Sacrament
according to y^ It is against the nature of an holy sign or sacrament not to
signific plain ^y.
Sacramentaries opinion, without a holy sign, a truth without a figure, a
certain grace without a certain foorme, a great mystery without belefe or
knowledge thereof. A notable institution of a supper i^ me^ knew, or might know
what it were, a thing to be made daily, to be frequented often, to be eaten and
dronken, but what it is, no man is able to prove it plainly. To this point our
new ^es would bring us.

That they covet to bring you into this blindness clean contrary to the word of
God, I wonder not, they do their ministry, they work their masters
inspiration, they practice the de^ils devises. Antichrist must deny all the
mysteries and veryties of Christ, Antichrist could not take away the whole
faith, if some part (...) not called in ^oubt before.
how could that come to pass if no man went before to bring them in doubt?
Suddenly to preua^le that belongs only to God, by piece meal, and by little
and little, to creep in, that is the work of Satan. They are faithful
servants to their Lord. And as long as they serve him, I blame them not, but I
exhort them to leave his service, for he is but an evil paimaster in th*end.
Mary that other so diligently follow them, that they so carefully strive to
maintain the same doctrine, that they by so long experience do not understand
whence it comes, and whereto it hasteneth that is the greater grief.

which argument is more agreeable to the word of God, it is a token of the body,
made by Christ, and The. xij. Chapter.
therefore not the body, or else, therefore it is the true body of Christ.
THe common argument of all the Sacramentaries against the blessed Sacrament of
the altar, is thus formed. The supper of our Lord is the Sacrament, the sign,
the figure, The ^rgu meant of he ^es.
the pledge, the token, the remembrance of Christ's body, therefore it is not
his body in deed.

This argument is so good, or rather so bad, that if I should dispute for my
life on the contrary side, I would bring the same, to prove the contrary truth.
I would say, the supper of our Lord is The supper of our Lord is his body*
because it is a sign thereof instituted by him self.
the Sacrament of Christ's body, the sign, the figure, y^ pledge, the token,
the remembrance thereof, instituted by Christ, therefore it is in deed the body
of Christ. Now let us go to the word of God, to try which argument is better.

First it is to be noted, that although before the incarnation of Christ,
signs were in part empty and void of the truth which they si^nified, yet now
the signs of the new Testament which Joan. 1. August. Psalm. 73.
Christ himself has instituted, conteyn the truth which they signi fie,
because truth is made by Jesus Christ. And S. Augustiue says, the Sacraments
of the new Testament gene salvation.

Again not with standing y^ Christ left to his Church only seven Sacraments,
which it should use according as the nature of eueryone, or the profit of men
does require, yet Christ him self made a great number more, not leaving
ordinary a^toritie to us to do the same, but those which him self made in his
own dispensa tio^ of ^esh, and which he left to his Church to be made, be all
of one nature. His incarnation, fasting, baptis^, miracles, transfiguration,
passion, resurrection, ascension, were marue louse great 1. Tim. 3.
Sacraments. For besides the truth which was wrought in them, they also be
tokened an other thing either fulfilled in the old ^igures and Prophecies, or
to be followed of his members, which 1. Pet. 2.
should conform them selves to the deeds of Christ their head.

But because we now speak of such Sacraments as are made chie^ly by words (of
which kind those are, which y^ Church practices.) I will show only a few such
places which do witness a thing to have been done, whiles a word signifying so
much, was spoken. And all my examples shall prove, that look what is out
wardly said, the same is inuisibly wrought at the same (...). So that the word
is an undoubted token of the thing don and made thereby. The true conception
(...) is (...) with the sign thereof. Lucae. 1.


For my part I say, the Angel Gabriel made the sig^e and token that Christ
should be conceived of the virgin Marye. Saying: Concipies in vtero. Thou shall
conceive in thy womb. And the holy virgin signified her consent thereunto
saying, Fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum. Be it done to me according to thy word.
Therefore Christ in deed was conceived, and took flesh of the Matthew. 8.
Cleansing (...) in deed (...) the word is (...).
virgin Marie at the very same time.

Christ ^ayd to the Leprouse man, Be thou made clean, which words gave a sign
and token of cleansing, therefore in deed he was made clean.

Christ gave a sign and token that sins were forgeuen to him that had the
palsy, by these words. Remittuntur tibi peccata Matthew. 9. (...) be forgiven
(...) when so (...) s^d (...) Christ. Math. 11. Those mi racies were don in
deed which were be^. Marci. 7. The ears were opened (...) deed when it was
said, be y^ opened.
tua. Thie sins are forgeuen the, therefore in deed they were forgeuen.
Likewise Christ bad him take up his bed, and go home, for a token that the
son of man had power in earth to forgive sins, therefore Christ in deed had
power in earth to forgive sins: Because his token and sign is never false.

When John Baptiste had sent two of his disciples to know whether he were the
man that should come, or an other, were to be looked for: Christ gave a token to
the eyes and ears of the messengers, that the blind saw, y^ lame walked, y^
leepers were cleansed: Therefore in deed it was so. And he bad them tell S.
Ihon what they had heard and seen.

Christ said to the deaf and domme man, Adaperire. Be thou opened, and as it
follows in the Gospel, straight ways his ears were opened, and the bond of
his tongue loosed. Thus might I go through every example of the whole Gospel,
and allways when at the doing of any thing an outward sign of an inward grace
is rehearsed, that which the sign sounds the grace works.

Mark well good Reader, that this rule be not wreasted to yt mere doctrine of
Christ, which he spoke doing or making nothing. Math. 13. Parables w^ used in
teachig but not in doing.
For then I confess many parables, many obscure sayings were uttered to
provoke his audience to be humble, to think of their own ignorance, to depend
wholly of Christ, and to ask him the understanding of the dark sayings. But
now I speak not of sole doctrine. I speak of a work that Christ makes and
of words ioy^d with his work. In this case I say, what so ever sign is
outwardly made, the same is inwardly wrought. Joan. 20.


Christ says to his Disciples. Take ye the holy Ghost, and withal he (...)
upon them. Behold the word and the doing. The outward word is a holy sign or
Sacrament, so is the outward doing, which is breathing. The inward work is the
perfoorming of the (...) sign which the word and breath did betoken.

Seeing then Christ at his last supper did somewhat, seeing he Christ rather did,
the^ taught in his supper.
took bread, seeing he blessed, seeing he brake, seeing he gave, seeing at the ty^
of this outward doing and working, he said somewhat, which saying was a sign,
a Sacrament, a figure, a token, a pledge, a (...) of his body: we are assured
by the word of God (which never shall perish) that Christ gave at the same 1.
Pet. 1.
time his true body under the form of that bread, which he took and which by
blessing he turned into his body.

Has not now the Apology depely reasoned? Has it not put a goodly foundation
of the Sacramentarie doctrine? to say the supper of our Lord is the evident
token of the body and blood of Christ, thereby meaning the his body is not in
deed really present? wherein although it speak otherwise then ye holy
scripture ^oth in the same case: ^et mangre the will of the makers thereof, it
proves the Catholic faith, because the sign that every Sa crament of Christ
makes evidently to our senses, is inwardly wrought in that creature, whereof
the signifying words are spoken. By this true declaration of the nature of a
Sacrament, it is proved, that so many Fathers, as call the supper of Christ a
sign or figure, give witness that it is also the truth it self. And if the
Apology will disprove the real presence of Christ under y^ foorm of bread, it
must show that his supper is not so much as a sign of his body and blood. But
as long as they grant us the sig^e, the word of God will convince the truth
to be present, which is signified.

The words of Christ's supper are not figurative, The. xiii. Chapter.
nor his token a common kind of tokens.
WHen I grant the supper of Christ to be a sign, a token, a figure, yet I do
not grant the words wherewith The words of the Sacrament be not figurative.
it is made, to be figurative. If I give you a ring and say, were this token
for the remembrance of me, I both give a token of me, and name a sign or
token, and yet my words are not figurative.

It is therefore to be noted, that how many Fathers so ever call the Sacrament
a figure, yet none of them all teaches these words: (This is my body, and,
this is my blood) to be words figurative. The Fathers calling y^ supper of
Christ a figure, mean not a figure of Rheto^.
For when they call it a figure, they mean not a figure of Rhetorike, but a
mystical figure, and calling it a sign they mean not a natural sign or
token, but a mystical sign, that is to say, a secret and miraculous kind of
token, such as the state of the new Testament requires, the nature whereof is
to do that which it says* because Christ the speaker (...) all that by his
divine power and substance, which his word spoken by ye mouth of his manhod, in
holy Sacraments does utter and signify. Now he that would the Sacrament of
Christ so to be a sign, that he should not make that thing to be his body in
deed whereof in word he says, This is my body, he most wickedly denies the
Godhead of Christ.

Ebion was an heretic, who denying the divine nature of Epiphanius. li. 1. To.
2. Her. 30.
Christ, said him to be Nudu^ hominem, a bare man. Epiphanius will prove
against Ebion, that he is God. How so? Because he was given to the world for a
sign. As the holy Ghost had prophesied before of him, when he said to Achaz,
Pete tibi signum, Esaiae. 7. The signs of Christ are miraculouse.
ask to the a sign. And for as much as he would not ask, then said the
Prophet, Ipse Dominus dabit vobis signum, our Lord him self will give you a
sign. Behold a virgin shall conceive: Now says Epiphanius: Non potest is qui
per omnia homo genitus est signi gratia mundo dari: He y^ is altogether
begotten as a man, can not be given to the world for a sign. For that which is
customably don, what sign of the Godhead could be therein?

Epiphanius therefore does signify that since Christ's birth was given to the
world for a sign, it could not be such a birth, as other men have, but it must
be miraculous, and the miracle stood in this point, because he was truly born
of a true virgin.

Much more we may say, since the blessed Sacrament of the altar has been left
unto us as a sign of the body and blood of Christ: It could not be so if it
were bare bread and wine, and not The Sacraments of Christ are secret tokens.
in deed his body and blood. what sign, what secret token, what miracle were
in the eating and drinking of bare bread and wine, if none other thing were
made thereof?

As the ordinary birth of man is no mere sign for Christ, who is true God, so
the ordinary eating of bread and drinking of wine, is no mete sign for the
remembrance of Christ's death.

As the birth of Christ was a true birth but most miraculous withal: so is the
Sacrament of the altar a true sign, and therefore his true body and blood, by
the great miracle of turning the substance of bread and wine in to them. This
is y^ sign that Christ made in his last supper.

This is such a sign as is withal a secret miracle. For it is a miracle not
showed to (...) but only to the faithful. For as The (...) of Christ's Chur
che be ge^ to the (...), and ther^ore are ^ble.
the birth of Christ is a (...) to the faithful only, who believe Christ being
God and man, truly to have been borne of a virgin, without sede of man by the
almighty power of the holy ^host: Right so the supp^ of Christ is a sig^e of
his body (...) blood to the faithful only, who believe the (...) of bread and
wine to be ^urned into his body and blood without (...) or corruption, by y^
only (...) of the (...) o^ Christ. Who said after bread taken, and (...), This
is my body, and this is my blood. Luc. 22.
Do and make this thing for the remembrance of me.

Behold: the making of Christ's body and blood ^or y^ remembrance of his death,
that is the sign we speak of. This was the memory or the remembrance whereof
David said: Memoriam Psalm. 110.
fecit mirabilium suorum misericors and miserator Dominus, esean^ dedit
timentibus se. Our merciful and graciouse Lord has made a remembrance of his
marvelous works, he has given meat to them that fear him. And think we that
a remembrance of marvelous things is made of God without a miracle? Ciprian. de
coena Domini. August. in manuali. cap. 11. Chrysos. de sacerdot. lib. 3.
Damasc. de orthod. fid. li. 4. c. 14.


S. Cyprian says the bread to be made slesh Omnipotentia verbi. By the
allmighty power of the word.

S. Augustine calls it Mirabile sacrificium, A marvelous sacrifice.

S. Chrysostom cries out, o miracle, o the goodness of God he that sits
above with the Father, in the self same moment of time is touched with the
hands of all men.

If thou ask how it is made (says Damascene) it is enough for the to hear,
that it is made by the holy Ghost, even as our Lord made for him self, and in
him self a body out of the virgin, Mother of God. And we know no more but that
the word of God is true, strenghtfull, allmighty. Eusebius. li. 5. demo^. cap. 3.
Beda in hom. vidit Jesus etc. Basilius in Litur. Gregor. Nyssen. in orat. de
paschate. Hieron. in Leui. Nicepho rus lib. 1. cap. 28.


Eusebius calls it Admirabilem exitum oraculi, a marvelous event of the
oracle.

S. Bid names it a sanctification of the holy Ghost that can not be uttered
by speech. The like words have S. Ba^ile, S. Gregorins Nyssenus, S. ^ieront,
Nicephorus.

This much I thought good briefly to say concerning y^ manner how the blessed
Sacrament of the altar is a sign, token, figure, mystery, remembrance: Every
word whereof expounded according to the Gospel and to the state of the new
Testament, does prove the real presence of Christ's body and blood under y^
foormes of bread and wine. It is a Sacrament which outwardly signi^ that which
is inwardly wrought. It is a figure co^teyning the truth figured. It is a sign
mete for the institution of Christ, whose signs are miraculous, it is a secret
token known only to them that believe. It is a remembrance of Christ's death,
by the presence of the body which died. What shall I say more? It is the body
and blood of Christ covered from our eyes, reveled to our faith, feeding
presently our bodies and souls to life everlasting.

That the supper of our Lord is no Sacrament at The. xiiij. Chapter.
all, if these words of Christ, (This is my body, and This is my blood) be
figurative. The ^rence between ^res of (...) and (...).

THere is a great difference between a figure of Rhetorike, and a Sacramental
figure made by Christ. The Rhetorical figures consist in words or sentences:
the mystical figures of Christ consist in deeds, and secret workings. Those
sometimes sound one way, and mean an other way. These mean and sound always
one thing, but they show it one way, and do it an other way. Those chiefly
serve the ears of mortal men: These chiefly serve the hearts of faithful men.
Those were found by men, these were instituted of God.

Christ sometime used figures of Rhetorike, because in taking the nature of man
he addicted him self to use the kind of speaki^g which men observed. But now
Christians use y^ mystical sign^es of Christ, because he that took their nature
left unto them the virtue of his almighty Godhead. Let noman ther^ore think
when y^ supper of our Lord is called sometime a figure, that a Rhetori The
figures of Christ are mystical.
call figure is meant, it is not so. A mystical figure, a secret knowledge, a
pri^ie watch word is understood by the name of a figure, as if Christ should
say to his Apostles and folowers. Let this be a token between you and me, and
between one of you toward y^ other that when a faithful man is washed with
water and in the Matt. 28.
mean time it is said over him, I Baptize the in the name of the Father, and
of the son, and of the holy ghost, straight all sins are forgeuen him. And
he is of my flock and received into my fold.

Let it be again an other covenant or sign between us. When my Apostles or
those which are made Priests by them, say over bread this is my body, and over
wine this is my blood, having Matt. 26.
the intent to bless and give thanks and to make a remembrance of my death,
that my body and blood are really present under the forms of bread and wine
accordingly as my words do sound.

These are mystical signs, privy tokens, and secret figures to be kept only
among the faithful, and not to be published to infidels. For as men by use of
speaking have agreed to transferr certain words from their most proper
signification to an other figurative custom: even so Christ has transferred
certain natural things to an other mystical use, which is now called in some
Fathers by yt name of holy signs, or figures, or tokens, or which is most
common of all, by the name of sacraments or mysteries.

See good reader to what myserie we are grown. He that comes late from his
grammar, where he learned certain figures of construction, or he y^ begins
his Rhetorik where he more ^oyes judge the figures of God to be figures of
grammar.
depely enters into the treatise of tropes and shemes, when he reads in a
two pe^ny book the place alleged, where it is said (in Tertullian) this is my
body, that is to say the figure of my body he judges out of hand that
Tertullian means a figure of Rhetorik, and Decolampadius, Calvin, or Peter
Martyr is a mete Heretics name what figure of grammar it is.
Scholemaster for him to expound what kind of Rhetorical figure it is, verily
saithei, metonymia, or synecdoche.

Again, when they hear S. Augustine affirm that Christ gave a'signe of his
body, they think he means such a sign as is set up at an ale house, or wine
tauern. yt Doctors mean a peculiar sign and token, miraculously instituted by
Christ, which conteyneth and gives to the faithful the truth which it
betokens.

This kind of signs and figures concerning the substance of (...) things.
them, consist of two parts as I said before. Of things and of words: the
things are diverse, as for example, water, bread, wine, Mystical words.
oil and such other. The mystical words coming to such things as Christ has
appointed, make up the whole Sacrament. So that the things are like stone,
timber, iron, where withal a man will build or make somewhat, the words are
like the order, and foorm which the Carpenter will set the stuff in. The things
are confuse until the words determine them particularly to this or that use.

Therefore S. Paul says, that Christ sanctifies his Church Mu^dans eam
lauacro aquae in verbo vitae. Cleansing it with the Ephesians. 5.
was^ng of water, in the word of life. What is that word of (...)? ^erily
whereof Christ said, go teach all nations Baptizing Math. 28.
them in the nanse of the Father and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: This
is the word which gives life to him that is duly washed. Of this word Christ
said: Iam vos mundi estis propter Joan. 15.
sermonem quem locutus sum vobis. Now ye are clean for the words sake which I
have spoken to you.

S. Augustine demands, why Christ said not, ye are clean In Joan. tract. 80.
for ye Baptim wherewith ye are washed, but rather ye are clean for the word
which I have spoken to you, saving that even in wa ter it is the word that
cleanses? Detrahe verbu^, and quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad
elementum and fit Sacramentum. Take away the word and what is water but water?
The word comes to the matter, and the Sacrament is made.

S. Angustine calls the thing or stuff whereof the Sacram^t Elementum.
is made, Elementum: Which is to say a material thing that serves for a
beginning whereof a farther mystery may be made, when the word appointed by
Christ comes to it.

The Grecians use to call those things, especially in the supper of Christ.
(...) (...) The things put or set before (...)
the Priest who must consecrate them with the word of God.

The element therefore whether it be water, oil, bread, wine, or any other
thing that Christ appoints, is the weaker and infer riour part. The word is
the more chief and principal. Vnde ista tanta virtus aquae (says S. Augustine)
vt corpus tangat and cor August. in ^oan. tract. 80.
abluat, nisi faciente verbo? Non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur, Nam and in
ipso verbo aliud est sonus transiens, aliud virtus manens. Whence has water
this great virtue, that it should touch the body, and wasshe the heart, but
that the word causes it, not (only) because it is spoken, but because it is
believed, For in the ^er e word the sound which passes away is one thing, and
the virtue which remains is an other thing.

Now have we three things considered by S. Augustine in a ^n. things in a
Sacrament.
Sacrament, the lowest is the element which in baptun is water, the higher, is
the word which again is co^sydered in two respects, in one as it is spoken, and
so being joined with the element it makes the substance of the Sacrament, and
passes away: in the other as it is believed of him that receaueth the
Sacrament, and so it works in him a grace, virtue, and effect of the
Sacrament.

If now the word be it that both chefely makes and effectually establishes
the Sacrament, it can not be douted, but that Christ gave the greatest
diligence of all, in assigning the solemn words of his blessed Sacraments.

For the words appointed by Christ to the making of his Sacraments are so
strong, that although the minister be never so August. co^t. Donat. li. 5.
cap. 19. and. 20.
evil a man, yet as S. Augustine says, God sanctifies his Sacraments, Ad
verba quae procedunt ex ore homicidae. At the words which come forth of the
mouth of a mankiller. And again he says, Deus adest Sacramentis and verbis
suis, per qualeslibet administrentur. God is present to his Sacraments and
words by whatsoever manner of men they be ministered. In so much that if August.
co^t. Ep. Parmen. li. 2. c. 12.
at the time of celebrating, both the geuer and receauer have don vula^fully
(says S. Augustine) Non tamen pro non dato habebitur. Yet the Sacrament shall
not be accounted as not given.

For seeing the word was once spoken and joined with the element, the substance
of the Sacrament was made though it lacked his effect. Whereof it follows,
that the Sacrame^tal words bring forth a secret strength for their own part,
albeit neither the minister Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Roma. Hom. 16
nor the receauer be of such worthiness as they owght to be of. In ipso
aquarum lauacro (says S. Chrysostom) verba Dei sunt quae nos generant. In the
very washing of the waters they be the words of God which begett us.

Which thing since it is so, the words of Christ's Sacraments do not depend
upon the understanding either of the minister, or of him that receaueth the
Sacrament, but they have a sufficient virtue in them selves, whereby they may
work. It is enowgh that the minister do as the Church uses to do in such
cases. This intention being kept, the words will bring the rest to pass. Or if
a maliciouse Priest baptize a child with the mind to make him a Lutheran or an
Anabaptist, shall yt child by yt intention be made an heret^ke? No verily: For
so much as the words of Christ wherewith he is baptized, make him a member of
his mystical body, not incorporating him to any other fellowship. Qui fuerit
superbus minister, cum diabolo computatur, sed non contaminatur August. in
Joan. tracta. 5.
donu^ Christi. The proud minister (says S. Augustine) is accounted with the
devil, but the gift of Christ is not defiled.

To come somewhat nere our purpose, S. Ambrose does by name witness, what
strength Christ's words have in making his Ambros. de Sacra. li. 4. c. 4. and.
5.
supper. Sermo Christi hoc conficit Sacramentum, The words of Christ make this
Sacrament. Antequam consecretur, panis est, vbi verba Christi accesserint,
corpus est Christi. Before it be consecrated, it is bread, when the words of
Christ are come to it, it is the body of Christ.

Hoc (ait Sacerdos) est corpus meum. Hoc verbo proposita consecratnr. Chryso.
hom. de prodi^i. Iudae.
S. Chrysostom writes, that when the Priest says: This is my body, the things
set forth are consecrated with this word or saying.

If now it be clear, that among many causes which concur to make a Sacrament,
one of the chief is the words pronounced at the same time: and in the Sacrament
of the Altar, seeing they are: This is my body, and, This is my blood, Which are
spoken over bre^d and wine, I say these words may be in no wise figurative.
For by that means they shall not only not consecrate the body and blood of
Christ, but (which is more) they shall not (...) so much as a sign of Christ's
body and blood.

For if words make any thing, they make it by signifiyng, as the which are not
only signs of things, but by S. Augustines August, de d^ct. Christi. li. 2 ca.
3. August. de Magistro.
judgment, they are the chief among all signs. And as the same Doctor says
in an other place, Signum nisi aliquid significet, no^ potest esse signum: A
sign except it signify sumwhat, can not be a sign. Now yt which does not
signify a thing at all, can not by signifiyng make and work that thing, which
it does not signify.

Take these four words, This is my body: Never a one of them does signify
washing. Therefore if a man washing an other with the mind to make him a member
of Christ's body should say, This is my body, out of doubt that man washed
with those words, should not be baptized. What is the cause? Washing was used,
ye minister was present with intent to baptize, some words also lacked not. but
yet because those words lacked, which might signify washing in the name of ye
Trinity, he was not baptized.

If then the words of Sacraments must signify that which shall be made, these
words, This is my body, spoken by any Priest, shall never make the sign of
Christ's body. Because they do The words of Christ's supper do not sig nifie
a figure of his body.
not signify any figure or sign thereof. Ou the other side, If they be in
deed figurative, (as the Zuinglians affirm them to be) they shall not make the
body of Christ, because (they say) Christ meant not so, but only meant a figure
to be made in bread and wine.

Behold to what case we are now brought. We have striued so long about the
words of Christ, whether they be proper or figurative, If Christ's words be
siguratiue, they make nothing at all.
that now they are proved to make nothing at all, if they be figurative. For
they make not the body of Christ, because (if they be figurative) they mean
not to make it. They make no figure of the body, because they name and signify
no figure. And that which they do not signify, they by signifying can not
make. For their whole institution, use, nature, and commodity is to signify,
to show forth, to betoken and make plain the mind of the speaker.

That which words do not signify they do not work. That Words do all (...)
they do by signifying.
which they work not is never don by them. But these words, This is my body,
and this is my blood signify no figure no sign, no token (for so much as
they signify an other thing) therefore they work no figure, they make no
sign, they leave no token. And then have we no Sacrament at all made, because
none is made without such words as may signify that which is made and wrought.

If any man say Christ may mean a figure and sign, and by his meaning, these
words, This is my body, may work a figure o^ his body, I answer, if Christ will
work by his meaning, who can forbed him, seeing he is almighty? And if he will
work without any words, who ca^ gainsaye him? But then his words work not. And
why then are they delivered to us, as the chief instrument to work withal? Why
said he, Hoc facite, Do, and make this Lucae. 22.
thing? why are they rehearsed in every Mass and communion? Why do the
ancient Fathers teach the bread and wine to be consecrated by them? Why may
not Baptism be made by other words then by those which Christ instituted?

Surely to say, that these words, This is my body, make a figure Math. 28
of his body because Christ will have it so, is to say that Christ will not hane
words necessary to the making of his Sacraments. Or it is to say, that he
will have a thing wrought by words, to work the which they be vumete
instruments: as if a man would take a saw to plane timber withal, and a beetil
to cut down a tree. The word of God has given ho^ur to words.


Christ being ye word of God has given that honor to words of men (but yet to
such as are appointed by him self) that they should principally among
isntrumental causes work and make his Sacraments. Next unto words he chose
marvelous convenient things, wherewith they should concur. The things to be
most agreeable to th*effect which they are set to work, all men agree. It is
convenient for water to wash, for bread and wine to concur to the Sacrament of
the Altar as meetest to nourish, for oil to serve in ointing at the use of
other Sacraments.

And now has Christ erred in chosing his words? has he (...) (body) to
signify the figure of his body? To whom does it signify after that sort?
Surely not to all men, as it is e^ident. not to all Christians, as it may
appear, in that we hearing it said, that Christ had a man's body, or walked in a
man's body, or that our Body does sig^i sie y^ substance but not the sigure of a
body.
bodies shall rise at the later day, in all these phrases, we take not the
name of body, for a sign and figure of a body: but we take it to mean the
true substance of flesh and blood.

How then? shall the word body be taken only in the supper of our Lord for the
sign and figure of body? Where is that rul^ readen? Where is that secret
reveled*? For dowtlesse if it were true, it were of it self a mystery, and an
unwont acception appointed by Christ, and it had neded to have been registered in
the Scriptures or in the holy Fathers, or at the least to have been delivered to
us by tradition.

But who teaches, that body stands to signify the figure of body? many
Fathers say the words of Christ are plain, manifest, true, and effectual, but
no man tells us of such a strange taking of the words (body and blood,) noman
witnesses them to be taken for the figures of body and blood, and no maruail.
For no man knew that iuterpretation.

They knew that the true body of Christ given after such a sort How Christ's
body is a figure.
under the foormes of bread and wine, was a figure of the self same body,
either walking visibly upon the earth, or suffering death upon the cross, or
sitting now at the right hand of his Father, or intending to come to judgment.
They could tell, that a thing present in a secret manner, is a token, a sign,
and a watch word to all the faithful, of an open manner, either past or to come
in the same thing. By this means they confessed the Sacrament to be the figure
of Christ's body and blood, but they knew no such figure as the Sacrame^taries
have devised. they never could tell of Synecdoche, or of Meronymia. they knew
Sacramental, and not Rhetorical figures, Mystical, and not Poetical, holy
and not profane. Let him therefore that will have any thing at all made by
Christ's words, acknowledge them to be proper, to signify sumwhat, and to make
that they signify, which is the true body and blood of Christ.

The real presence of Christ's body is that, which The. xv. Chapter.
sets his death and life before us.
WE do acknowledge the Eucharist to be a Sacrament, The Apo logie.
wherein is set after a manner before our eyes the death of Christ, and his
resurrection, and what soever he did here in his humane body.

The eating of common bread and drinking of common wine The answer.
is but an homely manner of setting the death and resurrection and life of
Christ before our eyes. Here is the Sacramentaries argument: I eat bread and
drink wine in token of Christ's death and resurrection, therefore he is dead
and risen. I pray you Sir, how does this argument hold? What affinity has
bread and wine with the death and with the resurrection of Christ?

But if bread and wine be turned into the same body and blood of It is the body
of Christ which sets his death before us, and not bread and wine.
Christ, which died and rose again, which wrought all the miracles done in
this world: Then is the death and resurrection and conversation of Christ in
deed it self set before the eyes of our faith. Because (as Chrisostom
teaches) Hoc idem corpus cruentatum, and caet. This very same body bloudied,
perced with y^ spear gave as it were out of a spring, fountaynes of blood,
healthful to the whole world. And the self body God a^anced unto the highest
seat, the which body also he gave to us, both to the intent we should have it,
and to the intent we should ea^e it.

But what speak I of S. Chrisostom? This (says Christ) is Lucae. 22. 1. Cor.
11
my body, which is given for you. And again, the bread which I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Joan. 6.
How often so ever (says S. Paul) ye shall eat this bread and 1. Cor. 11
drink the chalice of our Lord, ye shall show his death until he comme.

So that the having of the death, and resurrection, and all y^ miracles of
Christ before our eyes at Mass time, rises chiefly of y^ thing which is the
body of Christ. And secondarily of the things which are done about that his
body. The consecrating, the offering, the eating of the self same body, which
wrought these miracles, which died and rose again, those facts I say in that
thing, show his death and resurrection. All other ways of setting the death
and resurrection and conversation of Christ before our eyes without the real
presence of Christ, is painting and shadowing in comparison of this lively
representation.

O how many (says S. Chrisostom) say now adays, I would Hom. 83. in Ma^h.
see the soorm and shape of Christ, I would see his very garments, and
shoowes. Ipsum igitur vides, ipsum ta^gis, ipsum comedis. Lo, thou see him
self, thou touchest him self, thou eatest him self. Non quod corpus illud
(says Damascen) e coelo descendat, sed Damascenus de orthod. side. li. 4.
cap. 14.
quia panis and vinum in Christi corpus and sanguinem transmutatur Not as
though the body of Christ came down from heaven, but because the bread and
wine is changed into the body and blood of Christ.

See now good Reader, whether the Apology say more truly, that, the sign or
token of Christ's body and blood (the body it self not being made present
under the sons of bread and wine as it teaches) do more effectuously set
before our eyes yt death and resurrection and all the miracles of Christ, or
else whether ye incarnation, life, death, and resurrection of him be not better
and more according to the word of God set soorth by the Catholics who teach
that the substance of bread and wine is changed into yt body and blood of
Christ to the end the death and resurrection of the same body might be
effectually remembered.

So teaches S. Cyrillus in these words. Prebet Christus nobis Cyrillus in
Joan. lib. 12. cap. 28.
carnem suam tangendam, etc. Christ gives us his flesh to be tou ched, that we
might believe assuredly that he has in deed reised his temple. For that the
communion of mystical blessing is a certain confession of the resurrection of
Christ, it is proved by his own words. For he distributed the bread after it
was broken, saying, This is my body, which shall be given for you, for the
remission of sins. Make and do this thing for the remembrance of me.
Therefore the participation of yt mystery is a certain true confession and
remembrance that for our sakes and for us our Lord both has died and is
revived, and through that fills us with divine blessing. Let us therefore
flee infidelity after the touching of Christ, and let us be found strong and
steadfast being far from all doubtfulnesse.

Thus far S. Cyrillus. Who alludeth in that place to S. Thomas the Apostle. And
as S. Thomas touching the side of Christ cried out My Lord and my God, even so
S. Cyrillus teaches yt we touch the body of Christ when we come to the holy
communion. Joan. 20.
For as under the visible flesh of Christ, his Godhead lay privy but yet was
truly present, and had assumpted his flesh into one person, even so under the
visible foorm of bread the flesh of Christ is really present in the holy
mysteries, and therefore we touch that flesh, when we touch the foorm of
bread, as S. Thomas did touch the Godhead when he touched the flesh of Christ.
For in each place we touch not either the Godhead or the flesh visibly, but by
the mean of that thing, wherein it is truly present. That thing I say received
of us, does make his death and resurrection to be remembered.

Has not he all that ever Christ did, presently before his eyes, who has
Christ him self present? But take Christ away, and afterward it is a foolish
dream to talk, how his deeds be set before our eyes by bread and wine. The
appearance of bread is the token, that Christ's body is here to be eaten. And
the similitude of wine does show, that his blood is here to be drunken. But the
true showing of his death, life, and resurrection, arises of that truth which
is under those foormes.

When I eat the body that died, I show the death of it, because 1. Cor. 11
no sacrificed flesh was ever eaten before the host was offered. But we eat
really the body of Christ, therefore our fact cries, that Christ is dead. We
eat his body alive having the blood and soul in it, therefore our fact
cries, he is risen again. Thus the Ca tholiks reason. Let him that has common
sense judge, who goes nere the truth of the Gospel, the Sacramentarie, or the
Catholic.

Our thanksgeuing and remembrance of Christ's death is altogether by the real
presence of his body. The. xvi. Chapter.

TO the intent we should give thanks for his death and our The Apo logie.
deliverance, and that by often resorting to the Sacraments, we should
continually renew the remembrance thereof.

These men presuppose we have a sign or token left unto us The answer.
in bread and wine, to give thanks withal. We have in deed a token, but this
token though it were made of bread and wine, is not bread and wine. For Christ
in his last supper, took bread, Lucae. 22.
and when he had given thanks, he said, This is my body, which is given for
you, do and make this thing for the remembrance of me.

Behold the token, wherein Christ both him self gave thanks, and would us to
give thanks in the same. The making of his body for us, is the thanksgeuing for
his death, and for our deliverance.

Ipso genere sacrificij (says S. Chrysostom) ad iugem nos pro Chrysostom. in
Hom. 26 in Math.
beneficijs suis inuitans gratiarum actionem: Stirring us to give thanks
perpetually for his benefits, by the very kind of the sacrifice. And showing
farther in an other place what kind of sacrifice it is, God (says Chrysostom)
did yearly by certain holydays set the remembrances of his benefits before the
Jews. Tibi vero Chrysostom. Hom. 51. in Math.
quotidie ipse, ne obliuiscaris, proponitur. But he is set before thee daily
him self, lest thou should be unmindful.

See now by what means the death of Christ is renewed. Not by tokens wherein
he is doubtfully called to mind, him self being absent, (for that were a
feeble token) but by these tokens, wherein him self is made present, lest we
should forgett his death.

The body of Christ must be made, to the intent we may remember Lucae. 22.
his death. If you take from us the making of his body which causes the
vehement remembrance of the death, it is afterward a vain thing to talk of
the remembrance of his death by eating bread and drinking wine. For the
necessary mean of necessary remembrance of his death, consists in the
real presence of him that died. For who can forget his death, whose body is
daily made, worshipped and eaten, to the end the death may be remembered. But I
may right well eat bread and drink wine, not yet remembering thereby, that
Christ is dead for me.

The true resurrection of our bodies comes by The. xvii. Chapter.
eating that body of Christ, which is both true and is true in us.
TO the intent we being fed with the body and blood of The Apo logie.
Christ, may be brought into the hope of the resurrection, and of everlasting
life, and may most assuredly believe that the body and blood of Christ does in
like manner feed our souls, as bread and wine does feed our bodies.

I omit to say any thing upon that oversight, wherein the English The answer.
translation of a body has left out the word Vero, the true body, which the
Latin edition has. But here the Apology presupposes that Christ's supper
consists as well of bread and wine, as of body and blood. The first two they
will have given to the bodies: The later twain to the souls. The bread and
wine they will have present on the table, whence they be delivered: The body
and blood they will have to be received from heaven, by faith and
understanding. Against this dream thus I reason out of ye word of God.

Christ made his whole supper upon a visible table, accordingly as it was
prophesied by king David, Parasti in conspectu meo Psalm. 22.
mensam. Thou have prepared a table in my sight. And by Solomon, Prou. 9.
Sapientia proposuit mensam sua^ and insipientibus locuta est: venite, comedite
panem meum, and bibite vinum quod miscui vobis. Wisdom has set forth her
table, and has spoken to simple men: come ye, eat my bread, and drink ye
wine which I have mixed for you. S. Paul says, Non potestis mensae Domini
participes 1. Cor. 10
esse, and mensae Daemoniorum. Ye can not be partakers of our Lords table, and
of the table of devils.

Put these three together, and the sense will be, the supper and table of our
Lord was prepared and set forth in the sight of the faithful, that they might
thence cate and drink such as the wisdom of God gave them at his supper.
Therefore no meat, no food, no banquet is to be looked for at his supper, but
such as is prepared by Christ and set forth upon his table. Otherwise Christ
Psalm. 22.
had prepared no supper, in the sight of yt faithful (as David foretold) nor
had not set forth his table (as Solomon prophesied) Prou. 9.
nor we had not been partakers of our Lords table (as S. Paul 1. Cor. 10
writes.

For bread and wine is not prepared of Christ: But was before Bread and wine
was not y^ table that Christ pre pared.
hand made ready by the baker and vintner, or by the servants y^ brought them
forth. The preparing which Christ made, was by blessing and conse^ng, to make
of earthly bread, the bread of life everlasting. And having made it, he
delivered the same to the Apostles, and bad them both make and do that thing.

If he delivered not his own body with his own hands, Lucae. 22.
doubtless they did not eat his body. For he, said in respect only of that
which he delivered, take and eat. Whereupon S. Chrysostom Hom. 82 in Math.
says to him that comes to our Lords table: Cogita quid manu capias, and
caet. Bethink thy self what thou take in thy hand, and keep it free from all
covetousness and violent robbery. Consider again, that thou take it not only
in thy hand, but also The hand and to^ ge receive ^he same body y^ the heart
does.
put it to the mouth (and) after thy hand and tongue, the heart receaueth
that dreadful mystery. Thus much S. Chrysostom.

Let any reasonable man judge, whether he says not, that the heart receaueth
the same which the hand does, and the hand the same, which the heart does. For
if the heart receive it after yt hand, the hand received it before the heart.

It is not therefore, as the Sacramentaries falsely teach, bread only in hand,
and body only in heart: But body as well in hand, as in heart. And none other
true body in the heart, then was first in the hand, and mouth.

For this cause ever since we received the faith, we called this blessed supper,
The Sacrament of the altar. As if we said, the Sacrament Why the supper of
Christ is called the Sacrament of the altar. Malach. 1
which is made upon the altar or upon the table of Christ. for the table of
Christ is an altar, as in Malachie it may appear, and in an other place, by the
favor of God, I will declare.

This name of the Sacrament of the altar was delivered to us with our
Christianity, and it is found very often in the old writers, namely in S.
Augustine. By which we are informed that De ciuit. Dei. li. 10 cap. 6.
the consecration and oblation thereof is made, not in the hearts of men by
words of promising and preaching, but upon the visible altar, in the sight of
Christian people, by y^ visible Priest who as a public minister ordained by
God, consecrateth the body of Christ by the same power, which Christ gave when
he said: Hoc Lucae. 22.
facite, do and make this thing.

This is (...) table prepared in the sight of David, set forth by Psalm. 22.
Prou. 9. 1. Cor. 10 August. li. 9. confess. ca. 13.
the wisdom of God, whereof we are partakers, when we receive the blessed
Sacrament of the altar. At this altar S. Augustines mother desired a memory of
her to be made, vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam, qua deletum est
chirographum quod erat contrarium nobis. From which altar my mother knew
(says S. Augustine) the holy sacrifice to be distributed, whereby the
handwriting that was contrary to us, is put out. Behold the sacrificed body of
Christ was dispe^sed and given from the altar, as both S. Augustine, and his
mother, and all the faithful then believed. Thus thou see the dream of the
Apology by the word of God to be blown away like chaf and dust dispersed with
the wind.

The Apology says, our bodies are fed at Christ's supper Math. 26
with bread and wine. that is not in the word of God, where it is said: Eat,
This is my body.

The Apology seems to say, that our bodies be not no^rished with the body and
blood of Christ, for it assigns body and blood to our souls as our bodies
are fed with bread and wine. But Christ gave his body to no^rish our bodies
also. And therefore Joan. 6.
said: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye
shall not have life in you. That is (as Cyrillus expounds Cyrillus li. 10. c.
13 in Joan.
it) In corpore vestro, in your body. And therefore on the other side Christ
said, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, and
I will reyse him again in the last day. Ego (says Cyrillus) Id est, corpus
meum quod comedetur. I will reyse him, that is to say, my body which shall be
eaten. Reysing belongs to the body which falls into putrefaction by death.

As therefore the body is raised by Christ's body: so the body lives in the
state of grace, by Christ's body. and such life is by spiritual nutriment,
which is received of the flesh of Christ really present in us.

For which cause Tertullian confessed that not only our soul, Tertul. in lib.
de resurrec. carnis. Ireneus aduersus haereses. li. 4. c. 34.
but also our body seedeth upon the body and blood of Christ, to the intent our
soul may be made fat of God. Likewise Ireneus writes that our flesh is
nourish^d of the body and blood of our Lord.

We may now see what error they fall into, who assign the body and blood of
Christ to our souls, and bread and wine to our bodies, whereas there is no
substance left of bread or wine, but even our bodies feed upon Christ's body,
as Ireneus, Cyrillus and Tertullian have said.

Nothing is wrought in the supper of Christ according The (...).
to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries.
AFter the Apology had spoken of communion under both kinds, and of
transubstautiation, of which points as yet I speak not, it returns again in
a confuse manner to the matter of the real presence, and thus it says.

And in speaking thus, we mean not to abase the Lords supper, The Apo logie.
or to teach that it is but a cold ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought
therein, as many falsely slander us, we teach.

If they that pluck down altars, and other ornaments of Christ's The answer.
supper, if they that call the blessed Sacrament of the altar by so vile names
as you and your scholars have done, be not of your By what means y^ Lords sup
per is aba sed now in Engla^^
number, if they be not your derelings, if they learned not that contempt of
holy things, and the denial of the unbloody sacrifice of you, if they first
persuaded not the licenciouse youth and faithless company of men and w^men in
England rather by blasphemous names, given to the Eucharist, then by any word
of God (which you still pretend and never allege) then let it be thought, that
you mean not to abase the Lords supper.

But if you did set all the players and minstrels in the realm a work with
such scoffs, as your brotherhead invented against the blessed body and blood
of Christ, I fear me you be not slaundered, when you are said to teach it to
be but a cold ceremony, The Apo logie names y^ ho nouring of Christ's body,
the worshipping of bread.
since you doubt not to call, even in this Apology, y^ honor done to it the
worshipping of bread, whereas it is in deed the worshipping of the true body
and blood of Christ.

Well, you teach not, that nothing is wrought or made in the supper. Then by
like you teach, that somewhat is wrought there. I would fain see what it is
which you teach to be wrought in the sup per. For where you say, that Christ
gives him self in his supper that we may eat him by faith: You teach a work
of Christ, in giving him self, and a work of ours in eating him, but not any
thing wrought or made in the supper it self.

For the supper is that meat which is provided to be eaten at the table of
Christ. There you confess bread and wine to be taken. But seeing you teach the
same things (notwithstanding he speaks otherwise of them) yet to tarry bread
and wine still, I can not perceive, what substanciall thing you teach^ to be
wrought No substanciall thing is wrought in Christ's supper by the
Sacramentaries doctrine.
in the supper concerning the matter of the supper, which is bread and wine.
Now concerning the body and blood of Christ, which you grant to be given by
faith, I trow you teach not any thing to be wrought a new and made therein,
since they be impassible, and therefore can not have any thing made in them.
what is it then, which you teach to be made in the supper?

Either bread and wine is the supper, or the body and blood of Christ, or both
together. For nothing else is there mentioned. Bread and wine, you say, remain
still as they were before concerning their substance. Then I say, nothing is
wrought in them. The body and blood of Christ can have nothing wrought in their
substance, because that wherein somewhat shall be made, must suffer of that which
works it. therefore gloss the matter how ye will, you teach not any
substanciall thing to be wrought in the supper of Christ, except you call the
geastes them selves the supper. And then I we^e they must be eaten up of some
body, in so much as every supper is provided to be eaten.

We teach the substance of bread and wine to be made the substance What the
Catholics believe to be wrought.
of Christ's body and blood. And that is y^ true work made in the supper of
Christ, where the mutable creatures are turned into the immutable substance of
Christ. which work since you deny, babble what you will, you teach nothing to be
wrought in the supper of Christ.

The real presence of Christ's flesh is proved by the The. xix. Chapter.
express naming of flesh, blood, and body, which are names of his humane
nature.
FOr we affirm that Christ does truly and presently give his The Apo logie.
own self in his Sacraments. in Baptism, that we may put him on, and in his
supper, that we may eat him by faith and spirit, and may have everlasting
life by his cr^sse and blood.

Hear ye not how they affirm that Christ presently gives his The (...).
own self? would not a man think they meant honestly and truly? But since they
can make the words of Christ figurative when they list, wonder not if they
require their own words to be taken figuratively.

They mean not that Christ does give him self presently to our bodies and
souls, as is requisite to the presence of the flesh The Apo logie ^peaketh
(...) and meaner^ evil.
and blood of man. why then use they such words? Uerily because they see the
Scriptures so plain, the Fathers and Counsels so manifest, the ^aith and
practice of the Church so evident for y^ real presence of Christ, that in no
wise they may confess any other thing then they do. And yet on the other side
being fully determined to stick to their desperate opinion, that we really
neither eat nor drink under form of bread and wine the flesh and blood of
Christ, they have invented such kind of speaking, as may both seem to agree
with the Scriptures, and yet withal mayntein their false doctrine. The which
thing that thou may the better understand, this is to be considered.

The Catholic faith is, that Christ in one person has two natures: Two
natures in one person of Christ.
The nature of God, and the nature of man. which two natures are joined and
united together into one person, after such sort, that what so ever is said of
the one nature, may be said of the other, if we speak by that word which
signifies the person. For example, we may say that man was in heaven before
the Joan. 3.
ascension of Christ, and that God died, not because the nature of God could be
borne of a woman or dye, or ye nature of man could be in heaven before the
ascension of Christ, but because that which was borne and dyed, was also God,
and that which was in heaven was also man. albeit his birth and death was by
the nature of man, and his being in heaven by the nature of God. The natures
then tarry distinct, but y^ person of God and man is but one. Now shall you see
the mean, whereby these new prechers go about to deceive you.

They say Christ gives him self in his Sacraments. The word Christ, and him
self be names of his person
(Christ) does signify his person, wherein he is both God and man: Likewise
the word (him self) is a word belonging to his person, wherein both natures of
God and man are contained. Now when they say Christ gives him self, they mean
that he being God and man gives by some spiritual way the virtue of his flesh
and blood, which they call him self, for that he, as God, being every where,
may dwell in us more excellently by charity, as the Father and the holy Ghost
do.

But they mean not by giving of him self, ye real gift of his person and of
both natures which are joined therein, after such sort that our whole nature
might receive his nature. For then they should teach that, which we do. But
howsoever they babble of our souls, they will grant our bodies no touching nor
tasting of him, no not so much as under y^ ^oormes of bread and wine. You have
heard what they say: Now hear what Christ says.

Christ speaks of him self in diverse places diuersely. Due where he says:
I will not leave you Orphans, I will come unto Joan. 14.
you. There he speaks of his person, and concerning the nature of Godhead, as
it appears afterward where it is written: If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my Father will love him and we will come unto him, and make a mansion
or dwelling with him, or at his house. Here he speaks first in such sort of
his own coming, that his Father (as it appeared afterward) might come after the
same sort. Then was it the coming of God, and not of man.

At his departure when he ascended from the world into heaven, he said: Behold
I am with you all days even until the consummation of the world. These words
may be meant as well by Math. 28
the nature of manhod, which we have with his Godhead in the S. Germanus in
rer. Ecc. Theoria.
Sacrament of the altar (and so some holy Doctors have taken them) as also by
the only nature of the Godhead, which is every where by majesty, and in good
men by grace.

In an other place he said: Poor men ye shall have always Math. 26
with you, me ye shall not have always. Where, by the word, me, he means
not his Godhead, which is allways every where, but the nature of his manhod,
and that not as it is in the Sacrament, but as it was when he spoke, in a
visible form of a poor man, who had not any house of his own, where he might
rest his head.

Last of all let us mark, after what sort he said that he would Math. 8.
be in his blessed supper. Did he say: I will give my self to be eaten and to
be dr^nken? If he had said so, yet seeing he had mentioned eating and drinking,
which according to the letter, rather belongs to his manhod then to his
Godhead, we should rather have thought, that the words must have been taken
properly, then improperly. To eat the substance of a man may be said properly,
for in deed it may be eaten with mouth and teeth, but to Cyrillus in. 11.
Anathematismu^
eat the substance of God it is said improperly: For it can not be eaten with
teethe and mouth (as also S. Cyrillus has noted) but only with understanding
and faith.

If then Christ had said before supper, I will give my self to be eaten, and
had said at his supper: I do give my self to be eaten: These words with a
circumstance of a supper, had made so strongly for the bodily giving of him
self, that their part had been more probable, who had understood it of his
manhod. With whom if the tradition of the Apostles had stood, there were no
doubt but he should have been a wicked heretik, who, when Christ had said I
give my self to be eaten, would have denied that we had eaten the humane nature
of Christ.

But now attend what words Christ used: He forcseing this hearesie made (...)
against it, and therefore he said not, I will give or do give my self to be
eaten, as heretics now delight Christ used the names of his humane nature in
his supper.
to speak, but I give my flesh, my body, my blood. These are not words of
personage, which may be applied two ways, but they are the words of nature,
and only of man's nature. For God by y^ nature of his Godhead has neither flesh
ne blood, ne soul, ne body, ne bone. Christ as man has all these things.

Now do the heretics and false preachers of our age maruclously deceive the
people of God, who always say that they diminish not Christ's benefit, nor do
not abuse the Lords supper, (...) (say they) we teach that Christ gives his
own self, and they repete again and again his own self, his own self. And
thereby they mean no more then the coming of his grace and charity into our
souls, by faith, spirit, and understanding: Wholly robbing us of that flesh
which dyed for us, and of that blood which was shed for us.

For although God was able to have saved man otherwise, yet he swetely disposed
our salvation, by sending his dear son to take It is real flesh and blood
which saves us.
of the virgyn our flesh and blood. This flesh and this blood works our
salvation: Which he y^ takes away from the Sacrament of the altar, depriueth
us of the mean whereby to come to life everlasting. For as by this flesh and
blood we are redeemed: So that redemption is applied to all that be of lawful
age by worthy Joan. 6.
eating and drinking thereof. Now when these preachers cry unto you, of God, of
faith, of spirit, of understanding, of virtue, they seem perhaps to say goodly
things, but they craftily put you from that only mean of flesh and blood,
whereby God has ordained our salvation. Abraham was the sather of al beleuers,
Romans 4.
because never any man's belefe was so thoroughly tried, as his. He lacked not
grace, virtue and understanding, but he lacked the flesh and blood of Christ:
Which flesh when it came really into the world, when it was crucified and
gusshed out streams of blood, then the soul of Christ delivered the soul of
Abraham and all the other Fathers out of prison.

Well, to end this matter, Christ to show that he would be in his supper by y^
nature of his manhed, for that cause he named not his person, but his flesh,
his body, his blood. And S. Paul named Ephe. 5.
his bones, as you shall see hereafter. Wherefore y^ talk of his presence by
faith is unfaithful, y^ talk of his presence by spirit as Lucae. 24.
thereby excluding his body and soul from our bodies and souls, is spritish
and devilish. A spirit has no flesh and bones: Christ is with us in the
substance of his own flesh, and of his own bones.

And yet that we might understand that Christ naming flesh and blood, means
not that either his flesh is under y^ form of bread without blood, or his
blood under the form of wine without flesh, but that under each kind both
flesh and blood and soul and Godhead is: he says, he that eats my flesh and
drinks my Joan. 6.
blood, taryethin me, and I in him. That is to say, when I promise flesh and
blood, I name them only to declare plainly, that my being in the Sacrament is a
being according to y^ truth of my humane nature, and not as though I were not
there in mine own person. for he that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. But it I had said, that I give my self and no
more: (...) false preachers had expounded my self by my Godhead and by faith
upon me, my simple faithful people might have been deceived.

I name flesh, body, and blood, to show according to what nature I am (...).
But I am not divided as though my flesh were under one kind, and mie blood
under the other. And therefore I say last of all: He that catcth me, he also,
shall live for me, so that I am altogether in mine own person under each
kind, after consecration. Mark this again and again, and let not the
doctrine We ought to believe as y^ word of God speaks.
of Christ him self pretended in suttil words, deceive thee any longer. Believe
thou the presence of body, of blood, of flesh, and of bones, as the word of God
speaks.

It is a cold supper which the Sacramentaries assign The. xx. Chapter.
to Christ, in comparison of his true supper.
ANd we say not this is done slightly and coldly, but effectually The Apo
logie.
and truly.

The eating of Christ by faith and spirit is no slight or The answer.
cold thing. But to say that no more is done in his supper, that is slightly
and coldly said. Partly because so much may be done without Why (...)
Sacramentaries make the (...) of Christ a cold supper. Joan. 6.
the supper, namely when so ever a man with good faith and charity does
meditate upon his gloriouse victory over death and sin: Partly because, it
is a cold thing to (...) men, who consist of bodies, to a supper of Christ's
making, and to give their bodies none other meat then corruptible bread and
wine, as you teach, whereas Christ did forbid us to work the perishing meat
at his banquet.

How can y^ be worthily called y^ supper of Christ, which a man may make at
home, without coming to the table of Christ? As though it were not for his
honor to have a singular kind of sup^ of his own. Every man may eat bread
and drink wine at his own house with his wife and children, and remember that
Christ died for them, neither will Christ leave his good devotion unrewarded,
wherein the supper, that you assign to Christ, consists and is fulfilled.
And is not that, which may be done at private men's tables, coldly and slightly
done in comparison of that great sacrifice of the true Melchisedech, who by his
blessed word turns the substance of the bread and wine into that body of his
1. Cor. 10 Hebr. 5.
which died, and into that blood which was shed for us?

By eating we touch the body of Christ, as it may The. xxi. Chapter
be touched under the foorm of bread.
FOr although we do not touch the body of Christ with teeth The Apo logie.
and mouth, yet we hold him fast and eat him by faith, by understanding, and
by the spirit.

These men have lost their wits through malice. As who can The answer.
devise an eating of meat in a supper, which eating shall be without touching
the meat that is eaten with teeth and mouth.

For in the supper of Christ it is a detestable heresy and an intolerable
Math. 26
ignorance to say, that Christ saying: Take and eat, did not mean taking by
hands or mouths, and eating by teeth and mouth. Taking and eating is not
without touching: Christ said Take and eat, this is my body, therefore he said
in effect, touch my body with your teeth and with your mouth.

Neither does it skill that his body is immortal and impassible. for though it
be not perished by the eating, yet the eating and tou ching is not therefore
false, but so much the truer, by how much the meat received is the more
profitable cue^ to our bodies. And as we are said truly to kiss the Kings
knee, when we kiss his hose under which the knee is contained: even so in
touching the accidents of bread and wine, we touch the body and blood of
Christ which is contained under them. For which cause S. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
in 1. Cor. 10 Hom. 24 and in Math. 83
said, (...) we do not only see, we do not only touch, but we eat, and
fasten our teeth in y^ slesh of Christ, thereby noting and teaching the
undoubted presence thereof under the foorm of bread. Which foorm we see, we
touch, we eat, we chaw, and by that means we do these things to the body of
Christ under that foorm, not perishing the body one whit. For the same cause S.
Cyrillus speaking of the blessed Eucharist, says of Christ: Praebet Cyrillus
in loan. li. 12. c. (...)
nobis carnem suam tangenda^, vt firmiter credamus, quia templum vere suum
suscitauit. He gives us his flesh to be touched, that we might believe
assuredly, that he has truly reised his temple, that is to say, his own body.
Christ gives us his flesh to be touched, and yet do we not touch it? But how
do we touch it? Uerily as S. Thomas touched the Godhead of Christ. For as in
Joan. 20.
touching his flesh he confessed him to be God, because the Godhead lay hid in
that flesh: right so, when we touch with teeth and mouth the form of bread in
the holy mysteries, we confess that we touch thereby the flesh which lies
hid under that form, and yet the Apology denies us to touch the body of
Christ with teeth and mouth.

And whereas it says we hold him fast by faith, that is true also, but it is
not the whole truth. for as S. Thomas the Apostle did believe upon the Godhead
of Christ, and withal touch the flesh wherein it dwelt corporally: even so we
believe the presence of his body, and touch it under the foorm of bread, not
hindering Colos. 2.
our touching by our belefe, but rather furthering our belefe by our touching,
for so much as we touch that visibly, wherein we believe the flesh of Christ to
be inuisibly. The Apology supposes holding by faith, to be contrary to
touching with teeth. But we think them both to agree right well, and both to
be true in their proper kind.

S. Ireneus writing against those heretics who denied the resurrection Ireneus
aduersus (...). li. 5.
of our flesh, says: that S. Paul naming spiritual men, does call them so,
because they partake of the spirit, Sed non secundum defraudationem and
interceptionem carnis, but not as defrauding them, or as taking their flesh
from them. Even so it is true that we hold Christ by faith, spirit, and
understanding in the holy mysteries, but we thereby ought not to take away the
truth of his flesh which is in the same mysteries. It is an old custom of
heretics by ye assertion of one truth to imbarr and stop an other truth,
whereas y^ Catholics believe as well y^ one as y^ other.

The ^acramentaries have neither understanding, The. (...). Chapter.
nor faith, nor spirit, nor devotion to receive Christ withal.
ANd this is no vain faith which does comprehend Christ, The (...) logie.
and that is not received with cold devotion, which is received with
understanding, with faith, and with spirit.

The faith of receiving Christ in spirit (which you speak of) The answer.
is not vain, when it denies not some verity of the Gospel. But seeing you
deny this to be the body of Christ which Christ visibly delivered, now it is a
vain faith to believe, that who so denies Math. 26
parcel of his faith, does notwithstanding comprehend and receive Christ by
faith or spirit.

What understanding have you, that say: This is my body, does not mean, This
is my body?

What faith have you, that believe not the working and effectual words of Christ
which were spoken with blessing?

What spirit have you, when you know not y^ words of Christ Marc. 14.
to be spirit and life, as y^ which make all that which they sound in yt Joan.
6.
consecration of his holy mysteries? It is a warm devotion that hearing the
body of Christ by him self affirmed to be present, can eat without adoring,
and deny Godly honor to it. God keep Psalm. 21.
me and all others from such faith, such understanding, such spirit, and such
de^otion.

The real presence of Christ's body is proved by The. xxiii. Chapter.
the confession of the Apology.
FOr Christ him self altogether is so offered and given us in The Apo logie.
these mysteries, that we may certainly know, we be flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones, and that Christ continues in us, and we in him.

If Christ be given us in these mysteries, he is present in them. The answer.
For a gift is not made of a thing absent. But he is not any where to be showed
present, but only under the forms of bread and wine A gift is of a thing
present.
and yet Christ showed his body and blood saying: This is my body and this is
my blood. This and this be words that show things which are spoken of.
therefore the presence of Christ, which you confess, and which him self
shows, must needs be meant of his presence under the forms of bread and wine.

Again if we may certainly know, we are flesh of Christ's flesh, and bone of
his bones, if we may know it (as your words import) by his presence in these
mysteries: Seeing our knowledge That is not know (...) which (...) not true
must needs rise of a certain truth, (otherwise it were an error and not a
knowledge) it is certainly true, that in these mysterics we are by the presence
of Christ in them, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. But y^ can not
be, except y^ flesh and bones of Christ be really present, yea so really
present as Christ's mother was really present to him, and he to her when he
took flesh of her flesh. For a coniunctio^ betwixt y^ flesh of Christ and y^
flesh of men ca^ not de made by faith, spirit, and understanding: For y^ is a
coniunctio^ o^ mind, but not of flesh and bones. Flesh and bones have no faith
or (...) with flesh can not be made by (...) only.
spirit, whereby the conjunction between them and Christ may be received. they
have a natural substance as well in Christ as in us.

And as the man and wife can not be one flesh by the consent of marriage, except
in deed they come bodily together: Even so ca^ not the flesh of Christ be made
one with our flesh, except both his flesh he present in the Sacrament for us,
and we come to the self Sacrament to be joined to it. And this example of
marriage is so good and true, that S. Paul him self uses it in talking of this
very conjunction of flesh and bones betwixt us and Christ. which now the
Apology seems to allude unto. But the flesh of Christ comes not from his
Fathers right hand corporally to be joined with our flesh: Therefore it
remains that the bread is by consecration turned into Christ's (...), to
the intent it may ^e received and made one with our flesh.

Other means how either Christ may be present in flesh, or his flesh joined to
our flesh, the Gospel never taught, the Fathers never learned, y^ Catholic
Church never knew. But by this means, S. Irenens, S. Hilarie, S. Cyril, S.
Chrysostom, and other Fathers co^sesse our natural joining with Christ's
flesh, as it shall appear in diverse places of this book.

The contrariety of the Apology is showed, and The. (...). Chapter.
that the lifting up of our harrs to heaven is no good cause, why we should
lift the body of Christ from the altar.
ANd therefore in celebrating these mysteries the people are The Apo logie.
to good purpose exhorted, before they come to receive the holy commun^on, to
lift up their hearts, and to direct their minds to heauenward, because he is
there, by whom we must be full fed and live.

Who ever had to do with so forgetful men? A e^ueller name I The answer.
will not use. For Gods sake, good reader, suffer not thy self to be lead of
them, as if thou had nor wit nor sense. Be a child in 1. Cor. 14
anoiding malice, but in understanding show thy self a man.

I assure thee he is not worthy to be called a man, who perceauing their
extreme folly (as now he may) yet will addict him self to follow their doctrine.
See I beseech you how this gear hangs together.

Christ (said the Apology in the last sentence) gives him self present in
these mysteries, and we know we are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones,
and therefore we are bid lift up our hearts to heaven, because he is there by
whom we must be full fed and live.

Mark how this (therefore) comes in. it agrees together as if it were said in
shorter words: Christ gives him self present in The contr^tie of the Apo logie.
these mysteries, and therefore he is not here but in heaven, seeding us from
thence.

You deceived deceauers, how fear you not to dally thus with the dreadful
mysteries of God? Does Christ offer and give him self present in th^e
mysteries, or no? You grant he does. be these mysteries in heaven, or in
earth? I suppose they be in earth. Then (say I) your words import, that Christ
gives him self present in the earth. How then do you straight way infer (by
a therefore) that we are bid lift up our hearts to h^nward, because he is there,
by whom we must be (...) fed? If you mean he is both there and here, you say
very well, bu^ the you grant his body to be at once in diverse places, at the
least by y^ way of Sacrame^tall being. Except you will say his body is not in
these mysteries, and then he gives not him self present. For his body is the
chief thing whereof this Sacrament is named.

Neither we are flesh of his flesh in those mysteries, where his flesh is not
present to be joined with ours. You say, that Christ gives him self present,
yea so far present, that we know certainly we are flesh of his flesh, and yet
you bid us go to heaven, because he is there of whom we must be full fed. As
though his mysteries were not in earth, in which you grant he gives him sel^
present.

If any spark of grace remain in you, consider that God has Romans 1.
given you over into a lewd understanding, into a blind heart, in to palpable
darkness. Ye would set God and the devil together, ye would reconcile your fond
hearesie with the healthful Gospel of Christ, you would seem to conf^e with
Christ, y^ he gives him self present in these mysteries, with S. Paul, that we
are flesh o^ Joan. 6.
Christ's flesh, and yet withal you will join your own repugnant Ephesians. 5.
assertion, that the body of Christ is only in heaven, and consequently not in
these mysteries which are in earth. The longer you stand in this repugnance,
the more you shame your selves.

I have not spoken this for any other cause but to stir up your minds by words
of sharp warning (which S. Paul bids us Tit. 3.
use to heretics) thereby to provoke some such, as have regard to their souls,
to repent in time, and to persuade them selves that they are not able to give a
new exposition of Christ's supper, which may stand with the old Gospel of
Christ's Church. The body of Christ is the meat of his supper. For thereof he
said: Take Math. 26
eat, this is my body. If then Christ give him self present in these
mysteries, he geneth his body present. If his body be present, how say ye, we
must lift up our hearts to heaven, there to be full fed? Is not Christ him self
being present, able to feed us full? How is it then, that we must go up to
heaven to be full fed? But let us farther consider your discrete discurse.

It is said in the preface of the Mass: Lift up your hearts. which words you
interpret as though it were said, your meat is in heaven, and not upon the
holy table. This argument I maruail if any man be able to answer: The people
are warned before consecration, to li^t up their minds to heaven: Therefore
the body of Christ is not really present on the alter aftar consecration. As
much to say, as: Before the incarnation of Christ the Prophets and Patriarchs
called and cried to God them selves, and also exhorted the people to pray for
ye coming of Christ, therefore when he was come, he was not true God and true
man in earth.

We cry: Lift up your hearts, before the body of Christ is made, as beseching
God we may have his body made for us. and when it is made, we lift the body it
self up, to be adored, and worshipped of the faithful people as having then
obtained our desire, and yt because it is the true body of true God.

And yet even after consecration and after the body is really Chry so. de Dei
natura Hom. 4.
present, it might well be said, lift up your hearts to heaven. where by lifting
up, we should mean nothing else, but that the faithful men should not give
them selves to wordly thoughts of ye earth, of money, of flesh, but list up
their minds to think of everlasting joys.

Again by naming heaven, we mean not to deny y^ real presence either of God
in the whole earth, or of Christ on the altar, but only to show that we should
look for another world and y^ life thereof.

This argument might have become a tinkar better then a divine, and least of
all it could become a superintendent, who ought to have known, that y^ Church
is y^ kingdom of heaven, and therefore the kingdom of God is within us: and
that to consider, Lucae. 17.
what Christ works in his Church and for her sake, is also after one sort to
lift up our hearts to heaven: and last of all he ought to consider that S.
Chrysostom writes.

Did thou not promise y^ Priest, when he cried: lift up your Chryso. Hom.
de Eucharistia.
minds and hearts, and saidest thou not: we lift them up unto our Lord? Will
you see a wonderful matter? The table is furnished with the mysteries, the
Lamb of God is offered for thee, the Priest is hofull for thee, a spiritual
fire flows from the table.

See what lifting up of hearts was to the old Fathers. It was, to acknowledge the
mysteries upon the table, to believe the sacrifice of the Mass, and not to deny
the real presence of Christ. That is in deed a homely lifting up of hearts, to
lift the body and blood of Christ, clean from the altar and holy table. Such
lifting away becomes thieves.

Hitherto these men brought neither any evident authority of Scripture,
thereby to fortify their opinion, nor any sentence of ancient Father,
concerning the question of the real presence. And now I pray you see what
worshipful gear they bring. We say in the Mass, lift up your hearts, before y^
body is sanctified and made present: therefore it is not made present at all.
We say grace before the meat is set upon the table: therefore none at all is
set there. This is the stuff of them that boast so much of the Gospel.

This is my body is forgotten: which is four times repeted twice of two
Apostles, and twice of two Evangelists. Yet is that forgotten, and, lifting up
of hearts, which came of the good invention of Godly Fathers, but yet from men
it came, that is called in for a witness, against the truth of the Gospel.
And yet every man thinkeththey bring nothing but the pure word of God for their
false doctrine.

What be gross imaginations concerning the supper The. xxv. Chapter.
of Christ.
ANd Cyrillus says, that in the receiving of the mysteries, The Apo logie.
all gross imaginations must be put away.

Here is the second authority alleged against the real presence The answer.
of Christ's body, and that, I warrant you, full strong.

Gross imaginations must be put away in receiving the mysteries: The argu
meant of y^ Apology.
therefore Christ spoke not properly nor truly, when he said, This is my body.
Are we not now happy to have such fine preachers, who can show the believing of
that, which Christ says and teaches, to be a gross imagination? O gross
imagination of these pitiful preachers. May there be a more gross
imagination, then to imagine that Christ lied? Cyrillus bids us put Cyrillu^
in Epist. ad Calosyr.
away gross imaginations, and Cyrillus says of y^ real presence, Ne dubites
an hoc verum sit, eo manifest dicente, hoc est corpus meum: Sed potius suscipe
verba Saluatoris in fide. Cum enim sit veritas, non mentitur. Doubt thou not
whether this be true, since him self plainly says: This is my body. But rather
embrace the words of our Savior in faith. For seeing he is the truth, he lies
not.

Who so consydereth well these words, may understand, that Cyrillus thought
nothing more gross, then to doubt whether yt body of Christ be present or no.
What gross imaginations then did Cyrillus bid us put away? 1.
For sooth above all, yt we should not imagine, Christ to lie. 2.
Secondly that we should not imagine his words, concerning this Sacrament, to be
dark or obscure, seeing Christ (as he says) spoke manifestly. 3.
Again, that no man should think, any other body to be given, besides the true
body of Christ, who in one person is God and man.

In the time of Cyrillus, a great heretic named Nestorius, Nestorius his
hearesie.
scholar to one Diodorus, falsely taught that Christ had two persons, one of
God, an other of man. Therefore they imagined, the the body of Christ (which
all the world, even the heretics them selves, believed to be present upon the
altar after consecration) to be the body of man, but not the proper body of God
the word.

This was a very gross imagination, and therefore ought to be put away from
the mind of faithful men, in receiving the mysteries. Hereof Cyrillus
literally said, Number hominis comestionem In. 11. Anathematismo
nostrum hoc Sucramentum pronuncias, and irreligiose ad crassas cogitationes
vrges eorum mentem qui crediderunt? Do thou pronounce this our Sacrament, to
be the eating of a man? And do thou irreuerently enforce the mind of the
faithful, to gross cogitations?

Behold, the gross cogitation was to think, that we do eat yt body of a
man, whereas in deed through ye unity of person it is y^ ^ody of God him self.
And therefore Cyrillus says afterwar^: Proprium est corpus eius verbi, quod
omnia viuificat. It is the body proper to that word, which quickens all
things. Of this ^oule and gross e^oure, two epistles are extant of Cyrillus,
as Ad Successum Episcop. Isauriae.
also in all his works he full often confuteth it.

One thing I will further note. this fine penner of the Apology cites not,
where Cyrillus speaks of these gross imaginations, because the place is
marvelous evident against him. And what foul play is this, to belie Cyrillus,
as though he had spoken of that imagination, wherein we believe yt real
presence of Christ's body under the form of bread, whereas he spoke, of that
wherein Nestorius understood, that we did eat the flesh of Christ, with out
the divine nature united unto it in one person.

Cyrillus says, because the word which is of God the Father, Cyrillus* in
Anathem. 11. ad Enoptium.
is life by nature it has declared his flesh to be the geuer of life, and hac
ratione, facta est nobis benedictio viuificatrix and by this means, the
blessing is made to us, geuer of life.

Cyrillus calls y^ Sacrement of the altar, benedictio, blessing, because it
is made by blessing. Now in naming blessing, he must The Eucharist is called
bles sing.
needs mean, that which is blessed, which is on the altar before us, and not
any thing conceived in faith or spirit.

Therefore Cyrillus means out of all controversy, that thing which is made
by blessing, which we take in our hands, which Cyrillus natura di uinitatis
minime comeditur.
we put in our mouths, to be able to give life everlasting, which none other
eatable thing can do besides the real flesh of Christ. For the nature of
Godhead (as Cyrillus there confesses) is not eaten, by itself, or a part from
the flesh.

If we put this together, I require no more, but that he be an honest man, who
shall construe the place of Cyrillus. He shall be forced to confess such an
eating in the Sacrament of the altar as is not proper to the Godhead: And yet
eating by faith is proper to us in respect of the Godhead, therefore Cyrillus
speaks of eating, that which quickens us to life everlasting with our body
also, and not with faith alone.

An other gross imagination was to think that we eating the * 4 The. ^grosse
(...) gination.
body of Christ, should eat it dead, or mortal, and passible, as we use to
eat other meats: Whereas it is quick, yea of power to quicken us (as
Cyrillus teaches)

Quoniam Saluatoris caro, verbo Dei quod naturaliter vita estconiuncta,
viuifica effecta est, quando eam comedimus, tun^ vitam habemus in nobis, illi
coniuncti, quae vita effecta est. Because the flesh of our Savior, joined to
the word of God which is life na turally, is made able to give life: When we
eat it, then we have life in us, being joined to that flesh which is made life.

5.
The fifth gross imagination is, to think that we should so eat Christ's
flesh, as if it were raw and not by any means, made meat for man's cating.
Of this gross imagination, the Capharnaits were. Ad immanes ferarum mores,
vocari se a Chri Cyrillus in Joan. li. 4. c. 22.
sto arbitrabantur, incitarique, vt vellent crudas hominis carnes manducare,
and sanguinem bibere: quae vel auditu horribilia sunt. They thought them selves
to be invited of Christ, to the cruel custom of wild beasts, and to be
provoked, to eat the raw flesh, and drink the blood of man: which things are
horrible to hear.

It was yet no less a gross imagination to suppose, they should (...) 6.
cate the body of Christ piece meal, one taking the shoulder, an other the
leg, the third the breast, and so forth. Against which imagination S.
Augustine has written.

Their imagination also, is very gross, who think yt substance, August. in
Psalm. 98.
of bread to remain, after consecration, as though they would eat that
immortal and gloriouse flesh of Christ, with bakers bread. * 7.
Which is the cursed banquet, of the Luthera^s, whereas Christ said, The bread
which I will give, is my flesh. giving us to understand, Joan. 6.
y^ he would not have in his heavenly supper, an earthly substance, of material
bread.

And yet it is, a more gross imagination, to confess yt reallpresence * 8.
of Christ's body, and to deny adoration to it, since it is the body of God.

9.
But how gross is it to deny it to be a propitiatory sacrifice, since it is
his body, who is the propitiation for the whole world. ^. Joan. 2.


10*
I omit at this time his gross imagination who teaches the words which are
spoken of a gift presently made and delivered, to be words of promise and of
preaching.

* But the grossest imagination that ever was heard of, is of them, who affirm
no body of Christ at all, to be made really present, under the form of bread
when it is said over the bread, of Christ him self: This is my body. This
gross imagination, makes Christ a liar, as Cyrillus has witnessed.

And now came our Apologists, and bring those words against the Catholics, as
though they had a gross imagination, who think and teach, the words of
Christ, to be true and to work that they speak, when soever they belong to
any Sacrament. And therefore the substance of bread and wine, to be turned into
yt substance of the body and blood of Christ, the forms of the same bread and
wine remaining, as veyles and cortaines to cover the Why the forms of bread
and wine remain.
said flesh, as well because our faith should have merit, as because our eyes
be not able to see that gloriouse and mystical kind of presence.

The which consecrating of Christ's body, is an vnblody sacrifice wherein God
is put in mind, of the death, which redeemed the world. Every part of yt
Sacrament has in it whole Christ, every kind alone is sufficient to norish him
to salvation, who worthily eats it. And yet both kinds together must be
consecrated, to show the death of Christ. This belefe has no gross
imagination in it, as shall appear in all the work following.

What the first Council of Nice has taught concerning The. xxvi. Chapter.
Christ's supper.
ANd the Council of Nice, as it is cited in Greek of some, The Apo logie.
does expressly forbid us, that we should not basely occupy our minds about the
bread and wine set before us.

The words of the Nicen Council, whereof the Apology spea The answer.
keth, are these. Iterum etiam hic in diuina mensa, and caet. Again here also
in the holy table, let us not basely attend the bread and cup The words of the
first Nicene Con cell.
set before us, but lifting up our mind, let us understand by faith, That Lamb
of God, which takes away the sins of the world, (...), situ^ esse, to be
put, and laid on that holy table, incruente a sacerdotibus immolatum, to be
vnbloodely sacrificed of the Priests, and that we (...), Vere, Truly and in
deed, taking his own precious body and blood, do believe, these to be the
mystical tokens, of our redemption. For this cause we take not much but little,
that we might know we take not, to fill us, but for holiness.

In these words many things are affirmed, of the blessed Sacrament of the
altar, every of the which does prove, or help to prove, the real presence of
Christ's body, under the form of bread and wine.

1
First the Council says the bread and the cup to be set before us, upon the
holy table, bidding us not basely attend or consider them.

What other thing, can these words mean, then to warn us* that we should not
look to the natural appearing or show, of the Some virtue lies privy under
the forms of bread and wine.
bread and of the cup, but to a greater virtue, which lies privy under their
forms? Therefore begin we to collect, that the bread and the wine, which stand
upon y^ holy table, keep not any more their old nature and substance, but
contein under their old forms, the new substance of Christ. For if they
remained (as before consecration they were) material bread and wine: then we
need no warning to put away base considerations of them, since by that opinion,
we are bound to believe, earthly bread and wine, to be still bread and wine, and
to be nothing bettered in substance.

2
Then as concerning the use of them, so long as y^ blessed word of God, which
is the form of the Secrament, is joined with any How long a Sacrament may be so
called.
element, (which remains still in his old nature), so long y^ word and the
element, make a mystery: But when the word or form is ended, the Sacrament is
ended, as the which only works, and has grace annexed to it, whiles it is in
the use, whereunto Christ has appointed it. So long as the Priest, whiles he
washes, is saying, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, so long y^ baptim is a doing and working: when the
words be ended, the Sacrament is ended. For seeing y^ promise of forgiveness
of sins, is given to the washing in y^ Joan. 3. Marc. 16.
name of the Trinite, when that is done, the promise is sinished for that
course.

The council of Nice, speaks of the bread and of the cup after consecration,
after that it was said over the^, This is my body and this is my blood, which
words are the form of that Sacrament. For the council speaks of the being,
and standing, and of co^syderig these things upon the holy table, not only
whiles y^ words are spoken, but still afterward until they be received.

If then, both the words of the Sacrament be past, and yet y^ council say, we
must not basely attend, the bread and the cup that are upon the holy table. It
gives us to understand, that the words did not only come to the elements of
bread and wine, to make them a Sacrament, after the commen sort of making,
which The words of the supper di^ work so^ permane^^ thing.
is in baptim, in confirmation, in holy orders, and in penance, but also, that
the words did work some real thing, under y^ forms of bread and wine, which
remains still as long as y^ said forms and signs remain.

For this cause the council said, we ought not basely consider the bread and
cup, for that, more was under the show and color of them, then our eyes could
tell us. What must we then do?

(...)
We must resort to a higher master, then our eyes are: we must lift up our
mind, we must understand, not by loking and seeing, but by faith. Whether must
we lift our mind? To heaven? That is not evil, but the council says, an
other thing: We lifting up What lifeing up of the mind is.
our minds must understand by faith. Then the lifting up of our mind, is the
renouncing of our senses, and the cleaving to our faith. We must believe that
which we can not see.

4.
What must we beliue? That the Lamb of God is upon the holy table. Which Lamb?
He that takes away the sins of the Joan. 1.
world. On which table? On the holy table, whereon that stands, which seems
bread and wine.

5.
How is y^ Lamb there? He is put laid and situate there as a thing may be
situate which is under the forms of an other thing. For of such a situation
the council speaks and so we must believe of it. Now put this gear together,
and thus the council says.

Consider not basely that bread and cup which stands before The meaning of
the Nicen Council.
you. For although it seem that which nature made, yet we must lift up our
mind, and understand by faith, that thing or substance, which is standing on
the holy table, how so ever it appear bread and wine, to be the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world.

Now we see, what is base, and what is high. Bread and wine is base: Body and
blood is high. That must not be considered, because the substance thereof now
has ceased to be: This must be believed, because it is made present in
substance.

And it is so truly made, and the Lamb so truly prosen^, that he * 6. The
sacrifice of y^ Mass.
is offered not in heart alone, but even outwardly of the Priests, not by
shedding of blood (as upon the cross) but vnblodely as it becomes the clean
oblation of the new Testament, whereof Malachie did prophecy.

That sacrifice which Priests offer can not be but present, for Malach. 1 c^p.
they offer with their hands, mo^thes, and other external members of their
body.

7.
After that the sacrifice is made, the faithful people, who stand by, do
partake with the altar, which could not be, except a perma ne^t substance were
made by consecration.

The Lamb is upon the table. He is offered there by y^ Priests. It follows in
the Council.

8.
We take truly the precious body and blood: We take it and truly take it. That
is to say, in deed really and bodily. For the True body.
truth of Christ's body and blood, is not an imaginary or fained truth, it is
not a thing conceived only (as a man might conceive in his mind, men flying in
the aier), it is not only believed or hoped, but he in natural existence, and
among external things, has as true a body and blood, as any creature has a
substance of his own.

The true taking of the which precious body and blood, is the Trne taking.
taking of it in such a truth of subs^ce as it self has. And because it is
true in y^ thing it self, the taking of it, is in the thing it self.

9.
The taking of that which s^andeth before us on the table, is by instrument of
our bodies, therefore it is delivered according to the same external truth, by
the corporal ministry of y^ Priests So that all is truly and externally
done, by the judgment of this ancient council.

10.
Well, we truly taking them, believe them to be the tokens of our The tokens of
our redemption.
redemption or as some books read, of our resurrection. For as our redemption
was by the ^ame body and the same blood really wrought upon the cross: so
having them selves present upon y^ holy table, and truly taking them, we take
the sure witnesses and evident tokens of our redemption. Bread and wine be not
(...) of our redemption.


But if the things which stand upon the holy table were in substance bread and
wine, how could they be the tokens of our redemption? Did bread and wine redeem
us? Or did they rise from death for us? It is the body and blood of Christ
which redeemed us and which arose from death, and the self same body and blood
are now made present to us, and offered vnbloodely for us, to show in fact and
deed, our redemption already wrought by them, and to distribute the fruits of
y^ Cross, by none other thing so much, as by the same body and blood that
redeemed us.

For least we should assign any part of our salvation, to any Why Chri stes
body is the toke^ of our redemption.
other creature besides to the only body and blood of Christ, he made the
selfsame body, both the price wherewith he redeemed us, and the token and
dispensour of the redemption.

It was proved before, that if these things be the tokens of our redemption,
instituted by the express words of Christ, then they are the things them
selves, which they betoken, because they are mystical tokens of the new
Testament. But they are here not as redeming us new, and therefore as tokens of
y^ old redemption, that no man should think Christ to die again, or should
doubt (as S. Chrysostom has noted) of his death already past, or of Chrysos.
Hom. 83, in Math.
any manner prices of our redemption to be paid then one, or that it has any
other token left thereof in the holy mysteries besides it self.

For it was so worthy a truth and ra^som paid for us upon the Cross, which
was able to be painted worthily or set forth, to the remembrances of the
faithful by none other image, then such, wherein y^ truth might be set forth
after an other sort more mystical, concerning the manner: But no less true
then the thing which died was, concerning the substance.

Who so is faithful and humble, is now able to understand, how The some of all
that was said.
the show of bread and wine, stands with the truth, of body and blood present
on the holy table: How the unbloody sacrifice, is made of the Priests, whiles
by pronouncing the words of God they turn the substance of bread and wine in
to the substance of Christ's body and blood: how we both truly take the
precious body and blood of Christ, concerning the substance of them, under the
forms of bread and wine: And yet believe them to be tokens instituted of
Christ, of our redemption, betokening the price paid, by making present the
body and blood which paid it.

Was not this a worthy place, for the Apology to allege? But How much of this
testimony the Apolog^ left out.
I warrant you, it alleged the weakest part thereof, leaving out the situatio^
of the Lamb of God, on the holy table: The unbloody sacrifice made of Priests,
the true taking and receiving of the pre cious body and blood. Only bread and
wine, (which are named to show the forms within the which the body and blood
are) them they name, as a great matter, to further this new broched heresy.

But he is a faithful trier and examiner of ancient Fathers, who faithfully
cites the whole place, neither adding nor diminishing, which honest dealing we
may not look, for, at these defenders hands.

That the Catholics have the table of Egles, and The. (...) Chapter.
the Sacramentaries have the table of Iaies.
ANd as Chrysostom writes well, we say, that the body of The Apo logie.
Christ is the carcas, and we must be the Egles, that we may know, that we
ought, to fly high, if we will come to the body of Christ. For this is the
table of Egles, not of Iayes.

It is a weak stake that these me^ would not take hold of, being The answer.
now plunging for life, under the water.

S. Chrysostom so plainly expounds his own meaning, immediately where he
speaks, of the carcas and of the Egles, that I can not sufficiently wonder,
at the impude^cie of him, who allegeth this place. For the alleger, would have
the words taken, as though the body of Christ, were not upon the altar: But we
only should by faith ascend into heaven, whereas S. Chrysostom speaks, of
going in to heaven, by good life also, and not by faith only. His words are
these.

The body of our Lord is through death become the (...), Chryso. in. ^. cor.
Hom. 24
carcass. for unless he had fallen, we had not risen. Christ uses the name of
Egles to declare, that it behooves him, who shall approchevnto his body, to
seek for high things, and not to meddle with the earth, nor to be drawn down,
or crepe unto earthly matters, which are a low, but to flee allways up to
higher matters: And to behold the son of righteousness, and to have the eye
and the mind quick of sight, for this is the table of Egles and not of Iaies.
Hitherto S. Chrysostom.

1 The carcass.
Who first shows why the body of Christ is called the carcass. Not because it
is without life, but because it once has died for us

2 Like Egles.
Secondly we must be like Egles in life and faith. In life by forsaking earthly
affections: In faith by quickness of mind, whiles we believe, that not
withstanding bread and wine appear to us, yet it is in deed an other (...).
The propri^es of the Egle.


The Egle has many proprietes, as to flee high, to look ^edfastly upon the
sun, to see most clearly a far of, and to take his pray most swiftly: To the
flying high, our good life must answer: to y^ quickness of sight, our faith:
Not in such sort to flee a high as though the matter we seek were not
present, but to ^spie the body and blood of Christ under the forms of bread
and wine. This is ye table o^ Egles.


For as S. Chrysostom says: This is the table of Egles. He speaks not now
of heaven, which is a bo^e the sun, he speaks of the table which stands in
the Church before us, whereupon ye son of righteousness is situated, from which
we take the food of life, the joy of heaven, y^ earcase y^ has died for us.
The table is it whereof he speaks.

What impudency is this, so to abuse the words of that blessed man, as if he
spoke of going into heaven by faith, whereas in deed he speaks of them that
live like the saints of heaven, and of the^ that have a quick sight, to wit, a
faithful understanding, y^ they be able as it were to look through the forms
of bread and wine. there to see under those forms the real body and blood of
Christ. The quic ^ight of Egles is (...).


For straight upon the naming of a quick sight, he infers y^ this is the
table of Egles not of Iaies. As who should say here is a meat that none can
see but those who have a most pure eye of faith.

Aquila (says S. Augustine) sublimiter vola^s, de tanto intervallo August. in
lib. de diumat. Daemonu^
sub fluctibus natantem piscem dicitur per^idere, and grauiter aquis illisa
extertis pedibus atque vnguibus rapere. The Egle flying a high, is said most
perfitly to see a great way of, a fish swi^ming under the waves, and
vehemently beating her self against the water, by stretching out her feet and
claws, to snatch up the fish.

Behold an Egle sees one thing under an other: And so must An Egle sees one
thing under an other.
we repute y^ table of Christ to have in it one thing under an other. To have
upon it the body of Christ under the form of bread. And therefore no^e but
Egles can epsy the said body.

As for the Sacramentaries and Zuinglians they are like Iaies, The heret^s are
Iayes.
ever prattling of the body of Christ, but never espying it, or seeing where it
lies, they flee low as ye Iaies do, as thinking that good works bring small
aid to ^ife everlasting. They see weakly, and content them selves with a base
banquet of bread and wine, requiri^g to their bodies none other food of life.

And whereas the son of reghteousnesse has covered him self as it were with
the clouds of bread and wine, to thint^nt our eye might be able to bear more
easily the bright^esse of his shyning, The (...) sight of ^tiks.
yet they are of so dull and of so dim eye sight, that they say there is
nothing but (...) upon the table. So that our table is the table of E^les,
where faithful Egles may e^pie the son of (...) present upon the altar and
table, and their table is the table of Iaies, where nothing is (...) besides
that, which iufidell Iaies may find out by natural eye sight, and bare naming
without true being.

It follows in S. Chrysostm. If noman will rashly handle an Chryso. Hom. 24 in.
1. cor.
other man's garment, how dare we, to our great shame and reproach, receive this
pure and immaculate body* which is Lord of al, which is partaker of the divine
nature, through which we have our being and living, by which y^ gates of hell
are broken down: and the gates of heaven set wide open?

Thus S. Chrysostom shows, us to receive this body of Christ, from y^ holy
table or altar, as truly, concerning the substance thereof, as we may truly
touch, an other man's garment.

Heaven is used both in holy Scriptures and in the Fathers for Heaven. Lucae.
10. and. 12. etc
the heavenly life. And so we must flee in to heaven, not, to receive this body
(so it is not said) but, when we approach unto this body. The body is in earth
with us, concerning the nature and substance thereof, under the forms of
bread: But as it is a body glori^ied, and thereby made heavenly, even so we
must cleanse and purge our selves from sin, when we come to it, and so be made
heavenly, Lucae. 10. 1. Tim. 3.
or flee in to the state of them who live in heaven: And that state we profess
who are called the kingdom of heaven, and y^ house of God.

The bread, that is the meat of the mind and not of the The. 28. Chapter.
belly, can be no wheaten bread, but only the bread of life which is the body
of Christ.
ANd Ciprian, this bread (sayith he) is meat of the mind, The Apo logie.
not meat of the belly.

The truth is so strong, that y^ more is brought against it, the The answer.
better it is seen. The sayng of S. Ciprian makes so clearly for the
contrary of that which the Apologi teaches, as it is possible to devise.

If this bread be meat of the mind not meat of the belly, out That the
substance of bread r^ mameth not in Christ's supper.
of question, it is not material bread, it is not the substance of common
bread. for though such material bread, be never so much hallowed, by prayer
and thanksgeuing, yet it still remains, in substance, bread of the belly.

But seeing y^ substance of y^ common bread, is changed into y^ flesh of Christ,
(as we catholics believe and teach) now, it can by no means be meat of the
bellye. for albeit we receive it really, under the forms of bread, into our
bodies, and that also to feed Two kinds of feeding.
them, as well as our sowles, yet there are two kinds of feedyng, one, which is to
live in this world (and in that case meat is for the belly, and the belly for
meat, and God shall destroy both 1. Cor. 6.
the one and the other). But an other feeding is to life everlasting, and Joan.
6.
yt is called by Christ, cibus permanens, meat which abides and which
perishes not.

Such a meat, is the blessed body of Christ. It is a meat i^ deed. The body of
Christ is not the meat of y^ belly.
A meat wiche is truly eaten, but is not digested into our corruptible flesh,
and voided as common meats are, but a little and a little, it feeds and
nourishes us to life everlasting.

These defenders thought, if it were ^aten in deed, that it could The error of
y^ Apology.
not be, but meat of the belly. As well they might blasphemously say, that
because Christ was man in deed, he was born in sin. And in that opinion, they
are like the Capharnaits, who could Joan. 6.
imagine none other kind of meat, besides that which is divided into pieces,
and consumed by eating.

The true Christians have learned, by the mercy of God, with Cyrillus lib. 4.
in Ioa^. c. 14.
holy Cyrillus, how the flesh of Christ (because it is y^ flesh of God) may be
eaten, and yet quicken the eaters, and make them live to God, and notbe wasted
by eating, but rather how it may profit our souls being worthily received
into our bodies.

For so Tertullian says. The flesh is fed with the body and Tertull. de
resur. carnis.
blood of Christ, to the end that the soul may be made fat in God.

Perhaps the Apologists will say, that S. Cyprian does call it bread: I answer
he calls it bread because it is meat for he The kind of bread whereof S.
Cyprian spea keth.
says, This bread is meat. But what kind of meat? Panis iste quem Dominus
Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mu tatus omnipotentia verbi
factus est caro. This bread which ou^ Lord ga^e to the Disciples, being changed
not in shape, but in Cypria. de coena Domini.
nature, is made flesh by the almighty power of the word.

Behold the kind of bread, it is common bread in sha pe, but made the flesh of
Christ in substance.

In the old time says S. Ciprian, the show loves being cold Cypria. de coena
Domini.
and hard, were changed every Sabothe day, and hot loaves of the same number
were wont to be set upon ye table. I am nulla ^itpanis panis mutatio, vnus
est panis caloris continui. Now there is no change of bread made, there is one
loase os co^t^al heat, which never is cold.

By this we understand that sometime S. Ciprian speaks of common bread which
Christ took into his hands, and that is changed, and is at every time a new
loaf. At other times he speaks of ye bread whereunto ye change is made. And
y^ bread is ye flesh of Christ which is never changed. The first bread if it
tar^ed in substance, it should sill the belly.

But because the substance thereof is changed, the flesh of Christ which is
made by consecration is the meat of the mind, and not of the belly. For it
feeds us to that state of immortality where the belly shall no more be
filled with coruptible meats. So that it feeds us in such sort that we
leave to cherishe o^r bellies so much the less, by how much the more we eat
it (...).

Sacrame^tall eating differreth from eating by faith The. (...). (...).
alone whereof only S. Augustine speaks in y^ place al^aged by the Apology.
ANd Augustine. how (says he) shall I hold him that is absent? The Apo logie.
How shall I reach forth my hand into h^auen that I might hold him there
sitting? Reach out (says he) faith: and thou have caught him.

To make up and to con^lnde all these wrested places, which have The ^sivere.
been alleged heretofore out of ye Fathers, a plain text is brought forth out
of S. Augustine, which speaks never a wh^t of y^ present August. tract. 50.
in Joan.
controversy, nor can not be at all applied to it.

The question betwixt us is, whether Christ's body be present in ye Sacrament
of the altar or ^o? The Apology reasons thus

A Jew that yet believed not, niay begin to believe, and so may The arg^ meant
of ye Apology.
streche forth his hand to heaven, and hold Christ fast by faith, although he
be bodily absent, therefore Christ's body after consecration dewly made, is not
present under form of bread.

Is not this a mighty argument, and worthy to be kept for the last place? A
Jew may hold Christ by faith if he will believe upon August. tract. 50. in Joan.
him, therefore he is not to be eaten really of faithful Christians in the
Sacrament? Nos indicemus modo Iudaeis, vbi sit Christus. Let us now show to the
Jews (says S. Augustine) where Christ is. Occisus est a parentibus eorum, he
is ^aine of their Pa rents. Venturus est iudex, he shall come a i^dge. Audiant
and teneant, let them hear and hold. Respondet, quem tenebo? The I^we makes
answer, whom shall I hold? Absentem? Shall I hold him that is absent? Quomodo
in coelum manum mittam vt ibi sedentem teneam? How shall I stretch my hand unto
heaven that I may hold him sitting there? Fidem mitte, and tenuisti, strech out
faith, and thou have caught him. Parents tui tenuerunt car^, tu tene cord.
Thy Parents have holden (him) in flesh, hold hold^ (him) in heart. Quoniam
Christus absens etiam presens est, because Christ being absent is also present.
And again, corpus suum intulit coelo, maiestatem n on abstulit mundo. Christ
has carried his body into heaven, he has not taken away his majesty from the
world.

This dialogue S. Augustine made between him self and a Jew, not intending any
whit, to spcake in that place of the Sacrament of the altar, whereof Jews ought
to know nothing. And yet comes y^ Apology, and will prove that we touch not
the body of Christ with our teeth, and jaws, but by faith, mind, and spirit,
because, beside all the former arguments (which be not woreth a straw) S.
Augustine tells a Jew, yt he may believe upon Christ absent in body, but
present in majesty of his Godhead.

You will say perhaps, If Christ be absent in body, that his body is not
present under the form of bread, after consecration. Sir, S. Augustine speaks
not of Christ's body, as it is in y^ Sacrament to be eaten, but as it is visible
in heaven. Infidels were kept from Mass.


And to assure you thereof, it was y^ custom of y^ primitive Church, to let no
infidel see, or be present, at y^ time of Mass of y^ Christians. Therefore S.
Augustine might not lawfully talk to a Jew, of y^ mystical presens of Christ
in the Sa^ament, neither surely any word of his in that alleged place, is to
be referred to the Sacramental eating.

They are two distinct things, to receive Christ by faith alone, and to receive
by faith and Sacrament together: that may be done Receaui^g by faith. Act. 10.
Sacrame^ tall receaning. Justinius in Apol. 2.
before baptism (as it appears by Cornelius in the Acts of the Apostles)
But a Sacramental receiving in the supper of Christ, is granted only to
Christians after baptism (as S. Justinus y^ martyr and the experience it self
does witness)

For as he, that is not borne, can not eat, so he, y^ is not regenerated in
Christ, may not be suffered to eat his body and drink his blood in the
Sacrament. And truly, except a man has so addicted him self to Christ, that
he will be contented to bele^e what so ever Why infi^ might not come to Mass.
he shall say unto him, he would never be persuaded, that under the form of so
small a piece of bread the real body of Christ were contained.

But when he has learned in the articles of his faith, yt Christ is God, and
therefore almighty, after that belefe, he both can believe his word to be true,
when he said over bread which was taken: This is my body, and also may eat the
same body of Christ Math. 26
to his profit, and to the increase of life everlasting. But what ignorance was
this, to apply the eating of an infidel Jew to the mystical eating, which
only the faithful make in Christ's supper?

The preface of the third Book.
THe mystery of Christ's supper was so great, that not only Genesis 14. Leuiti. 2.
diverse figures in the law of nature and of Moses were by the Patriarchs
and Priests outwardly celebrated thereof, and not only diverse predictio^s were
made by the Prophets Prou. 9. Psalm. 22.
concerning the same: but also, when Christ him self was come into the world,
he did both make an introduction to the promise of his supper by a miraculouse
blessing and breaking of five and Math. 14 Marci. 7.
seven loaves to the Jews, and more over in express words foretold, that he
would give his flesh to be eaten, even the same flesh, Joan. 6.
which he would give for the life of the world.

But for so much as some men think, that Christ in the sixth Chapter of S.
Ihon speaks not properly at all (no not so much as by the way of promise) of
his last supper: I must as Two things are to be proved in this book.
well prove against them, who think so, that Christ spoke in that place of the
gift which he afterward made in his parting banquet: As also, that the real
presence of his flesh and blood, is evidently proved by such words of promise,
as he there uttered. For it can not be doubted, but the truth it self
performed all that in deed it self, which his words had before promised for
the time to come.

Neither ought it to be a grief to any man, if in handling these matters I
seem to entreat of hard questions, which are above ye capacity of the vulgar
people. For the nature of all holy mysteries August. de vtil. creden. ad Hon.
cap. 2.
is such, that (as S. Augustine says) it may sooner be impugned popularly and
plausibly, then be so defended. Which notwithstanding, I have done what I can
to utter all things plainly.

And yet who is there, that now can justly find fault with me, for handling
deep and obscure matters? Is not every man sufficiently instructed by this
time to judge of all points in divinity. Is not that man, who in parliament
scared not to sit judge of this high mystery, and without the consent of any
one Prelate in that house, to condemn the unbloody sacrifice of the blessed
Mass, is not that man able to understand such writings, as are set forth in
that behalf? He that must, if a parliament be called, prescribe a faith unto me
(what, say I, unto me?) he that will take upon him to prescribe it to all the
realm, to general Councels, yea to the whole Church, he that will accuse his
Fathers and graundfathers even to the tenth generation of ignorance, of
superstition, and of idolatry, he that accompteth him self 1. Cor. 2.
spiritual, and therefore sufficient to discern doctrines and spirits, will
he say that a poor scholar of Oxforde does write to high for his understanding?

If it be so, let him understand, that the said scholar is a very base member
in Christ's Church, and a very ignorant man, in re pect of those notable
Bisshops and other divines, whom he heard Of the (...) Council.
and saw at the Council of Trent with such admiration, that (...) deed he
was neither able nor worthy to speak among them. Let him understand that those
Fathers did so exactly search out the truth of the present controversies, as
well by conferring together the holy Scriptures, as by vewing the books of the
aun cient Doctors and Councels, that they spent in some one matter four
months continual. To be short, let him understand y^ seeing the tenth part of
the learned men (...) Christendom came not to y^ Council, and yet there were
in it above two hundred persons of such excellency, for wit, learning, and
virtue, that it passed much more the wisdom of any one realm, then the grave
Senate of a The wise dome of the whole Church.
whole realm does excede yt particular Council of never so mean a Litie: Let
him, I say, understand, what wisdom, what knowledge, what judgment is, and
has been in the whole Church of God, by the space of fiftene hundred years
together. The preaching practice, and government of which long time a few such
feared not of late by their open voices to condemn, as to whom if a man should
at their own house propose a very mean problem The judges of reli gio^ in our
time.*
or doubt in divinity, they would not only refuse to answer thereunto, but they
would also confess plainly, that they never studied the science of Divinity.
They would swear if need were, that they never attended principally to any other
thing, then to serve God and their Prince, and to hawk or hunt. Whereof I put
them in mind, to the end they should depely consider with what temeritie they
attempted, to determine the high and secret points of Christian faith, and that
knowing their fault they should bewail and amend the same. I beseech God to
give us al grace to know our selves, and t^ beware that, whiles we covet to be
as Gods in understanding the Scriptures, we taste not of the tree which is named
the knowledge of good and evil, and afterward be cast out of Paradise, because
we contented not our selves with the order Genes. 3.
and condition, which our Lord had appointed for us.

I trust, although the matters, which I entreat of, be very hard, to make them
yet plain by such help as the ancient Fathers have left unto us in their most
learned works and commentaries. According to whose wisdom I will expound those
places of S. Ihon, which specially appertein to my purpose.

The Chapiters of the third book.
1. The Argument of the sixth chapter of S. John is declared. 2. It is proved
by circumstances, and by the conference of holy Scriptures, that Christ
speaks in S. John of his last supper. 3. The same is proved out of the
Fathers and Councels. 4. Answer is made to them that teach the contrary out of
the Fathers. 5. Item to them, that teach the contrary out of the Scriptu^es.
6. The gift of the everlasting meat is showed to be the gift of Christ's flesh
at his supper. 7. The equality of substance alleged between Christ and his
Father, proves one substance to be given both of God the Father to Christ, and
of Christ to us. 8. Christ is not the bread of life to us by the gift of his
flesh, except we eat really his own flesh. 9. Whereas three gifts are named
in S. John, Christ's gift partaketh of both the other, and therefore contains
his real flesh under a figure. 10. The middle state of the new Testament
between the law and glory requires the same truth, which is in heaven, to be
given under a figure. 11. The bread that Christ will give, which is his flesh,
must needs be meant of the substance of his flesh. 12. Christ himself shows,
that the eating of him by faith or in a figure only differs far from the real
eating of his flesh in his last supper. 13. Christ's flesh to be as really
present in his supper, as water is at baptism: In so much that childern were
sometime communicated. 14. That S. Augustine did not teach these words, except
ye eat the flesh and caet. to betoken only eating by faith and spirit, or by
figure alone. 15. Christ's flesh, being meat in deed, must needs be really
present to be eaten. 16. By the manner of Christ's tarying in us, it is proved
that we eat his real flesh. 17. We are one with Christ by eating his flesh
in the natural substance thereof, as he is one nature with his Father by
eternal generation. 18. The real presence of Christ's hody was so true, that
it was taught with the loss of many disciples. 19. How the flesh profits
nothing without the spirit. 20. The words of Christ, being spirit and life,
make and witness his flesh to be present miraculously and above the course of
nature.
The argument of the sixth Chapter of S. Ihon is The first Chapter.
declared.
WHereas Christ may be received either by faith and spirit only, without the
Sacrament of the altar, or else in the Christ may be received three ways
Sacrament of the altar only, without lively faith and grace, or in both
together, which is the most fruitful kind of communicating: some have
thought, that in the sixth chapter of S. John there is no talk of the second
and third kind of receiving (which is referred to the Sacrament of the altar)
but only of the first, which is by faith and charity.

Merrily those men are not to be blamed for saying y^ Christ speaks Christ
speaks not in S. Ihon of unworthy eating.
not there, of y^ second kind of eating which is by Sacrament alone, without
spiritual eating and drinking (for thereof in deed he speaks not) but they
are to be reprehended, if they deny y^ he speaks of such Sacrame^tall
eating, as is used in our Lords supper, when it is (as it always ought to be)
worthily received.

My purpose is at this time, to show that albeit Christ in the former part of
that Chapter speaks for the most part of spiritual Worthy Sacrame^tal
eating is spo ken of to ward the end of y^ Chapter.
eating and drinking only, yet afterward he speaks also of yt eating which is
by receiving worthily the Sacrament of yt altar at y^ Priests hands. for to
that end chiefly goes all the talk of it, not as though spiritual receiving
alone were not better then only Sacramental receiving, but because both
together are better then one alone. Christ presses his Disciples to such a
receiving of him self as is most perfect of all. For proof of which thing, I
am constrained bri^fly to touch the time and order of Christ's talk.

A little more then one whole year before his passion, Christ about the great
feast of Easter, went beyond the sea of Galilee, and wrought that notable
miracle, wherein he fed about five thousand Joan. 6.
men with five loa^es and two fishes. Whereby y^ people were induced y^ rather
to seek him yt next day at (...). Whom The miracle of multiplying bread, was a
pre paratorie to the talk of Christ's supper.
he no (...) saw, but he did put them in mind of yesterdays miracle, telling
them that they followed him, not for the signessake which they had seen, but
because they had eaten their bellies full of bread. as though he had said: my
intent was yt you should rather have noted ye miracle, then have respected your
bellies* which (...) since you have not done of your selves, I warn you thereof
willing you to work, not the meat which perishes (as yesterdays bread and
fish did) but that which tarieth unto life everlasting, which the Son of man
will give you.

In these words Christ does manifestly declare (as also S. Chry^ostom Chryso.
in ca. 6. Joan. Ho mi. 45. Math. 14.
has noted) that the miracle of five loaves appertained in some part unto his
last supper, whereof he intended at that time to speak, taking an occasin of
that bread which by blessing and thanksgeuing he had multiplied. For which
cause he said, work (...) other kind of mea^e then ye did yesterday, for y^
meat is now perished, and ye are a hungered again. Work a meat that may tarry
longer with you, y^ may tarry unto everlasting life. Hitherto the words of
Christ may be meant* by spiritual eating and drinking only,

B^t the words that follow, do mean also a further kind of eating The gift of
Christ which is to come is meant of his supper
and drinking. For when he says: which the son of man will give you, he
plainly means yt gift of his last supper, as Theophylact does witness, but
yet utters his meaning after a secret sort, as S. Cyrillus does write upon
the same place. And in deed yt (...) Christ does expound the spiritual eating
before the Sacrametall ^ating.
is the gift which is namely reserved in this Chapter to the son of man, as
it shall appear afterward.

But because they could not come to y^ worthy working of Chrstes own gift,
until y^ work of faith were by y^ (...) wrought in them, he straight
declares by an occasion taken of the old figure manna, how they must have
faith from God, to believe upon him. for that he was the bread of life, who came
down from heaven to give life eu^rlasting both in body and soul to all such
as his Father brought unto him. for who so ever should eat of that bread which
him self was, should live for ever.

After which preparation made, he retourneth to expound his own gift which he
named the gift of ye Son of man showing most expressly that which he will
give in his last supper: And the Joan. 6.
bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world. The Spiritual
^ating was present.
gift of spiritual eating by faith and charity was not to come when Christ
spoke unto his Disciples. For it was then present, and therefore he said
presently, I am the bread of life, meaning that he was presently so, concerning
spiritual feeding, in so much as, if any man would have believed in him, even at
that instant, he might through grace have eaten of Christ.

But Christ says his own peculiar gift was to come: and there Sacramental
eating was to come.
fore he continues expounding his gift in many sentences, until at the last
he says, he that eats this bread (which him self had before promised to give
to be eaten) shall live for ever.

I will by Gods grace make ye proof hereof so plain hereafter, as any
reasonable man shall desire. Only first protesting that I follow not mine own
brain herein, but yt judgment of all y^ ^cient Fathers, who with one accord
have taken this Chapter to speak (by way of promise), of the Sacrament of the
altar, which was iustituted by Christ in his last supper.

It is proved by circumstances and by ye conference of holy The second Chapter.
Scriptures y^ Christ speaks in S. Ihon of his last supper. 1. The time of
Easter.

HE y^ does well consider ye only time when this talk was had, he that
weygheth how Christ having made yt great 1. The miracle made ^n bread.
miracle in blessing five loaves, does the next day about the time of Easter,
one whole year before the celebrating of his last supper, as it were make both a
prophecy and a promise 3. The Pro pheticall promise.
what he would do y^ Easter twelve month after, he that conferreth as well
what was done and said abonte the sea of Tiberias 4* The conference of things
done and said.
and at Capharnau^ as what was done and said in the last supper which was kept
the night wherein he was betrayed, he that notes the fathers gift to be
accounted present, and that to be the working of belefe in yt hearts of the
faithful (which is a spiritual 5. The present eating of Gods gift.
eating of Christ) but y^ sons gift to be rekoned as a thing to come
hereafter, and to be called eating his flesh and drinking his blood (Which if it
shall differ any thing at all from the fathers gift, must needs be more then a
spiritual eating of Christ's flesh) he shall 6. The eating of Christ's gift to
come. Joan. 6. Math. 26 Marc. 14.
perceane ^ this chapter both a spiritual eating presently offered, and a
sacramental eating promised hereafter ^ the natural substance of flesh and
blood. which in this place thus breefly touched shall at large be handled in
the treatise following.

At this time he that conferreth what was done and said both at the last supper
of Christ and the year before about the sea of 1. Bread taken.
Tyberias: shall see concerning the doyngs, bread taken in both places,
blessing and thanksgeuing in both, eating in both.

And as concerning words, let him deeply ponder, and consider 2. Blessing.
that as in S. John he began his talk of common bread saying to ye 3.
Thanksgeuing.
Jews: ye follow me because yehaue eaten of the loaves of bread, 4. Eating.
but at the length he ended his talk with the eating of his flesh, and
drynking his blood: So in his last supper he took into his 5. From bread to
flesh. Math 26
hands common bread, but at the length he ended his banquet in the eating his
body and drinking his blood.

As in S. John he speaks distinctly of a meat which the son 6. The son
of man is the geuer.
of man will give: So at his supper, ye soon of man did administer the whole
gift of his heavenly meat in his own person.

As in S. John he says: the bread which I will give, that is to 7. Meare is
given* Mar. ^4. Mat. 26.
say, ye meat of my last supper: so in his last supper he tak^g bread after
blessing and breakyng, does give a blessed food saying, sumite, take. 8. That
is (...) which Christ took first. (...). 6.


As in S. John he said, the bread which I will give, and not the bread which
I will take: so in his supper he took one kind of bread, and gave an other.
For as in S. John he says, the bread which I will give is my flesh: so at his
last supper after he had taken common bread, and blessed, he said: Take, this
is my body. 9. Flesh and body is given. Joan. 6.


As in S. Ihon the bread to be given and the flesh of Christ is all o^e: so in
his supper he gives none other bread besides his own body. For the substance
of the common bread was changed by blessing and speaking the words. 10. No
common bread is given. Joan. 6.


As his bread and flesh was said to be in S. John for the life of yt world: so
in his supper he said: This is my body which is given for you. 11. The flesh
that died is given.


As in S. John he says, my flessh is meat in deed: so in his supper he
says: take, eat, this is my body. That which is eaten in deed, is meat in
deed. 12. The gift is eaten in deed. Joan. 6.


As in S. Ihon there is mention o^ drinking the blood of Christ: so in his
supper he says: drink ye al of this, for this is my blood.

As in S. Ihon there is no mention of wine to be given or dru^ken: 13. The
blood is drunke^. Joan. 6.
so Christ in his supper neither spoke of wine at the time of dri^king, nor
gave any wine at all to be dru^ken, because it was by his words changed into
his blood. 14. No wine was ^run ken. Joan. 6.


As at Capharuaum certain of his Disciples went away from him: so at his last
supper he did reject and separate them from his table. And as his twelve
Apostles most faithfully tarried with him at Capharnaum: so they alone were in
the night of his betraying admitted to his holy table. 15. The. xij. only
tarried (...) both places.


As at Capharnaum when Christ had asked the twelve, whether 16. The. xij.
protested in both places not to ^orsake Christ. Joan. 6.
they also would go away, S. Peter answered for them (Lord to whom shall we
go?) meaning they were not offended^, nor would no^t got from him: even so
after his last supper S. Peter and likewise all the rest said they would not
de^ie him, though all the world forsook him, or took offense against him.

As at Capharnaum Christ said, that one of the twelve was a devil: so at his
last supper y^ Bospel does tell that Satan entered 17. Judas was reproved in
both places. Joan. 13.
into Judas one of the twelve.

If the time, words, deeds, and persons thoroughly agree, it is unseemly to
make them diverse kinds of eating and drinking, whereof one man at one time of
the year speaks and practices to the same Disciples so conformable a
doctrine and doing.

It is proved out of the holy Fathers and general The third Chapter.
Councels, that Christ in S. Ihon spoke of his last supper.
THat I may here omit S. Ignatius, who defines ye bread Ignatius ^ epist. ad
Roman.
of God, of heaven, and of life (which is named in the sixth of S. Ihon) to be
the flesh of Christ and his cup or blood: That I may let pass Clemens
Alexandrinus, who speaking of Clemens Alexa^d. De Paeda gogo. li. 1. ca. 6.
Joan. 6. Origin. Hom. 7. sup number. Joan. 6.
the nourishment which we, that are baptized in Christ, have by him, calls it
not only Christ, the word, milk, bread and drink, but also the flesh and blood,
and body of Christ, and the mystery of bread, alleging diverse places out of
S. Ihon for that purpose: Last of all, that I may not stand upon Origin, who
comparing the fulness of Baptism to the red sea which was but a shadow, and
likewise the Sacrament of Christ's supper to Mauna, declares out of S. Ihon
that now the flesh of Christ is meat in deed, by that means witnessing, that
he took the words of the sixth of S. Ihon to belong to the mystery o^ Christ's
last banquet: Surely S. Cyprian does not only by occasion of other talk, Cypria.
in oration nem Do mini.
but even of set purpose teach, that who so ever for some great fault is any
long time kept from the body of Christ in the Sacrament, he is in danger of
everlasting life. And y^ because Christ said: except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. And yet he
should wholly fail of his proof, if that place which he brings out of S.
Ihon, did not prove the necessity of communicating Sacramentally.

S. Athanasius setting forth a brief and compendiouse rehearsal Athanasius in
Synopsi. no. testa. lib. 4. Joan. 6.
of the whole divine Scripture, witnesses that Christ at his coming to
Capharnaum, reasons with the multitude concerning the mysteries. Which saying
of his can not be justified according to the historical sense which he
professes in that work, if Christ in S. Ihon spoke principally of yt
spiritual eating which is beside his holy mysteries.

S. Hilarie disputing of the natural verity of Christ which is Hilarious libr.
8. de Trinit. Joan. 6.
in us by the Sacrament of receiving his flesh, does not only bring for that
intent, these words, My flesh is meat in deed: But also concludes that as
well by the profession of our Lord, as by our own faith Christ's flesh is truly
in us. And certainly he means it so to be in us as we receive it in his last
supper. But if ye place by him alleged prove not so much, his reason lacks a
sufficient ground, for so much as he cites none other authority for that
argument of his against the Arrians, but only the words which are in S. Ihon.
By those words he affirms Christ to be in us after such sort, that he is in
us naturally, and we naturally in him.

S. Basile intituling his book of Baptism, and wholly bent to Basilius de bapt.
li. 1. ca. 3.
declare the Sacraments of Christ's Church, shows that after our second birth
nourishment is necessary to us, and straight way brings forth Christ's
words in S. Ihon: joining them with the words of his last supper, which S.
Basile says to be written Joan. 6.
in the end of the Gospels, thereby giving us to understand that as the
performance was made in the end, so the promise went before. Is it not marvel
now that any thing should be pretended out of this blessed man for the
contrary opinion? But how justly it is pretended, we shall see afterward.

Gregorius of Nyssa brother to S. Basile teaches the flesh of Gregorius Nys
senus in vita Moy sis. Joan. 6.
Christ to be a bodily thing because it is made meat for man's body. That it is
meat he proves out of S. Ihon. For there only are found the chief words by
him alleged, which are, Panis enim qui de coelo descendit qui verus cibus est,
non incorporea quaedam res est. For the bread which came down from heaven which
is the true meat is not a thing without a body. Quo enim pacto (says he) res
incorporea corpori cibus fiet? For by what means will a thing which lacks a
body be made meat unto the body? Doubtless Christ is made meat unto our
bodies no where else but only in the Sacrament of his supper. And therefore this
great clerck thought him self to reason well, in bringing such words as are in
S. Ihon for that effect which belongs to the holy communion. Because he
judged both places of holy Scripture to be of one argument.

Cyrillus of Jerusalem entreating of the Sacrament of the altar, Cyrillus
Catech. mystagogi. 4.
so evidently cites these words of S. Ihon, Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and caet. that noman may doubt of his meaning. And because this
part of my work would be over long if I should stay so long upon every of the
ancient Fathers, I beseech the studiouse Reader to be content that hereafter I
may in fewer words declare every man's judgment, showing him the place of the
author, where if it please him, he may at more leisure examine all the
circumstances. Ambros. de Sacra men. li. 6 cap. 1. Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. 5. ^
Pa^cha.


S. Ambrose disputing of the truth of Christ's flesh in the Eucharist, although
it self be not seen, brings out of S. Ihon: My flesh is meat in deed, and
except ye eat the flesh, etc.

Eusebius Emissenus having spoken of the bread and wine of Melchisedech,
shows Christ to have spoken of eating his own ^esh, and of drinking his own
blood in S. Ihon, as of two kinds whereby he is received, which is done no
where but in Christ's supper.

S. Chrysostom is so plain herein, that of those words, the Chryso. Hom. 44
in Joan.
bread which I will give is my flesh, he makes none other literal meaning, but
such as apperteineth to the Sacrament of Christ's body. And yet he expounds
the former parts of the Chapter indifferently of spiritual eating and
drinking.

S. Augustine albeit he may seem upon S. Ihon to press most August. in Joan.
cap. 6. tract. 26.
earnestly upon the w^itie, which we have with Christ by eating his ^esh and
drinking his blood, and by tarying in him, and having him tarying in us: yet he
means not to exclude out of those words al Sacramental receiving, but only
the unworthy Sacramental receiving. For he says expressly, he that tarieth not
in Christ ea^eth not spiritually his flesh* albei^ carnally and visibly he
press with his teath the Sacrament of (...) body and blood of Christ. There is
a dubble spiritual eating of Christ.


So that by S. Augustine there is a dubble spiritual eating of Christ's flesh,
one without the Sacrament, and an other with the Sacrament. Christ so spoke of
both, that he spoke specially of the most per^it, which is obtained by worthy
receiving of ye Sacrament. August* in Joan. cap. 6. As the greatest sign there
of, so the highest (...) is in this Sa crament. August. de ^uit. Dei li. 27
cap. 5. Joan. 6.
Out of this worthy receiving rises that great society and unity with
Christ and his mystical body, whereof S. Augustine so much speaks: This is
the Sacrament of Godliness, the sign of unity, the bond of cha^itie. Without
eating of this, one way or other, no life everlasting is to be looked for: and
by eating y^ same worcester thely in y^ best kind of way (which is in the Sacrament
of the altar) the highest degree of unity with Christ our head is ob^eined.

As the best sign of unity is in the forin of this Sacrament, so the best
effect springs o^t of the worthy receiving of ye substance which is under
that form. Therefore in other places S. Augusti^e (...) words out o^ S. Ihon
(This bread w^cih I w^ll give is my flesh for the life of the world) to show
the Priesthod of Melchisedech, which Priesthod him self declares to be in the
August. Epist. 95
Sacrament of the altar saying: Melchicedech prolato Sacramento mensae
dominicae, nouit aeternum eius Sacerdotium figurare. Melchisedech by bringing
forth the Sacrament of our Lords table, August. de conse. Euange. li. 3. ca. 1.
de ciuit. li. 17. c 5. de verb. Apostol. Sermon. 2. de pecca* mer. li. 1. ca. 20.
and 24. in Psalm. 33. and. 98. co^ tra Cresco^. Gra^. li. 1. c. 25. de verb. Do.
Ser. 11. and. 46. q. i^ Leui. ca. 57. Hieron. in. 1. ca. Epist. ad Ephesians. Joan.
6. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. li. 4. c. 14. and. 16.
did know to show the ^igure of his everlasting Priesthod.

Furthermore S. Augustine expounding these words of S. Ihon of the last supper
in very many places of his works most expressly says, that S. Ihon spoke
nothing of the body and blood of our Lord in the thirtenth Chapter (where he
mentioned the last supper,) sed plane alibi multo vberius hinc Dominum locutu^
esse testatur. But verily in an other place S. Ihon witnesses our Lord to have
spoken much more copiously thereof. Except S. Augustine thought y^ sixth
Chapter of S. Ihon to appertein literally to the Sacrament of the altar, he
would never have said that S. Ihon spoke not of the supper in the due place,
because he spoke of it in an other place more copiously. But of S. Augustie I
will speak again hereafter.

S. Hierome says, the flesh and blood of Christ is understood two ways or in
two manners: Either that spiritual and divine, whereof he said. My flesh is
meat in deed and my blood is drink in deed, etc* or else y^ flesh which was
crucified for us, and y^ blood which was shed with the spear of the Soldier.
And that one substance is in each manner of flesh and blood (only the manner of
giving it being diverse) it appears also by the sentence following, where he
says: one flesh of the Sai^res may see the salvation of God, an other flesh
can not possess heaven. Not that the substance of natural flesh, but the
worthiness of the men is diverse.

S. Cyrillus of Alexandria writing upon S. Ihon of purpose and showing the most
literal sense thereof that he could devise, or learn, interpreateth the whole
sixth chapter of S. Ihon of the Sacrament of the altar, naming very many times
the partaking of the holy mysteries and the mystical blessing, and the
communicating of the holy chalice. Also upon those words, I will reyse Cyrillus
in (...). li. 4. ca. 15.
him up again, he makes this exposition: Ego, id est, corpus meu^ quod
comedetur, resuscitabo eum. I will reise him, that is to say, my body that
shall be eaten, shall reise him. As if he said, I will reise him, because my body
which shall be eaten of him, shall reise him.

Sedulius proves the chalice of blessing to be the communicati^g Sedulius in
1. Cor. 10. Leo in sermon. 6. de Ieiun. men's. 7. Theodo ritus in D^alo* 1.
of Christ's blood according as Christ said: He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, etc.

Leo the great says, we ought so to communicate with our Lords table, that we
doubt nothing of the verity of his body and blood, seeing he said: Except ye
eat the flesh, etc.

Theodoritus speaking of the holy mysteries, joins with the words of the
supper these also: The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world.

Isychius showing that the penitent person may eat the bread Isychius in
Leuit. li. 6. c. 22.
whereof Christ said: The bread which I will give is my flesh, joins there
with all the words of S. Paul: Let a man prove him self and so eat: Declaring
both sayings to belong to one mystery.

Theophilact upon these words: The bread which I will give, witnesses that
Christ manifestly tells us in this place of the mystical communion of his
body. Damasce nus de Orthod. l. 4. c. 14.


Damascenus declaring that Christ said: This is my body, and not the figure of
my body, brings for the same purpose: Except ye eat the flesh, etc.

Prosper Aquitanicus joins these words, Except ye eat the Prosper de vocat.
gent. lib. 1. cap. 18.
flesh, etc. with these, except a man be born again of water, to show that the
Sacraments of Christ do give us grace, and not o^r own works which go before
baptism. As therefore S. Cyprian and S. Augustine apply those two sayings to
two several Sacraments of baptism, and of the Eucharist: so must we think that
Procop. in comme^t. in cap. 12.
Prosper does who most diligently followed S. Augustine. Proco pius Gazeus
writes, y^ these words: except ye eat my flesh, etc. Typum mysteriorum quae
sub ipso latent, continent, contain the foorm of the mysteries which lie
privy under it.

Eucherius teaching that Christ feeds us with the nourishme^ts Eucher. in 2.
Reg. cap. 4.
of the healthiull mystery, says that he distributeth to every man a ^ake of
that bread, which came down from heaven and gives life to the world.

Cassiodorus saying that Christ did consecrate his body and blood Cassiod. in
psalm. 109. Joan. 6. Primat. in 1. Cor. cap. 10.
in giving of bread and wine, proves it because him self said: Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, etc.

Primatius showing how the chalice of blessing is the communicating of the
blood of Christ, brings our Savior his words in S. Ihon saying, he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, tarieth in me and I in him. S. Bid
followed in all points S. Augustine, whose words he recites both upon S. Ihon,
and upon Joan. 6. Beda in Joan. 6. 1. Cor. 10 and 11. Angelomus in 1. Reg. c.
2. Ha^o in 1. Cor. cap. 11. Bernardusin (...). 90. verse. tertio.
S. Paul. And therefore we need not doubt but he is wholly of y^ same mind.

Angelomus upon the first book of the kings recites S. Ihon in the same sense.

Haimo upon S. Paul entreating of the Sacrament conferreth S. Paul's words
with the sixth of S. Ihon.

S. B^rnard although he say the eating of the flesh of Christ to be the
following of his painful conversation in suffering voluntary (...) for his
sake, yet well knowing that Christ spoke literally also of an other kind of
eating, he says, that Christ did speak of penance in a figure, that is to
say, covertly as rather including penance under the words which he named,
then expressly naming it. Vnde and hoe designat illibatum illud altaris
sacramentum, vbi dominicum corpus accipimus. wherefore that pure Sacrament of
the altar where we take our Lords body betokens so much.

Behold the true and literal meaning of Christ's words is to have his flesh
eaten in the sacrament of the altar. But that eating imports a following of
Christ in his painful conversation. For as that form of bread (says S.
Bernard) is seen to enter into us: so let us know that Christ thorough that
conversation which he had in earth, eutreth into us, to dwell by faith in our
hearts.

Whereby we may perceive that S. Bernard understands the sixth chapter of S.
John so literally of the sacrament of the altar, that thereupon he builds a
covert and a figurative preaching of penance.

Euthymius notes that Christ did not say: I do give my Euthymius in 6. Joan.
Joan. 6. Nicolaus Methon. In tract.
flesh, but I will give, because he minded to give it in his last supper.
Nicolaus Methonensis having first rehearsed the words of the Gospel, this is
my body, straight expounds all the chapter of S. John thereof, showing the
profit which we take by this Sacrament.

Samonas after the words of the supper declared, as not betokening Samonas in
tract.
a figure or image, affirms Christ to have said in other places the same
thing, and straight recites the sixth chapter of S. John. I omit here Petrus
Cluniacensis, Guimundus, Algerus, Lanfrancus, S. Thomas de Aquino, Albertus
Magnus, Dionysius the Carthusian, Nicolaus de Lyra, and a great number of late
writers, which all agreed upon the same understanding of Gonciliu^ Tridentinum.
sessione. 13. ca. 2.
the sixth of S. Iohu.

But what speak I of these Fathers one by one? not only the Council of Trident
has taken witness for the Sacrament of the altar out of S. John, but also the
seventh kept at Nice, and the first kept at Ephesus does allege against
Nestorius the heretic Concilium Nice number 2. Concilium Ephe sinum in epist. ad
Nestorium.
for the presence of Christ's person in the Sacrament, the words of S. John
his gospel.

Yea the whole west church reads the same gospel of S. John, when it
celebrateth the feast of corpus Christi day. And surely when the Church keeps
any feast, whereof there is mention in the gospel according to the letter, it
always chooses to read that part, where the feast is literally mentioned. It
would therefore The prac tise of the church.
be very absurd, since S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke, have written so
distinctly the history of Christ's supper, to leave them all, and to read the
words of Christ in S. John, if the same words had any other sense more
literal then that, which belongs to the supper of Christ.

So that I trust there is no possible cause of doubting to a sober man, but
that the words of Christ in this chapter may literally and according to the
first and chief meaning of them, be brought to declare, what we ought to think
of his bodily presence in the Sacrament of his last supper. But if any man be
not fully satisfied therein, let him read the process following, and he shall
have less cause to doubt any more in this matter.

Answer is made to their objections, who teach out The iii^. Chapit.
of the holy fathers, that the sixth chapter of S. John ought to be expounded
only of spiritual eating.
FOr their opinion, who think the sixth chapter of S. John to speak only of
the spiritual and not of the worthy sacramental eating of Christ's body, the
authority of certain fathers The argu ments for the contra rye part.
is alleged, who are thought sometimes to expound the words of this chapter,
partly of belefe in Christ, partly of the unity which rises by the
sacraments of baptism and of penance.

But it may seem a sufficient answer to that objection, if we The answer.
say first, that so many fathers do not expound the words of 1.
Christ in the sixth chapter of S. John of any other one argument, as do
conformably expound it of the supper of our lord. And when we speak of the
authority of the fathers, their consent The consent of Fa there is is most to be
followed. Math. 18.
and agreement in one point is the chief way to know (according to the
promise of Christ) in what case they are specially to be followed.

Secondly those fathers which are named some where to have 2.
expounded these words otherwise then of the supper of Christ, have them
selves in other places expounded the same words of the very supper: As we
may perceive by the places of S. Cyprian, of S. Hierome, of S. Augustine, and
of S. Bernard, before alleged. Whereby their authority is as great for that
which I say, as it is against it.

Thirdly no one of the ancient writers is brought forth, who 3.
denies these words in S. John to appertain to the supper. Li. Confess. 12.
cap 28. 29. 20.
And what skilleth it, if many senses of one place be found out, so long as
they all stand together? Is it not S. Augustines rule that all such senses may
be well kept and all admitted?

Fourthly many of those places which are brought for the con trary opinion, do
manifestly, and as it seems to me, inuincibly 4.
prove the words in S. John to be literally meant of the supper of Christ.

S. Cyprian (who is first alleged for the other side) puts Cypria. ad Quiri
number. li. 3. cap. 25. and. 26. Joan. 3. Joan 6.
forth this truth, that a man without baptism can not come t^ the kingdom of
heaven: because except a man be borne again of water, and of the holy ghost,
he can not enter into the kingdom of God. Likewise, except ye eat the flessh
of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you.

Now they suppose that S. Ciprian brings these two sayings for baptism
alone. Wherefore (say they) it was not said of the supper, except ye eat the
flesh etc.

But herein they seem to be deceived, because the custom of the primitive
church i many places was, to give the sacrament of y^ altar Baptism and the Eu^
^ere in some places given together. Dionys. de Eccle. Hierar. c. 1. i fine.
Ambros. de ijs qui init. ca. 9. Cypria. de lapsis. Cypria. ad Quir. cap. 26.
together with the sacrament of baptism, not so much for necessity, as for
sureties sake.

Hereof we have mention i Dionysius Areopagita, and in S. Am brose. In so much
that ye very infantes were in ye primitive church in some countries made
partakers of the sacrament of ye altar.

Seeing then ye sacament of ye altar was used to be given straight after y^
sacrament of baptism, therefore S. Cyprian joined together those two witnesses
which did belong to those two Sacraments, and that is undoubtedly proved by
his own words, for after he had cited those words in S. John, it follows
^mediatly Parum esse baptizari et eucharistiam accipere, nisi quis factis et
opere perficiat. It is little worth to be baptized and to receive the eucharist,
except a man by deeds and works make all perfect.

Behold as he alleged two sayings of Christ, so he names the two sacraments
whereof they were spoken. Thus I think it most clear that S. Ciprian did not
expound the eating of the flessh of Christ as spoken by baptism only.

And ye like may be said of Innocentius, Augustinus, Eusebius Tob. 2. August.
Epist. 93. and. 106. Eusebius. Hom. 5. in Pascha Justinius Martyr in Apologia. 2.
Joan. 6.
Emissenus, and of such others, which bring these words of Christ, except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man etc. against the Pelagians, to prove that
infantes cannot have life in them selves, unless they be first baptized. For
seeing they knew, that no man could come to the eucharist, except he were first
baptized (as also Justinius Martyr has witnessed) and seeing y^ Eucharist was
namely called the bread of life, which who so did eat, he should live for
ever: and who by any fault of his own did not eat it, he should not have life
in himself: moreover, seeing the person baptized, had not only Christ in him
spiritually through baptism, but had right unto the very Sacrament of Christ's
supper, and also being of lawful discretion customably received it straight
after baptism: these things being so, it is most true, that who so is not at
all baptized, he is not only excluded from y^ kingdom of heaven (as y^
Pelagians granted) but likewise (which thing they denied) Joan. 3.
from everlasting life, because he is by all means excluded from the food of
life, which except we eat by some means or other, we cannot have life in us.
and we cannot eat it by any means at all, that is to say, not so much as
spiritually, except we be first baptized, either in deed or in perfect desire.
And being once baptized we do eat it in some effect at the very font, and
really may, and commonly must eat it afterward in the Sacrament to a farther
effect.

So that the reasons of those Fathers do not import, as though Christ meant in
S. Ihon of spiritual eating only, but that he meant of that kind of eating at
the least: and meant a farther kind Joan. 3.
of eating also in that case, when farther occasion should be ministered. For as
when Christ said: except a man be born again of water and of the holy Ghost,
he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven, he so meant in those words to
include his salvation, that would be born and vowed him self to be born again
(although by prevention of death he were not really so borne) that yet not
withstanding, he meant much more to have most men really so born of water and
of the holy ghost: Right so, when Christ said: The preceptof bap tism, and of
eating Christ's flesh are like.
except ye eat the ^lesh of the son af man and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you, he so meant to bind us to eat his fleash, that he
should have life which was at the least spiritually fead there with in
baptism, and yet also that most men should be bound to feed really thereon,
and that he should have most perfect life, who was ^d sacramentally with his
flesh and blood in the Sacrament of the Altar.

As therefore not withstandinge that the will of being baptized ^seth to some,
others must be sacramentally baptized by that Joan. (...).
very precept of Christ in S. Ihon: even so though it be sufficient for ^tes to
eat Christ in baptism spiritually, yet other are bound by y^ same very
precept to eat his flesh Sacrame^tally. Now to a^irme the one sense which was
less meant, denying therewithal the chief sense which was principally meant,
it is no small iuiurie to Gods word. Certainly S. Innocentins, Gusebius, and S.
Augu^ in saying that infants can not have life except they ^t the least wise
eat Christ in baptism, did not mean to say that these words except ye eat
the flesh, and cae. were only spoken of baptism, or else more principally of
baptism, then of Christ's supper, but rather they meant clean contrary, as
it may appear by S. Augustines own words. who disputing against the Pelagia^s
in this very question which we now speak of, says expressly, Augu. de pec. mer.
li. 1. c. 20.
Dominum audiamus non quidem hoode. Sacramento lauacri dicentem, sed de
sacramento sanctae mensae suae (quo nemo rite nisi baptizatus accedit) nisi
manducaueritis carnem meam, and caet. Let us hear our Lord, verily not saying
this of the Sacrament of baptism, but saying it of the Sacrament of his holy
table, (whither no man comes well, unless he be baptized) except ye eat my
flesh, and soforth.

S. Augustine here declares the precept of eatinge Christ's flesh which is in
the sixth of S. Ihon, so to appertein to the Sacrament of his holy supper, that
it apperteineth not in such sort unto baptism. And yet if by eating his
flesh he meant only believing in him, and the receiving of grace or the unity
of Christ's mystical body, then truly those words, except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man, should belong first to baptism where we are united first,
and incorporated unto Christ (...) But S. Augustine ^meth a difference between
baptism and the Eucharist by these words, in so ^uche as he says God spoke
of the one and not of the other. But if he spoke of spiritual uniting us to
Christ without the Sacrament of his own supper, then he rather spoke of
baptism then of his supper, which S. Augustine him self denies. Therefore
S. Augustine meant, that Christ in S. Ihon literally Lib: 1. ca. (...).
promised the gift of his supper, but yet to them only that were baptized. And
for y^ cause he gives a reason why this gift which is proper to Christ's
supper, is applied to the infants which are Augu. in Epi. 106. 10. 2.
baptized, his reason is, quo n^mo rite nisi baptizatus accedit, to the
Sacrament of which holy table no man comes duly, without he be baptized. y^
which reason also he brinketh another where for the same purpose.

If the Sacrament of his holy table be taken for the thing and general effect
of that Sacrament (as some expound S. Augustine) then the reason alleged is
false. for some man, yea all men that are worthily baptized, in the very
baptism come to the thing, to the grace, and to the geuerall effect of
Christ's holy table, because they come by baptism to the unity of his
mystical body, which is a general effect wrought in the Sacrament as well of
baptism as of Christ's table, as S. Paul says: we are one bread, one body,
(...). Cor. 10
all that receive of the one bread.

But if we take the thing or effect of Christ's table for the special effect
rising thence (which is the nourishing and maintey^ of life ^ing) that effect
being spoken of in S. Ihon does inf^ of (...), that the ordinary ca^se of the
same effect is also spoken of* which is the blessed Eucharist. For every effect
presuppose^ necessary cause. But the cause without which we can not ordinarily
maintein o^r spiritual life, is the Sacrament of Christ's supper. He therefore
saying except ye eat my flesh, ye shall not have life in y^; means exceptye
co^ ^helye to the Sacrament of my supper, ye shall not keep and preserve life
in you.

For, that the verb, (...) habere, does in holy scripture signify Habere.
not only the first obteining of a thing, but also the keeping and Hieron.
adu. Iou. lib. 1. 1. Cor. 7.
use thereof. S. Hierom has well noted against Iouinian, upon those words of
S. Paul: Vnusquisque habeat vxore^ suam, let every ma^haue and hold his wife.

I make ^o doubt but al men of judgment will confess, that The main tenance
of life depends upon the Eucha rist alone.
when a Sacrament is instituted of Christ for a special purpose, that purpose
depends ordinarily upon that Sacrament alone. and although Christ be able
otherwise to save ^en (...), yet we can not warrant that he will save him, who
being of lawful age does abstein voluntarily from the Sacrament of his holy
table.

Thus much I have said concerning S. Augustines mind, (...) whose works I
never saw one syllable, why to think that he would the literal sense of the
sixth of S. Ihon to ^long only to spiritual eating. But I have seen very much
and have alleged, and shall hereafter allege many places out of him, wherein it
ap^ most clearly, that he meant otherwise. Basilius in ep. 141


S. Basil is also brought forth, who says that Christ in those words: except
ye eat my flesh, etc. calls his whole mystical coming flesh and blood. But
what of that? is not therefore that saying verisied also of the Sacrament of
his last supper? which The Eucharist is y^ sum of al y^ Christ did in his
flesh.
who so receaueth worthily, he is partaker of all the mysteries of Christ, of
his (...), of his preaching, of his passion, ^tion, ascension, and of all the
rest his doings and saings. so that it is a very good sense to say: except ye
believe that the so^e of man ^ath done and taught in flesh, and except your
selu^ by his grace (...) and keep all his commandments, ye shall not have
lyse in (...), but S Bastil knew right well that the chief Sacrament left by
Christ was the institution of his last supper, and therefore that Sacrament is a
singular piece of that which Christ in these words commands us to believe and
to perform, and for that cause in the place where S. Basil purposely disputes
of the holy Sacraments, Basilius debaptis. li. 11. c. 3.
he declares all the later part of the sixth of S. Ihon to appertein
specially to Christ's supper.

Their reasons are answered who deny Christ to speak properly of his last
supper in S. Ihon.
THe first reason which is brought, to show that Christ in S. 1.
Ihon promised not properly the Sacrament of his holy table, is grounded upon
this negative proposition, because there is no mention made of bread and wine,
which are the matter and elements whereof his supper is made. As though he The
answer.
might not promise the thing which should be made in his banquet unless he
named that whereof it should be made. A man may be invited to a pastie or tart
or some like confection, although it be not told him of what stuf it shall be
made* it skilled nothing for y^ multitude of men to know the order of ^king his
banquet, which thing was committed to the Apostles alone. But it skilled much
for them all to know what kind of food they should receive.

Again the matter of any sacrament is not more necessary, then the form of
wor^ which is used therein. But when Christ said: except a man b^ ^orne again
of water and of the holy Ghost, he Joan. 3.
can not enter into the kingdom of heaven, He showed not by what words the
water which washes, should be made a sacrament to our use and profit.
Therefore (if this kind of reasoning be good) he spoke not at all of baptism
to Nicode^us, which is a false conclusion. In ^ede it follows well, Christ in
S. Ihon speaks neither of bread, nor of wine, therefore he means not to bind
us by his words in that Chapter to receive v^der both kinds* but only
binds us to receive that thing which is his flesh and blood, under whatsoever
kind we receive it. But to say that he speaks notat all of his flesh in
respect of the sacra^nt of the altar, that is not true* as I have proved before.

An other argument of theirs, is, that Christ speaks of 2.
eatinge him by faith, and therefore says: this is the work of God, that ye
should believe in him whom he has sent. He that believes in (...) shall not
hunger, but there be some of you which believe not, so that the eating is the
believing, and the not believing is the not eating. Christ in deed speaks of
belefe which is very The answer. Cyr. li. 4 ^a. 17. in Joan.
necessary and even the foundation (as S. Cyrillus notes) of his last supper,
but he speaks also of a farther act, which is to build upon the foundation
of faith the working of the everlasting meat that he will give* and to work not
only by faith, but likewise by eating and drinking, and therefore as he
chalengeth belefe to his godhead, so does he say that we must eat his flesh
and drink his blood according as he is the son of man.

Thus may we consider in Christ's words, a dubble kind of eating, the one is
called ma^ducare ex hoc pane, to eat of his bread The diffe rence between
e^tinge of Christ, and eatinge Christ.
the which bread Christ is, the other is manducare hunc panem, to eat this
bread. by faith we eat of Christ, by his last supper we eat Christ. By eating
of him we partake some effect of grace from him: By eating him we receive his
whole flesh, blood, soul and godhead into our bodies. As therefore Christ
wills us not ouly to eat of him, but also to eat him self: so besyds the
eating which is by faith, he gives us to understand there is another eatinge
proper to his last supper described in S. Ihon.

The third argument of theirs is, that Christ was the bread of ^.
life presently, when he spoke to the Jews. For he said I am the bread of
life, or the lively bread which am come down from heaven and my father does
geu^ you y^ tru^ bread from heaven. Therefore Christ was presently the bread of
life, yea rather he was so when he was incarnate first of the virgin. for even
then he came down from heaven. but how can this stand together, if his words be
applied to his last supper, which was not yet instituted? The answer.


Christ through his Godhead was the bread of life to us all for ever, and
straight upon his incarnation he was the bread of life through his manhod, and
so continued still at the time when he spoke to the Jews, and after that
visible and corporal sort he was to be eaten by faith and not corporally. But
he sa^d also: work the meat which the Son of man will give you, and the
bread which I will give, is my flesh. This gift which Christ says he will make,
differs in time and manner from the gift which his Father does presently make,
so that as he is the bread of life by faith, so he will be the bread of life by
corporal participation. which second gift is fulfilled in his last supper which
he him self now promises. For no reason can be showed why Christ should say
his gift was to come, except it had been some other gift the^ to eat him by
faith alone. The which eating by faith since it was lawful even at the same
instant wherein he spoke, he would not say: I will goue, of any spiritual eating.
therefore he spoke of the Sacramental giving which he intended to make at his
last supper.

Against this last saying of mine, Caietane or some other of his The iii^.
argu^t.
opinion will pretend, that Christ's gift whereof he speaks in S. Ihon was in
deed to come, but yet not meant of his last supper, because it was the gift of
him self to death upon the Cross which This obie ction has many things to be
weighed in it.
he meant. And therefore he said, the bread which I will give is my (...) for
the life of the world, signifying that the gift which he will make shall be such
as shall redeem the world. Which gift was only performed upon the Cross, and
was partaken always of the old Fathers, and may be daily and howerly partaken
of us. Which points do not agree with the gift of ye holy Eucharist in
Christ's ^upper.

This argument although it were wittily devised, yet it is insufficient, The
^sw^.
and for many causes.

First because Christ spoke of a meat which he would give even unto our bodies,
and not only unto our souls. And that may ^ppeare to be so, as well for that he
ordained the miracle of multiplying five loaves to be an introduction to this
talk (the which loaves were corporally eaten) as also for that he showed him
self to be the true bread, which would fulfill and excede ^anna the figurative
Cyril. in Joan. lib. 4. ca. 16.
bread of the Jews. and therefore S. Cyrill says, that Christ saying, my
flesh is meat in deed, makes a distinction between the mystical benediction
and manna* for manna did not give life everlasting, but by the blessing of the
mystery (says S. Cyrill) we take the very son of God. Now seeing manna was
eaten of the Jews, both spiritually of the just men, and also corpor^llye of
all the Israelites, Christ who said his father to give presently the true
bread, and promised that him self would give Christ pro miseth his flesh as he
gave 5. loa ues and manna to y^ Jews.
hereafter his flesh to be eaten, which is ^ate in deed, did show, the
spiritual eating of manna to be presently fulfilled by his fathers gift,
whereby he took flesh, and that the corporal eating should likewise be
hereafter fulfilled in his last supper.

Which being well considered, it is plain that Christ when he speaks of a
gift which he will make, does speak of such a kind of gift as the miracle of
five loaves, as the figure of manna, as the name of bread and nature of eating
requires. But his death upon the cross is not the fulfilling of manna, in
that respect as manna was eaten either corporally or spiritually. It is in deed
the cause of all our feeding both in spirit and body, the fontain of all our
sacraments, the welspring of al grace. B^t we seek a similitude of things which
are spoken together, an agreement of one matter with an other.

Manna was a sacrament only and not properly a sacrifice, and Manna wa^ ^ Sa
cr^te ^ely.
therefore it being eaten betokened the gift of Christ which he would make in
his supper, wherein the true manna should be sacramentally eaten. For which
cause after Christ had said, the bread which I will give is my flesh, he both
commanded his flesh to be eaten and showed the profit of eating it, and
concluded in this wise, not as your fathers have eaten ma^na and be dead, he
that eats this bread, Joan. 6.
shall line for ever. If now we must eat that which he will give, and we must
eat it after the rate as manna was eaten (albeit y^ thing eaten is far better)
surely the gift promised must be of a thing that De co^se. di. 2. c. de hac.
Mark this place of S. Hiero^. in cap. 1. ad Ephesians.
shall be given to us in a supper, and not y^ shall be made for us upon the Cross.
for noman (as it is alleged out of Origines) eats properly the flesh of
Christ as it was crucified. In so much that S. Hierom distincteth expressly the
flesh of Christ, whereof Christ speaks in S. Ihon, from the respect which
the same flesh has being crucified. For although it be one substance, yet it
is cru^fied as a sacrisice only, but it is eaten as a sacrament wherein the
sacrifice is partaken.

Secondarily the Greek text makes mention of two gifts:

The one of that which Christ will make to us, which also is y^ same substance
y^ he will give for us. The bread (says he) which I will give is my flesh, the
which I will give for the life of the world. Chr^t ma keth two diuerser ^o mises
of giving.
It is not in vain said twice I will give. For he will give one and the same
flesh both as a Sacrame^tal food, and as a bloody sacrific^: the one gift he
will make in his supper, the other upon the Cross,

Neither does it skill that the latin copies report but once I will give, for as
they say that which is true, so the same truth is made the plainer by the greek
text. God forbid we should so understand the one, as to make y^ other false or
super^ons, seeing both may stand right well together.

Thirdly it ought diligently to be marked y^ Christ said before, work the
everlasting meat which the Son of man will give you. He there said he would
give meat unto them, but he determined not what kind of meat it was, but now
expounding the kind of meat be says, and the bread (or meat) which I will
give is my flesh.

As then the meat which y^ Son of man said he would give Christ pr^ miseth
to give his flesh to us
was promised to be given to us (for he said dabit vobis, he will give to you)
even so the kind of meat, to wit, the ^esh of Christ which he will give, must
be understood of that gift which he will make, nobis to us, and not only pro
nobis, for us. But his death is given more properly for us, then to us. His
death, I say, was paid to God the Father, to whom we were detters, and it was
Christ's death was for us rather then to us.
paid for us and in our behalf, but his death was not properly given to us.
For then a sacrifice should be made of Christ to us, and consequently God the
Father is robbed of his glory, and that glory is given to men. From which
thought all good men do abhor.

All is one to say, the son of man will give, and I will give, to say,
everlasting meat, and the bread which is Christ's flesh. But it was expressly
said in the first proposition, Dabit vobis he will give it to you, therefore in
the second it is to be supplied, the bread which I will give to you, is my
flesh for the life of y^ world, that is to say, it is the same flesh which I
will offer to my Father to the end the just men of the world may live for ever.
And so a reason is given by Christ why his flesh is that everlasting meat unto
us which he said before tarieth into life everlasting. For y^ which is offered
meritoriously to God for the life of the whole world, must needs even by that
sacrifice have strength in it self to quicken all that eat it worthily, and
to reconcile the partakers thereof to God.

Farthermore, when Christ said: The bread which I will give is my flesh, he
said in effect, The eatable thing which I will give is my flesh, as if it were
in other terms said, I will give you my flesh to be eaten. For bread unto the
Hebrews does show all y^, What bread is in this place.
which is apt to be eaten of man. Christ ^ad the Jews work the everlasting
meat which he would give. They straight said, their Fathers had eaten Manna,
thinking that Christ was not able to give them a better kind of bread. Then
Christ showing that his Father had given them him self by his incarnation the
true bread of God, last of all comes to show what bread he him self would give
them. And the bread, says he, which I will give, that is to wit, the Manna,
the food, the meat which I will give is my flesh, so that by the promise of
bread he shows him self to speak properly of a banquet which is to come.

The Jews who knew the Hebrew phrase, albeit they did amiss in that they
tarried not to see how y^ promise should be perfoormed, yet they understood
right well that Christ said: I will give you my flesh to eat. And therefore
they in other words reporting the same sense, ask, how this man is able to give
them To give bread which is flesh, is to geu. flesh to (...) ^aten
his flesh to be eaten? As who should say, we understand that he promises us
the eating of his flesh, but we see not that he is able to perfoorm it, in such
sort as Manna was given to our fore^athers. Neither is any man able to deny,
but the Jews took the words of Christ after this sense, ^s knowing him to
promise his flesh to be really eaten. The which sense surely is against their
opinion who suppose that Christ meant only of the gift of his flesh upon the
Cross.

Yea Christ allows the sense of the Jews concerning the natural sound of
his words, and (as S. Basile has noted) with a Basil. de baptis. li. 1. cap. 3.
vehement repetition signifies, he will so truly give his flesh to be eaten,
that except they do eat is, they shall not have life in them selves. Neither
is it to be doubted but if they had so obediently submitted them selves to
Christ concerning the manner of perfoorming his gift, as they understood what he
promised, they had not offended at all. For they lacked rather belefe, then wit
or understanding.

What shall I say more? The circumstance of the whole talk, the Greektext, the
like words going before, the propriety of the Hebrew tongue, the understanding of
the Jews, the oath and confirmation of Christ give a witness above al
exception, that when he said, The bread which I will give is my flesh, he
meant, I that The meaning of Christ's promise.
am the true bread, which by incarnation came down from heaven, I that am
presently sent and given to you to be believed on of my Father, I will hereafter
give mine own flesh, even the same flesh which is offered for the life of the
world, to be meat unto you y^ will tarry with me, which have the words of
eternal life. Which sense being thus proved, their sense who would have the
gift of Christ's death only to be meant, is not sufficient or full enough for
the right interpretation of this place, but it must be also meant of the last
supper, as all the Fathers both Greek and Latin have been showed before to have
taken it, and as all these reasons do evidently convince.

Now whereas they (who dissent from me in this matter) say, that Christ
speaks here of that gift which was common to the whole world, even to the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and therefore that it is a spiritual gift (for else
David and Abraham could The answer.
not have partaken it) I answer, that Christ does not promise in these words
any one meat unto the whole world, but he promises his flesh to be eaten, the
which flesh is given for the whole world. For as at his last supper he said:
This is my body which is or shall be given for you (thereby giving us in his
supper a far Lucae. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
better meal, then he gave to Moses or Elias) even so in this place, when he
promises to give us the bread which is his flesh for y^ world, he means not
that we shall have no more then Jacob had, but that our meat is such as also
is the propitiation for 1. Joan. 2.
the sins of the whole world. By which words it is showed y^ our meat is also
an external sacrifice, and not that it is only a spiritual food received by
faith and charity.

Concerning that daily we may eat y^ bread which Christ promises, it is not
against the Sacrament of his supper, which is left to be our daily and
supersubstantial bread: Either because we Math. 6.
may come daily to it, or else because being received at certain times, it
always tarieth with us, by some spiritual effect, which the Sacramental
receiving works in us. And as the absolutio^ which we receive of the Priest
at certain times, causes a continual Penance in us through all our life: so a
Sacramental receiving of Christ's body causes a continual eating of him by
spirit. Now Christ so meant to have his flesh eaten spiritually, that the
ordinary cause of that feeding should consist in the Sacrament of his last
supper. for that Sacrament mainteineth our spiritual life as S. Paul teaches.
The last reason of the contrary part 1. Co. 10.
is thus foormed.

Christ in S. John speaks of that eating, which makes us tarry in him, and
him to tarry in us. But that is not always the effect of the Sacramental
eating. for as S. Paul says, a man 1. Co. 11.
may eat Christ's body in the Sacrament of the altar unworthily, and to his
damnation. Therefore, say they, Christ speaks not in S. Ihon of sacramental
eating, but only of that eating by faith and charity whereby we may live for
ever.

For answer to this argument thus I say: Sacramental The annswer. Sacrame^
tal eating is considered two wais.
eating must be considered two ways, as all the other works of God toward
men may be considered. one way is to consider it in that nature, virtue, and
effect which God for his part puts in the Sacrament. An other is in that
abuse, and imperfection which man wickedly commits about the holy works of
God.

Who can doubt but that Christ came into the world to save Joan. 3.
men, vt saluetur mundus per ipsum, that the world may be said by him? as for
condemnation it was not brought in by Christ, Romans 5.
but by Adam and Eve our first parents, and by our own wilful sins ad
misdoinges. And yet the holy scriptures witness that 2. Cor. 2.
Christ is the savor of death to many, and the stone whereat they stomble, not
through any fault of his, but because they use their 1. Pet. 2.
freewil to the worse part with whom he has to do.

Even so comes it to pass in the blessed Sacrament of the altar. Christ
gives it only to this end, that we by eating thereof may tarry in him and he
in us. For as Isychius has well Isychius in Leuit. c. 22. l. 6.
noted, Sanctificationis causa, non autem contaminationis proposuit suum
mysterium. Christ has set forth his mystery to sanctify, and not to spott
us. As he gives faith to the end it should Gal. 5. Jacob. 2.
work by charity, and not to the end it should lie dead and unfruitful.

And in deed so should all men tarry for ever in Christ, if they did eat this
Sacrament as they ought to do. If now they will profanely come unto it without
contrition, and confession of their Joan. 20.
sins, and absolution of the priest, that is not the sault of the Sacrament,
which is given to make us dwell for ever in Christ, but it is their fault, who
abuse the gift of God to their own hurt and loss.

This thing well weighed I answer, that always the effect of The Sacramental
eating, on Christ's behalf is ever profi table.
Sacramental eating on Christ's behalf is the tarying of us in Christ, and of
Christ in us. And S. Paul saying, that some receive it unworthily and to their
damnation, speaks not of any effect rising of the Sacrament it self, but only
of a negligence and impiety which stands on their part, who come to the rea^
1. Co. 11.
flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as if it were common bread and
wine, only hallowed by the devout prayers of man, whereas in deed it is changed
in substance by the mighty power of the word of God.

Let it therefore stand for a truth (as it is a most undoubted truth) that
Christ in the sixth chapter of S. Ihon does prophecy of his last supper,
promising to give in it his own flesh to be eaten, as the which is meat in
deed, and for his part he promises that it shall have a perfect effect, albeit
we sometimes through ma lice withstand his goodness. This meaning is not only
true in it self, but it is confirmed also by S. Augustine, who declaring that
Augusti. contra Cr^scon gramm. li. 1. c. 25. Romans 3.
a thing good in it self may be vnpro^itable to him y^ uses it evil, after he
had showed that to be so in light which hurts sick eyes and delights the
whole eyes, and in the law, in which although the Jews were, yet they abused
the same: at the length he comes to our very purpose saying, Quid de ipso
corpore and sanguine Domini vnico sacrificio pro salute nostra, quamuis ipse
Dominus dicat: nisi manducaueritis, and caet. What say we concerning the very
body and blood of our Lord the only sacrifice for our salvation? Not
withstanding that our Lord him self says, Except Joan. 6.
a man eat my flesh and drink my blood, he shall not have life in him self,
does not yet the same Apostle teach even this thing to be made hurtful to
them y^ use it evil? For he says: Whosoever eat eth the bread and drinks
the chalice of our Lord unworthily, he shall be gilty of the body and blood of
our Lord. What ca^ be 1. Co. 11.
plainer then these words of S. Augustine? Who thought that argument, which I
have answered, to be nothing worth at all, affirming the Apostle S. Paul, and
Christ in S. Ihon to speak of one and the same body or flesh of Christ, as it
is given in the Sacrament of his last supper.

And truly they do no small injury to S. Augustine, who by any means would
father upon him this opinion, as though he S. Aug^ stine allwais expounds the
sixth of Ihon as being the promise of Christ's supper.
taught Christ in S. Ihon to speak only of a spiritual eating by faith and
charity, whereas he never gave any sufficient token of that meaning, but
expressly teaches the contrary as all the other Fathers do. The reason which
moved some men to think, that S. Augustine meant so, was for that he speaks
much of spiritual eating and of the unity of Christ's Church. But that eating
is also made, and best of all made in the mysteries of Christ's supper when
they are worthily received, as Christ would allways have them to be received. If
any other argument remain, by this which is already said it may be easily seen,
what answer ought to be made thereunto.

Thus I have proved by the propriety of y^ words in S. Ihon, By how many wais
it is proved, y^ Christ i S. Ihon speaks of his supper.
by the circumstance of the time and place, by the conference of holy
Scriptures, by the uniform consent of the ancient Fathers, by the authority
of general Councels, by the yearly practice of the west Church, by the
confutation of the reasons which are made to the contrary, that Christ in his
disputation at Capharnaum spoke in some part of y^ sixth Chapter (by the way
of promise) of y^ Sacrament of his last supper. All which things if they prove
not Joan. 6.
my intent, I desire the learned Reader to show me, wherein they fail from the
truth. But until that be showed, I must say all the authority, that is an y^
earth, seems to concur to that my position. And therefore God willing, I
intend to build upon this so sure a ground the rest of my disputation against
the heretics of our time, who teach false doctrine in the matter of Christ's
supper, The entra^ ce to the ^e cond part of this book.
affirming that Christ promises in S. Ihon to give his flesh in spirit only
and not under the form of bread. Against whom I will from hence forth dispute,
if yet I first show somewhat more particularly, that the everlasting meat
(which Christ promises in S. Ihon) does appertein to that part of Christ's
talk which is before proved to appertein to his last supper.

The meat tarying to everlasting life, which Christ The (...). Chap.
promises to give, is meant of his real flesh and blood to be given at his
last supper.
CHrist going about to draw the people from filling of their bellies to a more
spiritual feeding, said: work not the meat which perishes, but that which
tarieth to life Joan. 6.
everlasting, which the son of man will give you.

This proposition is diligently to be considered, as being the chief keye of
the whole disp^ation following. And therefore I will declare how every part of it
does agree with the process of The conference of Scriptures.
the talk, which toward the end of the chapter is made concerning Christ's
own gift.

First where he says: the son of man will give meat, he afterward utters
the kind of meat or food more plainly saying: The Bread which I will give, is
my flesh. Joan. 6.


And whereas he ^ad them work the said meat, he afterward shows that by
working, he means first believing in him with a true and working faith, and
afterward also eating and drinking What it is to work the meat which
Christwil g^ue.
worthily his own flesh and blood. And therefore says: this is the work of
God, that you believe in him whom he has sent, and again: Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you.
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting. And yet
farther expounding his former words he says, for my flesh (...) meat in
deed. the word ( vere in deed) declares what kind of vere.
work belongs to this meat, not only a metaphorical work, but a true
work of the body and soul, of the soul in believing, of the body in eating.

So that if we mark well, the meat that must be wro^ght, the bread that he
will give, and his ow^e flesh which must be eaten, is al one thing. The working
of this meat req^reth the help as well of the mind as of the body,
accordingly as Tertullian Tertul. de resur. carnis.
says: Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo
saginetur. non possunt ergo separari in mercede quas opera coniungit. The flesh
eats the body and blood of Christ, to the intent the soul also m^e be made fat
of God. They can not therefore be separated in reward whom the work joins.

The body works with the soul in eating y^ flesh of Christ, ye The bo^y
works in eating Christ's flesh.
work joins them, because they both work and eat one thing, and therefore
they must be rewarded both together in the day of Iugdement. But if we did
eat the body of Christ by faith only (as the Sacramentaries teach) our bodies
should not work the meat which perishes not, but only should eat bread and
drink wine, which must needs ^erish.

But Christ goes forward to show his own flesh to be meat in deed, and to be
that true meat, which he said before should not 3. Joan. 6.
perish, but tarry and abide still, saying: for he that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, tarieth in me and I in him; which thing ^hy Christ's flesh
being eaten ^arieth vnco^ su^ed.
comes so t^ pass, because Christ's flesh being eaten is not digested into
our earthly flesh, and so consumed of us as other meats are, b^t rather as
being incomparably stronger then o^r stomaks, it consumes all our carnal and
fleshly humors. If then it cause us not to perish, how much more is it self a
meat not perishing, but tarying for ever?

And to show, that the said worker of the meat and flesh which Christ will
give, ta^ieth in Christ ^ot only for a time, but to life everlasting, (as the
not perishing meat was before said to do) again it follows, He that eats
this br^ad shall live for ever. By which (...) of Christ's words it is evident
when he says: work not the meat which perishes, but which tarieth to life
everlasting, which the son of man will give you, that then he means they
should eat his flesh and drink his blood, in such ^orte as the son of man
will give it.

I (...) thee, good Reader, once again to confer these sayings. Is it not
all one to say, the son of man will give, and 1.
I will give. Likewise the son of man will give you meat, and 2.
the bread which I will give is my flesh. only this difference there is that in
the later words he names the kind of meat, which in the former he did not
name. The son of man will give the meat which perishes not. and what is
that (...) say, but that he 3.
will give his flesh as meat, which flesh he will give for the life of the
world. And how can that flesh be thought able to perish, which makes all
other men that believe in it to live for ever? The meat which the son of man
will give must be wrought: and the bread which Christ says to be his flesh
which he will give, must also be eaten. for except ye ^ate the flesh of the
son of (...) 4.
and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. The meat of the son of
man tarieth, and he that eats the flesh of Christ and 5.
drinks his blood, tarieth in Christ, and Christ in him. The meat of the
son of man dureth to life everlasting. And he that 6.
eats the flesh of Christ has life everlasting.

If these things answer thoroughly, if Christ be the son of man, if the bread
he will give (which is his flesh for the life of the world) be the meat which
perishes not, if the working of this meat be both believing and eating, if the
meat make the eater ^arie for ever: then ^ith so many things agree, let these
words be confessed no less to perteine to the promise of Christ's supper,
then those do toward the end of the chapter when he says, the Theoph. (...)
cap. Joan. 6.
bread which I will ge^e is my flesh.

So does Theophilact expo^d this place; Cibum manentem mysticam dicit
sumptionem carnis domini, quam nobis ipse dat filius hominis factus. He calls
the meat which tarieth, the mycall receiving of our Lords ^esh, which him
self being made the Son of man gives us.

What name I Theophilact? All the Fathers, yea all Christians August. in Psalm.
(...)
agree that Christ in his supper is the meat whereof it is said, it perishes
not. Now Christ perishes not whether he be given to us by faith as his Father
is said to give him, or in the Sacrament of his supper, as y^ Son of man is
afterward said to be of the will to give his flesh which is meat in deed.

As therefore we can not deny Christ when he is given by faith Christ in his
supp^ is the not perishinge meat.
to be the not perishing meat: so it were wonderful impiety to say the
substance of Christ's flesh given at his supper, not to be the same not
perishing meat. or seeing it is also a not perishing meat at his supper, why
should not these words be understood of the same supper?

And seeing Christ would it to be wrought not only as his Father gives it
presently, but also as the Son of man will give it hereafter, to wit, under ye
form of bread at his last supper: it must needs be granted y^ Christ speaking
of working the gift of ye Son of man, meant no less of working his own gift
which he names afterward eating, then the working of his Fathers gift which is
straghtways called believing. How beit concerning equality of substance in
Godhead, all is common betwixt them.

In fine, the not perishing meat which the Son of man will give to y^ Jews,
is his flesh, which he will give to be eaten. Which flesh (...) not perish, as
well because it is wholly (...) in by the na ture and substance of almighty
God, as also because it is not changed Collos. 2
into our flesh when it is ^aten, as other meats are, but spiritually changes
us into it.

Now that flesh not perishing but tarying in our souls and bodies makes them
also keep and preserve (...) life, whereby we The ^eat whereof (...) spe keth
^elon (...) to our bodies. Cyril. in Joan. li. 3 cap. 28.
come to the ioy^s of heaven. For, that Christ meant of such a not perishi^g
meat, as might be received not only into our souls but into our bodies. Also,
S. Cyrillus has witnessed upon this place.

Operemur igitur (vt saluator ait) non eum ^ibum, and caet. Let us work
therefore (^s our savior says) not that meat which ^iding into the belly and
giving us a short pleasure, at the leugth go^th forth in excrements and
perishes, but let us work the spirit^all meat, which strengthens the hearts,
and leads to life ^uerlasting, the which meat he promises that he will give
saying: the Son of man will give you this meat. Thus he has joined the
things Humana
o^ man to the things of God, and touched the whole mystery of the
incarnation. For he shows sum what privily the spiritual Occult.
meat whereby we live in Christ, being sanctified both in soul and body. But
he will say this thing more openly anon, wherefore Apertius
we also will write there more at large, an interpretation that shall agree to
this place.

(...) dured the words of S. Cyrillus, who as he was a most excellent man of
wit and lerning, so has he most exactly declared the meaning of these words
which I now expound.

Christ mea^t to persuade the Jews his divine nature, and that Christ's (...).
he was himself according to his flesh the true ma^a which came down from
heaven, and that he would give the self same flesh as truly to be ^aten into
the bodies of the faithful for a spiritual nourishement of them, as ever the
Jews did corporally feed upon manna. To persuade this he wrought a miracle in
bread, he trai^ed them to talk of bread, and of manna, withal exhorting the^ to
sede upon the ^corruptible meat which he would give. This meat was his own
flesh. but he as yet would not utter so much, until their minds were
somewhat prepared thereunto by true faith. For this cause S. Cyrillus writes,
that Christ as yet describes the spiritual meat occultius somewhat secr^tly.
Bu^ that afterward h^ will show it apertius more openly.

Agame S. Cyrillus says: Christ has joined humana diuinis, the things of man
to the things of God. The things of man are yt, flesh assumpted by Christ, and
the sanctifying of our bodies by receiving his flesh into them through the
gift of Christ, which he gave as man. The things of God are, the feeding of
our souls by right belefe upon God.

Thirdly by the judgment of S. Cyrillus, this place apperteineth to that which
follows concerning the sanctification as well of our bodies as of our souls.
but that which follows is most properly meant of the sanctification, which
our bodies receive by the food of Christ's supper, of which supper S. Cyrillus
exponndeth those words: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man. etc.

What need more words? this place is like to ye other following in the end of
the same chapter: The bread which I will give is my flesh, which words all the
ancient fathers without any contradiction, teach to belong to the supper.
Therefore doubtless they are of the same mind concerning this place also, but
because this place is not so plain as the other, no man need to marvel why
they rather allege the other, then this.

And yet even to this place of S. John, the holy martyr Ignatius alluded, when
he said in that epistle, which both Eusebius and Hier. in Catalo. Ignatius ad
Rom^ nos.
S. Hierom acknowledged to be his: Non mihi placet cibus corruptionis, neque
voluptates vitae huius. panem Dei volo, panem coelestem, panem vitae, quod est
caro Christi filij Dei, and poculum volo, sanguine^ eius, quod est charitas
incorruptibilis and perennis vita.

The perishing mea^e and pleasures of this life pl^ase me not. I long for Gods
bread, the heane^ly bread, the bread of li^, which thing is the flesh of
Christ the son of God, and for the cup, his blood, which thing is ^haritie
not perishing and life everlasting.

Thus as well the conference of holy scriptures, as the witnesses of S.
Ignatius, of S. Cyrillus, of Theophilact, of S. Augustine, and of Tertullian do
show this place to belong to the Sacrament of the Altar. therefore therein we
must eat, not bread and wine which perish, but only the permanent flesh of
Christ, and so we must eat it by mouth, as we believe on it in heart. For eating
and believing is referred in this Chapter to the self same flesh of Christ.
therefore as really it must be eaten by mouth, as it is believed in heart to be
most r^all in it self.

The equality of substance with his father (which Christ allegeth for his
gift) proves the real presence of his body The vii. Cha^tt.
and blood in the Sacrament of the altar, even as God the Father gave hun real
flesh and blood at his incarnation.
CHrist for the meat which he promised to gene in his last supper, alleged
his divinity, as who should plainly say: wonder not that I promise you such a
thing of so great difficulty and miracle, for I am God. His words are these:
work (says he to the multitude of the Jews) not the meat which does perish,
but that which tarieth to life everlasting, which the son of man will give
you, for him God has signed, that is, God the father has printed his divine
substance upon him by 1. The father and y^ son be equal. Psalm. 44.
eternal generation, or has oynted him with the oil of gladness above al
others, because his humane nature is united to the godhed, whereby he is able
to do as much as his father.

It is not to be thought, that Christ would have alleged his equal authority
with his Father, for a gift which were not of 2. Their gift^s be equal.
equal truth and of equal power with that, which his Father is said to gene.
But his Father gave him not only the virtue and (...) of flesh, but real and
natural flesh and blood at his incarnation, therefor God the S^nn (...) to
give us the same (...) ^ral f^sh in his last supper. For which cause he does
immediately declare both God his Fathers gift, and his own. (...) Joan. 6.
his Fathers gift he say (...) My Father gives you the true bread 3. The
Fathers gift.
from heaven, for it is the bread of God, which comes down from heaven, and
gives life to the world. But what bread is this? I (says Christ) am the
bread of life, I am the lively bread which came down from heaven. ^ow we have
learned, that God the Father gave Christ his Son from heaven; when he sent him
to take the flesh of man: which flesh assumpted o^ the word is also by union to
the word made the bread of life.

Christ therefore having showed his Fathers gift, and that him 4. Theso^n^ gift.
self is the bread of li^e, comes to show his own bread, which he will give
saying: And the bread which I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world.

The brief discourse of y^ whole doctrine is this: work the meat which tarieth
for ever, which the Son of man will give you. for 5. the whole discours^.
this Son of man is equal with God his Father, whose natural image he has
printed in him. God the Father has given his Son to the world and made him
true man, the true bread of life. Therefore God y^ Son being equal with his
Father, will give us the same true flesh of the Son of man as meat y^ shall
tarry with us to life everlasting. But his Father gave him ^o the world not
only in faith and spirit, but in real and substancial flesh. Therefore God the
Son by the drift of all his talk does signify, that he will give in his
supper (whereof he speaks) not in spi rite and faith only, but in truth of
nature and substance, the (...) same real and substanciall flesh.

First he says, he will give that meat, which shall tarry to life 1.
everlasting. Secondly that he is able to do so, as one signed of 2.
God his Father. Thirdly he shows what bread and meat his ^.
Father has given him, that is to say, the true flesh, wherein ^e 4.
spoke to that present multitude of men. Fourthly, he says y^ bread 5.
that he will give is his flesh. Last of all who so cateth it, has life
everlasting. 1. Christ took real flesh.


Does not all this go to prove, that as he bad them work the meat which
tarieth for ever, and showed him sefe (concerning 2. He is able to give us the
same.
his (...)) to be made that meat, sent from God his Father: so he is able to
give them that meat which his Father gave him, and says he will give it them,
to the end they eating it, may live 3. He says he will give it.
for ever, he tarying in them, and they in him?

And yet is not that his real and substanciall flesh, which he promises? Or
did he not perform in his supper, that, which he pro 4. Healwais performs his
promise.
mised? If he can not be false of his word, we have in our Lords supper (where
he perfomed this promise) the real and substancial body of Jesus Christ, as
truly as ever his Father gave him real 5. In his supper he gave it.
and substancial flesh in this world. And consequently we have it not only by
faith and spirit, but in truth and substance.

This plainly is the disco^rse of Christ him self, who by his 6. He gave it
really and not by faith alone Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinit.
Godhead assures us of the gift of that incorruptible meat, which is his
flesh. Whereupon S. Hilarie says, that no man douteth of y^ verity of
Christ's flesh in us, except he deny Christ to be true God.

Seeing Christ is the bread of life to us by the gift of his flesh, the eating
of that flesh by our faith and spirit The (...)* (...).
only suffiseth not, but it self also must be really eaten.
GOd sent his Son, who is by nature the bread of life (as (...). 6.
him self has witnessed) to take flesh for us, that in his flesh he might give
us the same di^ine nature, which is ye (...) bread of life. Therefore when
Christ had said: The Son of man will give you the meat, which tarieth to
life everlasting, straightways he shows in one word three causes of y^ his
promise. For God the Father (says he) has signed this Son of man, that is
to say, he has given him his own substance concerning the divine nature of
Christ, and concerning his humane nature he has showed his will by him, as by
a seal of his own hand. Farthermore he has assigned him to bring us this
meat, which Signare.
tarieth to life everlasting. The verb Signauit, he has signed, may 1.
Cy^illus Libr. 3. cap. 29.
signifye the printing of the same form and image, which the original seal
has, as S. Cyrillus has noted in this place. also it may stand to show or
confirm a thing by witness of seal, as 2. Theophi lact. i^ ca. 6. Joan.
Theophilact expounds it. Orels to assign or appoint a thing to some certain
effect and purpose, as S. Chrysostom, and E^thymius take it. 3.


God the Father signed Christ after the first sort by giving him 1.
his own nature: And after y^ second sort by showing him (through 2.
miracles wrought in his flesh) to be his own Son. And last of 3.
all in appointing to have his will done most perfitly and executed Joan. 4.
by him, as Christ him self said: It is my meat to do the will of him that
sent me.

According to this last sense, it was the will of God, that Christ should give
us the everlasting ^eate, which naturally is his Godhead, and by the mystery
of the incarnation, it is his flesh. And to signify so much, Christ said: I
will give you the everlasting meat, because my Father has signed me to this
purpose. The which sense S. Chrysostom follows in the first place of
Chryso. ibidem.
his interpretation writing thus: Signauit, hoc est misit, qui hunc vobis cibum
ferret. God the Father has signed, that is to say, has sent the Son of man,
to bring you this meat. And E^thymius agrees with S. Chrysostom therein.

Christ therefore being sent of his Father to give us the everlasting meat of
life, first fayeth: I am the bread of life. And then shows how he will give
the same bread, saying: And the bread which I will give, is my flesh. S.
Cyrillus upon those words: Cyrillus in I^an. li. 3. c. 36.
I am the bread of life, writes thus: His verbis subostendit sanctissimi sui
corporis vitam, and gratiam, qua in nobis vnigeniti proprietas, id est, vita
and ingreditur, and permanet. In these words he shows privily the life and
grace of his most holy body, whereby the propriety, that is to say, the life
of the only begotten both enters into us and tarieth.

Likewise S. Hilarie has these words: Si vere verbu^ caro factum Hilarins lib.
8 de ^rinit.
est, and nos vere verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter
manner in nobis existimandus est? If the word be truly made flesh, and in our
Lords meat we truly re ceaue the word (made) flesh, how can it be, but he must
be judged to dwell naturally in us? Christ being for ever God in the fullness
of time took flesh, and when the hour of death was at hand, he gave us that
flesh to be eaten, by the which eating we re^eaue the word it self, that is to
say the natural Son of God into our bodies, and so Christ dwells in us not
only by faith, spirit, or understanding, but naturally. Wherefore S. Hilarie
says, we take and receive the word truly. Vere verbu^ sumimus. We receive
truly and in deed the word which was with God in the beginning, and which was
God. But how can we receive Joan. 1. Joan. 4.
God truly or naturally? God is a spirit, and our nature, consisting of a body,
can not feed truly and naturally upon a spirit, but only by faith and charity.
How ^hen receive we God truly? For south because (...) took flesh truly, and we
receive truly the word made flesh. Noman doubted but we can truly receive
flesh, seeing then the word is made flesh, we thereby can receive the word it
self, not only by understanding, but also whiles his own propriety, that is to
say, whiles ye life and Godhead, which corporally dwells in Christ's flesh,
enters into us with his flesh and tari^th in us, if we receive worthily his
most holy body. Thus it appears that Christ in his flesh gives us the bread
of life which he was sent to give, and he gives it because that flesh is
united to the word of God, which is life by his own nature.

But if this flesh of his be given to us by faith alone, and understanding, or
spirit alone, and not in very deed: We have not y^ bread of life in deed given
to us, but only given to us by faith and spirit or understanding. And so it
was given to us before y^ incarnation of Christ. For God was ever believed on of
the just men Hebr. 11. Joan. 14.
^oth to be, and to be the rewarder of them who seek him, as S. Paul says.
And faith by nature is due to God, as Christ says: (...) believe in God, believe
also in me. Therefore although Christ has taken flesh, yet if his flesh he
given to us only by ^aith and spirit, the bread of life and nature of God,
which dwells corporally Colos. 2.
in that flesh, is not given us after the coming of Christ by any other means
then by faith. And so by the incarnation of Christ we have not the bread of
life given to us by any other way then we had it before. Which is expressly
against the word of God, where the everlasting meat, and the bread of life is
now first promised by the gift of Christ, as who came into the world to bring
us this everlasting meat. And the bread which he will give is his flesh.

Therefore to save the truth of y^ Gospel (which never ca^ fail) we must
believe, that by the incarnation of Christ and by his gif^ at the last supper we
have his real flesh, and in it the bread of life given to us, more then by
faith, or understanding, or spirit. and that more, is the gift of the true
substance of flesh and of blood, wherein the Godhead corporally dwells. And
by it the Godhead is received of us, not only by an effect of grace, and by a
certain ver^ue, Colos. 2*
but in such truth of nature, as it is corporally dwelling in the person of
Christ, who is one in substance with his Father. Ierem 23 Justinius Martyr in
libr. de Trinitat.


For although God be every where by nature, and fill both heaven and earth, yet
as Justinius Martyr witnesses, he is in the Son of man by so excellent a
mean of v^g man to God, yt he is no where else after that sort. And by that
singular mean he was promised unto us, as who is only the everlasting meat,
which alone satisfies the hunger of man: whose heart as S. August. li.
co^fess. 1. cap. 1.
Augustine confesses, is without rest, until it rest in God, because it was
made to come to God: And nothing is at quiet, until it have obtained the end
whereunto it was first made.

Seeing then God is by nature y^ only everlasting meat which perishes not, and
seeing he must be given to us in his own nature, and we are not able to receive
him as he is a spirit, he has done for us as good mothers and Nourses do for
their babes. The mother eats bread, and by her eating, turns it into milk,
and that milk she gives to the infant, and by that means the August. in
co^c. 1. in Psalm. 33 Joan. 1.
infant eats bread made milk. This similitude S. Augustine brings for the
same purpose whereof I now speak.

In the beginning was the word and the word was with God, and the word was God.
Ecce cibus sempiternus: Behold, says S. Augustine, the everlasting meat, Sed
manducant Angeli: But the Angels eat it. Quis homo posset ad illum cibum? What
man were able (to attain) to yt meat? Oportebat ergo vt illa mensa
lactesceret, and ad paruulos perueniret. It behooved therefore that food should
be turned into milk, and so come to little ones. Vnde cibus in lac conuertitur,
nisi per carnem traijciatur? By what means is meat turned into milk, except
it be conveyed through flesh? Quomodo ergo de ipso pane pauit nos sapientia
Dei? How then has the wisdom of God fed us with y^ bread it self? Quia
verbum caro factum est, and habitauit in nobis. Because the word is made flesh
and has dwelte in us. And so S. Augustine concludes y^ man has eaten Angels
food, and that, as he shows there, in the new sacrifice of Christ's supper.
For of that sacrifice and Sacrament he entreats.

Thus we see that God him self must be eaten of us, not only by faith (for then
he neded not to have been made man) but he must be eaten also, as infants eat
milk, by mouth and body. And because that could not be, unless God were made
man, he united to his divine person the nature of man, thereby making the bread
of life and the food of Angels apt to be eaten of men. And at his supper he
gave that flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwelt, by which only means y^
word of God is fulfilled, where he says: Work the everlasting meat which
the Son of man will give you. For God the Father has signed him to this
intent, that he should bring and give you this meat. The way of bringing was
for the word to become man: The way of giving was for the Son of man to give
the flesh of his, which is united to the Godhead, to be eaten. It is given at
Christ's supper under the form of bread.

No other mean of geuinge will serve. for eating by faith No gift ca^
reco^pense the gift of Christ's real flesh.
alone, be it never so lively a faith, lacks the Godhead, in such sort and
truth, as it has assumpted the flesh of man to feed us therewithal. No
spirit, no understanding, no faith, no grace, no other gift in heaven or in
earth (beside the natural substance of Christ) can supply the gift of Gods
nature dwelling corporally in Christ. What thing can be equal to the gift of
y^ everlasting meat, and to the gift of y^ bread of life? There is but one
means in all the world for us to obtein y^ substance, which means is the
flesh of Christ, where it only dwells for us. and God assumpted that flesh
to give it unto us.

And now what cruelty is it, to spoil us of yt flesh, and thereby to spoil
us of God, of life, and of the spirit? That spirit is it which we must eat.
The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit Joan. 6.
that quickneth, it is the Godhead that feeds, God is a spirit: And because
man consisting of a body could not eat Joan. 4.
God, therefore the spirit assumpted flesh, and quickened that flesh singularli^
for our sakes. That flesh is given us, and is profitable, not in respect as it
is flesh, but because the spirit of the Godhead and the life it self dwells
in it, and that not by faith or understanding alone, but corporally. That
Godhead the Sacra^entaries deprive us of, that spirit they pluck from us, and
it is no where else to be so eaten of man.

Heaven and earth, Angels and archangels, yea all yt creatures can not give us
God corporally dwelling in them* and so to be eaten in any kind of meat
besides the flesh of Christ. But in that flesh we eat the substance it self of
God him self. So teaches Ambros. de Sacra mentis li. 6. c. 1.
blessed S. Ambrose, saying: Tu qui accepisti eius carnem, diuinae eius
substantiae in illo participaris alimento. Thou that have taken his flesh, art
made partaker of his divine substance in that fode.

It is not possible to understand this saying of any spiritual virtue, or of
any other thing, then of the real flesh of Christ. Therein only is the
substance of God made mete to be eaten of man. No sign suffiseth to convey to
us that heavenly br^ad. It is an heinous impiety and an horrible blasphemy
to say that a piece of bread can make us partakers of the substance of God, as
it has assumpted flesh in one person: Or to say that my faith is able to
derive the substance of God as meat into my ^phes. 2.
soul and body. faith is a great gift of God, but yet a creature only wherein
the fulness of Godhead dwells not. and therefore it is not able to a^iue to
the union of Gods nature, and much less able to give it me.

But Christ although he be true man, yet is he God also in one person, equal
with his Father, and yt fullness of Godhead dwells in his flesh. that flesh
he gives and in it the fulness of the Godhead. So may we eat the meat which
perishes not: So we receive the bread of life. But other way in the whole
world none can be devised, how we may eat God, or carry him in our bodies
properly and corporally.

By the three diverse geuings which are named, in S. The. ix. Chapter.
Ihon, it is showed that Christ gives his real flesh under the figure of an
other thing.
IN that wonderful disputation which our savior had at Capharnaum, and which
is described by S. John, diverse persoues at three several times are showed to
have had somewhat to do about the giving of bread or food: God by the mynisterie
of Moses, God the Father him self, and Jesus Christ God and man.

God by Moses, is said to have given in time past: He has 1.
Joan. 6.
given them bread from heaven to eat. God the Father him self 2.
is said presently to give: my Father gives you from heaven the 3.
true bread. Jesus Christ says that hereafter he will give: Work the
everlasting meat which the son of man will give you: the bread which I will
give is my flesh. God by Moses gave bread The breadgeu^ by ^vses was figur^ue
which was figurative, coming from the uppermost part of the air, not able to
give life of it self, and therefore not the true bread.

The bread of God the Father was from heaven it self, able to The b^d of God is
true.
give life of it self, and therefore the true bread.

Christ's bread is such according to the form thereof, as both God by Moses
had figured (which was ma^na) and such in substance Thebread of Christ (...)
true under a figure.
as God the Father gave, which is the flesh of his son incarnate, and
therefore it is called the bread, which is the flesh of Christ.

Christ's bread, concerning the substance thereof, is the same flesh which
gives life everlasting, which is made the proper flesh of the word, and it is
under the sorme of bread, in token The gift of Christ shows both his Godhead
and manhod
that he fulfilleth the figure of manna. For Christ being true God with his
Father, and true man with Moses, does both give us by his Godhead the same
true fle^h, which his Father gave to him, and also he gives it by his manhood,
under such a figure and form of bread, as in the ministry of the law was
used, and eaten with the paschal lamb a litell before the making of his ow^
supper.

He gives not the substance of common bread, as Moses did, (for then the
outward substance of his gyste had been no better, The form of bread.
then God by Moses gave) neither gives he the shape of flesh. as his Father
gave (for then he had kept no agreement with the Keeps y^ agreement with the
law of Moses.
figurative law of Moses) but he gives as true flesh, as his Father gave him,
because he is one with his Father: and covers y^ same flesh with y^ form of
bread, because he is not only God with his Father, but man also with Moses,
and with all us.

By which manhood he is less then his Father. and therefore as under the
form of man he covers his true Godhead, (wherein he is equal with his
Father) so under y^ form of bread, he covers the gift of his flesh, wherein
he gives as much as his Father gave him.

Only this difference there is, that it was expedient for us the flesh
assumpted of Christ to tarry flesh still. and in deed seeing God Why the
substance of bread taken is changed, and y^ substance of flesh taken, (...).
Math. 26
is by all means immutable, neither could the word be changed into flesh,
neither flesh into the word. but since the substance of common bread does not
help us to life enerlasting, and may be changed into the flesh of Christ, it
is by the power of Christ changed into his flesh, when he taking bread and
blessing says, this is my body.

Hereby we may see how the name of br^ad and the figure of Manna is joined with
the flesh of Christ, as the process of this chapter teaches. Hereby we may
understand how the blessed Genesis 14.
seed of Abraham, which is the body of Christ, is joined with the apparent
show, that Melchisedech made of bread and wine: Exo. 12.
how the unleavened bread eaten with the old lamb is the cover of the true
paschall lamb Jesus Christ, and to be short how the substance of the old
figure, is gone into the substance of Christ's flesh, and how the outward
form of the figure remains until we come to heaven, where we shall see face
to face without 1. Co. (...).
any veil or shadow put between us and the gloriouse flesh of Christ.

Hence it comes that (as S. Ireneus does witness) the Eucharist Ireneus l. 4.
c. 34.
consists of two things, of one earthly which is the form of bread and of
wine: of the other heavenly, which is the substance of Christ's body and blood.

But if Christ's gift consisted of the substance of bread being The absurdities
which rise of the Sa cramentaries opinion.
only sanctified in quality and made a sign of Christ's body (as y^
Sacramentaries teach) it should neither be that true bread, which his Father
gave him, nor be in substance better then manna, but rather worse (for that
Manna was miraculously wrought by angels, whereas at Christ's supper common
bread is taken) nor it should not be dis^ncted from the gift made in the law:
for Psalm. 77.
as much as there also while Manna was eaten, the just men had grace from God
given them, because it was a Sacrament of the law. It is not therefore grace
and common bread which Christ gives, but the substance of his flesh made under
the form of common bread by his almighty word.

By the shadow of the law past, and by the (...) truth to come in heaven, it
is perceived, that y^ middle The x. Chapter.
state of the new Testament requires the real presence of Christ's body under
the form of brea^.
THe occasion of the three times, the past, the present, and the future, and of
the gifts made in them which are named in S. John, does provoke me to e^tre
into a farther discourse, whereby it may appear to those that delight in
conferring the holy scriptures, what wonderful witness every part of them
does bear to that truth, which our forefathers believed, and we that are not
bastard children do keep and mayntaine.

The law (says S. Paul) has the shadow of good things to Heb. 10. Shadow.
Image of things. Things them (...). a. Cor. 5.
come, not the very image of things. whereby he means, that as the law had
but a shadow: so the gospel has the thing it self. but yet not clear and
plain. for (as the same Apostle says) we in this world walk by faith, and
not by vision and clear sight.

If Christ gave not unto us his real and substanciall flesh under the form of
bread, how gave he us the thing it self? How Christ is the thing it self.
were he by that gift proved greater then Moses, and equal with his Father?
If on the other side he gave us his flesh naked, how were our state an image of
the things them selves?

Christ is our mediatoure. A mediator is in the myddle to Galat. 3. 1. Tim. 2.
join two parts that otherwise do not agree. then if he will make man agree
with God, he must have ^oth the nature of God and of man joined in one person.
likewise if he will make the state of the gospel present, agree with the law
past, and with the state of glory to come, he must take the similitude of the
law and the nature of the glory of heaven, and join these two into one
mystery, and so he has done.

For as he is in one person very God, and very man: so he has perfectly
expressed the old state of the law and the state of heaven in o^ Sacrament.

The nature of the law of Moses was to show Christ, and to The state of the
law. Galat. 3.
be a guide unto the schole of Christ, which thing it did by diverse figures.

The nature of glory is to see face to face, to have all truth with 1. Co. 13.
The state of glory. The middle state.
(...) any figure.

Now the state of the new Testament, being the middle state betwixt the law and
the glory of heaven, must have the very truth that is in heaven (which is the
true flesh of Christ whereon Angels desyer to look) and the true Godhead,
which is the full blessedness of all saints, and this thing it must have under
a figure. Therefore the the^e Sacrament that Christ left unto his Church (which
also he called the new Testament in his Luc. 22.
blood) must by the same reason have y^ true flesh of Christ, wherein Colos. 2.
the Godhead dwells corporally, and y^ under a very figure, which is the
form of bread.

And truly this form of bread and of wine is only a true figure, because there
is in it none other substance but the bare figure. Other figures of the old
law were set to signify, being them selves (...) other substance in nature, as
the arc, the tabernacle, The form of bread is only a true figure.
the veil, the ^hewebread and all the sacrifices. but the bare figure of bread
without the substance of bread set to signify the bread of life really present
under it, that is the only true figure as the which has none other truth in
his own substance, but only the truth of a figure, because the substance
thereof is turned Hebr. 5. Psa. 109.
into that flesh of Christ, who under the figure of y^ order of Melchisedech
(whereof he is priest) fullfilleth all figures, that ever have been of him, in
his real and substanciall flesh.

which real flesh if we had not in our Sacrament of the altar, Christ gave no
more in his outward mysteries then was given by Moses, he were not equal with
his Father by his gift, he were not y^ corner stone joining the state of
Moses law which Ephesians. (...).
was only (...) and the verity of glory together. But if these are great
^rrours, let us steadfastly believe that Christ left us his very crew rcall flesh
in the blessed Sactament of the altar, under the form of bread and wine. Math.
5.


For as in other precepts we may understand the old law not Galat. 5.
to be taken away concer^ing the spirit which lay hid in it, but only to be
fulfilled and made more perfect: so notwithstanding the old figures be dead and
changed, yet the state of fulfilling them is such, that the new Testament is
not it self without all figures, but rather contains the truth covered with a
convenient figure. Uerily Christ said so much in effect, when he taught that he
came not to putt away the law, but to fulfill it* for the fulfilling Math. 5.
of the law without the putting away thereof, is no less to say, then to putt
the fullness of new grace under a shadow, which shadow may seem to keep a
resemblance with the old law: so that of two distinct states there must now be
made one new middle state of the which the outward part resembles the law,
and the inward is one with the state of grace.

Let us put an example in the precepts of nature to make this thing more
plain. The law says: Non occides: Thou shall not Exo. 20.
kyl. This precept was not put away by Christ, but the true ground of it
(which is, not to be angry) was joined thereunto as it appears by y^ serm^n
of Christ in S. Matthew: It was said Math. 5.
to them of the oldelaw, Thou shall not kyl, but I say unto you that every one
that is angry with his brother shall be gylty in judgment.

Here we see two things, the one of kylliug, the other of being angry. That of
kylling is outward: That of anger, is inward. Anger is the ground of not
kil^ng.
they both make but one precept of the new Testament. the not kylling depends
upon the not being angry, and then is kylling thoroughly taken away, when
anger is thoroughly cured, and as it fares with this precept: so staudeth it
with the the blessed Sacrament, whereof we reason.

For it keeps y^ form of bread and wine which under y^ law was empty, and
ye truth which was be tokened by the old manna, is put by the almyghtic power
of God under the forms of bread and wine. and so remains the law not
altogether put away (for a kind of figure taryeth still, and it was ever a
siguratiue law) but fulfilled, because the body of Christ, which is the
fulfilling of the law, is made present under a figure.

The sign of circuncision (says S. Leo) the sanctification of Leo de passione
Domini sermon. 13.
gifts, the consecracion of priests, the purity of sacrisice, the verity of
washing, the honor of the temple is with us. there is no legal instruction, no
prophetical figure, quod non totum in Christi sacrame^ta transierit. which is
not wholly transferred into the Sacraments Leo de passione Domini sermon. 8.
of Christ: and again, one oblation of thy body and blood fulfilleth the
diversity of the old sacrifices. Hitherto S. Leo the great.

To y^ same effect serve y^ words of blessed Dionysius a Counselor of the
Senate of Athens scholar to S. Paul, who having In lib. de coele. Hi erarchia.
declared the holy kind of gouerna^ce, which is in heaven among the ordres of
Angels, and having showed, that by them the inferior degrees of men are
brought unto God according to their capacity, he first shows that God gave
unto the world the goueruement of the law, which he gave as to children in
signs and tokens, and as to weak eyes in figures, clouds, or shadows. But
afterward came our holy governance, which is the end and fulfilling of the
former law. Now says this holy Dionys. Areopagita ^ eccles. Hie rar. ca. 5.
writer.

Nostra hierarchia and coelestis est and legalis, quae communiter medietate
extremorum comprehenditur, cum illa communes habens spiritales contemplationes,
cum hac autem signa quo sensum mouent, quorum varietate distinguitur and per ea
pie ad deum adducitur. Our holy governance (says Dionysius) is both heavenly
and legal, that is to say, having somewhat like to the law contained in common
between those two extremyties, partaking with that of heaven spiritual
contemplations, and with this of the law sensible signs, whereby it is
diversely distincted, and by them it is brought after an holy mauer unto God.

We have heard how the scholar of S. Paul joins in our Our state is mingled
of law and glory.
state the heavenly contemplacio^s of Angels (who look upon God him self)
with the outward signs of the law. For by heavenly contemplacions S. Dionysius
means that truth, which face to face is seen in heaven. But let us return
again to the words of S. Paul, who did yet express this matter more plainly,
keeping the same division, but giving every thing his plain name.

The law had the bare shadow of things to come: The truth, Heb. 10.
is the body of Christ it self, which he calls also Rem ipsam, the thing it
self, wherein also dwells the nature of God. Now the Colos. 2.
joining of a figure with the truth is called Ipsa imago reru^, the very shape
or image of the things. Vmbram enim habens lex futurorum Heb. 10.
bonorum non ipsam imaginem rerum: For y^ law (says S. Paul) has the shadow
of good things to come, not the very image of the things. The good things to
come are the vision of The good things.
Christ in glory, and y^ clear sight of God, who corporally dwells in the
body of Christ. The shadow hereof was y^ law, whereof The shadow. The image of
the things.
Moses being steward, obtained bread from the air for the children of Israel:
But the image it self of the things, that is to say, wherein the body of Christ
is contained and in that body God dwells, y^ image is the substance of God
and man covered under the forms of our blessed Sacrament of the altar. The
pecu liar gift of Christ.


And therefore that Sacrament is properly the gift of Christ co^ teyning both
it which we shall see in heaven, and such a figure as we have seen under the
law, covering presently the truth to come, with the shadow past, to come I say
without a shadow, and Maxim. in scholijs in Di ony^ Pachim. Oecume nius in 10.
ad Hebr. The distinction of the gifts is not in vain.
past I say, without y^ real truth, but now having the truth under a shadow.
Maximus and Pachimera do upon S. Dionysius allege S. Paul for the proof of
that which Dionysius said. Oecu menius likewise expounds the things them
selves, to be the life to come, the shadow to be the old testament, the image
of things to be the state of the Gospel.

This I take to be the true meaning of the holy Ghost, who does not in vain
cause the gift of God by Moses to be named diversely from the gift of God the
father, and the gift of Christ to differ from them both. Moses is said to have
given, God the fa there presently to give, Christ promises that he will give.
God by Moses has given bread, God the father at the time of speaking, gave
his son in visible flesh, Christ promyseth to give y^ bread which is the
flesh of the son of man, which flesh under the form of bread brings
together in the Sacrament of the altar the good things of heaven, and such
figures as were in the law. The Sacramentaries make void these diverse gifts


All which distinctions of giving, and truth of gifts, the Sacra mentaries by
their figurative doctrine make void, as they do the rest of the holy
Scriptures. For they will that Christ's outward gift should in it conteyne no
invisible truth of flesh and blood, but even the bare substance of common
bread and wine, feeding us with needy and impotent creatures, as though we Gal.
4.
remained yet babes, as though Christ in fulfylling all figures had destroyed
them, and not left them full and perfect.

That which the water and the cloud did signify, is now really 1. Co. 10.
performed in baptism, where we are saved by the washing of regeneration and
of the renewing of the holy ghost. Likewise Tit. 3.
that which Manna did then shadow having the sweetness of all deyntie and
pleasant tastes, as now really given, because y^ flesh Sap. 16.
of Christ is meat in deed.

We differ not in substance of our manna from the Angels of We are nere to the
Angels then to y^ Jews.
heaven, but only they are out of all fear, we lyuc in good hope, they see and
eat we eat, and see not, but be^ue. They are in their and our country, we
are in the way to them. Whiles we are going, the truth of heaven is covered to
us, but since Christ came down to be our guide, he has left the kingdom of
heaven in the blood of the new testament among us, as really as him self
really for that purpose took flesh, and dyed in the same flesh, to Joan. 12.
the intent he being exalted upon the cross, should draw al things unto him
self.

The bread that Christ promises to give which is his flesh, must needs be
meant of the substance of The. xi. Chapter.
his flesh.
Having already touched the three several times of giving* which are spoken of
in S. Ihon, order would y^ I should show the three several kinds of working
those three gifts. But for as much as the last gift of the three is the gift of
Christ, whereof we do principally entreat, I thought good to say somewhat of
it alone.

Christ having said before: work the everlasting meat which the Son of man
will give you, comes now to name what kind of meat it is, and the bread (says
he) which I will give is my flesh.

I have proved already that these two sentences belong to one manner of gift,
which also is promised to be given to us, and not only to be given for us, as
some do a^. To be given to us I say, in the Sacrament of Christ's supper, and
not only for us upon y^ Cross, the which thing because I have by diverse
reasons proved in two places of this present book. it shall be now su^ In ^he ^*
Chap. in y^ answer to the iiij. objection, and in the vi. Chapter. Cyp de
orat. Do min. Chrysostom. hon. i. 46 in Joan. Cyril. li. 11. in Ioa^. cap. 22. Aug.
de ciuit. lib. 17 c. 5. de pec. mer. and remis. li 1 c 24. etc. Theodo. dial. 1.
to warn the reader that S. Cypr^ writing upon our Lords prayier, has alleged
these words: The bread which I will give is my ^esh, as spoken of the
Eucharist. The like has S. Chrysostom done in his comments upon the same
place, affirming that Christ spoke of the mysteries: beside that which he
speaks hereof upon the sixth of S. Ihon, does also allege it again for the
Sacrament of Christ's supper, naming benedictionem mystica^, the mystical
blessing.

S. Augustine often times allegeth this text for the gift made in Christ's
supper, as I have declared before also. Theodoritus was of the same mind: and
as for Theophilact and Euthymius be so clear in this matter, that they never
doubted thereof.

Which since it is so: let it stand for a truth most universally received, y^
Christ saying, The bread which I will give is my flesh, meant, the bread which I
will give you at my last supper is my flesh.

Moreover, the word bread must be noted, which stands not presently for
wheaten bread, but only for food and meat. For as Christ said before, work the
meat which the son of man will give you: so now he says, and the bread which
I will give is my flesh, declaring y^ bread in this place is all one with meat.
The which Cyril. in Joan. lib. 11. ca. 22.
truth is also expressed of S. Cyrillus where he says: Saluator cu^ ad
Iudaeos multa de carne sua dissereret, ac viuisicum vere panem ^am appellaret,
panis enim, inquit, quem ego dabo, caro mea est. When our Savior disputed
many things among the Jews, of his flesh, and ca^ed it the bread truly giving
life, he said: for the bread which I will give is my flesh.

Thus it is clear, that Christ in effect says, I will give you a kind of meat
or food in my last supper, y^ which is my flesh, even the same flesh which I
will give for the life of the world.

This promise Christ made at Caph^ to all the ^tude, but (...) submitted the^
selves to receive that doctrine beside the twelve Apostles, among whom Judas
being one, had this promise made to him also. For although Christ knew him to
be a devil and traitor, as him self said even at Caph^um: yet seeing Joan. 6.
he tarried with the twelve even at the last supper, and other men knew not so
much of his maliciouse intent, Christ dissembled it, and as he promised his
flesh to all, so he gave it to the twelve in the night wherein he was betrayed.
The which thing I speak to thend the reader might perceane, what Christ
promised presently. Such a gift it was the which was performed ^o less to
Judas, then to the other Apostles. It was not therefore a spiritual gift only
which was promised (for such a one Judas neither did nor could take) but it was
a real *and external gift, which was delivered with the hands of Christ, and
received into the mouths of the Apostles. After which sort Judas took it.
Which could not be so, except the flesh of Christ were under the form of
bread, which Christ gave.

Again Christ spoke not now of giving his flesh by faith only, for that gift
his Father presently gave, as he said: Pater meus dat vobis panem de coelo
verum, my Father does give you the true bread from heaven. That gift Christ him
self was being given in flesh, to thend we should believe in him, and (...) upon
him by spiritual devotion. But Christ's gift both has an other person, and an
other time. The person is Christ, the time is to come. Whereupon Chrysostom. homi.
46 in Joan.
S. Chrysostom here notes: Se, non patrem dare dicit: He says him self to
give, and not his Father. It is therefore a real gift to be made externally
whereof Christ speaks.

Whereupon it follows, that Christ's flesh was promised under the form of bread
which suin his ^pper was taken, blessed, and delivered. Under that form
Christ's flesh is promised not in faith only, but in truth of nature, and in
the same substance which was given (...) the life of the world.

The Sacramentaries must now say, that flesh here stands The ^ction.
for the sign and figure of Christ's flesh, and so by that means (they will
say) both Judas had the figure of Christ's flesh given* and the other Apostles
had the flesh it self by faith and spirit.

It has b^e ^wed before, that the bread, whereof Christ now The ^swere.
speaks, and which he affirms to be his flesh, is Christ him self, as he is
true God and man. Therefore to say, the bread which Christ will give, is the
sign of his flesh, is to say that Christ him self through his own gift is the
sign of his own flesh, for of any other bread Christ spoke not in this place,
then of such bread as him self is. And of that he spoke, not in that only
respect as he is God, but as he is man. And so either the man^hood of Christ
is y^ Either no sign is ge uen by Christ, or his flesh is the sign y^ is
given.
sign of his flesh, or nothing else is here called the sign thereof. If the
ma^hood be the sign, surely the ma^hood is now promised and is delivered even
to Judas at his last supper: which being so, I grant it to be a most true ^se,
y^ Judas did eat such a sign of Christ's flesh, as his own substance is. But
if the Sacramentaries will needs have material bread meant by these words (
The bread which I will give) besides that they take that word otherwise, then
it is taken in all the talk which apperteineth to y^ true bread which came
down from heaven, I will confute that gross error an other way also.

Christ joins together two diverse tenses, the future, and the present, Dabo,
I will give, and est, it is, a^ing that the geuig of his bread is to come, but
the substance or being o^ the same bread which he will give, is present. for he
said not, y^ bread which Flesh here can not mean the ^igure of flesh.
I will give shall be my flesh, but is my flesh. And yet if the word bread did
stand for material bread, and the word flesh for y^ sign and figure of flesh
(as some doubt not falsely to teach) or it the (...) ( is) o^d stand ^or the
verb ( signi^icat) which m^aneth to betoken or to signify, the^ Christ even
by our adversaries interpretation should have said, the bread which I will give
shall be my flesh, and not (as he now said) is my flesh.

For seeing that Christ spoke these words one whole year before his supper (as
by the gospel it may appear) if the bread which he said he would give,
should only betoken his flesh, and not be his flesh in deed, then were it
falsely spoken that the same bread now presently is his flesh. for if the bread
it self he not yet made, yea perhaps not so much as the corn thereof in the
ground, and certainly not yet blessed of Christ, how is it possible that the
bread which now is not, can be now a sign or token of Christ's flesh? That
which is not it self, can much less be a ^oken of an other thing. but that
which Christ said he would give, was exta^t in substance at that time when he
spoke, and at that present instant when he spoke. For he said the bread which I
will give, is my flesh as I say, is now, is at this moment, wherein I speak.
But the material bread that I will take into my hands, and turn into my
flesh, is not as yet extant any where. Or if it be, it is not a token until I
bless. But the bread that I will give is even now my flesh: As much as if
Christ said, that which I will geu^ at my last supper, how so ever it seem
common bread, and appear in the form of bread, which form and figure is to
come: (and therefore I say that I will give it hereafter) yet the substance
that shall be contained within that form of bread, that sub stance which is the
being and essence of my gift, whereof now I speak, that substance is now
present in your eyes. What substance is that? Forsooth the substance of my
flesh. For as the form of br^ad is to come, and the substance of my flesh is
here present in me: so by the form of bread I say, I will give it. but
concerning the substance thereof, I say it is my flesh. I say not it shall be,
lest you should think I meante to make such a gi^t of my flesh, the substance
whereof were to come rather then present. But I say, it is my flesh. For within
the form of that bread none other sub stance shall be, then that which you see
here, which is my flesh. so that these words (the bread which I will give is my
flesh) are as much to say, as I will give you the substance of my flesh to eat:
And that the word flesh does here signify the substance of Christ's flesh,
Tertullian has witnessed almost fourtene hundred Tertull. de carne Christi.
years past. Who disputing against those heretics, that confounded the flesh
and the soul of Christ, takes upon him to declare that they are two
distincted natures. Of y^ soul of Christ it was said: Anxia est anima mea
vsque ad mortem, my soul is sorrowful to death. of his flesh, Panis, quem ego
dedero pro salute mundi, caro mea est. The bread which I shall give for the
life of y^ world is my flesh. Quod si vna caro, and vna anima, illa tristis
vsque ad mortem: and illa panis pro mundi salute saluus est numerus duaru^
substantiarum (...) genere distantium, excludens carneae animae vnicam speciem.
If the flesh be one and the soul an other, y^ soul sorow^ui to death, and the
flesh bread for the salvation of the world, the number of two substances
differring in their kind is safe, excluding the one kind of a fleshly soul.
If in this disputati^n we might expound flesh for the sign of flesh, and being
for the sign of being, Tertullian by this place had not proved a real
substance of flesh, since a sign of flesh, is not the substance of flesh. but
now, as in this saying, my soul sorrowful, the word, soul stands for the
substance of the soul: so in this, the bread which I will gene is my flesh,
the word flesh stands for the true substance of Christ's flesh. Seeing then
Christ promises to give the substance of his flesh, and it must needs be that
he fulfilled his promise, vndonbtedly he has given us in deed the true
substance of his flesh in his last supper, when he said: Take and eat, this is
my body, that is to say, as now I have pros^d, the substance of my body. Thus
it is pro^: first, that these words belong to the Sacrament of Christ's supper:
Next that the word bread (...) ^eth Christ him self the bread of life: Thirdly
that if it were ex^ for common bread, yet every way the sense should serve to
prove of (...) the true gift of Christ's substance in his last supper.

A farther declaration of the real presence of Christ's bo The (...). Chapter.
die and blood taken out of the discourse of his ^wn words concerning the
different eating of him by faith, and the re^auing of his flesh and bl^ in the
S^amente of the ^ltar.
Marvel not, good Reader, that I stand long about a little. The strength of
the word of God is so great, that a few syllables of his can not be
sufficiently expounded by a great many books of any mortal ma^s making. for
God spoke Psalm. 61.
but one, and yet David heard two things, to wit, the power and mercy of God.
Whereby are understood the two hole books of the old and new Testament.

Now I will go forward to show you the plain differerence, that Christ him
self has set forth in this Chapter between eating of him by faith, and
eating of his flesh and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. For these two are
not one, as our new preachers go about (against the word of God) to make you
believe: neither do they differ only, because in the supper a bodily sign of
that thing is eaten, where upon we feed by faith: but because that thing is
received into our bodies, where upon we feed by faith. In so much that of
purpose Christ impugneth and destroys the Sacrame^tary doctrine by these his
words in this Chapter. wherein as I have heretofore no^ed diverse kinds and
times of Three (...).
ge^ng, because God by Moses gave naked figures in the time past, the father
him self gives presently the true natural flesh of his natural son to our
eyes and hearts. and Christ will give hereafter the same true flesh under the
form of bread to our mouths and minds: so now must I note diverse workings
of the said gifts.

One work answered to Gods gift by Moses, another to Three workings.
the fathers gist, and the third to Christ's gift.

By Moses his minister God gave Manna. This bread was 1. Manna was wrought
corporally
only corporal, and the people wrought the substance thereof only with their
teeth and bellies: other thing was there not in it which might be wrought. for
although it were ordained to be a figure o^ a greater thing to come in Christ,
yet that was no part of the Manna it self, but consisted and had his whole
ground in the appointeme^t of God, and in the understanding of y^ people of
God. to whom (if they were well instructed and so took it) Ma^na was a figure:
and whether they took it so or no, it was ordained to be a figure, but not to
them profitable who took it only for bodily food. Again those which understood
well what Manna signified, had not any good by the meat it self, but looked for
it of the truth which Manna shadowed. for which cause Christ says, your
fathers have eaten Manna in the desert and are dead: as who should say, Manna
by his own virtue could save none of them all, but that true bread Jesus
Christ only saves, which Manna did signify.

The second gift is the present gift of the Father, whereof Christ 2. Joan 6.
Christ wrought on by faith Augu. in Joan. c. 6
says: My (...) does give you the true bread from heaven. This gift of the
father must be wrought not by teeth and bellies (as Manna was) but by faith
and spirit. And therefore S. Augus^ine says upon this place: Vt quid paras
dentem and ventrem? Cre de and maducasti. What do thou provide tooth and
belly? believe, and thou (...).

The third gift is that where Christ promises to give his flesh: Christ
received cor porally.
and the working of it, is to eat worthily the same flesh under ye form of
bread.

God the father is said to gene the true bread, which is Christ Christ given.
him self in such sort as he is God and man in one person: and the same one
God does work faith in all that hear his voice, by Faith given.
the which faith they may work upon Christ and eat of him by spirit. Of this
work it is said: This is the work of God that ye Joan. 6.
believe upon him whom he has sent. of this kind of working it is said: He that
comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes The reward of faith.
in me, shall not thirst for ever. To be short, of this work does Christ
speak specially, and in manner wholly from that place where he said, that the
Father gives the true bread, for twenty sentences together, until he conclude
that kind of working by these words: If any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever* Take the pain to read over once or twice the Chapitre of S.
Jhon from that place, where it is said, operamini, work, not yt The division
of the Chapter.
meat which perishes, and so forth to the end, and conferte therewith that
which I now write, and you shall see as clevely as can be, that Christ
distincteth as three gifts, so three workings of the^.

As God by Moses gave the delicate bread called Manna, so they wrought upon
it by eating the same bread with their teth. As God the father gives y^ true
bread Jesus Christ, so the faithful must work it by believing, and their
reward shall be life everlasting. But as thou do tender thy soul health, so
go forward with me to the third gi^t, and the third working or eating: which
in deed if it be done profitably contains both a bodily and a spi rituall
working, a bodily with manna, a spiritual with the gift The third gift is
cate^ with body ^ soul.
of God the father. a bodily to (...) the manhod of Christ, a spiritual to
eat it fruitfully. the eating is spiritual because it requires faith in
Christ, and love toward God and our neighbors, the same eating is bodily,
because it in deed eats under yt forms of bread and wine that flesh of
Christ, which it believes in says and heart.

First Christ shows his gift, saying: And the bread which I will give is my
flesh for the life of the world. That this gift does differ Christ's gift
^issereth from manna.
from the gift of Moses (who gave bare bread) it is easily seen. For the
sons gift tarieth for ever, but Ma^na perished and they that did eat it,
concerning any virtue that Manna had in his own substance to save them from
death. The working of this gift is also named eating and drinking, but yet
after another sort then the eating of Manna was under Moses. for here the
truth is eaten that was figured in Manna. But how it differs from the fathers
gift, and the work which belongs to the fathers gift, there stands a
great part of this question.

Here I must warn the Reader, that he confound not him self. for in often
repeating what the Father, and what the son, why the Father, and why the
son gives this, or that: it is to be seared least the mind gor^et the chief
distinction, and so take one part in stead of the other.

The Father, and the son, yea the holy ghost also be all one God, and give al
one thing. But the holy scripture, for the instruction The who le trinity
works.
of us, and by reason of Christ's flesh assumpted, does attribute sometime one
thing to the Father, an other to y^ son, an other to the holy ghost:
meaning most commonly by the name of the Father, God, and the whole Trinity,
according to the which appropriation of works and gifts, we now intend to
speak.

The Father is said to give many ways in this chapter, he gives faith into
our hearts, he gives Christ to the world in How many ways y^ Father gives.
flesh, he gives Christ to us, and gives us to Christ. Therefore the gift of
the Father may be respected specially two ways. either in Christ him self, or
in us toward Christ. The Fathers gift in Christ him ^elf is real and
external, because he sends and gives his only begotten Son in the true
flesh of man to be seen, heard, and felt. The Fathers gift, in respect of y^ we
receive of him, is real, but internal, spiritual, and without working
outwardly yt same sensible gift which is wrought inwardly. For after the Father
had once given flesh to his Son, all sensible and external working was
worthily committed to that heavenly instrument of Christ's flesh. So that
sometime we say the Fathers gift is real and external, but then we mean the
visible flesh of Christ in his own person: Sometime we say the Fathers gift is
only spiritual, and then we understand the faith, charity, and grace, which
the Father works in us, whom he brings to Christ by faith and spirit. This
distinction well remembered, I trust to make the matter plain enough.

The state of our nature is such, that since we consist of body and soul, our
soul being the chief part of us, and our body the inseriour part, God the
Father in his gift intends to feed our The Father feeds the soul. Sap. 9.
souls: which being fed, our body shall be fed, by reason it depends upon the
soul. But Christ considering that our heavy bodies most commonly weigh down
our souls to the pit of hell, would also invent a way, that our very bodies
might not only not hindre, but rather help our souls, and not only through
our souls, but also through a meat that them selves should receive, be made
light and meet to rise upward, and to obey the spirit gladly.

So that the meat, which God the Father gives to the soul, Christ (...) y^
spiritual food even to the body.
Christ brings to the body. And because the body has no faith to apprehend
the flesh of Christ withal, neither understanding, nor spirit, whereby to
follow the flesh of Christ into heaven: it has pleased his infinite mercy to
leave his flesh in so maruelouse a manner under the form of bread, that it
might be given into our hands, mouths, and breasts, by which means we are
able to receive it corporally and naturally. The Son The Fa^ and (...) geu^
one thing not one way.
therefore and the Father give one thing on Christ's behalf, but not one way
on our behalf. For the Father gives Christ unto the world in deed, but to us
in faith and spirit. The son gives him self to us in faith and spirit with
the Father, and moreover he is here said to give him self in truth of body and
blood to oursoules and bodies.

Because therefore the thing it self is one which the Father and the Soune
give, one effect does follow in us of both gifts. For as it is said of the
Fathers gift, He that believes in me, has everlasting life: So it is said of
the Sounes gift, He that Thereward is one of both gifts The diverse ways of
giving. The first difference.
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life. But for so much
as the Father and the Son give not their gifts after one sort: Therefore
their two gifts are in this chapter of S Ihon diversely described.

First as I said before, of the Fathers gift it is said, He does give the true
bread, in the present tense: Of yt Son, I will give, in the future tense.

The Father gives Christ in the form of man, and therefore The (...)
difference.
it is said: This is the will of my Father which sent me, that every one, who
sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and again, ye
have seen me and have not believed. Behold, by the manner of the Fathers gift,
the faithful may see that Son of man, upon whom they believe. But of the
Sons gift it is only said. The bread which I will give, is my flesh. where
it is not said that his flesh shall be seen, but rather insinuated yt it shall be
under a covering of an other kind of food, which the naming of bread
signifies. And in the supper (where this prophecy was fulfilled) it is most
clear.

The Fathers gift is called Verus panis de coelo, the true bread The (...).
difference.
or meat from heaven: The Sons gift is called not only true bread, but also
truly bread, and meat in deed, Caro mea vere est cibus, my flesh is truly
meat. some true meat may chance not to be truly meat, because it is not
eaten: but nothing is meat in deed, and truly meat, except it be in deed
eaten. There is difference between being the true vine, and a vine truly.
Christ said him self was the true vine, but he said not, that he was truly any
certain vine.

The Jews and Disciples went not away from Christ for The iiij. difference.
any thing that was spoken about the Fathers gift. For albeit they believed not
Christ to be y^ son of God, yet they well perceived, that such a gift of
eating by faith might stand with the custom of Gods people. but when the
sons gift came to be declared, they could abide no longer. Seeing then it is
plain that they lacked faith, but yet lacked not understanding, we may be sure
they saw more apparent absurdity in the sons gift (as they took it) then
in the Fathers. because it seems stranger for man's flesh to be eaten, as the
son seemed to say, then God to be made man, which is the Fathers gift, who
sent his son to take our flesh.

The gift of the Father is called by such names only, as belong The v.
difference.
to the person of Christ, or to his dyuine nature, to say: the bread of life,
the lively bread, the true bread, (for God only is absolutely the true bread of
life) or by the pronown^ ego, which is to say, I. but y^ gift of Christ, is
called also by y^ names of his humane nature, to wit, the flesh and blood o^
the son of man.

An other difference may be, to consider, that Christ ends his The vi.
difference.
talk of each gift with repeating the old figure Manna, betokening y^ as well
by the giste of the Father as of the son the shadow of manna was fulfilled.
But (as it shall hereafter appear) Manna was more perfectly fulfilled in
outward doings Manna was fulfill led in both gifts.
by the sons gift. As therefore when he had long reasoned of the belefe
which they ought to have in him, whom God the Father had sent, he last of al
concludes: I am the bread of life. To eat o^ this bread
Your Fathers did eat manna in the desert and be dead, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever: right so, having at To eat this bread
large reasoned of eating his own flesh, and of y^ effect which ryseth
thereof, he at the last ends: This is the bread which came down from heaven:
not as your Fathers have eaten manna, and be dead, he that eats this bread
shall live for ever. The like peroration used in both places with words
somewhat unlike, does declare that one substance is given of the Father to be
eaten of us by faith, and of the son to be really eaten. so that the manner
differs, because we eat only ex Christo, that is to say of Christ by faith,
but we eat and receive Christum Christ him self, in the Sacrament of the altar.

For it pleased the whole Trinity, y^ the fullness of our salvation should be
in the manhood of Christ, whose food it is, to end Joan. 4.
his Fathers work. The Fathers gift is to believe in Christ: the sons gift
is, to eat and drink in very deed his flesh and blood.

In working the Fathers gift, a working faith is sufficient. in working the
sons gift, ^aith is required with taking and eating that, wherein we believe.

The Fathers gift is to work Christ in us, as Christ is God and man: but more
as he is God, then as he is man. for our ^aith and belefe is due to the
Godhead first of all, and unto the manhood because it is joined unto the
Godhead: and therefore Joan. 14.
Christ said, ye believe in God, believe also in me. But drinking and eating is
first apperteyning to the manhood, and afterward reaches unto the Godhead,
because y^ Godhead is in that mea^e and drink, which we take, therefore Christ
said: he that (...) my flesh, dwells in me, and I in him. 4.


The Fathers gift is belonging first to our spirit, and then to our flesh,
because it is the flesh of such a spirit, which believes in God, and loves
him. the sons gift is first in our body and flesh, concerning the
Sacramental receiving of him, and then in our spirit, because it is a spirit
belonging to such a flesh, which receaueth the flesh of God thorough Christ.

In the Fathers gift we are not said to receive y^ true bread it 5.
self, which the Father gave into the world, but to receive, as it were an
effect wrought by y^ strength thereof. for after Christ had at large described
his Fathers gift, he said: this is the bread coming We eat of Christ by the
Fathers gift.
down from heaven, to the intent that if any man shall eat, ex ipso, of it, he
may not dye. he says not ipsum, if any man eat it, but of it. Again: Ego sum
panis qui de coelo desce^di, si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in
aeternum. I am the bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever. to eat of this bread, is, to receive some grace
and effect coming from it. And this much concerning y^ Fathers gift.

But concerning the sons gift, Christ says: except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man. He says not of the flesh, but y^ whole flesh it self. Again, My
flesh is truly mea^ he that eats my flesh We eat Christ by y^ Sons gift.
tarieth in me. and afterward, he that eats me^ he says not now of me, but
me. Last of all: qui ma^ducat hunc panem, viuet in aeternum, he that eats
this bread shall live for ever. he says not now, he that eats (of this bread)
as he said before speaking of spiritual eating, but he that eats this bread.

And yet to make the matter more plain such an eating is assigned 6. We eat
Christ in his supper as Mana was eaten.
to the gift of Christ (which is made in his supper) as before was named of
Ma^na. for it was said thereof: Our Fathers did eat Manna. they said not of
Manna, but Manna in his own substance. which words are three times conformably
rehearsed, and every where they did eat Manna, not only of Man na (as though
they had only taken a certain virtue out of it) but they did eat Manna, as we
eat common bread.

Seeing then we may eat of a thing, or else the thing it self, the eating of it
is a spiritual eating by faith and understanding. But the eating it is a real
eating, in the nature and substance of the thing it self.

When I say, that by the Fathers gift we eat of Christ, and by the Sons
gift we eat Christ, I mean not to deny but that also by the Sons gift we
eat of Christ. For as he that has six, has four: so he yt eats worthily
Christ's flesh, eats He that eats Christ, may eat also of Christ.
both Christ, and of Christ, but not only of Christ, for he eats Christ in
his humane nature, wherein the divine nature dwells, and is given thereby to
be eaten of.

He eats of Christ, I say, concerning that effect and grace, which by
Sacramental eating the Godhead works in his body and soul. For the Godhead
it self is the bread whereof we must partake. But the mean to partake it most
abundantly is to receive worthily y^ manhood, wherein the Godhead corporally
dwells. Therefore Christ giving all the spiritual gifts that his Father
Colos. 2.
does, as mean to make us partakers of y^ Godhead, gives also besides all
them, the truth of his flesh and blood in the Sacrament of the altar, as y^
mean far y^ highest to join us most nigh to y^ spirit of God. And although
his Father give us by his appointment the same flesh and blood which Christ
does give, yet Christ calls it for a great reason his own gift, because the
substance of it proceeds from his own person, where unto he assumpted flesh
and blood. For in this Chapter (as in many other places) by the Fathers gift,
the gift of God and of the whole Trinity is meant. And by y^ Sons gift that
chiefly is meant, which peculiarly proceeds by mean of y^ incarnation and
strength of Christ's flesh joined always with y^ dyuine nature, the which flesh
we receive in the Sacrament of Christ's own institution, Mat. 26.
wherein he said in his own person: Take and eat, this is my body, drink ye
all of this, for this is my blood.

Who sees not now the difference between the gift that God gives us by
charity (which he spreads in our hearts) and the gif^ wherein he gave his
own Son, when he took flesh and became man with us, and the gift which the
Son being made man gives in his supper. No gift of God could save us (the
Theword made (...).
prophecies standing as they did) but only the giving of his son into the
world, when he took real flesh for us. And yet was not Christ ma^e our
sacrifice.
that enough, except the Son again had given him self to death for us. Then
the flesh of Christ is the mean for us to be saved, that is, a ladder let down
from heaven, whereon we may step and so clyme up. God him self we could not
eat, thereby to be Christ made our food.
changed into him, and made members of him. But God became man, that we eating
man might receive God, as he dwelt in that flesh which we re^aued.

The conclusion is, that if the Fathers gift, which is the in^arnation of
Christ and his manhood, be to be taken in spirit and faith, concerning the
feeding of our souls (as you have seen it plainly proved) the sons gift
(which is an other different manner of giving, and has an other kind of
working, appoin ted to it) must be received not in faith, spirit, and virtue
only, but also in the substance of flesh and blood.

Our new preachers expound the whole matter, as though The Sacramentaries ex^.
Christ gave his flesh in his last supper no^e otherwise (excepting material
bread and wine) then his Father gives it unto us by faith. And therefore they
teach, that we receive in the supper of our Lord with common bread and wine,
Christ him self by faith and spirit. But by that means Christ gives a great
deal less, then his father gave. For bread and wine is less then the gift of
faith, and when Christ gives faith, he does it as God, therein being one with
his father. Is then his own gift only bread and wine? Came he into the world
to give a less toke^, then God had given before under Moses? For who can
doubt, but manna did in his own substance far pass bakers bread and wine of
the grape? Is this the end of this long disputation, of so many differences put
between Moses, God the Father, and Christ, between manna, Christ's
incarnation, and his supper? between eating by body alone, by faith alone, by
body and faith together? Is this al, to have by y^ gift of Christ, only a
token of him self in bread and wine? how is then the bread, which is eaten,
able to make us live for ever? if the eating it by faith only at Christ's
supper, make us live for ever, and yet we had it by faith before of the fathers
giving: then Christ geneth him self by none other mean (saving bread and
wine) then his father had done. and does he in vain (trow ye) distinct his own
gift from his fathers so many ways? is it then all one to eat of Christ
alone, and to eat Christ and of Christ? Uerily if concerning our taking of it,
the thing were thoroughly one (saving bread and wine) he would not make so many
differences.

But if Christ's gift (concerning our partaking) differ front his fathers gift
in time, in manner, in degree, why should it be so, but that Christ gives for a
greater joining of us to him* y^ same in truth of nature, which his father in
faith and spirit gave before, as the necessary preparation to the sons
gift? His father is only spirit and truth, and therefore gives Christ
really to the world to be fed of, spiritually by us. But the son is flesh
Joan. 1.
(for the word is made flesh) and so gives really to us the gift of that
flesh which he took, not for his own sake, but for ours to the end we might
really eat the spirit of God which is in it.

Neither let it be strange to you, y^ Christ seems to give more to us then his
father. for he gives more both for us upon the Cros^, and to us in his
supper, then his father does outwardly ge^. but yet all his gifts come srom his
father, because his father gave his only begotten son to us in the truth of
our flesh, to thend he should give the same fl^she in his own person both for
us and to us: that by such an excellen^ mean we might (...) the nerer joined
to God him self.

Although the conference of the words of the Ghospel do prove sufficiently that
which I have said, yet I will show also that S. Chrisostom took this chapter in
the same sense that I have done.

First he notes the diversity of persons, in that Christ said: se, In Joan.
hom. 45.
non pat^em dare: him self to give, and not his Father.

Secondly, the distinct places of the chapter where Christ speaks, in the
one, of eating his Godhead by faith: in the other, of In Joan. hom. 44.
eating his body. Primum de diuinitate etc. de corpore circa fine^ inquit.
Panis quem ego dabo etc. Christ speaks first o^ his Godhead: and of his body
he says toward the end: the bread, which I will give, is my flesh.

Thirdly S. Chrysostom notes, that the word panis bread, signifies either the
doctrine of Christ, and salvation, and faith in him: In Joan. him. 45.
or else his body. By which words who sees not, y^ he distincteth eating by
faith alone, from eating y^ body it self? The body therefore is it self eaten
otherwise then by fa th.

Fourthly he says (upon these words, my flesh is verily meat) that Christ said
so, to thend they should not think him to speak In Joan hom. 47. In Joan.
hom. 45.
in parables. And yet by flesh to meaue the sign of his flesh, or by eating to
mean be^uing, is to speak in parables.

Last of all he says, it is brought to pass by the meat which he has given
us, that we should not only by love, but also in deed In Math. hom. 83.
it self be turned into y^ flesh of his. And again: Christ mingleth him self
with us not by faith only, but he makes us his booy in it self. But if we
(...) Christ by faith only and love, surely we should be reformed to him by
none other mean the^ by faith and love. But now we are turned from our
corruptible nature, and are made able to live for ever, not only by the gift of
faith and charity, but even by that we receive Christ's flesh in deed it self
in his own substance, truth and nature. All these things did S. Chrysostom
gather out of Christ's words.

I need not to show in many lines that Theophilact and Euthymius follow yt same
order in expounding S. Ihon, which S. Chrysostom before had used. For I think
no man, who knows their trade of writing, doubts of it. The former says
upon these Theophi lact. in 6. Joan.
words: The bread which I will give is my flesh, that Christ manifestly in that
place speaks of the Sacramental communion of his body, and that y^ bread
which is eaten of us in y^ mysteries is not only a certain resembling of our
Lords flesh, sed ipsa caro Domini, but the flesh of our Lod it self.

Euthymius likewise agrees, that Christ is bread two ways, Euth. in c. 6. ^oa^.
according to his divine and humane nature.

Non autem dixit, quem do, sed quem dabo. He said not, which I do give, but
which I will give. For he minded to give it in his last supper.

Now as Christ is bread two ways: so is he eaten two ways. As God, he is eaten
by faith alone: as man giving his flesh to us at hi^ last supper, he is eaten
not only by faith but in very deed. The later way of eating the Sacramentaries
take away.

The like precept made to men o^lawful age for The xi^ij. (...).
caring Chris^es flesh, as was made generally for (...), shows his (...) to
be as really present i^ his (...), as (...) is in (...).
WHen Christ had promised to give his flesh to be eaten, and the Jews had
asked how he was able to do it, Christ answered: Except y^ eat the flesh of
the Son Joan. 6.
of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you: he that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting, and I will reise him in the
last day.

These words first were spoken to men of lawful age as it appears by the
circumstance, who are bound to receive the blessed Sacrament of Christ's
supper, if no lawful impediment stop them, to thend they may nourish and
maitein the life which they took in baptism, and increase it to a higher degree
of unity with Christ him self.

But baptism, by our adversaries confession, may and ought to be given to
infants, and yet it could not do them any good, if it contained not in it self
ye strength to regenerate them in Christ, seeing they are not able for their
parts to believe actually. Mary if baptism really make them a new creature, and
save them (as S. Paul speaks): the nourishment which we receive in y^
Sacrament 2. Cor. 5. Tit 3. Greg. in orat. catheche^ ca, apud Euthy. in
Panoplia. li 2. Hor. 21.
of ^ altar (being now of perfect understanding) must needs be also real. For
as ^regorius of Nyssa reasons, our nature is not at any certain state, but
continues in his substance by perpetual motion, drawing to it that which it
lacks, and expelling superfluo^se things.

As therefore our baptim is made by real washing with water, and real renewing
of y^ holy Ghost: so now in the supper of Christ it behooves we be really fed
with the fruit of the (...) of life, which is ^one other thing beside the flesh
of Christ. That flesh th^n (...) be really eaten of us, and not only eaten by
spirit, ((...) is convenient for Angels, but satisfies not the necessitie^
(...) nature) but eaten by mouth and body. For of (...), (...) Christ at this
time, neither is it worth while to say, that the body shall eat bread while
the soul feeds upon the flesh of Christ. For the bread and wine have no
promise made in this place of them. For albeit bread and wine be necessary to
the consecrating of the Sacrament, yet the substance of the^ is not necessary
at y^ time of receiving the Sacrament. it is only the flesh which died for us,
that Christ promises to give to be eaten, it is the flesh of the son of man,
which if we eat not, we shall not have life in us. It is Christ's flesh, which
if we eat, he will reise us up at the last day. That flesh of his must be
eaten and his only blood must be drunken.

This threatening which is made, if we receive not worthily the flesh of Christ,
must be understood in his kind, like the other threatening precept made
before, concerning baptism: where it was said, except a man be borne again of
water and of the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. both
are Sacraments, both necessary to faithful men and both profitable to life
everlasting. that which water does in wasshing us, the flesh of Christ must
do in feeding us. for this cause the ancient Fathers have alwais both joined
these two Sacraments together, Cyp. ad Quiri. li. 3. cap. 26. and 26. Basil. de
baptis. li. 1. c. 2. and 3. Ambr de sacrame^. and de (...) qui initia^ Aug de
(...). mer. and remis. cap 20.
and have alleged these two places for them: the one out of the third, the
other out of the sixth of S. John. and they have named the one baptism, of
wasshing: and the other is called Christ's body and blood, of that substance
which is given in it. What should I name here S. Cyprian, S. Basil, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and all the rest, who reckon every where the same truth
of flesh to be in the (...), which is concerning water in baptism.

Therefore as the water which washes us, is present really: so must the flesh
of Christ which feeds us, be made really present. As baptism can not be
truly kept without natural water, so can not the supper of Christ be truly
kept without his natural flesh. As if an evil man come to baptism, he is truly
washed though not profitably to him self: so if an evil man come to the supper
of Christ, he truly (though not worthily) receaueth his flesh. As it is not
enough for the Sracrament of baptism to have water present in faith only and in
spirit or understanding: so the presence of Christ's flesh by faith, spirit,
or understanding only suffiseth not, to make the Sacrament of his supper.

I pray you what understanding had children, wherewith they might receive the
body and blood of Christ? and yet seeing it is (...). in ser. de lapsis.
Innocent. epist. 92. to. 2. apud Aug. and Aug. epi. 106.
(...) by the witness of S. Cyprian, of S. ^unocentius, and of S. Augustine,
that children (although without evident (...)) received the (...) in many
places of christendo^, even while the Church was yet in his chief flower, it
can not be denied but in that age all those Bishops, Doctors, and preachers
which used to do so, did well understand, that the receiving of the Eucharist
consisted not in receiving Christ by actual faith, and meditation of his death
and resurrection, but in the virtue of those visible gifts, which were
sanctified by the Priests upon the holy altar of God, and thence distributed
to the faithful people.

That custom of so ancient time used more for a security the^ The com^ (...)
of infants does (...) the (...) taries.
for necessity, yet was approved of God thus far, that we thereby might have
an (...) witness of the learned farthers aucthority, against them, who doubt
not to affirm all the writers and preachers of the first six hundred years
after Christ, to have believed of our Lords supper, as the new preachers do now
pro^ in England.

But the new preachers make the substance of Christ's supper to (...) in faith,
in spirit, and in understanding. And that not in (...) says, which another
man (...) for me (as it is d^ne for (...). antes at the (...)) b^t teach the
^upper ^o con^ist in (...) faith, as every man for him self brings and (...).
So that if a man think not of Christ's death, and lifting up his heart do not
swetely feed upon Christ sitting at the right hand of his Fa there, they say
he does not receive our Lords body. And they teach that he eats nothing but
bread and wine, and touches nor the body and blood of Christ at all.

Of who^ I ask, what S. (...), what all the other Bishops Cypr. in (...). de
(...).
of A^rica thought. If they had thought so as these men do, they would not
have given the Eucharist to children and infants, who could not ^uminate
Christ's passion, nor think upon him sitting in heaven.

They doutlesse believed far otherwise of the Sacrament, then so. They believed
the body and blood of Christ to be really contained under the forms of bread
and wine, and therefore that children might have profit by receiving it into
their very bodies and souls, albeit they could not lift up their minds
actually to heaven. The matter in those da^es did not stand upon the faith of
men, but upon the word of God, who said: this is my body. This, I say, which I
bid you take, this, which I give, this, which I bid you eat. What a toy is
it now for our Sacramentaries to imagine an eating above the sky, whereas the
body is given to the Apostles hands and mouths by Christ himself, and to the
hands or mouths of other faithful men by his ministers in earth? The xiii.
Chap^ter*


That S. Augustine did not teach these words, except ye eat the flesh etc. to
betoken the eating o^ Christ on^y by faith and spirit, nor yet the eating o^
material bread with (...) remembrance of him, but the eating of his flesh, to
the^d we may be the better wyned to the spirit of God.
IF any speech (says S. Augustine) seem to command a dishonorable Aug. de
doctrina Christ. li. 3. c. 16.
act or uncharitable deed, or to forbid a profitable or benesiciall thing,
that speech contains some figure. Fxcept ye eat (says our Lord) the slesh
of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. He
seems to command a dishonorable act, or an evil deed. It is therefore a
figure commanding that we should communicate with the passion of our Lord, and
y^ we should swetely and profitably remember, that his flesh was crucified and
wounded for us.

This place of S. Augustine may be alleged against me, first by The objection
of the ^uthera^s
the Lutherans, who would prove thereby that Christ in S. Thou spoke
figuratively, when he named the eating of his flesh and the drinking of his
blood. For there (will they say) he took eating and drinking for perfect
believing and remembering Christ's death, which is no sacramental eating.

To whom I answer, that S. Augustine by calling this speech The answer.
a figure, means not to deny that it apperteineth to the last supper, but
only that it is a figure of speech in respect of the manner of eating his flesh
and of drinking his blood: because it seems to command the visible and
external eating of a man's flesh, which is a heynouse thing. but in deed Christ
meant, that they should ca^e his flesh and drink his blood swetely and
profitably in a Sacrament, in a mystery, in a remembrance of his death who
purchased our life: which was done at Christ's last supper, when taking bread
he said after blessing, this is my body which is given Luc. 22.
for you, take and eat. which body who so eats worthily, he must needs
communicate with the passion of Christ, in so much as he eats that body,
which suffered so bitter a passion for him. Now by the fact of eating to
communicate also with the spirit and godhead of Christ, that is the figure
whereof S. Augustine speaks: but otherwise it is out all question, that S.
Augustine meant not by the sweet remembrance of Christ's death to exclude the
necessity of receiving that Sacrament, the which if we ca^e not when we should
cate it, we shall not have life, and the which is ^. Co. 11.
commanded to be made for Christ's remembrance. Or is any man able to make a
more sweet remembrance of his own devotion, then Christ has iustituted for us
at his last supper? therefore S. Augustine ^oth mean that whiles we eat the
Sacrament, we should communicate with Christ's passion, by doing y^ in soul,
which our body does.

Farthermore S. Augustine expounds these present words of Christ's last
supper in diverse other places of his works. in Aug. de pec. me. li. 1. c. 20.
so much that he disputing against the Pelagians expressly affirms them to be
said, De sanctae mensae Sacramento, of the Sacrament of the holy table. and
upon the book of Leuiticus, he asks why the Jews were forbidden to drink
blood, since Christ and in Leuit. 9. q. 57. and in ep. 106. etc. and in Ps. 68.
contra Crescon li. 1. cap. 25.
exhorts all men that will have life, to receive the blood of his sacrifice,
in alimentum, to nourish them. which thing is known to be done in the
Sacrament of the altar, and the exhortation thereunto is made in S. John. This
much is sufficient to answer the Lutherans concerning that they lean to S.
Augustins authority, in whom he that lists to see more, may read the places
noted in the marge^t.

Secondarilie the Zwinglians granting this place to be understood of
Christ's last supper, and building untruly therevppon The obie^ of the (...).
the necessity of both kinds, make an argument, that in his last supper we
have not the body of Christ present under the form of bread after
consecration, but only that by eating material bread the figure thereof, we
must remember it absent, and swetely repete in our mind what pains Christ
suffered ^or us, and with how great love he redeemed us. and this their saying
they would father upon this present place of S. Augustine, because he calls
Christ's speech figurative.

For the better understanding of this present controversy, it The annswer.
is to be noted, that S. Augustine, writing rules or precepts of christian
doctrine, takes and defines a figurative speech after a certain peculiar
manner, which he him self describes in this sort: Aug. de doctrina Christ. l.
3. cap. 10.
Quicquid in sermon diuino neque ad morum honestatem, neque ad fidei veritatom
proprie referri potest, figuratum esse cognoscas. Whatsoever in the word of God
can not be properly referred neither to the honesty of manners, nor to the
truth of faith, be thou sure it is figurative.

Whereby we may perceive, that he measures a figurative What a fi guratiue
speech is to S. Augustine.
speech, by true faith and good manners. to either of which all that cannot be
properly attributed, he doubts not to call figura tiue, in such sort as he
now uses that word for a thing that means a farther truth, then the word
naturally sounds. The figure, that S. Augustine finds in Christ's words, is
because if we rest in their natural sense, they can not be referred to the
honesty of manners. for it seems a dishonorable deed and against charity to
eat a man's flesh. for it is both against that charity which a man owes to
him self (and therefore is called flagitium, ^agitiu^.
dishonor) and also against y^ which we owe to our neighbor, and therefore is
named facinus an uncharitable or hurtsull act. facinus.
For as S. Augustine him self shows how he takes a figurative speathe, so
does he tell how he takes flagitium and facinus. L. 3. c. 10.


It is surely a wilful abusing of good lerning, if a man knowing how a master
and teacher takes his terms, will notwithstanding dispute with him, using
them in other seuse. which thing since it is not landable, we knowing what S.
Augustine calls figurative, and what he calls dishonor and uncharitable,
must so talk of those things, as he has done.

Why then is it a figurative speech, when Christ ^ad the Jews ^ate his flesh?
S. Augustine him self gives the cause, saying: Facinus vel flagitium videtur
iubere. he seems to command a thing dis honorable and hurtful. dishonorable
to y^ cater, hurtful to him, whose flesh is eaten. for it is a thing much
against the honesty of nature to feed upon our brothers flesh, and it can not
be naturally and properly done, without the loss of his life whose flesh we
eat. for these two causes, or else for any one of them, we ought to think this
precept to be a figure, that is to say, that it must be more profitablie
understood, then y^ words do properly sound. what sound they properly?

See, good reader, whether I deal syncerely with thee, or no. It is a weighty
matter to handle divine mysteries, and therefore I endeavor to use therein such
wariness, as becomes me. I will bring none other man's words, but S.
Augustines own, to show, what the precept of eating Christ's flesh at
Capharnaum did seem to sound properly. S. Augustine speaks in this wise
August. tract. 26. in ^oan.
of the Jews: Carne^ sic intellexerunt quomodo in cadauere dilaniatur, and
caet. The Jews understood flesh after such sort, as it is torn in pieces in a
carcass, or as it is sold in the shambles, and not as it is quickened with the
spirit. And in an other place S. Augustine writes also of the very same
matter: Durum illis Aug. in Psalm. 98.
visum est quod ait, nisi quis manducauerit etc. it seemed a hard saying to the
Jews: except a man eat my flesh, he shall not have life everlasting. They took
it foolishly, they thought of it carnally and supposed, that our lord minded to
cut of certain small pieces of his body, and to give it them. This is a hard
talk said they. they were hard, and not the talk. for if they were not hard,
but gentle, they would say to them selves: He speaks not this thing rashly,
but because there lies privy some Sacrament. ^eing gen tle and not hard, they
would ^arie with him, and should learn of him that thing which, after their
departure, those learned who tarried. for when y^ twelve had tarried with him (the
other being departed) they (as who were sorry of y^ others departing,) warned
Christ, that they were offended with his word and so were departed. but Christ
instructed them and said: It is the spirit which quickens, the flesh
profits not, the words which I have spoken to you are spirit and life.
understand that, which I have spoken, spiritually. Ye shall not eat this body
which ye see, ne shall not drink that blood which they shall shed who will (...)
me. I have commended to you a certain Sacrament, which, being spiritually
understood, shall make you live. and although that Sacrament mustenedes be
visibly celebrated, yet it must be inuisibly understood. thus much S.
Augustine.

First I note in these words against the Lutherans, that S. 1.
Augustine understands the precept of eating Christ's flesh of the Sacrament
of his last supper. for there only a Sacrament of his death is visibly
folemnized, and inuisibly understood.

Secondly I note against the Zuingla^s, that the figurative 2.
speech which S. Augustine acknowlegeth in Christ's words, is to be measured
and meant according to the natural and customable speaking and understanding of
carnal men, who yet be not fully faithful. for they thought they should have
eaten Christ's flesh torn into pieces, and to f^l their bellies there withal.
for in deed ye eating of flesh naturally imploieth cutting or tearing, before
it come to our month, and afterward chawing with the teeth, and so the filling
of the bellye. but in respect of all such meanings, the words of Christ be
figurative.

For seeing it is against the honesty of manners to order man's flesh after such
a cruel fashion, the Jews should have devised how to make an honest meaning of
his words, whom Joan. 6.
they confessed to be a great Prophet, or at the least they should have asked
of Christ the true meaning of his own words. For seeing Christ had multiplied
sieve loaves miraculously to feed them, and did so many other miracles and so
much good in all the country, that all men who were void of malice confessed
him Joan. 9.
to be of God, reason gives, they should harken obediently to his words, as
the which they might perceive to be spoken by no mean or common man, and that
therefore they should not measure them by their own fantasy and experience.
Now then to say, that except ye eat my flesh, is a siguratiue speech, is no
more to say, but you must not take the eating of Christ's flesh so as at the
first sight it comes to your mind, neither concerning the usual manner, nor
concerning the customable end of y^ eating, for that is dishonest. Tarry
therefore until you find a better sense. Which sense is found when it is
known that Christ under the form of bread gives the substance of his flesh
whole, Colos. 2.
sound, and quick, with the Godhead corporally dwelling in it, to the end we
should live spiritually for ever, by worthy receiving it into our bodies and
souls.

Thirdly I note much the kind of speaking, which S. Augustine uses. For he
calls that thing a Sacrament upon y^ words of the Psalm now alleged, which in
his books of Christian Psalm. 98.
doctrine, he called a figure: Showing him self to take the name of a figure
for all that, when a farther and higher thing is to be lib. 3. ca. 10.
understood then was outwardly expressed, in which case the thing expressed
is a Sacrament, to wit, a figure or a holy sign of that higher truth which is
to be understood. but he meant not by the name of a figure either to exclude
the truth of eating Christ's flesh, or the truth of drinking his blood, but
only the gross manner of eating and drinking it to a carnal end, which the
Jews thought upon. for as the killing and eating of the Paschall lamb was not
only natural, but also gave y^ faithful to understand that Christ ^ould be both
killed on the cross, and eaten in a Sacrament: and as the figure which was in
that Lamb did not diminish the real killing and eating thereof, but only did
refer it to a higher truth: so the figure, which is in eating Christ's flesh,
does not diminish the true eating thereof, but only declares that eating to be
a figure, because it is referred again to a higher truth, both in Christ,
whose flesh that once died is now eaten, and in us, who eat it not so much for
to eat it corporally, as to feed spiritually of God him self, who makes that
flesh profitable. and that S. Augustine thought so, it is evident by his own
words upon S. John: ye know not what is yt manner of eating this flesh, but
except ye eat it etc. Lo the manner of eating was secret, but the thing that
should be eaten was natural flesh. August. in Joan. tractat. 26. and. 27


Again: Carnem sic intellexerunt, quomodo in cadauere dilaniatur, aut in
macello venditur, non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. They so understood flesh, as
it is torn in a carcass, or sold in the shambles: And not as it is quickened
with the spirit or Godhead. Here it is reported, wherein the Jews did err.
They took the word, flesh, amiss, not concerning the substance of it, (which
must be really eaten) but concerning the manner of eating Modus.
it. Is not modus Latin for the manner? Is not quomodo as much to say, as by
what manner? The Jews understood y^ name of flesh, Quomodo dilaniatur, non
quomodo vegetatur: After such manner as it is torn into pecces, and not after
such manner as it is quickened with the spirit of God. Do not these words
import, that the Jews erred in the manner of eating Christ's flesh? Does not
he that finds fault only with the manner of eating flesh, sufficiently allow
the eating of the flesh it self, if it be done after a good manner?

Yea farther, does not he that shows the manner how it may be well eaten,
approve that kind of eating it? As we must not ^ate Christ's flesh after such a
gross manner, as is used in eating such flesh which is commonly cut into
pieces: Right so we must eat Christ's flesh after such manner, as it is
quickened with the Godhead. So do S. Angustines words import.

I beseech thee, good Reader, see the odds between the argument of a Catholic
and of a Sacrame^tarie. He reasons thus: The Sacramentarie.
we must not eat Christ's flesh carnally and butcharly, therefore we must not
eat really y^ substance thereof. We reason thus: We must eat Christ's flesh
as it is quickened with the Godhead, The Catholic. Why the Sacramentaries
argument fails.
therefore we must eat really the substance thereof. The argument of the
Sacramentarie is naught, because a certain use or manner of a thing forbidden
does not infer, that the substance of the thing it self is forbidden.

Yea contrariewise, the forbidding of one manner seems to license the same
thing in an other manner. As if the law say, let noman were a sword in the city,
it seems to grant that men may were a sword in the high way. And yet because
S. Augustine says, we ought to take Christ's words figuratively in respect of
such a foul manner of eating his flesh, as the Jews imagined, the
Sacramentarie will conclude, that Christ's flesh it self must not be eaten
really and substancially at all.

See on the other side, why the Catholics argument is good Why the Catholics
argu meant is good.
and laudable. Every manner and quality which is granted, concerning the use
of any substance, does infer of necessity the having of that substance. But we
may externally in a Sacrament by our fact and deed, as well as by faith, eat
Christ's flesh, Quomodo spiritu vegetatur, after such manner as it is quickened
with the spirit, therefore we must have it substancially and really present, to
the end we may so eat it in the said Sacrament. The not eating it after a
gross manner, does not take away the eating of it in substance. but the eating
of it in a Sacrament, whereof we now speak, as it is dw^t in of the (...)
(which is a mo^ pure manner of eating it) does include the eating of it in
substance, where dwells the Godhead but in the substance of Christ's flesh?
Or how can I eat it as the spirit does quicken it, if I eat not the substance
of it, which only is quickened and united to the Godhead? which thing since it
is so, S. Augustine means no^, by calling Christ's words figurative, to
exclude the eating (...) his flesh substancially, but to exclude the eating of
it by piece meal, or else for the filling of the belly. And therefore upon.
(...) thus he writes: Quomodo illi intellexerunt carnem, non tract. 27.
sic ego do ad manducandum carnem meam. After such manner as they understood
flesh, I do not so give my flesh to eat. What is this to say, but I g^ue my
flesh to be eaten after an other sort, but not in an other substance then the
Jews thought of? The Jews erred in the manner of eating, as thinking they
should eat it in that visible quantity wherein Christ spoke: and so they
erred in the manner, but not in the substance of Christ's flesh. But the
Sacramentaries err in the substance it (...). The Jews thought Christ's slesh
should have been eaten properly and naturally, as other meats are eaten which
are divided and perished in the eating. The Sacramentaries think, that Christ's
flesh must not be eaten substancially or in truth of his own nature, but (...)
and by faith alone. The truth received in the whole Catholic Church is, that
Christ's flesh is eaten both substancially and figuratiu^, in such sort, that
the (...) eating is referred to an eating by faith.

we eat Christ's flesh substancially, because his true substance Genesis 14. Exo.
(...). and 16. Pro. 9.
was both shadowed in the law of nature and of Moses to be eaten: and
prophesied of before as meat and drink: and promised by Christ under those
names: And delivered by his own hands with these words, This is my body, and
this is my blood, take and eat. and believed in the whole church, and adored
Hila. li. 8 de Trin. Augu. in Psalm. 98.
under the forms of bread and wine through all Christendom: we believe yt same
substance of Christ's flesh to be also eaten figuratively, because it is not
removed thereby from his place in heaven: but is made present by words, which
signify and work the presence of his flesh and blood. It is not seen in his
own shape, not felt nor tasted in his own proprieties, not cut into pieces
although diverse take it together: it is not perished by eating, it ^deth not
the belly, or y^ sensible, but the reasonable and spiritual life, it is not
eaten only to be eaten, but to make us remember effectually, and to conform
our selves to the death and life of him, whose flesh it is. And thereby to make
us to love him, and to believe him to be the bread of life to all the faithsull,
and no less to gather diverse men into one mystical body of his church, then
diverse bodies of wheat and of grapes are made into one artificial body of
bread and wine. the which mystical body he will no less change from
mortality, then he has changed the substance of bread and wine into the
substance of his flesh and blood.

Seeing the flesh of Christ may signify so many things unto us through the
manner of the presence, it were more then madness to say it is not a figure, or
is not eaten figuratively. But because it signifies so many things, therefore
to deny it to be present, is to take away no less the figures which come by
the presence of it, then the thing it felfe.

Christ is the figure of his fathers substance, the image of God Hebr. 1.
Coloss. 1. Phil. 2.
who can not be seen, he is (...) in shape as a man. But what? is he not
therefore the same substance with his father, (...) God with him, and true man
in deed: who reason thus but (...); who Tert. co^. Mar. l. 5. (...). ep. 46.
but Arria^s, but Marcionits, but (...)? did S. (...) gustine ever mean such
a figure of Christ's (...), which was void of the truth sigured? taught he
not that we must adore the body and blood of (...) we (...) it* but of (...)
Aug. in Psalm. 98.
(...) I (...) to (...). (...) not (...), (...) a (...) may (...) a (...) of it
(...) does not the (...) a (...) or twain (...), (...) that bread is there to
be (...) lose is both bread, (...) a (...) of (...), (...) bread in (...), and
a (...) in (...) of (...): so is the (...) of Chri. a (...) and (...) that
(...) us. It is the flesh it self and the (...) (...), but it is (...) in (...)
own substance without any (...) or lack, and the (...) in (...) of death
which the same (...), having (...) once, (...) not now suffer, but would by
his own (...) make it (...) to us in such sort, that we should (...) the death
of (...), and partake the fruits of the death as often as we came to receive
that (...) worthily. what need more words?

To give a brief resolution of S. (...) mind, it is to be noted, that both by
his judgment, and by the (...) of the Sa cramentaries, these words, except ye
eat the flesh etc. belong to the mystery of Christ's supper: therefore, if
they be figurative, they must show some figure in one part or other of the
supper. The supper consists of bread and wine as of material parts, ^of it
must be made, and of pronouncing upon or over them (as S. Justin. in Apol. 2.
Justinius the martyr speaks) the words instituted by Christ, this is my body
and this is my blood, the which words when they come to the elements of bread
and wine, the Sacrament is made: what is that Sacrament? we say, it is the
making present (in a miraculouse sort) the true body and blood of Christ. Our
adversaries say, it is the appointing of bread and wine to be a figure of
Christ's body and blood through the remembrance of his death. For our belefe, I
bring S. Augustines authority, who says, except ye eat my flesh, are words
figurative, and out of it, thus I reason.

The ^ating of Christ's flesh, and the (...) of his blood, being real (...)
which must be performed in Christ's supper, and yet being called (...) good
(...) siguratiue (...), must needs (...) the sigures of somewhat, and the (...)
deeds and words being referred to the supper os Christ, (...) needs betoken
somewhat as they are there (...). But the eating of flesh in Christ's supper
can betoken nothing at all, (...) his flesh be there eaten, the eating whereof
may be the (...) of this betokening. Therefore these words import of (...),
that in Christ's supper the (...) of Christ is really eaten, and his blood is
really drunken.

It is not said of Christ: except ye eat bread and drink wine. Of Bread and
(...) are not ^ned at Ca (...)
those elements he in the promise of his supper made at Caphar^, speakethnot
one syllable. for which cause we must not ask at this time what they figure
and signisy in Christ's supper, because now there is no mention of the^,
except any man be so frontike as to say, that y^ flesh of Christ is here made
y^ figure of bakers bread, and his blood y^ figure of wine. whereupon it would
follow that y^ (...) and blood, as being (...) of these dead (...), were worse
and baser then the elements the^ selves. for every figure is some way or other
behind the truth, which it figureth.

If then we must leave of the consyderation of bread and wine, if likewise no
respect must now be had of the words of consecration, which are not yet spoken
os: what other thing can these (...) ratiue words, except ye eat my flesh,
signify in Christ's supper, but this: except ye eat my flesh in that
mystical and wonderful manner, which I will give it in, and to that (...) end,
for the which I (being true God) will give it you? that is to say, except ye do
both take it in the Sacrament, and spiritually remember my death (...) me
thanks for it, and conforming your selves to it, ye shall not have (...) in
you. By which interpretation Christ's (...) are figurative, in so much as they
mean neither that manner of ^ating p^ces of flesh, which the Jews
understood, no^ that end of eating it, which they thought upon, mynding altoge
Cyr. li. 3. ca. 35. in Joan. Chrysostom in Joan. ho. 44.
there (as S. Cyrillus and S. Chrysostom note) the feding of their bellies.

But if Christ's flesh be not present at all, whereof is it a figure when it is
eaten? can that, which is not, signify or figure any thing? ca^ the flesh
which is only figured at the time of our eating bread (as the Sacramentaries
teach) be made a sign and figure by eating it? if the eating of Christ's
flesh be not the figure, the words: Except ye eat my flesh, be not
figurative. For if eating ^e thoroughly taken for believing and for no eating at
all, the^ these words do not apperteine to the Sacrame^tall eating of Christ's
supper. But seeing the Sacramentaries teach them to speak of the supper (as in
truth they do) the eating must so be figurative one way, that yet it be true
another way. For if there be no true eating, there lacks a ground which may
be the figure of another eating, that is to say, of spiritual communicating
with Christ's passion.

If some real eating must be had to warn us of that spiritual eating, surely
that real eating can not in S. John be meante of bread and wine, since Christ
never named them. therefore it is employed that Christ means, except ye eat
my flesh so, as it is a figure both of my death, and may be a cause of your
spiritual life, ye shall not live euerlasti^gly. Thus doubtelesse did Christ
mean, thus did S. Augustine expound his words.

The Sacramentaries doc err in making Christ's words to be figurati^ only
passiuely, whereas they are also figurative Wherein y^ Sacrame^ taries ^re in
(...) ding th^e wor^es.
actiuely. That is to say, the Sacramentaries so take this matter as if it were
only said, the flesh and blood of Christ be figured and signi^ed in his supper
as to be spiri^ually fed on. But it is not so said only, but also the actual
eating of Christ's flesh is taught to be a figure it self of another
spiritual eating. Therefore we eat really flesh one way, to signify another
way the ^ating and Ambr. in 1. cor. ca. 11.
believing in flesh spiritually. And that is proved out S. Ambrose most
mani^estly, where he says: In edendo and potando (...), and sanguinem, (for
there is the point, albeit the Sacramentaries go about to corrupt his words by
evil distincting of them) quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus. In eating
and drinking the (...) and blood, we signify those things, which were offered
^or us. Behold, the ^ating (...) does signi^ie and make a figure of the self
same flesh, as it was offered for us. And so does both Christ and S. Augustine
^ane at this time. our Lord commanding us to eat^ his flesh, does command us
to communicate with his passion (says Li. 3. ^ 1^ de doct. Christ.
S. Augustine) and profitably to remember his death, that is to wit, he
comma^deth both to eat the body which died, and to eat it worthily, to eat
it in heart as well as in mouth: to eat it in remembrance of his love toward
us, as well as in the Sacrament: to eat it as the Godhead does quicken it, and
as it figureth the entering and tarying in his mystical body the Church.

This eating of Christ's ^eshe is sweet, is profitable, is not hard, not
carnal, not without a figure, or mystery. For to eat without any mystical
meaning is only to fill the belly, whereof Christ spoke not. he commanded a
figurative eating of his flesh, (...) that figureth another thing must be
(...).
the which figurative ^ating should not take away the real eating of his flesh.
for that eating which is not real, can not be actiuely figurative, since
every figure is made upon a true ground of one thing done really, and of
another thing meant mystically. But the figurati^e eating imports a farther
thing, then to rest in the eating it self.

It is therefore insensibly said of the Sacrame^taries, that those words which
naming a certain actual and real deed (as the eating of man's flesh is) be
^iguratiue, because the flesh is not really ^ten. But they be in deed
figurative because the flesh of that (...) is (...) also and understood to
be more then ^ally eaten: for it (...) spirit^lly eaten also.

The Sacrame^taries com^ted an other foul error in these (...) second (...) y^
(...).
words. (...) whiles they will draw this place of S. John to their purpose,
they are constrained to expound the words of Christ i^ this (...): (...) ye
eat the (...) of the son of man, that is to say, the sigure of his flesh.
That is the (...) speech which they find ^n the text, and yet that might be well
born withal, if they rested there. For in deed it is meant in some sense of
Christ, except (...) is a (...) of it self.
ye eat the figure of my flesh, to wit, except ye eat that invisible s^stance
of my flesh, which is a figure of my visible and passible (...), ye shall not
have life in you. But now they can not so ^ke it. For they will not grant that
Christ mea^t of his own substance to be really eaten. For which cause they
must go forward and expo^d again the figure of Christ's flesh saying: ^xcept
ye eat the ^gure of my flesh, the which ^igure bread and wine Bread ^ (...)
are not the (...) which S. (...). Aug. de doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 16.
shall make, ye shall not have life in you. Did S. Augustine refer the ^gure
he (...) of, to bread and wine? Did he once touch or mention those material
elements, in declaring the figurative speech that Christ by his judgment used?
where named S. (...) bread and wine? He says our Lord commanded us to
communicate with his passion, to remember swetely the flesh which was crucified
for us. In that communicating and remembrance he puts the figurative
speech. So that, if we mark well, the real eating of Christ's flesh is not
(...), but left still as the (...) the ^gure must be built. The figure must be
in the end of the work, and not in the beginning ther^of. (...) ^gure looks
higher to a truth above it, and not lower to (...) elements which ^re (...) it.

^rily neither Christ, nor S. Augustine did speak or mean of bread and (...),
and (...) bread and (...) the (...) the (...) which (...).

Christ says: except ye eat my (...). ^hey s^y, (...) ye (...), which shall
(...) the (...) (...) and blood. (...) a (...) ^s this, to (...) and blood to
(...) bread and wine, and there (...) to make (...) and wine to (...) and
blood? What ignorance, what abusing of Gods word, what a blasphemy is this, to
make y^ higher (...) first to si^nifie the lower, that the lower may afterward
(...) y^ higher? It is as much to say, as Chr^ (...) a door, and then a door
is s^o^darily the token of Christ. Where is honesty? where is shame^nes? where
is common (...)? I ask of them whether these words, except ye eat, belong to
y^ supper. They say, they do belong to the supper so truly, that they build
upon them falsely the (...) of both (...).

Then say I, ^ating is meant not only of eating by heart and faith, but also by
mouth, as S. Basil, S. Chryso^ome, S. Cyrillus, S. Augustine, with all the rest
of the fathers besore alleged, do confess, and the Sacramentaries grant the
same most willingly. Then we are agreed that eating stands in some part
properly, concerning that some one thing eaten shall enter into our mouth.

I ask the^, wherein the figure cheefely stands? They say in y^ word flesh
principally, and secondarily in eating, y^ is, in remembering (by that thing
which is eaten) an other thing, and I con^e it also.

What is now meant by that word, flesh? They say, the figure of flesh. and that
do I grant, although it were more properly said, that flesh means, and is
the figure of the passion. But let flesh stand for the figure of flesh. Here
begins the issue.

What mean you by the figure of flesh? Bread, say they. That, Flesh can not
signify bread.
say I, is stark false, and impossible. For how comes flesh to be latin for
bread? By what grammatical, by what Rhethoricall, by what Mosaical or
mystical figure is that interpretation brought about? All the world sees,
that in proper speech he that will have bread, uses not to call for flesh. Or if
he do so, I think the butcher will sooner serve him, then the baker. Moreover no
figure will serve to make one thing mean another, except there be some
affinity or dependence between them. but flesh and bread are clean several
kinds of natures.

Thirdly, Christ never in any covenant or truse instituted flesh to signify
material bread. we have no such Sacrament neither in the old, nor in the new
Testament. and surely since flesh is neither a natural nor a divine token of
bread, nor so used in common speech, it can not by any ordinary mean
betoken bread. In so much that the lawiers, who of all men best know the
propriety of words, and are most prone to expound them favorably in the
testamentes of men departed, yet have concluded, that if any man err in naming
the kind of thing, as if intending to bequeath his garments do say: I
bequeath my silver, or contrary wise: the legacy can not hold. For says
Ulpian: Rerum vocabula immu Vlpia. de leg. 3. l. 4.
tabilia sunt, hominum mutabilia. Proper names given by men may be changed, and
therefore an error in them is tolerable. but the appellatiue names of things
can not be changed. and yet our new brethern can find the means how flesh may
stand for bakers bread, and blood for wine of the grape. The contrary might
stand right well, because bread and wine were instituded by God in the law of
nature and of Moses (as the fact of Melchisedech Genesis 14. Leu. 2. 1. Cor 10
Joan. 6.
and the figures of the law do show) to figure and shadow Christ's flesh and
blood. So was the rock instituted to signify Christ, manna to be a sign of
his last supper. But that flesh, yea ye flesh of Christ (who is the end of the
law) that it should serve to signify wheaten Romans 10.
bread, that divinity was born and sprang first in our days, being unknown
to S. Augustine, and to all other Fathers and Councels. yet it is so good
divinity iu England, that a man may sooner have a bishopprick for it, then for
saying God is one in three persons. I have stood sumwhat long upon this place,
because it is one of them, where upon the Sacramentaries use fondly to boast
and bragg, as thowgh they had gained sumwhat by ye name of a figurative
speech, which S. Augustine says is in Christ's words. but y^ figure serves
to show a higher and a more profitable mystery, the^ ye word names, but not
as they vulearnedly would have it, to show ye base creature of wheaten bread and
wine. It is ye passion of Christ, and ye spiritual manner of eating, in respect
where of Christ's speech is called of S. Augustine figurative. for if Christ's
flesh were eaten only to fill ye belly, without farther account of spiritual
grace and life, then were the eating of that flesh natural, sensible,
accustomable and without all figure, and should be eaten by cutting, tearing,
and wasting it: but in that case flesh profits nothing. the flesh we speak
of, must be How fles^ must be eaten in a figure.
be eaten as a figure, as a mystery, as a Sacrameut, as a holy sign of a
higher truth wrought in the soul, then that bodily eating does work. So
likewise in baptism we are washed in a fi gure, because the washing has a
farther and higher end, then only to cleanse the body. That speech therefore
wherein Christ comma^deth his flesh to be eaten, is figurative, not that we
should deny the true eating of his flesh, but because that eating is referred
to a greater purpose, then to the feeding of the body. for Christ's flesh is
meat in deed, that is to say, is eaten in deed as I shall prove upon that
place. but it is not eaten only yt it should be corporal^y received, but to
thend we should partake of the spirit and godhead which is in it, and so by the
merit of that flesh really present in us, obteyn life everlasting with it. now
from what a worthy meaning would these figurative Gospellers bring the words of
our savior? whose hard hearts I beseech God to mollify, that when they hear
the truth, their stomach do not kendle to maynteine their old fashon, before
they have well looked about them. rather choosing to confess a fault and to
amend it, then to make a new sin by myssexcusing the former fault.

Christ's slesh being meat in deed, must needs be really received into our
bodies.
HE that will know exactly why the flesh of Christ is called meat in deed, must
put before his eyes three things. The first is, that the Jews hearing Christ
say he would give 1.
them his flesh, asked, how he could give it, to be eaten? The second is, that
although Christ answered not directly to their captious, 2.
how and vnsaythful question, yet he said, the eating of his flesh to be
necessary for them (as without the which they could not have life) and
profitable (as whereby they should have everlasting life, and that not in their
souls only, but also in their bodies, for so much as he would reise them up in
the last day. after which two things well pondered, the third is to mark,
that 3.
Christ confirms all these former sayings of his, by such words, These
words co^ firm the former talk.
as give a reason of them. for my flesh (says he) is meat in deed, and my
blood is drink in deed. as if he had said, wonder not y^ my flesh gives you
life everlasting, and reiseth up your bodies, for it is meat in deed. that is
to say, it has truly and in deed those proprieties, which any man would wish
for in true meat.

Two things may be considered in meat: the one, that it is truly received
into the body of that living creature for whose Two proprieties in (...).
use it is appointed: the other, that it is received as a medicine which may
preserve us against death. for meat is neither properly attributed unto the
feeding of the soul (but only by a metaphor and an improper speech) neither
is it worthy to be called true meat, if it gene not a true remedy against
death. there fore when Christ says: My flesh is meat in deed, he means
thus, my flesh both shall be received into the very bodies of my people, and
shall give life everlasting as well to their bodi^s, as to their souls* the
which interpretation S. Chrysostom makes writing thus: Quid significat etc.
what mean these words, Chryso. in Joan. Hom. 46
my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is truly drink? either it means
that flesh to be ye true meat which saves the soul, or else, he speaks it
to confirm them in the former words, N^ obscure locutum in parabolis
arbitrarentur, sed scirent omnino necessariu^ esse vt corpus comederent: that
they should not think him to have spoken in parables darkely, but that they
should know Note that Christ ^pake not now in parables.
it to be by all means necessary to eat his body. thus far S. Chrysostom.

By which interpretation Christ gives a reason both of his first words,
wherein he said, the bread which I will give, is my flesh, and of the second,
when he said, he that eats my flesh has life everlasting. for my flesh is
meat in deed, both in that respect that it shall be given to you as true meat
is wont to be delivered to them, who truly take and truly eat it, and also in
that respect that it nourishes truly, as true and e^erlasting meat ought to
nourishe. he that denies any one sense of the twain, deuieth one verity of
ye gospel. he that grants both senses, must needs grant, that the true
eating of the flesh stands It were a parable if flesh stood for bread and
(...) for (...).
not for eating truly the sign of flesh, because he spoke not obscurely nor in
parables as S. Chrysostom affirms. and yet it is an obs^nre saying to put
flesh for material bread, or eating for believing. it is a parabolicall
speech, if when flesh, blood, eating, and drinking is named, yet we shall
^derstand that bakers bread must be eaten and wine drunken, and Christ must be
loved and believed upon? these parables neither Christ thought of, nor the
Fathers knew.

If Adam had not sinned, the opinion of ancient doctors is, that
notwithstanding his body consisted of contrary elements, by whose continual
fight and battle it should naturally have drawn to corruption and
dissolution, yet through the maruelouse grace of God (says S. Augustine) his
body sho^lo have Aug. de ^iuit. dei lib. 13. c. 20. Genesis 2.
been far from disseases, from old age, from death, and from all corruption, by
tasting of the wood of life which was in y^ midst of paradise. Tanquam
caetera essent alimento, illud Sacramento. vt sic fuisse accipiatur lignum
vitae in paradyso corporali, sicut in spiritali, hoc est, intelligibili
paradyso sapientia Dei, de qua scriptum est: Lignum vitae est omnibus
amplectentibus eam. So that Prou. 3.
other meats (in paradise) were to nourish Adam corporally, the word of life
was also instead of a mystery or Sacrament, to the end the word of life should
be understood to be after such sort in the corporal paradise, as the wisdom
of God is in the spiritual paradise, which is atteined to by only
understanding. the which wisdom of God, as it is written thereof, is the wood
of life to all that embrace it.

As now the wood of life which should have preserved man from Corporal ^asting
is ^ecessarie to make y^ ^eat true ^eate.
incorruption, was to be bodily tasted of, and yet to wor^e a Sacramental and
spiritual effect in preserving man's body above al course of a corrutible
nature: so is it meant that Christ's flesh, which is in deed the wood of life,
should be a Sacrament unto us by the corporal eating and spiritual working
thereof, and for both these canses together it is called meat in deed.

Take a way y^ corporal tasting of Christ's body: and charity, ^aith, hope,
or any like virtue is proportionably and in his degree meat in deed, or drink
in deed, as the Sacrament of Christ's supper Jacob. 1.
is. For all those virtues coming from God feed us in deed to life everlasting,
and therefore have yt second propriety of trut meat, which is to nourish for
ever. But they have not y^ first propriety, which is to be received after an
external manner into our bodies. To this external manner Christ had also
respect, when he ^ayd: My flesh is meat in deed, or verily meat. For he said
not only my vere* Truly.
flesh is true meat, but it is truly meat. It has not only y^ true nature of
meat, but also y^ true manner of it. for as verus cibus is true meat: so is vere
cibus truly meat. As true meat is said in respect of the essential propriety
and effect of meat, which is to nourish: so is the flesh of Christ truly meat
in respect of the manner of it, because it is received in at the mouth, and
goes into the body, after such sort as other meats doc, although it nourish
spiritually.

I have said often times, that Christ in this chapter speaks both of
spiritual eating alone, and besides that of Sacramental eating together with
spiritual. He speaks of spirtuall alone about the midst of the chapter
^raight after those words: work The theme of y^ (...). of S. Ihon.
the everlasting meat which the son of man will give you. Which words are the
general theme to the whole Sermon following. But of Sacramental eating, as
being the second part of his Sermon, Christ speaks specially and expressly,
from these words forward, and the bread which I will give, is my flesh.

Whiles Christ was yet about the first part of his Sermon, which belongs to
spiritual eating alone, he said: Patermeus da^ vobis panem de coelo verum. My
Father gives you the true Verus panis.
bread from heaven. Qui credit in me, non sitiet vnquam. He that believes in me
shall not thir^t at any time. As Christ is only believed on and only received by
faith, so he is panis verus, the true bread, or meat.

But when he was come to the second part of his Sermon, where he spoke of
Sacramental eating as well as of spiritual, there he said, for Pater meus
dat, ego dabo: For verus, vere. In How the Sons gift is different from the
Fathers gift.
stead of, my Father, he says, I: instead of, does give, he says, I will
give. Instead of, him self to be true food, he says, His flesh is truly food.
There is in the second part none other substance then was in the first, to
the end we should understand that Christ gives in his Sacrament the same real
flesh, which his Father gave him when he came down from heaven by taking flesh.
But there is an other time of Christ's gift at his last supper, and an other
sort or manner of his giving. For that which God the Father gave unto the
souls of the faithful, God the Son gives to their bodies also. And by that
means he is not only true meat, but also truly meat. And that without all
dark speeches or parables.

S. Hilarie well understanding the strength of the same word Vere, truly or
verily, or in deed presses the old Arrians and new Sacramentaries therewith in
this manner.

De naturali in nobis Christi veritate quae dicimus nisi ab eo discimus,
Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinitat.
stulte atque impie dicimus. ipse enim ait, caro mea vere est esca, and caet.
Thus they are in English. That we say concerning the natural truth of Christ
being in us, except we learue it of him, we say it foolishly and ungodly. For
him self says, My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed: he
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, tarieth in me and I in him. There
is no place of doubting left concerning the truth of flesh and blood. for now
both by the profession of our Lord, and by our own faith it is truly flesh, and
truly blood. And these things taken and swallowed are the cause, that we tarry
in Christ and Christ in us. Is not this thing the truth? It may well chance
not to be true to them, who deny Jesus Christ not to be true God.

S. Hilarie disputing in those words against the Arrians, who would Christ to
be one with his Father in will only, does prove that we also are one with
Christ naturally by some ^anes, that is to say, by natural partaking of
Christ's flesh in his last supper. And to prove that thing, albeit he might
hauc brought many places out of the Gospel, or out of S. Paul, yet (...) to
bring this place out of S. Ihon, as the which he thought no less plain, then
any other was. And twice he repeteth that the flesh of Christ is truly meat:
D^ce as being spoken of God, an other time as being also believed of us. and
farther he affirms upon this place, that the flesh and blood of Christ being
taken Accepta.
and swallowed, bring to pass that we are in Christ, and Christ in us.

The taking of Christ by faith does not prove S. Hilaries purpose. for he must
show that we take Christ in body and nature, even as he defends Christ to be
one nature and substance with his Father. The being of Christ's flesh in our
bodies, and the real joining of the one to the other is that, which S. Hilarie
forces upon. And therefore he says afterward, that Christ naturaliter in
nobis permanet, tarieth naturally in us.

By that word naturally S. Hilarie expounds how he takes Naturally. Truly.
the word Vere, truly. For he takes it, as if it were written, my flesh is to
be naturally received of my Disciples, as meat. The which thing he had twice
expressed before, saying: nos vere, verbum Lib. 8. de Trinitat.
carnem, cibo Dominico sumimus. We take y^ word (made) flesh truly in our Lords
meat. And again: Vere sub mysterio ^arnem corporis sui sumimus. We take the
flesh of his body truly under a mystery. Lo, by thies means the natural
verity of Christ is in us, according as we learned of him, saying: My flesh is
meat in deed. All men know what we receive into our mouths and bodies in
Christ's supper. That very thing is affirmed of Christ to be his flesh. And by
that receiving of ours, his flesh is truly meat.

S. Gregory of Nyssa, brother to S. Basile the great, warns Gregor. Nyssen.
in vita Moysit.
us, puro defaecatoque animo coelestem cibu^ sumere: To take the heavenly meat*
with a pure* and clean mind. The which meat (says he) no sowing brought forth
unto us by the art of tilling the ground. But it is bread provided for us
without seed, without sowing, without any other work of man. It flowing from
above is found in the earth. for the bread which came down from heaven, which
is the true meat, which is obscurely meant by this history of Manna, is nor a
thing without a body. For by what means ca^ a thing without a body be made
meat unto the body? The thing which is not without a body, is by all means a
body.

This blessed man alludeth evidently to the words of Christ in S. John, where
he says: my flesh is meat in deed. for ye bread which came down from heaven
which is the true meat, is none other thing then the flesh of Christ. this
kind of thing is not a spiritual thing that lacks a body, but it is a true
body. how does S. Gregory prove it to be a true body? because it is Nyssenus
proves ye truth of Christ's body by ye truth of the eating it.
made meat unto the body. for how (says he) can a 'thing which lacks a
body, be made meat unto the body? as who should say, there is no doubt but the
flesh of Christ is made meat unto one body, because Christ said: my flesh is
meat in deed. and meat is ordinarily promised to nourish the body, although
it, being the meat of God, helps the soul also.

If the bread that came down from heaven which is the flesh of Christ, be
true meat, it is a bodily thing. for else how could a thing that has no body,
be made meat for the body? if that can not be so, truly the flesh given at the
supper of Christ, which is meat in deed and drink in deed, can not be only
received in spirit, but it must be so real, that it may feed our bodies also,
to thinte^t they may be reised in the later day. therefore that which our body
receaueth when Christ says: take and eat, is the same flesh of Christ which
is meat in deed. and seeing it is proved to be a body, because it is made meat
unto ye body, it must be meat in deed unto us, and must be really taken into
our bodies by our mouths, or else Nyssenus ^ayleth in his whole discourse. for
he proves it a body, because it is meat unto the body. then certainly it is
not meat only to the soul, nor it is not only received by faith, but truly
and in deed. And seeing al wise men reason The faith of the primative church.
upon a sure ground, we may not doubt but all the Catholic Church twelve
hundred years past and so upward took it for an evident truth, that Christ's
body was meat unto our bodies.

By the manner of our tarying in Christ it is proved, The xvi. chapit.
that we receive his real flesh into our bodies.
WHereas hitherto the necessity, the profit and the truth of eating Chrisies
flesh has been showed and confirmed: Now the proper effect of that banquet is
The effect of Christ's supper.
also declared, because he that eats Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood,
tarieth in Christ and Christ in him. In respect whereof the same thing was
before named, Cibus permanens, the meat which tarieth. Whereby we may
perceive, that in the Sacrament of Christ's supper we do not beginue to live
(as in baptism) but we maintein, keep, nourish, and increase the sede of life,
which we took in our spiritual birth.

Neither only do we preserve life during the time of our feeding, but also
when the banquet is ended, some effect remains in us, through the which we are
said to tarry in Christ, and he in us. Let us then try out what effect that is.
for by the manner and kind of the effect, we may gather somewhat of the cause.

What meaueth it, that Christ tarieth in us and we in him? S. Chry^ostom
answers: In me manet, dicit, vt cum ipso se admisceri ostendat. Christ says:
He tarieth in me, to show that him Chryso. hom 46. in Math.
self is mingled with him. S. Chrysostom means, that whiles we receive
worthily the substance of Christ's flesh into our bodies, we are so intierly
joined to him, that we may be said to be mingled with him. And how that is
done, S. Cyrillus declares by Cyril. in Joan lib. 4. ca. 16.
this similitude. As if a man pour wax upon melted wax, he wholly must needs
mingle the one with ye other, so it must needs be, if any man receive the flesh
and blood of our Lord, that he be so joined with him, that Christ may be found
in him, and he in Christ. And again: Sicut parum fermenti, and caet. As a little
leaven tempereth the whole lump of dow: so a little benedictio^ (whereby he
means a piece of the consecrated host, be it never so small) draws the whole
man unto it, and fills him with his grace, and by this means Christ tarieth
in us, and we in him.

S. Cyrillus calls the things which are consecrated at Christ's Cyril. li. 4.
in Ioa^. cap. 17.
supper, Benedictio, a blessing, because they are consecrated by the words of
blessing, the which Christ left unto us. Now a little of that blessed food being
received worthily of us, is not so properly said to tarry in us, as we to tarry
in it, for that, though it be small in form, yet in virtue it is great. And
therefore it draws us unto it, as leaven turns the dow to his nature.

It can not be avoided by these interpretations, but that the heavenly food
which we receive into our mouths, is the real substance of Christ's flesh.
For it is here called Benedictio, the Benedictio.
blessing. and that word is not meant of an inward virtue coming srom heaven,
but of that which seems bread, and is visibly received at our Lords table. For
even in the same Chapter S. Cyrillus exhorts men ad recipiendam
benedictionem, to receive the Sacrament of Christ's supper. The which Sacrament
if it were wheaten bread, how could it be true, that a little thereof should
draw the whole man unto it? Does wheaten bread make us like it? are we then
made unreasonable, insensible, and a corruptible creature, as wheate^ bread is?
Christ says, his meat tarieth to life everlasting, so does not wheate^ bread.
Christ says by eating his flesh we tarry in him. But we tarry in him, whiles the
gift, which at his supper he delivers, is mingled with us, and conuerteth us
unto it, as S. Chrysostom and S. ^yrillus teach: And yet we be not converted
or drawn to the nature of material bread or wine. therefore it appears the
gift which Christ delivered, not to have been bread and wine, but his own body
and blood under those forms.

S. Hilarie brings the very same word of tarying to prove, Hilar. 8. de
trinit.
that as Christ is in his Father by the nature of Godhead, and we in him by his
corporal birth: so he is in us by the mystery of the Sacraments, and tarieth
in us naturally.

The like witness Theophilact gives, saying: Contemperatio Theophi lact. in
Joan. 6.
fit noua and super rationem, ita vt sit Deus in nobis and nos in ipso. There
is made (by eating Christ's flesh) a new mingling together, so that God is in
us and we in him. Briefly thus Christ means: He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood receaueth me, as meat into his body and soul. But because I
come not to nourish carnal life but spiritual in him, he does not digest and
turn my body into his, (as it happens in other meats) but he is turned to be
like me. For the real joining and knitting of my flesh to his makes a
maruelouse mixture, as if melted wax were poured to other wax, so that a great
grace and virtue is left of me in him, whereby he may tarry still in me and
increase ye fountain of life, which is in him.

This kind of our tarying in Christ, and of his with us, could not be true, if
we ^ed spiritually only upon Christ absent in body. For how can the body, which
is only in heaven, be so te^pered t^ our bodies and souls in earth, as one
melted wax being powered to an other wax does make one thing of twain, which is
the similitude made here by S. Tyrillus? What like joining to that other
similitude of the leaven can be, if no leaue^, that is to say, no benediction
or no flesh of Christ be received into us, which may draw us to it? What
mingling together is made of things that be so far distant as heaven and earth?

If you say, faith and spirit does join, mingle, and knitte Christ to us, and
us to Christ, and make us to tarry in him, and him to tarry in us, either you
give a cause of y^ joining which may stand with the cause alleged by Christ, or
else you correct his cause and put a better.

If the faith and spirit, whereof you speak, shall stand with Christ's cause,
it must be such faith as does concur with the eating of his flesh. For he now
said not, he that believes in me tarieth in me, but he y^ eats my flesh
tarieth in me. Therefore though (...) tarry ^ng in Christ is assigned to eating
and not only to (...)
ye believe never so well, yet your present tarying in Christ is not assigned to
faith, but unto eating. Faith is necessary to worthy eating, and consequently
to our tarying in Christ. But not every ground, which is necessary to a thing,
is by and by y^ cause th^reof. Or though it be one cause, it is not the only
cause. In the former part of this chapter says had his due commendation. But
now Christ speaks of eating his flesh, and says it makes us tarry, that is
to say, to be joined to him wholly, and to be mingled with him as well in body,
as in soul, which thing can not be otherwise then through that we eat his
flesh substantially. He that leaving that eating of Christ's flesh, staieth
upon feeding by faith alone, corrects the cause assigned by Christ, and also
depriueth us of that natural tarying in him, whereof he now entreats.

We are made one with Christ by natural participation The xvi^. Chapter.
of his flesh, as he, being one nature with his Father, has assumpted our
nature into his own person.
HE that eats Christ's flesh tarieth in Christ, and receaueth life of him,
not by the means of faith and spirit only, but also by natural participation
of his flesh. which thing Christ declares by this example: As the living
Father has sent me, and I live for the Father: also he that eats me, shall
him self Christ ^ueth not for his Fa there in faith.
live for me. But Christ lives not for his Father by faith at all, (because he
sees his glory face to face) nor yet by the mean of spirit alone, as we take
spirit for devotion, or else for spiritual gifts and qualities. but he lives
for his Father, having his Fathers whole substance really present in him self:
therefore we yt eating Christ live in like manner for him, must have his whole
substance really present in us, and so must we receive life, not by faith or
spirit alone, but by taking the flesh of life it self into our bodies and
souls.

Thus veri^ic Christ does mean. That we may reach to the true ground of this
comparison, it behooves we learn first, how Christ lives for his Father: and
then we may understand, how we receiving his flesh worthelie, shall live also
for him. Christ having two natures in one person may be said to live for his
Father, according to either of both natures. As God: he lives for his Father,
for that he is eternally begotten of him, to whom the Father ge^eth his whole
nature, substance, life, glory, so that How Christ lives for his Father as
God.
uo di^ference is between the Father and the son, but that the son is
begotten of the Father and the Father is altogether unbegotten and without any
relation to a farther beginning. This order wherein the son (otherwise equal
God (...) his Father) does yet always refer his generation and life to an
everlasting Hilar. li. 8 de trinitate.
beginning, is the cause why Christ as God, lives for his Father. the which
interpretation S. Hilarie, S. Basile, S. Chry sostom, and S. Augustine do
confess may well agree to this place.

Christ as man li^eth for his Father, because his Father sent How he lives as
man*
him to take flesh, whose flesh (being of it self neither able to give life
everlasting, nor to have it in his own nature) yet for the word whereunto it is
united in one person, both has life and gives life. now the word is naturally
one God and one life with the Father. this second sense does better please S.
Basile, S. Augustine, and S. Cyril, although they allow the former also: but
this second sense does more agree with those words sicut misit me pater, as my
Father sent me. For the sending of Christ was the taking of flesh at his
incarnation. both senses agree herein, Wherein both senses agree.
that both life is really and corporally dwelling in Christ's flesh through the
Godhead, and the Godhead is naturally with Christ, through that he is the son
of God the Father.

Two things are to be noted in this comparison. the one is the real presence of
life: the other is the having of it by gift, and by relation to a farther cause
or beginning. For as Christ's flesh lives for the word of God, to whom it is
really united, and the word of God lives for the Father, whose whole substance
it has Wherein be similitude stands.
really received by generation without beginning of time: so he that eats
Christ, lives for Christ, having the substance of his flesh really present
with him, and thereby partaketh life everlasting.

This very sense Christ's words have, both by the conference of the text it
self, and also by the interpretation of S. Hilarie. Arrians.
who by this scripture confuteth the Arrians that said, Christ to be inferior
to his Father, and not to be equal God with him. To maintain the which
heresy, they brought forth a similitude of Joan. 17.
unity which is made in holy scripture between God the Father, Christ, and us:
affirming Christ to be one with his Father as we are one with him, but (said
they) we are one with Christ only by will and consent, therefore Christ is one
with his Father only after the same sort. to which argument S. Hilarie
answering, Hilar. li. 8. de Tri nitate.
turns it upon their own heads in this wise: Viuit ergo per patrem, and
quomodo per patrem viuit, eodem modo nos per carnem eius viuemus. omnis enim
comparatio, etc. Christ then lives by his Father. and as he lives by his
Father, after the same manner we shall live by his flesh. for every comparison is
presumed to be made according to the form and concept of our understanding, to
the intent the matter whereof we entreat may be so perceived, as the example
gives, which is proponed.

This truly is the cause of our life, in so much as we have Christ Christ in us
by flesh.
abiding by flesh in us, who consist of flesh: and he shall live through him by
such condition, as he lives through his Father. If we then live through him
naturally according to flesh, that is to wit, having obtained the nature of his
flesh, how can he but have naturally the Father in him self according to the
spirit (or Godhead) since he lives through the Father?

S. Hilarie shows first in these words, y^ there is a similitude of living
between us and Christ, and between God the Father and Christ. we live for
Christ, by eating his flesh, as he lives for his Father who sent him: but we
(says S. Hilarie) live for Christ by eating his flesh in such sort, that we
have the nature of his flesh in us. Therefore Christ living for his Father,
has his Fathers nature in him self. Thus have the Arrians gained nothing, by
saying that the Father was one with Christ, as Christ is one with us. For
Christ is found to be one with us naturally. and thereunto it suffiseth not that
Christ took our natural flesh in his mothers womb. for Christ spoke not of
that unity: otherwise The (...) nation ma keth not Christ to be in us
naturally.
the gentiles, Jews, heretics, and heinouse sinners should be naturally one
with Christ, which thing is not so. for, to be one with Christ, it behooves
that as he took our nature into his own person, we take his nature into our
bodies and souls. Two reasonable parties, which have both free will and
consist of bodies, be not properly made one in nature, if they both do not as
well consent thereunto in mind, as also approach in bodies.

Let us put an example between Dina and Sichem. for although Genesis 34. One in
bo die without mine
Sichem had by force oppressed Dina corporally: yet she not consenting in heart
thereunto, was not thoroughly and in her whole nature made one with him, for
that the chief part of her dissented. Again, let us put the ca^e, that two
other persons be together in heart wisshing to be man and wise: but yet that
they can not come together, because both, or one of them is enclosed One in
mind with out body.
in prison. these also are not one naturally, as long as their bodies be
asonder. even so albeit Christ have the same nature which all men have
(excepting sin) yet he is not naturally, that is to say, in the whole truth
of nature one with us thereby, except we both in heart and body approach unto
him. If we come to him in body alone, we come unworthily: if in heart alone, it
is a spiritual conjunction, which will serve if either necessity or infamy
keep us from natural conjunction. but if we come to lawful age and have
opportunity, we must approach both in body One in bo die and mind.
and soul to the Sacrament of Christ's supper, to be made one with him
naturally, that is to say, to take his body really into ours, to the end the
spirit and Godhead which dwells corporally in that body of his, may feed our
spirit and soul (which believes in him) to life everlasting. Of this kind of
living Christ spoke when he said: he that eats me, lineth for me, as I live
for my Father.

And it is to be considered, that Christ brought the similitude of his own
living for his father, to show thereby how we do line for him, when we eat
him. But S. Hilarie was so sure of this later part of the similitude, to wit,
that we live for Christ by natural conjunction of his body and spirit to our
bodies and souls, when we eat him: that thereby he proved Christ to be one
with his father in nature and substance.

And now come our new Sacramentaries teaching the argument 1. The Sacramenta
ries be aga^st S. Hilarie.
of S. Hilarie to be nothing worth, because they presuppose Christ's flesh not
to be eaten of us, and consequently not to be in us in his own nature and
substance. whereby they also affirm that the father is not proved to be in
Christ naturally by these words of our savior. as the living father sent me,
and I live for the father, also he that eats me, shall live him self for me.
For if here the comparison be only in this point, that as Christ refers his
life to another beginning, which is his father: so we live by Christ who is the
cause of all the grace we have: if I say nothing else be respected in both
parts, but that a thing which is 2. Against ^ Godhead of Christ.
less receaueth a benefit by the greater: these words rather seem to prove
against the Godhead of Christ then for it. Yea the ma^hood is not by the^
showed to be really united to the word. And so that which the Catholic
fathers bring for the truth, which is believed in Christ, the Sacramentaries
make altogether void.

Let us add to the former consyderations, yt we, eating Christ, live for
Christ. we then so live for him, as we eat him. For seeing the eating is the
cause of the life, such is the life as the eating is. But the Sacramentaries
auouche that we eat bodily nothing else at Christ's supper beside bread and
wine, therefore by their 3. Against ^ life of our bodies.
judgment we shall live bodily none other way, then to that end whereunto
bread and wine ca^ feed us. They can not feed us to life everlasting, therefore
it follows of the Sacramentarie docrine that our bodies have no meat whereby
they may live for ever.

What say ye masters? Have we not bodies as well as souls* Do not our bodies
eat in their kind, as well as our souls? Do 4. Against yt food our bread.
not our bodies line by their proper meat, as our souls do live by the meat
which is convenient for them?

If Christ be meat unto us, is he not meat to us as well in respect Joan. 7.
Our bodies bo fed to live for ever.
of our bodies, as of our souls? Does he not heal the whole man, regenerate
the whole, feed the whole, and save the whole* Then by like he feeds our
bodies to life everlasting. What food it that? Where is it given? how comes it
unto us?

The Catholics answer: It is the flesh of Christ which is given to us under
the form of bread. But ye Zuinglians (who deny that real presence of Christ)
show what meat our bodies receive, which is able to make them live for ever.
Either say, they shall not live, or show the mean of life. You say our bodies
eat sanctified bread at Christ's supper. Be it so. But is that sanctified
bread still bread, or is it made the flesh of Christ which is the bread of life?
If it be made Christ's flesh, ye agree with me. our bodies have Bread is no
food of life.
the true food of life. But if it tarry bread still, it can not give our flesh
life everlasting.

Ye will say, Christ is able to use wheaten bread tarying bread The obiec tion.
for his instrument or toke^, to give us by that maane euerlastiug life: As
common water tarying water, is in baptism y^ instrument and mean, as well to
our bodies, as to our souls of life euerlastig. In which reason ye vaunt your
selves over much, and think ye have found a goodly defense. But beware least ye
triu^ph before ye The answer.
victory.

As hitherto I have resorted to the word of God to confute your vain doctrine:
so now I will repair to the same undoubted fountain of true wisdom.

It is most certain that God were able to save us by what mea nes he would. But
his will is now committed to writing, that heretics might not fame upon him
what should please them, but should be controlled by his word. For as universal
tradition suffiseth Scriptures were provided against he retikes.
to Catholics who believe it, so the heretik, who estemeth no tradition, must
have his overthrow by the holy Scriptures.

In them we read, that who so believes and is baptized, shall be saved: Whereby
is most clear, that baptism has his promse of salvation Marc. 16
annexed to it. But when we come to our Lords supper, no promise at al is made
to him, that eats material bread, or driketh wine. Therefore no man may be so
bold to say, that by eatig No promise is made to bread..
bakers bread we shall be saved. Eating verily has his promise of salvation
annexed thereunto. but it is the flesh of Christ which must be eaten, it is
the blood of the son of man, which must be drunken, it is the food of life
Christ him felf, which must be Sacramentallie received.

In all S. John there is promise of life made to none other Joan. 6.
thing. At the last supper it is said: this is my body, take eat: and this is
my blood, drink ye all of this. Where no mention of eating Matt. 26.
bread, or of drink^g wine is made, much less any promise of life is
thereunto annexed. S. Paul speaks of none other bread 1. Cor. 10 and 11.
then of that, which is the communicating of his flesh, and which being one, is
received and partaken of al faithful: and yet neither in him, nor in the acts
of the Apostles, nor in anieplace place else is any promise made by Christ, that
who so eats material bread in his remembrance (though he eat it never so
devoutly) shall by that eating live forever.

Now whereas Calvin pretends y^ words of Christ's supper In the. 1. book.
to be words of promise, it is already confuted. and albeit they were words of
promise, yet they neither promise bread to be eaten, nor life to them that
devoutly eat bread. In consideration whereof we may conclude, that water is
the instrument to give life, because baptism is expressly named, andd has the
promise of salvation in Gods word. But seeing bread has not such promise, they
speak beside all scriptures, who think it sufficient for our bodies to eat
bread, and to drink wine at Christ's supper.

And lest any man should think, that I may be deceived in the word of God, and
that some promise there made to bread and wine may escape me: I answer, that
even here Christ shows us not only to live for him, but also to line for him
by eating him: so that we have the word of God, that Christ him self is our
food not only by faith, but by eating. We have then two adua^tages, one that no
promise of life is made to bread and wine: The other, that express promise of
life is made to him, who eats Christ. whereupon thus I reason: Either this
promise of life, which is made to him that eats Christ, su^iseth in the kind
of eating or no.

If this suffice not, the word of God is reproved, which says: He that eats
me, shall live for me. And by eating Christ he understands It suffiseth
^ocate Christ.
(as I have often times declared) believing upon him, doing his will, and besides
all that the receiving of him corporally in the Sacrament of his supper.

If now his promise of life be alone sufficient, what place is left for the
Sacramentaries, to challenge life to their bodies by the eating of wheaten bread
and by drinking wine. Their bodies verily can not live without the food of
life, for as Christ said before, except ye eat my flesh, ye shall not have
life in you. and I am sure he spoke to men that had bodies. But material bread
is not Christ's flesh, neither has it any promise to give life to our bodies,
therefore either our bodies die for ever, or else they live through y^ Our
bodies receive Christ. Cyril. in Joan. lib. 10. ca. 13.
that they receive Christ into them corporally, the which saying of mine is
confirmed by this place of S. Cyrillus.

Non poterat aliter corruptibilis haec natura corporis ad incorruptibilitatem
and vitam traduci, nisi naturalis vitae corpus ei coniungeretur. This
corruptible (...) of the body could not otherwise be brought to incorruption
and life, (...) the body of the natural life were joined unto it, which, if it
be true, (...) not they, who take the body of Christ (who is the natural
life) from (...) corruptible bodies, deprive us of all hope of life in our
bodies: How the^ do we live for Christ and through him, as he lived for his
father? Does not he live for his father as well in body as in soul, because
his manhood is united to ye word which word is ye son of y^ father? Therefore
as we live for him by eating him, and as he lives for his father who sent him:
so must we be naturally joined to his flesh in the Sacrament of his supper, and
by receiving y^ same worthily into our bodies, live in body and soul for ever.

The eating of Christ's flesh was so true, that it The (...). Chapter.
was taught with the loss of many disciples.
IT is not to be thought that Christ, who forbids all occasions Matt. 18.
Christ gave no offense.
of giving offense to other men, would him self cast a stumbling block in his
disciples way, by pressing them to eat his flesh and to drink his blood, if
in deed they were not really to be eaten and drunken. But if Christ spoke that,
which was true in deed, and spoke it as it was true, then was it their fault
(who had seen him the day before working so great a miracle) not to Joan. 6.
believe such a Prophet, as their own experience and express words witnessed
him to be.

If then they were bound to believe him, and y^ they could do no The disci ples
should have believed.
otherwise, then if they believed that he would give them his flesh to eat in
deed, their fault was in that they did not believe that he was both able, and in
deed would by a conu^nient mean give them his true flesh in the way o^ meat,
and his true blood in the way of drink. If that were their fault, then is it
their ^ault likewise, who in our days think and teach, that Christ has not
given us in his last supper his (...) flesh to be really eaten, and true blood
to be really drunken. (...) the manner of eating flesh and drinking blood (...)
should in time convenient have learned that also.

Al men do know, that when a thing is to be done, the first question is to
demand, whether it may be done or no. wherein it is The natu rall order of
questions.
also contained, how easily a thing may be done. The second is, whether it be
worthy y^ taking in hand. The third, how it may be brought to pass. As long as
the thig is thought either impossible, or very hard or vnpro^itable: so long it
is in vain to talk of the manner of the doing it.

Christ did talk with the Jews of the two first points, showing that he was
able to do it: Quia h^nc pater signauit Deus, because God the father has
signed him, whereby he declared him self to be almighty God. He said also that
it was profitable, because he that did eat his flesh and drink his blood,
should be raised again to life everlasting. If they had believed him in these
The Jews believing not the ^. first points ler ned not y^ third. Matt. 26.
points, they might have asked, yea without asking they had known (at, or not
long after his last supper) the manner how it should have been conveniently
done, as those Apostles did know, who continued in their belefe. And the way of
knowledge was at his last supper, where taking bread with speaking of these
words (this is my body) he changed the substance of the bread into his body:
and wylled his disciples to take and eat his body. This much those could not
fre, because they would not believe. but to say that Christ hyndred their belefe
by words more hard then neded, that is more cruelly said, the it neded.
Oportebat, etc. they ought (says S. Cyril) first of al to cast the roots of
faith in their mind, and then to ask the things that were to be asked, but
the Cyril. li. 4. c. 14. in. Joan.
Jews asked importunely before they believed. for this cause our Lord showed
them not, how it might be brought to pass. and a^terward S. Cyrill declares,
how Christ in his last supper showed y^ manner also to the^, who did believe,
although they asked not for it.

The right understanding of those words: It is the spirit The xix. Chapter.
that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.
I May be the shorter in this point, because none of those who are meanly
conversant in the books of ancient writers (though otherwise they believe not
well) have applied these words against the real presence of Christ's body in
his last supper. for how can it be, that Christ's flesh, which is given for
the 1. de bap. li. 1. ca. 2. 2. in Ioa^. hom. 46. 3. in Ioa^. tract. 27.
life of the world, should profit nothing? Therefore S. Basil, S. Chrysostom,
and S. Augustine do expound the name of flesh (after one sort) for the fleshly
and carnal understanding of the Jews, who thought they should have eaten
Christ, as men eat mutton and beef, whereas Christ meant to give his flesh in
a secret manner, as the faithful know. which notwithstanding, the Luciferian
spirit of Calvin reproves this first understanding in his comments The pride
of Calvin.
upon this place. But it is sufficient, to say, that he difsented from those
three notable pillars of Gods Church before named.

The second understanding is on Christ's behalf, whose flesh should not profit
any thing, if the spirit, yt is to say, the Godhead did not make it able to
give us everlasting life. The which sense is chiefly followed by S. Augustine
also, and by S. Cyrillus. Aug. in Psalm. 98. and in Ioa^. Cyril. in Joan. li. 4
c. 23. and 24
Now seeing the flesh of Christ is given so to us under the foorm of bread, that
the Godhead is present with it, we are sure to have much profit by it. What
need more words?

If this saying appertem not to the last supper, it makes nothing against our
belefe: If it do appertein to it, the words are Prophetical, because they
speak before hand of a thing, which most certainly shall come to pass in the
last supper, and then the fulfilling of them will make them plain. For as
Procopius says: A prophecy at the first sight is not clear, but when it is
come Procop. in praefationem genesim.
to the event, which was forespoken, and is co^ferred with the thing it self,
then draws it to a perfect clerenes. If now the said words were fulsilled at
the supper, and take a clear understanding thereof, How Christ's flesh was
given spiritually.
what meaning can they have but that when Christ gave his body, he gave it
after a spiritual sort and not after a fleshely manner? He gave not a shoulder
to one Apostle, and a leg to an other, a breast to the third, and a ribbe to
the fourth, but the whole body to every (...): not visible in the form of
flesh, but invisible in the form of bread: so making plain, why he had so
often called him self bread, and said that the bread which he would give, is
his flesh. He gave not his body without his soul and Godhead, neither his
blood without his bones and flesh: but the spirit quickened al things, each
kind had whole Christ. He lost not his visible body by giving of it, but by
his words, which are spirit and life, turned bread and wine into his body and
blood, showing y^ as he was at the table in his whole body, notwithstanding
they did eat the same body, so he might be in heaven although the sub stance
of his true body and blood were given in his Sacrament in earth. What shall I
say more? If the understanding of these words depend upon the last supper, they
must not give us a rule how to understand the last supper, but they must take
their understanding of it. Who dare say that bread was crucified for us,
because Jeremy said: Mittamus lignum in panem eius, let us put Hie. c. 11.
wood into his bread? Do we not rather say, that because we are sure that the
true flesh of Christ was crucified, therefore in Jeremy bread is taken for
flesh? Who dare say that Christ had horns in his hands, because Habacuk said:
Cornua in manibus eius? Do Habac. 3.
we not rather say that by horns he meante the corners of the cross, because
we are sure that Christ had upon the cross no material horns in his hands?
If then these words, the spirit quickens, be referred to the supper, and
there we find bread and wine taken, and after blessing, body and blood given,
we may be well assured that one truth does not take away the other. Spirit does
not take away flesh, but spirit must be taken for the Godhead, which makes the
flesh both to be present and profitable, to all such as receive it worthily.

The words of Christ being spirit and life show, that The xx. Chapter.
his real flesh is made present in his last supper above all course of nature
and reason.
VErba quae ego locutus sum vobis, spiritus and vita sunt. The words which I
have spoken, or (as the greek text reads) which I do speak to you, are
spirit and life.

The Capharnaits hearing Christ say, he would give his flesh to be eaten, partly
thought it not possible for him to give, partly not semely for them selves to
take. They imagined a division of y^ flesh The error of the Capharnaits.
which should be delivered, and consequently the person, whose flesh were cut
in such pieces, must die. but how could a dead man give his own flesh to be
eaten? Again though he could do it, what a cruel thing were it for them to
eat man's flesh?

Christ knowing this their gross concept, says, that the son of man will
ascend into heaven where he was before. Thereby declaring first his almighty
power and Godhead: Next, that the gift of his flesh does not import the lack
of life either in y^ geuer, or in ye thing given. For the^ in deed the gift
should be little worth, because it is the spirit and life which quickens, dead
flesh profits nothing to everlasting life.

My words (says Christ) be spirit and life, that is to say, they be The spirit
of Christ is his Godhead.
words of him that is by nature everlasting life, who means to give his flesh
alive, and that not only so alive as our flesh lives whiles the soul is in
it, but so living as that flesh lives, which is (...) and joined in one person
to the Godhe^d.

Think no more (you gross Capharnaits) of dead flesh given by piece meal,
which is not auayable to br^g you to heaven, but think of such a flesh as God
has assu^pted, to give life by it to ye world, of such a flesh as will ascend
by his own virtue into heaven, of such a flesh as being conceived not by the
sede of man, but by the holy ghost, has power to become spiritual without
loss of his true nature and substance. My words be spirit and life.

Spiritus est Deus, God is a spirit. In ipso vita erat, life was in Joan. 4.
Joan. 1.
the word, and verbum caro factum est, and y^ word was made flesh. Of that
flesh Christ words must be understood. That is ye flesh which he will give,
and which we must eat. that flesh lives with God and in God, and gives them
life who receive it worthily.

This doutlesse is the literal meaning of Christ's words, and therefore S.
Cyrillus douted not to write: Spiritum hic etc. Cyril in Joan. lib. 4. ca. 24.
Christ has called here the very flesh, spirit, not because it has lost the
nature of flesh, and is changed into the spirit, but because the flesh, being
very nigh joined with the spirit or Godhead, has received the whole power of
quikning, or of making things to live. The words then, which I have spoken to
you, are spirit, that is to Spiritus.
say, spiritual. Et de spiritu and vita, id est, de viuisica and naturali vita
sunt. And they are of the spirit and life. That is to say, of the natural
life, and of that which makes other things to live. De spiritu.


This phrase: Verba mea de spiritu sunt, my words are of the spirit, does
mean, that the words of Christ have in them some of his spirit and of his
divine power.

Which meaning since it is most true, these words of Christ do Note.
not show, that the naming of flesh and blood which went before was figurative,
and that now Christ declares only a spiritual understanding of them (as the
Sacramentaries teach) but all is clean, contrary. For Christ now gives a
reason, why his former words be possible, easy, true, and proper. The reason
is, for that he is God that spoke them, and he spoke them of that flesh, which
is united to the son of God.

Spiritus viuificans est caro Domini etc. The flesh of our Lord Damasc. de
Orth. sid. li. 4. cap. 14. Joan. 3.
(says Damascen) is a spirit which quickens, because it was conceived of a
quicken^g spirit. sor that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Which thing
I say not, taking away the nature of the body, but intending to show the
Godhead thereof, and the power which it has to make things live.

As therefore the flesh of Christ was not thereby no flesh, because it was
joined to his divine substance, but rather had by that union the power to make
us live for ever: even so y^ words which before did show the flesh of Christ to
be meat in deed, and his blood to be drink in deed, are not now declared to be
figurative or improper words, but rather they are declared to be most proper
and true, because they are witnessed to be spirit and life. For as the Godhead
is in his own nature most infinite, almighty, simple, and uncompounded, and the
truth it self: So those How the words be spirit^al.
words, which partake of the Godhead, are declared to be of most strength to
work that they sound, to be most simple, and to have least figures and parables
in them, as the which contain the virtue to make that truth which they
signifi^.

So that the name of spirit does not stand to depri^e us of Christ's real
flesh, but only to make it profitable to us, and to show that Christ by his
word is able to give us his flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwells.
Corpus Dei (says S. Ambrose) Ambros. de ijs qui init. myster. c. 9.
Corpus est spiritale: corpus Christi, corpus est diuini spiritus, quia
Spiritus est Christus. The body of God is a spiritual body, the body of Christ
is the body of the divine spirit, because Christ is the spirit, that is to say,
God. Non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritalis est. It is therefore no bodily,
but a spiritual food.

The food is spiritual as the body of Christ, which he took of Spiritual food.
the virgin, is spiritual. But the body is not spiritual, as though it lacked
the substance of true flesh, but because it was wrought and made by the holy
Ghost in the virgens womb. Therefore the heavenly bread, which we receive from
the altar, is a spiritual food, no^ that it lacks the true substance of
Christ's flesh, but because it is wrought and made present under the foorm of
bread by the spirit of God and by the holy Ghost above all course of nature.

It is clear (says S. Ambrose) that the virgen did bear (Christ) Ambros.
ibidem.
otherwise, then the course of nature was. and this body which we make, is of
the virgen. What sekest thou here the course of nature in the body of Christ,
seeing our Lord Jesus him self is brought forth of the virgen beside the course
of nature? As who should say, the real flesh of Christ is made present under
the foorm of bread by the holy Ghost, even as Christ was incarnate in the
virgens womb by the holy Ghost. It is the Godhead, the spirit, the life that
works all things in y^ holy mysteries. The flesh without y^ Godhead profits
nothing. From y^ Godhead the words came which Christ spoke. That Godhead is it
which makes Christ's flesh profitable. Per carnem spiritus (says S.
Augustine) August. in Joan. tract. 27.
aliquid prosalute nostra egit: caro vas fuit. quod habebat, attend, non quod
erat. By the flesh the spirit (or Godhead) did somewhat for our salvation. The
flesh was the vessel (or instrument) mark what the flesh had or held, and not
what it was by his own nature. And again: The charity of God is spread in our
Roma. 5.
hearts by the holy Ghost which is given to us. Ergo, it is the holy Ghost which
quickens. The words which I have spoken to you are spirit and life. What is
it to say, they are spirit and life? They are to be understood spiritually.
If thou have understood them spiritually, they are spirit and life, if thou
have understood them carnally, they are spirit and life, but not to thee.
Thus far S. Augustine.

The word spirit may stand to signify God, Angels, the soul what spirit may
signify.
of man, the life, the gift of God made to any reasonable creature, and the
wind, or breath, or air, or briefly any thing that moves. But among all
significations the chief is to signify God, who is by nature the only spirit
which quickens and moves all other spirits: In whom we live, are moved, and
have our Acto. 17.
being. Therefore the words, which are called spirit and life, are called in
effect divine and almighty.

Spirit sometime stands to signific the words of God, as when S. Paul says,
the letter kills the spirit quickens, the letter in that place does
signi^ie the law, and the spirit does signify Basil. de baptis. l. ^ cap. 2.
the words of our Lord, as S. Basile does expound it. For Christ our Lord
gives grace to his words, that they should not only signify things (as the
words of the law did) but also make and work the things which they signified.

The words that be spirit must be understood spiritually, Spiritually.
that is to say, divinely, and as it becomes the words of him who is God him
self, whose words have power in them selves to work that which they betoken.

To understand the words of Christ spiritually, it behooves we believe them
first as they sound to humble and reasonable men. Esaiae. 7.
for if we believe not, we shall not understand: but if we do believe, then we may
be assured (as S. Chryso^tom upon this place Chryso. hom. 47. in loan.
has written) that they contain no natural course, but are free from al
earthly necessity and from the laws of this life.

Which being so, when Christ taking bread, and blessing says, this is my body,
we may not say with our selves, how can this be so? what other body can here
be, then a piece of bread which mine eye sees, and my tongue tastes. If we
speak after this sort, The Sacramentaries make Christ's words no spirit.
we call the words of Christ from the spirit of God to the course of nature and
of reason. and we do not believe them to be spiritual, that is to say, divine,
and above the course of nature. but we understand the^ carnally, loking for no
miracle to be wrought by them. and yet they are spirit and life, able to
quicken what soever they list. they can make bread to be Christ's body, and
wine to be his blood. they have power to change natures, and to work
inuisibly. The words of parables.


In a parable it is not needful that all things be in deed, as the words do
sound. but when Christ's words are said to be spirit and life, then it is
declared to us, that they partake the nature of his Godhead, that they work a
thing above our capacity, and make all that, which they say. A spiritual body.


Yea but (say you) show me the body which they have wrought. I answer, they are
spirit and have wrought a spiritual body, not such as lacks the truth of
flesh, but such as through the union which it has with the Godhead, has
disposed the substance of flesh under the form of bread in such sort, as our
souls are disposed within our bodies, which are undoubtedly there, but they
can not be touched or felt by any sense. even so we believe the real presence of
Christ's flesh under the form of bread and wine, because the words of Christ
are spirit and life, albeit no scuse or reason can attein to that high
mystery.

Seeing then these words of promise (the bread which I will give is my flesh) be
spirit and life, these words of performance, which after bread taken, say
presently: this is my body, must needs be much more spirit and life, y^ is to
say, of divine power to work that which they sound.

Let now al heretics cease to mock us of so many miracles, as we teach to be
in the sacrament of the altar, for so much as Christ has witnessed it should
be a miraculouse sacrament, and above all This Sa crament is miraculouse.
course of nature, as being made by words which are spirit and life. Let them
likewise no more abuse the name of spirit, to make men believe that Christ spoke
not properly, since Christ calls his words, spirit, because they be so proper,
that they come nere to y^ nature of the Godhead (as being his words who is
naturally God) then the words of men are able to do. and as the Godhead is
most immurable, and not at al subject to any change: even so those words, which
partake most of the Godhead, are most unchangeable, and least figurative. for all figurative speeches are Tropi.
changed and abused, having the name of tropes among the Grecians, (...), ab eo
quod vocabula mutantur a propria significatione in alienam. figurative speeches
are called in greake tropes, that is to say, cha^ges, because y^ words are
changed Malach.
from their proper signification to an improper meaning. but God is not
changed, nor those words be not changed from their proper signification, which
God has called spirit and life. but as they partake y^ Godhead, so doc they
partake the propriety of not being changed from their most accustomed meaning,
and proper nature.

It is a world to see what difference there is between y^ words of Christ's
Gospel, and the interpretation of the false Ghospellers: The error of y^
Sacrame^ taires.
between the old Fathers, and the new brethern: between Catholics and
Protestants. Mark I pray thee, good Reader, the differences diligently.

Christ by his incarnation was made to us the bread of life, to the end we
might eat his Godhead otherwise then the Fathers had done before. the new
brethern after the incarnation and supper of Christ, wherein we should have the
Godhead given us, bid us believe upon Christ in heaven, and so to feed upon him
by faith alone, as No^ and Abraham did. Their counc^l is not (...) in bidding
us sede by says, but where is y^ Godhead (...) by this means? is that also
received by faith? why, so it might have been received and so it was received
before Christ was man? Where is the food of Angels made the food of man? where
is the Psalm. 77.
word of God so given to me after his incarnation, as it could not be given
before? Where is any everlasting meat for my body? Where is the supper, which
may feed the whole man? faith fedeth my understanding, but my will and affection
has as much need to be fed. my flesh is rebelliouse to my spirit, and it has
need to be fed. my body was the mean to poison my soul, therefore my soul
must have a medicine, which shall be received into my body, and so be
communicated unto my soul.

S. Ireneus reproved those heretics, who because men were Ireneus. aduersus
Her. li. 5.
called in scripture spiritual, denied the true resurrection of their flesh,
as though their spirit only should tarry for ever. and yet our new brethern,
where so ever mention is made of spirit or of a spiritual body and flesh, so
wrast it, as though the real substance of flesh in the Sacrament were by that
word denied or diminisshed: whereas it is rather increased, for so much as that
flesh which is spiritual is not thereby the less true flesh, but it partaketh
the more of the spirit. And because a spirit once created is by the natural
gift of God immortal, a spiritual flesh is likewise like to the spirit in that
case. S. Augustine writes, that after resurrection August. lib. 1. retractat.
cap. 13. and de ciuit. Dei. lib. 13. cap. 22.
the body shall no more have need of corporal nourishments, because the only
spirit shall suffice to nourish it. qua causa etiam spiritale erit, for which
cause also the body shall be spiritual. now as after resurrection the spiritual
being, which our bodies shall have, does not diminish the truth of their
nature, but declares a wonderful abettering of them, in yt they be made in
manner equal to spiritual substances: even so the body of Christ in his supper
is spiritual, not for any lack of his true substance under y^ forms of bread
and wine, but because it is wholly possessed and replenished with the Godhead,
and is present after the manner of a spirit, as being neither seen, nor felt,
nor tasted, but only believed. And therefore this blessed Sacrament is worthily
called of the Church at the consecration of the blood, yea (as I think) it is
12. The mystery of faith. 1. Tim. 3.
called of S. Paul also, mysterium fidei. the mys^erie of faith, because it
secretly co^teineth under the forms of bread and wine, the flesh, the blood,
the soul and the spirit, or Godhead of Jesus Christ. The which mystery of
faith the Deacons used to deliver to the faithful after consecration, as
Justinius the martyr does witness, and therefore S. Paul willed the Deacons to
use that mystery of faith with a pure and clean conscience.

To be short: The Sacramentaries abuse y^ word of God miserably, when they
talk of the spirit and of the flesh of Christ in such sort as they do. For
Christ said, the flesh profits nothing, meaning only the corruptible flesh of
a bare man, who is no God.

The Sacramentaries expound it, as if it were said, it is nothing worth to eat
Christ's own flesh really, but only it is profitable to feed on it by faith.

Christ said, it is the spirit that quickens, meaning the Godhead, to make
his flesh profitable unto us. They take it so, as though the spirit alone did
q^icken us at his last supper, without eating his flesh really. Christ by
naming the spirit reuoketh ^ot the real gift of his flesh, the eating whereof
he avouched to be necessary for us. They use it contrarily to prove his flesh
to be given us really in his last supper, as though he had corrected his former
words: Christ meant to add more dignity and worthiness to the eating of his
flesh, then is in other men's flesh, because the spirit made it alone quick,
alive, and profitable.

They endeavor by the precense of the word spirit, to say, he would not give his
flesh to be eaten in deed, and so abuse yt name to the diminishing of his
inestimable gift. Christ said: my words are spirit, that is to say of divine
power, and proceeding from God.

They imagine he said: my words be improper and cropicall or parabolicall, as
being only true by an allegory. Christ meant his words to proceed from his own
spirit and majesty, and therefor to be true above the course of nature. They
expo^nd the^ as if he had said, you must care my flesh in your spirit only, and
not in very deed. Thus they wreast that to the spirit of man, which Christ said
of the spirit of God, and under this ambiguitie of words they cover their
poisoued doctrine.

Christ would us to understand spiritually the real ^ating of his real flesh,
because he would give it us without loss of his own body, without lothsomnes
of our stomachs, and without removing from his own place in heaven. They apply
the spiritual understanding of eating his flesh, to take away the real ^ating
of it, as though he that understands a thing spiritually, should not
therefore eat that really, which he understands to be mystical. The
substance of Christ's flesh eaten is the ground of that mystery, figure,
Sacrament, or spiritual understanding, which Christ spoke of. Because he would
them to eat his flesh, not to fill their bellies, but to signify and partake
y^ merits otherwise done in that flesh.

They taking away the ground of the figure (which is Christ's flesh) add of
their own i^ention, bread and wine to be the ground of this figure and of the
spiritual understanding.

They making Christ's spiritual words tropicall and gramatically ^iguratiue,
abase the^ beneth y^ condition of common words. For a proper word i^ of more
dignity then an improper, and me^ for the most part speak properly. Christ
said, my words are life, meaning the^ to be so proper, that they perform
whatsoever they promise or speak, as having the propriety of the Godhead which
is most far from all figures, shadows, and changes.

They make them dead words. For seeing the mind of the speaker uttered in plain
words is y^ life of the words, the same words uttering the speakers mind
obscurely are as dead and without life, until they be expounded. What shall I
say more? they take these words to be figurative in such sort, that they make
the^ inferior to the common words of mortal men, who never ligthtly use y^
words flesh and blood for the signs of flesh and blood, but for the substances
of them, and much less do they use, flesh and blood so to signify bread and
wine, that the same bread and wine must again signify Christ's flesh and
blood, as I have noted before that the Sacramentaries are constrained to say,
if they will defend their false and (...) doctrine, the which I pray God they
may have grace to see and to amend.

The preface of the fourth book.
VUe have showed what proufes may be brought out of Christ's promise at
Capharnaum, for his real and corporal presence in the Eucharist: it remains
we now declare the same truth, by that which he performed in his last supper.
And because the chief controversy is, whether the words of Christ do mean as
they sound, or else must be taken otherwise: I will first make it plain, that
they ought to be taken properly and as they sound to men of common
understanding, until an evident reason be brought why they must be meant
improperly. and therewithal I show, that no reason is now to be heard for the
improper interpretation of them, because the time of all such allegatio^s is
expired more then fiften hundred years past, for so much as the whole Church is
in possession of the proper meaning.

Afterward I will prove the proper and literal meaning of those words by the
circumstances of the supper: by the conference of holy scriptures taken out of
the old and new testament, and last of all by the commandment which was
given the Apostles to continue the Sacrament of Christ's supper until he come
to judge the world. If in conferring the promise with the performance, or by
any other occasion I chance to say somewhat, which was before touched: I must
ask pardon thereof, as who endeuore partly to make al things plain, partly to
confirm the present matter, whereof I speak by such convenient allegations as
for the time come to my remembrance. Once I am sure, it is not a thing affected
of me to say the same thing often: albeit either the affinity of the argument,
or the desire to have the thing well remembered, or my forgetfulness may cause me
to fall in to that default.

The Chapiters of the fourth Book.
1. That no reason ought to be heard, why the words of Christ's supper should
now be expounded improperly or figuratively. and that the Sacramentaries can
never be sure thereof. 2. That as al other, so the words of Christ's supper
ought to be taken properly, until the contrary does evidently appear. 3. The
proper fignification of these words (this is my body) and (this is my blood)
is, that the substance of Christ's body and blood is contained under the
visible forms of bread and wine. 4. That the pronoune (this) in Christ's
words ca^ point neither to bread nor to wine. 5. That the pronoune (this) can
not point to any certain act, which is a doing about the bread and wine.
6. That the said pronoune points finally to the body and blood of Christ, and
in the mean time it signifies particularly one certain kind of food. 7. The
naming of the chalice proves not the rest of the words to be figurative, but
helps much the real presence. 8. That the words of Christ's supper be
proper, though many other (unlike to them) be figurative. 9. The real presence
is declared by xxvij. circunstances which belong to Christ's supper. 10. The
same is proved by conference of holy scriptures in the new Testament. 11. Why
the Sacrament is called bread after consecration. 12. The real presence is
proved by c^nference of holy scriptures of the old Testament. 13. Item by the
words (hoc facite) which do signify, make this thing. 14. Item by the
words: for the remembrance of me. 15. The gross error, and impudent challenge
of M. Novvell is corrected, and fully satisfied concerning the conference
between these words: this is my body, and, I am the true vine.
That no reason ought to be heard, why ye words of The first Chap^ter.
Christ's supper should now be expound^d improperly or figuratuely. and that
the Sacramentaries can never be sure thereof.
CHrist in his last supper was b^th like a testatour, who disposes before his
death what shall be com^ of his goods afterward, and like a maker of laws, who
prescribes an The gift or legacy of Christ.
order to be kept in his common weal. The legacy bequeath ed, or rather the
gift made by his life time in consyderation of death cer^einly approaching, was
ye delivery of those inestimable t^wels, which he called his own body and
blood, willing his heyrs and fruids to take and to care h^s bod^, which should
be given for the^: and to drink his blood of the new Testament, which should be
shed for the remission of synn^s.

The law which he made, was, that the Apostles and their successones The law of
Christ.
(in the like degree of Priesthood) should make that Sacrament, which he had
then instituted, for the remembrance of his death, until he came again to
judge the world.

His Testament and the gift made therein was confirmed by yt famous death,
which he siffered the next day upon the Cross. His law was received and
practiced from the coming down of the holy Ghost even to this day through all the catholic Church.

A few years after Christ's death his Testament and law which The writing of
both.
he made by mouth, was by witnesses of sufficient credit, put in writing,
published, and acknowleged of al faithful men. If therefore any question arise
concerning such words, as were either in y^ last will or in ye law, or the
narration of them who wrote the Gospel: We ought to weigh, whether that
question be moved of a thing not already determined, or else upon that which
many years before was accustomed and received. For as reason would a new Ne^e
doubts*
doubt to be newly dissolved: so no reason, no law, no conscience can suffer,
that a matter once fully decided and perfitly ended, should be again called
into judgment.

The question is, whether the words of Christ be figurative, or proper. I say,
that question was decided above fiftene hundred years past. For when yt will and
law of Christ was first published, The question decided of old.
al men took those words, This is my body, and this is my blood, to be proper:
And so we received of our forefathers from hand to hand, in so much yt the
Church never heard before these days any other doctrine preached by public
authority. it never saw other practice, then to adore with Godly honor those
things over which the Priest, as Christ's mynister, had said the words before
rehearsed.

The universal preaching and usage of Christ's Church is a sufficient witness,
that it has always taken those words to be proper and not figurative. Which
thing since it is so, minime sunt Paulus ff. de leg.
mutanda (says the lawier) quae interpretationem certam semper habuerunt.
Those things are least of all to be changed, which have always had a known
understanding. And yet if we should come to give account of these universal
customs, how reasonably might it be applied to our purpose, which y^ same
lawier says. Si de interpretatione legis quaeratur, inprimis inspiciendum est,
quo iure ciuitas retro in huiusmodi casibus vsa fuisset. Optima enim est legu^
interpres (...). If a question be moved concerning the interpretation of a law,
it is principally to be attended, what order and law the common weal has used
before in those Custom.
cases, for custom is the best interpreter of laws.

We are sure that before the birth of ^uther, yea also of Berengarius, The use
of Gods church.
all the Church used to worship the body and blood of Christ under the forms
ofbread and wine: and yet it could not have done so, if it had taken the word,
body, for material bread only signifying ye body, and yt name of, blood, for
wine which was appointed only to signify Christ's blood. For the Church of God
would never have worshipped with Godly honor bakers bread and wine of the
grape, though they were tokens of never so goodly things.

But if the Sacramentaries answer, that once the Church did other wise, and yt
the ancient fathers neither adored the body and blood of Christ under yt
forms of bread and wine, nor preached the words of Christ's supper to be
proper, beside that such answer of theyrs is stark false, as by yt plain words
of S. Ambrose, The adoration of Christ's body.
of S. (...), of S. Augustine and of Theodoretus it shall hereafter euide^rly
appear: yet surely though so much could not be presently declared, yet it were
a great folly upon the allegation of a thing so far beyond memory of man (as
the primitive Church is) to leave the manifest use and custom of the present
Church, the which Christ no less redeemed, no less governs and loves, the^
he did the faithful of the first six hundred years.

Furthermore if all that is presently believed shall be undone, as often as it is
pretend^d that the primative Church thought otherwise, what quietness can there
be in the Church after this order? what end shall we have of controversies?
When shall we hope to see that agreement of minds, that consent of wills, that
uniformity of life and belefe, which our grandfathers and great grandfathers
had?

The Trinitaries of Polonia under their Capitain (...) A new heresy in
Poolela^d.
(who is a false preacher in (...) yt chief city of y^ Kingdom) said that the
name of the blessed Trinity is a monsterouse thing, not because they openly
deny the father, y^ son, and y^ holy ghost, or the equality of them, nor
because they defend any more then one God: But they affirm, y^ albeit there are
three vnius naturae, of one nature and of one Godhead, yet there are not three,
say they, y^ are vna natura, vel Deitas, one nature or Godhead. And for proof
hereof they appeal to the new Testament and old, and to the Church which they
call privative, which was of ye first two hundred years, or thereabout, bidding
us, look whether we find, Trinum and vnum deu^, or Trinitatem in vnitate, or
vnum deum in tribus personis, in any scripture, or in any Father of that age.

As for S. Athanasius, S. Hilarie, S. Basil, S. Augustine and so forth, they
esteem no more, then our new brethren esteem S. Bid, or S. Thomas of Aquine.
The book entitled of the Trinity, which is in S. Justinius works, they affirm
not to be his, using presently the same shamles shifts against the blessed name
and nature of yt Trinity, which the Sacramentaries use against the nature and
name of the Mass.

Not long after these Trinitaries, an other cumpany began to Circum^ of them
sel^s
think circumcision so necessary, that in Lituania many (...) them selves, who
to defend that heresy must needs deny S. Pan les epistles, as Luther has
denied S. James his epistle, for that it is against his justification of only
faith.

And what forbids an other sect to do the like in an other Tertull. de prae
scriptio^. aduersus haeretic.
matter? Thus always are we seeking (as Tertullian says) but we never find
any thing, if once we go from that which we all believed.

If then a stay be to be made at any time in questions of belefe, if we may be
sure of any article of all our faith, it behooves we undo not that, which our
forfathers have so long before concluded to be true. No reason of induci^g a
new faith can be so weighty, as the peace and preservation of unity in
Christ's Church ought to be singularly weighed of every man.

There was but one universal chang to be looked for in religion One change only
could be in religion.
from the beginning of Christ's Church to the last end thereof. And that was at
ye coming of Christ into the world. The which chang that it might not be
sodein, it was prophesied of before in all ages both by y^ deeds and words of
Patriarchs, of Prophets, and of Priests. And when the fullness of time was
come, it was proved to become by miracles of so great virtue and name, that the
very stones, that is to say, the infidels were turned by them: so great a
matter it was with God, to have the order of his religion altered. And now shall
we after Christ's faith preached and believed fiften hundred years together,
shall we now take a new faith of Luther, of Zumglius, and of Calvin? If they be
Christ, I grant we must admit their doctrine: but if they be not so, it is not
possible they should come of God, though they came with never so many miracles,
but they must be the forerunners of (...).

To come again nere (...) own matter, if we shall give any ear to them who
affirm the words of Christ's supper to be figurative, Jacob. 1.
that must be with some dout of our former faith. and in douting thereof we are
become men that lack faith. which if it be not sure, it is not good, for so
much as it has not the foundation of Heb. 11.
the things, which the Apostle said were to be hoped for.

Or tell me, he that first gave ear to Bere^garius or Zuinglius against the
bessed Sacrament of y^ altar, may the same man give care now to another that
should wickedly say, the Apostles had A teacher of new doctrine is not to be
heard.
no authority given them to write holy scriptures? If he may, the^ he may dout
of the said ^utoritie. and yet surely it were very hard to prove to a wrangler,
that such authority of writing Gospels or epistles could be justified out of
the express words of the holy Bible.

But if it be unlawful to hear any such seditiouse man, how could it be
lawful when ear was first given to Berengarius or Berenga rius preached a new
doctrine.
Zuinglius? for then it was no less generally received through all
Christendom, and much more expressly to be proved by the holy scripture, that
the things set forth and consecrated upon the holy table and altar were the
real body and blood of Christ, then it is said, that whatsoever the Apostles
did write, should be confirmed and established, as the words of the holy goo^.

Where yet I will enter farther into the (...) of the cause* And before we
hear what reasons he can bring, who will reprove the faith of the church in the
blessed Eucharist, I say, he is not The Sacramentaries can have no ground of
their doctrine.
to be heard, because it is not possible that his reason can have any
sufficient ground, why we should give over our old faith: and that whether we
respect the written word of God, or y^ faith of all Christians, or the glory of
God, or the love of Christ toward us, or the profit of his church.

For neither can he show, where it is written, or when it was 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
believed, This is not my body: nor can prove that it is more honorable to God,
or more agreeable to Christ's coming, or more profitable to us, that we should
lack his body present under the form of bread, rather then have it. For if the
death of Christ did proceed from excessive charity of him toward us, and of
God and our profit, that his Son should take flesh and dye for us: I can not
devise how the most honorable remembrance of the The honor of God.
same death should not be most according to the intent of Christ, and to our
souls health. And doubtless it is a more honorable and a more loving
remembrance, where the true substance of Christ is made really present for the
keeping of his death in memory, and we take more benefit by such a
commemoration of his bloody The profit of the faithful.
sacrifice: then if instead of Christ's real body, a piece of bread and wine
be left unto us with never so great a feding by faith. For imagine ye the faith
to be never so great, I am sure it will not be the less because Christ is
taken into our hands, mouths, and breasts. The touching of his garment never
hindered any Lucae. 6.
good heart, much less can the taking of his whole body hurt our faith or
devotion. And yet if corporal touching did not also help, the faithful woman
troubled so long with a bloody flux, had not Lucae 8.
been so miraculously cured by touching the hemme of Christ's garment. Her
faith touched his Godhead, and her soul was healed. Her body also touched his
manhod, and her body was likewise cured.

Seeing then it is written: This is my body, and all men believed it once as well
as the other articles of our faith: Seeing that be^eif is so honorable unto God,
so mete for Christ's coming and love toward us, and so profitable unto us, that
the contrary assertion shall lack the like holy Scriptures, and the like
belefe of the Church, the like honor of God, the like love of Christ, and the
like profit of our souls: There can be no reason alleged hereafter, why we
should o^ce give audience to him, that pretends to prove the body of Christ
not to be really present under the forms of bread and wine. For what thing
possibly can excede these causes before alleged?

Moreover, all ^igures were invented partly for lack of proper Two cau ses of
spea king figurati^ly.
words, partly for the pleasantnes of speaking. Christ surely lacked not words
to show, yt he gave bread for a sign of his body, if in deed he had done so.
For since Zuinglius and Calvin had words to signify their opinion in this
matter, it could not be but that Christ was able to have spoken that which they
speak. If then he spoke not figuratively for necessity, our new brethern must
prove, that he spoke figuratively for his only pleasure. but how can they know
that? Aug. de doctrina Christ. l. 3. cap, 10.


S. Augustine bids us nolesse beware, that we take not a propre speech for
a figurative, then that we take not a figurative speech for a proper. The rule
to know ye one from the other is this: Vt quicquid in sermon diuino etc. that
what soever in the word of God can be properly referred neither to the
honesty of manners, nor to y^ truth of faith, thou may know to be
figurative. If now these words of Christ, this is my body and this is my
blood, may be referred to the truth of faith (in so much as all men have
believed the body of Christ to be given The proper sense of (...) is another aga^
the (...), nor good manners.
in the Sacrament of the altar, not diminishing thereby their faith in any
other article) by S. Augustins iugdement these words be not siguratiue. For
certeinlie they be not only nothing against the honesty of manners (as good men
understand Christ's presence under the form of bread) but rather the strong
belefe of them makes al men more honest in life, whiles they come with great
fear to so dreadful mysteries. therefore it follows y^ they be not of
necessity figurative: of necessity, I say, because there is no repugnance in
says or good manners, why they may not be proper. which notwithstanding a man
for his pleasure might use his words in a figurative sort, when he neded not*
but who so affirms so much, beside that he breaks S. Augustins rule, he
casts himself in great danger of proving y^ which hangs of an other
man's pleasure.

What argument have our new brethern to prove, that it pleased We can never be
sure that Christ spoke figu ratiuely.
Christ at this time to speak improperly? what ground in the word of God can
their opinion have? how can they be sure, that they err not in their
indgement? when we read that God is angry or sorry, or that John Baptist is
Elias, or that the rock is Christ, we say they are siguratiue speeches,
because they can not be proper. Anger falls not in God, nor sorrow. the rock
for that reason is not Christ in person and nature, because it is a rock. for
by nature they are several things, and such as do not stand together. the
like might have been thought in this Sacrament, if Christ had said: this bread
is my body, and this wine is my blood. but he foresaw great cause, why he would
not say so. For he would by his word so make his body and blood of bread and
wine, that when the substance of his body and blood should be present, the
substances of bread and wine should not remain, of this we are sure, because
beside the faith of the whole Church, the proper signification of the words
inforceth so much, as now it shall be declared.

That as all other, so the words of Christ's supper The ii. Chapter.
ought to be taken properly, vutill the contrary does evidently appear.
WHat meaning words ought to have, we judge most directly by the proper
signification and common use of them. For if the contrary do not appear, al
words Words are to be taken as they do properly signify.
must be taken in yt meaning and sense, which the usual custom of speaking and
writing has given them. Otherwise all things are confounded, and the profit,
which comes of words, is lost. Neither any man shall know what an other
means, neither how to make his own bargain, or last will and Testament.

Certe peruersissimum est (says Tertullian) vt carnem nominantes, Tertull. de
carne Christi.
animam intelligamus, and animam significantes, carnem interpretemur. Omnia
periclitabuntur aliter accipi quamsunt, and amittere quod sunt, dum aliter
accipiuntur, si aliter quam sunt, cognoninantur. Fides nominum, salus est
proprietatum. Truly it is a most overthwart thing, that naming the ^esh we
should understand the soul, and signifying the soul, we should Things must be
believed a^ they are named.
expound it the flesh. all things shall be in danger to be otherwise taken then
they are, and whiles they are otherwise taken, to loose that they are, if they
be named otherwise then they are. The faithful naming of things preserves
their proprieties.

By these words of this ancient Doctor we may judge, how foul a thing it is,
that hearing the body of Christ named, we should without any reasonable cause
expound it the figure of his body: And hearing the blood of Christ named, we
should expound it the sign of his blood. As well when he is named the Son of
God, we may expound it, the image of the Son of God. And so we open a gate to
all heresy, we take away all certeintie of speech, and make the holy
Scriptures subject to every man's filthy lust and pleasure. We must therefore
keep every word in his own nature and in his known signification, except it be
manifest unto us that the speaker meante otherwise. Does not natural reason
teach us so much?

Says not Marcellus the same, being taught only by common Li. 67. de leg. 3.
wisdom and judgment? Non aliter a significatione verborum recedi oportet,
quam cum manifestu^ est aliud sensisse testatorem. We must not otherwise depart
from ye signification of the words, but when it is manifest y^ the testatour
thought an other thing. In which rule if we rest, all the world well knows
that when The names used at Christ's supper are to be kept.
Christ said (This is my body) and (This is my blood) the words both by their
propre signisication, and by the present use of all speakers and writers, do
importe the real presence of Christ's true body and blood.

For neither the pronoun (This) points to a thing absent, This is body.
neither the verb (is) can be said of that, which presently has no true being,
neither the noun (body) uses to be verisied of a shadow, figure or token of a
body, neither when Christ says: This is my body, any faithful man doubts,
but that both Christ had my.
a true natural body which he might give, and is able to make his word true,
and uses to utter no falsehood. And whereas Christ said after bread taken, This
is my body, it is given us to understand, that by his word he makes that
particular substance of bread, which was taken into his hands, to be his own
body. what cause can now be brought why we should forsake these known
significations, and seek out other more strange? The law of nature would us to
rest in the names which we find. Iradition also makes for the same
interpretation. And surely these are yt chief rules to know yt meanig which any
words may have.

Epiphanius in this matter has a notable rule, saying: Omnia Epipha^. lib. 2.
to. 1. haer. 61.
diuina verba non habent opus allegoria, sed prout se habent, accipienda sunt.
Speculatione autem indigent and sensu, ad cognoscendam vniuscuiusque argume^ti
vim and facultatem. Oportet autem and traditione vti, non enim omnia a diuina
Scriptura accipi possunt. All the words of God need not an allegory (or a
figurative Tradition is to be re spected in exposiding holy scriptures.
meaning) but they are to be taken as they be. They require in deed a diligent
observation and understanding, that the strength and power of every matter
proponed may be known. (wherein it behooves to use tradition.) For all things
ca^ not be gathered out of the divine writing. Here is the first place given by
Epiphanius to the natural taki^g of words, for all things be not figurative,
though many be.

To know which is figurative, and which is not, diligent consyderation, and
ancient tradition helps much. Well, of other helps hereafter. Now let this
be granted, that the first rule of all makes for the Catholics. Which is,
that every word and speech, as long as the contrary is not manifestly proved,
is to be taken, as it commonly does signify. According to the which rule these
words of Christ (This is my body) and (This is my blood) affirm the real
presence of Christ's body and blood, as now it shall be showed.

The proper signification of these words This is my body, and This is my blood,
is, that the substance The ii^. Chapter.
of Christ's body and blood is couteyned under the visible forms of bread and
wine.
WHen the Paschall Lamb was eaten, and the Disciples Joan. 13.
feet washed, Christ by taking bread into his hands declared him self to be
disposed, to use it for some one purpose or other: by blessing, and
thanksgeuing over it, we are informed he would make some divine mystery of that
bread. And when he began to make the mystery, saying (this is) and ended it,
adding thereto (my body) we lern by the two first words (this This, can be said
but of one substance.
is) that his mystery consists not of bread and of his body, but of one
substance only, which was declared to be so really intended as well in his
mind, as at his tongs end, that having once named what it was, to wit (my body)
no man alive might doubt, but either he both in word and deed made a false
signification, (which is with all true Catholics a thing without al
possibility) or else that it was in deed so, as his words of blessing, and of
saying, This is my body, witnessed.

And for as much as his word affirmed this to be his body, and his deed of
taking bread, and of blessing showed his words to be Christ's words directed to
the bread.
directed unto y^ which was in his hand, or lay before him (which was bread
before) it must needs be, that the pronoun (this) so showed to his Apostles ye
thing already subject unto their eyes, that much more it served to teach their
understanding verily, this, which appeared to them bread, to be in substance,
at the ending of the words, his own body.

Therefore we teach the pronoun (this) to serve both to the The strength of
the pronoun this.
eyes and to the understanding of the Apostles. to their eyes, in pointing to
the foorm of bread which they saw: to their understanding, in teaching that
substance which was present under that they saw, to be his own body straight
when it was so named. And in so much as the same form of bread tarieth after
consecration which was there before, the pronoun (this) does always direct
their eyes to one and the same form of wheaten bread, which was there when
Christ took it first. and also it insinuates to their understanding, that
they must look (by the nonn that follows the verb) to know what propriety or
substance that visible thing has. And seeing the noun which comes after, is
not the name of a q^alitie or propriety, but the name of a substance, and of
such a substance as before was not present: Without all question, these words
(This is my body) have according The pr^per sense of Christ's words.
to the proper custom of speech, this meaning: The substance which is
contained under this form of bread, and under the accidents the which I show
you, is the substance of my body. Whereof it follows, that the same thing is
no longer the substance of bread, and consequently thereunto, that the
substance of the bread is, by the word of Christ, changed into the substance
Transubstantiation.
of his body. And likewise when Christ said: This is my blood, the sense is:
The substance which is contained vnter the form of wine (which you sensibly
perceive to be in this cup) is my blood, or is the substance of my blood.

Which interpretation is so true, that Christ has forced us to 1. Co. 11. Luc.
22.
seek it out, in causing S. Luke, and S. Paul to write: This chalice is the
new Testament in my blood. For of necessity we must interpret these words,
This chalice, that is to say, the thing contained inthis chalice, is my blood.
As therefore (This) in na ming the chalice does serve to show the place and
compass, within which I must look for that substance, which afterward is
defined to be the blood of Christ: even so (this) being spoken of the bread
which was taken into Christ's hands, does first point unto the eye, within what
circuit or quantity the mind shall seek for that substance or propriety, which
afterward the mouth of Christ will declare. and when the name is once heard, it
shows it to be yt substance of Christ's body. Out of which discourse we may
gather two conclusions: The one, that (this) begins most naturally with the
sense of man: The other, that it with the rest of yt speech informs ye
understanding of more then the eye saw. To ye sense it shows y^ outward
forms, to ye understanding it shows pr^cipally ye inward substance under
those forms.

Now look by how many degrees the inward substance does hoc, this, (...) the
noune (body.)
pass the outward forms, and the end of the talk does pass the beginning
thereof: by so many the pronoun (this) rather apperteyneth to the substantive
(body) wherein it ends, then to the forms, within the which it goes about
to show an invisible substance. Which being so, Hoc, (this) is in Latin of the
neuter gender, because the noune substantive (corpus) body, whereunto it
hasteneth) is of the neuter gender. And in the consecration of the blood Hic,
(this) of certeintie is the masculine gender, because sanguis blood, whereto it
belongs, is of the masculine gender.

Thus the literal sense of Christ's words is declared, which ought to be taken
for true, until the contrary be proved. But this propriety of words standing
(as it ought to stand) mark that whenever any Catholic says, The substance
of Christ's body and blood to be under the forms of bread and wine, he
speaks not any other thing, then the natural and proper signification of
Christ's words does give. For as he that pointing to that kind of beast (which
an other comes to learn) says: This is an Oelephant, in effect says: The
substance of an Oelephant is contemed under this visible form: So Christ
having taken bread, and saying, This is my body, says in effect: the
substance of my body is contained under the form of this bread.

Only this odds is between Christ's naming and ours, that Christ's naming to
making.
we either must name the thing by his former substance or propriety, or else we
make a lie: But Christ by (...) one thing ye name of an other, gives it also
the substance thereof whenever Romans 4.
he speaks, not in parables, but in the way of doing some good turn. for he
being God, as easily calls things which are not, as those which are. and by
his calling he makes them to be as he names them, and not as them selves were.

That the pronoun (this) in Christ's words can The (...). Chapter.
point neither to bread nor to wine.
Seeing Christ in his last supper assigns none other substance to (this, and
this) beside the substance of body and blood, and yet the Sacramentaries will
not grant so much: I ask them (for as much as although it were so, that his
words did mean an accidental token of his body and blood, that token must be
grounded in some substance or other) I ask them what substance is pointed unto
(as wherein the figure of Christ's body and blood may by their judgment
consist) when Christ says, this is my body and this is my blood? is any
substance included in those words, or none at all? if none, (this) may not be
said to be any particular nature at all. for if it be any certain thing
consisting by it self, it is a substance: if it be in any other thing, it may
be an accident and quality. but Christ says not, this is in my body, but this
is my body.

Admit now that he meant, this does signify my body. yet this that does so
signify, must be sumwhat or other. I ask what this The optmo^ of the
protestants.
thing is, which you say does signify or shadow Christ's body? you must needs
say, it is bread and wine, and therefore you must expound it, this bread
signifies my body, and this wine signifies my blood. This interpretation of
yours can not be true.

For (this) will not agree with bread or wine neither in greek, nor in latin.
For hoc in latin and (...) in greek is of the neuter gender, but panis in latin
and (...) in greek is of the masculine gender. therefore hoc, (this) does
neither in greek nor in latin agree with bread. likewise (hic) in latin is of
the masculine gender, vinum, wine is of the newter. and contrary wise in greek
(...) is of the newter gender, and, (...) wine, is of the masculine gender,
therefore (this) another in greek nor in latin can be referred to wine.

Now to say, hoc, this thing, (understanding, which is bread) is to correct the
words of Christ, as though he had said: hoc quod est panis, est corpus meum,
this which is bread is my body. and yet if it had been so said, the sense must
have been thus: the substance of bread does signify the body of Christ. for
that thing which is bread, is to say, the substance of bread. which if it The
substance of bread is not pomted unto.
were so, every substance of bread should be the sign of Christ's body,
because that which the substance of one loaf is, ye substance of an other loaf
is also in the same kind. and consequently whenever any man eats any
substance of bread without examining 1. Co. 11.
himself, he is guilty of the body of Christ.

Again when it were said, hic est sanguis meus: hic, being of the masculine
gender, could not be expounded by, hoc quod est vinu^, (this thing which is
wine) for it stands not neutrally to signify this thing, but only agrees
with the noune blood, which follows after, when it is said: this is my blood.

The pronoun is put in the same case, gender, and number whereof the substance
is, whereunto it points. as when Christ Mat. 21.
said: hic est haeres, this is the heir, hic, this, is of the masculine
gender, as well as the noune substa^tiue, h^res, an heir. h^c est hora Luc. 22.
vestra, this is your hour. As hour is of the femine gender, so is the
pronoun haec, this. hoc est opus Dei, this is the work of Joan. 6.
God. as opus work is of the neuter gender, so is the pronoune, hoc, that. But
when Christ took bread and blessed, he pointed not This, and bread be not of
one gender.
to bread by the pronoune (this) as to the substance which should remain at
the end of his whole talk. for bread is of the masculine gender, both in greek
and latin.

Again let us consider, that it is all one to say, hoc est corpus Cypria^. de
coena Domini not far from the beginning
meum, and haec est caro mea. in so much that S. Cyprian rehearses the words
of Christ's supper by these words, haec est caro mea, where haec being the
feminine gender does only agree with caro flesh, and not with, panis bread,
which is neither of the neuter gender, that hoc may agree with, nor of the
feminine tha^ haec may be referred to it, but only of y^ masculine gender.
Therefore if Christ had pointed finally to bread, he must hane said, neither
hoc est corpus, nor haec est caro, but hic est corpus meum, understanding to
hic, the substantive (panis) and in Greek it This, in English is of all genders.
should have been (...), and not (...). In English (this) is of all ge^ders,
and therefore it can not be exemplified in our barbarous tongue, which thereby
appears not so mete to have the word of God handled literally in it, as the
learned tongs are, although it is able enoughe to receive an interpretation of
Gods word. But it is much like as if one pointing to a man, called Laurence,
should say, she is Laurence, or her is Laurence, which is as good english among
the Brytons, as hoc panis, and hic vinu^, is good latin among the
Sacramentaries. Thus make they the wisdom of God to speak at this time, who
say that the pro noune (this) determines and points to bread, as to a thing
that still remains in his old substance, whereas bread is of the masculine
gender, and the pronowne hoc, (this) of the newter gender. and God provided of
purpose yt the article (this) should neither agree with bread nor with wine,
but only with body and blood, or with the chalice wherein the blood is
contained.

That the pronoun (this) can not point to any certain act, which is a doing
about the bread and wine. The v. Chapter.

LEast any man should think that in these words (this is (This) does not
stand to signify many things.
my body) the prononu^ (this) does stand to signify neither bread nor body,
but only this thing which is a doing, whereby a certain taking, and breaking,
and eating of bread in the remembrance of Christ should be meante: he must
understand that every thing which is so distinctly showed, is a particular
thing, and it is but one thing. otherwise it should have been said in the
plural number, these things are the tokens of my body and of my blood.

But now since it is said in the singular number (this) it must needs be only
one singular thing which is spoken of. Therefore if you will have (hoc) this
thing, to appointe to a doing, name which doing it is. For Christ did many
things in his supper. He took bread, he blessed, he brake, he gave. To which
does (hoc, this thing) point? To all it can not, sor they all be not only this
All the doings be not pointed unto.
one thing in the singular number, but many things. If any one be named, I
ask which of them? If breaking (which is one of the most like of all owtward
actions to signify the death of Christ) I ask how you are able to prove, that
breaking is pointed unto? surely S. Paul says, the bread which we break is
the 1. Co. 10.
communicating of our lords body. which could not be so, if the words of
Christ, which make it the sign of his body, had not been first spoken over the
bread.

For (as Justinius Martyr, Gregorius Nyssenus, S. Ambrose, 1. in Apo. 2. 2. in
Or. cathech. 3. li. 4. de Sacram. 4. depro dit. lud. 5. contr. Faust. li. 20.
ca. 13. and epi. 59. Breaking is not poin ted unto.
S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and briefly all the Fathers teach) the bread is
consecrated by these words of Christ, This is my body. And surely before it be
consecrated there unto, bread can not signify Christ's body, nor it can not be
to us the communicating of Christ's body. Therefore seeing the bread which we
break is the communicating of our Lords body (as S. Paul says) the words
which were spoken over y^ bread before the breaking of it, can not presently
point to that which is not yet done. And consequently (this) does not point
unto the act of breaking, nor unto the act either of giving or of eating,
which followed after the breaking.

If any man say, that Christ whiles he spoke these words, did break the
bread, or eat it him felf, or make his Apostles eat it: the vuiuersall
custom of the Church in all ages does show the contrary. Which all, even
from the Apo^les time have used to consecrate and to say these words: this is
my body, and this is my blood: over bread and wine at the holy altar and table,
a good time before the breaking or eating and drinking of them, Of S. James. Of
S. (...). Of S. Chrysostom. Of S. Chrysostom.
as the ancient Liturgies manifestly declare.

Besides, if the act of breaking, whiles it is adding, did only betoken to us
his body: when that act were past, the sign of his body were ended. and so we
should not eat the sign of Christ's body. Moreover, seeing neither the chalice
nor the wine is broken, therein should be no sign of Christ's blood at all.

On the other side, if eating or drinking only were the sign Eating or drinkig
is not alone pointed unto. 1. Cor. 10
pointed unto, it should be no sign before the eating, and thereupon it would
follow, that the bread which we break is not the communicating of Christ's
body, since no sign at all is made therein, if the whole sign depend upon the
eating alone. For if the sign depended of both together, it could not be said,
this, i^ the singular number as I said before, but it must have been said:
these acts and these doings about these creatures do signify the body of
Christ.

But seeing it is said, this is my body, which (this) can point but to one
thing, and seeing that one thing can be neither bread (wherewith it agrees not
in gender) nor any one act or doing (which alone does not signify the body of
Christ) doubtless (this) The body or blood is only pointed unto.
can by no means be referred to any other word or deed, then to the true
substance of Christ's body under the form of bread, and unto the true
substance of his blood under the form of wine.

The which thing once granted, after that Christ has taken bread and
blessed, and said, this is my body, whatsoever is done either in breaking or in
eating, or in giving, and taking, does siguifie the body of Christ, because it
is done to that thing and about it, which is the true substance of his body.
the breaking The brea king.
of the form of bread, under which the body is, does signify the body of
Christ once to have been broken with scourging The taking.
and nailing to the Cross, and now also to be impassible. The taking and
touching signifies the visible and palpable body, which walked upon the earth
preaching visibly to his disciples. The eating signifies it to be the true
bread of life, which who so eats The eating. Luc. 22. The giving.
worthily, he shall live for ever, and shall eat it in heaven after a new
manner. The giving of it does signify, how Christ gave it ^or us to death. To
be short whatsoever is done about y^ which is the body o^ Christ, does signify
somewhat either past or to come in that same body, and it does signify it so
much the more, because the presence of Christ's glorious substance is such,
that nothing done to it can hurt it, or bring any detriment thereunto. For the
breaking, taking, giving, and eating is done in a figure and mystery, the
which figure is grounded in the real presence of Christ's body. which if it
were not under the forms of bread and wine, the things said and done about the
Sacrament should not be so mystical and miraculouse, as they are.

That the pronoune (this) points finally to the body The vi. Chapter.
and blood, and particularly sig^fieth in Christ's supper one certain kind of
fo^e.
Seeing it is declared, that y^ pronoun (this) points neither to bread and
wine, nor to any act done about them, it remains y^ it points only to the
body and blood of Christ, and so long as the words of Christ are a speaking
(which in so few words is not long) the pronoune s^pendeth his last
determination. And Theop. ^ Math. 26
when all the words are ended, his pointing is also ended. Theresore (...)
expounding what hoc, this, does finally mean, writes ^us: Dicens hoc est
corpus meum, ostendit quod ipsum corpus domini est panis qui sanctificatur in
altario, and non respondens figura. Christ saying, this is my body, shows
that the bread which is consecrated on the altar, is the self body of Christ,
and not a figure which answers thereunto. And again in an other place he
says: hoc est corpus meum, hoc inquam, quod sumitur. This is In Marc. 14.
my body, this I say, which you take. So that by his (...) (this) points not
finally to that wheaten bread which Christ took, neither to any doing of
his, but to y^ body of Christ which he made by his words at the holy altar and
table, and which the Apostles took afterward at the hands of Christ.

Howbeit if any man be so hasty, that he will not tarry the speaking of four
words, to know what particular and final substance the pronoun, hoc (this)
does point unto, but will needs know what it means as soon as it came out of
Christ's mouth, until the last word be pronounced: I answer, that by the
circumstances which are about and concern the deeds and words of Christ, it
may be well said, that the pronoun (this) beside his general signisication
This, does mean particular ly this eatable thi^
(which is declared before) does here also particularly betoken, even from the
beginning of Christ's words to the end, this thing which is to be eaten or
drunken, and so does it declare as well the beginning of the words (which
belong to wheaten bread whose chief use is to be eaten) as the progress which
tends to a supper, the substance whereof is eating, and the end, which is the
bod^ of Christ made present to be eaten. So (this) does truly always signify
this food or eateable substance, of which particular pointing and signification
I shall have occasion to speak more at large hereafter, when I come to confer
y^ holy scriptures together which belong to the supper of Christ.

The naming of the chalice proves not the rest of The vii. Chapter.
Christ's words to be figurative.
HEreof the Sacramentaries make no small boast, that Christ said: this chalice
is the new Testament in my blood. 1. Cor. 11
It can not be denied (say they) but the name of chalice is figuratively put
for that, which is in the chalice. Why may not The obiecion.
therefore other words in the supper be also figuratively taken?

Masters, it follows not, because one word is evidently siguratiue, The
answer.
that therefore another word must be also figurative, except one reason be in
both words. Which in our case is clean contrary, and that for diverse causes.
for all men, that is to say, as well Catholics as Protestants and
Sacramentaries confess the word 1.
(chalice) to be figurative, and they are compelled so to do, because if we
take the name of (chalice) properly, we must confess, since Christ says this
chalice is the new Testament in my blood, that a material cup of wood, glass,
or silver is the new Testament, or y^ cause of our sins to be forgeuen, which
no reasonable man will so much as dream of. Seeing then we are constrained by
force The Cha lice.
of reason to say the (chalice) to stand for that, which is in the chalice, and
no like reason presses us to think the like of the verb (est, is) or of the
noun (corpus, body) or of ye noun (sanguis, blood) the example which moves us
to grant a figure in ye one word, keeps us from suspecting any figure in the
other words, which are nothing like.

Secondly, whereas S. Luke and S. Paul named the chalice, 2. The chalice expou^
ded in holy scripture.
S. Matthew and S. Mark speak not of it, giving us to understand, that the
meaning of Christ was only to make and show the blood of the new Testament,
which was in the chalice. As therefore the holy Ghost provided for a sufficient
declaration of tha^ word which was in deed figurative: so leaving the verb
(est, is) and the nounes (body and blood) still in they proper signification,
without mention of sign or figure, it has sufficiently witnessed that they
were to be taken as they did naturally sound to the common ^ares of men.

Thirdly although the word (calix) a cup or chalice were at the 3.
beginning appointed to signify chefely that vessel, which holds liquour
me^e to be drunk: yet by common use of speaking (which The chalice by use of
speakig signifies the drink in it.
is far the chief governor in the understanding of words) we being at the
table mean by the cup that, which is in the cup. in so much y^ if a man
sitting at the table, bid y^ cup be given to another, no servant is lightly so
rude, as to give a stranger the cup without drink in it. now when words are as
commonly used in their siguratiue sense as in their natural, then each way the
sense is proper enough, in so much as the use of speaking is equal to the first
propriety of the word.

Fourthly, seeing Christ sitting at the table, and in the sight of his 4.
Apostles, taking the cup of wine mingled with water, blessed, and This cha
lice where in liquor is known to be can not make the speech obscure.
gave thanks, saying not only the chalice or a chalice, but this chalice or
this cup is the new Testament in my blood, it could not be that any dout could
rise to his Apostles through naming that chalice which the Apostles them selves
knew to contein a certain liquour, but that notwithstanding maruelouse great
dout would have risen to them and to al Christians, if he should have used (est
for significat) and body and blood, for the sign of body and blood, for so
much as they could not conjecture any other meaning of these words, then they
did outwardly sound. For it is no common use of speaking, but only both seldom
used and not understood, but by great doctors and interpreters, who know and
discern tokens of things to be called sometime by the names of the things them
selves.

Fifthly, when with a figurative word an other is immediately 5.
joined, which does expound the figure, the whole speech is ra there to be
accounted proper, then figurative: for so much as the weaker part yeldeth
always to the stronger, even as in (...) when one noune adjective serves two
substantives of diverse genders, we make it agree with the masculin as with the
more worthy gender. When Christ said to S. Peter, I will give thee Matt. 16.
the keys, he spoke figuratively (concerning the name of keys) but if we
mark that he joined thereunto, the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and yet
again, what soever thou bindest or loosest in earth, and so forth: by these
words the former speech is made plain, as if it were not figurative at all:
right so when he says, The word io^ned with the name of (...), makes a^ pla^.
this chalice is the new testament in my blood, y^ na^ing of the blood is so
plain a declaration how the name of chalice is taken, that al is one as if it
had been said, this is my blood of y^ new testament, which is in the chalice.

See then for Gods sake, how far the figurative naming of y^ 6.
chalice is from any figurative naming of the body or blood. As to y^ chalice
such words were joined which did show the name to b^ figurative: so to the body
and blood such were joined, as forbid us to think the like of them, not only
because Christ said: This is my body and my blood (which surely were enough to
prove that I say, because the body and blood of Christ wa^ not figurative but
true and natural) but also because to the naming of Christ's body it is joined
in S. Luke: The which is given for you, Luc. 22.
And to the name of the cup, the which is shed for you.

Last of all the naming of the cup or chalice was provided of 7.
God for a maruelouse declaration and setting forth of the real blood of
Christ made within it. For whereas the new preachers bid us list our minds to
heaven to receive y^ blood of Christ by faith, spirit, and understanding (as
though it were not present at Christ's own table) the holy Ghost knowing that
afterward such false reachers should arise, provided that the words of Christ
should not only be reported (This is my blood of the new testament 26.
as S. Matthew and S. Mark write) but also (as S. Luke and S. Paul 14.
have penned the^) this chalice is the new testament in my blood, this cahlice,
that is to say the thing c^nteyned in this chalice, to (...) the (...) is ^amed.
the intent we should be sure, that the said blood was even within the compass
of this chalice, and not only apprehended by says and spirit. so that even the
word (chalice) although by exact account of grammar it stand figuratively, yet
by common use it signifies the liquour in it, and that liquour is expressly
named the blood of Christ, and that blood is declared to be present in the very
chalice.

That the words of Christ's supper be proper, The (...). Chapter.
though many other be figurative and improper.
VUhy these words of Christ (this is my body and this is my blood) can not be
like the other, where Christ is said to be Joan. 15. 1. Cor. 10
the door, the way, the true viue, and John Baptist to be Elias, or the rock
to be Christ, it shall be more particularly declared in the last chapter of the
book. Now it shall suffice to say, that they were never taken to mean as
they seem to stand, therefore the general consent of al Christians taking them
for figurative, is an evident cause why they must be confessed to be
figurative. Uniuersal consent is a way to know figurative speeches.
And that vninersail consent is of more importance, then the proper
signification of the words. But on the other side y^ words of Christ in his
last supper have not only no such universal judgment and consent against them,
but rather they always have been taken to be meant of the presence of his own
body and blood, accordingly as they do sound.

Again none of all those propositions does so much as seem to sound like y^
which Christ said in his supper: This is my body. For partly they do name two
several natures, as The Baptist and Elias, whereas these words (this is my body)
name but one: partly they speak not of any certain thing (as Christ's body)
or if they do so, yet they point not to it as to a thing present. A door and
the door, is not (this door) this does express a great deal (...) door. The
door. Chi^ore
more the^ a, or the. A door is meant generally of any door, the door of a
certain door spoken of before, but this door points presently to y^ door
whereof he speaks. Christ's words were directed to one thing only, which is
made and showed together, when y^ Godhead makes y^ which by his ma^hod he
points to, saying (this is my body) so that in deed in all scripture there is
no like speech to that, which Christ used in his last supper, much less any
like is figurative, and least of all that it self can be proved figurative,
while it is compared with other speeches.

Let all the Sacramentaries, show where that proposition is figurative, which
first instituteth and makes any thing and presently points to the same,
saying, this is this, or this is that, as it is said: this is my body, and this
is my blood. For whereas it is said in Ezechiel: this Jerusalem, it is nothing
like, because Ezec. c. 5
it was said rather by the occasion of expounding a parable, then at the doing
or making of any thing by him that said, this is Jerusalem. But Christ when he
made his supper and instituted his chief Sacrament, said of that which was in
his hands, this is my body. What ignorance then is it, to say these words be
improper, because other words (from which they differ) be improper?

It is showed by the circumstances of Christ's supper, that he made his real
flesh and blood present under the forms of bread and wine, and consequently
that his words are proper.
NExt unto the proper signification and common sense of The circu^ stance of y^
speech is to be considered. Aug. lib. quaest. 83 q. 69.
speaking, the circumstances of the talk are to be considered, of which kind
of handling matters belonging to divinity, S. Augustine gives us a learned
rule, writing thus: Solet circumstantia illuminare sententia^, cum ea quae
circa scripturam sunt praesentem quaestionem continge^tia, diligenti
discussione tractantur. The circumstance of y^ scripture is wont to give light
to the meaning thereof, when those things which are about the scripture (to
wit, which go before and follow after) concerning that which is presently in
question, are diligently examined. by this rule we have now to consider about
the supper of Christ, and about the meaning of deeds and words there in, who
spoke, or did, when, where, to whom, upon what occasion, how and in what
manner, what were the words, for what cause, and to what effect or purpose he
spoke or did, with such like respects.

For I will at this time so examine the last supper, to prove The int^t of the
author in this chapi ter.
thereby the real prensence of Christ's body and blood under the forms of
bread and wine, that I will show every part thereof, whether it consiste in
deed or in word, to help much rather, then to hinder any thing, the
catholic belefe of the said real presence, and consequently that no reason
at all should either sufficiently or meanly move any man, to think the words
of Christ to be figurative, or improper. and truly whether the words be
proper, the body and blood, which they signify as present, must needs be
present, or else whether the body and blood be proved present, y^ words which
signify so much, must needs be proper.

The first circumstance of Christ's last supper is to consider who made it.
THe maker of the supper is almighty, as being the natural Joan. 1. and 14.
God Joan. 6. Sent (...) flesh.
son of God. so that no man may discredit his words for lack of power to
bring them to pass.

The same Son of God was sent of his Father to take man's flesh, to the end he
might in that flesh bring us the everlasting meat of the divine substance.

Neither came he in flesh to bring us the meat of his Godhead To men that were
flesh.
in faith and spirit only. for so the Godhed was eaten ^y Abraham, Moses,
David and other (...) men ((...) not so plentifully before the incarnation of
Christ) but Christ ^me not only to make us believe the better in God, but also
to make our weak bodies and imprisoned sonles partakers of his Godhed by a
better and higher mean, then by our faith alone. ^or our faith is received
Romans 12. Col. 2.
in measure, but the (...) of Godhed dwellech corporally in Christ's flesh. and
so his flesh r^ally eaten of us, with due faith and charity, is a maruelouse
instrument to give us the everlasting meat, and to join us most (...) to the
spirit of God.

Mark well, that concerning the eating God by says and mind, we approve it
as a special good thing, but we say farther, that God came in flesh, to be
eaten in flesh of them, that consist of flesh. And therefore having said: my
Father gives you the true bread from heaven, and I am the bread of life (which
hitherto is meant to be eaten by faith) he also goes forward Promises flesh.
promising an eating to come herafter, that is to say, in his last supper, and
thereof says: the bread which I will give is my flesh, and he that eats me
tarieth in me.

The same Christ comes in his own person to perform y^ Gives flesh.
former promise, not saying only, believe ye in God and in me as I teach you,
but saying and doing, that is to wit, taking, blessing, giving, and saying:
take, eat, this is my body which is given for you.

(...) this only point were deeply pondered, it seems to me He is to be
believed
that the almighty speaker so sent, so promising, and so doing ought to be of
such authority, that nothing should stay us to believe that external thing
to be his body, whereof he said: this is my body.

Let us now add hereunto the wisdom, the providence, the truth, and the
goodues of y^ speaker, who would not of purpose blind his own spouse with
siguratiue words both of promise and of performance: and yet the one joined
with the other, and the person (who both speaks and does) well considered,
make to men of reason such persuasion of a proper speech, that no sufficient
cause is left, why to presume those words to be figurative. Of this first
circumstance Eusebius Emissenus writes: Eusebius. homil. 5. in pasch.
Ad cognoscendum and percipiendum sacrificium very corporis, ipsa te roboret
potentia consecrantis. Let the very power of him that consecrateth it
strengthen thee, to know and to perceive the sacrifice of the true body. Again:
recedat omne (...) ambiguum. qui auctor est muneris, ipse etiam testis est
veritatis. Let al doutfulnes of insidelity depart, he that is the author of
the gift, is him self also the witness of the truth.

The second circumstance may be, to consider the time when the supper was made.
THe time of speaking was the night before Christ departed Men speak most ware
ly toward their death. 1. Co. 11.
out of this world, at what time men are wont to speak most plainly. And S.
Paul himself noted that circumstance, saying: our lord in the night that he
was betrayed took bread etc. For when the hour of death draws nere, men use
manifestly to show their last will without al figures and tropes, as nighe as
the matter will suffer. And how much more would the wisdom of God use words
warily in this case? specially seeing S. Augustine witnesses, that he gave this
Sacrament after supper, Aug. ep. 118. ad Ia nuar.
when his passion was at hand, to the intent the highness of the mystery might
the better stick in the hearts and memory of the disciples. whereas otherwise
the Church is taught by the holy ghost, to receive this Sacrament fasting, for
the honor (says S. Augustine) of so great a Sacrament.

Let us now a little weigh with our selves, whether any good Christ (...) not
bethought less discrete in his words then other men would (...).
and discrete man, knowing his parting hour out of this world to be at hand,
will speak of purpose such words of ordeining matters to be done after his
death, the which words he foreseeth will cause his heirs either to sin
grievously, if they observe the^ plainly as they should, or else to have an
inward dissensio^, if some affirm them to be plain, others denying and (...)
them ^o be figurative. for if Christ's words be in dedt figurative, the
Catholics sin, both in teaching the contrary, and in adoring Christ's body
and blood under the forms of bread and (...), which thing they are constrained
to do by the force of the words. and then they are guilty of (...), who
possibly can find no cause, why they should not believe their master so speakig
and doing as he spoke and did. and thus lies the ^ander upon Christ himself.
but if the words be in deed plain, then Christ is purged, and the only sault is
in them, who will not believe. I think it far the better to believe the
wonderful discretion of Christ, ^ so (...) him, to mistrust the infidelite of
wicked men.

The third circumstance concerning the persons, who were at the last supper.
THe hearers were his twelve Apostles, who should instruct y^ whole world of
that, which they learned of Christ, The Apostles have (...) Christ's words to us
without any mention of a figure.
in this very business whereof we talk. and so they did, never leaving in any
piece of all their writings or preachinges, that Christ lest a figure of his
body without the very truth thereof contained in the Sacrament of the altar.

To the same Apostles it was given to know and understand the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. where^ore it is very Math. 13.
iueredible, that the greatest mystery of the whole Church was either hidden
from them by Christ, or by them hidden from us. Parable^ hide the truth in
part. Math. 13.
Yet it can not be denied but it is in some part hidden, if yt words which
report it, be figurative and parabolicall. for parables are spoken (as Christ
himself witnesses out of Esaias the Prophet) so, that men hearing do not
understand in heart the things which are spoken.

Thyrdly, the Apostles were those who tarried with Christ at Capharnaum, where
he promised his flesh and blood. therefore if Joan. 6.
Christ had then spoken figuratively to the people, yet now at the least he
should and would have declared the matter more plainly. and so he did in deed,
not verily adding any word, which might show his former talk to have beue
figurative (conceruing the substance of flesh to be eaten, and the substance of
wine to be drunken) but only teaching the manner of giving them his flesh and
blood, under the forms of bread and wine, to be figurative and mystical,
because they are not given to fill the belly, but to feed the soul, and not
so much for the fleshes sake, which we (...), as for y^ spirit and Godhead
which replenisheth that flesh of Christ.

The fourth circumstance concerning the ending of the old passover, and the
making of a new.
THe occasion moving Christ at his last supper, rather then at any other time
to say over bread (This is my body) and over wine (This is my blood) was the
setting and placing Leo in sermon. de pass. do.
of the new Paschal Lamb instead of y^ old. For least his Church should be
without a mystical sacrifice (called according to the law of Moses a
passover, that is to say, a sacrifice betokening Exo. 12.
our passing over the sea of sin, and our (...) to the Land of grace and life
which we look for) as soon as the old Lamb 1. Cor. 5. Joan. 1.
was eaten, and the time come that shadows and figures should be fultilled by
the death of Christ the true passover, and the true Lamb of God: Straight way
he began to make this new Sacrament instead of the old Paschall Lamb, that the
Church of Ireneus lib. 4. ca. 32. Leo de pass. do. sermon. 7.
Christ might have a new oblation, which should contain really the true Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the world. For as Leo the great says:
Vetus Testamentum consummabat, and nouum Pascha condebat, he ended the old
Testament, and made a new passover. As therefore the old Paschall Lamb was
really present and really eaten: so much more the true passover Jesus Christ,
in y^ banquet which him self instituted, is really present to be really eaten,
except we shall say, y^ his ^ew banquet is less true and really, then the old
was, or that the old being an undoubted figure of the new, did not by the
eating thereof declare, that the new Paschall Lamb Jesus Christ should be also
eaten, not only by says (which kind of eating Christ, both Moses and Phinees
had) but even externally under the form of bread, the which kind of eating
Christ's flesh, the old Fathers had not, Heb. 7. Joan. 1.
because the law brought nothing to perfection. but we have it, because the
truth is made by Jesus Christ, who delivered us his own flesh to be eaten
really, and in deed.

The fyfth circumstance concerning the preface which Christ made before his
supper.
AS the ending of the old ceremony moved Christ to institute a new, so the
joy which he took of that change was Lucae. 22.
so great, y^ he could not forbear, but said to his Apostles: Desy derio
desyderaui hoc Pascha manducare vobiscum, antequa^ patiar, I have desired with
desire to eat this passover with you, before I suffer. And as S. Chrysostom
witnesses, he did really Chryso. in Math. ho. 83.
receive the mysteries at his supper, to encourage his Disciples to receive
them without all scruple or fear.

Neither does it skill to my purpose, whether the words be first referred to
the old Paschall Lamb, or to the n^w. If they be referred to the new alone,
Christ desires only to eat his own body with his Apostles. But Christ could
not eat it by faith and Christ did not ea^ his own flesh by faith but in deed.
devotion, since he had it present in a better manner then so. therefore by
showing him self desirouse of eating it, and by his own eating it, we learn
that it is his own real substance, and not only an effectual sig^e thereof.
And it is not to be wondered, that he will gladly eat his own flesh (namely in
such an unspeakable mystery, as him self has prepared) because thereby (as S.
Chry Hom. 83.
sostom writes) he encouraged his Apostles, not to be afeard ther^of.

And why should not Christ do that thing for our great profit, seeing that
other men have often times eaten their own flesh even in a gross man^r either
for hunger, or for anger, or fancy, without doing so great good to them
selves or to any other, as Christ in this fact has done to all his Church? Or
is it more strange to eat his own flesh in so miraculouse a manner (as it is
present in) then voluntarily to give the same flesh to shamful death for our
sakes? Mark, that I say, Christ did eat his own flesh, not as butchers and
cooks dress it, but in so pure a sort as Angels feed on it, by having it
really present with them, and yet in so true a sort, as men receive meat into
their bodies. For Psalm. 77.
herein man eats Angels food, in that he eats the same spirit of God in
Christ's flesh, the which feeds the Angels really in heaven. Now for Christ
to eat his own body in truth of substance after that Angelical manner, it is
no absurdity at all. But for him to eat it by faith, it were a thing clean
impossible. And to eat it in abare figure without says, it were to lack the
chief point that is requisite to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament.

If the words be first referred to the old Paschall Lamb, the (...) yet is all
one, because it is certain he desired not to eat the The old Lamb was not
desired for his own sake.
old Lamb, for the Lambs sake, but only for that it was the last eating of the
Lamb, as the which was out of hand to be taken away, and to have the flesh of
the true Lamb of God given to the faithful instead thereof. In either of ^oth
ways, the desire and joy of Christ was not finally for eating the Paschall
Lamb (wherein according to the Prophets words he had no delight) Psalm. 49.
Malac. 1.
but for the eating of his own passover, which can be none other thing beside
his own flesh. Therefore Tertullian expounding this matter, notes well,
Indignum esse, vt quid alienum concupisceret Tertul. l. 4. aduer. Marcio.
Deus: How it were unseemly, that God should desire any thing, which were other
then his own. With whom S. Chrysostom agreing, writes: Non solummodo Pascha,
sed hoe, Chryso. in Ps. 37.
in quo cum praeterijsset figura, peracta erat veritas. Christ desired not
simply a passover, but this passoner, wherein (the figure being passed over)
the truth was celebrated. And as he says in Chryso. in Math. hom. 82. and 83.
an other place, Wherein he would deliu^r the mysteries and new things unto us.
Lo that which Christ desired was the truth it self, to wit, his own substance,
because it being united to y^ Godhead was the only meat wherein God takes
pleasure, and that substance is the meat of Christ's supper, and not only the
eating thereof by faith.

The sixth circumstance concerning the love which moved Christ to institute
this Sacrament.
WHereas Christ through all his life had loved his Joan. 13. In fine di lexit
eos
Church, he both continued that his love even to the last end of his life, and
spent his own life for the same love, and most evidently showed that his love
the night before his passion: first, by wasshing most humbly his Apostles
seete, and then by giving his own body and blood unto them, in so much, that
the said Sacrament is thereof called, Signum vnitatis, and vinculum charitatis:
The sign of unity, and the bond of charity, Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad Anti. Chrysostom.
1. Cor. homi. 24.
Whereof S. Chrystom writes thus: Christ has mingled him self together with
us, and has tempered his body into us, to thend we may be made one ^rtein
thing, as it were a body joined to the head: Arde^ter enim amantium hoc est.
For that is a point of them who love fervently. the like he says also upon S.
Paul.

Seeing now love was one of the causes which moved Christ to institute this
holy Sacrament, let us conjecture by that circumstance, whether it be more
like y^ he leaft a piece of wheaten bread for a sign of his love, or else left
the best and greatest jewel he had, great love cauleth y^ greatest gif^s.
to wit, his own substance under the form of bread, to witness y^ same
excessive love toward us. I think it more then probable, that since he was
able to give the substance of his own body to us, by turning bread into it, and
having taking bread, said after thanks given: this is my body, I think it more
then probable, that his great love did rather give his real body under that
blessed sign of bread, then that he would say he gave us his body, and yet in
deed gave us wheaten bread, which were less then his body. Howsoever
shamefast men are wont to speak modestly to them whom they love best, surely
they will not blush to do most bo^tifully for them: much less may we think
that Christ, loving us so well, spoke more then he did perform.

The vij. circumstance of washing the Apostles feet.
THe Paschal lamb being eaten, Christ sat down at the table Joan. 13.
with his disciples, He arose again, laid his garments down, girded himself
with a towel, poured water into the basin, and began to wash his Apostles
fete, and to wipe them, showing thereby, both his own humility, and also of
what a great mystery they should be made partakers. For the worthy coming
whereunto, not only their mind should be tried and purified, but also their
bodies, yea even the the uttermost parts of their affections should be purged
and cleansed.

For which cause ever sins the Apostles (...) (as it may appear Dionys. de
Eccl. Hierar. cap. 3.
by the practice of the Church, and by S. ^ionysius the Areopagite) the
Catholic Bishops and Priests have used (before they come to consecrate y^
dreadful mysteries) to wash the very tops of their hands. What to do I
pray you? w^ether because they should come to handle bread and wine? then might
Christ have washed his disciples hands, as he did their fete, before they had
eaten the Paschal lamb: for it was not eaten without bread, neither without a
cup of wine also, if we shall believe S. Hierom, S. Hieron. in Math. 26. Luc. 22.
Bid, and Theophilact, who think such a cup of wine, as the Jews drank
of after the Paschall lamb, to be mentioned in S. Luke.

And why is not the bread and wine, which was joined with the flesh of the
Paschall lamb, it being set also to signify the same Christ, for which the
bread and wine of the new testament is appointed (as the Protestants teach) why
is not, I say, that bread and wine as good as this which we have? one God made
both, and both be assigned to sh^ow one Christ: both oblations, both
Sacraments, both be (...) of the same men in the same night and place. And yet
so much (...) is between the bread and wine of the old (...) and that of the
new, that it was sufficient for the one to be eaten with (...) not unclean,
but the other (...) have (...) the bodies purified for the more worthy receauig
Why the bread of Christ is (...) y^ of (...).
thereof. (...) not because it is bread and wine still, but because it is made
the (...) of life, the food of Angels, the body and blood of (...). Hence
comes all this preparation, hence comes the difference between the old and new
(...). For although they meet inone signification, yet in substance the one
was earthly, the other in substance is heavenly: the one published by Moses,
the other of Christ's own ins^utio^: and for that cause y^ one a bare shadow of
the truth, the other a truth of y^ shadow, and also covering the ^me truth in a
mystery.

The (...). Circumstance, concerning the place of the last supper.
THe place where Christ kept his supper, was chos^n and appointed, not without
a miracle, by giving his disciples a Luc, 22.
strange sign how to go to an unknown house, by following him that should
carry a pot of water into it.

That house Nicephorus and Damascene write to have been about the mount Siou,
which stands in holy scripture (eue^ by Niceph. li. 1. (...). Eccles. cap
28. Damasc. de orth. fi. lib. 4. cap 14. Gal. 4. Hebr. 11.
the inrerpretation of S. Paul) to signify the City and Church o^ God: all
which things do portend that some great and unaccustomed matter shall be done in
such a place so assigned. In the house a faier parler was decked, and adorned,
and therem a table at the which Christ sitting down made thereupon his maundy.

Of which table (for the meats sake which should be given at it) the holy
Ghost had before prophesied, by king David, saying: thou have prepared a table
in my sight. And by Solomon, wisdom has set forth his table. Likewise y^
table whereupon the twelve Psalm. 22. Prou. 9. Leuit. 24
loaves of ye show bread stood in the tabernacle of the law before the face of
God, shadowed this table of Christ's supper, whereat the twelve Apostles sat
before the face of Christ our Lord, he being the bread of life, and giving to
every of them a loaf under the form whereof his own substance was contained.

Christ then making his supper upon this table, and thence distributing his
meat unto the Apostles, does us to understand, that whatsoever he feeds us
withal either in spirit or in body at his supper, is reall^ present upon the
very board, whereupon Christos supper is upon the table it self.
he did eat. For Christ at this time is not talking in parables, not disputing
in the synagoge, not preaching in the temple* he is in a house, in a parler, at
a board, showing thereby where his banquet is exhibibed, where it is served, and
whence it is received.

We are not now occupied in spiritual praicr alone, but also in corporal
eating and drinking. If the everlasting meat of Christ's supper be only
spiritual, and only received in mind by faith, let the house be thought only to
be spiritual, the parler to be spiritual, and the board to be spiritual. Let
us deny that any of If y^ table be r^ll, much more the meat.
these things were natural and real. but if all the rest be confessed real,
seeing al they are provided for the meats sake which shall be eaten from the
table, what an impudent folly is it to say, the body and blood of Christ
(which only is the everlasting meat of this banquet) are taken neither in
hand, nor in mouth, nor be not at all upon the material board, whence Christ
visibly delivered them to his Apostles own hands, bidding them take and eat.

The nyntenth circumstance of the taking bread and wine.
OUr savior sitting down at the table took bread, and the cup of wine. and he
took it, who never touched the thig Luc. 6.
which he did not sanctify, because virtue went forth of him, even by touching
his garments.

Moreover it is to be thought he took such bread, as the pres^ The bread ^
Christ took was already ha lowed.
feast of Caster (which was begu^ne) might suffer: Unleauened I mean, and such
as presently was upon the table at the eating of y^ Paschal Lamb. The which
surely was already figurative bread, it was already a token of Christ, and
already was partake^ of the disciples. Shall we think then that Christ goes
about to do that which was already done? No, no, this (...) of his goes to an
other end, as we shall perceive anon.

Thirdly, by taking bread and wine into his hands Christ The (...) of Christ's
supper is made in bread and wine.
means us to look for the mystery (that shall be made) within the forms of
those cratures, which he touches. He now points not to his Apostles, as
though he would only consecrate somewhat in their breasts (as Calvin dreameth).
he takes bread and wine. there we must seek the first work of his supper.

Last of al, by this kind of taking bread and wine he puts us in mind of
that great Priest Melchisedech, who brought forth bread and wine, and blessed
Abraham. As therefore Melchisedech took Genesis 14.
bread and wine to offer them first unto God, next to communicate Abraham with
them: so does our true king of rightuousues intend to offer to God and his
Father the present bread and wine which he takes.

And because the thing sacrificed is to be changed (one way or other) even in
substance from the former nature which it had, as Leuit. 1. 2. etc. Al things
that be sacrificed be changed.
being sometimes killed, sometimes burnt, and sometimes eaten, when Christ as
the high Priest of God, for so it appears in the end, took bread and wine, he
took them to offer, and consequently to thange them in the most perfect manner
that ever could be devised, as who is the most perfect Priest. And into what
substance shall Matthew. 5.
he change them, but into the sede of Abraham, his own body, who came to fulfill
the law, and gather all things into him self, and so to bring them again unto
his Father? For which cause S, Cypria^ Cypr. ad Caecil. li. 2. epi. 3.
shows, that as Melchisedech first brought forth bread and wine, that so the
blessing might duly be celebrated about Abraham: so Christ fulfilling the
truth of the prefigured image offered bread and wine, suum scilicet corpus and
sanguinem, that is to say, offered his own body and blood, This great mystery
could not be thoroughly handled in a whole book, much less I am able to
conclude it within the cumpasse of a circumstance. it is now s^icient to touch
the chief points of so long a matter.

The tenth circumstance of blessing.
OUr chief Bishop did not only take bread and wine, but he blessed also.
Benedictio, blessing, is as it were a blessed Blessing. Psalm. 148
saying: and because God says, and it is done, in him blessing is doing. and
in Christ who is both God man, blessing is most properly of all, a doing by the
mean of saying or signifiyng. for not always when he blesses, he needs to
speak: but Joan. 6.
if he bless as man, he makes at the least some outward token Marc. 6. Luc.
24.
of the good deed, which he is about, either by lifting up his eyes or hands to
heaven, or by making the sign of the cross, or by speaking certain words.
Howsoever it be, it ca^ not be well imagined The blessing of god is a doing
that blessing should be in God or in Christ without a doing, otherwise it
should not differ from a simple saying, yea it should be the saying of m^n,
rather then of God. But now it is called the blessing, as if we should say, a
beneficial saying, which in God always imports a doing.

In this place it shows also, what intent and purpose Christ The word
blessing shows y^ intent of Christ.
had. For whereas Christ might have spoken in the way of exhorting, or of
prophesying, or of threatening, or of comforting, when it is written, he blessed
and said: we may learn, that he speak in ye way of doing, of working, of
bestowing some real benefit, and of giving virtue and strength unto his word
for that effect. which being so, we can not now with any pretense of honesty
imagine. that those words are in the substantial parts of them (...), at the
prononcing whereof the Gospel has rehearsed the word and virtue of blessing.
For as a figurative saying is an imperfect speech, and therefore less then a
common kind of speaking: so is blessing far more the^ any speaking, and
therefore a true doing. What repugnance then were it to say, that Christ
blessed at such time, as he not only did no great miracle, but also did less
then the ordinary nature of speaking requires? For ordinarily men use proper
words.

Well, that blessing in this place is to be referred to the words: Amb. de ijs
qui init. mys. cap. 9.
This is my body and this is my blood, it is the doctrine of the most ancient
fathers. For S. Ambrose calls this mystery benedictionem verborum coelestium,
the blessing of the heavenly words. and S. Cyrillus commonly names the blessed
Eucharist, benedictionem Cyril. li. 4. in Ioa^. c. 16. 17. 19. and lib. 11. ca.
22. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
Christi, or, mysticam benedictionem, the blessing of Christ, or the mystical
blessing. The like does S. Chrysostom writing upon S. Paul. Now for so much
as blessing stands here be^wene taking of bread, and saying, this is my body,
the which bread and body ca^ not be truly verified of the same thing at once:
the blessing so declares the working and making present of Christ's body, that
it does intimate withal, the bread to be changed into his body. For as all
blessing does give some benefit, so when a creature takes a benefit, it is
ch^ged into a better state. For which cause both, S. Gregory of Nyssa, and
Nysse. in orat. cathechet. Amb. de ijs qui init. ca. 9.
S. Ambrose at^ribute the changing of the nature of bread and wine into
Christ's body and blood, to the virtue of his blessing. It would pa^e y^
describing of a circumsta^ce and become a whole book, if I should prosecute
any of these matters so largely as the thing would bear, which at this time I
may not do.

The eleventh circumstance, of gening thanks.
GOd blesses his creatures in bestowiing some benesite Blessing.
upon them, and the creatures bless God by praising and rendering (...) unto
(...). Blessing therefor in a diverse s^se is common to God and man, but
thanksgeuing is the proper Thanks (...).
duty which man owes to God. As Christ by blessing at his supper showed his
intent of changing bread and wine to a better nature, then they before had: so
by giving thanks, he declarerh his change to appertein to the honor of God,
and that after such special sort in this Sacrament, that the whole mystery
taking Justin. in Apol. 2. Euchar.
thereof his name, is called, as Justinius the martyr does witness,
Eucharistia, that is to say, the giving of thanks.

Whereas thanks be given by words alone, or deeds alone, or in both together:
it can not be denied, but those are best thanks, The best kind of thanks.
wherein most excellent deeds are joined with most true and real words. And
who can dout but it is a more worthy deed, to make present the body of Christ
under the form of bread, y^ God may thence be glorified and thanked, then to
make bread, still taryi^g bread, to be an effectual sign of Chistes body?

Who can dout but ye words of thanking are more true, which True words be most
tha^k full.
say, this is my body, and mean the same, then those which name y^ body of
Christ, and mean the figure of his body? The Chatholiks believe that Christ
gave thanks to his Father with most true words, and with most perfect deeds: in
so much that we deny any perfiter work to be any where done upon any creature
in the whole world, then that was, wherein Christ wrought his body present
under the form of bread, to thend it should be a sacrifice of ^ren. lib. 4. ca.
34,
thanksgeuing to God. And consequently we confess with S. Ireneus, eum panem,
in quo gratiae actae sunt, corpus esse domini. that bread, wherein thanks were
given, to be the body of our Lord. And therefore he adds: iam non communis
panis est, sed Eucharistia. it is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, or
sacrifice of thanksgeuing.

The Sacramentaries on y^ other side make thanks to be given of Christ in bare
wheaten bread and wine. They make also the words of thanksgeuing figurative,
and thereby untrue in their proper sense. The li^e was done by their
ancestors before, as S. Ignatius does witness, whose words Theodorus
allegeth Theod. Dial. 3.
thus: Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur
Eucharistiam esse carnem saluatoris nostri. They admit no sacrifices of
thanksgeuing nor oblations, because they confess not the Eucharist to be the
flesh of our Savior. But hereof I shall speak again hereafter.

The xii. Circumstance, of breaking.
BY the fact of breaking the Protestants think them selves to have one
circumstance making for their opinion. for what can be broken (say they) at
Christ's supper, beside common bread? But if we take the bread to have been
broken before the consecration thereof, they have no more advantage by the fact
of breaking common bread, then they had by the fact of taking common bread. For
we confess it to be still common bread, until Christ has said of it, this is
my body. After which words if we think the breaking to have been used (which
is far the more probable opinion) we must needs confess the Evangelists not
to have rehearsed The order of doing and speaking.
all things in such order as they were done in, and we must construe the words
in this wise: Christ took bread, blessed or gave thanks, and said, this is my
body, and then brake, and gave 1. Cor. 10
to his disciples. the which interpretation is confirmed both by S. Paul, as
I have showed in an other place, and by the daily practice of the universal
church. neither have the Sacramentaries any just occasion to triumph hereof,
that we grant a figure in changing the order of the words. for the figure is
not in Christ's words (of which only we contend) but in the words of the
Evangelists, who knowing that, before the time of their writing, the order of
Christ's supper was taught and practiced in a great number of Christian
churches, did rather attend to write the (...) of the matter (as in most other
things they have done) then curiously to note the cerimonie and order of the
doing and speaking.

And therefore he that will, may observe, that they ^oyne together Christ's
supper divided into (...) and word^.
all the deeds of Christ's supper, belonging to each kind, and afterward place
the words apperteyning to the same, not because none of the words came not
between some of the deeds, but to make short, and by division, made into deeds
and words, to set like to his like. That is to wit, to join only deeds with
deeds, and only words with words: the deeds were, taking bread, blessing,
thanksgening, breaking, delivering, which stand together. the words are, take,
eat, this is my body, do and make this thing for the remembrance of me. and
those be placed altogether. Let it then go for a truth (howsoever our
adversaries are now pleased withal) that Christ did break and gene after the
words of consecration. yet shall it even so make more for the real presence of
his body under the form of bread, the^ against it, because yt very breaking
does show the substance of flesh (whereof Christ said this is my body) to be so
really and miraculoush present, that it was contained whole under every piece
and fragment of that which still appeared bread. otherwise every Apostle could
not have ^aued one and the same whole substance (without more and less) which
an other did ^aue. but the contrary was figured in manna, of the which some
gathered more and some less, but Manna. Exodus 16
neither he that gathered more had more, nor he that gathered less found
less, when it came to the trial of measure. the which thing S. (...) shows
to be verified of yt Sacrament of Christ's Hieron. aduersus Iouinia. lib. 2.
supper. and yet it were not so neither externallie nor spiritually, if it were
the substance of wheaten bread which the Apostles (...) after y^ breaking. for
then one should have the greater piece of bread, an other the less, neither
could any balance or measure da^y make them througly equal.

Again if (it being bread which was broken and taken) Christ be only eaten by
faith and spirit, surely seeing the faith and devotion which every man has, is
in a (...) measure from that which an other has (according as Christ or the
holy Ghost divides Ephesians. 4. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12
his (...) to one after one sort, to an other otherwise, as he lists to every
man) neither by that meaues one should have as much as the other. And that
especially, because some receive life everlasting by eating that, which was
broken to them, and other eat their own damnation. And how is it (I pray you)
all 1. Cor. 11
one measure to them? Or is it one, to be saved and to be damned:

S. (...) having spoken of the equal measure of Manna, says: Et nos Christi
corpus ^qualiter accipimus vna est in mysterijs Hieron. aduersus Iouinia. lib.
2.
sanctificatio, Domini and serui, and (...). Quanquam pro accipientium meritis
diuersum fiat, quod vnum est. And we also take the body of Christ equally.
there is one sanctification in the mysteries as well of the servant as of the
master. Albeit according to yt merits of the (...), that is made diverse, which
is one. The meaning of which words must of necessity be, that one substance of
Christ's body is received in the mysteries, to wit, under the foorm of bread,
as well by the poor as by the rich: although the devotion be diverse,
wherewith it is received. To one it is more meritoriouse in effect, and to an
other less meritoriouse: but in substance it is one sanctification to all men.
So that the breaking and the pieces, which are made, certify us of such a
mystical presence, that (as Eusebius (...) witnesses) Corpus hoc sacerdote
dispensante tantum est in exiguo, Homil. (...) in Pasch.
quantum esse constat in toto. And again: De hoc vero pane cum assumitur,
nihilo minus habent singuli quam vniuersi: totum vnus, totum duo, totum plures
sine diminutione percipiunt. This body (when the Priest (...)) is as great in
the small piece, as it is great in the whole (loaf). of this bread when it is
taken, every man has no less, then altogether have. (...) has all, twain
all, (...) have all without diminishing.

These words I say can be (...) neither of material bread outwardly broken,
and delivered, the pieces whereof are unequal: nor of inward grace and faith,
the measure whereof is diverse* but only of the substance of Christ's body,
which is con^ wholly under every fragment of that which is broken, having with
it none other substance, which may cause any man to have more or less then his
fellow. Of this kind of breaking S. Ignatius ad Phila delphien (...).
Ignatius says: Vnus panis omnibus confractus est. One bread is broken to
all, one bread of life he means. As for material loanes they were diverse
(even in the same Church) and not always one. But the bread of Christ's supper,
to wit, the subs^ of his own body is one to all. But the eating by faith is not
one In Theo (...). Eccles.
to all. It is the body which is one. Therefore (...) the Archebisshop of
Constantinople writes: Post eleuationem statim partitio diuini corporis fit.
Verum enim vero tametsi in parts diuiditur, indiuiduus and insectus in
singulis partibus sectorum totus agnoscitur and inuenitur. Aster the elevation
(which among the Breaks was done immediately before the communion) by and by a
partition of the divine body is made. But truly although he be divided into
parts, yet he is acknowledged and found undivided, (...), and whole in every
part of the things, which are cut. what is this to say, but that the form of
bread is only broken, and the substance of Christ's body (...) whole under
every piece of the said (...)?

But what speak I of the Fathers? S. Paul says: The 1. Cor 10
bread which we break is it not the communicating of our Lords body? Because
we being many, are one bread, one body. For so much as we all partake of the
one bread. If the bread be broken, how partake we all of one bread? That which
is broken, is not according to the course of nature one in number. And surely
the Corinthians had more then one loaf, which was broken among them. And yet S.
Paul having showed that we break a kind of bread, says: Be we never so many
we partake all of the one The one bread to Christ, who (...) breaking (...)
whole.
bread. How is that? but because the bread which we break, is no material
bread, but how many loaves so ever there were before, after it is once said
(...) them, This is my body, every one of them is turned into that one bread,
which is Jesus Christ. And that bread is distributed under the forms of common
bread, and so is the scripture instified, which says: The bread which we
break is the communicating of Christ's body. And therefore that body being one
bread it self, makes all us one bread, which partake of that one bread.

The xiij. circumstance, of giving.
It is not to be thought that Christ delivered first the fragme^ts of bread
unto his Apostles, and then said the words of consecration. for then he had not
delivered them a Sacrament, but only had given them the matter and element
whereof the Sacrament should be made. but seeing S. Paul says, y^ bread which
1. Cor. 10
we break is the communicating of Christ's body, we must rather judge, that he
had consecrated his body, before he brake: as who intended by breaking to
distribute the Sacrament, which was already made. And consequently as the
Sacrament was made being yet in Christ's own hands, or lying upon the table
before him: so it was delivered with his own hands and by Christ gave with his
hands
none other way (that ever I can read of) unto his Apostles. but Christ had
willed them before, not to work the perishing, but the everlasting meat, which
the son of man should give them, and Joan. 6.
which he showed afterward to be his flesh, and now fulfilling his promise, he
gives the same everlasting meat with his own hands: which could not be so,
except the said everlasting meat were under the form of bread or in the
chalice, which only the Apostles do see in Christ's hands, therefore it is
inuincibly proved by the word of God, that Christ's body, which is the
everlasting meat, was and is given to them, that communicate under the forms
of bread and wine.

What soever is said of spiritual meat coming down from The meat of Christ's
supper came from his hands.
heaven (as to be a part of Christ's supper) it is utterly void and without all
ground of Christ's institution, wherein, yt Apostles are bound to rest upon
that only which Christ does corporally give, and when he is readen to give
(the which was done with his hands) for us at the same time to look beyond
him, as if an other way more might be had then at his own hands, it is a
horrible blasphemy and a reproving of his gift, as insufficient. He said, I
will give you the everlasting meat: the Gospel says, he gave at his supper
saying, this is my body: the Catholics believe, that he the^ gave the same
everlasting meat, which he had promised, to wit, his own flesh and blood: the
Sacramentaries say, he gave it not with his own hands. I say there is none
other way of giving mentioned in the supper, and yet there only was the flesh
of Christ to be given, as the Sacrament it self declares, being called the
body and blood of Christ.

I allege S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, S. Paul, where 26. 14. 22 1. Cor. 11
it is written, that Christ brake and gave. I think our (...) will not deuie,
that gift of his to have been made with Christ's corporal hands* therein I
believe his promise to have been fulfilled, Christ's gift in S. (...) is meant
of an external gift.
therein the spiritual and everlasting meat to have been delivered. S. John
witnesses, that Christ said: dabo, I will give. the which is not meant only of
a giving by faith (for so Christ had already given his flesh to diverse men)
but it was meant of giving by hands, after which sort he had not yet given, now
the other four (...) before, witness that our lord in his supper dedit: gave.
I say, this later word fulfilled the former promise.

I ask our Sacramentaries, what other Gospel they can bring forth, wherein
Christ fulfilled at any time his promise of The Sacramentaries can not (...)
when Christ full filled his promise.
giving the bread which was his flesh, and the meat which tarieth to life
everlasting? pardon me, good reader, if in so weighty a matter zeal force to
(...) out upon these false preachers of Gods word. You cruel murderers of
Christian souls, where is that everlasting meat given (by your false glosing)
which Christ promised, and called it his flesh? is it not given at his own
supper? where then? is it given at Christ's table? by which word show you that
gift, if not by the word, dedit, he gave? if that word show it, that word
signifies a gift of that which was broken mystically, and delivered with
Christ's hands, appearing still bread: therefore under the form of that bread
Christ's flesh was given, which is the meat that tari^th to life everlasting.
I speak so earnestly, to the end I might provoke you to come to the trial of
these effectual points in Gods word.

The xiiii. Circumstance of saying.
WOrds be sometime applied to the decking and garnishing 1. The profit of words.
of a matter, the which without the^ might do right well, albeit it does the
better through their help. But when the thing stands so, that either nothing
at al can be understood without words, or the chief part of the business
will be hindered for lack of the^: in that case they are by all means 2. The
necessity of words.
as most necessary, so most diligently to be observed, as for example: we
could know nothing that belongs to (...) matters, if God reveled it not unto
us by his only son, by Angels, Apostles, prophets, or other his servants. For
this reason those words are most carefully to be weighed, which come from 3.
The words of God.
God, and belong to causes of religion.

And yet in them as every thing is most obscure: so are words more necessary
for the opening of it. All mysteries by their very name pretend a secret and an
obscure knowledge. Among all the 4. Mysteries.
mysteries which were lest unto the Church by Christ, none has obtained that
name so peculiarly, as the Sacrament of Christ's supper. whereupon it follows,
that words are most necessary of all for the declaration of that Sacrament.
therefore noman 5. The mystery of Christ's supper.
ought to wonder, that with so many deeds of sitting down at y^ table, of
eating the paschal Lamb, of washing the Apostles fete, of raking bread and
wine, of blessing, thanksgeuing, breaking and giving, words at the length be
joined, which may show plainly the meaning, whereunto all those deeds tend. Let
us not therefore follow the Sacramentaries in this behalf, who look only to
this, that Christ took bread, and will not consider his promise 6. The
Sacramentaries trust not Christ's words.
(going before his present performance in giving that, which he promised) his
blessing, and his words, Wherein he plainly says: This is my body. But because
bread was taken and still bread is tasted and seen (do^ and say Christ what him
list) they will trust their eyes, and not his word. But S. Matthew, S. Mark, S.
Paul (...), that Christ did these things, and said. 26. 14. 1. Co. 11. 22.
S. Luke writes he did them, saying. All mean that saying is a principal
part of the supper. And that not without a cause.

For whereas deeds may have many and diverse interpretations 7. Deeds be
doubtful.
(as it appears by the figures of the law) except words be joined withal to
make them certain and plain, we shall not know how to understand the deeds,
and therefore we can not tell how to believe them. For this cause S. Chrysostom
said, Chryso. in Math. Hom. 83.
that whereas Christ's words ought in all things to be more credited then our
senses, yet he adds: Quod praecipue in mysterijs faciamus, the which thing
let us do specially in the mysteries.

Ponder then, I pray you, whether Christ did expound one parable 8. The (...)
of the supper were para bles.
by an other. For the deeds of his last supper (...) to me undoubted parables.
Who could tell what the taking of bread meant after supper, or to what end the
blessing and giving of thanks would go, except Christ's own words had
interpreted his mystical doings? For whereas all Christ's doings are our
instruction, it can not be denied, but when he took bread, blessed, gave
thanks, brake and gave, those deeds were a certain aduertissement or dark
lesson to his Disciples. Of the which some understood more, some less,
according as they had grace and wit. Now the words of Christ come to these
deeds, as it were a plain 9. The words of the supper expound y^ parable of the
deeds.
exposition added to an obscure parable. And yet shall we think, that the words
also are para^? Shall we say, the thing that is spoken to give more light,
brings more darkness? Or did the comment of Christ need again an other
comment?

He did certain things, and to show what he did, He said: this 10 Mere (...)
words ex pound nothing.
is my body. If these words be (...), it had been better he had said nothing,
but only, do^ this for the remembrance of me. For by that means we might have
done as he did, and so have referred obedie^tly the meaning of the deed to his
wisdom. But he in words expounded the secret meaning of the deeds, and said:
This is my body. What reason can now excuse us, why we should not rest in the
authority of the speaker, since he spoke as an expositour or interpreter of his
own doings? This reason alone ought to persuade any man. But now I will bring a
greater.

Not only the interpretation of Christ's deeds depends upon 11. The words of
y^ supper give (...) to y^ (...)
his words, but also the whole substance of them. For he being the word of God
has ordained, that no Sacrament shall be made without words. Yea, that words
shall be the chief part of every Sacram^t. This appears in baptism where the
washing with Joan 3. Matt. 28.
water is the less part, and the pronouncing of the words is the chief part.
Hereof I have spoken before, and have declared out of S. Chrysostom, S.
Ambrose, and S. Augustine, that y^ Sacraments In y^ second book ca. (...).
have their very chese being through words. As therefore water, bread, wine
and oil, which are the inferior elements, and the baser part of the
Sacraments, be most commonly known and most easily gotten: so the words (which
are the higher part of the same Sacraments) must be such, as be most common and
easy. 12. It is no sing^ (...) che is not known.
For every Sacrament is a sign, and every sign is to give knowledge of a
thing which otherwise had been secret. Now if the token it self be secret,
what knowledge can rise thereof? Seeing therefore Chri^ making a Sacrament,
said, this is my body, we must think either no sign at all to have been made,
or else we must believe the words as they sound outwardly.

The fiftenth circumstance, of taking.
Seeing Christ willed all the twelve Apostles (among whom Judas also was (to
take that one thing which he gave: we must understand such a taking, as may
agree to (...) nolesse, then to the other Apostles. Again whatsoever taking be
understood, it must appertein to corporal apprehe^sion whereof only Christ
said: take. (...) thing therefore which was taken either was (...) bread being
a bare figure of Christ, or the body of Christ under the form of bread. For in
both these ways Judas might take that, which all the other took. As for any
effectual sign (whereof Calvin uses to brag) no man corporally took, since it
is clear that Judas took none such, and yet it was said to him no less then to
the other, take. N^w if the Apostles took only a bare (...) of Christ's body,
Christ gave no more with his hands but a (...) sign, (...) they ^oke that
which he gave. but Christ was not sent to give bare signs (which thing was the
(...) of the old law) therefore it being false that he gave a bare sign, it
must needs be true, that the Apostles took at his hands his own The (...).
body under the form of bread. Neither will it serve here, if a ^cramentarie
say y^ Christ gave spiritually more ^he^ bare signs, and likewise that y^ good
Apostles took more spiritually: for if The aunswer^.
we speak of spiritual gifts, they wanted ^ot in y^ (...) of (...) and of the
old law.

Abraham believed God, and it was (...) to instice. Elizeus received the d^bble
spirit of (...), and (...) beseching God to restore him y^ (...) of his (...),
and to strengththen Joan. 6.
him with his chief spirit, does (...) that both he had once the holy Ghost,
and looked again for greater comfort of him. Seig then the good men always
received ^pirituall (...), (...) between Christ and the old law does not stand
only in ^all gifts received in the soul, but in this, that Christ in his
ma^hod which he took for that purpose, left us such co^poral means and
instruments of grace, as might work also upon our souls. And therefore Christ
denied (...) to be the true bread, not because it was not a sign of true
bread, neither because who so devoutly received it, should not be delivered
from everlasting death, of God: but because it self had not in it any thing,
which being cor^ally taken ^ight save a man (otherwise good) from everlasting
death: whereas the true bread which the Apostles took into their hands (through
Christ's gift) was that very ^esh, which by the power of the Godhead whereunto
it is annexed, keeps our souls that they dye not by sin, and r^eth out
bodies to live for ever. S. Augustine says: Dominus sinit Iudam In Epi. 162.
accipere inter innocents disipulos, quod fideles nouerunt, preciu^ nostrum.
Our Lord suffers Judas to take among the innocent disciples our price, which
the faithful know. See what kind of taking S. Augustine speaks of. surely of
that which was common to Judas, and which was made with hands. See what Judas
took, precium nostrum, our price. Is bread and wine our price? We are then
derely bought in deed. But if the real substance of Christ's body and blood be
only our price, when Christ says take, he means, take y^ real substance of
my flesh into your hands, that thence it may come afterward under your har^s.

The sixtenth circumstance, of eating.
CHrist said: eat ye, once only, and he said it of that one thing only, which
he delivered to his Apostles corporally, and they so took it. but Christ meant
they should eat it as well in soul, as in body, as well by faith, as by mouth.
For he had said before, work ye the everlasting meat which the son of man
will give you, and he declared the work of God to be this, that they should
believe in Christ, who is the bread of life, and who said his flesh to be meat
in deed* therefore when Christ said, eat, this is my body, he meant eat
bodily that I give you, and eat it also spiritually, because it is a heavenly
kind of bread, and a meat which never perishes.

Neither does the verb, eat, by this mean stand improperly, (...) belongs
to the body ^ soul.
because ^ating belongs naturally both to the soul and to the body. but yet,
concerning the cause of eating, principally to the soul, as the which alone
gives power to the body to eat, and concerning the mean of eating,
principally to the body, as the which only has convenient instruments to
receive corporal meat. For neither a dead body can eat at al, neither a soul
which lacks a body can eat properly. Now when the soul and body may both
not only eat, but also be nourished by the eating, that is the truest eating
which can be devised.

Christ then in saying eat, means, eat ye as ye are men, who consist of
souls and of bodies, eat in both, and feed them both together. For this is
my body, which has in it the Godhead corporally dwelling. Eating this, you
eat a food both spiritual and corporal. This feeds the whole man, this is
it which Tertul. de resur. carnis.
Tertullia^ says, Caro etc. The flesh is fed with the body and blood of
Christ, that the soul may also be made fat of God. Note the perfect eating. the
flesh is fed, and y^ soul is made fat. The Catholics upon this ground believe,
the flesh which must be eaten spiritually, to be under the form of bread, which
is eaten really, and that Christ saying to a reasoable man: eat, this is my
body, says by the reason of that kind of meat which he names, eat in body
and soul my body,

The Sacrame^taries teach a dubble substance to be eaten in a dubble manner; of
which y^ one is present corporally: y^ other absent, they teach bread and wine
to be eaten and drunken corporally, as things present, but the flesh of Christ
only to be eaten spiritually, as a thing absent in his own substance. they
divide the work of our bodies from the work of our souls. But the word eat
ye, can not be so meant, since it only points to y^ which the disciples had
taken into their hands. none other literal meaning can be of this word, eat.
eating by faith, has no part in Christ's supper, neither is at al commanded,
if the thing eaten be not in the hands of the Apostles.

The (...). circumstance, of these words, this is my body.
I Will speak of these words, not all that may be said, but rather no more then
the nature of one circumstance (among so many as Christ used in his supper)
will conveniently bear. who taking bread after blessing and thanks giving,
said: this is my body. If y^ meaning be, this bread is y^ sign of my body, he
gave thanks for the institution of a bare sign: for so I must needs call it,
seeing ^ (...).
bread remaining still in his own nature, can never be any more then a bare
sign, so long as it is not the body it self, which it does signify. For every
figure, image and token which differs in substance from his original, is
always bare and naked in respect of that truth, which it (...), and has not
the same in it self. So was Christ a bare ma^to ye Ebionits, because they
denied y^ substance Epipha. haer. 30.
of God to be in him, howsoever they extolled him otherwise.

(...) Christ come the^ to leave naked and bare signs to his Church: and is he
so glad of that promotion, that he thanketh his father for it? was this the joy
he had of eating the new passover, wherein he would give us only bread and wine
mixed with water, in ^ede of bread, wine, herbs, and flesh, which were given
under the law of M^yses? is not his outward gift at the least desaced by this
doctrine?

Uerily seeing with thanks giving Christ joined, this is my body, presenting in
effectual words that, which his heart intended before to consecrate unto God:
we must no more say, that he instituted a bare figure of his body in these
words, then that he presented a bare sign in his heart when he gauc thanks.
For who can think that Christ, who had said by God and by his Prophet D^uid,
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but thou have Hebr. 10 Christ pre
sented no external sacrifice beside his own flesh Genesis 14. Exodus 16
framed me a body, meanig that none other sacrifice pleased God beside his
unspotted flesh: who can think that he now expressly naming that his body, yet
presents to his father bread and wine only, as figures and signs of his body
and blood, and that he gave thanks for them*

Melchisedech ended the mystery of his bread and wine in the blessing of
Abraham him self: and does Christ after bread and wine taken end his blessing
only in a figure of the sede of Abraham: that, whereof Moses said, this is the
bread which our Lord has given you to eat, was in deed a more excellent bread
then he could name, and ^oth Christ name more then is really present? Surely
the sign of Christ's supper is so bare, if that which he points unto, be not
in deed his body, y^ in words he gives greater (...) to God his Father, then
in his deeds. For his word (...) this (whereunto he points) to be in
substance his o^n body, but his deeds perform only a sign of his own body, as
the Sacramentaries teach.

May I not now say to the Sacramentaries the like to that, which Malachie the
Prophet said to those (...) among the Jews, who offered in the temple of God
^ind, lame, and feint, or sick oxen and sheep? Offer illud (...), si placueret
Malac. 1.
ei, aut si susceperit faciem tuam. Offer such halting presents to thy Lord or
capitain, and tell me whether it will please him, or whether thou shall be
welcome to him, or no.

If one should come to a great personage, and with solemn thanks make him a
present in words of a fat ox, or of a couragiouse horse, and when the noble
man were come forth to accept the present, he should give him a pe^ce of paper
wherein it were written, this is a fat ox, or a couragiouse horse, would the
noble man take it well?

Now come these new preachers, and whereas they confess y^ Christ gave thanks
to his Father, and said in words: This is my body, yet they fear not to
teach, that he offered more to him in words, then he performed in deeds.

Yea they doubt not to teach, that the words wherewith he makes his present,
are utterly improper and figurative, not withstanding that S. Ambrose speaking
of the Sacrament of (...) supper, says: In co^secratione diuina verba ipsa
domini Saluatoris operantur. In the divine consecration the self words of our
Lord and (...) do work* The words do work how the^ are they (...)? A
figurative word, is like a paited image, Working words ca^ not be figurative.
which may be somewhat, if the thing meant thereby be real and true, but
otherwise it is an idol and nothing at all. But as an image of never so lively
a truth, absent in substance from it, can not it self work or do any thing
(because it is dead) no more can words grammatically figurative work of them
selves, for that they are dead, as not having their meaning (which is their
life) present with them. Chrysostom. homi. de prodit Iudae.


S. Chrysostom likewise writes: hoc est, ait, corpus meu^: hoc verbo proposita
consecrantur. This (says he) is my body: with this word the things set forth
are consecrated. And yet can this word, which does so wonderful an act, can
it be in the mean t^me so weak, so feeble, so dead, that it has not in it
self so much as the natural propriety of common words? Commonly words do
mean as they sound, and those which do not so, be, concerning the use and
service of words (which is to utter a ma^s mind) of baser condition, then
other words are. But Christ's words be so lively, that they have power to work
and make that which they sound, in so much that he called them in S. John, life
Joan. 6.
and spirit. therefore it is unreasonably said, that they are figurative.

Hoc est corpus meum, are but four words, of which four they leave never a
one in his own signification, and some of them they pluck from his gender,
other they pluck from their case, which they were put in. hoc, this, is the
neuter gender with his noune How the Sacrame^ taries (...) Chri stes words.
substantive, corpus: body. they draw it to the masculine gender, that it may
agree with panis, bread. Est, is a verb substantive, signifiyng the substance
of that noune substantive, with whom it is joined. They draw it from yt
signification to signify an accident in bread, which in these words is not
named. They put corpus meum (which is by Christ's setting the nominative case)
into sometime the accusative, sometime the genitive case. for they ^ay this does
signify my body. and then is it in y^ accusative case: or this is the figure
of my body, and then it is the genitive case. what miserable taking is this of
so heavenly words? but hereof I think to say more upon those words, this is my
blood, least I now excede the measure of a circumstance.

Yet this one thing I can not but warn y^ ^eader of, although Chryso. in Joan.
Hom. 35.
it may seem to some man of no great weight. But I think with S. Chrysostom,
no syllable or prick in the word of God to be superfluously placed. S. Paul
reciting the words of Christ's supper places them thus: (...). hoc mei est
corpus, this of me is the body. For where as the other Evangelist had written
the pronoun (...) in the last place, as we likewise in latin put meu^ last, the
holy Ghost foreseing the heresy y^ now should rise, caused S. Paul to join
that pro^oun belonging to Christ's How S. (...) placed (...)* words.
person, unto y^ other pronoun (...), hoc, this. For although (...) be ruled of
the noun body, and in sense must needs follow after it, yet it pleased God to
place the same pronoun, with (...) this: showing thereby that (...) must
finally be referred unto the noun corpus, body, as well as the other pronoun
meum mine. as if it were in latin, hoc mei est corpus, this of me is the body.

That joining I say, of this, and of me together, does give such conjecture (as
in the order of words may be had) that as of me is the genitive case coming
after y^ noun body, so this likewise apperteyneth to the noun substantive body,
and only rests and ends his signification in that word. Whereas on the
other side if this were only referred unto bread, no reason could be brought,
why S. Paul should join the word (...), of me unto it. This bread of me is
the sign of body, judge what a hard speech it were.

Let noman wonder if I so narrowly scan every syllable. For you shall see
before all is done, that God has caused the word^ of his last supper by so
many circumstances of writing and speaking to be opened unto us, that when the
rest is all heard, it will seem probable enough, not so much as the setting of
(...) with (...), to have been superfluouse.

The. (...). circumstance, of these words: Which is given for you.
ALthough S. Matthew, and S. Mark thought it sufficient to report that Christ
said: This is my body, as the which words both were plain enough, and able to
make the mystery of Christ's supper: yet the holy Ghost stirred up S. Luke, to
add the other words which Christ had also used, to th^ntene the literal
meaning of Christ's words might be most c^tainly confirmed, and therefore he
writes that Christ said: This is my There is but one noun substanti^ in
Christ's (...).
body which is given for you. In all the which words there is none other noune
substantive named, besides the only substance of Christ's body. With it agrees
Hoc, This, with it, quod, the which. It comes after the verb est, is, and
goes before the verb, datur, is given.

If now we interpret the noun corpus body, by figura corporis the ^igure of the
body: Look what place corpus did occupy, the same figura corporis must needs
occupy. And therevppon it follows, that the pronoun hoc must be ruled by the
noun figura, By the Sacra^ doctr^e a ^gure was cru^ for us.
likewise the relative quod: and it must follow the verb est, and go before
the verb datur. And so the sense is, Haec est figura corporis mei quae pro
vobis datur. This is the figure of my body, the which (figure) is given for
you. Thus the Sacrame^taries have brought us not only ^o a figurative presence
of Christ's body, but also to a figurative death and sacrifice thereof. The
ob^ction.


I know they will say, that albeit by the noun corpus body, they vndcrstand
figura corporis, the figure of the body, (...) they would not the relative quod,
which, to be ruled by the noun figura, but by the genitive case corpus, body.
As if it were said, this is the figure of my body, the which my body is given
for you.

This shift will not serve, because after that sort the noun substantive The
answer.
corpus, body, is taken two ways, that is to say, first improperly, and then
again properly. Unproperly, when it stands for the figure of Christ's body:
properly, when it is said to be given for us. Now seeing that noun substantive
is but once named in all, how so ever it is taken at one time, it must be taken
likewise at the other time, for so much as it is not twice repeted, but once
only mentioned.

This (says Christ) is my body, which is given for you. I One word can not
have at once a pro per and improper meaning.
ask, how ye take the word (body) which is but once named in the whole
sentence? If ye take it to stand for the sign of Christ's body, mark well that
you take it improperly. And remember that you ever continue in taking it
improperly after the same sort. therefore if it be Christ's body improperly, it
is given for us improperly. If it stand for the sign and figure of Christ's
body, when it is joined with the verb est, is, how can it but stand for the
same sign and figure, when it is joined with the verb datur, it is given? The
rela tiue must repete hi^ whole (...).


Can the relative, quod, take half of that signification, which was in his noun
substantive, and lay aside the other half? You say, corpus does signify two
things, to wit, the figure of Christ's body. beit so. Then the one piece of the
signification is in the noun figure, the other in the noun body. To which word,
so consisting of two parts, when a relation is made, that relation can not
respect the o^e half of the word, and neglect the other half. But howsoever the
word is taken, so must the pronoun relative, quod, repete him again.

In, this is my body (say you) the body stands for the sign of Christ's
body: therefore (say I) in these words, which is given for you, it must needs
be understood, the which sign of my body By the Sacramentarie doctrine bread
is sacrificed for us.
is given for you. And seeing they say y^ this points to bread, it follows
that bread is given for us. This later sense is so blasphemous, that the very
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, and Anabaptists abhor from it, therefore
they ought likewise to abhor from the former sense, where they take the noun
body for a figure of Christ's body. For doubtless as they take y^ word in the
one place, they must needs take it in the other, since it is one simple
proposition, having but once in it the word, body.

This thing is yet more plainly seen in the Gr^ke text, where S. Luke writes
thus: (...). Which is to say word for word, as ^igh as our tongue may attein to
the phrase: This is the body of me given for you. Or rather, presently given
for you. And yet more expressly, this is my body, the same body, I say, which is
presently given for you. Two of the which Greek words can hardly be expressed
in the Latin tongue. The one is the participle (...). Which being of the (...).
present tense, has no like in Latin answering to it. But we are constrained
to put for it, these two words, quod datur, which is given. The other is the
article (...), which repeteth again y^ noun (...).
(...), body: Giving an undoubted witness, that the thing given for us is the
same body, which is pointed unto and affirmed to be present.

This is my body. This is the same body, I say, which is even There is but one
verb in the Greek text.
presently delivered to be sacrificed for you. But in Greek all this sense is
without any other verb, saving the verb substantive, est is. As if it were said
in Latin, Hoc est corpus meum datum pro vobis, this is my body given for you.
In which proposition corpus is the noun substantive to the participle datum.
And therefore one and the same body is both pointed unto under y^ form of
bread, and presently given, that is to say, offered to (...) sacrificed on the
Cross, and to be pierced and crucified the next day for us.

I require and humbly beseech him y^ thinks me to be deceived (...) the (...).
in this point, *as he loves God and his neighbor, to show me wherein I
misconstrue these words, or by what means the argument, which I now make for
the real presence of Christ's body, may be possibly avoided. For it seems to
me that noman of good conscience, who will not wilfully be damned, is able to
avoid, but that Christ affirms, this (which he points to) really to be the
same substance of his body, which was betrayed and offered upon the cross for
us. He that says, this is a figure of Christ's body, says a figure of his
body to have been given for us. I can devise no manner of escape beside wilful
malice.

It may be, some ignorant man will say, that the noun corpus The (...).
body stands not for the sign of Christ's body, but that the verb est is,
rather stands for the verb, significat, does signify. and so the sense to
be, this does signify my body. and so the noun body stands still properly.
who so makes any such objection, understands not that it is all one to say,
this does signify my The answer. To signify and to be a sign ^o all one.
body, and this is the sign of my body. therefore either of both being
confuted, both are confuted. for the cause why the verb est should be resolved
into the verb significat, must needs come from the word corpus body: since,
this, does therefore signify the body, because it is made the sign of
Christ's body. But if it be not the sign thereof, surely it does not signify
it, in so muh that Significat, (...),
this proposition, hoc significat corpus meum being resolved into this hoc est
significans corpus meum (as the rules of good reason and of the art of logik
require) the word, which apperteined to the sign shall be found a part
praedicati, rather then a part copulae, that is to say, it shall be found that
the reason of signifieng con sisteth in the noun body, rather then in the verb
est is. for which cause Oecolampadi^s admitted as well the one as the other,
making no difference whether est is stand for significat, to signify, or
corpus body, for signum corporis, the sign and figure of y^ body, so that the
real presence might be taken away.

But (as I have now proved out of the word of God) seeing y^ body is pointed
unto which died, and the true substance it self died for us, the true substance
is pointed unto under the form of bread, and so pointed unto, that none other
co^struction of those words can be made. for if corpus body does not stand
properly, when it is joined with the verb est is, it is not possible that it
stands properly, as it is the noun substa^tiue to the participle (...),
datum, given: or as it is antecedent to the relative quod, which. In deed if
Christ had said expres^ie, this is the figure of my body, it might well have
followed, the which body is truly given for you. for of the two antecedents the
relative might have been referred to the next. But now there is but one
antecedent in all, and it is taken improperly (as the Sacramentaries say)
therefore in that improper signification it must be antecedent to the relative
following. all the grammarians in Christendom can find none other construction
of these words. If the Sacramentaries can excuse the matter, let them bring it
to light.

The xix. Circumstance, of the verb facere, to do, or make, or to offer
sacrifice.
ALthough the verb facere does signify most generally all making and doing,
yet because the most excellent deed that can be made, is to offer a true
internal and external sacrifice unto God: therefore it is come to pass, that
facere in his most principal signification is used sometimes to signify the
offering of a sacrifice, neither does it skill, whether it stand alone, or be
3. Reg. 18 Leuit. 15
joined with an other word in the accusative, or in the ablative case. for it
is the circumstance of deeds and words, which principally make it so to
signify.

That facere in this place does betoken the offering of a sacrifice, it
appears by all the circumstances of the supper. first, in that Exodus 12
Christ has now in the fourtenth day of the first move at evening tide
begonthe blessed sacrifice of his passion: next, he has offered the old
^aschal Lamb the cheef sacrifice of the law: thirdly, he has taken bread and
wine the material part of the sacrifice of Melchisedech. fourthly, he
blesses, and gives thanks externally to God in a fact, wherein he
consecrateth his own body the only Genesis 14.
sacrifice of mankind. yea farther he so consecrateth it, y^ he douted not to
say, over y^ bread: this is my body which is given for you. straight upon which
words, he adds hoc facite, do ye, or, mak^ ye this thing.

Wh^t other sense now can this verb have, but do that I have done, who now
have exercised my priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech?

So did S. Cyprian take this verb facere, when he said of this Cypria. lib 2.
Epist. 3.
very matter: Jesus Christus Dominus et Deus noster, Ipse est sum mus sacerdos
Dei patris, and sacrificium Deo patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui
commemorationem praecepit. Jesus Christ our Lord and our God, him self is the
highhest priest of God y^ Father, and first has offered sacrifice unto God the
Father, and has commanded the same to be done for the remembrance of him. If
Christ offered sacri^ice, and commanded the same to be done, he The (...) were
com (...) to (...) sacrifice.
commanded sacrifice to be offered of his Apostles. and therefore it follows
in S. Cyprian concerning a priest of the new Testament: and sacrificium verum
and plenum tunc o^ert in ecclesia Deo patri, si sic incipiat offerre, secundum
quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse. and he then offers a true and full
sacrifice to God the Father in the Church, if he so begin to offer, according
as he may see Christ him self to have offered.

If now Christ has willed his Apostles to offer that which he has offered, it
is most certain yt Christ offered none other thing in the whole earth, beside
his own body, the which he took to Psalm. 39. Heb. 10.
offer to God instead of al other oblations, as David and S. Paul say.
therefore that body of his he both offered himself, and willed his Apostles to
offer it. but what soever he offered in his last supper he had it in his hands
or upon the table before him, and gave The body o^red was at Christ's ^ble.
it under the form of bread and wine to his Apostles: therefore the real
substance of Christ's body and blood was under the said forms, that it might
so be offered unto God, according as Melchisedech had before signified. This
argument were able to recea^e a great deal of matter, but it would be above the
cumpasse of a circumstance.

The xx. Circumstance of the pronoun hoc, this thing.
CHrist said not only facite, do ye or make ye, but, hoc facite do ye and
make ye this thing. The which words as they command bread to be taken,
blessing, breaking, giving, taking and eating to be used, and the words of
Christ to be duly pronounced: so beyond all these things they command one
special thing to be made, which is the body of Christ. for none other thing in
all the supper can particularly discharge and fulfill those words beside the
body of Christ.

As for bread and wine they be not commanded to be made, ^ith they were made
before the supper began. taking, blessing, breaking, and eating partly are not
this one thing, but many things: partly they be not such as may be in all
degrees repeted and done so, as the precept of doing or making this thing
requires. For Thisthi^g is more then such an other thing.
the taking and breaking of other bread, is y^ doing of a like thing to this,
which Christ has done, and not the doing or making this thing. But Christ
said not, sic facite, do so as I have done, but hoc facite, do or make this
thing.

If we shall keep the propriety of Christ's words, the meaning must needs be,
make this body of mine. For he said: this is my body, which is given for you,
make this thing. which this thing, but that only thing which was named? for
none other special thing or substance was named beside the body of Christ. Hoc,
is the neuter gender, and either it must be referred to the noune cor pus,
body, as to his substantive which went before (and the sense Haimo in 1 Cor. 11.
is, facite corpus meum, make my body) and so does Haimo construe it: or else it
must stand substantiuely, and so it means, this thing, that is to say, the
thing which is the body of Christ.

I do not without great cause stand so long about every little word. I know the
tergiuersation of them that missexpound the word of God, who alt^ough they will
so^er be confounded, then amended, yet the more particular my reasoning is, the
more it ought to move them earnestly to look to the word of God, and not to
content them selves with the bare shows thereof. For my exposition, beside
the very order and conference of Christ's Justin. i^ Apol. 2.
supper, has for it as ancient a witness, as Iust^s Martyr is, a man within
the first two hundred, not only within the 600. years: whose works Robert
Steue^s printed in greek at Parise, An. Dom. 1551. Thus he writes: The
Apostles in their com me^taries, which are called gospels, have delivered, that
Jesus gave them thus in commandment, who when he had taken bread and given
thanks, said: do and make this thing for the remembrance of me. (...), id est,
corpus meum. That is to say, my body.

Thus I read the words, and thus they are understood, make this thing. That
is to say, make my body. They that have translated Justinius, have turned (...),
Hoc est, which words may (...)
be Englished, as if the cause had been, This is. But they also may signify,
hoc est, that is to say. For so the compound (...), is taken in greek, in the
way of interpretation or of exposition, when the words that went before are
expounded by the words that follow. The same phrase is used in S. Matthew,
where after the Matt. 27.
Hebrew words were written, which Christ said upon the Cross Fli, Eli,
Lamalabachtami, it follows (...), etc. That is to say: my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Therefore albeit the Latins can not distinct between,
hoc est, which Hoc est.
signifies, this is, and hoc est, which signifies, that is to say, yet the
grecians write the first (...), (which thing Justinius also has obserned in the
words belonging to the blood putting in every letter) The last they write
leaving out y^ last letter of (...), by an Apostrophe, in pronountiation making
one word of both.

And this sense is proved true by the process of Justinius, who after that he
had said: we are taught, the meat which is consecrated by the prayer of the
word (which we took of Christ) to be his body and blood, He would prove it to
be still so, because the Apostles did witness, Iesum sic sibi mandasse, Christ
to have given the^ such a precept. Hoc facite, make this thing: what thing? my
body. Now if this thing, were not meant to be y^ body of Christ, Justinius had
proved no commandment thereof, and consequently no flesh of Christ present,
which yet he affirms most plainly. Therefore straight after he had rehearsed
the commandment: Hoc facite, make this thing, he shows what thing it is,
^aiyng: that is to say, my body. whereunto we must needs understand (to make up
the full sense) make my body, or make this thing, which is my body. Therefore
as well by the force of the letter of the Gospel, as by the authority of S.
Justinius, these words can be verified of no sign or figure, nor by any other
way, theu by that we make the selfbody of Christ, which always is, this thing,
because it always tarieth one and the same in number and person: whereas the
taking of bread and breaking or eating it, is alwais such anotherthing, but
never this thing.

the xxi. Circumstance, of the words, in meam commemorationem, for the
remembrance of me.
THe final cause of instituting this new passover was to 1. Cor. 11
make the remembrance of Christ's death, which so effectually and profitably
for us could be made in nothing else, as in the same flesh, that died for us:
and being made therein, it forces us by all means through the presence thereof
to remember him whose flesh it is. If now he that has a business to do will
those the beast means he can to bring it to pass, if Christ came into the
world to redeem us by his death, and if in believing and following that death our
life consist: seeing no mean possibly can be devised so effectual to make us
remember and partake his death, as if the thing which died be it self made
present with us, and it self delivered to us: a wise man may easibly judge,
whether Christ has not rather leaft his own body to us, for an undoubted
token of his death (seeing his words do sound so) theu that he has leaft a
piece of bread and a little wine, which neither be spoken of in the delivery of
the mystical tokens, nor be apt^ enough to work the matter, for which they
are said to be least.

Therefore S. Chrysostom showing the difference between A thing is the
remembrance of it self.
other figura^iue remembrances and this truth, says: Tibi quotidie, ipse ne
obliuiscaris proponitur. Christ is every day him self put before thee, least
thou should forget him. Note, that Christ him self in this Sacrament is a
remembrance of him self dying for us, even as Manna was kept in the taber^le
of God to be a remembrance of it self. Keep it, says God: Vt nouerint filii
Israel Exo. 16.
panem quo alui vos in solitudine. That the children of Israel may know the
bread wherewith I fed ye in y^ desert. So likewise the self body of Christ is
kept as it were, and preserved in the tabernacle of this blessed Sacrament,
that we may know (by that knowledge which is meet for faithful men) that our
Lord has died for us.

The xxij circumstance, of these words: Drink ye all of this.
AFter the cup was taken and thanks given, Christ gave to Matt. 26. Luc. 22.
his disciples and said, bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this. In S. Luke
it is said, take and divide among you. By these words Christ means literally,
that all the twelve should drink of that one cup, and S. Mark witnesses this
precept Marc. 14
to have been f^illed, saying, Et biberunt ex illo omnes, and all drank
thereof. This interpretation S. Dionysi^s ye Areopagite De eccl. Hierar. cap.
3. In Joan. li. 4. c. 14
confirms, saying, that one chalice was divided among them all. And as S.
Lyrillus witnesses, Circumtulit calicem, dicens, bibite ex hoc omnes. He
carried about the chalice, saying, drink ye all of this. By carrying about, he
means all the twelve to have received the drink out of that one cup in order.

Christ then would, that his twelve Apostles should al drink of the same cup.
The reason, why he would have it so, follows. For (says he) this is my blood,
as if he said, I have conserated this why althe Apostles drank of one cup.
cup only, and none other, therefore drink y^ all of this. For if two or three
of the twelve should have drunk up all that was in that cup, either Christ must
have consecrated the cup again, or the rest must have received a drink not
consecrated. But it is not the will of Christ, that one Priest should consecrate
in one Mass any more then once each kind of the Sacrament, because Christ died
but once, and then he onght to consecrate both kinds together, because Christ's
blood and soul must be signified a part from his flesh and his bdoy.

It is not therefore according to the mind of the Gospel, that (as now they
do in England) when one cup is drunken up, an other should be filled out of a
prophaue pot that staudeth by, as Thea^use (...) the English ministers.
though al were one, so that wine be drunken with a remembrance of Christ's
death and resurrection. it is not so. All must drink of one chalice, that is to
say, of y^ one blood of Christ which is consecrated at one time, though the
chalices which hold it were diverse, as sometimes they have been, when a great
multitude of people did receive at once.

This circumstance does show, that it is more then wine which is drunk. This
does show that these words, This is my blood, work somewhat in that one
chalice, whereof all must drink. And consequently that Christ speaks to bread
and wine at his supper, and not only preaches to the audience, as Calvin most
ignorantly and impudently affirms. This is the cup whereof S. Ignat. in
epist. ad. Phi.
Ignatius writes: Vnu^ poculum vniuersis distributum est, one cup is
distributed to the whole e^mpanie. and he means not so much one cup in
number, as that the drink is al one in every cup, to wit, the blood of Christ.

This cup was so thoroughly communicated to all the twelve, Matt. 10. Judas
drank.
that Judas one of the twelve drank thereof, and that to his own damnation,
because he made no difference between the blood of Christ and other drinks. And
now the Sacramentaries be in the same case, concerning that they teach the
substance in Christ's chalice, to bethe substance of common wine, and not the
blood of Christ.

As our Sacramentaries in England by giving the faithful people drink (they
care not whence, so it be wine) do by that fac^e show them selves to believe,
that the blood of Christ is not present in the cup of the holy table: so Christ
by willing his Apostles that all should drink of that one cup, because it was
his blood, gives us a great warning to beleuc that cup to have had really his
own blood in it. For contrary doctrines have contrary vsages.

The xxiii circumstance of these words: This is my blood.
I Must needs touch in this place somewhat spoken of before, but I will do it
for a farther purpose and to an other effect. whereas the Sacramentaries
teach, the wine to be made a ^igure of Christ's blood, wine is neither named
at the consecration time (as it is evident) nor pointed unto, because the
article hic this (which only points to all that is pointed unto) can not
agree with wine, but diffe^eth from it in gender, for so much as in Latin hic
this, is of the masculine gender, and vinum wine is of the neuter. Again in
Breeke the articicle (...), is of the neuter gender, and (...) wine, is of the
maculine: so that if the pronoune hic this be not a noune substantive it self,
but do point unto a certain substance, and yet that substance by the rules o^
The gra^maticall sense of Christ's words.
grammar can not be wine, and withal it both may be blood, and of Chist is
said to be his blood: there can be none other literal, proper, and historical
sense of these words, but that, This which is showed by pointing unto it, is
the substance of Christ's blood.

I chose rather to say this much upon these words, then upon y^ other, This is
my body. Because though in them also, y^ pronoune hoc this does only agree with
the noune body, and not with bread, yet I know that the Sacramentaries would
strive therein, and say impudently that hoc stands substantiuely, for this
thing, and so would resolve it into this thing which is bread. But in the
consecration of Christ's blood they can not pretend so much. for it is not
said, hoc est sanguis meus in the neute^ gender, but, hic est sanguis meus in
y^ masculine gender, where the pronoune hic may only agree with sanguis, blood.
By the which words we are certified also, that in hoc est corpus meum, the
pronoune hoc this, may only agree with the noune corpus body, and neither with
bread, nor with any other act, which at the supper ty^ is a doing.

It can not now be said that (est) does stand for significat, seeing there is no
nominative case at al to go before the verb significat. Est (...) not stand
for significat.
for hic this can not stand neutrally, but is of the same case, ge^der, and
number, that his substantive sanguis blood is of. It can not therefore be said,
Hic significat sanguinem meum, this does signify my blood, because in that
speech (this) does lack a noune substantive, to whom it may be referred, and
consequently the verb significat lacks a noune substantive to be the
nominative Heretics build with out a foun dation.
case unto it. By which means the Sacramentaries leave no congruitie of speech
at all. And so (as S. Hierom well notes, of their forefathers) they build a
roof without walls or foundation. For what sense can they make without congrue
words? or what congruitie of words, is, in hoc panis and hic vinum? what
proposition will they have without a nominative case? or what nominati^e case
without a noune substantive, or without an other thing, which may stand
substantiuely? Or how can hic this in the masculine gender stand substantiuely?

The words of S. Hi^rome are: Debemus scripturam sanctam Hieron. in Amos proh.
c. 4
primum secundum literam intelligere, facientes in ethica quaecunque praecepta
sunt. Secundo iuxta allegoriam, id est intelligentiam spiritualem. Tertio
secundum futurornm beatitudinem. Vos autem primam, inquit, and secundam
contemnentes diem, spiritualia vobis quaedam figmenta componitis, sine
fundamento and parietibus, tectum desuper imponentes. We ought first to
understand Three (...) of ho^ scriptu^e.
the holy scripture according to the letter, doing whatsoever things are
commanded concerning moral virtues. Secondly according to the allegory, that
is to say, according to the spirtual understanding. Thirdly according to y^
blessedues of the things to come. But you (says God) contemning the first and
y^ second The literal sense ^s the fon d^tion.
day, do frame you certain spiritual imaginations, putting a roof thereuppon,
without a foundation and walls.

Even so the Sacramentaries tell a goodly tale of eating and drinking by faith,
and of spirtuall feeding, but they take away the meat and drink whereupon we
should ^eed, they take away the literal sense of Christ's words, which being
once gone, all that is builded upon the words, is the putting up of a roof
without walls or foundation. These three propositio^s are found, hic est
sanguis meus, haec est caro mea, hoc est corpus meum. In Cypr. de coena do haec
est caro mea.
all three it is evident, that the pronoune agrees only with the noune
following the verb. The Sacramentaries pull hic from sanguis, blood, and join
it to vinum wine. They pull haec from caro flesh, and hoc from corpus body, and
join haec and hoc to panis bread. Is not this to play with Gods word, to elude
the scriptures, and to destroy the whole written Gospel?

What the new Testament is, whereof the holy Scripture speaks.
FOr as much as in consecrating of the blood, S. Matthew. S. Mark, S. Luke, and
S. Paul make mention of the new Testament, it is necessary for the
understanding of the circumstances which follow* to declare what the new
Testament is. A Testament is the solemn ordeining of a thing by words, A
testament.
which is wont to be confirmed by natural or violeut death. For neither the
last will of any man is of strength and force, until the Hebr. 9. Gene. 31
testatour dye: Nor any truse or (...) is perfect, until it be dedicated with
sacrifice, wherein some living creature is wont to be offered unto God bloodily.

Of Testaments, one is old, an other new. For it was of old Galat. 4.
time couenanted with the Jews, that in case they kept the law of Moses, they
should have a temporal inheritance for keeping it.

Christ made a new truse, that if we kept his law, we should have forgeuenes of
sins, and enjoy the everlasting inheritance Ierem. 31
of God. The old truse was dedicated (as S. Paul speaks) Hebr. 9.
by the blood of calves or oxen, which were offered for the confirmation
thereof. The new truse is dedicated by Christ's own blood, which was shed for
the confirmation of his new law and promise. The blood of the old truse was put
into bas^s, and so Exo. 24.
sprinkled with hysope upon the people. The blood of the new truse is put into
a cup or chalice, and thence it is drunk by the people of God. They that kept
the old truse enjoyed the land of promise: and they that keep the new truse,
enjoy the kingdom of heaven.

Now because there are many things requisite to a Testament, Three things in a
solemn Testament
first a law, covenant, or promise, next a bloodshedding to confirm the
promise, thirdly an application of the blood that was shed, for to be as a
witness and a remembrance to all them, who bound them selves to keep the
conditions agreed upon: it may so be, that either all these things, or some one
of them alone may be called the new Testament.

When God says by Jeremie: consummabo Testamentum Ierem. 31 Hebr. 8.
nouum, he means all together. For he will as well publish his true law, as
confirm it by blood, and distribute the blood wherewith it is confirmed, to the
faithful, when Christ says: This is my blood of the new Testament, he
means the first part of the new Testament, which is the law and promise it
self of forgeuing sy^s. And therefore it follows, the which shall be Math. 26
shed for many, for the remission o^ sins. In which words he shows, how
this is the blood of the new Testament. Uerily because it is the blood, which
shall obtein and merit the forgiveness Ierem. 31
of those sins, which the new law promises to take away.

^e called it (says S. Chrysostom) the blood of y^ promise of Chryso. in Math.
Hom. 83.
y^ new law. And again: Testamentum nouum hoc ipso confirmatur. The new
Testament is confirmed with this very blood. Tertullian says of Chr^:
Testamentum constituens sanguine Li. 4. co^t. Marci.
suo obsignatum. He establishes the Testament, that is to say, the law, sealed
with his own blood.

But when S. Luke and S. Paul report Christ to have said: This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, they seem to take the word Testament for the substance
of the thing, which does confirm the new Testament, or witness it to be
confirmed, and not properly for the new truse and promise thereof. For this
that is in the chalice, is not the promise of remitting sins, but it is the
new Testament in Christ's blood, that is to say, it is the thing that
confirms the new law, or that witn^h it to be confirmed. Sedulius in. 1. Co.
11.
So does Sedulius very well expound the words of S. Paul, saying: Ideo autem
calix Testamentum vocatur (for so I think the true reading to be, and not
Testamenti) quia testatus est post paululum passionem futuram, and nunc
testificatur factam. The chalice is therefore called the new Testament, because
it did The chalice bears witness.
bear witness (at Christ's supper) that the passion should be a little after,
and now it does bear witness, that y^ passion is made or done.

Thus we see, that whereas a Testament has a law, a confirmation, and a
witness of the confirmation: the blood of Christ is not the law it self, but
it is both the thing which confirmed the law, and the thing which does witness
it to be confirmed. The which if it be well remembered, I trust the
circumstances of greatest importance, whereof I shall speak hereafter, will be
the better understood.

The. xxiiij. circumstance, of the blood of the new Testament.
THis is my blood of the new Testament, says Christ, that is to say, the
blood, wherewith the new Testament is con firmed and sealed, as S. Chrysostom,
Tertullian, Theophilact, 1. (...) Math. Hom. 83. 2. l. 4. co^. Marci. 3. in
Lucae. 22.
and the other ancient Fathers declare. But the blood of Christ's new
Testament was real and true: Therefore this which Christ does point unto, is
the true and real blood of Christ, and not the substance of wine, which the
Sacramentaries imagine to be a figure of this blood: And so cons^ the words,
this is the sigue of my blood of the new Testament.

But their interpretation is proved false by conferring the old Testament with
the new. For as the old Testament had none other thing to signify the blood
thereof beside y^ self same blood of the calves, which was shed to confirm the
old covenant: so The same blood which con firmeth does also witness y^ (...)
much more the new Testament must have no^e other thing to signify the blood
thereof, beside the self same blood of Christ, which was shed to confirm the
new law. For if it be a perfection not only to have the tru^e and law confirmed
by blood, but also to have the confirmation thereof witnessed by sprinkling y^
blood which was shed upon the people: it is not possible that the old law
should in that point pass the new. For as S. Chrysostom Chryso. in Joan. Hom.
13.
says, the figure neither is clean different from the truth, and yet if it
keep the condition of a shadow, minor erat veritate, it was less then the
truth. And yet the basin of calves blood were more then the truth, if the
substance of common wine were set to show, that the new truse is confirmed.

Again S. Paul and S. Luke so evidently expound these very words, by reciting
them otherwise, that no reasonable man co^^ing the words together will say,
that in these words, blood may stand for a figure of blood. They write thus:
Hic calix nouum Testamentum est in meo sanguine. This cup is ye new Testament
in my blood. but the new Testament is not in the figure of Christ's blood, but
in his true blood. Therefore the name of blood, which Christ used in
consecrating the liquor in the chalice, is not used figuratively.

For ye same blood, whereof S. Matthew, and S. Mark do speak, The blood is not
meant the figure of blood.
is also meant of S. Luke. and of S. Paul. but as S. Paul and S. Luke take
the noun blood, it can not possibly be taken figuratively* except any man will be
so desperate, as to say, that the ^w promise and Law of Christ is established
in a figure of blood, or in the substance of common wine.

Which if it were so, we are in worse case then the Patriar^hes and Jews, who
at the least had true blood to co^firm their temporal truses, Testaments, and
promises (as it may be se^e both Gene. 31. Exodus 24 Hebr. 9.
in Genesis and Exodus) although it were the blood of beasts. and it must
needs be, that the heaueuly things them selves be cleansed with better
sacrifices, says S. Paul. If then the name of blood being put in these words,
this cup is the new testament in my blood, be taken for the substance of
Christ's blood, which is that better sacrifice whereof S. Paul speaks,
without al question, in these words, this is my blood of the new testament, it
stondeth likewise for the substance of Christ's blood.

It is one supper, one Sacrament, one part of the supper, and one part of the
Sacrament, yea one self same thing, whereof all four do speak. If new do
answer to new, testament to testament, this to this, is to is: how can it be,
that blood should not answer to blood? But, this cup is the new testament in my
blood, can not be meant in y^ figure of my blood (least y^ sign of blood, and
not the truth thereof, be that which establishes the new truse) therefore in
these words, this is the blood of the new testament, the noune blood stands
not for a figure and sign of blood, but for the real substance thereof.

The xxv. Circumstance, of these words: this cup or chalice.
AS every Apostle or Evangelist wrote later then other, so Lucae. 22. 1. Cor. 11
he made the supper of Christ more plain, giving us evidently to understand,
that the words of Christ's supper are so far of from figurative speeches, that
rather the propriety of them is by all means fortified. I have showed before
how the name of cup or chalice does not hinder any whyt, why all y^ rest of
Christ's words may not be proper, and literally true: but Why the cup is named.
now I affirm also, that it increases much the reason of their pro prietie.
Why so? Because the cup is named to show the manner of fulfilling of the old
figures.

In the old Testament the blood of the oxen was put in crateras, Exodus 24
into great cups or basins, and so the people were sprinkled therewithal. Now
to bring the Apostles and all us in mind thereof, Christ names the cup or
chalice: Declaring thereby, that his own blood is now to us, as the blood of
oxen was to the people of Israel: His in the chalice, as the blood of oxen was
in the basi^s: His presently drunk, as that other was presently Chryso. Hom. 27
in. 1. Co.
sprinkled. Erat autem veteris Testamenti calix, and caet. There was a cup or
chalice (says S. Chrysostom) of the old Testament and sacrifices, and the
blood of brute beasts. For after sacrifice (the blood being taken in a chalice
and cup) they made after that sort libations (or offerings of that which was
liquide and renning.) Cu^ igitur pro sanguine brutorum sanguinem suum
induxisset, ne quis his auditis perturbaretur, illius veteris sacrificij
meminit. Seeing therefore he had brought in his own blood instead of the blood
of brute beasts, least any man hearing of these things should be troubled, he
makes mention of the old sacrifice. Decumenius also Oecum. in. 1. Co. cap. 11.
writes thus concerning the naming of the chalice or cup: Pro sanguine
irrationalium Dominus proprium dat sanguinem. Et been in poculo, vt ostendat
vetus Testamentum antea hoc delineasse. Our Lord gives his own blood instead
of the blood of unreasonable creatures. And he does well to give it in a cup,
to show that the old Testament did shadow this thing before.

Behold why the cup is mentioned. Uerily to show Christ's blood to be as really
in the cup of his own supper, as ever the bru^e beasts blood was in ye cup of
the old testament. yea much more also. For the blood of the oxen was really put
into that old cup, to show that Christ's blood should be really present in the
cup of his supper. the old blood did not show, that wine should be in Christ's
cup (for that had been less then the old testament it self, because the blood
of oxen is better then wine of the grape) but that blood in ye basin did
signify, that Christ's blood should Christ's blood real ly in the chalice.
be in our chalice, not only as in a figure (for so it was in the basin also of
the old testament) but even in very deed under the form of wine. It is not now
sufficient to say, we drink Christ's blood in heart or by faith: it must be
drunken really out of the chalice and cup of Christ's supper. thence the heart
must take it at Christ's supper, thence it must be received both in faith and
truth.

The xxvi. Circumstance of the verb est, left out in S. Lukes words.
IT is the custom of writers in the Hebrew tongue, to leave out many times the
verb sum, es, fui, which is latin, to be: and The verb substa^tiue left out.
that, because common sense and use does easily teach us to supply that verb,
as being both most necessary of al other, and most frequent in common speech.

S. Luke writes thus: This cu^ is the new testament in my blood shed for you.
this sentence is imperfit for lack of a verb which may knit the parts thereof
together. I ask what verb we shall understand, to make it perfect. The
Sacramontaries say, that Christ means, this cup does signify the new
testament in my The verb significat can not be understand ded.
blood. will ye then understand the verb, significat, does signify? if ye do
so, I will show that as well the noun cup, as (...) testamentum are both put in
the nominative case. but if S. Luke had meant to understand the verb
significat, he would have put one of them in, the accusative case.

If ye supply the verb est is, to make the sentence perfect, that The verb est
must needs be supplied.
verb must needs be taken in the same sense, wherein it is wont to be supplied:
but it is commonly supplied as a common verb whose nature is to declare the
substance and not the figure of the thing, which is spoken of: therefore so it
must be taken at this time. Otherwise, what a folly were it, when a verb is at
ye first left out, to call it of purpose into the speech, and as soon as it is
placed there, to say it stands not properly, but to remove it again, and put
an other verb for it? What? was the verb est, being once left out, brought in
for this intent only, y^ as soon as it was in his place, it should be
immediately cast out, and changed into ye verb significat?

If ye say ye were compelled to call it in, I agree with you, and The necessity
of the verb est in Christ's words.
say further, ye are to blame to cast it out. For the holy Ghost would not have
compelled you in vain to call it in. God meant ye should call it in, and keep
it in. For in yt he left it out, he would show to your hard hearts, how that
verb, which when ye had it present in other Evangelists ye disdanied, and
scortiefully removed, that it was not only well placed, but it was so necessary
to the meaning of his words, y^ when it was left out, ye should be forced to
call it in. And will ye be so forgetful, as not to note these secret inforcements
of God? Know ye not that one iota or one title of the law (and much less of
the Gospel) passes not away, Math. 5.
until all things be fulfilled? And yet dare you take away the verb
substa^tiue it self from Christ's own words, the same verb, I say, which he
compelled you to take in, when it was omitted by S. Luke? See how far Christ
is from your mind. when it is but once left out, he will have it even then put
in, and when it is expressed in the words of Christ's supper seven times, you
will every time put it out.

It is the custom of the Hebrew tongue to leave out the verb substa^tiue sum,
es, fui, when it signifies properly. But how is it left out, when (if you say
true) it was never meant to be in? Or how was it meant to be in, when being put
in, it is by you removed as not meant properly by him that spoke? And yet it is
so necessarily meant to be put in Christ's words, that when it is left out, the
Sacramentaries can not chose but supply it and put it in. therefore Christ
meant to have it stand in his proper and usual signification. For, seeing the
verb est, is used to be left out, because it may easily be supplied, and may
be taken as expressed (though it be not expressed in deed) then the use which
makes it to be leaft out, as a verb easily supplied, must by the same reason
make it signify that thing, which it uses commonly to signify, since it is
supplied by the only force of the use of speaking. and surely the use of the
verb est, is to signify the substance of that noune substantive which has a
peculiar substance, and consequently in the words of Christ's supper it must
signify the substance of his body and of his blood really present.

The xxvij. Circumstance, of these words: which is shed for you.
THis cup is the new Testament in my blood (says S. Luke) which is or shall be
shed for you. The relative, which, in Qui calix, The which cup
these words is not ruled (as some perhaps would think) of the noune blood,
which went last before: but of the noune, cup, or chalice. Which thing is most
plain in the Greek text:. (...). Hoc poculum nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo,
quod pro vobis effunditur. This cup is the new Testament in my blood, the
which cup is shed for you. For seeing the Greek participle (...), which
signifies shedding, is in the nominative case with the noune cup, and not in
the dative with the noune blood, no escape can be had, but it mu^t be referred
to that word, wherewith in grammar it may agree: otherwise, if we shall neglect
the literal sense, which arises of the right construction of the words, we
build a roof (as I alleged before out of S. Hier^m) without In Amos cap. 4.
walls or foundation.

What meaning then have these words, the which cup is shed for you, or as the
latin copies read, which shall be shed? For it was both presently shed in a
mystery at the holy table of Christ, and should the next day be naturally shed
upon the cross. The substance of blood was one in both places, the manner of
shedding only differing. But, as I said, how is the cup said to be shed for us?
The word for us imports a sacrifice made in the shedding: and therefore S.
Matthew shows it to be shed in rede^ptionem peccatorum, for the remission of
sins.

Mark, good Reader, the manner of speaking the cup is shed* that is to say, the
thing contemed in the cup. For we all agree herein, that the name of, cup,
stands to mean the liquour in it, as continens is used to be put pro
contento. the thing which holds a liquour is used to be put for the liquour
it self, which it holds. We say, he drank up a great bolle, who drank the
ale, bear, or wine that was in it: and that is a figurative speech by exact
rules of Grammar, but a speech made as proper through use and custom.
Therefore to say, the cup is shed for us, does signify, that the liquour in it
is shed for us, what liquour was that?

It is the greatest mar^eyle in the world, if any man be so impudent as to
affirm, that material wine was shed for us, or that wine obtained us remission
of our sins: and yet it can not be denied, but the liquour contained in the
cup of Christ's supper was shed for us, as Christ says. Therefore I say, the
liquour contained in the cup of Christ's supper could be no wine, but only the
blood of Christ. Is this a plain argument, or no? the liquour in the cup of
Christ's banquet was shed for us to obtein A demonstration out of Gods word.
the forgeuenes of sins: but only the real blood of Christ was shed for the
remission of our sins: therefore the only real blood of Chist was contained
in the cup of Christ's banquet.

What answer can be framed to this argument, if Hell were let loose? what
probable solutio^ were it able to bring? The first part is in S. Luke, the
second is in S. Paul: who affirms it to be Hebr. 9.
the blood of Christ (who offered him self by the holy spirit vnsp^d unto God)
which cleanses our conscience from dead works to serve the living God. After
these two parts the conclusion (...) solow, that Christ's real blood is in the
cup of Christ's supper. in the cup, I say, which Christ showed and pointed unto
saying: this cup, that is to say, the thing herein contained is the new
Testament in my blood. the which thing con^eiued in the cup is Euthy. in c.
Luc. 22.
shed for you.

Euthymius well peceauing this to be y^ meaning of S. Lukes words, writteth
thus: Quod vero dicitur, quod pro vobis effunditur, ad poculum referendum est:
porro poculum est saguis eius. Whereas it is said, the which is shed for you,
it is to be referred unto the cup. Now the cup is Christ's blood. God grant
our deceived brethren may once perceive this Grammatic^ll and literal sen^e
of Christ's words.

The last circumstance, of the Hymn said at Christ's supper.
WHen Christ had ended his banquet, he renounced to ^ate or drink any more with
his Apostles, until the ki^gdom of God came, giving the^ an evident watchword
therein: that he would presently offer him self to death, and so depart from
this world, until he should arise the third day.

And straight he sang an hymn, and with his Apostles went forth of the parler,
where they had supped. Although the hymn or song of praise, whereof S. Matthew
speaks, do not alone Matt. 26.
prove the real presence of Christ^s body and blood: yet it helps thus far
toward it, as to show and express a singular banquet to An hymn said only at
Christ's supper.
have been made: after which so rare and solemn a praise was given to God, as
again is no where else mentioned. For albeit no man may doubt, but Chist did
always give thanks unto God after his meat received: yet we never read of an
hym^e said or song after any other Feast, beside this. And yet I doubt nothing
Joan. 12.
atall, but that Christ gave him self by faith and spirit even at the supper
time to some of his Disciples before this night, and namely to the blessed
Mary, which at Betha^y oynted his feet at supper time. but that giving of him
self to Sain^t M^ry or any other to be eaten of by faith was not this dre^ful
gi^t of Christ's supper. The hymn which was externally song or said, was ^ue to
this external work of God, wherein he wit^ (...) own hands gave his own body
and blood to his disciples.

To conclude at the length concerning all these circumstances of this heavenly
supper: I beseech the Reader, to account and weighe them all together, and not
only to consider them a part albeit many of them alone are not able to be
answered. but a circumstance is not a perfect thing of it self, but is a part of
that whole thing, about the which it has his being and place. If all these
circumstances joined together do prove the real presence of Christ's body and
blood, under y^ forms of that bread and wine, which Christ took, and said
thereof, this is my body, and this is my blood: I have my purpose and intent.
but he deals unhonestly who dividing them a part, cauilleth at one or two,
and will not look to al at once. If al these joined together prove not my
purpose, let him who thinks so, either show me so many and so strong for his
contrary assertion, or let him yield to y^ Catholi^ faith.

The real presence of Christ's body and blood, and the The x. Chapter.
proper meaning of his words, is proved by the conference of holy scriptures
taken ou^ of the new Testament, and speaking of our ^ords supper.
Every place in holy scripture has not another place like, or in appearance
contrary to it, whereby the more light may be taken for the understanding
thereof: but when there are any such places, they help marueilously toward the
understanding of holy scripture.

Christ one year before his last supper said at Capharna^: The bread, which I
will give, is my flesh: and my flesh is meat in deed. Joan. 6. Math. 26
At his supper he took bread, and having blessed, said: Take eat, this is my
body, and this cup is the new Testament in my blood: S. (...) speaking of the
self same mystery, writes thus: The 1. Cor. 10
chalice of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communicating of The
places which are to be confer^ed.
Christ's blood? And the bread which we break, is it not the com municating of
the body of our Lord: Let us now confer every word together.

That which was promised in S. John by these words: The Joan. 6.
bread which I will give, is discribed in the supper presently by Math. 26
these words: Take, eat (this) and this cup. not that I make (this) the
accusative case to the verb eat, but only to show, that these three words
agree with the first words in S. Ihon. And afterward in S. Paul it is called,
The bread which we break: so that 1. Cor. 10
these four particles belong in effect to one thing: The bread, which I will
give: The bread, which we break, and, take, eat, (this) or drink ye this
cup. By which conference we learn, how the pronoune (this) may be particularly
expounded in Christ's This.
supper: for of his general signification, which is to show under a visible
form an invisible substance, I have spoken before sufficiently. (This) then is
as much to say, as: this meat, drink or food, which is now broken and given,
and willed to be taken and eaten or drunken, is my body or blood. It has been
evidently proved upon the sixth of S. Ihon, that y^ bread which he promised,
was Thebre^d promised is not m^ teriall bread.
not meant of wheate^ bread (whereof Christ spoke not in y^ place) but of the
meat and food of everlasting life. Therefore, when Christ says (this) in his
last supper, he means none otherwise, then this eatable thing, or this which
is to be drunken, this kind of meat or drink and food, which I n^w give, is
my body or blo^d: otherwise, i^ it were not his flesh and blood, but material
bread and wine, it were not the everlasting meat, which Christ at Capha^namn
promised to give, and now at his supper does give.

So that whereas Christ both brake and gave, and after blessing said, take,
eat (this) therewith beginning to consecrate the Sacrament of his last supper:
we have it expounded what (this) This is (...) by y^ other places.
does (...), by three (...) ways: by the time to come, when it is said: the
brea^ that I will give, which out of question is understood the food (...)
Christ will give. For Christ him self called it before the meat which tarieth
to life everlasting. Again, the pronoune (this) may be well expounded by the
deed exercysed about the Sacrament after cous^ration, when it is said of S.
Paul: The bread which we break. for the breaking is used after consecration
in the sign and form of bread, to show the death of Christ, wherein his flesh
was in deed broken, and to distribute the m^rites thereof by the holy communion.

The third way is, by conferring together the very words of the consecrating
the two kinds. For as he said of the bread, this alone, so he said of the wine
this cup. giving us to understand, that as this cup must of necessity be
resolved into y^ thing within the cup: so in the other kind we should resolve
the pronoune this into that, which is within this visible form. Thereby
declaring that (this) generally means, the substance under this: and
particularly means, the food under this.

All is in effect to say, The meat that I will give, the eatable thing that
we break at Mass, that, whereof Christ said, take and eat, that which is
contained under the apparent forms: that is it, which in the supper is termed
by the pronoun^ (^his)

The next word is the verb (is) which can very hardly be expounded The verb
(...).
by any other word in any tongue: because it being the verb substa^, is in all
tongues set alone, to signify y^ being or substance that every thing has, and
no other one word is equal to it, which may expound it. Yet I may boldly say,
the holy Ghost has done so much to expound this verb, as may suffice What
(...) mean by (...).
to any reasonable creature. For Christ said, before any sign of his body was
(...): The bread which I will give, is my flesh. When Christ made that promise,
there was nothing in y^ whole world, whereof the verb (is) might be verified
in the present tense, but only that substance of Christ's flesh, which he had
in his natural body. The outward gift of the supper was then to come, and yet
Christ said of the substance of his gift, The bread which I will give, is my
flesh. I say not only that it shall be my flesh, but I say it is my flesh at this
time: because the substance that I will give, is now present with you, although
the manner of deliverance be to come. Let us therefore so expound the verb
(is) in the supper, that it may agree with the verb (is) in S. Ihon: where it
cannot be taken for a bare significatiue being, because then there was no sign
of his body made.

Moreover S. Paul writing after the supper was past, does interpret the verb
(is) as plainly, as can be devised: to signify a substancial, and not an
accidental being. for he says: The bread, The communicatig
which we break, is the communicating of Christ's flesh. it is y^
communicating, as though he said: it is so truly Christ's flesh, that no
difference is between it, and the being or substance of Christ's flesh. All
thing is common between it, and Christ's flesh: no division, no separation, no
distinction comes between these two. All this the word communicating does
signify, and more to. For the bread, which we break, is so far Christ's
body: that it makes us also the body of Christ. The bread which (...) break,
is so (...) distant from being a bare sign: that it has Christ's body made
common to it by consecration, and it makes Christ's body common to us by
communion: so that for est, is, S. Paul puts, communicatio est, it is the
communicating, or the having, or making common Christ's body and blood. Chrysostom.
in 1. Cor. hom. 24.


S. Chrysostom so vehemently presses the word communicating and union, whereof
ye Apostle speaks: y^ he says, S. Paul would not leave so much as a little
difference between the men, which do communicate, and that, which is
communicated: and yet if that, which is communicated, were material bread, it
would so much differ from Christ our head, and the mystical body, which we are
in Christ, that it should be an other nature and substance clean diverse from
it, not only not communicating in one and the same member of a mystical body,
but neither in the whole kind of things, which the Logicians call speciem, or
genus proximum.

Let us add hereunto, that if we take, est, for significat, in these words,
hic significat sanguinem meum: the verb shall lac^ a noune substantive to be his
nominative case. And that S. Luke, by leaving est, to be understood by common
reason, does show it signifies properly, as men commonly are wont to use that
verb.

Thus much being said for (this) and (is), the word (body) remains, Body.
Matt. 6. Joan. 6. Matt. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 1. Cor. 10 1. Cor. 11
Joan. 6. Matt. 26 Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 10 1 Cor. 11 Matt. 26. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
to be declared by the conference of holy scripture. In S. Matthew it is called
supersubstantiall bread. In S. John it is called my flesh, which I will give
for the lite of the world. In S. Matthew and Mark my body. in S. Luke, my body
which is given for you. in S. Paul, my body which is broken for you, or
shall be betrayed for you, the body of our Lord this bread, and the one bread.
Likewise concerning the blood, it is called the blood of the son of man: my
blood, the blood of the new Testament, the new testament in my blood. The
chalice of blessing which we* bless, the blood of Christ, the blood of our
Lord, and the chalice of our Lord. Of the body it is said take, eat: of the
blood, take and divide among you, and drink ye all of this. Of both together
it is said, to the Apostles, make, and do ye this thing. Of evil men it is
said, that they eat this bread, and drink the chalice of our Lord
unworthily, not judging rightly our Lords body: And last of all, he that
eats me, shall live for me. If now we will expound Joan. 6.
body, for the sign of body, it will follow, that the sign of Christ's body
was g^n for us. And when it is said, He that eats me shall live for me: it
must be expounded: He that eats the sign of me, shall live for the sign of
me.

To conclude, as (this) belongs not to the substance either of bread or of
wine, wherewith it can not agree in (...): as the verb est, is, can not stand
for significat to signify, least it lack his nominative case: as the cup shed
for us, can not stand for wine shed in sacrifice, or else for the sign of
blood shed, but only for the substance of blood shed on the cross: so corpus
body can not stand for a figure or a sign of the body, because hoc est corpu^
meum datum pro vobis (accordingly as the Greek has) can not be interpreted,
this is y^ figure of my body which is given for you* except with Ualentinus,
Marcion, Manicheus it shall be said, y^ figure of Christ's body was given to
death for us. Wherefore I may boldly conclude, that stubburnly to defend, that
the words of Christ's supper are Grammatically or Rhetorically figurative
(concerning the substantial parts of the chief propositions) is extreme
ignorance in the rules of Grammar and of Logic, palpable blindness in the
study of divinity, and a malice inexcusable at the day of judgment, if the
party repent not.

Now on the other side, confer Scriptures, whether Ihon Baptist be Elias: it
is evident, that it is not so. There was between them in time above five
hundred years: Ihon Baptist was killed, Elias lives yet. The Angel said by
Ihon Baptist, Lucae. 1.
He shall go before our Lord in the spirit and virtue of Elias: He said not,
in truth and person. And Ihon Baptist being asked, whether he were Elias or no,
answered plainly: Non sum, Joan. 1.
I am not. It is plain enough, that Ihon Baptist is not Elias in person: but
only in like office and function. Thus you may see (good Reader) what odds is
between those places, which our aduersa^s would have like, and would make you
believe that these words (This is my body) be no more properly spoken, then
these (He is Elias.)

The like may be said of the rock, which means two diverse Exodus 17 Number. 20
natures, ^se giving water: as it is described in the books of Moses, and
well known to be neither Christ by nature, neither by co^ne^on of any rok into
Christ. For neither Christ ever said of the rock (This is my body) neither did
he command us, to say so.

What shall I say of that insensible objection, that God dwells Acto. 17.
not in Temples made with man's hand? For we now speaking of the body of Christ,
speak not of the dwelling, which belongs to God: but of that, which
belongs to his humane nature, which it self also is not a Temple made with
the hand of man, or begotten by the seed of man, but formed and conceived of
the holy Ghost in the womb of the Uirgin, in the which Collos. 1.
manhod of Christ, the fullness of Godhead dwells corporally.

As for those places where Christ says: Poor men shall ye Marc. 14 and. 16.
Lucae. 24. Romans 8.
have with you always, but me ye shall no^ have: And, he is risen, he is not
here: And, whiles Christ blessed his Disciples, he went from them, and was
carried into heaven, there sitting at the right hand of his Father until the end
of the world, with such like: they* are not to be conferred with these words
(This is my body) because they speak of a natural being of Christ, and not of
such a being, as is peculiar unto the Sacrament of Christ's supper. Neither is
it possible, that one of those kinds of (...) should impugn y^ other: since
Christ has ord^ed both, and the Church did (...) always both together.

Christ ascended into heaven there sitting at the right hand of Actor. 1. and.
2.
his Father, and leaving us the belief thereof as a chief article of our
faith, Christ made his own supper, saying: This is my body, and commanded his
Apostles and their succ^s to make L^. 22.
the same, saying: Do and make this thing, for the remembrance of me.
Therefore neither the making of Christ's body, neither the belefe thereof, can
be contrary to the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his father. Again,
since nothing is impossible to The presence of Christ's b^dy is not impossible.
God (albeit that which imploiet^ co^tradiction in it self, be therefore
impossiple, because it repugneth to the truth it self which is in God) it is
not possible to God, y^ y^ body of Christ should both be in heaven after one
visible sort, and in the Sacrament after a mystical sort. It were in deed
impossible for the body of Christ both to be in heaven, and not to be in
heaven. Or, to be in the Sa crament, and not to be there in the same respect:
but to be in heaven and in the Sacrament, or to be in many places at once, that
makes no (...), but only shows an allmighty and infinite power in him, who
works it.

Of this mind all the Church of God has been hitherto, and therefore it has
believed as well the sitting of Christ at his Fathers r^ht hand in heaven: as
the real presence of his flesh and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. Yea it
has believed the one, because of the other. For in so much as Christ is so
almighty, as The sitting of (...) in heaven (...), a h^p to his (...) presence
in the Sacra (...).
to sit at the right hand of God: he is able to perform his own word and gift
in the Sacrament of the altar. And therefore in the sixte of S. Ihon when he
spoke of eating his flesh, and of drinking his blood, which he would give: he
also declared, that he would go up into heaven in his manhood, where he was
before in his Godhead. And that thing he spoke (as S. Cyrillus has noted) to
declare, that he was God, and therefore able to work that, which he spoke of,
in so much as his words were spirit and life. For this cause Chrysostom cries
out: o miraculum, o Dei Chryso. de sacer. lib. 3.
benignitatem. Qui cum Patre sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis articulo
omnium manibus pertractatur, ac se ipse tradit volentibus ipsum excipere ac
complecti. O miracle, O goodness of God. He that sits above with the Father,
in the same very momen^ of time is touched with the hands of all men, and
delivers himself to those, that will receive and embrace him. Number tibi ista
contemptu ac despectu digna esse videntur? Seem these things to thee worthy to
be despised and neglected? Sacra nostra non modo Christ's supper pas seth all
wo^dering
mira esse videbis, sed etiam omnem stuporem excedentia. Thou shall perceive,
our holy things not only to be wonderful: but also to excede all wondringe,
and astonyng of the mind.

If then we understand, that only a great wonder is wrought in our Lords
supper, and no contradiction at all to any other parts of our belefe: we may
be sure, that none other article of our creed does drive us to miscredit the
real presence of Christ's body and blood in his own supper.

And therefore where we dispute of his last supper, we must examine y^ meaning
of y^ words, which were spoken there, according to other places of y^
Scriptures, which belong unto y^ last supper.

The places apperteyning to Christ's last supper, according The places
belonging to Christ's supper.
to the interpretation of ancient doctors, are these: the later part of the 6.
Chapter of S. John. the supersubstantiall bread in the 6. of S. Matthew. and
the supper it self in the 62. of S. Matthew, in the 14. of S. Mark, the 22. and
the 24. of S. Luke. certain sentences in the 10. and 11. chapter of the first
epi^le of S. Paul to the Corinthians: in the 5. to the Ephesians, in the 2.
chapter of the first epistle to Timotheus. in the 13. to the Hebrews. in the
2. 13. and 20. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. In all which places and
other (if there be any like) we find much to con^e the real presence: but
nothing to lead us to a siguratiue meaning. These words, which be in S.
John: the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit which quickens, my
words be spirit and life, be declared in the former book, when we disputed of
the sixth chapter of S. John.

Why the Sacrament is called bread after consecration. The (...). Chapter.

NO man ought to mistrust the real presence of Christ in his Sacrament, for
that it seems in many places to be called bread even after consecration, and
that as well in S. John as in S. Paul, and in the Acts of the Apostles: noman
(I say) ought upon this slender argument to change his belefe otherwise
grounded upon so plain scriptures, and the faith of y^ Church so generally
received: but rather he ought to lern the cause, why the body of Christ is most
justly called bread in this Sacrament.

The custom of speaking in holy scriptures came chefely from the Hebrew tongue,
wherein the old Testament was written: as also S. Mathewes Ghospel with the
epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews were. The residue of the Apostles and
Evangelists, albeit they wrote in Greek, they very osten kept the Hebrew
phrase in their words. Bread in the Hebrew tongue his called Lehem, and comes
of the verb Laham, which signifies to All food (...) in Hebrew called bread.
^ate: so that al which man may eat, is meant by the Hebrew word Lehem, as
well bread, as flesh or fruytes, in so much that sometime it signifies only
flesh, as the Hebrew Doctors have Vide Pagninum in verbo Laham.
noted out of the sixte and seventh chapter of Job. Now y^ Apostles and
Evangelists writing also in Greek have put for the Hebrew word Lehem, the
Greek word (...): and they that translated the scriptures into latin, have
turned it into panis, and we in our vulgar tongue name it bread: by which means
it comes to pass, that the Greek, Latin, and English word must be taken in
holy scriptures according to y^ Hebrew word Lehem: which betokens all what
soever is to be eaten of man, but espe nally bread, as being the chief fruit
of the earth.

After which sort when Christ says in y^ Ghospel: man lives Deuteronomy. 8. and
Cath. 4.
not by bread alone, but by every word, which proceeds from the mowth of God,
he means by the name of bread, al kind of natural nourishment, which man
takes by mo^th. without all which he may li^e either by natural bread, as
Manna was: or, if it so please God to say the word, without any meat at all,
as Moses and Elias fasted forty days. according to which general Math. 6.
Luc. 11.
taking of bread, we ask in our Lords prayer, our daily and supersubstantiall
bread: that is to say, all necessary sustenance for body and soul.

It is further to be noted, that in holy scriptures, when one thing is
converted into an other, the later thing is many times called by the name of
the first thing: not because it is still the first, but because it was made
from the first. As when it is said, Exodus 7.
that the rod of Aron devoured the rods of the Coniurers of Pha rao: where that
is called a rod, which was in deed a serpent, and not then a rod: but it is
named a rod, because from a rod it was turned into a (...). Likewise Adam is
called earth, because Genesis 1. 3.
he was made of earth.

Thirdly a thing is called in holy scripture not only as it is, but also as it
seems outwardly to be. so the Angel, which the godly w^men saw at the
sepulcher of Christ, is called a young Marc. 16.
man, because he appeared so, although in deed he were not so. Which things
being well pond^red, it is casie to satis^ie them that say, the holy communion
is bread still, because after consecration That (...) be (...) b^ad w^ch (...)
bread (...) ^et sem^th br^ad.
it is called bread: To whom I answer, first that it is called bread, because
it was bread, and still seems bread: but that notwithstanding, it is flesh and
was made flesh from of the substance of bread, being converted into flesh by
the almighty words of Christ: who taking bread, said in the way of blessinge,
and of thanks giving, this is my body.

Secondly I answer, that in deed after consecration it is a kind of bread and
food (not that which it was before) but ine^ably bitter and of more price,
and more worthy of yt name of true bread, then it was before: that is to say,
it is the true flesh of christ which nourysheth the bodies and souls of the
faithful men to li^e everlasting. And to prove this answer true, it may
please the Reads to remember, that Christ called himself the bread of life:
and named the gift of his supper the meat which Joan. 6.
tarieth to life everlasting, and the lively bread which came down from
heaven. After which meaning he says, and the bread which I will gene is my
^esh. Behold ye kind of bread. Again S. Paul 1. Cor. 10
says: The bread, which we break is it not the communicating of our Lords
body? For we being many are one bread, one body all we that partake of the one
bread. all partake of the one bread, and it be the bread which we break,
surely that, which is broken, can not be any material bread, but is only the
body of Christ the bread of life.

And least any man should think, that in saying the name of bread in Christ's
supper stands for meat and for flesh, I speak without sufficient
authority, beside the authority of y^ scriptures already alleged, which can
not be otherwise taken: let him also weigh together with me, how co^formably ye
ancient Fathers taught Ignatius in 2. epi. ad Romans
the same doctrine. S. Ignatius says: Panem Dei volo, quod est caro Christi. I
desire the bread of God, which thing is the flesh of Christ: Which thing in the
nenter gender, is none other to say, then which substance. Justinius in Apol. 2.


Justinius the Martyr affirms first that the Deacons give to every man the
bread, wine, and water which are consecrated with First. Bread, (...), (...)
water.
giving of thanks. Where he calls them by the ^ames which they had before
consecration: And s^raight expounding y^ names of bread, wine, and water, which
they have by consecration, he writes thus: Hic cibus apud nos Eucharistia
nominatur, This 2. Consecration.
food is called with us ye Eucharist, Wherefore for all three names, 3. Food.
he puts this one name of food, wherein they all meet. Neither so content,
he says yet again: For we take not these things as common bread and drink,
but we have learned, the meat which is consecrated by the words of prayer taken
of him, to be the flesh and blood of Christ. So that first, he declares him
self by bread, 4. Flesh and blood.
wine, and water, to mean the matter of the Sacrament. Secondly, he confesses
the consecration, to make them a more heavenly food. Thirdly, he denies them
to be now common bread and drink. Fourthly, he affirms it to be that kind of
food, which is the flesh and blood of Christ.

Of the same very Sacrament S. Hilarie says: Nos vere verbum carnem cibo
Dominico sumimus: We take the word truly ^esh, in our Lords meat. Where he
calls the thing, which is given at Christ's supper, cibum Dominicum, the
meat which our Lord gives, meaning it not to be any more common bread, but
that kind of bread, which is also called meat or food. S. Cyprian Libro. 2.
Epist. 3. ^d Cecil. 2. Ireneus. ^. 4. ca. 34
says, Christ offered bread and wine, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem: that
is to say, his own body and blood. Mark the kind of bread. S. Ireneus says: It
is not now (to wit after consecration) common bread, but the Eucharist.

S. Ambrose asks, why after consecration we say in o^r Lords Ambrosius de
Sacram. li. 5. ca. 4.
prayer: Give us this day our daily bread? And him self answers: He calls
it bread in deed, Sed (...), hoc est, supersubstantialem: That is to say, as S.
Hierom expounds it, qui super omnes substantias sit, such a bread which is
above all substances. And yet farther S. Hierom says, Panem illum petimus,
Hieron. in Math. cap. 6.
qui dicit: Ego sum panis viuus, we ask that bread which said: I am the li^ely
bread. But to return again to S. Ambrose, he concludes: Non iste panis est,
qui vadit in corpus: sed ille panisvitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae
substantiam fulcit. It is not that bread, which goes into the body, but that
bread of everlasting life, which holds up the substance of our soul,
Gregorius of Ny^a Nyssen. in vita Moysis.
speaking of the Sacrament of the altar, says: Panis est absque semine, absque
aratione, absque alio humano opere nobis paratus. It is bread provided for us
without seed, without plowing, and Tract. 26 in Joan.
without any other work of man. S. Augustine says: when would flesh understand
this thing, that he called bread flesh? In Leuit. c. 22. l. 6. In oper^ Paschal.


Isychi^s names the bread, which S. Paul says is eaten unworthily,
nutritorem substantiae nostrae intelligibilis: the nourisher of our
intelligible or spiri^all substance. Sedulius speaking of the bread which
Christ gave to Judas, says: Panem cui Thebr^ given to Judas was betr^ ^ed for
us.
tradidit ipse, Qui panis tradendus erat. to whom Christ himself gave bread,
the which bread was to be betrayed. See, the bread that Christ gave, it was
not every bread, not the substance of common bread: but even that bread in
substance, which was betrayed for us to death. For Christ is bread, and giving
himself to Judas, he gave the same bread that was betrayed, except any other
thing was betrayed for us beside Christ.

I might surely bring a maruelouse number of such testimonies, all which
declare the name of bread (which is attributed to the body of Christ after
consecration) not to signify material or wheaten bread (as it was before the
blessing and pronouncing of the words) but to describe that meat, that food,
that true Manna: which is only the flesh of Jesus Christ eaten under the form
o^ common bread. And that kind of bread is never named without an article or
pronoune joined with it: Whereby the excellency of the bread is witnessed, and
the difference of it from common bread. Math. 6. Joan. 6. 1. Cor. (...)
It is called in S. Matthew supersubstantiall bread, and in S. John the bread
which is flesh, and in S. Paul the bread, which who so eats unworthily, he is
gilty of the body of Christ: which is as much to say, as that kind of bread is
the body of Christ.

The presence of the body and blood of Christ in his The xii. Chapter.
last supper is proved by the conference of holy scriptures taken out of the
old Testament.
FRom Adam to S. John Baptist, all the faithful people of God was both in
continual expectation of the coming of Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. 2. de Pasch.
Jesus Christ: and partly foreshewed in deeds by holy figures and pagents:
partly foretold in words by the spirit of prophecy, what should afterward be
done by Christ him self, and be observed in his kingdom the church. After which
sort the brazen ser^ent Number. 21. Joan. 3. Ionae 2. Math. 12.
betokened the death of Christ, and Jonas his resurrection. The figures by the
way of doing, commended the same truth to ye eyes, which ye prophecies by the
way of speaking did set forth to the ears. Which two senses are the chief
means, whereby we atteine to knowledge in this life.

And because both figures and prophecies are obscure, dark, and unpleasant,
until they be fulfilled: I thought best, not t^ speak of them, before I had
declared the true meaning of that gift, which Christ made at his last supper.
Now it remains, y^ we briefly confer the one, with the other, showing that
sense of Christ's words, which the Catholics defend, to be agreeable to such
old shadows, figures and prophecies, as apperteined to the Sacrament of the
altar. For to the Jews (as S. Paul affirms) 1. Co. 10.
all things chanced in figures. And Christ says, all things must Luc. 24. Genesis
4.
needs be fulfilled which are spoken of him in the law, Psalms and Prophets.
De mira bil. sacrae scriptur. cap. 3. Hier. in quaest. He br. in ge.


The figure of Abel.
ABell the first shepherd, Priest, Martyr, and perpetual virgin, made a
sacrifice of the first begotten of his flock, and of the fat of them: which
God showed him self to accept by sending down fire from heaven. Abel then
having first offered him self unto God under the shape of other things,
afterward went forth to be offered in his own person and shape, being Didym.
in epist. Joan. 1.
^aiterously put to death by his brother Cain, with a deadly ^ripe of a wodden
club or stake: whose blood the earth (opening her mouth) received into her
bowels, and from thence it cried to God.

The prince of shepherdes, the chief Priest, great martyr and witensbea^ to al
truth, the flower and garland of all virginity Ezech. cap. 24.
is Jesus Christ God and man. whose flock the faithful men are. The first
bego^e^ and fat of them, is the flesh and blood, which Jesus ^oke of the
virgin Marie: which flesh and blood he first offered to God by will and
affection, when he took into his hands Math. 26
bread and wi^e, within a certain parler upon mount Sio^, where he did eat
the Paschal lamb with his Apostles. And God showed him sel^o to accept that
intent of the son of man, by working with the consuming fiex of his Divinity
that marucilouse grace: which turned the substance of bread and wine into y^
substance of Christ's own flesh and blood. And from that place Joan. 18. Aug.
ad quaest. Orosij 4. 9 Prosper de promissis and prae dict. De^ He. 11. 12 If
any good man were able to offer (...) to God his own body in his own hands,
he would do Abel by sleying his L^bs showed himself to have desired an other
sacrifice.
Christ went forth over the brook of Cedron, to be offered in his own person
and shape, betrayed by Judas, and put to death upon the wood of the cross by
his own brethren the Jews: whose blood the Church, called forth from among
both Jews and gentiles, with all due honor receaueth into her mouth, and
bowels: whence it gives a better cry, then the blood of Abell did from the
earth, where it lay.

Abel under the sig^e of his Lambs did by will and affection consecrate the
same truth of his body and soul to God, which at y^ time of his death he
actually rendered and gave up into the hands of his maker. And surely if he had
been able to have made the substance of his own body an^ soul present in his
own hands, when he offered, he would much more (...) have offered, it, then
y^ d^ad flesh of lambs, which he used for a sign of (...). For who would
content him self with a bar^ sign, if he we^e able to offer the truth it
self? He was not of such power, as to change the lambs into him self,
thereby working that in his haudes outwardly, which his heart inwardly offered.
But yet he showed his desire to have a change made, in that he slew y^ la^bes,
taking from them their former substance, to thin^t by consecration they might
obtei^e a more holy and sac^ed being.

God also looked upon his gifts, as well accepting the mind of his Priest, as
the manner of his doing. But that which lacked in Abel (who was feign to show
outwardly the consecration of his own heart by a thing of an othere substance)
that thing Christ fulfilled, making the same substance of his own flesh
present in Marc. 14
his hands, which he dedicated to God in his heart: For taking bread and
blessing he said, This is my body.

Abel offered his gift, before he went forth into the field, where Genesis 4.
he was ^aine: The Sacramentaries de^e Christ to have offered his gifts in his
last supper, before h^ went forth to his passion. Abel contented not him self
with the former substance, which his lambs naturally had: They teach, that
Christ contented him self with the former substance of bread and wine. Fire
from heaven in^amed the external gifts of Abel: They deny y^ fire of the word
of God to swallow up the substance of bread and wine which Christ took. Abel
consecrated his own body and blood, as far as he was able, under the outward
sign of his lambs: They deny Christ to have consecrated his own body and
blood under the forms of the bread and wine which he took, although they must
needs confess, that both Christ was able really to do it, and Aug de Trm. l. 3.
by y^ way of blessing to have said, this is my body: which words all the
Fathers have called the words of consecration. The real blood of Abel was
taken into y^ mouth of y^ sensible earth: They deny the Church (which is the
earth of God) to take the blood of Christ into her sensible mouth, whereas S.
Augustine says: Aug. in Psalm. 39.
Terra quae ore accepit sanguinem, Ecclesia est. The Church is the earth, which
has taken the blood in her mouth. The blood of Abel cried from the bowels of
the earth to God: They deny the blood of Christ to cric to God out of our
bowels. Abel figured both the supper and passion of Christ: They deny Christ to
have fulfilled the figure concerning his supper. Abel offered him self two
ways, once under a sign, and again in the visible truth of nature: They deny
Christ to have offered him self under any sign, but only in y^ visible truth
of his nature. The devil had the more power upon ^ain, because he came to the
high office of sa crificing unworthily: They granting that Satan entered into
Judas at the banquet of Christ, yet deny Christ to have made a sarifice there.
And so confessing that Judas did eat unworthily, they will not confess the
worthiness of the thing eaten. To be ^hort, the Sacramentaries (who teach bread
and wine, which The Sacramenta ries make the supper of Christ like to the
doings of ^ain.
are fruits of the earth, to remain in their own earthly nature, not having
the body and blood of Christ offered under the forms of them and accepted)
make the supper of Christ to be like the earthly fruits of Cain: who neither
him self went about to change them, neither obtained to have y^ earthly
grossenes of the^ p^rged with fie^ from heaven, neither offered his own body
and blood under the outward signs of them: but keeping back that, which was of
most price, he offered only a few base fruits of the earth, giving an example
for his part, what a base and ^arthly Cain did bear a sigure of y^ English
communion
communion heretics would set up directly against the blessed sacrifice of
Abel: which in all points Christ fulfilled, and the Catholics do keep and
follow. If I should have handled every member of this comparison at large, thou
may judge, good Reader, how great a book it would have made. In matters of
the old T^stament I had rather be short, then tediouse. which excuse I desire
thee to accept throughout every part of all this whole chapter.

The figure of Melchisedech.
THe Sacramentaries deny, y^ Christ exercised any Priestly office after the
order of Melchisedech in his last supper: As Genesis 14.
though ^elchisedech did not bring forth bread and wine, and Christ like wise
did not take at his last supper bread and wine. Math. 26 Genesis 14. Maro. 14 Genesis
14. Math. 26 Genesis 14. Math. 26 Galat. 3. Genesis 14.
Melchisedech did bless, and Christ blessed. Melchisedech gave thanks to God,
and Christ gave thanks. The thing blessed by Melchisedech was Abraham: And the
thing made by Christ's blessing was his own body the seed of Abraham.
Melchisedech gave thanks to God for the victory of Abraham, by co^secrating
the person him self, who was the conqueror, saying: Blessed be Abraham to the
high God. So did Christ make his ^charist, y^ is to say, he gave his thanks to
God for the victory obtained at his death, by consecrating the self same body,
which died, and wherein he wan the field, saying: This is my body which is
given Luc. 22.
for you. And yet did not Christ at his supper sulfill the whole order of
M^lchisedech?

The weakest and basest thing that Melchisedech had in all his Priesthod, was
the bringing forth of bread and wine. At y^ which Genesis 14.
he stayed not, but went forward to bless Abraham, the end of his sacrifice.
And now the Sacramentaries make Christ to stay upon the substance of bread and
wine, without going forward by blessing, to make there of his blessed body, the
seed of Abraham,

Melchisedech gave his bread to Abraham, to the end it, being Clemens Alexa^d.
Stro^. l. 4. Christ ^as seth Melchisedech by turning the bread, which he
brought forth, into his own body.
eaten of him, might be made a better substance in his flesh, then it was in it
self. But Christ gives not us the natural substance of common bread (for
common bread profits nothing) but Christ changes it into a better substanc^,
verily into the substance of his own flesh: to the end we eating his flesh
might be made a better and more holy substance, whiles we abide in Christ whom
we eat, and to whom we are united.

The Sacramentaries, who confess Melchisedech to have had Abraham really
present, as it were, in his hands at the tune of blessing and consecrating him
to God, deny Christ to have had his own body and blood present in his hands
at the time of his blessing and consecrating, which he made in his last supper:
Cypria. ad Caecil. li. 2. ep. 3.
As though Melchisedech were the figure of Christ, because Christ, who is the
truth, should have less, then he had. Melchisedech in the show of bread and
wine, showed an image of the Euthy. in panoplia.
supper of Christ. But under his image he had not present the real truth:
because an image of a lively thing made in a dead kind of stuff or matter,
differs from the chief pattern in substance. But Christ acknowleging his own
image in the sacrifice of Melchisedech, kept the forms of bread and wine
(because Christ has set his own true substence under those forms of brend
and wine, which Melchise dech used.
they were images and forms of the priesthod, which he excersiced in his
supper) but he changed the inward substance of them: for so much as the
substance of bread and wine were not the substance of his priesthod. And in
deed an artificial image of a liucly thing made by man, never can have the
truth it self under it, whose image it bears: but when Christ had put the
substance of his own flesh under the forms of bread and wine, then was the
image and shadow of Melchisedech fulfilled with the truth, which it signified.
And so is the whole Tatholike faith perfitly shadowed, by conferring the figure
of Melchisedech with the supper of Christ.

The figure of the (...) Lamb.
THe paschall Lamb was taken up yt tenth day of y^ first Exodus 12 Gregor.
Nazian. in Pasch. orat. 4. Leo de pass. domin. se. 7 Theod. in 1. Co. 11. Joan.
1. Joan. 12. Luc. 22.
moon, and yt fourtenth day at night it was, after y^ (...) thereof, wholly
offered and (...) with (...) bread, the blood being sprinkled over and upon
both posts of the door. Christ is the Lamb of God, who in his own person
came to (...) the tenth day of y^ first month, being received with great
triumph, in so much yt day took thereof the name of Palm sondaie. The
fourtenth day at night (which was (...) Thursdaie) he offered him self to God
by consecrating his own body and blood, turning the substance of common bread
and wine by the fire of his divine word, into the pure substance of his
heavenly flesh, which him self took of his mother: and he gave the same self
body of his to be eaten under the form of unleavened Gregor. Paschal. Hom. 22
bread, sprinkeling with it as well the post of our mouth, as of our heart, in
token that we receive the same self blood into our mouth, which our heart
believes.

In which supper Christ must be understood to be as truly offered, roasted,
eaten, and his blood as really sprinkled (after a mystical sort) as all this
was visibly done about the Lamb. The mystery, we speak of, takes not away
any truth from the ^ mystery contains the truth, but it contains it after
a secret manner.
thing: but shows the manner of the doing to be spiritual. For the offering
is made without slaughter, the rosting without operation of sensible fire, the
eating without co^suming of the meat, the sprinkling without division or loss
of the blood.

But as the incarnation being wrought without the seed of man, did not cause
the (...) of Christ to be the less true: even so the invisible changing of the
substance of bread and wine into his body and blood, the unbloody offering, the
Sacramental eating and drinking, does rather show to all faithful people the
worker of so high a mystery to be true God, then any why^ hinder the real
present of his flesh and blood under the forms of bread and wine.

The Prophecy and figure of Manna.
GOd said to Moses: Behold, I will rain bread to thee from Exo. 16. Joan. 6.
Exo. 16. Joan. 6. Exo. 16. Joan. 6. Matt. 26. Luc. 22.
heaven. Christ said, work the meat abiding to life everlasting which the
Son of man will give you. This is the bread, which came down from heaven:
And the bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world. The
Israelits said, Manhu, What is this? For they knew not, what is was. The
Capharnaits striued, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Moses
pointing to Manna, says, This is the bread, which See how y^ words of Moses
and of Christ agree.
our Lord has given you to eat. Christ pointing to that true Manna coming
down from heaven which him self made, says: Take, and eat, this is my body,
which is given for you. Moses said, this: and Christ, this. Moses said, is:
and Christ, is. Moses, the bread. Christ, my body. Moses, which our Lord has
given: Christ, our Lord, says, which is given. Moses, to you: Christ, for
you. Moses, to eat: Christ said, take and eat. The Exo. 16.
bread, which Moses showed, was not the substance of wheaten bread, but
heavenly. Neither the bread, which Christ gives, is the substance of wheaten
bread: but the true bread, which by the mystery of the incarnation came from
heaven. The bread, which Joan. 6. Psalm. 77
Moses showed, was made by Angels of such earthly stuff and vapors, as they
found in the ^ppermost part of the air: And the bread of Christ was made by
the Angel of great Council, of Mala. 2. Luc. 22.
such earthly stuff, as he found upon the table of the Paschall Lamb, which
was bread and wine, willing also his Priests (who are his Angels in earth) to
do and make the same. The bread, which Moses showed, was truly eaten of the
Israelites Exo. 16. Matt. 26. The bread which Christ ge ueth is both a sign
and a truth. Exo. 16. Luc. 22 Exo. 16. Hieron. aduersus Iouin. l. 2 The whole
sub stance of Christ is under (...) ry piece of the form of bread. The figure
of Ma^na is not fulfilled except the real flesh of Christ be given under y^
form of bread. 1. Cor. 12 Ephe. 4. All that come to y^ sacrament (...) y^ body
of Christ equally. Sap. 16.
within the cumpasse of that white and clear dew which they gathered: And how
much more is the body of Christ eaten of the Apostles and of other Christians
within the cumpasse of y^ form of bread, which they receive from the altar of
God? The bread, whereof Moses (him self bearing but a figure of the truth) at
this time spoke, was a sign, and not the truth. The bread which Christ (being
the truth it self) gives, is both a sign and the truth. The bread which
Moses showed was perfect in his own nature, before the Israelites did eat it:
Even so the meat which Christ gives is perfect in the Sacrament it self under
the form of bread, before we do (...) it. whether more or less were gathered
of Manna, oue measure was always found in the end: to signify that, since
whole Christ is under every part of y^ form of bread, whether you take a
greater piece of the form or a less, ever the same substance of Christ's body
is wholly received of every Communicant. Neither is it sufficient to fulfill this
figure if we say, that every man has the virtue and grace of Christ's body
given him by faith and spirit. for the measure of that grace is, as S. Paul
teaches, diverse in diverse men, according to the measure that Christ gives it
in. Some have greater gifts, and some less, and no one member is the whole
body. But Manna was in one measure to all men. Even so the substance of
Christ's body under the form of bread is given to all, that receive the said
form, in one measure and equally concerning the body it self: For every man
receaueth the whole. As well the good men, as the (...) did eat Manna: But the
evil did eat with (...), but to the good it gave the taste of all swetenes.
Right so y^ body and blood of Christ, which is under the form of bread and
wine, is as really taken of the evil, as of the just: But they take it to
their damnation, these to their salvation. He that marketh these comparisons
shall easily perceive, that the holy Ghost both by the figure and by the truth,
condemns their false doctrine: who teach the real body of Christ not to be
given under the form of bread and wine, after consecration is once made.

The figure of the old Testament.
Moses having offered oxen to God, powered one half of The figure of (...) old
Testa meant. Exo. 24. The (...) of covenant Heb. 9.
the blood upon the altar, the other half he powered into basins. And after he
had readen the book of (...) between God and the Israelites, and the people
had promised to keep the conditions thereof: he sprinkled them with ye blood
saying: This is the blood of the Testament, which our Lord upon all this talk
has made with you. Christ intending to offer him self unto his Father, and
certain years before publishing to his people the conditions of his new
Testament, at the last, in his supper he gives his own blood, the very same
blood which con firmeth the new agreement made with us: And instead of ^ling
us with it, he took the chalice and gave thanks, and gave to Matt 26. The blood
of the new testament (...) given in the chalice as the (...) was given in (...).
his Disciples saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new
Testament: Which shall be shed for many for the remission of sins. The figure
and the truth answer maruelously, as they may find, who will confer the
parts. It is sufficient at this time to note, that as the blood of the old
Testament was in the (...) or cup really, whence it was sprinkled: so the blood
of Christ, which is the blood of the new Testament, is really in the chalice,
whence it is received. As the noune blood in the old Testament, which is but a
figure of the new, yet was not taken figuratively but properly for true
natural blood: so much more the noune blood in Christ's words, which appertein
to the new Testament it self, may not be taken tropically, but even as the word
most literally does sound. As the substance of blood which Moses spoke of, was
showed under the accidents of the natural blood of calves: so the substance of
the blood, whereof Christ spoke, was showed under the accidents of wine. For
(as Jacob had Prophesied) Christ washed his garments and cote in Genesis 49.
wine, because he took the ^orme of wine to cover his own humane nature:
which was his garment, in respect of his Godhead, as S. Paul says, Habitu
inue^tus vt homo. Found in his Philip. 2.
apparel as man.

The prophecit and figure of Job.
THe men of the tabernacle of Job said: Who might give The prophecy of Job
applied to Christ. Job, 31. Hieron. in hunc locum. Greg. in Job li. 22 cap. 11.
Matt. 26.
us of his flesh, to the intent we may be filled? The tabernacle or household of
Job (whom some of his servants hated, some loved) was the figure of the
Church, wherein are good and bad. The bad wish for one that might give them
Christ's flesh, to fill their hatred upon it: as the proud Pharisees bought
Christ of Judas, and now a days the Jews will give any money for the blessed
body of Christ in the form of bread: that thereupon they may show their
malice against Christ, whom the Heretics of our age follow in yt point.
Therefore these soldiers of darkness, when they can find Christ visible or
invisible, show all the spite they can against him.

But on the other side good men that be in the tabernacle of Job, Chrysostom. hom. 45.
in Joan.
with love and reverence wish for his flesh, and desire to be filled with it,
to their inestunable comfort. Christ gave his visible body to the hands of the
Pharisees and Jews: Wherein having their desires satisfied, they nailed it to
the cross. And how much more is Christ to be thought, to have fulfilled really
the desire of good men, who long for the invisible substance of his own body?
Luc. 22.
especially seeing his own desire was so vehement to eat this passover of his
own body with his Apostles, at which time Matt. 26.
he said to them: Take and eat this is my body, which is given for you If we
had not as really y^ flesh of Christ given to our hands and mouths, as the
Pharisees had the same delivered to their cruel hands: it might seem, that
the worse part of the tabernacle of Job had obtined more truth, and more
fulfilling of their desire, then the better. which is a thought unworthy of
Christen men.

The just men of the tabernacle of Job loved him so well, that they desired to
be filled with his flesh, even for the love they bare to him: which love the
greater it is, the greater union it wishes Love desires as great a joining
and union as may be had.
and (...). Christ fulfilled to his people that, which the sernantes of Job
figured in their vehenient affection, which they had to be filled with their
masters flesh. They of the tabernacle of Job wished not only to see him, or
hear him speak, nor they wished not at all to f^ede upon him in spirit and
understanding (for they knew well he was not God) but they would fill their
flesh with his flesh, and their so^le with his soul, and so make a perfect
union: for so much as them selves consisted as well of body, as of soul.

This union Christ has truly granted us, making us one Joan. 6.
with his very flesh, saying his flesh to be meat in deed: which who so eats
worthily, (...) in Christ, and Christ in him for ever. That is the union of
real flesh, which was prophesied of in Job, and which is made betw^e Christ
and us, when we receive Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Matthew. and 45. in Ioa^nem.
worthelie his natural flesh under form of bread, into our natural bodies
and souls, and are made one with it re ipsa, in deed it self: as meat is made
one substance with him, that eats and digesteth it well.

The prophecies of David and Solomon.
THou have prepared a table (says David to God) in my Psalm. 22. Prophecies
taken out of the Psalms, and proverbs of Salomo^. Prou. 9. What supper wisedo^
prepared. Cyp. lib. 2. epist. 3.
sight, against them, who afflicte me: And my chalice, which makes me drunk,
how excellent is it? Wisdom has offered his sacrifices, set forth his
table, and says to the innocent and simple: Come, eat my bread and drink my
wine, which I have mingled unto you. They falsyfie the holy Scriptures, who
teach the substance of common bread and wine to be by Christ prepared at his
last supper: But his preparing was to convert the substance of them into his
flesh and blood. And those were the sacrifices, which wisdom made. That was
his bread and his wine: which if it were only received by faith and spirit,
how says the Prophet, that the table was prepared in his sight? No man is
able to see that, which is only spiritual: But, according to the word of God,
the Catholics believe that their meat is The supper of Christ is set upon the
table.
prepared, set, and laid upon the table, before they receive it: and it is set
forth in their sight in that visible form of bread, which is consecrated.

Again the table is but one, come good, come bad: They eat Christ has but
one table. Aug. in Ioa^. tractatu 50.
the same meat, and surely none other at the supper of Christ, besides y^,
which is upon his table. Judas did eat the same meat that Peter and Ihon did,
although diverse effects came of it: because them selves were not like
affected. But the Sacramentaries make Christ to have two tables: one, where the
good men receive Christ him self with bread and wine (as they ^each) an The
Sacramentaries assign two tables to Christ. 1. Cor. 10
other, where only common bread and wine is given to the wicked men. And yet
David, Solomon, and S. Paul speak but of one table, and it is prepared and
set forth not by faith and spirit, but in our sight. It is not only drunk of,
by mind and understanding* but the very chalice of it is of strength, to make
us drunk, because it conteyneth the blood of life and salvation. Psalm. 21. An
other prophecy taken (...) David. Only Christi^ adore that they eat, because
they only eat the flesh of God. Bread not (...) our Lords table. Augu. in
psalm. 98. Coloss. 2


An other Prophecy of David.
ALl that be fat upon earth have eaten and adored, which thing the Prophet
spoke, thereby to show, as it may appear in the same place, that all the
nations of the world were by faith subdued to Christ. And he brings a most
vndou^ed token thereof, in so much that they adore that, which they eat, which
thing is peculiar to Christians, because none other people does ^ate the real
flesh of God, which only may and must be adored. This property and token of
the true faith they take away, who say, we eat in our Lords supper the
substance of common bread: forbidding us to adore the blessed Sacrament of the
altar, the footestole, wherein the (...) of Godhead corporally dwells.

Many figures and prophecies joined together for breuities sake.
WHat shall Isay, that Noe being made drunk with y^ Genesis 9. Cypr. li. 3.
epist. 3. ad Caecilium.
wine of his own planting, lies naked and is lawghed to scorn of his own
child, to show that Christ having drunk in his supper of the same blood,
which he planted for him self in the virgyns womb, hangs afterward naked
upon the cross, and is lawghed to scorn, not only of the Jews for his
nakedness: but also of the Sacrame^taries, for so gross a deed, as they
repute it to be, that he drank his own blood under the form of wine.

What shall I rehearse, that Abraham did set cakes made of ^ine wheaten meal
befo^ the Angels, and they allowed his deed: not Genesis 18.
for the (...), which they n^ded not, but for the excellenty of the mystical
cake, which was come in Christ's supper? That Isaac Genesis 27.
having stablished his son Jacob with corn and wine, says to Esau demanding
his blessing: what more can I do now to thee? as who should say, al goodness
is already figured in that, which I have assigned to thy younger brother: which
betokens y^ faithful people of the Gentiles, whose greatest mysteries be made
of corn and wine? That Jacob prophesied of the fat bread of Aserwhich Genesis 49.
should give spiritual delicats to the faithful kings of Christ's Church: and
yet how ca^ any bread be fat, except it be the bread of life, which is the
flesh of Christ, which is made fat with the presence of his Godhead?

Who sees not, that God promises, as the highest reward in Exo. 22.
earth, for keeping his co^mamdements, to bless the loaves of his people, and
to give abundance of bread and wine? That wheate^ Leuit. 2. Justin. in Triph.
Leui. 24. Leui. 21.
meal is appointed for fit matter, to make a sacrifice of? that the show bread
must stand continually in the temple before the face of God? That Priests shall
offer the loaves of their God, and therefore shall be holy? Or what is the loaf
of God beside the flesh of Christ?

And who would not wonder to consider, that even the chief 1. Reg. 2. Mala 2.
Aug. de ciu^. Dei li. 17. c. 5.
Priests of the Jews (whose lips kept once the law of God) after the coming
of the faithful Priest Jesus Christ (to whom God has built a new Church,
which shall never be unfaithful to him) are constrained to ask a morsel of
mystical bread at the hands of those Priests, which God has appointed over
the faithful Gentiles, if they will have any part of the everlasting heritage in
the house of God? so that all the sacrifices of the law must be supplied,
fulfilled, and made perfect by the Priests of the new testament in that cake or
piece of the lively bread, which is the body Luc. 22. 1. Reg. 21 secu^d. 70
of Jesus Christ given for us.

David flying from Saul king of the Jews, to king Achis a Gentile, changes
his countenance, appearing like a fool or mad man to the unfaithful
courtiers, driueling on his beard, stumbling, and being carried in his own
hands: to show y^ Christ should appear under an other form to the converted
Gentiles, the^ he had commonly appeared in among the Jews. For now he seems
contemptibly under the f^rme of bread add wine, who appears daily of great
authority to the Jews in the natural Aug. in Psalm. 33. Joan. 6.
form of his true manhod: but at his last supper he driueled like a child to
their seming, that be wise in the world: he offended even his own Disciples at
Capharnan^ with the promise of giving his flesh to cate: he changed his
countenance, and carried him self after a sort in his own hands: when holding
and giving to be eaten that which seemed bread, he by his almighty Godhead, Luc.
22.
dowted not to say, as the thing was, This is my body which is given for you.

The same kingly Prophet had great joy in his heart considering the increase,
that came by the fruit of corn and wine: he praised Psalm. 4. Psalm. 103. Psalm.
22.
the bread that strengthens, and the wine that makes merry the faithful heart
of a spiritual man: The goodly chalice that makes true Christians drunk: The
remembrance which God has Psalm 110.
made of his marvelous works, giving meat to them, that fear him.

How can it be thought a small mystery, that Elias is fed from the air with
bread and flesh? that he walks forty days in the 3. Reg. 17 3. Reg. 19
inward strength of a piece of bread, very weak and feeble to see unto? that
Esaias says: the wheat corn of the Church of God shall Esaiae. 62 Hieron.
ibidem.
no more be given to her ennemies: and that the vine, wherein she has
labored, shall not be the drink of strange children? That ^ieremie calls
the flesh of Christ, the bread, wherein the wood (of the Cross) is fastened?
That Zachary asked, what good thing Iere. 11. Zach. 9.
there is besides the corn of the elect, and the wine which engenders
virgins? That Malachie complaining how the Jews had polluted Gods ^ble with
unclean bread, promises a pure and Mala. 1.
clean oblation made to his name among the Gentiles* That God him self would
be called the bread of Angels? That Christ having Psalm. 77.
taken ^eshe, would be called through his divine nature, the Joan. 6.
tr^e bread which came down from heaven? and through his humane nature, wherein
the Godhead dwells, mea^e in deed and drink in deed? And last of all, that
the holy Ghost would cause the preacher to say, and very often to repete, none
other thing to be Eccl. c. 3. 5. 8.
good under the son, besides eating and drinking with gladness and mirth.

Which saying who so understands of the eating common bread or meat, and
drinking common wine: he does not well to think that the holy Ghoost commends
(...) living. Neither does the Prophet mean such a kind of eating and
drinking, Eccl. c. 7 Aug. de eiuitate Dei li. 17 c. 20.
(...) y^ same book he says: It is better to go to the house of moorning,
then to the house of feasting: for there a man is warned of the end, that all
living things shall have, and in his life time thinks what things are to
come.

On the other side, he that so understands it only of spirit, faith, and
virtuous meditation, that he leave no possible means to eat and drink
bodily such a kind of bread and wine, in comparison The best thing under y^
So^ may be eaten and drunken.
whereof nothing may be judged good under y^ son: he seems without just
cause to deny that Sacramental eating and drinking there to be mea^, whereof
the prophet may be right well thought co speak. For as the holy scriptures by
the usual manner of attributing to God the passions, qualities and natures
Origin. tractatu ^o in c. Math. 22
partly of other creatures, but especially of man, did thereby give us warning,
that one time or other God should become true man himself, after that sort
fulfilling those prophetical phrases of speech: even so the ci^toine of
commending so much ^orn, wheat, meal, bread and wine, and of eating and
drinking, The custom of scriptures in commending so much bread and wine shows
that the body and blood of Christ should be given under their forms. Ephesians. 5.
Joan. 17. Now all things are one by the Sacrament of y^ altar.
does declare, that such a thing should at the last be eaten and drun ken under
the forms of bread and wine, as might be called not only good: but even the
best thing absolutely under the son, except any thing can be better then
Christ, or any action more acceptable to God, then the receiving of that flesh
and blood worthily which both makes al just men to be one body among them
selves: and to be one with Christ through eating his flesh, who is one with his
Father in divine nature and substance. Whereby three persons in the holy
Trinity and one God, two natures in Christ and one person, many persons in the
Church and one nature, al be made one in a maru^lous mystery.

The Sacrament of which unity because our Lords supper is, both in showing
many grains to be actually molded into one loaf, and in making many persons
really to be members of y^ one flesh, which every of them under the form of
bread worthily receives, and is changed into it: therefore in comparison of
this eating and drinking none other thing is good under the sun. And he well
says, under the son, for above the Son Eccles. 3. 5. 8.
there is (I will not say more goodness) yet more fruition of the same goodness:
when the form and cover of bread and wine being taken away, we shall see face
to face, eating and drinking upon the Luc. 22.
table of God in his kingdom.

These words of Christ's supper hoc facite, do not The xi^. Chapter.
only signify do this: but much rather make this thing, whereof it follows,
that y^ body of Christ is commanded to be made.
FAcere, does more properly stand to make, then to do, specially Facere.
when it has an accusative case joined with it, whereupon somewhat is to be
wrought: as, facere librum, nauem, domum, is to make a book, a ship, a house.
But when it Hoc facere.
has a general word joined with it, as hoc, this thing, is, then it may stand
either to make, or to do, according as the matter spoken of does require. For
if I do a thing first, and afterward say to an other, hoc fac, do this thing:
if my deed were also the making of a thing (as the making of a chayer, or of a
sword) then my word imports, that he must by doing make this thing. But if my
deed were only doing, and not making, as if I did only play upon a harp: in
that case, hoc fac, does not import make this, but only do as I have done.

Christ in his supper both did, and made. His doing was to The supper had both
doing and making.
take bread, to break, to give: His making was to say (with the intent of
blessing and of thanksgeuing) This is my body: For y^ word so spoken made his
body. Therefore when he says afterward to his Apostles, hoc facite, he
means, do and make this thing: Or by doing the like to that, which I have
done, make this thing, which I have made. That is to say, by taking bread, and
by blessing, and saying: This is my body, make my body. Thus does facere stand
most properly and truly.

For making does first signify such a work as presupposes a matter to work
upon: Which is the difference between creare Creare. Facere.
and facere, in that creare is to make a thing of nothing: Facere, is to make
one thing of an other, according to which sense Christ Cont. Marc. l. 4
made bread his body, as Tertullian says. And when one thing is made of an
other, that, whereof it was made, may either keep his old substance (as it
chances in artificial things which are made, and it is called facere
quippiam ex aliquo, to make one Facere ex aliquo
thing of an other, as a chayer is made of wood) or else the substance may be
changed, and it is more properly called facere aliquid de aliquo, to make one
thing from an other thing, that is to Facere de aliquo De Sac^. li. 4. c. 4.
wit, so to make it, that the thing, whence it was made remains not in his
former nature. And so S. Ambrose says, De pane fit caro Christi, from of bread
the flesh of Christ is made.

Moreover facere (which is in Greek (...)) does differ as S. Basilius hom. 1.
in hexame. specular. Agere.
Basile notes from (...), speculari, and (...), agere. Speculari is an action
of the mind, exercised by thinking or studying, without any outward working at
all: Agere, is to work with the body, not leaving any work behind, as he that
daunceth can not show what part of his dancing remains, after that it is
Facere.
past. But facere, does signify the doing of a work, which remains to be
seen or understood after the working of it. As God made heaven and earth, not
only to tari^ for the time of working them, but also to remain still as a
witness of his handy work. The Greek word (...), (whereof S. Basile writes)
is (...)
the same, which S. Luke and S. Paul have used to express the commandment
given in Christ's supper by these words (...), hoc facite.

If the body of Christ were not meant to be made by this commandment: what
thing is it, that Christ will have made? Will he have bread and wine to be
taken, eaten, and drunken, for his remembrance? No surely. For he had said
before, Take, and eat, and drink ye all of this, which notwithstanding, he
said hoc facite, clearly certifying us, that he now commands an other thing
beside eating and drinking. And that is verily ye making of his own body and
blood from of bread and wine, by blessing and speaking the words of
consecration.

Let us now consider also the persons, to whom this commandment Ireneus li.
4. c. 32.
was given. They were those twelve Apostles, whom Christ at his last supper
taught the new oblation of the new Testament, as S. Ireneus writes, giving
them authority The pricst hod of the new testament.
by this precept, to consecrate, to make present, and to offer to God his body
and blood. As for bringing of bread and wine to the table, it is a kind of
doing, which may be performed by other as well, as by the Apostles. eating and
drinking belongs not necessarily to them alone, but to all that communicate
with them. But when it is said namely to them, Make this thing, such a thig is
commanded, which none other man may do beside them, and their successors. And
that is not only to eat and to drink, but to make the body of Christ.

That body is the only thing, which is so precisely appointed A^ saving y^ body
of Christ is rather a like thing then this thing. Joan. 13.
unto in Christ's supper. For whatsoever else is done at the supper, which may
consist in any action, whether it be taking, blessing, breaking, eating or
drinking: it is rather the doing of a like thing to that, which Christ did,
then the making of this thing.

When Christ had washed his Apostles feet, he said not, hoe facite, make this
thing: But I have given you an example, that as I have done, Ita and vos
faciatis, even so you also may do. In which place the word facere does
signify to do, and not to make. And therefore Christ does not say, do you
that thing, which I have done: but ita faciatis, do ye so, as I have done. But
straight after that he had said: This is my body, he then said not, ita facite,
do so as I have done: But hoc facite, make this thing, to wit, my body.

Moreover as it is here said, Hoc facite in meam commerationem: Psalm. 110. A
memory is made.
so in an other place David in the spirit of prophecy did say, concerning this
very fact of Christ, Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum misericors and miserator
dominns, escam dedit timentibus se. Our merciful Lord and taker of pity has
made a memory of his marueilouse works: he has given meat to them, that
fear him. Behold, as it is said in the Gospel, Make this thing for the
remembrance of me: so it is said in y^ Psalm, He has made a memory of his
miracles. And even as he has made a memory: so has he willed this thing to be
made for his memory. Making then can not (...) excluded from these words, hoc
facite: which hitherto being proved by the proper nature of the word facere, by
y^ circumstance of the words, this is my body, and make this thing, joined
together, by the word hoc this thing, which is joined with facere, by the
conference of a like place in holy scripture, and by the condition of the
persons to whom it was spoken: I will now prove the same truth more plainly out
of y^ old Fathers.

S. ^ames (of whose Mass mention is made in y^ sixth General council) when
he was effectually working and fulfilling the Can. 32.
commandment of Christ, when he was doin^, yea rather making ^acobus in
liturgia.
that, which Christ bad him make, thus he prays unto God: Spiritum tuum and
caet. Send down (o Lord) thy most holy spirit now also upon us, and upon
these holy gifts put before us: that he coming thereuppon, with his holy and
good and gloriouse presence sanctificet and efficiat, may sanctfie and make
this bread y^ holy body of thy (...). Behold what is to be made. The bread is
made the body of Christ. Can you say, that the holy Ghost does this bread the
body of Christ? No verily, that were Clemens li. (...). const^ut Apo^ol.
no English. The true English is, that the holy Ghost does make this bread the
body of Christ. Therefore facere in this place is not taken for to do, but for
to make. The like may be noted in S. ^leme^t, S. Basile, and S. Thrysostom: who
all have written Masses and liturgies, wherein the like prayer is used.

Which thing is confirmed yet more strongly by the auctority Cyrillus in Ca^a.
mist. 5.
of S. Cyrillus Archebisshop of Jerusalem, who expounding the order and
mysterios of the Breeke Mass, has these words: Deum benignissimum oramus, vt
S. Spiritum super proposita emittat, we beseech God, to send his holy Ghost
upon the things, which are set before us, (...). vt panem quidem saciat
corpus Chri sti, vinum vero sanguinem Christi. that he may make the bread (to
be) the body of Christ, and the wine (to be) the blood of Christ. Lo, the holy
Ghost is desired of the priest to make bread Christ's body, and he is desired
so to do of the priest: who were not otherwise able to make so high a
mystery, if Christ had not commanded him to make this thing.

S. Dionysius ^reopagita shows, that the Priest purges Dionys. de eccle.
hierar. cap. 3.
and excuses him self of this great office, saying: Tu dixisti, hoc facite in
meam commemorationem. Thou have said, make this thing for the remembrance of
me: after which excuse made, the Priest (says Dionysius) desires that he may
be made worthy of this holy sacrificing, or of making these holy things. For so
much the word (...), does signify. It is worth the labor to mark, how S.
Dionysius having declared, that the Priest makes his excuse concerning the
making of that thing which Christ bad him make, consequently shows, what the
Priest does make, The most (...) things be made.
saying: The Priest (...), and again, (...). Diuina perficit, diuinissima
consecrat, seu sacra operatur. He makes the divine things, and works holy or
co^secrateth the most divine things. He says not, (...), id est agit: sed
perficit, opera tur, consecrat. He says not, that the Priest, does holy
things: he says, he makes them, he works them, he consecrateth them.
Manifestly witnessing, that facere in these words (hoc facite) is to make, to
work, to consecrate, and not only to do.

(...) Martyr is of the same mind, who rehersing Christ's ^ustin. in Apol. 2.
words, make this thing, consequently adds, that is to say, my body. As if he
said, make my body. (...) I spoke before. Ireneus aduersus (...). l. 5 The
(...) is made.


S. Ireneus has these words, Quando mixtus calix and fractus panis percipit
verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia corporis and sangui nis Christi. (...) the chalice
mixed with water, and the bread being broken takes the word of God, then the
Eucharist of the^ body and blood of Christ is made. The^ it is made, says
(...), it ca^ not there be Englished, y^ Eucharist is done, but only is made.

Likewise (...) says: Acceptum panem and distributu^ discipulis, (...).
aduersus Marcionem li. 4. To (...) bread his body. Amb. de iis qui (...) mist.
c ^ The body is made.
corpus suum illum fecit the bread taken and distributed to his disciples, he
made it his own body. fecit pane^ corpus suu^, he made the bread his body. It
were (...) English to say, he did bread his body.

S. Ambrose has these words, Sacramentum istud, quod accipis, Christi sermon
conficitur. And again, Hoc, quod (...) corpus, ex virgin est. This Sacrament,
which thou receauest is made by the word of Christ, and this body which we
make, is of the virgin. The Sacrament (...) is made, and we make the body of
Christ. By what other (...), then by the word of Christ, who said: make this
thing* For if these words, hoc facite, We make Christ's ^ody because he said:
make this thing.
do not contain facite corpus meum, make my body: S. Ambrose in (...) says
conficimus corpus Christi: we make the body of Christ. But so wise a man says
not so (...) vain, because he well knows, that hoc facite, does signify
thus (...), make this Hoc.
thing, to wit, make the body of Christ. See now what is facere, and see whatis
hoc: Facere is to make, hoc is this thing, which is the body of Christ.

According to the which meaning S. Hierom said: Absit, vt de (...). in Epist.
ad Heli. The body of Christ is made (...) the (...). (...). in (...). (...). 2.
(...). (...). lib. ^.
ijs quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes Christi
corpus sacro ore consiciunt. God forbid y^ I should speak any thing amiss of
them, who coming in place of the Apostles degree, make the body of Christ with
their holy mouth. If they make it with their mouths: surely it is because
Christ after y^ he had made it with his own mouth, said unto them: hoc facite,
make this thing.

S, Chrysostom writes thus: Sacra ipsa oblatio, sieve illa^ Petrus, sine illam
Paulus, sieve cuiusuis m^riti Sacerdos offerat, (...), est, qua de^it Christus
ipse discipulis, quamque Sacerdotes modo quoque The priest makes y^ holy
oblation.
conficiunt. That self holy oblation, it is the same, which Christ him self
gave to his Disciples and which the Priests now also do make. Again in an
ocher place: Operantibus Sacerdotibus, Sacramenta Chry. de sacerdotio. li. 3.
haec quae dico initiantur perficiu^turque* when the Priests work, the holy
things, which I speak of, are begun and ended or made persit. And showing that
(...) Priest does not this in his Chrysostom. hom. de prodit. Iudae.
own, but in Christ's person, he says: Non homo est, qui corpus Christi facit
and sanguinem, sed ille qui crucifixus est pro nobis Christus. Sacerdotis ore
verba proferuntur, and Dei virtute proposita consecrantur and gratia. Hoc est
enim, ait, corpus meu^. (...) Man makes not Christ's body by his own virtue.
verbo proposita consecrantur. it is not a man which makes the body and blood
of Christ, but Christ who has been crucified for us. the words are spoken by
the Priests mouth, and the things which are set before us are co^secarted by
the power and grace of God. for this, says he, is my body. with this saying
the things put before us, are consecrated. Thus much Chrysostom. S. Angustin
affyrmith Aug. co^tra Faust. Man. lib. 20. ca. 3. Ourbread is made unto us
mystical. Theoph. in Math. 26. Damasc. de Orth. fide li. 4. ca. 14. Psalm. 113.
and 134. Ge. ca. 1. Psalm. 32.
that our bread and chalice certa cosecratione mysticus fit nobis, non
nascitur: is made mystical unto us by a certain consecration, and not born: is
made, I say. Therefore hoc facite signifies, make this thing. (...) says,
Inefficabili operatione (...), tra^sformatur, etiam si nobis videatur panis.
although it seem bread to us it is made an other thing, or transformed by an
unspeakable working.

(...) after this sort. If the word of God be lively and of efficacy, and all
things, what soever it would, it has made: if it said, Let light be made, and
it was made, let the firmament be made, and it was made: If the (...) be
establyshed by the word of God, and all the virtue of them by the spirit of his
mouth: if heaven and earth, water, fire, aier, and all the decking of the^, and
man himself a living creature spread and made common every where, were made
perfect with the word of God: If God was made man.
God the word him self of his own will was made man, and has vpholden and
stayed in his own person flesh without seed of man, out of the most pure and
(...) blood of the holy virgin: is he not able to make bread his own body, and
wine and water his Christ ma keth bread his (...) body. Genesis 1.
blood? He said in the beginning, let the earth bring forth (...) spring, and
to this day (reyne being made) it brings forth springs helped and strengthened
with the commandment of God. God has said: This is my body and this is my
blood, and make this thing for the remembrance of me, Et omnipotenti eius
praecepto, donec veniat, efficitur, and by his (...) it is made, (...) he come.
Euthy. in ca 26. Matt.


Mark whether Damascene does not ground all his authorities upon making, and
the authority of Christ's supper upon these words, make this thing. (...)
expou^ding these words, Hoc facite, says: Hoc, inquit, nouum mysterium, and
non illud vetus make this new mystery (says he) and not that old. Haymo Make
this mystery.
says: Hoc facite, id est, hoc corpus sanctificate, sanctify this body: that
is to say, make holy and consecrate this body.

(...) Archbysshop of Cantorbury, although he shows Ansel. in epist. 1. Cor.
c. 11
first that by this word (Hoc facite) eating and drinking for the remembrance
of Christ's death is commamded to al Christians: yet declaring also a farther
sense of y^ same words, he says: Aut cord vos, qui Sacerdotes estis, hoc
facite quod ego (...) feci, id est, calicem vini consecrate, vt (...)
sanguismeus, hoc facite in mea^ commemorationem, vt in hoc facto sitis memores
mei and eorum Make y^ which I have made
quae pro vobis passus sum. Or else, ye that are Priests make that which I have
now made: that is to say, consecrate the chalice of wine, that it may be made
my blood, make this thing for the remembrance of me, and of those things which
I have suffered for you. (...) the Archebisshop of Constantinople says, that
the holy Ghost makes the mysteries by the hand of Priests Germ. in rerum
Eccles. theoria in tract. ad eos qui haesi.
and to^g. Nicolaus Methonensis says, the body and blood of Christ to be those
things, quae hoc ritu perficiuntur, which are made pe^fit with this ryte.

If sanctificare and efficere panem corpus Christi, panem facere corpus Christi
and vinum sanguinem: if consecrare and operari diuinissima, fieri eucharistiam,
facere panem corpus Christi, conficere corpus Christi, ore conficere,
oblationem Christi conficere, pane^ and calicem mysticum fieri, panem sui
ipsius corpus facere, nouum mysterium sacere, corpus effici, corpus hoc
sanctificare, co^secrare calicem vini, vt fiat sanguis Christi: If al these
phrases and kinds of speech can not be ^nglished by doing, but only by
making, and yet the aucthority and commandment, that any Priest has to make
the body and blood of Christ comes only from these words Hoc facite: it must
needs be confessed, that these words do A^ authority of ma king Chri stes body
^ometh from these words: make the thing.
signify much more make this thing, then do this. Otherwise, we should not
make the body of Christ at al: whereas S. James Dionysius Areopagita, S.
Justinius, S. Ireneus, Tert^llian, S. Hierom, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine,
Theophilaet, Euthymius, Haimo, Damascene, Germanus, Methonensis, yea all the
whole Church does say with one accord: that Priests do make, and are
commanded to make the body of Christ.

Is it now possible, that the body of Christ, which is thus made from of
wheaten bread by y^ commandment of God him self, should not be for all y^
present with us under the form of the same bread? If when the word was made
flesh in the virgins womb, it was present with us not only by says and
spirit, but dwelt really in Joan. 1.
the world, being conversant among men, and was seen in earth: likewise when
the body of Christ is made from of the creature of Bar^. 3.
bread, by the Priests mouth in the virtue of Christ's word, it is present with
us, not only by faith and spirit, but in deed and tr^th it self, and it
dwel^eth not only among us, but even within us, as meat dwells in him who
receaueth it weth a sound stomach, and digesteth it well.

For seeing Christ having taken bread and blessed, said, this is my body, and
^ad his Apostles make this thing: bread is in such sort made his body, y^ when
y^ (...) of the words is past, the body of Christ remains still (according
to the distinction Basil ho. 1. in Hex.
of S. Basil, as the work which was wrought by y^ said words) and it is
received of the faithful people under the form of bread, to nourish their
souls and bodies to everlasting life. The (...). Chapter.


What these words do signify, For the remembrance of me: and that they much
help, to prove Christ's real presence v^der the forms of bread and wine.
IT may be (some man will say) I deal not honestly* for Christ An ob^tion.
said not only, make this thing which I have most pressed upon, but he added
other words thereunto: which declare, that a figure should be made, and not his
true body. For he said, do this in the remembrance of me. If it be a
remembrance of Christ, how is it Christ him self? The remembrance of a man
differs from the man him self.

Thus much if any man say against me, I fear nothing, but The a^swere.
I shall satisfy him concerning my doing: if now I show, that the words of
remembrance (whereof he takes hold) does much more help my saying, theu his.
Which that I may the better perform, The words of Christ were not wet
Englished by the Prote (...).
I beseech him to remember, that Chist said not, hoc agite in co^memoratione
mei, do this in my remembrance, or in remembrance of me, but hoc facite in
meam commemorationem: which signifies as well to make, as to do this thing, not
only in, but rather for the remembrance o^ me: and yet so have these words been
commonly Englyshed and (...) by the (...), as though he had said only, hoc
agite, do this, and not (...) hoc facite, which is, both do this, and make
this thing. Again as though he had said in mea commemoratione, in the ablative
case, in the remembrance of me: and not (...), in meam commemorationem, in the
accusative case, the true English whereof must be, for the remembrance of me.

Christ said, make this thing for the remembrance of me, that What the
remembrance is whereof Christ spa^e.
is, make my body, which is given for you: to thend my geuiug of it for you
upon y^ cross may through that your fact and doing be remembered. This is the
true meaning of Christ's words. For so does S. Paul expoimd them to the
Corinthians: where after he had declared the history of Christ's supper, of
purpose teachig us what is meant by the remembrance of him, thus he writes: As
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink the chalice, ye shall 1. Cor. 11
show our Lords death, until he come. Lo, the showing of our Lords death is
the kind of remembrance, for which Christ wills his body to be made and
eaten, his blood to be made and ^runken. Wherefore saying, make or do this for
the remembrance of me, he says this much: Take bread, bless saying, this is
my body break, give, eat, and all to this end, that my death may be
remembered until my second coming.

Here we learn, that the remembrance, whereof Christ speaks, The reme^
brance of Christ is the showing of his death by fact.
is the showing of his death, and that not by word only, but by deed and fact,
and by making and doing. For the making of Christ's body, by changing the
substance of the bread into the substance of his flesh, is a mar^ilouse showing
of his death. For as his death was the dissolution of the soul from the body:
so his soul, which (as S. Ambrose notes) is understood by the Ambros. in
ca. 11. 1 ad Cor.
blood, is showed under the form of wine, and his body is showed a part from it
under an other form of bread. I do not say, that either the body is without
soul and blood, or the blood without flesh and soul: but I say, the showing
of the body under form of Christ's body and blood made under diverse kinds does
show and make us remember his death.
bread, and of the blood under y^ form of wine (in ^che of which whole Christ
is contained) is the showing of his death, and also of his resurrection. For at
the death in deed the soul and body were a sonder, and at the resurrection
they came again together: Even as now in figure and show they are a sonder,
not withstanding that in truth they are together.

But if the bread and wine remained in their old nature still, taking only the
name and sign of Christ's body and blood: Then should nothing be made for the
remembrance, or to show our The real body with the signs of breakig is the
remembrance y^ Christ spoke of.
Lords death, whereas he said: Make this thing for the remembrance of me: That
is (says S. Paul) for the showing of my death, the which death is yet
f^rther showed, when the same body in a sign is broken and given to be eaten,
and the blood drunken. For then as Christ's flesh was in deed broken upon the
Cross, so it is in show and sign broken, first in the Priests hands under
form of bread, and next in his or their mouths who communicate with him, by
eating and chewing of it. And likewise y^ blood is powered or shed into his or
their mouths under the form of wine, as it was in deed shed upon the Cross,
and as in deed Christ there delivered his ghost into his Fathers hands.

But if the bread and wine were not changed into the body and blood of Christ:
then that body, which at all were not so much as in sign and show broken
(because it were not present) and that blood, which were not so much as in
appearance apart from the flesh, or shed into the mouths of the receauers,
could not show our Lords death at all, whereas Christ would his own death to be
showed by the making of his own body and blood, with the signs of breaking,
shedding, parting and dissoluing. Thou see^ now, good Reader, how the kind of
remembrance, which Christ required to he had of him, is not only nothing at all
against the real presence of his body and blood: yea rather it is so
singularly set forth thereby, that without the presence of the body and bloo^
it shall be somewhat hard to devise, what memory at all here can be of Christ's
death. Most sure it is, that though man's wit may deuyse much, yet can it never
invent so perfect a mean, to make the death of Christ be remembered, as if his
own self be present to warn us thereof.

If it has chaunted to any man, whiles by manly fighting he has delivered his
frind from peril of death, to take some great wound in his own face: tell me
on thy conscience, is there any The presence of y^ benefactour is y^ best mean
to make his good deed (...) bred.
way more effectual for that wounded man, to put his frind in remembrance of
that fighting, then if him self come with the skar in his face to his frin^s
presence and sight? Is it not more, then if he sent an hundred letters, an
hundred tokens and messengers to warn his frinde thereof? Even so fares it
with Christ at this time, who fighting for us upon the Cross, whiles he
delivered mankind from the bond of death, took a wound which made him give up
his ghost.

Can therefore a more vehement remembrance be stirred up in our hearts, then if
the same Christ offer him self present to us with ^he skar upon his face? Thou will, I think, grant that nothing would move us, or make us more vehemently
remember the death which he took for us. But thou will say, that Christ now
The presence of a man hyndreth not his (...).
comes not before us, and that we see him not. Well Sir. First you grant
that the remembrance of Christ's death is nothing at all hiudered by the
presence of his body: why then said you before, if the Sacrament of the altar
be a remembrance of Christ, it is not Christ him self? Why said you, that the
remembrance of a thing must uedes differ from the thing it self? And now you
see and confess, that Christ present with the resemblance of his wounds,
should make you best remember his death.

Beware hereafter of this kind of reasoning. Christ made a resemblance of his
death at his supper, therefore it is not his own A perfect remembrance
requires y^ real presence of y^ thing remembered.
body. That argument is not good, yea rather this is good: Christ made a
perfect remembrance of his death, therefore his own body is given, to put us
in mind, that he died for us. Now let us return to that you said, Christ was
not seen of us.

If he were seen, your faith should be of small merit, beside that you could
not receive him into your body after that visible quantity, wherein he walked
upon the earth. He therefore that died for you, has now given you the
substance of his natural flesh and blood under the forms of bread and wine:
Where he is as verily present, as if you saw him or touched him. For (I A thing
may be pre sent though it be not seen.
trow) you understand that eye sight is not necessary, to make a thing present:
Otherwise, blind men were in evil case, and to them nothing should be
present: Which seeing it is not so, the body of Christ is not therefore the
less present, because you see it not.

But if it may please you to believe Christ, that said: This is my body, and,
this is my blood, the remembrance of Christ's death shall no less work in
your mind by reason of your faith, The faith of Christ his body is as much to
us as the sight of it.
the^ if you saw with your bodily eyes y^ self same body of Christ, which is
under the form of bread. For faith is that to Christians, which eye sight is
to infidels. You must consider, that Christ gives this Sacrament only to them,
that being already Christened, profess to believe him in all things. He now
tells y^ this is his body, and this is his blood: If you believe him not, you
have denied your faith, and are become an infidel: But yet ye may repent and
recover your old faith again. If then you believe him, now tell me, what his
bodily presence does hurt the remembrance of his death: or contrariwise, what
hinderance comes to the memory of his death by the bodily presence? Does not
one help the other, and so help, that no like help can be devised by all the
world? Does not his blessed body, as it were, cry unto thy heart: Behold, here
it is that suffered all the scorues, scourges, nails, thorns, spear and death
for thee?

And yet come our new preachers and cry: O good people, The new preachers:
Christ called bread his body by a figurative speech: and that appears,
because he said, do this in my remembrance, In my remembrance, I say. It is
therefore no body, but a remembrance of his body. Is not this gaye divinity?
Is not this true dealing (...) Gods people? Are not these preachers worthy of
Bishopriks, and the contrary teachers worthy of chains? Have they not found a
fresh remembrance, to put the fruit of Christ's death out of all remembrance?

Whiles the faithful people believed, the body of Christ to be What ki^d of
fruitful reme^bran ce the belief of Christ's bodily pre sense did work.
present: they came with that preparation, with that circumspection, with that
humble and contrite heart unto this blessed Sacrament, that in all their life
after, they were the better. They died unto sin, and mortyfied them selves,
to comme worthily to this high banquet: and by those means they so well
remembered Christ's death, that they practiced it in their own flesh, and
printed it in their hearts. And this was a great cause, why Christ himself would
put the nature and substance of his body under the form of bread: to the
intent he might so be remembered of us, that for fear of coming to this
dreadful Sacrament unworthily, we might conform our selves to his death by
contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

For besides the pauges of bodily death, none other thing in the world makes
us so fruitfully mindful of Christ's death: as the Sacrament of the altar.
And this to be one piece of the Basil. de baptis. li. 1. cap. 3.
remembrance, which Christ would have to be made in our hearts, S. Basile does
witness: Oportet igitur accedentem ad corpus and sanguinem Christi, in
commemorationem ipsius etc. He that comes to the body and blood of Christ,
must not only be clean from all filthy spot of flesh and soul (that he eat
and drink not to his damnation) but also he must evidently show the
remembrance of him (who died for us and rose again) in mortifying himself to
sin, and to the world, and to himself, so that he may live to God in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

This great learned and virtuous man puts our mortification for a piece of
the remembrance, which is made of Christ's death and resurrection. And in deed
the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and the belefe thereof in us,
causes us to mortify How Christ is remembered in eating bread and in drinking
wine.
our selves, lest we come unworthily to such high mysteries. But now Christ is
so well remembered in bread and wine: that neither sins be confessed, neither
amendment minded, neither faith exercised, neither charity used. Is this the
remembrance, which Christ would have of his death?

Men of woorship and honor, when they see death at hand, provide to have a
goodly tumbe built: Whereby their memories may be preserved, as long as it is
possible. And the Egyptians wisely considering how the life is very short, and
the time of being in the grave ex^eding long, did bestow much more cost The
tu^bs of the Egyptians.
upon their tumbs, then upon their houses: Thinking it best, there to buyld
most surely, where they should dwell longest.

Christ for his part refused not an honorable burying, and a gloriouse
sepulcher: Which to this day stands at Dierusalem. But yet since he took his
body for men's sake only, he chose his The body of a faithful man is the tum^ of
Christ.
longer memory and perpetual sepulcher to be rather in the body and heart of
man, then in the bowels of the earth. Rising therefore the third day from
death, he left no more his body in the earthly sepulcher: But the night before
he died, he had instituted such a memory of his death, as became the son of
God. For such a one in deed no man were able to make.

His memory is, to have bread turned into the substance of his body, and wine
turned into the substance of his blood, and the The monument of Christ.
same to be received of us: To the intent we might be turned into Christ,
dwelling in him for ever. Hereby his death is showed until he come to
judgment at the end of the world.

As the noble Acts, which other men have done, be written upon their
sepulchers: so in this memory of Christ, his acts are daily showed and
rehearsed. Then his incarnation is betokened most What remembrance is made of
Christ at the mass time.
mystically, when bread is made flesh: as the word was before made flesh, and
that incarnation is represented in outward show also, by singing of the Angels
Hymn, Glory be to God in the highest. Then the going before of Iho^ Baptist is
expressed, by reading of the Epistle. Then Christ's preaching is represented,
by singing of the Gospel. Then the faith of his Apostles and Disciples is
betokened, in pronouncing the Cr^de or articles of the faith. Then the supper
of Christ is made with no less authority, then himself instituted it. Then
his Cross is showed, by making the sign thereof upon the holy mysteries.
Then his death is invisibly wrought under the forms of bread and wine, by
turning their substances into him self, and showing them, as if the body were
divided from the blood. Then the fruit thereof is sown in the hearts of the
faithful people, by giving them the grace to fear him, to love him, to come
penitentlie unto him, and to be made one with him. Then ye resurrection is
outwardly showed, because the several forms of bread and wine each of them
contain whole Christ under them. Then the body is adored, which suffered for
us. Then Christ is glorified for the redemption of all mankind. Then thanks
be given to God, blessing to the people, and prayer is made for all the world.

This is the memory of Christ, whereby his name is great Malac. 1. Esaiae 11.
Psalm. 100
among the Gentiles, as Malachias did prophecy: And this is the gloriouse
sepulcher, which Esaias spoke of: this is the memory, whereof David says, Our
Lord has made a memory of his maruailons doings. Now is it likely, that all this cost is bestowed upon a piece of bread and wine?

Two kinds of sepulchers we read to have been always, and Two (...) des of
sepulchers.
this day to be in use: the one is, where the body lies present, and that is
properly the place of burial: the other, when the body is absent, and only a
token of it is erected, and this later kind is Caenota phium.
called Caenotaphium, a void monument without having the body in it.

Judge, good Reader, whether it be more semelie, since Christ Christ's
remembrance is no void monument.
would this Sacrament to be made for his remembrance, that it be a void
monument, without having the body in it: or else a sepulcher truly containing
his body within it, whose name it bears. specially seeing himself said of this
tumb and sepulcher: This is my body, and this is my blood.

The body is named of the Greeks (...), The body is y^ tumbe of y^ soul.
that is to say, of y^ burial or sepulcher, as though the soul were buried
therein, as the carkase is put in the sepulcher. And yet it is much more apt,
to call the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar, the sepulcher of his
passion: because in it is buried y^ whole virtue of that gloriouse sacrifice,
and thence it is applied and dispensed to the faithful.

S. Chrysostom also called the body of Christ in the Sacrament Chrysostom. in 1.
Corin. Hom. 24
(...) a carkase: because it is present after the same rate, as it was dead in
the sepulcher. not in deed without soul and life, but yet without sensible
mouinge, as Epiphanius also has noted. Epipha. in Ancorato. Psalm. 115.


The holy Martyrs (whose death was of great price in y^ sight of God) have
leaft their bodies behind them to our comfort: neither have they yet recea^d
the second robe of their flesh, Deo pro nobis melius aliquid prouidente, vt non
sine nobis consummarentur, Heb. 11.
God providing some ^etter thing for us, to the intent they should not be made
thoroughly perfect without us. even as Abdias historiae Apostol. li. 5.
the Fathers of y^ old Testament (of whom S. Paul speaks) had not the
reward of their faith, until some of the new Testament were joined to them.

S. John the E^angelist, although his carkase appeared not, yet he was not
unremembered, because manna flowed out of his monument abundantly, as Abdias
has witnessed. And now shall Christ leave a void memory without his body, or
without Manna in it? Are the relics of the blessed Martyrs profitable unto
us, and is not the flesh of Christ, who is Lord of all Martyrs, more then
necessary for us? It was mete yt Christ should arise with body and soul,
because he is the first fruits of 1. Co. 15.
all them that arise from death. But he now sitting at the right hand of his
Father, had before instituted a memory, wherein bread and wine should be
converted into the substance of his body and blood: that thereby we might both
have his body, and him self not lack it. For so it becommed all justice to be
perfectly fulfilled Math. 3.
in his person.

I trust, by this time it appears, that the remembrance of Christ's death is
maruelously set forth by the real presence of The body of Christ is the best
mean to re member his death.
his body and blood. Seeing then the said remembrance is y^ end, why the
Sacrament is made: it is a better kind of reasoning to affirm that so
profitable a mean, as the body and blood of Christ is for the remembrance of
his death, was not omitted by Christ: then to teach, that because it is a
remembrance, therefore it is The intent of Christ is furthered by taking the
words (...).
not the body of Christ. Specially since Christ said, This is my body.

For when the thing, which is intended, is the more furthered by taking the
words properly, then figuratinely: as well the proper nature of the words, as
the scope of the whole matter compels Origin. Hom. 13. in Leuit.
us, to take them as they naturally and usually sound, without any ^arther
circuition or seking of figures. Si res^ icias (says Origenes) ad illam
commemorationem, de qua dicit Dominus, A propitiatory re me^brance.
Hoc facite in mea^ commemoratio nem: Inuenies, quod ista est commemoratio
sola, quae propitium faciat hominibus Deum. If thou look to that remembrance,
whereof our Lord said: Do and make this thing, for the remembrance of me: Thou
shall find, that this is the only remembrance, which may make God merciful to
men. Mark this propitiatory kind of remembrance. Aug. de fide ad Petrum cap.
19.
S. Augustine also declares by conferring the Sacrament of the altar with the
facrifices of the law: how it is the remembrance of Christ, saying: In isto
sacrificio gratiarum actio atque commemoratio est carnis Christi, quam pro
nobis obtulit, In this sacrifice a thanksgeuing and a remembrance is of the
flesh of Christ, which he offered for us, and of the blood which the same God
did shed Euidenter osten ditur.
for us. Therefore in those (old) sacrifices, it was figuratively signi fied,
what should be given us: But in this sacrifice it is evidently showed, what
has now been given us. In those sacrifices it was before hand showed, that the
son of God should be afterward killed for wicked men: But in this he is
showed to have been already killed for wicked men.

By this writer (whether it were S. Augustine, or as others think, Fulgentius)
the whole nature of the remembrance, which we keep of Christ's death, is
showed: wherein the death is in Mark the difference between a figurauue
signifying and an evident showing.
deed past and absent, but the body of him, that died, is present. But in the
old sacrifices, neither the death neither the body was pre^ent, but only a
shadow of both. Therefore those sacrifices are a figurative signification, as
Fulgentius says: But the Sacrament of the altar is an evident showing. Mark
the words of Fulgentius, and you shall see two words of the old law, answer
unto other two of the new law. By the old sacrifices, he says, sigurate
significabatur, it was figuratively signified: By the new sacrifice, euidenter
ostenditur, it is evidently showed. Look how much difference is between
showing and signifiyng, between evidence and figures: so much is between the
old sacrifices, and the new.

Yet if under form of bread the body were not, and the blood under the form
of wine: surely the old did better show Christ's death, then this. for there
was flesh to show flesh, and blood If we had not Christ's body present, y^ old
shadows would show (...), is death better, then bread and wine.
to show blood. The blood was both in deed and in show also shed, and in deed
separated from the flesh, and poured upon the altar: and the flesh in deed
eaten by them, that made the offering. Therefore our sacrifice does not pass
that in showing outwardly the manner of Christ's death, but in evident showing
that which died. In evident showing, I say, under the form of bread and wine,
which showing is called evident, not for the seeing, but for the certeyntie of
the place and circiut: within the which we know by Gods word y^ flesh and blood
of Christ to be under the same form, because Christ him self showing to us the
foorm of bread, said, This is my body.

What need I to bring the Fathers one by one, since the whole Council. Nicenu^
secu^dum
second Council of Nice doubted not to say: Nemo sanctorum Apostolorum, qui
tuba sunt Spiritus sancti, aut gloriosorum Patrum nostrorum incruentum nostrum
sacrificium in memoriam passionis Christi Domini Dei nostri, and totius suae
dispensationis factum, imaginem corporis illius dixerit: None of the holy
Apostles (who are the trumpet of the holy Ghost) either of our glorious In
vnblo die sacrifice in the remembrance of Christ.
Fathers, has said our unbloody sacrifice, which is made in the remembrance of
Christ our Lord and God his passion, and of his whole conversation, to be a^
image of that body. No Apostle, no Father has called this remembrance an image
of the body so, as it should be denied to be y^ body it self. An unage of the
death it might have been called, but an image of Christ's body no Doctor ever
called it. because it is y^ truth it self. It is the body of Christ made for
the remembrance of his death, accordingly Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11
as Christ said: This is my body, which is given for you, make this for the
remembrance of me, Showing my death until I come.

Answer is made to the challenge of M. Nowell concer^ng the difference between,
I am the true vine, and, This is my body.
MAster Nowell (iu his reproufe of M. (...) proof) Fol. 102.
having occasion ministered to speak of these words, This is my body, (about
the which M. Dorman had said, that Luther and Calvin did not agree) he
answers first: they agree both in this, that the Papists ex^ound them
^alsely: Next he affirms, that M. Dorman, nor all Papists with him, shall M.
Nowels words.
never be able to show cause, why these words, Ego sum vitis vera I am the true
vine, do not prove as well a transubstantiaton, as hoc est corpus meum, this is
my body.

I am, M. Nowell, one of those Catholics, whom you call Papists, The answer to
M. Nowell.
who by Gods grace will show sufficient cause, why these words, I am the true
vine, do not prove as well a transubstatiation, as, This is my body,

In these words, I am the true vine, I say not only, that there is no
transubstantiation: but I affirine also, that in them there can be no
transubstantion at all. Whereas in the words, This is my body, a
transubstantiation both may be, and is. To make the What tra^substa^tiation,
means.
proof where of plain, it is to be known, that by the word,
transubstantiation the change or passing of one substance into an other is
meant.

To have one substance go and pass into an other, it requires that two
seu^rall substances be first or last really found: of which (...) real
substa^ces be requisite to a transub^.
two, y^ one must be extant, before it be changed: the other must at the least
be extant when the change is made, though it were not extant before. As for
example. The bread, which at his supper Christ took into his hands, was one
certain substance: the other was his own body, which he had taken of the
virgin Mary. Now when Christ said over the bread, which he had taken, This is
my body: we believe, that he changed the bread into his body, and we call the
passing of the substance of bread, into y^ substance of Christ's body,
transubstantiation.

This (...) we build upon the deeds and words of Christ. Two grounds of
tra^substantiatio^.
Upon his deeds, that he took bread, and blessed or gave thanks: Upon his
words, in that he said, This is my body. we believe his words to be proper,
because (beside that he spoke them in the way of blessing, of (...) a
Sacrament, and of commanding his Apostles to make this th^g) he also expo^ded
them him self, as not being only contented to say, This is my body, but adding
thereunto, which is given for you.

Upon these infallible grounds, we say that the thing pointed unto, is
Christ's own substance really present at y^ speaking of the words. And seeing
we know the same to have been bread before, and that it can not be at once both
material bread, and withal Christ's body (for that the substance of bread is
not united Bread is not ^ited to Christ.
to the person of Christ) we are constrained to believe, that the bread was
changed or (...) into Christ's body.

Such a change is not only possible, became bread is a creat^ able to be
changed into Christ's own body: but it is also most Leu. 1. 2. (...) bread is
(...) Christ^s body. Genesis 14.
convenient, as well to make the external sacrifice of the new testament (for
no external sacrifice is made without a change) as (...) to make it according
to the order of Melchisedch: whose oblation began in bread and wine, but was
ended in blessing Abraham, Psalm. 109. Cyp ep. 3. lib. 2.
and in pronouncing him blessed to the high God^ the which prophetical figure
the true Melchisedech Jesus Christ fulfilling, took bread and wine, to begiune
his new sacrifice withal: but by blessing and pronou^cing this is my body, he
(...) his ^nblody sacrifice, in that blessed sede of Abraham's owu body and
blood.

Thus we (...) touching these words, this is my body, both a sufficient cause,
why transubstantiation may be in them believed: and an undoubted possibility of
the same. But concerning the other words, I am the true wine, alleged by M.
Nowel: the very first ground of al transubstantiation lacks in them.

For whereas in every transubstantiation two particular and several substances
are to be granted, one which may be changed, an other into which the change
may be made: in these words, I am the true vine, here is but one particular
substance, which is Christ him self. As for the true vine, ^ither it is Christ
him self, The true vine is no particular substance. distincted from Christ
(and so it is no several substance from him, whereunto he may be changed) or
else it is no particular substance at all: but only a general ^ame of a kind of
substance, which has in it self no dotermined and proper being. For as, before
Christ spoke, there was no such vine extant, which might be pointed unto: so
(...) speaking he made no such true vine any where, he brought forth no such
material thing, nay, he meant not of any vine or of any other creature under
the son: but only meant him self to be that in his How Christ i^ the true vine.
own person toward us his members, which the natural vine is toward his
branches. And therein him self to be so much the ^uer kind of vine, the^ y^
natural vine is: because the juice, which unites his members to him the head
of his mystical body, is more true and more nigh to the spirit of God (which
is the truth ^t self) then any material vine can be nigh to his own branches.

Seeing then transubstantiation can not be made otherwise, then by turning o^e
material substance into an other: where one material substance only was found,
there possibly could no transubstantiation be made. Christ in deed is one
substance, but the vine, he spoke of, was no one particular substance at all.

It was therefore a great ouersyght to compare these words, I am the true
vine, to these, This is my body: which words were so spoken, that by the
circumstance of the supper they are understood to pertein after a sort to two
substances, to the one, as taken before the begnining of Christ's words, which
was bread: to the other, as made present at the end of them, which is y^ body
of Christ. For this which is bread, when Christ takes it into his hands,
afterward when he says of it, This is my body (by cha^ging of the former
substance) is made from bread the substance of Christ's own body. Here are two
paticular substa^ces, of y^ which o^e both may be right well changed into the
other, and so much is signified by Christ's deed and word: but in these words,
I am yt true vine, since two particular substa^ces are not, but only one^:
the like change could neither be meant, nor be made by any means.

Again in every tra^substa^tiatio^ as two substa^ces are presupposed first or
last really extant: so when the change is made, one of y^ twain must cease to
be: for so much as it is changed into y^ other substance. as, when water was
made wine, the water was no Joan. 2.
more extant: but the wine only was extant, into which the water was changed.
If in these words, I am y^ true vine, any change In these words either christ
is changed or nothing.
at all might be, Christ were the thing that should be changed. for he is
personally affirmed to be the true vine, in whose person two natures are
believed. Seeing therefore in the proposition he occupies the inferior place
(which thing is cl^rely signified in that he is constrned before the verb,
and (as it were) is made to serve and to be subject unto the true vine) either
nothing is meant ^o be changed, or else Christ himself is the thing.

Now it is clearly impossible, y^ Christ's person should change Christ co^
(...). Mala. 3.
his own substance, because he is God. Who says of him self by the Prophet,
Ego Dominus, and non mutor. I am the Lord, and am not changed. Therefore
Christ can be changed into no substance at all, much less he may be changed
into the true vine: which it self is no determined or peculiar substance
(...) from Christ's person.

But when after bread taken it is said: This is my body, the bread may be
right well changed, because it is a mere creature The bred is (...) to change.
subject by nature to mutatio^. So that look how much ods there is between
God, who is immutable, and his creatures, which are always changed: so much
sooner may the bread be made Christ's body, then Christ can be made the true
vine. Whereupon it insueth that M. Nowell avouched that, which was utterly
false: and he said it maruelouse ^gnora^tly, when he affirmed these words, M.
Nowels (...) assertion.
I am the true vine, to prove a transubstantiation as well, as, this is my body.

What M. Nowel? take you upon you, to challenge all the Papists in so weak a
matter: wherein a young Logician would not only be able to answer you, but
also to drive you out of the schools? You bring forth a proposition, which
imports two substances: the one signified by the pronoune, ego, I, the other
by the noune vitis, a vine. in which proposition each word does so Each part
of M. N. proposition is against (...).
violently withstand al manner of substantial change: that the one can not
suffer it through the excellency thereof (which is the substance of Christ) the
other can not bear it, for lack of the existe^ce thereof, because the true
vine, whereof Christ spoke, is no peculiar nature at all distincted from
Christ: but only shows the similitude of a truth, which truth is found no
where else beside in Christ him self. in so much that if Christ should be
changed into the true vine, he should be changed into a property of his own:
howbeit that could be no change from one substance to another, since it is only
one substance in all.

But is it like in yt supper of Christ, where he says, This is my Each part in
this pro position bears a transubsta^ tiation.
body? Is the bread, over which these words were spoken, a substance, which can
not be changed? Is it any more then a creature without reason and sense? On the
other side, is not the body of Christ a real substance, into which a change
may be really made? Is it not a substance different from the substance of bread
both in number and in the kind of nature?

Perhaps M. Nowell will say, that albeit so great a difference be found between
I am the tr^ vine, and, This is my body, concerning The obietion.
the two extreme and uttermost parts, which are Christ, and the vine: bread,
and Christ's body: yet at the least the verb, which does couple them together,
is like in both propositions. For as in the first person Christ says, I am
the (...): so it is said in the third, This is my body. Now M. Nowell meant by
like, that the verb est, is, does signify no otherwise in this is my body:
the^ the verb sum I am, does mean in these words, I am the true vine. As
though the matter, and things them selves, which are signified The answer.
by the two uttermost parts of a proposition, were not of more importance: then
the verb alone, which serves to couple them, and to show the agreement of y^
one toward the other. But what if the verb also be otherwise put in, this is
my body: then it is in, I am the true vine? Then surely, these two
propositions, which M. Nowell compares together as in all points like
(touching transubstantiation) shall be found in every point diverse, touching the
same (...).

The words, sum, es, fui, does serve to signify y^ kind of being* The signi
fication of the verb, Sum, es, fui.
which every thing has, according to y^ matter and case wherein it is used.
Sometime it signifies the general, or special, or personal and proper nature
of a thing* sometime yt difference thereof, sometime the proper or the common
accidents belonging to it. Yea sometime it only means such a being, as is in
the mind or understanding, without any real existence at all, as when we say,
sin is nothing: or, sin is evil: y^ verb, is, does s^rue to show how
s^nne is said to be.
after what manner the reasonable mind conceaneth sin: the which concey^th it
as being inde^de nothing, because it is no creature made by God: but yet the
mind speaks of it and consydereth i^, as somewhat. Uexily as the lack of a
perfection, which should have been really, where sin is now said to be.

Among al these (...) of being, the verb (...), fur, does most God is most
properly. Exo. 3.
prop^ly serve to ^ignifie God him self: who (as he said to Moses) is he, that
is by nature, and therefore he named him self, Ego sum qui sum, I am who (...).
Next unto God it signifies every substance most principally, as every one
partaketh of God a most excellent and p^fit being.

And as among all substances they are most principally such Particular ^ces
have their being next unto God.
which are most r^ally de^rmined, and limited by nature, as this man, that
bread, this body, and such like peculiar substances, which are (...) named the^
(...) and chief substances, and can not be (...) into a^y creatures more
particular, then them solues are: even so they are most specially meant by the
verb sum, es, ^ui, (...) they may be so (...).

They need have no reason brought sor proof, that they are really meant to be
that, which they are called, when they are named together with the (...), (...)
if there be not evident (...) the^ proper mea^ing, naturally they are Joan 1.
Joan 6. Matt. 12. (...) 1. Man. 16. Matt. 21.
included. Thus when it is said: The word was G^d, the word was made flesh,
there was much grass in that place, the ^onne of man shall be three days in the
ha^t of the earth, John was in (...) ^ those particular substances really, to
be that which they are named: but if it chance otherwise, we ask, why it does
not signify* as it should chiefly do.

Which being so, we must seek the reason why these words, I am the true vine,
do not signify Christ (...) self to be y^ substance of the true vine which,
thing the (...) someth to import. But, as the truth is, when Christ says, I
am the Why, the verb Sum, ^th not ^gnifie Christ to b^ the substan^e of a
(...).
true vine, he can not mean, I am the substance of a vine: for if he were so,
he were not Christ. Because the substance of Christ, who is God and man,
differs wholly (...) the substance of a vine. But Christ pr^eth of him self, I
am this, or that: ^fore we are compelled so to expound his words, that his
(...) may still be saved. He says not, I am changed into a vine: or I am made a
vine, the which words (...) a (...)* of being with the loss of the former
Being: but (...) says, I am the true (...), wherein somewhat is rather
attributed or given to his former substance* then any thing taken from it, and
much less the former substance it self is wholly taken away.

If then it repugne to the nature of Christ^ words, that he It is against
reason, to take away Christ's sub^ by words, which signify a virtue thereof.
should in the^ ^e thought to (...) spoiled of his (...), by which words his
substance (...) and (...): we (...) needs find o^t some other way of expounding
those words, then ^o a^e that* Christ is the substance of any material vine.
Seig then these two subst^es (for so in word they seem to (...), although in
de^ they can not so be meant) seeing (I say) these two (...) substances* Christ
and a vine can not either be wholly one, whiles they be diuer^, or be whol^
(...), while (...) be said to (...) a wise man avoiding (as nigh as may be) all
absurdity, seeks out such a meaning: that both natures may remain still
(...) concerning their different substances, and that they may co^municat and
agree in some* ^uality, which is common to ^th.

The which consyderation made all the learned Fathers in these phrases of
speech, I am the door, I am the way, I am the true Joan. 10. 14. 15. 1 Co 10.
Math. 11.
vine, the rock is Christ, ^on Baptist is Elias, and in such like, to show what
condition quality or property was common between these natures, without any
surmise at all that any transubstantiation could be meant in those words: in
all which propositions the verb sum, es, fui, does stand to signify an
accidental, and not a substantial agreement between diverse natures and
substances.

But it is far otherwise, when Christ having taken bread, says Two sub stances
be neither na med nor meant in This is my body
after blessing, This is my body: for in those words two several natures are
not joined together, and thereby aff^ed still to be the substances they were
before. It is not said, This bread is my body. No Enangelist, no Apostle, no
Disciple reports Christ's words in that sort: such additions comme from
Luther, from zwinglius, from Decolampadius, from Calvin: but not from S.
Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke or S. Paul. The true Apostles of God by the in^inct
of the holy Ghoost were so far This, can not be referred to bread or wine.
from the mind of saying this bread, or this wine: that they did put the
pronoune this, in such a gender: as neither could agree to bread nor to wine,
whereof I have spoken sufficiently before.

The proposition then being such, as names one substance only, and that most
particular: there is no cause, why the verb, est, is, ought not to stand in his
most proper and usual signification, verily to signify this one thing, which
was known to have been bread, by Christ's word to be the substance of Christ's
The body of Christ is not com mo^ bread.
own body. which if it be once granted, it will necessarily follow: that this,
which is the substance of Christ's body, is not also common bread, because
those natures were not at any time appointed to be together in any one
propriety of person.

If it be not common bread, and yet it does seem so: it will insew, that the
substance of y^ bread is changed into Christ's own substance, which is really
present under the form of common bread. Thus I have showed cause, why the verb
est, is, does signify otherwise in, this is my body, then in these words, I am
the true vine: by reason of which proper understanding of the verb substantive,
transubstantiation is of necessity inferred.

For as when I hear it reported for certain, that Peter, who was in the
morning at Dover, was seen the same night at Calis, I do thereby understand,
that Peter passed over the sea, not because so much was spoken, but because it
follows upon that, which was done: Even so, when I read, that Christ in his
supper The consequent whereby ^substan station is gathered.
took bread, and said after blessing: Take, eat, this is my body: I understand
the bread, which by nature is not Christ's body, by blessing and speaking to be
made his body, and consequently to be changed from his own substance into the
substance of Christ's body. None of all which things can be reasonably applied
to the other words, I am the true vine.

For which reason I conclude, that whereas in every proposition three parts are
either expressed, or employed: the one which goes before the verb, the other
which follows after, and y^ verb it self: every one helps to prove
transubstantiation in these Every lord of y^ (...) ^ropo ^tions is against
(...). No^.
words, This is my body: and every one hinders the proof of the same
transubstantiation in the other words, I am the true vine. So discrete a
challenge M. Nowel made in comparing these two sayings together. But who can
look for better stuff at his hands, since he has forsaken the notable wisdom
of the Church of God, and takes Caluins dream to be Gods word?

Hitherto, M. Nowell, I have showed the true meaning of every word of the two
propositions by you alleged. But now I have such confidence in the cause of
those Catholics, whom you (...) Papists: that I will grant you for farther
disputations ^ake, every thing to be otherwise, then it is in deed. Let us
imagine, that Christ were not God, and therefore might be changed That is
grated for arguments sake, which is not true.
in substance: that the true vine were a certain particular vine ^eueral from
Christ, into the which a real change might be made: that the verb sum, I am,
did stand to signify a being in substance, and not in quality alone: yet
these words, I am the true vine, The more semely tra^ substantia tion would be
the ^ter proved
would not prove as well a transubstantiation, as, This is my body: for that
transubstantiation would be better proved in all doutes moved therevppon, which
were the more semely for Christ to work. But it is a great deal more semely
for him, to turn bread into his body: then to turn him self into a vine.
Because it is to be thought, he being the wisdom of God changes allways for
the best. Which were not so, if instead of him self he should leave us a
material vine: and yet in turning bread into his body, the change is made for
the better by infinite degrees. Therefore these words, I am the true vine
(though al other thigs were equal) could never prove that unwise change so
well: as, This is my body will prove a most wise and happy change of common
bread into the bread of life.

Morcouer, these words, the vine, albeit they were meant of a certain vine: yet
there is no necessity, that they should show it The, both not show a thing
present.
present. Since those words may be verified of a vine, which being a hundred
mile thence, were known to Christ alone: as likewise, when S. Paul said, The
rock was Christ, the rock whereof he spoke was not present (...) him: but in
his mind he noted a certain 1. Co. 10.
rock, which yet in truth it self was not very certain (touching any one
material rock) because two diverse rocks were Exo. 17. Number. 20 The true vine
might be (...) to the ^posties.
stryken, out of which water flowed at diverse times. But (as I was about to
say) the true vine, being only described by those terms, might be uncertain
to the Apostles and to the hearers of Christ, either because they never knew
it, or because they have forgotten it. So that these words, I am the true vine,
will not as well prove a transubstantiation, as the other words, This is my
body. For both the bread, which was changed, was first present, and the body,
whereunto the change is made, is presently showed, taken, and eaten under the
form of the same bread.

It is doubtless a great help in proving transubstantiation, to know both the
uttermost parts, and to be able to bring that forth, into the which the other
is changed. For the nature of proof among men consists in making a thing
plain to reason, Proof.
by the mean of senses: and among faithful men, it consists in making it
plain to faith, by the mean of the same senses. If one should ask where the
vine is, whereof Christ said, I am the true vine, and ye could not bring it
forth: and on the other side, if I could bring forth the body of Christ, into
which y^ bread were changed: although you might as well believe the
transubstantiation of Christ into the vine through the word of Christ, as I do
believe the transubstantiation of bread into his body: yet you could not so well
prove it, because you could not show it so well.

The vine, is less then, this vine, and the proof that (this) makes, He
proves best who shows the thing most really present.
does far excede the proof that (the) can make. If an inquisition were made,
who had done a certain murder, and you said the man has done it, but I could
say, this man has done it: I suppose, all the Judges in the world would say,
that I proved the murder done better, then you. When it is said, the man has
done such a murder, albeit the Judge believe the saying: yet his understanding
is not quieted, but he asks farther, which man is that? But when you come so
nigh to the point, as to say, this man has done it: nothing ca^ be asked more
plain. Which being so, albeit I granted a transubstantiation in each saying:
yet M. Nowell had not said truly in affirming, that these words, I am the true
vine, do prove as well a transubstantiation, as, This is my body. By how much
(this) in making proof does pass (the) by so much the later words would better
prove a transubstantiation, then the first.

Besides this, when two transubstantiations are affirmed, of the which one has
been in some like sort practiced before, but the other has not been likewise
practiced: those words which affirm such a transubstantiation, the like
whereof has been before done, do prove the said transubstantiation better:
then those that speak of a thing, that never was done.

Bread was usually turned into Christ's body, whiles he lined Bread was turned
into Christ's body whiles he lived. In orat. Catech.
in earth: for his body was nourished with bread, the which bread was turned
into his flesh. Quamobrem recte nunc etiam Dei verbo sanctificatum panem in Dei
verbi corpus credimus im mutari. Wherefore now also we believe well (says
Nyssenus brother to S. Basile) the bread, which is sanctified with y^ word of
God, to be changed into the body of God the word.

This argument also Damascene, Theophylact, and Euthymius Li. 4. ca. 14. in
Joan. 6. in Math. 26
do make. So that it is no news for bread to become Chri stes body: but for
Christ to become a vine, that, as it is thoroughly impossible, because Christ is
God and unable to be changed: so albeit we did grant it possible, yet it were
y^ harder to prove it, because it had not ben^ done before.

Last of all, there was never any ancient Father, or General Council, nay
there was never no learned man, were he Catholic or otherwise, there was never
none of the lay people, no woman, no child, no natural fool: which took or
thought any vine or rock in the whole world to be the natural substance Noman
ever tok^ any vine or (...) to be Christ. Transubsta^tiation (...).
of Christ: Notwithstanding that Christ had said, I am the true vine, and S.
Paul, that the rock was Christ. But if we come to these words, This is my
body, and consider them so pronounced, as they were: we shall find, not only
thousand millions of faithful people to have believed the bread, over which
those words are spoken, to be changed into Christ's body: but also whole
General Councels, wherein many hundred of Bisshops and of great clerks have
been gathered together, to have taught and decreed Transubsta^tiation decreed
and taught.
directly or by manifest sequel y^ doctrine of transubstantiation: as the
Councels of Lateran, of Basile, of Constance, of Florence, of Trent. Which all
are known to have agreed in this behalf.

Besides many ancient Fathers have most constantly written In Apo. 2 2. li.
4. ca. 34. 3. l. 4. co^t. Marc. 4. de caen. Dom. 5 de ijs qui init. cap. 9. 6.
hom. 60. ad P. Antio.
the same: as S. Justinius the Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, with all the rest. The prosecuting of which argument
were at this present to far distant from my principal intent: but in case I
may understand, that these few reasons do not satisfy M. Nowell, or any other
man to whom my labor may do good, I will prove most fully the doctrine of
transubsta^tiation both out of the holy scriptures, and out of the holy Fathers.

Now for M. Nowell, not withstanding al these s^ue^ differences, to affirm yt
no Papist shall ever be able to show cause, why I am the true vine: does not
prove as well a transubstantiation, as these words, This is my body: it was an
ignorance in a preacher not pardonable. For if I should only stay upon the
last The faith (...) doctri ne of the Church is a reason of the thing taught.
argument, wherein all Christendom is showed to have believed transubstantiation
through these words, This is my body, and that as well before in deed, as by
confession of our adversaries, ever sense the great Council of Lateran (which
was kept above three hundred years past) seeing M. Nowell for his part could
not bring forth one reasonable creature, that ever surmised any
transubstantiation in these words, I am the true vine: were not cause showed,
why these words, I am the true vine: did not as well prove a
transubsta^tiation, as these words, This is my body?

S. Paul thought it a sufficient prouf of resurrection, to say: If there be no
resurrection, our faith and our preaching is in vain. But that can not be so
(as S. Paul concludes) therefore likewise 1. Co. 15.
the faith of all Christendom these three hundred years together was a cause,
why a transubstantiation should be proved by the one words much rather, then by
the other.

M. Nowell. M. Nowell.
Is not this as plainly spoken and as pithily, I am a true, or a very vine:
as, this is my body?
IT were small pleasure to me, M. Nowell, to impugn your words, against whose
person I have no quarrel: were it not, yt Act. 15. Galat. 1.
you are and would be accounted a teacher in y^ realm of England, which kind
of men as it is most necessary, when by lawful commission it preaches the
Gospel, which it has taken of the Apostles and their successors: so is the
same most perniciouse, when it preaches a Gospel of his own framing,
otherwise understood, then they took it of their Prelates, under whom Joan.
21. Chryso. ibidem.
they lived, before they departed from y^ fold of Christ: who appointed S.
Peter to be y^ general sheperd of his whole flock in earth, in whose chair
the Bishops of Rome sit by lawful succession.

Is it then so plainly and so pithily spoken, M. Nowell, I am a true, or a very
vine: as, this is my body? If the words, I am a These words be more pithy,
which inst^uted a Sacrament.
true vine, or a very vine, be as pithy, as those of Christ's supper: without
controversy they must as well institute a Sacrament of a true and of a very
vine, as Christ at his supper did institute a Sacrament of his own body and
blood. For words a like pithy, must work an effect of like pith: otherwise, if
y^ words of the supper do work that, which the words of a true and very vine do
not work: you have spoken falsely, in affirming that it is as pithily said, I
am the true vine, as, this is my body.

Before Christ came in to the world, he made diverse figures of his last
supper: as that of Melchisedech, of the Paschall la^b, of Genesis 14. Exodus 12 and
16. Leuit. 2. and 22.
manna, of show br^d, of wheate^ meal, and of such like. was there likewise so
many figures made, to prefigure that he would be a very vine?

When he was come into the world, he promised at Capharnau^ that, the bread
which he would give was his flesh. Made he the like 3.
of giving any vine to us? or of making himself a very vine? Joan. 6.


When the hour of sacrificing the Passover was come, he sent 4.
S. Peter before, to prepare the passoner, which was but the shadow of his
supper. Did he likewise make a certain banquet, or any like matter be prepared
for him: which might be the shadow of himself in any such respect, as he is the
true (...)? (...) did eat the 5.
passover with all the twelve, a mystical number, as it may well Math. 10 26.
Act. 1 Joan. 13.
appear in the holy (...): one of y^ which was departed from him, before that
he said: I am the true vine.

He protested his desire to eat this passover, but not so to eat, 6.
or to be made any vine. Luc. 22.


He washed his Apostles feet immediately* before his supper: wherein he said,
This is my body: but not immediately before that 7.
he said, I am the true vine. Joan. 13.


He sat at the table, when he said, This is my body, which was 8.
the place, whereupon he wrought his mystery: but he rose and Joan. 14.
went out of the place, before he said, I am the true vine. And so Psalm 22.
lacked the circumstance of that table, whereof David and Solomon Prou. 9.
had prophesied. To make his supper, he took bread: but he took nothing at all,
to make thereof a vine. Therefore there is a 9.
more real ground of the one, then of the other.

He blessed at his supper: he did not so, when he said, I am the 10.
true vine: and yet surely y^ words, wherewith blessing is joined, are thereby
the playner.

He gave thanks there, but not here: which is a token, that 11.
the myst^rie of his body was the greater.

He brake there, but not here: whereby the very vine lacked a 12.
notable cerimony concer^ing y^ represe^tation of Christ's death.

He gave there, but not here: because in his supper the chief gift 13.
was external, and given by Christ's hands to their bodies and hearts.

He said there, and also he did those other things, as S. Luke 14.
r^orteth, (...), saying: wherein he does us to understand, that Luc. 22.
Christ at his supper as well did, as said: for he took, he blessed, he brake,
he gave saying, to wit, his saying and doing went together and one made the
other plain: but when he said, I am the true Joan. 15.
vine, he did nothing else, whereu^to his words could apperteyne, so that the
deed might give light to the word.

At his supper he bad his Apostles, take* not so in speaking of 15.
y^ true vine, because they had already the gift of being the branches of him,
the true vine.

At his supper he bad them eat* not so in the other place. for y^ 16.
he provided no external meat under the form of auy vine, as he had prepared
his own flesh under the form of bread.

At his supper he said, This is my body, where one substance 17.
only is named: and yet that by Christ's doing and speaking is understood to
be verified within the cumpasse and form of that, which once was known to have
been the substance of bread: but in these words, I am the true vine, two
substances are named: of the which one is only a proper and peculiar
substance, the other is taken improperly, and is no real substance distincted
from Christ.

There the words pass from the worse to the better, from that 18.
which was bread to the body of Christ: here they pass from the better to the
worse, from Christ to the name of a vine.

There is in the former part a demonstration, by pointing to 19.
this thing really present: here it is only described to be the true vine, but
no such creature is showed or brought forth

There such words are added, which restrain the name body 20.
to that true body of Christ, which died for us: here such words be Luc. 22.
added, which declare the true vine, which is spoken of, not to be a natural
vine, but a parabolical vine. for it is said afterwad: As a Joan. 15.
branche can not bear fruit of it self, unless it tarry in the vine: so The
circu^ stance of y^ words in both pla^s.
neither ye, except ye tarry in me. See the ods, M. Nowell, This is my body.
Which body? which is delivered for you. to say, this is mine own substance,
the very same, that is put to death for you. but concerning the true vine he
says, As the branch can not bear fruit, unless it be in the vine: so can
not we bear fruit, except we tarry in him. The particles as and so, be words of
similitude, and not of substance.

Behold how he is a vine, by a similitude, and by a metaphor, by an example, by
having a like propriety toward us: as the vine has toward his own branches.

These be other manner of circumstances, for the pithy and plain setting forth
of his real body under the form of bread: the^ you can bring any to make so
much as an appearance, that Christ should be a vine. And is yet the one with you
so plain and so pithy, 21.
as the other? To what case would you bring the words, this is In Apol. 2.
my body: if your power were to your will?

S. Justinius the Martyr calls them words of prayer, because 22.
they were spoken with thankesgeuing. Deprod.
Iud.


S. Chrysostom, words which consecrate the things set forth: because 23.
they make a Sacrament of y^ bread and wine. S. Ambrose De ijs qui init. cap. 9.
calls them words of blessing, and a speech which works: because they are
spoken with the intent of working that they sound. 24.
S. Augustine names them a mystical prayer, of consecrating, of In epi. 59 and
li. 3. de Trin. c. 4
vowing, or offering, because they consecrate, vow and offer unto God the
substance of bread and wine: to the^d it being accepted of him, may be made the
body of Christ our only sacrifice, wherein the oblations of the new law must
end.

You making these words no more pithy, the^, I am the true vine, would have
them work no more: then metaphorical words do work. which is to say, that they
teach only a comfortable doctrine: but work no essential thing in the
substance of bread, which is set forth to be consecrated.

Christ after his body was consecrated, said to his Apostles, 25.
Make this thing for the remembrance of me: but after the words of the true
vine were spoken, he bad no thing to be do^ or made for any purpose or effect.

The making of Christ's body was e^r accounted a great 26.
sacrifice, as the greek Liturgies and latin ^bookes delare: S. James.
but there never was hard of auy vine, that was in that opinion S. Basil.
among the faithful. S. Chry.


The words, which consecrate Christ's blood, show likewise, 27.
what is to be thought of, this is my body: but the true vine is not so con^d
by any other like consecration annexed.

The blood is pointed unto within a cup or chalice, declaring 28.
the body also to have been pointed unto under the form of bread: but the vine
was not so limited within a certain place, where it might appear to any sense
of the Apostles.

It is called the blood of the new tostament, or the new testament 29.
in Christ's blood: the like addition is not made to y^ true vine.

The very cup of Christ's supper is said to be shed for us, because 30.
the blood is contained in it, which was only shed for us: y^ like is not said
of any thing, wherein y^ vine might be contained.

The words of Christ's supper be so plain and so pithy, that 31.
if we take them not as they sound: the prono^nes hoc and hic shall lack their
noune substantive.

The verb est, is being once taken for significat, shall have no 32.
substantive at all, to be his nominative case.

The noune corpus, body, being expounded for the figure of 33.
Christ's body, shall not agree with his participle (...), datum, given: or else
the relative quod, which, shall not agree with his antecedent corpus, body:
except we defend a figure of Christ to have been crucified for us. None of all
these things compel us, to take these words, I am the true vine, in such
sort. There is no pronoune, no Relative or Participle, which may so restrain
the nature of the words: but that we may take Christ's kind of being the true
vine, for having the quality of a true vine, and not being any vine in a
several substance.

Three Evangelists have written, This is my body, one after an 34.
other, confirming the propriety of the words: but only S. Ihon wrote, that
Christ said, I am the true vine. Now that is not so plainly said, whereof
four men write conformably, as that, which one writes alone. For if an other
had written the parable of the vine, perhaps he would have added other words to
have made it plainer, although it be plain enough already.

For the honor of these words, This is my body, Churches 35.
and Altars have been builded: where that blessed body might be consecrated
under the form of bread. For any vine I never think the like to have been
done.

You your selves allow at the least a square table, where this 36.
is my body, may be solemnly pronounced: but not so for these words, I am the
true vine. 37.


The body whereof Christ spoke, has been taught to be adored 1. de spir.
sanct. l. 3. cap. 12. 1.
under the form of bread by S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and all
the Fathers. You are the first M. Nowell, who Cor. ho. 24. 3. in Psalm. 98.
would either a vine to be adored equally with Christ's body: or else his body
to be no more adored in the Sacrament of the altar then a parabolicall vine.
For to that end your words run, that M. No^ scope
as well Christ should be a vine: as that whereof he spoke in his supper, should
be his body. to say, that his body is only present in a parable at Christ's
supper.

S. Chrysostom calls these words, I am the true vine, a parable, 38.
and theresore says: Quid vult haec parabola significare, what In Joan. hom.
75.
will this parable mean? And again: Vide, quam diligenter hanc parabolom
exequitur. See, how diligently he prosecuteth this parable. But thought he,
trow you, that: This is my body, was likewise a parable? No, no, it never was
his mind. For writing Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 83.
upon these words, Take, eat: this is my body, and having asked, why the
disciples were not troubled hearing that thing, he answers: Quia multa iam,
and magna de hoc antea disseruit, because Christ has disputed of this thing,
many and great things before. Where no dout at al can be, but that S.
Chrysostom means the the disputation kept at Capharnaum: where Christ
promised the Joan. 6.
Chrysostom. in Joan.
bread which is his flesh, affirming his flesh to be not only true meat, but
to be meat truly, therein showing: that it is meat not hom. 46.
only concerning the truth of nourishing, but also concerning the manc^ of
ca^ing it. upon which place S. Chrysostom writes, that Christ called his
flesh truly meat, either because it is the true meat which saves the
soul, or to confirm them in his former sayings: ne obscure locutum in
parabolis arbitrarentur, sed sc^rent omnino necessarium esse, vt corpus
comederent: least they should think him to have spoken darkly in parables, but
should know it to be by all mean^s necessary, tha^ they should eat his There
is no parable in the worcester des belonging to the gift of Chr^stes flesh.
body.

Behold, in promising his flesh, and in affirming it to be meat in deed Christ
spoke not in parables: much less could he do so in performing his promise, and
in saying, Take, eat: this is my body. Yet M. Nowell thinks a parable as
plain, as that speech which is no parable: Forgetting y^ Christ said him self
to speak Matt. 13.
in parables to the multitude, so that the hearers did not understand him. Yet
M. Nowell will have, I am the true vine, which is a parable, to be as plain,
as, this is my body.

S. Augustine says, Christ is called a vine by a Similitude or 39.
Metaphore: but he never taught the like, of, this is my body. For Trac. 80 in
Joan.
he says, Noster panis and calix certa consecratione mystious fit nobis,
Contra Faust. li. 20. ca. 13:
no^ nascitur: Our bread and chalice is not borne, but is made mystical to us
by a certain consecration. That, which is consecrated, is in deed made
somewhat, which it was not before, and not only showed to be a thing by a
similitude. A parable or similitude (as I am the true vine is) has no
consecration belonging to it: but our bread has a certain consecration, which
works some mystery: and what consecration is that, beside the effectual
operation of these words, this is my body?

Christ was the true vine, before he said, I am the true vine: but 40.
the thing pointed unto at his supper was not his body, before it was said,
This is my body. Therefore these words, which make a new thing, when they are
spoken, are more pithy: then those, which only show a thing already extant. But
are metaphors used to be really made after acerteine mauer of consecration,
Master Nowell? They be named and written many times, but they be never
consecrated (...) made really.

S. Cyrillus (...), that he called himself a vine exempli ratione: 41.
by the way of example. But what? said he likewise, this is my In Joan. li. 10.
c. 13 The vseof ^n example.
body, as it were for examples sake? when we bring an example, we bring it to
prove some other thing, which is more principal, then the example was. Christ
inte^ding to teach in what sort his disciples depended upon him for their
spiritnal life, shows it by an example of the vine: but in his supper his own
body consecrated, made, and eaten was not an example brought to declare an
other thing: but it was the principal thing it self, which was intended.

Therefore, this is my body, was more pithily said: then, I am the true vine.
For the principal is always more pithy, then that, which is alleged for to
serve an other purpose: in so much that Ibidem.
S. Cyrill says, Long ab omni ratione remotum est, ad naturae substantiaeque
rationem illud traducere, quod per similitudinem dictum est. It is far distant
from all reason, to apply that, which The ar^a^s reason.
was spoken by a similitude, to a comparison of nature and substance. Which
words, S. Cyrill spoke of the Arrians, who denying these words to be meant of
Christ's humane nature, by the similitude went about to pro^e: that as the
vine, and the husbandman be not of one nature, so God the father, who is, as it
were, the husbandman, and Christ, who is the vine, were not of one nature.

And as the Arians did amiss, to apply the words spoken by a A similitude
must not be applied to disprove (...) substance.
similitude, to the denying of Christ's own divine substance: right so M.
Nowell does apply the same similitude evil, to disprove by the example
thereof the substanciall presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament.

But as S. Cyrillus does return the argument of the Arians upon their heads,
by showing how Christ is the vine, and we I am the true vine, serves to show
the real presence of Christ's body.
the branches according to his humanity: so may we show to M. Nowell, that
these words of Christ, I am the true vine, serve to show the real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament of the altar.

S. Augustine says, Christ was made man, to the end the nature Aug. in Joan.
of man might be the vine in him: of which humane nature we men might be the
branches. S. Cyrill affirms likewise, Tract. 80
Cyr. l. 10 in Ioa^. 13.
Christ to be the vine even according to the flesh: and us to be branches both
spiritually and corporally. He proves it, for so Thempst^ call blessig.
much as the mystical blessing makes Christ to dwell corporally also in us,
by the communicating of the flesh of Christ. What means he by dwelling
corporally? Himself shows saying, Non habitudine solum, quae per charitatem
intelligitur: veru^ etia and naturali participatione. Not only by habit, by
power, by effect, or by the state and condition of charity alone: but also by
natural participation. ^o, he places natural participation, as a farther
degree beyond that dwelling of Christ in us, which is by faith or charity.

M. Nowell will say pe^haps, that the natural participation An obiec^.
of Christ's flesh is to believe, that he is true man and true God: and so to
feed upon him by faith at the time of eating bread and of drinking wine. Such
cursed interpretations now adays they The a^nswere.
bring: as though he, that does not believe Christ to be in deed true man and
true God, can be joined to Christ at all* by faith and charity. But S. Cyrill
speaks of that participation, which is made not only by faith and charity:
but also by natural partaking his body and blood.

We must put a certain just man to believe most p^y, who yet has not received
the mystical blessing or communion of Christ's flesh. That just man is joined
to God by faith and charity, but not yet corporally. He is a branche of the
Godhead (which is principally the true vine) and a branch of the manhod in
that he believes in Christ, who is true God and man: but he is not yet
corporally a branch of the manhood (which is also the true vine) except he
(...) worthily the mystical blessing, which is the Sacrament of Christ's
supper: the which makes Christ to dwell in us corporally also. Note the word
quoque, also.

For Christ dwelt in his Apostles hearts before the last supper (...).
by right faith and charity, and therefore he said they were all clean saving
Judas: but this mystery makes him dwell in them Joan. 13.
corporllay also. And S. Cyrill expounds farther, how Christ by the Sacrament
dwells in us. For whereas Christ had said, except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man and drink his blood, Life.
ye shall not have life in your selves: He interprets life, the flesh of
life, in your selves, in your body. That is to say: except ye eat my flesh, ye
shall not have the flesh of life in your body. Vita autem iure ipsa vitae caro
intelligi potest. The life may well be understood the self flesh of life. In
vobis ipsis dicit, id est, in corpore vestro. Christ says, except ye eat y^
flesh and drink y^ blood of the son of man, ye shall not have life in your
selves: that is to say, in your body.

Is not this plain enough? Then hear yet a plainer similitude, which fully
does open his mind. S. Cyrillus expressly affirms A ^tude made by S. Cy rill.
Christ to be in us, and us to be in him, by the communicating of his body and
blood, even after that sort: as if a man taking wax (which is melted by the
fire) do so mingle it with other melted wax, that one manner of thing seems to
be made of both. How think you, M. Nowell? Is one wax mingled with an other by
faith and spirit alone? or is it mingled by signs and tokens (...) the one
part, without the real presence of both waxes.

What wicked men are ye, who will make us believe, y^ S. Cyrill did not mean
the real substance of Christ's flesh to be reallie and corporally in us, by
communicating his body and blood? If you believe him not, why do ye not deny
his authority? If ye believe his doctrine, why teach you not the same? These
be The points to be noted in this place o^ S. Cyrill.
the points, M. Nowell, which you must answer unto. For every word, that
follows, is in S. Cyrill even in that place, where he disputes of the true
vine: though not in such order, as I now put them. Which thing I do, to make
his whole mind appear at once. Thus he says.

* 1. The mystical blessing, or the communicating of Christ's body and blood*
* 2. makes. * 3. Christ, or the life, or the flesh of life. * 4. to be, or to
be made, or to be joined, or to dwell. * 5. in us, or with us, and us to have
it in our selves, or in our bodies. * 6. according to the flesh, or corporally.
* 7. and not only by habit, or power, or by ^aith, or charity, or spiritually.
* 8. but also, by natural partaking. * 9. even so as one melted wax is mingled
to an other melted wax, and in manner made one therewith. * 10. By this means
we are both corporally and spiritually branches of Christ's flesh, which is
also the true vine.

See now, M. Nowell, how y^ parable of the true vine rightly expounded, makes
altogether for our purpose. As Christ is the true vine according to his flesh,
so are we the branches according The vine.
to his flesh. He is the vine, by having his flesh really present and united to
himself: therefore we be the branches by The bran ches.
having the same flesh really present in us, and by being really united unto
it, as the branch is united to his root. As Christ is the true vine two
ways, by his Godhead and by his manhod: so a man may two ways live by Christ,
by partaking of his Godhead and manhod: by habit only, if he have a good faith:
and by partaking his manhod corporally also, if he receive worthily the
Sacrament of the altar.

But that Sacrament could no more make us be branches according to the flesh
of Christ, then our faith and charity does make us to be branches thereof:
except it had his flesh really present. For otherwise our faith it self is a
better mean to gra^ us into Christ, then bread and wine is: because it is a
joining of us to God in a higher degree. But the mystical blessing in S. Cyril
is made the mean to join us to God in a higher degree, then faith or
charity. Therefore S. Cyrill and all the Fathers before him, (whose mind he
professes himself to follow) believed the real presence of Christ's flesh in
the Sacrament of the altar: And that by the way of turning the bread into his
flesh. For the flesh of Christ could not be really present, to dwell corporally
with us and in our bodies, except it were corporally received of us. And other
way, how to receive it corporally, I see not: except the bread be changed into
it.

Thus you see, what advantage, I am the true vine, does bring to the Catholic
faith: but no hinderance in the world can be thence deduced against the real
presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar.

M. Nowell. Nay, if Christ had said likewise, this is my true and very body, as
he said, I am a true or very vine what a rule had we then had?
I Marvel, if M. Nowell think more strength to be in these The answer.
words, my true or very body: the^ in these, My body which is given for you. as
though y^ true and very body were not given for us. But if the true body were
given for us, Christ saying, This is my body, which is given for you, said
also: This is my true and very body. And therein M. Nowell shall have a rule, to
know that Christ spoke not metaphorically: for the relative quod, which, can
not agree with any other word, then with the noune substantive corpus, body.
which noune corpus, body, if it stand improperly, the relative must needs
repete it so, as it stands: and then, if this be the sigure of Christ's body,
which is given at his supper, the figure of his body is given for us upon the
cross.

I confess M. Nowell, I could be content to go to schole, and to ^rne of so
ancient a scholemaster as you are: how a word which is but once named (as y^
noune corpus, body, in Christ's supper) may be antecedent to the relative,
quod, which, (as the Latins read) or noune substantive to the participle
datum, given, (as the Greeks read) and yet be otherwise meant in his relative
and participle, then it was being the antecedent or the noune substantive.
Christ said, This is my body given for you. will you divide the participle
given, from his noune substantive body? If you will not, as the body given for
us was the substance of Christ's body: so this is the self same substance of
Christ's body, which the Apostles are commanded to take, to eat, and to make.
In that you turn the words vitis vera, not only a true, but also a very vine,
you are much deceived. The word vera, is not now to be pressed, as if it were
set to signify a natural vine (where unto your words run) but to signify a
perfect vine, in respect of an imperfit: for so we say, he is a true man,
meaning a truth in his words and deeds, but not in nature. for a lier and
falsifier is also a true man in nature. Even so Christ means himself to be a
most true and perfect vine concerning the sweet fruit, which a vine ought to
bring forth and to communicate unto his branches. For the Jews being a vine
well planted by God, became through sin a ^oure vine, and brought forth none
other but wild grapes: but Christ is a true, a perfect, a most excellent vine,
which brings forth sweet grapes in his faithful members of y^ Church. Thus
does S. Augustine expound y^ word vera, true, Tractat. 80. in Io ann.
saying: that when Christ calls him self a true vine, he makes a difference
between him self, and that vine, to which it is said: Esai, 5.
How art thou turned into the bitterness of a strange vine?

Euthymius declares the Greek word (...), to signify In cap. Joan. 15.
either an excellent, an incorruptible, a spiritual vine: or else a vine, which
for his fruit brings forth verity and truth.

Now such an addition does rather detract sum what from the natural and very
vine, whereof M. Nowell speaks: then help it any thing. For which cause he
should not have had such a rule with us, as he thinks, if it were said, This
is my true body: since the word true might have been taken for the effect or
fruit proceeding from his body, which would not have been so much for our
purpose, as when it is said, This is my body which is given for you. Thus every
way M. Nowell is deceived in his construction. And no wonder, since he builds
not upon the rock planted by Christ in the Catholic Church: but upon Caluins
new inventions, which are more feeble, then the sands them selves.

M. Nowell. Christ says, Ego sum panis, I am bread: and yet no
transubstantiation of his body into bread. Why should these words, Hoc est
corpus meum, this is my body, more transubstantiate bread into his body?
HOw long will you continue in falsifying the holy Scriptures, M. Nowell? When
shall a man find you to deal uprightly? Where is it written, I am bread? Where
says Christ those words? Uerily if he had said them, yet you may know, he
meant him self to be bread only by a similitude or Metaphore: as it was
expounded before in the words, I am the true vine. And therefore, I am bread,
could import no transubstantiation for seven causes.

* 1. The bread, he speaks of, is no certain or limited substance. The
causes, why Christ ca^ not be ma teriall bread.
* 2. Christ can not be personally changed, for that he is God. * 3. The verb
sum, I am, being joined with two natures clean distant does always signify a
like condition or property, and no identitie of substance. * 4. It were a
change made for y^ worse, such as Christ uses not to make. * 5. It would be y^
harder to be proved, because the thing, whereinto the change should be made, is
not pointed unto, as present. * 6. It had been a change, the like whereof had
not been used before. * 7. It was ne^r ta^ght nor believed in the Church.

But in these words, This is my body. * 1. The body is certain. This is my
body may work ^ change.
* 2. The bread taken is a creature made to be changed. * 3. The verb est, is,
does not stand between two diverse substances: but between the pronoune and his
only noune substantive. * 4. The change is for the better. * 5. It is better to
be pro^ed, because it poynteth presently to the thing made. * 6. Bread was
before changed into Christ's flesh, whiles he eating bread lived thereby. * 7.
The Church believed, the Fathers taught, and the General Councels decreed the
change of the bread into Christ's body.

It had not been hand, to have answered thus: if Christ had said, I am bread.
But phy upon that impiety of yours, M. M. Nowell has falsified y^ word of
God.
Nowell, who in so few words commit so many faults? You report, that Christ
said, I am bread: and therein you falsify the word of God. It is not said any
where, I am bread. For what call you the saying of Christ? It is written, Odiui
omnem viam iniquitatis: And again, Omnem viam iniqua^ odio habui. I have Psalm.
118. verse. 104 and 128.
hated every way of iniquity, I have hated every unjust way. Were it now truly
reported, that God had said: I have hated every way? And thereof to conclude,
that noman may either walk by the high way, or walk in the path of God: because
God has hated every way?

After the like manner does M. Nowell report the words of Joan. 6.
Christ: who said twice, I am the bread of life. And once he said, I am the
living bread. Now comes M. Nowell and leaves out The geni (...) ^afe l^ft out.
the genitive case in the two first sayings, and the participle in the last,
and the article in both, and affirms that Christ said, I am bread. In deed M.
Nowell, these words be found, as likewise we find, I have hated every way: but
it is no small sacrilege, to allege Gods word, leaving out any essential part
thereof. And specially when the word left out is so joined with the rest: as y^
genitive case is joined to the noune, which it follows, or as the participle
is joined to his noune substantive.

It had been bad enough, to have said in our tongue, which has The article left
out
articles: I am bread of life. for even so the article (^) the, had been left
out: because it is written, I am the bread of life, or, I am the living bread:
And not, I am bread. But to leave out both the article (the) and the genitive
case (of life) or the participle (living) and to argue upon that false ground,
that Christ is not transubstantiated into bread: it is so dissolutely done,
that it may warn you, M. Nowell, of your ow^ blindness of heart, and of y^
blindness of all such other fal^e preachers as you are.

Who through (what other great sins I can not tell) but certainly The blindness
of Schisma t^ks.
through schism are so wonderfully forsaken of God: that you see not now, not
only what his true meaning, what his word and Gospel* what the most sy^cere
faith of his Church is, but you see not that, which natural Philosophers,
which men of common reason, which children in y^ Catholic Church see. You see
not the dependence between the pronoune adjective, and his noune substantive:
but refer hoc to panis, and hic to Hoc panis.
vinum: you see not, how the nominative case agrees with his verb: but in
expounding Hic est sanguis meus, for hic significat sanguinem meum you leave
the verb without a noune substantive Hic signi ficat.
to go before him: which is not so, when we say, Hic est sanguis meus, this is
my blood, taking the verb substantive est, is, properly. For s^ing here is in
all but one substance named, the pronoun hic, this, is so referred finally to
the blood alone, that yet we do not construe the words saying, this blood is my
blood: The Catholics fall not into the like er rour.
but we make the last determination of the pronoune (this) to rest only in the
substance following. And so as long as the substance is unnamed, the noune
substa^tine to the pronoune is unknown, as in, Hic est filius meus, haec vidua
erat, hoc est verbum fidei: but Math. 3.
straight upon the naming thereof, the pro^oune is ruled in case, Luc. 7. 20.
10.
gender, and number, of his noune substantive, which co^eth after the verb.

But when you have expounded the words of Christ by hic sinificat Significat
never has a noune to be his nominative case.
sanguinem meum, when all the speech is fully ended: your pronoune of the
masculine gender and of the nominative case finds no noune substantine at
all, with whom he may rest, but still is without his due construction.

You turn the nounes corpus, and sanguis, from the nominative Corpus.
case into the accusative. You divide the relative quod, which, Quod.
from his antecedent corpus, body, in that you make him repete but half the
signification of his antecedent. You divide the participle (...)
(...), given, from the signification of his noune (...), body. You supply in
S. Luks Greek words the verb est, is, by common use: and when you have it
present, you cast it out again, Est sup^d.
or expound it not according to y^ common use of speaking: which forced you to
supply it, but according to an improper meaning very sildom used, and not
understood of any mean learned man.

You teach by necessary and inevitable sequel of your doctrine, (...) figure
offered for us. Wine shed for us.
a figure of Christ's body, that is to say, material bread to be sacri ficed
for us. You teach, the wine to be in the cup: and yet Christ says, the cup,
to wit, that which is in the cup, to be shed for us.

You divide the noune substautine from his genitine case: sanguis from
testamenti, vitae from panis. you cut of the article. you mysse^glish many
things, as I have noted before. These be faults, into which a Grammarian should
not fall: and yet you are so blind, that you see them not. For so I rather think
of you: the^ that you of purpose chose to be Heretics, and to be damned persons.

What might a man do, to bring you home? You wrote not passing twenty lines
together of this blessed Sacrament in this place: and yet s^ into what gross
(...) you be fallen. If your whole book were so particularly skanned, every
leaf is full of such like faults. But because it would pass all measure of
writing, if in a great volume every line should be thus staid upon: therefore
al things every where be not, nor can not be so particularly examined. but
surely all be as fond, as vain, as false. How Christ is the bread of life.


To return to my chief purpose, Christ is y^ bread of life, according to his
Godhead and manhod: and is to be eaten of by faith, as it is often times said
in S. (...). But he is also to be eaten i^ his humane flesh, and to be drunken
in the substance of his natural blood not only by faith, but vere, truly*
that is to say: he is to be taken at the mouth, and so comes to our hearts
and minds, which is the wa^ of eating him at his last supper.

The which way (by that mean of eating) fulfilleth the figure Ma^na. In
respect whereof Christ calls him self not dead food, as y^ was: but ye living
bread, not without power to quicken (as that was) (...) the bread of life:
which can give life to him, that Bread of life.
worthily (...) it. Not a (...) bread, as Manna was: but the true bread* not
given from the (...), as Manna, but from True bread. Bread from heaven. The
everlasting in eat.
heaven. and the bread says Christ, which I will give, is my flesh.

This bread of life, M. Nowel, is the everlasting meat, which the son of man
promised to give: and at his supper he does give it, even as he is the son of
man, to wit, by the instrument of his manhod verily by his own hands, and by
his corporal delivery made to the twelve at his last supper.

The preface of the fifth Book.
ALmighty God knowing the real presence of his Sons flesh under the form of
bread, to be a thing so far above the whole course of nature, that no
understanding of man was able to atteine unto it, did at the least so fortify
the same by his holy words put in writing, and by the continual practice of
the Church: that who so lists to believe, may have more then sufficient gr^nd,
to b^ld his faith upon.

That I may now omit other pro^es, how plainly does S. Paul speak in this
matter? whose words are the more earnestly Aug. de opere Monachor. c. 2
to be weighed: for so much as S. Augustine, a man much ^nuersant in the
Epistles of this chosen (...), affirms him, to dispute (according to the
Apostolic manner) more plainly. Et magis proprie quam figurate (...) qui, and
rather to speak properly, then figuratively.

Which thing I wish the Reader to have always in his mind, depely consydering,
that if Chr^s body. (...) not really present, ^o (...) has spo^ more ^ely,
(...) S. Paul: be* cause he alone has written more of the last (...) it self,
then any other holy writer. But (...) he uses for the most part to speak
properly, we must not in this my^y alone take his words (...) (...).

The Chapiters of the fyfth Book.
1. The real presence of Christ is proved by the blessing of the cup of his
blood. 2. Item by the name of breaking and communicating. 3. Item by the one
bread, which makes us all one body. 4. Item by the conference of al those
words together. 5. It is showed how we are one body in Christ. 6. The real
presence is proved by the like example, which S. Paul used concerning the
Jews and Gentiles. 7. Item by the kind of showing Christ's death. 8. Item
because evil men eat this bread vnvvorthelie. 9. Item because evil men are
gilty of Christ's body and blood, by eating and drinking it. 10. Item because
they discern it not in their doings from other meats. 11. Item because no
figure can make a man gilty of Christ's body without special conempt, except
it be the truth and the figure together. 12. Last of al, the real presence is
confirmed by the frequent repetition of the body and blood of Christ.
The real presence of Christ's body and blood is proved The first Chapter.
by the blessing and communicating of Christ's blood, where of S. Paul
speaks.
S. Paul writes to the Corinthians of the Sacrament of the 1. Cor. 10
altar in this manner: The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communicating of the blood of Christ? as though he said: there is no doubt, but
that the chalice, which we bless, makes us partake the blood of Christ. This
advantage we have by conference of those holy scriptures, which speak of one
Matt. 26.
matter: that one place gives light to the other. S. Mathewe reherseth, how
Christ taking the chalice, said: This is my blood of the new testament. S. Luke
shows, that he said: This chalice is Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 10
the new testament in my blood. S. Paul adds thereunto: The chalice of
blessing, which we bless, is the communicating of Christ's blood.

A blessing in holy scripture is either a praising of a thing, or What blessing
is.
it is the giving of a benefit thereunto. It is certain, that the chalice, as
long as it has nothing but wine in it, can not deserve any praise, because a
thig without life is not apt to receive praise. It remains then to (...),
what benefit is bestowed upon the liquour in the chalice.

The Sacramentaries will say, that it is made holy wine of common An obi^tion.
wine, and sanctified bread of common bread, which sanctisying is a blessed
action: and by that holy signification, whereunto it is appointed, a certain
holiness is given to it, which may be called a blessing.

This were very well said, if it had been only said generally of y^ The answer.
chalice, that it is the chalice of blessing which we bless: but the blessing,
that S. Paul speaks of, is named specially also the communicating of
Christ's blood.

A general blessing gives a general benefit, as when we say: our Lord bless
you, God send you good speed, the right hand of God bless this meat, the
holy Ghost sanctify this wine, and make it to be a remembrance of Christ's
bloodsheading. These and like words be blessings, and hallow or sanctify the
thing blessed: 1. Timo. cap. 4.
as S. Paul says, the creatures to be sanctified by the word of God and
prayer. But when a special blessing is given, a special sanctifiyng must
follow: As when God blessed the (...), Benedixitque eis dicens, Crescite and
multiplicamini, and replete aquas Genesis 1.
maris: and God blessed them saying, Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the sea: this special kind of blessing works a A blessing made by
words, works y^, which the words (...) signify.
special benefit unto the creature, which is blessed* and it works even
that which the word signifies* who doubts, but by these words of Gods
blessing (increase and multiply) the fisshes took the virtue of increasing and
multiplying, which before these words they had not? for this kind of blessing
gave them this kind of benefit.

Seeing then Christ blessed the chalice, saying: This is my blood of the new
testament out of doubt he gave it really this virtue, to be the blood of the
new testament. Tell me no more, that Christ willed it to signify his blood:
for I tell you out of y^ word of God, what soever words have b^ spoken belonging
to any creature by the way of blessing, they have wrought that, which they did
signify. But Christ said in the way of blessing* This chalice is the new
testament in my blood: Therefore he made, by that blessing, his blood within
the chalice.

Bring me no more of those paltry examples: I am a door, I Christ is not
called a door, vine, or rock by (...) way of (...).
am a vine, the rock is Christ, John Baptist is Elias, the holy Ghost is a
dove, and a (...) of that sort. I (...) in one word to al, that none of these
were spoken by God in the way of blessing. The (...) says not, that Christ
blessed any certain vine, saying this is Christ, or: This is my body* He said
many things without blessing, and he bl^ed sometimes without speaking.

But when blessing and words are ^oyned, we are certified, that those words are
not figurative, nor only tokens and bare sig^s: but working and making that,
which is said. For if they promise Genesis 8.
Romans 9.
a thing to come, they work by the way of causing the promise in due time to
be fulfilled: as when a so^e was promised to Abraham by the Angel of God. If
they be spoken, as betokening a present verb, they presently work the thing
betokened.

Let no (...) deceive thee, good Reader. There is a dubble blessing spoken of
in S. Paul: there is the chalice of blessing, and the chalice, which we
bless. The chalice of blessing, as S. Chrysostom In. 1. cor. cap. 10.
says, is that: which when we have before us, we praise God with admiration
and horror of the unspeakable gift: but it is not the chalice of blessing,
until we have blessed it. The blessing, which makes it the chalice of
blessing, is that we speak of: and that is the blessing, which is made by the
words of consecration, as I have said before. Therefore S. Chrysostom writes
thus upon Chrysostom. 1. Cor. hom. 24.
this place of S. Paul: Cum benedictionem dico, Eucharistiam dico, and dicendo
Eucharistiam, omnem benignitatis Dei thesaurum aperio, and magna illa munera
commemoro. When I say blessing, I say the Eucharist, and in saying the
Eucharist, I open all the treasour of the goodness of God, and I make rehearsal
of those great gifts.

But least any cavil should be made, as though the words of Amb. d^ ijs qui
init. mys. cap. 9.
(...) were not the words of blessing: hear what S. Ambrose a^th of this
Sacrament: Quantis vtimur exemplis, vt probemus, non hoc esse, quod natura
formauit? How many (...) use we to prove, that it is not y^ thing, which
nature made: but that, which blessing consecrated? Lo, that, which con^eth, is
blessing. But what blessing? After y^ S. Ambrose had brongh^ many examples, to
show what strength blessing had: at the last he concludes: Quod si tantum
valuit humana benedictio, vt naturam conuerteret: quid dicimus de ipsa
consecratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa Domini Saluatoris operantur? If the
blessing of man was of that power, that it changed nature: what say we of Gods
own consecrating, where the self words of our Lord and Saniou^ Blessing.
Co^secrat^ng. working. words.
do work? Mark good Read er: blessing, consecrating, and the words of our
Savior working, is all one matter.

And yet again, to make it playner, S. Ambrose says: Nam Sacramentum istud
quod ac cipis, Christi sermon conficitur, for this Sacrament which thou
receauest, is made with the words of Christ: and what the words be, he tells
him self: Vide, omnia De Sacr. li. 4. c. 5.
illa verba Euangelistae sunt, vsque ad: accipite, sieve corpus, sieve sanguinem:
inde verba sunt Christi. Behold al those are the words of the En^ngelist,
until we come to this word, take, either body or blood: from thense they are
the words of Christ.

If blessing be that which consecrateth, and both blessing and consecration be
made with the words o^ Christ, and his words he those, which follow the word
take, and y^ words which follow be these, This is my body, and This is my
blood: who perceyueth not, y^ these only are the words of blessing? Then we
bless the chalice, when we consecrate, when we say: This is my blood of the
new testament: and when we bless saying the words of blessing in Christ's
mysteries, then we make so much as our words do signify. For which cause S.
(...) concludes, that y^ chance, which we bless, is the communicating of the
blood of Christ. In saying, which we bless, he shows the cause, why it is
Christ's blood: In saying, it is the communicating of Christ's blood: he
shows both y^ effect wrought by blessing (which is y^ presence of the blood
of Christ) and the cause final, why it is made, verily to communicate unto us
the merits of Christ's death, where the said blood was shed for the remission
of sins.

If the ^halice after blessing had no blood in it, how did it communicate
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 10
to us the blood of Christ? S. Chrysostom giving the literal sense of these
words, writes thus: Eoru^ aute^ huiusmodi est sententia. Quod est in calice,
id est quod a latere fluxit, et illius sumus participes. of these words this
is y^ meaning. The same which is in the chalice, is that, which flowed from the
side, and thereof we are partakers. He affirms S. Paul to say, that both y^
blood, which flowed from Christ's side, is in the chalice, and also that we are
thereof partakers. But y^ blood, whereof we are partakers, by the confession of
y^ Sacramentaries is y^ natural blood of Christ, therefore the natural blood
of Christ is contained within y^ chalice. And conseque^tlie they are deceived,
in tea^hing that we partake it only by faith: for so much as we drink really
y^, which is in the chalice.

The real presence is proved by the name of breaking The second (...) piter.
and communicating.
CHrist taking bread and blessing, said: This is my body. S. Paul shows
those words to have been spoken, not (as ^arolostadius said) of his body
sitting visiblie at the table: not (as ^aluin said) of the body feeding us by
faith from heaven: but of that very body, which was made under the form of
bread. And how shows S. Paul thus much? By the word Breaking
breaking: for when he says: The bread, which we break, is the communicating
of our Lords body: he determines the presence and the distribution of the body
to that, which is broken. As though he said, there we must believe the body of
Christ to be, and thence to be distributed, where we see breaking used at the
Mass time.

For not every bread, that is broken, is the communicating of Christ's body:
but the bread, which we break after blessing and thanksgeuing. The two
Disciples knew Christ in the breaking Luc. 24. Ex ^erm. de verb. Euang. apud Be
dam.
of the bread. Nouerunt fideles (says S. Augustine) (...) quid dicam:
nouerunt Christum in fractione panis. Non enim omnis panis, sed accipiens
benedictione^ Christi fit corpus Christi. The faithful have known, they can
tell, what I mean: they have 1. Co. 10.
known our Lord in breaking of the bread. For not every bread, but the bread,
which takes y^ blessing, is made the body of Christ.

If the bread, which once was common, be made the body of Christ by blessing,
and in breaking of that bread the faithful do know our Lord: that bread can
not be still the substance of common bread, for then it were not made the body
of Christ, as S. Augustine says it is. Again if Christ were not under the form
of that bread, the faithful knew not our Lord in the breaking of The knowing
of our Lord in bread.
that bread: for if the substance of Christ be absent, no sign or token is
sufficient, to make us know our Lord more at the breaking of bread in the
Church, then at our own howses. If one substance be in both places, and it be
broken in both: what odds is it, whether it be broken here or there? in this
place, or in that?

But to say, that the bread broken at our common tables is the body of Christ
because it may signify his body: it were to say, that who soever eats common
bread in mortal sin should be 1. Co. 11.
damned for eating it. when S. Paul says: The bread, which we break, is: do
not al men perceive, that he goes about to show, what the bread is, which we
break? If it be common bread, it is a fondnes, to show what it is: for he has
already named it and who knows not, what common bread is? But he means not
so. He goes not about to teach, what bread is: but what that bread is, which
we break: whereof it follows, that we have a ^eculiar kind of bread, which
we break.

What bread is that? He answers, It is the communicating of The communicating.
Christ's body. Why does he not say, it is Christ's body? Forsooth because the
holy (...) foresaw, that (...) should rise, who would say: the verb est, is, to
mean significat, it does signify, or else the noune corp^s, body, to mean the
sign of Christ's body. Therefore S. Paul being the instrument and Secretary
of God was made to put in such a word between the verb, est, is, and the noune
corpus, body: that every man might know, no figurative being of Christ's body,
but his real and substantial being to be meant. For S. Paul speaks, as
though Christ had said: this is the communicating of my body. For of that,
which Christ brake and said thereof: This is my body: of the very same S. Paul
says, The bread, which we break, is it not the communicating of our Lords
body? Now say I, that which is the communicating of Christ's body, can not be a
figure of his body still remaining in the former substance of bread.

For a communicating, which the (...) name (...), is (...)
such a giving? that the whole is made common. Otherwise, as S. Chrysostom
says, it should have been called (...), a participation: (...).
but now as well in speaking of the chalice, as of the body, S. Paul used the
Greek word (...), which is communicatio in Latin, communicating in English, or
having and making common: alb^it the common Latin translation reads
participatio, partaking, in respect that every man for his own part receaueth
that bread, which in substance is the body of Christ. But when the one word or
the other stands properly, therein we must be judged by wise men: among whom
S. Chrysostom Chryso.
is worthy of a special place. who having rehearsed these words of 1. Corin.
the Apostle, the bread which we break, is it not the communicating Hom. 24
of our Lords body? asks: Quare non dixit participatio? Quia amplius quiddam
significare voluit, and multa^ inter haec conuenientiam ostendere Non enim
participatione tant^m and acceptione, sed vnitate communicamus. Quemadmodum
enim corpus illud vnitum est Christo, ita and nos per hunc panem union
coniungimur. Why said not S. Paul: The bread, which we break, is the
partaking of our Lords body? Because he would signify a greater thing, and show
the great affinity which is between these things: that is to say, between them
that receive, and the thing that is received. For we communicate not only by
participation and partaking, but in unity: for as that body is united to
Christ, so we also are joined in vnio^ with him by this bread.

S. Paul then by the judgment of S. Chrysostom chose that word, which might
express a most inward communicating and joining between us in this Sacrament.
But if this Sacrament were a figure of Christ, without the substance of his
body: S. Partaking were to goo^ a wor^ to ex press a figure of Christ's body.
Paul has not done well, to use the word of communicating. for partaking were
to good a word to express so slender a gift, as the Sacrame^taries talk of.
But S. Paul said: The bread which we break, that is to say, the mystical
bread of our Lords supper is not only a partaking, but a communicating. and yet
no figure can make us one with Christ in unity of nature. Therefore this
mystery, which gives more then a figurative union, is the very true body of
our Savior: for it makes common with us all, that is in Christ.

The bread (I say) which we break makes the body of Christ and all things in
it common with us. No bare figure can do so. Therefore the bread, which we
break, is the true body, and not There is no less partaking then to have the
(...) only common.
only a figure. Tell me, good Reader, he that receaueth a figure of a thing,
does he not rather take a part, then the whole? Yea does he not take a very
slender part? Or can there be any less part of a thing, then the image and
figure of it? When we will show how far a thing is from that, which it is
called, do we not say: Hoc nomine tenus tale est, and no^ re ipsa? This is
such a thing in name, and not in deed? So that the naming of a thing without
being the true thing it self, is the nakedest and barest thing, that can be*
Our adversaries would the bread after consecration to be the body and blood of
Christ in name only, and not in truth: which being so, the chalice of
blessing, and bread which is broken, should rather be called partaking (because
a sinal part of y^ truth is taken) then communicating, where all is made common.

But S. Paul said, it is a communicating, and S. Chrysostom says, he did it
to show that it was more than partaking: therefore it is a false doctrine, to
say that y^ true body and blood of Christ is not really under the form of
bread which is broken, and within the chalice which we bless. Let us confer
the scriptures, and seek the word (...), communicare, in other places (...)
of the new Testament: we shall find, that it stands to give and make common
the thing it self, rather then the shadow or name thereof.

S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles says: Multitudinis cre Actor. 4.
dentium erat corvnum and animavna, nec quisquam eorum, quae possidebat,
aliquid suum esse dicebat: sed erant illis omnia communia. Of the multitude of
beleuers there was one heart and one soul, neither any man said any thing of
that he possessed, to be his own: but all things were common to them. In which
place we have it defined what communicating is: truly it is such a giving, that
all is made common, and nothing challenged as his Where a communicating of the
body is, the whole bo^y is com mon.
own. If then the chalice of blessing, which we bless, be the communicating of
Christ's blood, and the bread which we break the communicating of his body:
all the blood and all the body is made common to them, that recea^e that
chalice and that bread. If all be common, then we do not receive only a
spiritual remembrance of Christ's body, or a figure and sign of his blood.
For in so doing we had not all, but rather the smallest part. In so doing
Christ kept the best back, and challenged somewhat, yea far the best part to his
own self, and we should not have it.

Likewise when S. Paul says, that the Gentiles did communicate Romans 15.
with the spiritual goods of the Jews (for his word is (...)) he means not
a joining in name, in show, in figure, in signs: but in the truth of faith,
and in ye grace of God, and in the redemption of Jesus Christ, Last of al S.
Paul showing, Christ to call the faithful people of God his brethren and
children, reasons thus: Quia ergo pueri communicaueru^t earni ^eb. 2.
and sanguini, and ipse similiter participauit ijsdem. Because therefore the
children did communicate ^lesh and blood, him self likewise took part with
them. In which place, communicating is the natural knitting and uniting, which
men have to flesh and blood: so that whether communicating be spoken by flesh
and blood, or by the goods of the world, the communicating of them is the
having of them common, or making them common.

Every where communicating imports a great and liberal giving or taking,
which can not be fulfilled with the only figure and bare name of body and
blood: but requires the things them selves in truth of nature, as holy Ireneus
a disciple of the Apostles scholars writes against those, that taught that our
flesh Irenaeus lib. 5. aduerius haeres.
could not arise again to glory: Vani sunt omnes, etc. They are all vain,
that denyd the salvation of the flesh, and despise the regeneration of it,
saying: that it is not able to receive the state of incorruptibilitie. So in
deed, to wit, according to those sayings, neither our Lord has redeemed us with
his blood, neither the chalice of thanks giving is the communicating of his
blood, neither the bread, which we break, is the communicating of his body.
For blood is not but from the veins and flesh, and from the other substance,
which is belonging to man: in the which substance y^ word of God truly made,
redeemed us with his blood. S. Ireneus accompt^th it a great absurdity, that
the bread, which we break, should not be the communicating of Christ his true
body, and the chalice of the Encharist the communicating of his blood. Of what
blood? of the same, which (...) from veins, from flesh, and from the rest of
our substance. And S* Ireneus brings this interpretation, to prove that we,
that receive the said body, and blood, receive therein a gift sufficient A
figure of Christ's body can not raise out flesh.
to raise our flesh at ye later day. But surely fignes and figures of Christ
will not raise our flesh, for so much as they are perceived only by
understanding: and be not of the same nature and kind whereof our flesh is.
And S. Ireneus never dreamed of blood, that should be received from heaven: but
only of that blood, which is in the chalice and cup of Christ's supper.

The presence of Christ in his supper is proved by The iij. Chapter.
the one bread, which being received of us makes all us one body.
VNuspanis and vnum corpus multi sumus, omnes qui de vno 1. Co. 10.
pane participamus. we being many are one bread and one body, all we that
partake of the one bread. He that lists only to mark the order of S. Paul's
words, may quickly perceive what his meaning is, concerning the true doctrine
of the Sacrament of the altar. First he described our Lords supper by the name
of the chalice of blessing, which we bless, and of the bread which we break.
Secondly he says, that each of them is the communicating, the one of Christ
his body, the other of his Blessing. Breaking Communicating. ^niting.
blood. Last of all, he fears not to say, that the partakers of that bread,
all are one bread and one body. Who sees not, that he is come from blessing
and breaking to communicating, and from communicating to uniting and making
one? so that, use we what words we please in uttering the matter, call we it
partaking, eating, drinking, or communicating: certainly it is so nigh a
joining, that a very union, which is to say, one thing is made of What union is.
that, which is received in this blessed Sacrament, and of those that receive
the same. one thing, I say, is made of both, yea one of al: not only he that
receaueth this one bread, is made one with the bread, but he is one also with all them, that any where within the Church worthily receive of the same bread.
for when two things me^e in a third, they mete also between them selves.
Whence this great union comes.
The reason of this great joining is the real presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament: for seeing the bread received is Christ, he is so strong
a bread and food, that he can be ouercomed of no stomach, but ouercometh all
their natures that touch him. By that means it is brought to pass, that as
(...) approaching nigh to any thing ^urneth all, that is apt to be burned into
it self, making it of his own condition and quality, yea Deuteronomy. 4.
rather of his own nature: so Christ, who is consuming fire, turns into his
mystical body, all that worthily eat and drink his natural body in the
Sacrament of the altar. If we did eat common bread and drink common wine, out
of all question both the bread and wine would be ouercomed of our stomach, and
by little and little would be converted into our flesh and blood, to The vnio^ can
not be made by wheaten bread.
norrish them corporally: by which means neither we should by eating wheaten
bread at any time be made one bread, neither any of us should become one with
an other. For they that differ by reason of diverse persons, as diverse men do:
can never in any kind of meat be made one, whiles they eat that, which is
digested into their veins, and made part of their persons: but only they are
able to be made one, who eat that, which taryeth still whole and sound in his
own nature, still common to all, and never appropriated to any one, but
gathers all them into it self as making one spiritual and mystical body of
all faithful men. If then we eat a kind of bread in the holy mysteries, and
are one bread because we eat of the one bread, surely it is no common bread,
but such a food and meat, as being eaten is not consumed of us, but rather
consuming our weakness makes al us, that eat it, of the same immortal nature
with it: which none other meat does absolutely, besides the real body and
blood of Jesus Christ: and it so mightily works our spiritual union, that
Christ would his own body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, to be
the Sacrament of that self unity, which it In sermon. ad infantes.
works. Nothing is more common in S. Augustine, then to say, that we take in
the Sacrament, the body of Christ, which we are. Vos estis in mensa, vos estis
in calice. ye are in the meat, ye Ex sermon. de sacrafidel. ser. 2. paschae. and
in 6. ca. Joan.
are in the cup: but we are not in the substance of wheaten bread (albeit we
are after consecration signified by that form of bread, which bread it self
was from many grains of corn, made one loaf) but we are not at all signified
by the substance of the bread. For so every bread in the world were the holy
sign of y^ Church of God, and by that means it were much more the body of
Christ, Contra Faustu^li. 20. ca. 13.
which thing S. Augustine denies, saying: that every bread and cup is not
borne mystical to us, but it is made mystical by a certain consecration. If
then the natural substance of bread suffice not to signify the body of Christ,
and the fellowship of the elect, and yet they be manifestly signified to be one
in the Sacrament of Christ's supper: what other ground must concur, to show
them to be in the meat which they receane, and in the cup whereof Hilar.
(...). 8. de Tri. Cyrill. in Joan. lib. 10. ca. 13.
they drink? The Catholics have learned of the ancient Fathers, that it is
the real body and blood of Christ, which only (being under the foorm of bread
and wine) can make us to be showed in the meat and in the chalice. For we are
showed in them, because our head Jesus Christ is there within the form of
bread and wine: now where the head is, there also the members be signified to
be. specially seeing the head is there, to gather his members Chrysostom. in Matthew.
hom. 83.
nere unto him, and (as S. Chrysostom speaks) to make them, as it were, one
lump with him. For, as many grains of corn are made into one loaf, and that
loaf by consecration is turned into Christ's body, the form of bread still
remaining: so, many persons are in Baptism made one mystical body, and that
body at Christ's supper is again naturally joined to Christ's own flesh, and
by that corporal union is mingled and wholly tempered with him, so that one
thing is made of Christ and of his Church.

The real presence is proved by joining together all The iiij. Chapter.
the former words.
Having particularly declared, how breaking, communicating, and uniting, make
for the real presence of Christ's body and blood, I thought good now to
co^ferre al these things together: The bread which we break, is the
communicating of 1. Cor. 10
Christ's body, because we being many are one bread, and one body, for we all
partake of the one bread. Here bread is thrice named, and four things are
affirmed of it. 1. We break bread, 2. bread is the communicating of Christ's
body, 3. we are one bread. 4. we partake of the one bread.

Seeing in all these places the name of bread is put to express one and
the same mysteri^: it must needs be meant so that all these sayings may be
verified, without (...) of the one to the other: which can be done by no
means, except we take the substance The bred (...) S. Paul spe^keth.
of Christ's body, under y^ form of bread, to be called bread. By that means
the body, in respect of the form of bread, is conuenieiuly said to be broken.
By that means the substance of the body is the thing communicated unto us
under the form of bread. By the communicating of that substance we are united
to the one bread, and be made one body, not only by faith and will, as in
baptism: but by the corporal co^innction of Christ's flesh, because we partake
of that one bread in his own substance: whereof we did partake before in
certain effects of grace proceeding from it. (...). Com^unicating. (...).
Partakig


Thus the breaking and distributing of such a bread is the cause of the
communicating of Christ's body, and such a communicating is the cause of
joining us corporally in one body, and such an union proceeds of the partaking
of that one bread in his own substance. And consequently all things agree well
together. But if we once take the sub stance of common bread, to be the thing,
which is broken: neither that substance is the communicating of Christ's body
(because every bread in the world should by like reason be the communicating
thereof, for so much as that, which is the substance of any thing, is in every
particular propriety of the same kind) nor we are not all one material bread,
as it is evident: nor we all partake not of one wheaten bread, either in
baptism, or after.

Again if the wheaten bread, which is said to be the communicating To be. To
signify.
of Christ's body, be interpreted to signify y^ communicating between us and
Christ: when it is likewise said of the Apostle, we are one bread and one body:
for it is one verb and oue noune in both places, est, there: and sumus here:
communicating of one body there: one bread and one body here: If the bread,
which is the communicating of Christ's body, be the bread, which is the figure
of the communicating: we that are said to be one bread, are said to be the
figure of one bread.

Likewise, seeing we partake of the bread, which is broken: if the Break^g.
bread broken ^e material, we partake of the material bread, and yet the
bread, whereof we partake, is by S. Paul named one bread. Therefore we partake
of one material bread, which can not be so. For seeing the bread is broken, it
is not still one. These and many like absurdities can never be escaped, except
we say (as the truth is) that the bread broken is the flesh of Christ under the
Partakig
form of bread: for our partaking is named of taking part of that, which is
broken: but we all that are one patake only of Christ him self, and be one in
him alone, and be not one in any material bread. Therefore Christ is the bread
broken (by the reason of the form of bread under the which he is) and the bread
communicated, and the bread which we are: for that he is the cause of our
mystical conjunction. For albeit the mystical bread and body, which we are,
be in several persons and di^tinct proprieties of men: yet the substancial
cause of that bread, which we are, is only found in the person and substance of
Christ: who is the beginner, mainteyner, and the end of that our mystical
body. from Christ, as from the cause of our v^itie, the same unity proceeds to
us in an effect wrought by him. But either to make us one material bread, or
to make it, being still bread in substance, to be notwithstanding the
communicating of Christ's body to us, or to be the bond, which holds us
together by partaking thereof: it is a doctrine which can not hang together.
And because the matter is of great importauce, I will yet entreat farther of
this our union.

Now we are one mystical body in Christ. The fyfth Chapter.

THe Church is one body more then one w^ First, because Ephesians. 4.
it is called and holden together with one s^ite of God. Romans 10.
Next, because it is grounded in one faith, (...) ^reaching of Gal. 1.
Phil. 2.
one true Gospel, mai^teined with one hope, perfited ^th one charitic, 1. Tim.
2.
watered with one baptism of spiritual regene^ation, redeemed Ephe. (...).
by one Mediator, ruled by one head, (...) to one husband, 2. Cor. 11
joined in marriage to one f^esh of Christ, and rewarded with Ephesians. 5.
one essential fruition of one everlasting God.

The first foundation of this one cumpany, which is the house, the tabernacle,
y^ temple of God, is the blessed Trinity: of whom, Romans 11.
by whom, and in whom all things are. In his divine spirit 1. Cor. 12
we mete, and be one not only with the Patriarchs and Prophets: but also we
therein be one with the Angels, Thrones and Seraphins, Hebr.
in so much that he uses them for our ministry: who never sinned or swarued
from the way of truth and righteousness.

Next after God, all mankind puts his everlasting confidence Ephesians. 3.
in the flesh of Jesus Christ: who is the only Mediator of 1. Tim. 2.
all men, that fell by sin either actual or else original, and there is no
salvation in any other man. Christ took really our flesh, to Act. 4.
make it an iustrument: whereby we might be brought again to God. Therefore he
both offered the same flesh unto God even to Heb. 10.
death: and gave the same flesh to be partaken of us, for the obteining of
everlasting life. The partaking whereof is called in holy scripture by the name
of eating and drinking, because although it be granted to us by diverse means:
yet the chief mean of all is, when we eat his flesh, and drink his blood.

The first and most necessary mean of all is faith, without Hebr. 11.
which it self (in men of lawful age) or without the Sacrament thereof (in
children) none other (...) can serve. But faith alone Joan. 3.
Gal. 5.
(though it work by charity) does not always ^uffise: because it is
conueaient for a corporal substance (such as the flesh of Christ is) to be
partaken by corporal means also. For seeing the corruption Sap. 9.
of our flesh was the thing, which did most incline us to Heb. 4.
sin: as the son of God took our true flesh without sin, to thend by it
he might purge our sins: so he instituted diverse Sacraments in certain
corporal things, and in mystical words: Ioa^. 3. 6, 20.
whereby the grace of his flesh might ^e applied to our flesh, and by that
mean also to come to our so^es.

Against the corrup^ion of our birth he would us to be washed Matt. 28. and 3.
in water, which element his own flesh had sanctified in the flud Jordan:
against the tentation of the devil, he confirms us with Act. 2. and 8.
the holy Ghost. Instead of the custom of synning, he gives us Joan. 6.
heavenly nourishement, as well in body as in soul. By these means (I say) we
are one body in Christ, of the which, faith and charitic are means only
spiritual: the Sacraments are both spiritual means through the inward grace,
and corporal, through 1. Cor. 10
the visible forms of them. The means only spiritual be never Heb. 10.
changed, since our faith is all one with that of the Patriarchs: but our
Sacraments differ from theirs, as which contain the truth, whereof the old
Sacraments were only the shadow.

Hitherto it has been said, that we can not be of the mystical body of
Christ: unless we partake his flesh, either by faith or by Aug ad Simplic.
quaest. 2.
the Sacraments. For (as S. Augustine writes) Albeit in some the grace of
faith be so great, that they are now assigned to the body of Christ, and to the
holy temple of God: yet in some it is such, as does not suffice, to obtain the
kingdom of heaven: as in the Cathecumenis, as in Cornelius, antequam
Sacramentoru^ participatione incorporaretur Ecclesiae, before that he was
incorporated to the Church ^y paraking of the Sacraments. The Sacrament, Joan.
3.
wherein we are first incorporated to Christ, is well known to be Baptim: which
seeing it consists of speaking holy words, and of Matt. 28.
washing with the eleme^t of water, it is not to be denied, but that God
works our incorporation by corporal means also, and not by faith a lone.

And as it is not enough for having the nature of a man, to be conceived only,
except he be also borne: so if, when he is borne, he be not fed, he can not
long co^tinew a man. Therefore as the Sacrament of baptim begins the
incorporation (specially now, when we al are baptized in our infancy) even so
after the we are come to the years of discretion, an other Sacrament is
requisite, to mainteyne us in the body of Christ: which is called the Sacrament
Joan. 6.
of his body and blood, whereof Christ said: he that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, tarieth in me, and I in him.

Now, s^ing the sacrament, which makes us tarry in the body of Christ, must
^edes be a corporal thing, as baptism was, and yet it has none other nature,
then that which Christ gives it, and he names it his own body and blood: we
ought to confess, that the Sacrament, which nourishes the state of life
everlasting in us, is the body and blood of Christ corporally present: that is
to say, that it so feeds us, as the water in baptism does wash us: and that
as water touches our body, so it enters into our body. Which thing is so
true, that Christ having taken bread and blessed, Matt. 26.
stretching forth his hand, said: Take, eat, this is my body, which is given
for you.

Where (not without a great mystery) Christ gave his body under the form of
bread, not only to feed us presently through y^ grace, which proceeds from
his flesh by touching and eating y^ same: but also to show us, that this is the
same body, which before had incorporated us into it self. For, as of many
grains of wheat, one loaf, and of many persons one Mystical body of Christ
was made: so when Christ turne^h ye substance of bread into his own substance,
and so makes him self present under y^ form of bread: he both feeds many
persons, who partake of that one bread, and by the form of bread shows, how
they being never so many, are yet one in him, because they are all incorporated
into him.

Of this Sacrament S. Paul entreating, said: The bread which we break is the
communicating of Christ's body: because through it we both partake of the one
bread, which is Christ, and 1. Cor. 10
are our selves showed to be one bread and one body. What are we in mystery,
but only members of Christ? And for as much as Christ is him self present under
the form of this bread, and is the very substance, which is received there: we
are no less named one mystical bread of this one bread, then we are named one
mystical One bread One body
body of Christ's true body: out of which discourse it is undoubtedly proved,
that the bread, which we break, is the body of Christ. How could we otherwise
be called thereof one bread.

How could one bread and one body be put to signify one thing, but that in
deed bread and body are here in substance the same self thing? we are named
the mystical body in respect of y^ The mystical body Ephe. 4.
union, which we have with the natural body of Christ, and among our selves.
But we are also called one bread in S. Paul. Therefore out of dout S. Paul
means that one bread, which is Christ, in respect whereof we are named to be
y^ mystical body of Christ.

The Church takes her names from Christ: that, which Christ is The proportion
of Christ and y^ Church.
in truth, the Church is in mystery, so that nothing can be verified of the
Church, which was not true before in Christ: for the members follow the state of
their head. But the members are called one bread, one body, for mysteries sake:
therefore the head is in truth one body. and he is the one bread whereof we
partake, and we partake of that which is broken (by mean^ of y^ form of bread)
therefore Christ is really present under that form of bread, which at his
supper we break and partake.

We are members of this bread, before we take it in the Sacrament of the altar:
because this bread is that substance of Christ under the form of bread, to
whose mystical body we were joined in baptis^e: whereof S. Augustine writes
thus. Aug. in sermon. ad infantes apud Bedam.


Nulli est aliqu^tenus ambigend^, and cae. No man ought by any means to doubt,
but that he is then made partaker of the body and blood of our Lord: when he is
made a member of Christ in baptim, neither is he alienated from the company of
that bread and 1. Cor. 10
that cup: although before he eat that bread, and drink that cup (being
placed in the unity of Christ's body) he depart out of this world. For he is
not deprived of the partaking and benefit of Joan. 6.
that Sacrament: for so much as him self has found that thing, which that
Sacrament does signify. Whereas Christ said, Except ye eat my flesh and drink
my blood, ye shall not have life in you: a man would have thought, that every
person were bound to receive actually the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood:
but S. Augustine shows, that thing not to be after that sorce necessary to
all men. For he that is made a member of Christ in Baptism, is therein made
partaker of y^ body and blood of Christ. How so? Because he receaueth that
thing, which the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood signifies. What does it
signify? The mystical body of Christ. By what means?

S. Augustine expounded y^ mean a little before, saying: Bread In sermon. ad
insan tes.
is not made of one grain, but of many: likewise one liquour is made of many
grapes. Thus our Lord Jesus signified us. he would us to apperteine to himself.
Mysterium panis and vnitatis nostrae in sua mensa consecrauit. he has
consecrated the mystery of our peace and unity in his table. Note, that our
mystery was not made by the baker, but consecrated by Christ: the consecration
was, to turn the substance of the bread into his own flesh, keeping still the
old form of the same bread.

But if the body of Christ were not really under the form of bread: how could
he, that is baptized, be partaker of the benefit of this Sacrament? Was he
made partaker of bread and wine? The sign of the mystical body.
No verily, but of the mystical body. What has the mystical body to do in
this Sacrament? For ^oth so much, that here is both the thing, which makes us
all one, which is Christ: and he is so present, that he shows him self to
have joined all us to him, as he has joined the grains of wheat unto his
flesh.

For as the bread, which we break, has none other substance beside the
substance of Christ, and yet it has an outward appareuce of an other thing: so
the mystical body of Christ has none other substance, through which it is one
body, besides y^ body of Christ: although it have an o^tward appare^ce of an
other thing. For be we never so many in number and persons, we are one body 1.
Co. 12.
in Christ. How so ever we appear mortal men, as we once were. Ephel. 5.
yet in truth we are joined to the body of Christ, and are members of him our
only head.

Take away that body of Christ from the form of bread, and here is no sign of
unity in Christ. A sign of unity here is, but The unity must be signified
in Christ.
not in Christ. Every loaf (...) unity, but none other betokens our unity
in Christ, but yt bread, the substance whereof is Christ, and y^ form whereof
is the form of common bread.

If the natural substance of Christ be absent from the bread, which we
consecrate, and so be signified without the real presence thereof: if again
the natural substance of bread remain and signific the mystical body of
Christ, who is absent him self in What sign y^ substance of common bread
makes.
substance: no sign is by that mean more effectually made, then that Christ
and his members are as far a sunder, as heaven is distant from the earth: and
that as Christ is signified present being in deed not present: so his members
be signified to be joined to him, and in truth be not joined to him.

These are the mystical signs, which do follow necessarily upon the
Sacramentaric doctrine: whereof I have the gladlier written, to the intent S.
Augustines doctrine might be opened: who always notes this Sacrament to be
the sign of the unity, which is made by Christ in baptism among the
faithful: but he means such a sign, as Christ him ^elf makes under the
form of bread, when he affirms him to consecrate herein y^ mystery of
unity. Is it not an extreme madness, to affirm, yt wheaten bread keeping his
own earthly nature, should be the mystery of unity?

Christ is that mystery, first, because he is both God, who alone Christ is
the mystery of vuitie.
made all things to serve him: and man, in whom all things are a new collected,
which where before made. Secondly, because Christ makes us one with God,
reconciling us to him, by the Colos. 1.
blood of his cross. Thirdly, because he makes us one among our selves by his
one spirit and Baptism. Last of all, because he shows and gives him self
really present under the form of bread: wherein he would us to understand the
unity, which is really made between us, and him, and God.

Of this unity S. Hilarie writes: If Christ assumpted truly Hilar. l. 8 de
Tri^.
the flesh of our body, and we take truly, under a mystery, the flesh of his
body, and by this thing we shall be one, because the Father is in him, and he in
us: quomodo voluntatisvnitas asseritur, cum naturalis per Sacramentum
proprietas perfectae Sacracramentum sit vnitatis? How is y^ unity of will
affirmed, whereas the natural propriety through the Sacrament, is the holy
sign of a perfect unity? This place, good Reader, opens all the hard points
of the mystery of unity.

First, Christ took truly flesh. Next, we take truly the same flesh under a
mystery. By his taking, God and man were made one, concerning the whole nature
of man. By our taking, we and Christ are made one concerning every particular
man, who receaueth worthily his body. And that is not only done so, but withal
it is showed so: for the thing, which we receive, is the flesh of Christ under
the form of bread. The flesh, y^ is there being received, makes us in deed to
be one with Christ. The form of bread shows not only them to be one, that
receive this food: but those also, who now do not receive it (if yet they be,
or shall be baptized) to be one in Christ. And says S. Hilarie so much? Ye
doubtless, and that he twice repeteth.

For when he says: Vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, we take
truly under a mystery the flesh of his body: then Under a mystery.
he means, that under the form of bread we take Christ's flesh. Under what
other mystery can it be said, we take it? Or seeing he speaks of the last
supper, does he not mean the sign of the same supper, which was bread? But
yet let us hear more plain words.

Naturalis per Sacramentum proprietas perfectae Sacramentum est vnitatis. The
natural propriety through the Sacrament, is the Proprietas.
Sacrament of a perfect unity. The word proprietas means one particular
substance proper to one thing, which in men is commonly called a person. S.
Augustine witnesses, that Christ is In Joan. (...). 80
called the true vine, Per similitudinem, non per proprietatem, by likeness, not
by propriety: that is to say, Christ is y^ true vine by like condition, and
not by the self substance of a true vine.

S. Hilarie then says: The natural propriety of Christ by a Sacrament, is a
Sacrament of perfect unity. Here is the word Sacrament twice iterated: the
propriety of Christ is a Sacrament, and it is a Sacrament by a Sacrament. A
Sacrament is a holy sign. Therefore the propriety or substance of Christ is a
holy sign. But how? Every substance is the truth. How is it then a sigue? It
is not barely and absolutely called a sign, but a sign A sign by a sign.
by a sign: that is to say, the true substance of Christ put under the form of
bread, by that sign of bread, is se^ to signify a most perfect unity made
between God and us.

The natural propriety of Christ by the sign of bread makes and signifies a
perfect unity. It makes it, whiles we receive Christ into us, who is one with
his Father in nature: as we naturally have him in our bodies and souls. It
signifies the same unity, because the substance of Christ (who is one nature
with his Father in Godhead, and one with us in manhod) being now under the
sign of bread shows him self (as it were) with all his faithful members
about him, offering them all to God, as if he said: Ecce ego and pueri mei
mecum. Behold Father, I am here, Heb. 2.
and my servants or children with me. Aug. de ciuitate Dei li. 10 cap. 5.


This (says S. Augustine) is the sacrifice of the Christians, we being many
are one body in Christ: Quod etiam Sacramento altaris fidelibus noto frequentat
Ecclesia: vbi ei demonstratur, qu^od in ea oblatione, quam offert, ipsa
offeratur. The which thing also The Sacrament of y^ altar.
the Church celebrateth in the Sacrament of the altar known to the faithful.
Where it is showed to the Church, that in that sacrifice which she offers,
her self is offered.

It is well known, that the Priests of y^ Church taking bread and wine,
according to the institution of Christ, consecrate them saying in Christ's
name: This is my body, and this is my blood. If by those words the body and
blood of Christ be not made pre sent under the form of bread and wine: how is
the Church offered in the offering, which she makes? Who does make an oblation
of her to God? Will ye say, that Christ sitting in heaven presents A goodly
mystical body.
to his Father the bread and wine which is in earth, saying: Father, look
upon my faithful members? See what a mystical body I have gotten to me in
the earth.

Might not God answer? Why son, is the substance of your mystical body,
bread and wine? Have you coupled my servants your brethren, whom I created
reasonable, to those vnse^sible creatures? Or is the handy work of the baker
your oblation, or The oblation of the Church.
the oblation of your mystical body? But if Christ be under the form of
bread, and thence make an oblation to his Father of all his obedient members,
which are there signified by the form of bread: then is none other substance
of those mystical members presented, beside the true substance and head of the
mystical body: to wit, the flesh of Christ, which works and gathers a body
to it self through out the whole world. The^ the Church offers none other
substance beside the one oblation, which dyed for Heb. 10.
us.

The same real conjunction of the faithful to Christ's flesh may be declared
also by the example of building a house. For as every house is in the fundation
most large, and afterward it is drawn always so much the nigher together,
by how much it approaches to the top or end thereof: even so the Church being
1. Tim. 3.
the house of God must be one, so that it may in some parts thereof be joined
together in the top it self, which is the flesh of Christ.

For they that are one mystical house by faith and charity alone, they are
one in the fundation through the spirit of God: but not yet one in the top. And
the unity of that fundation would 1. Cor. 6.
not cause them to be a perfect house, if some stones being reised thereon, did
not at the length mete really together in the top of Ephesians. 4.
the building, which is the flesh of Christ: through the connection of which
stones, those also which lay in the lowest place, may be said to mete in the
top: for that they are necessary and substancial parts of that house, which is
builded from the lowest part of the ground up to the very highest top.

Faith is the fundation and ground of the things, which are Heb. 11.
hoped for. Baptism goes nerer the top, because beside the grace of faith, it
partaketh some other grace proceeding not only from Chrysos.
the spirit of Christ, but also from his flesh: in that the water, according
Hom. 16 ad Romans
to the mind of S. Chrysostom and of Leo, is, as it were, the womb wherein,
and the word is the sede, wherewith man Leo de natiuit.
is regenerated, as well in body as in soul. Confirmation gives strength to
the new building, wherein the stones are, as it were, Domin. ser. 5. and 4
with strong bars of iron holden together. Acto. 8.


But when Christ gives him self to us under the form of bread, then are we
come to the top of the building, and are joined really to him, that is y^ end
of the law. For which cause this Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, is
called of the Grecians, Cone.
(...) perfectio, the end or perfitenes of our heavenly Ancyr. can. 6.
building. This flesh is also in the fundation, but by spiritual efficacy, not
by real union. It is in Baptism by the use of corporal instruments of water
and the word: and so by spiritual efficacy, and also by mean of bodily
instruments proceeding from the flesh by that Sacrament of Baptism, which he
constituted Math. 3.
in his body, and sanctified the element thereof with his body.

In the Sacrament of perfection this flesh it self is present, to Faith.
Baptism. Christ's flesh.
make a most perfect end of the whole spiritual building. Thus are the
baptized Christians built upon y^ faith of the Patriarchs and Prophets: and the
faithful, who receive Christ's body in his last supper, are built in a higher
degree above the faith of the Fathers, and above the Baptism of those, who
died before they partaked Sacramentally Christ's flesh.

And seeing all these concur to make up one house, the top whereof may touch
Christ's natural body, which he took to make the real coni^nction with us,
who consist of bodies: all the mystical body of Christ is perfitly one through
them, who being one with the rest in faith, spirit and baptism, be also one
with Christ's flesh in truth of natural and corporal union to Christ's flesh
really partaken at his holy table.

Let us once deny the flesh of Christ to be really in the blessed Sacrament of
the altar: and here is no perfect building toward the flesh of Christ, and
consequently no reason, why we should be Ephesians. 4 and 5.
called his mystical body, or flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. For
as if Eve had not been taken really out of the natural body of Adam, she
should not have been in truth bone of his bones: so we are not flesh of
Christ's flesh in truth it self, except the flesh of Christ in the natural
substance thereof be the mean by our natural co^ction to it: that we are
framed and wrought into a spiritual man.

These last words of S. Paul, where he touches how we are Ephesians. 5.
^esh of Christ's flesh, do also lead us to an other notable example of our
natural union which is to be made to yt flesh of Christ. For when S, Paul had
said, that the husband is head of the woman, as Christ is head of the Church:
he provoke the husbands to love their wives, as Christ has loved his
Church. Who have loved it so intierly: that he has cleansed it in the washing
of water and the word, to thend he might make him self a gloriouse Church
without spot or wrinkle.

Behold, baptism is a token of Christ's love, but to what end? That he might
have a clean spouse. To what purpose? Will he then come nere to his wife: and,
as it were, be cloupled with her? Yea verily, not for any fleshly pleasure: but
to nourish her by his real flesh. And therefore S. Paul goes forward, saying:
Husbands ought to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loves his
wife, loves him self. And surely noman ever hated his own flesh, but he
nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ does his Church.

What mean you S. Paul? Is then the Church the flesh of Christ? For your
words import so much. He answers, it is so. For we are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause the man shall forsake Father and
mother, and shall be joined to his own wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.
This Genes. 2.
is a great Sacrament or mystery, but I mean in Christ and the Church.
Hitherto S. Paul has provoked the husbands, to love and to cherish their
wives, as Christ has loved his Church in cleansing it through baptism, and
as he cherishes it, as being members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones.

Note, that as the love of husbands toward their wives is compared to baptis^:
so the cherishing of them is compared to the cherishing and nourishing, which
Christ uses toward his Chur^* which is know to be done after baptism. for
no man cherishes that, which is not yet borne.

When we are borne again in Christ, we are made members of Christ's body: and
therefore those words, Membra sumus corporis eius, we are members of his body,
may be meant of baptism* where we are made members of his my stical body,
according as S. Paul had said before: Sumus inu icem membra, we are members
Ephesians. 4.
one of an other. But when he adds, de carne eius and de ossibus eius, of his
flesh, and of his bones: he then speaks not of any mystical flesh and blood,
but even of the natural flesh and bones of Christ: whereof we are made
members, not by faith and mystery alone (as in baptism) but by natural
participation of them in the last supper.

So does S. Ireneus take these words. For S. Paul, spoke Irenens aduers.
haeres. l. 5 Luc. 24.
not (says he) of any spiritual or invisible man (since a spirit has neither
bones nor flesh) but of that disposition which is agreeable to man, the which
consists of flesh, of sinews, of bones. the which disposition is nourished
of the chalice which is his blood, and is increased of the bread which is his
body.

So does S. Chrysostom also take these words, saying: we are Hom. 45 in Joan.
members of his flesh and bones. And again, he has mingled him self with us,
and brought him self into one with us. Vt corpus cu^ Ephesians. 5.
corpore vniretur. That the body might be united to the head. Behold, we that
by baptism were the body, must yet be united with our head. what? by only
unity of w^l, or faith, and love? all that we had before, but we must be
united now in nature, in real conjunction of body and blood. Cyril. in Joan.
li. 11. c. 26


S Cyr^l writes thus: If we all eat one bread, we are all made one body. For
Christ suffers not himself to be divided or separated. Therefore the Church
also is made the body of Christ, and ^uery one of us, according to S. Paul, y^
members of Christ. For Ephe. 5.
we being joined to Christ alone through his body, because we have received him
in us who can not be divided, our members are rather applied to him then to us.

Theodoritus touches as well the union of baptism as of the (...). Cor. 11
Eucharist, saying: As Eve was formed out of Adam, so we out of Christ our
Lord. For we are buried together with him in baptism. and we rise together with
him, and we eat his body and drink his blood. Thus we are members of Christ
either by faith and mystery (which is done in baptism) or by ^is body and
blood, which is done in the Eucharist. That is the beginning of our uniting,
this is the end: that is the foundation of the house, this is the top: that is
in spirit chefely, this in chefely in flesh.

But now let us grant that when S. Paul says, we are members of his body, of
his flesh and of his bones, that he meant, we in baptism are members of
Christ's mystical body, and we are members as it were, taken out, or proceeding
from his flesh and bones, that is to say, we are one mystical body, because the
flesh and bones of Christ have given virtue to the font of baptism, whence we
are regenerated. Let us admit S. Paul had meant so (the Ephesians. 5.
contrary whereof all the ancient fathers teach) yet the words which follow
in S. Paul, can by no means (...) avoided.

For he uses the example of Adam and Eve, showing it to be a great mystery in
Christ and the Church. and that mystical example may be applied to the unity
which is between Christ and us, either in baptism, or in the supper of our
Lord. For concerning baptism: as Eve was not corporally begotten of Adam, but
Aug. de ciuit. lib. 22. ca. 17.
was taken out of his side whiles he slept: so our regeneration is made by the
water which flowed from Christ's side whiles he slept upon the Cross, without
the personal begetting of Christ him self in his own substance. But what*
stays S. Paul in this part of the similitude? Goes he not forward to a
great mystery?

Says he not, for this cause, the man (which is Christ) shall forsake Father
and mother, and shall cleave to his own wife (which is the Church) and they
shall be two in one flesh? Eve was taken out Genesis 2.
of Adam, and was flesh of his flesh. but as the spirit of God and not Adam
wrought that birth: so y^ union of baptism is wrought rather by the spirit of
Christ, then by his flesh, Albeit his (...) flesh is y^ material pattern
according to which God (...) flesh in baptism, even as Adam was y^ material
pattern according to which God formed Eve. But Eve was borne beside the
customable course of nature, to betoken that the Church should be born of the
virtue of Christ's flesh, not by company of two sexes, but by the working of
God, without the natural seed of man.

But when Adam knew his wife carnally, then the flesh taken Genesis 4.
before out of him by God, was not only joined again to his flesh by God, but
also by the actual cooperation of Adam him self* the^ two were made not only
out of one flesh (which was the miraculouse work of God in forming Eve out of
Adam) but also two diverse persons already made by God, are by natural
conjunction of both their bodies, made really one flesh, even as man and wife
when they beget children, are not now two (as Christ him self Matt. 19.
testifies) but one flesh. This is a great mystery, I mean (says S. Paul)
that it is great in Christ and the Church.

For when the faithful members, who were incorporated to Christ in baptism by
the virtue of his flesh really absent in substance, (...).
but present in efficacy, when those members come again to Christ in the
sacrament of his last supper, they then find not his The supper.
flesh absent in substance (as before) but two (that is to say, Christ and his
spouse the Church) are in deed one flesh, they are in deed soyned together in
truth of substance on each part.

Christ by his power and virtue prepared our flesh in baptism, and by cleausing
it there, he made it a mete spouse to receive his natural flesh in his own
real substance. But in the supper we are The vnio^ of Christ's flesh is
temporal.
not only of him, but we are him self. For we two are one flesh for the time
that the conjunction dureth. for as the man and wife be not always joined in
the act of begetting children, no more is y^ real flesh of Christ always joined
in his own substance with our Joan. 6.
flesh, albeit his spirit and the virtue of his flesh tarry still with us, and
make us tarry in him. but when we come to the Sacrament whereof he said: take,
eat, this is my body, then we really have y^ substance of Christ's flesh in
our mouths and body.

In marriage there are diverse degrees of coupling, the first is by Three
degrees in marriage
words of promise for marriage to ensew. The second is by words of present
bargayning. the third is when the man and wife deliver their bodies each to
other for begetting of children.

Christ was made one with his Church in the way of spousage from the beginning,
when he promised that the sede of y^ woman should tread down the serpents
head. The which promise the Patriarchs believing, were even then joined by
faith and love unto God. The sign whereof Abraham and his sede carried in their
flesh, and it was renewed to David, and denou^ced by many Prophets as by the
lawful proctours of God.

At the length Christ by taking flesh came to the house of his Genesis 17. Faith.
spouse to see whether she would go forward in marriage or no. Genesis 17.
And although the unfaithful Jews forgetting the covenants Psalm. 131.
of spousage, played the harlots part with Christ (whereof he Oseae. 2.
grievously complains in his Prophets) yet Christ keeping his Exo. 24.
Iosue 24
promise, went forward in marriage with them who would Iere. 3.
receive him. Who consenting to his conditions by the answer Baptism.
of a good conscience in baptism, were by present words made sur^ ^. Pet. 3.
unto him for ever renouncing all other ^orain husbands, after which consent
each part has right upon the others body. new 1. Cor. 7.
may the party baptized call for the Sacrament of Christ's body, if he be of
the years of discretion. And likewise him (...) is on the Ephesians. 5.
other side bo^nd to obey the voice and command^me^t of Christ, and to be
subject to him, as the wife is to her husband.

As therefore the parties married come to the third unity of being made both
one flesh, is no lawful imp^diment stay them: so does Christ present him self
in the Sacrament of his body and blood, to make perfect and to co^s^ate his
marriage in the last degree. And as in adultery S. Paul grants a place of
reconciliation 1. Cor. 7.
be^wene the man and wife: so if any man, after he is married to Christ, follow
the world, the flesh or the devil, he may be absolved by the Priests, and so
come to be joined with the body Joan. 20.
and blood of Christ in union of true flesh.

If now the natural and the whole mystical body of Christ have so great
affinity with the state of marriage, that in all degrees they be described by
like terms in the word of God, seeing The bodies joined must be present
the last and chief conjunction, which is in marriage, can not be made without
the real presence of the two bodies, which are joined: no more can the last
union of Christ and of his Church be made in his last supper unless both his
and our bodies come really together. If Christ sit only in heaven not having
his body made present at his holy table, and our bodies be yet still in the
earth: what conjunction of bodies is made between Christ and us?

If the unity, which is between two persons in marriage, be a sign of the
unity, which is between Christ and the Church, as S. Paul pro^eth: it is not
possible, that the unity can be less real Eph^s. ^
in the truth, then it is in the sign. But in marriage (which is the sign)
the persons married are one flesh (during the tym^ of their being together) and
they are both present bodily: Thersore Christ is present in his own substance,
to be joined in that most cha^e and unspotted bed of matrimony with his own
spouse: which Hebr. 13.
ioyuing is made in a Sacrament, the which Sacrament is ministered in those
known forms of bread and wine. Therefore vnderthose forms, the substance of
Christ's body and blood is really present.

This is that, which S. Hilarie says: Vere verbum carne^ cibo dominico
sumimus. We take truly the word (made) flesh, in the ^ila. lib. S. de Tri.
meat of our lord* we take y^ word made flesh, y^ is to say, y^ whole substance
of Christ: and we take it truly, and that in the meat which our Lord gives.
It is written, that he gave saying: Take, eat: Therefore in that meat we take
truly the word made flesh: but Matt. 26.
seeing that meat seems bread: under that, which seems bread, we take the
whole substance of Christ. Again he says, Naturam carnis suae sub sactamento
nobis admiscuit, he has mixed the nature of his flesh to us under a sacrament.
That same word sub under, shows, what he means: for the form of bread is
called a sign Sub.
or sacrament alone, as the body under it is called a sacrament or sign, and
also the thing or substance of the Sacrament.

S. Chriostom says: vt non solum per dilectionem, sed reipsa in illam carnem
conuertamur, per cibum id efficitur, quem nobis largitus Chrysostom. in Joan. hom.
45.
est. It is brought to pass by y^ meat which Christ has given us: that we
may be converted into that flesh not only by love, but in the thing it self. If
bread and wine be not the thing it self, but only Christ's own flesh, and yet
we are connerted in very deed into y^ ^lesh of Christ through the meat which he
gave, seeing he gave all that he gave under the form of bread and wine: under
those forms we receive in deed and truth that flesh, according to which we are
reformed.

Which place of many shall I bring out of S. Cyrill? He says one where, Cum
mystica benedictio in nobis fiat, nonne corporaliter Cyr. l. 10 ca. 15.
quoque facit co^municatione carnis Christi? For as much as the mystical
blessing is made in us, does it not make Christ to ^wel in us corporally also,
through the communicating of Christ's flesh? Can the mystical blessing make
Christ dwell corporally in us, if it self have not Christ's flesh corporally in
it?

Cur membra fidelium, membra Christi sunt? Nescitis (inquit) quia membra vestra
membra sunt Christi? Membra igitur Christi, Cyrill. (...). 10. cap. 15.
meretricis faciam membra? Absit. Why are the members of y^ faithful the
members of Christ? Know ye not (says S. Paul) that 1. Cor. 6.
your members are the members of Christ? Shall I then make y^ members of
Christ, the members of a harlot? God forbid. Here S. Cyril does manifestly
allude to the kind of unity, which is between man and wife in lawful marriage:
and between foruicatours in unlawful conjunction.

In e^he place two are made one: but in marriage lawfully, in whoredom
unlawfully. The Sacrament of Christ's supper is like to lawful marriage. And
therefore S. Cyrill concludes, Non habitudine solum, quae per charitate^
intelligitur, Christum in nobis hab^are: sed participatione naturali. That
Christ dwells in us not only by affection, or devotion, or efficacy which is
understood Habitudo.
by charity, but by natural partaking. It is therefore an heresy: to defend
(as the Sacramentaries do) that we are joined to Nataralis participatio.
Christ's flesh in his supper, by faith and spirit only: as though Christ
being so long married never came bodily to make up that most chaste knot of union
between him and his Church.

But if the Sacramentarie doctrine were true, it should have less: for as much
as it should not be present really with us, it should not be offered externally
unto God by the Pri^ts of the new law, it should not be upon the table, it
should not be in the mouths of them, who receive y^ same, it should not be
made naturally one with our bodies, nor we one with it.

S. Paul by the real unity, which is made between the meat of Christ and of
his faithful people, does prove an unity in less degree: but yet an unity
between those who did eat together of meats offered to ydoles. But y^ meat of
Christ's supper, whereby we should be joined as well to it, as among our
selves, our new brethern take clean away from the visible table and altar.

S. Paul says: Ye can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the
devils table. Our new brethern granting the devils a real table, will not
allow any such to Christ. They must con^esse a table as well invisible as
corporal of the Jews and Gentiles, for each of them had their faith and their
God, albeit not good and true: but to Christ's body and blood, which is the
altar and table of the new Testament, they will not allow any external or
visible altar or table.

I need not insult at them for it, ^ ^ithens the day will come when Christ
will not allow them any table to eat or drink with him in the kingdom of
heaven. They that have brought all his mysteries to naked names, shall enjoy
his glory no more really, then they allow him a real truth in his blessed
Sacraments.

The real presence is proved by the example, which S. Paul uses concerning
the Jews and Gentiles. The vi. Chap^ter.

SAint Paul intending to dissuade the Corinthians from eating and drinking
with the Gentiles at their false and vain sacrifices, uses in that behalf,
this kind of argument.

Whosoever does eat or drink that, which is offered up in sacrifice, he is
made one with the oblation it self, and with it, to whom the things eaten and
drunken are offered. This proposition The Chri steans.
he proves by example of the Christians, who by partaking of the bread which
we break, and of the chalice which we bless (which are the communicating of
Christ's body and blood) are made one bread, one body: because they partake all
of the one The Jews.
bread. The like is seen also in the carnal Jews, among whom they that eat
the oblations or things offered, thereby were partakers of the altar: to wit,
of the sacrifice, and of the worshipping of God, to whom it was offered.
Therefore if the Corinthians The Ge^ tils.
would also partake of the meat offered to ydols, it must follow, that they
should be partakers of the ydolatrie.

For although the dead ydoll be no true God, nor any thing at all, wherewith
they may communicate: yet a society is joined thereby with the devils, who
reign in those ydols. Therefore as ydolatry it self: so the eating of the
meats offered to ydols is to be avoided. Out of this discourse it is proved,
that the Christians, Jews and Gentiles, each of them have a God, true, or
false: each of them offers an external sacrifice to him: each of them use to
partake of the things offered: and each of them communicated among them selves.
The sacri fice of the Jews.


The meat offered and eaten of the Jews was the flesh of such clean beasts,
or such other oblations as were allowed by y^ law of Moses. The meat offered
and eaten of the Gentiles, was Of the Gentiles.
such, as their superstition had received. To one ydol a sheep was offered, to
another an ox. The meat offered and eaten of the Of the Christians
Christians is described of S. Paul, to be the bread which we break, which is
the communicating of Christ's body: and the chalice of blessing which we
bless, which is the communicating ^f Christ's blood. The unity rising thereof
is to be one bread, one body, because all partake of the one bread.

Upon which ground it may be well built, that the meat partaken at Christ's
supper is the body and blood of Christ: wherein we pass and overcome the Jews
and Gentiles, who had other earthly oblations, but none of them had this food,
which came down from heaven. For as S. Paul says: We have an altar, Heb. 13.
whereof they have no power to eat, who serve the tabernacle. But surely they
might eat bread and wine, who served the tabernacle: therefore the meat of
Christ's supper is not bread and wine, but the bread of life, and the blood of
Christ. And whereas the Jews had certain obseruancies of eating this, and of
leaving that meat: or that the Leuits should eat this, and the Priest that,
and the lay people an other meat: S. Paul counsels them to stablish their
heart with grace, and not so carefully to observe the old law, which commanded
so many differences of meat.

How beit if it be a good thing to have some meats reserved for the Priests,
which the common people may not eat (as the Jews think) then says S. Paul:
we Christians also have an Our altar.
altar, to wit, a thing offered unto God, and that so preciouse, that the very
Priests and Bisshops, who serve in the tabernacle may not eat thereof. That
meat is as Theodorite says: Hostia rationalis In 13. ad Heb.
and diuina. A reasonable and divine sacrifice: as Sedulius writes, y^ altar
whence we partake the body and blood of Christ: as Theophtlact witnesses, the
unbloody sacrifice of the body, which quickens.

This then being the meat of our altar, it follows, that this The agreement of
the holy meats.
meat is no less present upon his holy table: then that, which the Jews or
ydolatours did eat, was present at their sacrifices. But that, which they did
partake, was really present, an^ received into their mouths: therefore
likewise (...) flesh is really present, and is received into our mouths. The
meat of the Jews and of the Gentiles was made one natural flesh with the
partakers thereof: therefore we likewise are made one natural flesh with the
meat of Christ's tab^e.

But herein is the odds, that their meat was turned into their flesh, because
it was weaker then their own nature: but our flesh The diffe rence of y^ meats.
is turned without loss of his own substance or propriety, into the nature
of Christ's flesh: because it being the flesh, which is dwelt in by the
Godhead, is stronger then our nature.

Again, as the Jews and Gentiles by eating meats offered up, are made one body
among them selves, by co^formitie of will and mind alone: (because the meat was
not able to tarry in his own nature, and to draw them unto it) so contrariwise
we that eat Christ's body, are made really one flesh with Christ and among our
selves: because (as S. Cyrill declares) Christ suffers him Li. 11. in Joan.
ca. 26.
self to be no more divided, but k^ping his own flesh whole, he gathers all
us into it. And seeing we all, that eat Christ, are made naturally one with
Christ: we are also one among our selves. For they, who are one in any third,
are withal one among them selves. Thus the meat of Christ's table has more
truth in it, then the meat of the Jews or Gentiles had, according to the
Catholic doctrine. The vij. Chapter.


The real presence is proved by the kind of showing Christ's death.
QVotiescunque manducabitis pane^ hunc and calicem (hunc) 1. Co. 11.
bibetis: mortem Domini annunciabitis, donec veniat. How often so ever ye shall
eat this bread, and shall drink this chalice: ye shall show the death of our
Lord until he come. Showing may be either in word alone, or in deed alone, or
in both together. S. Paul speaks in this place, of that showing, Showing by
deed.
which is by deed alone: for eating and drinking is a kind of doing. But not
the eating of every bread, and the drinking of tuery chalice does show Christ's
death: except it be this bread eaten, and that chalice drunken, whereof S.
Paul had said in Christ's person a little before: This is my body, which is
broken for you, and, this cup is the new Testament in my blood.

The eating and drinking of ^ sacri^iced body and blood does evidently show the
death thereof: as the which should not be eaten A thing ^s not eaten whiles it
^ueth.
and drunken, if it were not already consecrated by death unto God. For who
does eat the flesh of any creature, whiles it yet lives and has blood in it?
Or how can blood be drunken in a cup, if it be yet in the veins of the body?
The nature of the fact is such, that it presupposes the immolation, and
sacrifice, and death of that holy thing, which is eaten: for a living and
sensible creature is not used to be eaten, without it be deprived first of his
life.

Therefore Theophilact says: Quinta vesperi fecit Dominus Theoph. in 28.
coenam, and caet. Nemo enim quicquam edit, nisi prius mactatum fuerit. The
fifth evening (which was on Maundy Thursday night) Math.
our Lord made a supper, and ^ayd to his Disciples: Take and eat, for this is
my body. And so, because he was of power to lay down his soul: it is evident,
that he then sacrificed him self from that time, wherein he delivered the
Disciples his body. For no man eats any thing, unless it be first killed.
Thus we see, that the real presence of Christ's flesh, to the end it may be
eaten, is the consequent, whereby S. Paul proves the showing of Christ's
real death.

Who perceaneth not, that it is a good argument, to say: I eat in a Sacrament
Christ's real flesh, therefor he is (...) dead? Does it not follow well in
the discourse of reason, I drink the true blood of Christ: therefore Christ
has truly shed his blood? The figure of Christ's bo^y eaten, does but show a
figurative death past
Or does any faithful man at the table of God eat the flesh and drink the
blood of that thing, which is not yet dead and offered in a sacrifice? This
argument of S. Paul they make utterly void, who say: that we eat a figure,
and not the truth of Christ's substance: for then should Christ be showed
figuratively dead, as he should be figuratively eaten. Neither could it follow,
that because Christ is eaten by faith in a figure: therefore he is already dead
in truth it self, but only that he is dead in a figure or in bare name, without
the truth of death as yet presently showed.

When the Paschall Lamb was eaten, the Lamb was truly dead: but as the Lamb was
the figure of Christ, and not Christ: did it thereof follow, that it was only
showed in a figure that Christ sometime should dye, and not that in deed he was
dead? But now that he is dead in deed, and so dead, that his death is showed
true by the eating of his own body, and by the drinking of his own blood:
undoubtedly, as truly as ^uer that same Paschall Lamb was killed, which was
eaten, so truly is the same body of Christ dead, which is eaten: and thereupon
it will follow, that by eating the flesh of the man that dyed, that man is showed
to be dead in ded^.

Wherefore S. Ambrose says, upon this place: Quia enim mor Ambros. in 1. Cor.
cap. 11.
te Domini liberati sumus: huius rei memores, in edendo and potando carnem and
sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus. Because we are made free
through the death of our Lord, being mindful thereof, we in eating and in
drinking flesh and blood signify those things, which were offered for us. Lo
the very fact of eating flesh and of drinking blood show the things, that were
offered to death for us: That is to say, show the flesh and blood of Christ as
dead.

Damascene in that pleasant history of Iosaphat, makes the Damascenus in
historia Barlaam and Io^aphat.
King Auenite to demand of certain Eremites: why they carried about them yt
bones of dead men, to whom they answered: Ossa ista munda and caet. we carry
about with us o King, these clean and holy bones, representing the death of
these maruelousemen whose they are: and bringing our selves in mind of their
exercise and of their conversation beloved of God, and flyring our selves to
the like zeal. And afterward, the bones of dead men cause the remembrance of
death to them that are a line.

Here we see many commodities, which the blessed relics The Com modity of
Relics.
of Saints do bring to good men. Among other things they cause us to remember
the virtues of them, whose bones we re^erently kept. And for as much as Christ
did show his charity Rom 5.
chefely, in dying for his enemies: we have no greater thing to remember by the
presence of his body, the^ the same loving death Rasil. de Bapt. li. 1. cap. 3.
of that body. But if the bare presence of dead bones make us remember yt
Saints that be with God, whose bones they were: how muh more does the eating of
Christ's body both make us remember his death, and show it to our eyes being
eaten after such sort, as this body is eaten.

This kind of reasoning, which S. Paul uses, is called of The reason of S.
Paul in this place.
the logicians, A consequentibus: when by those things that are put for true
and follow, an other thing is proved to have necessarily gone before. As, for
example, we may reason thus: This woman is brought a bed, therefore she has
companyed with a man: in so much that reason declares that no woman by the
course of nature ca^ have a child, except she lie before with a man.

Now, as if the bringing a bed be but in a shadow, thereof no true cumpany with
a man may directly be inferred: even so at this time, if by eating y^ body of
Christ, we show Christ's death, and yet we do eat the body of Christ only in
a shadow: then may it not be inferred hereof, that Christ is showed to have
dyed Such as the Conse quent to, such ^nte (...) may b^ proved ther^by.
truly and in deed, but only in a shadow. Such as y^ Consequent is, where upon
we reason: such antecedent may be inferred thereof. If y^ Conseque^t be real,
true, perfyt: y^ Antecedent is showed to have been like. If the Consequent be
imperfyt, figurative, or sayned: the Antecedent is not thereby showed to be
true.

If two persons are married together, it may be well inferred, that they
consented together: but if their marriage be ^ained, to say, made upon a
s^afold in the way of playing some Comedy or interlude: then is the consent
also sayned. If the marriage were true, the consent was true. Christ made his
last supper chefely Luc. 22.
to have it a remembrance of his death, and therefore he said: Hoc facite in
meam commemorationem, do and make this thing, for the remembrance of me. S.
Paul having before declared, how this thing may be made by the preistes of the
new Testament, for the remembrance of Christ, in declaring that Christ took
bread, brake, and said: this is my body: he shows afterward how the some body
may be eaten by the common people for the remembrance of Christ's death,
saying: As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this chalice, ye shall
show our Lords death, until he come. so that y^ consecrating of Christ's body
by priests, and the eating thereof by all Christian men, is the showing of
Christ's death.

Here I would know, whether Christ instituted this Sacrament, y^ y^ death of
Christ shall be she wed past in deed the body must be eaten in deed.
to show his death as past in deed: or else past in a bare shadow. If to show it
in a bare shadow, the^ two absurd sequeles may seem to be employed. One is, y^
it may show Christ's death as well to come, as already past. An other is, yt if
it be past: it is rather showed to have been a figurative death, the^ a true
death, For as the eating of unleavened bread under the law, were the faith of
yt eater never so great, did not show Christ's death past, but only to come: so
this eating of common bread in our Lords The figure cease to be only a
figure, when the truth of it is come.
supper does not by the eating infer the death of Christ to be past, but
rather as being to come. For every shadow belongs to a truth, whereof it is
the shadow, and is (...), until the truth it self come: but when the truth is
ones present, the shadow is no more a bare shadow, but a shadow filled with the
truth. But by the Zwi^glians opinion the Sacrament of Christ's supper is common
bread without any real truth made or wrought about it: therefore it is a
figure, a shadow, and an imperfyt work, whereas if y^ truth of it were come,
it should not ^. Co. 11.
be only a shadow: but should have a truth under the shadow. Thus we may
perceive, that the eating of common bread for a figure of Christ's death with
never so great a faith, does not so much by the eating show his death past, as
to come herea^ter.

Again, were it granted, that by reason of the faith of the eater, it showed
the death past: yet because it shows it in a simple figure, it may seem, that
it is past in a simple figure: whereby this Sacrament, after the interpretation
of our new preachers, is no sufficient mean by the deed it self: to show that
true death, which Christ suffered for us upon the cross. and yet S. Paul
says, that by eating this bread we show the death of Christ: that is to say,
we show him to have died. by eating it, I say. For now we speak not of
preaching the Gospel, not of remembering the articles of our creed, nor of
other undoubted witnesses: whereby it is proved, that Christ has died for us.

We speak of S Paul's argument, who ^aith: by eating this bread we show,
Christ to have dyed for us. which argument is none, is vain, is rather
against the faith, then with it: if the bread, that we eat, be not the real
flesh, of Christ. But if we once confess, that we eat the subs^a^ce of
Christ's natural body, and drink the substance of his natural blood, then
does it follow inuincibly, that Christ is dead for us. It follows, I say, by
the order of Gods words: for no flesh is eaten whiles the beast lives, whose
^lesh it is, as it is written: Carnem cum sanguine Gen 9.
non comedetis, ye shall not eat the flesh with the blood in it, or any member
cut from the live beast: whiles the blood yet remayueth in it.

Again the order of religion, as well under the Patriarchs as under the law of
Moses shows: that no beast was eaten Sacramentally, before it was killed and
offered. From the sacrifice of Ab^lto to the coming of Christ, certainly Christ
is really dead for us: and being his true flesh that we eat, we show his true
death* and we show it past, and not to come.

Neither let any man say, that Christ in his last supper gave his Why Christ
gave his flesh before he died.
flesh before he died: for he did not that, before his death was at the very
point to be fulfilled. The Jews began their feasts on the evening tide,
cou^ting the day from Son set, to the next Son set. according as it is written:
A vespera in vesperam celebrabitis Leuit. 23
Sabbata vestra, from evening to evening ye shall keep your holy days. Christ
therefore kept his supper the mau^dy thursday at night, after Son set, when y^
goodfryday (whereon he dyed) was now begone, when he was already sold unto the
Jews, and all things prepared for his death: so that he came to the giving of
his flesh, as men do come in their death bed to dispose what shall be done after
their death. willing this mystery to be made for the remembrance of him.

And (as it may appear in the acts of the Apostles) after the Act. 2.
(...) of Christ and coming down of the holy Ghost, the Christian m^n
bega^first to keep and continue this: at which time they showed him both dead
and risen, and sitting at his Fathers right hand in heaven. And surely, as well
S. James in his liturgy, as Damascen Iacobus in Liturgia.
expounding these words of S. Paul, whereof we speak ^aieth: Mortem filii
hominis annunciatis, and resurrectionem eius Damasc. de Orth. fid. lib. 4. cap.
14.
con^itemini, ^onec veniat, ye show the death of the son of man and co^f^sse
his resurrection until he come. Thus by eating this body we show Christ's true
death, and by eating it, being in it self alive, we show also y^ which followed
his death, which was his resurrection and ascension.

B^t by a figurative eating we should not show his true death, and much less
his true resurrection: for as the death is showed by eating the body which
died, so the resurrection of the said body is showed, by, eating the body,
which died and now is a live: the death is showed, whiles the body is under the
form of bread, and the blood a part under the form of wine, as though they
were still a sunder. The resurrection is showed, whiles under each form whole
Christ is contained. Therefore we eat Christ more then in a figure, and more
then by faith and spirit. we eat him in deed: whereby it follows, that he is
dead for us in deed. we eat him alive, without impairing or diminishing any
part of him: whereby it follows, he is risen from death and remains
immortal. Now let us hear, how S. Chrisostom alludeth to the same reason: who
speaking os Christ's last supper, writes in this manner: Quando id propositu^
videris, dic tecum: Hoc corpus, and cae. When Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
thou see that body set before thee, say with thy self: This body nailed and
beaten, was not ouercommed with death. This body the ^onne seeing crucified,
turned away his beams: Through it also the vele of the temple was torn, and
the rocks, and the whole earth shaken. The self same body made bloody, and
wounded with a spear, gusshed out in founteines of blood and water healthsome
to the whole world.

See thou, after what sort Chrysostom talks of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament of the altar* See thou, by what means he there shows the death of
Christ? This (body says he) was nailed, wounded, perced with a spear. It is
then the real body, that shows the real death of Christ, and that shows
it not only, when we remember, that Christ dyed, when we think of his
res^rrection and ascension: but though no man think of his death, yet the very
eating of this very real body shows his death to men, to Angels, to God.
The deed (I say) and fact of eating shows him to be dead, whose flesh is
eaten: even as the blood Genesis 4.
of Abel cried to God from the earth, where it lay: and as the body of Christ
in heaven by his only presence makes continual intercession to God the Father
for us, always putting God in mind of his death and of our salvation.

The real presence is proved by the illation, which S. The (...). Chapter.
Paul makes concerning the unworthy eating and drinking of evil men.
WHen S. Paul had said, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup
of our Lord: ye shall show our Lords death, until he come: he goes forward,
saying. Therefore, who so eats this bread and drinks the chalice of our
Lord unworthily: he shall be gilty of our Lords body and blood. How does this
sentence hang upon y^ former? how comes it in with ^ Therefore? but because
in the former sentence S. Paul Therefore.
said, by eating this bread we show Christ's death. And for as much as we show
it in that self thing, which dyed for us: therefore he that eats unworthily
such a meat (wherein by the substance which died, he shows Christ's death)
he is gilty of our Lords body. none otherwise, then if he had betrayed it as
Judas did. For the same body that Judas did by a false kiss give to death we
eat under the form of bread, to show the same death.

If then Judas were gilty of Christ's natural body for giving it unworthily to
death: we are gilty of the same natural body, when by eating it we show
unworthily the same death. But if we had not present the same real flesh, which
Judas hetraied: our unworthy showing could not be like his unworthy doing. all the strength of S. Paul's reasoning is only grounded upon the real presence of
Christ's body: the unworthy showing, whereof he Unworthy ^ating
now speaks, is the unworthy ^ating. And for so much as eating is a corporal
action, which is done by the instruments of teeth and mouth: S. Paul does us
to understand, that evil men might touch and have in their mouths y^ bread and
drink of our Lord.

But his bread and his drink is of him self affirmed to be his body and blood:
therefore S. Paul confesses, that evil men may have the body and blood of
Christ in their mouths. But that they could not do, except the body and blood
were under the forms of bread and wine: therefore he teaches, the body and
blood of Christ to be really present under the forms of bread and wine.

Says not S. Paul: whosoever eats this bread, and drinks the cup of our
Lord unworthily? Then this bread and the cup of our Lord may be eaten and
drunken unworthily. But what? Speaks he of eating by faith, or of drinking by
spirit? No verily, for such eating and drinking can not be unworthily made. You
will say, it is bread and wine whereof he speaks. If it were so, why does S.
Paul name it, this bread* For (...) the This (...).
pronoune (this) does show a thing present to some sense or other: and seeing
when S. Paul wrote these words, he being absent in body from the Corinthians,
could not show them any thing by any corporal actio^ of his: it remains, that
y^ thing whereunto (this) does point, was named in the epistle of S. Paul,
which he worte to those faithful men: and also, that it went not long before,
as the which otherwese might be of uncertain understanding. What is it then,
which went before? Christ took bread, and after thanks given said: Take, eat,
this is my body. whosoever eats this bread unworthily, he is gilty of the
body of our Lord. If this bread point unto that, whereof Christ said, This is
my body: S. Paul means to show his faut, whosoever eats the body of our
Lord unworthily. and thereby he grau^teth evil men to eat Christ's body: which
they can do by no means, except that be Christ's body, which they take into
their ^outhes. An ^tion.


The Sacramentaries will object against me, that Christ The ^swere.
meant the sign of his body: which truly can not be so. For seeing S. Paul
named no sign, as (this) can not point to that, which was not named: so it
must point only to the thing named before. But the thing before named was the
body of Christ broken for us: therefore this bread means that body of Christ,
and none other substance.

The real presence is proved, because unworthy The ix. Chapter.
receauers are gilty of Christ's body and blood.
WHo soe^er eats this bread, or drinks the cup of our Lord vnwortehly: he
shall be gily of y^ body and blood of our Lord. A man may be gilty, either for
doing an evil Doing.
deed: or for leaving a good deed clean undone: or else for doing a good deed
in an evil manner. Here S. Paul makes the unworthy receauer gilty, for eating
this bread, and drinking the cup of our Lord unworthily. which is to say, for
doing a good deed after an evil manner. his deed is eating, which thing he so
rea^ly does: that S. Paul affirms him to eat and drink damnation to himself.

But no man is gilty of doing more, the^ he actually does: therefore the
unworthy receauer, who for eating and drinking is gilty of the body and blood
of Christ, does eat and drink in deed the same body and blood of Christ,
whereof he is gilty.

The Sacramentaries imagine S. Paul to have said: He that The ^meles
interpretations of Heretik^.
eating by mouth material bread at Christ's supper, refuses to eat by faith
the body of Christ sitting in heaven, is gilty of not eating Christ's body. Who
ever heard of such a toy? what jot of all the scriptures, which appertein to
Christ's supper, have they left vnwrested, untorn, or undefiled? what
sentence, clause, or word have they left in his natural meaning? If S. Paul
and the four Evangelists were not the^ selves men of sufficient discretion,
who might consider how needful it were to understand well the mysteries of
Christ: yet surely in repeting one matter often, it would at the least chance
unto them, that they should have told us some one syllable: which might have
made for the Sacramentary doctrine, if it had been true.

But now whatsoever they speak, does destroy utterly and overthrow their fond
assertion. And that I may for this time go no farther, what ca^ be answered to
this place of S. Paul? he that eats a very good thing unworthily, is
pronounced gilty: therefore his present fault consists in the evil manner of
his eating. For to eat unworthily is to eat in deed, but not to eat after a
good manner. No man, by eating in an evil manner, can be gilty of that, which
he does not eat in that evil manner: and yet the unworthy receauer of this
bread is pronounced gilty of Christ's body, and it is meant of his natural
body. Therefore this bread, which he does eat unworthily, is the real and
natural body of Christ.

If a man had done never so heinouse a robbery, yet thereby to condemn him of
adultery, it were an evident (...): although the pain due to adultery be
less then that, which is due to robbery. But now to condemn a man for eating
the body of Christ, who did eat only the figure of it: that were much more
unjust, Deuteronomy. 25
for that his pain increased above the measure of his fault. Let it be never
so great a fault, to eat the holy bread unworthily: yet if that holy bread be
not in deed a man, it shall never be the fault of eating man's flesh, to eat
that bread unworthily.

S. Paul says not only, he is gilty, who eats this bread: but he is gilty
of the body of Christ. How can that be, except this bread, which he eats,
be the body of Christ* If this bread be his body, seeing it st^ll appears
bread, we must confess: that the body of Christ is really present under the
form of bread.

And truly, that is the cause, why S. Paul names it this bread: This bread.
for y^ word shows him to mean the bread consecrated at y^ altar: yt bread,
which yt Priest from thence delivers: y^ bread, which yt people receaueth at
the Priests hand. Whosoever eats this bread unworthily, he is gilty of
Christ's body: because yt substance of this bread is yt substance of Christ's
natural body made and given under yt form of bread. If it were not so, the
eater of this bread could not by his eating be gilty of Christ s body.
Otherwise, the talk of S. Paul would no more hang together, then if it were
said: he that touches unworthily the kings garment, is gilty of murdering his
person. I am loath to heap up in this place y^ manifold witnesses of the
ancient Fathers (whose words I have partly touched also In the third chap* of
the second book.
before) concerning that evil men eat Christ's body. Now it shall suffice to
show, that they make the same sequel of S. Paul's words, which I do: for
they show, the unworthy receauer to be gilty of Christ's body: because he
inuadeth the body of Christ, and not because he eats wheaten bread.

Theodoritus expounds these words, whereupon we dispute, Theodo. in 1. Cor.
cap. 11.
after this sort: Illud autem: and cae^. These words, he shall be gilty of the
body and blood of our Lord, signify this much: That, as Judas betrayed him, and
the Jews the^ selfs insulted, and rayled shamfully and sclanderously at him:
so these shame and defile him, who take his most holy body with unclean hands,
and put it into a polluted and unchaste mouth.

Lo, the taking, touching, and eating unworthily Christ's body Haymo* 1, Cor.
11*
makes them gilty: as Judas and the Jews were gilty of Christ's death. Yea
Haymo says: It were better for him, who comes with mortal sins to this
Sacrament, never to have known the way of truth, then to go backward and to
do worse then an infidel: Primasius faith. He despises Christ and his body
Primasius.
as the Jews did: who comet^ to it without trying of his own conscience.
Sedulius, besides that common similitude of Judas Sedulius
and the Jews, uses another saying: If no man dare put it into a filthy cloth
or vessel, how much more ought he not to put it into an unclean heart? Note,
good Reader, that the self same Sacrament is put in the cloth or vessel: which
is put in the heart. It is not therefore, as the Sacramentaries blaspheme,
bread and wine, that is put into a cloth and vessel after consecration, and
body and blood, that (whiles the body eats bread and wine) is in heart
received. The same thing is in the heart, which is put in the vessel, wherein
the Sacra meant is kept.

S. Hierome using the same similitude of a cloth or unclean Hiero. in 1. Cor.
11
vessel, declares farther, that as Joseph did fold the body o^ our Lord in a
clean sheet, so must we receive him with a clean conscience. D^u menius
declares the fault of the evil men to be, in that they touch the body of
Christ with unclean mouth and impure hands, saying that as Judas betrayed
Christ, and the Jews did violently run upon him: even so they do shame to
him, Quod sanctissimum ipsius corpus manibus impuris suscipiunt, veluti tunc
eum Iudaei tenuerunt, and execrando admouent ori: Who do take with impure
hands his most holy body, none otherwise then the Jews at that time held him,
and do put it to their cursed mouth. Theophylact says of the blood of Christ:
Theoph. in ca. 11. 1. Cor.
Qui indigne hunc hauserit nullu^ ex eo fructu^ adeptus, frustra ac temere
Christi sanguinem fudit: He that drinks the blood unworthily, he has shed in
vain and rashly the blood of Christ. taking thereof no fruit. And again, The
cause why evil men take no fruit (says Theophylact) is not through the nature
of yt mysteries (as the which both have life in them and give life) but it
chau^ceth through the unworthiness of them, that come to them: who take hurt by
them nonc other wise, the^ as the son is wont to hurt them, who have sore
eyes: Theophylacte means, that as it is oue son, which shines to whole and
to sore eyes, but yet the sore eyes through their own defecte take hurt
thereof, and the whole eyes take good: so the mysteries are one to the good and
to the bad concerning their own nature, being (as he says) always of that
nature both to conteyne life and to gene life. But the fault why life is not
taken, comes of the unworthy receauer. We have now hard, that evil men
receive the same true body of Christ, which the good men do receive: but not to
y^ same profit, because they have not well prepared them selves. We must not
then think, that ever any ancient Father was of this mind: to say, that evil
men have in their mouths only bread and wine, and the good men eat only the
true body of Christ. That heresi^ is as far from the opinion of the Fathers,
as it is far from the truth of the Scriptures.

S. Chrysostom says, he will suffer his own blood to be shed: In Math. Hom. 8*
rather then he will grant the most holy blood of our Lord to an unworthy
man. Does not he mean, that he has our Lords blood in his own hand at the
time of celebrating the mysteries: and that he will not deliver the same to a
known evil man? In Joan. li. 9. c. 19
S. Cyrill notes, that it is not said in vain of Judas, Exiuit continuo, he
went forth by and by: Timet diabolus benedictionis virtutem, ne sintillam in
animo eius accenderit. The devil fears the virtue of the consecration or
blessing, lest perhaps it might have kendled a spark (of grace or of
repentance) in his mind. S. Augustine having spoken of Judas, who gave him De
Bap. cont. donatist.
self to the devil, Non malum accipiendo, sed male accipiendo, not by taking
an evil thing, but by taking it in an evil manner, 5. cap. 8.
concludes generally of all evil men: Corpus enim and sanguis domini erat
etiam illis, quibus dicebat Apostolus: Qui manducat indigne, iudicium sibi
manducat and bibit. for it was the body and blood of our Lord even to those, to
whom S. Paul said* he that eats unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
him self. It were easy after this sort to allege a very great number of y^
old Fathers: but our adversaries well knowing that we our selves believe, that
the evil men, albeit they receive the substance of Christ's body, yet they do
not receive the grace and unity, for which it is given: abuse maliciously the
words which S. Augustine speaks of the effect of Christ's body, against the
real substance thereof. But what speak I of the injury done to S. Augustine,
since they have done so great and manifold injuries to the word of God it self.

The real presence is proved, by the kind of discerning The x. Chapter.
our Lords body.
LEt a man examine him self, and so eat of that bread and drink of the
chalice: for he that eats and ^nketh unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to him self, not discerning our Lords body: That is to say, not
putting a difference between it and other meats.

The not making of this difference may rise upon mysbele^e, Misbelefe
as when a man thinks, that Christ was not able to make the bread his body:
or, that his flesh is under y^ form of bread apart from his blood. An other
sort of men may so contenme Christ's Contempt.
body, that he will not worship it, although he believe it to be present. But S.
Paul speak^th not of those desperate men, who through their special malice be
gilty of Christ's body before they Aug. in (...). tract. 62.
come unto it: (...) they are the more gilty for touching it really: He
speaks of them, who o^it to examine them selves, in so much that S. Augustine
writes thus of this very matter.

De his erat sermo, and caet* when the Apostle said this thing, the talk was of
them: who did receive the body of our Lord indiscretely and neglige^tly, as if
it were any other meat. And again, Negl^gence.
If the negligence of the guest be touched with reprofe: with what punishment
is he vexed, who sold the maker of the feast? Here S. Augustine does witness,
that S. Paul speaking of unworthy receauers did mean them: who for negligence
omitted to prove and examine them selves, coming to the supper of our Lord, as
if they came to a profane supper.

S. Chrysostom, and after him Decumenius account the fault Chrysostom. i^ 1. Cor.
of the Corinthians to have beue the dispising of the poor men: Hom. 28
because S. Paul said in the same Chapter, Ye put those to shame who have not
goods of their own. Theodoretus says besides, 1. Co. 11.
that some of them were ambitious: others also did eat the things offered up
to Ydols, one had married his own mother in law, these 1. Co. 11.
were the faults of the Corinthians, and not any special contempt of heart,
namely against these holy mysteries.

According to which sense the Prophet Malachie does say, that Mala. 10.
the offering of polluted bread upon the altar of God, was the despising of
him: and S. Hi^rome there says, Opera peccatorum Hieron. in Malach.
despiciunt mensam Dei, the works of sinners despise the table of God.

Seeing then, S. Paul speaks of such fault and contempt of the Corinthians,
as rises of their negligence and for the lack of discretion: this kind of
giltines can not come only of the mind it self (whose judgment is rather
upright) but it comes, for so much as the fault is committed about that thing,
wherein the body and blood of Christ is really contained.

For whereas an injury done may either touch our body, or Alpian. de iniur.
lib. 1. c. 7.
estimation: and when we will persecute the same, reason and law would we should
specially describe the kind of injury, least we do wrong to him, whom we
burden falsely with a more greuouse kind of fault, then he has done: seeing S.
Paul does by name burden the unworthy rec^auer of this Sacrament with being
gilty not only of Christ's worship or name, (wherewith in other Romans 2.
places he burdeneth other great sinners) but with being gilty 1. Co. 11.
Heb. 10.
of his own body and blood, with which fault he never (...) 1. Cor. 2.
any other then the unworthy receauers of this blessed Sacrament, or y^ Jews,
who laid (...) hands upon Christ at his death: it must needs be, y^ such a
co^municant recea^eth Christ's own natural body, and so offends Christ not
only in his name or in his estimation, but also in his natural flesh and blood.

Moreover, seeing when he warns him to beware of doing this evil deed, he
bids him only put a (...) between Christ's body, and all other meats: it is
evident, that none other meat is here present beside the body of Christ.
Otherwise, he should have said, Non dijudicans panem and vinum, figuram
corporis Domini. Not discerning bread and wine, the sign of Christ's body. But
now he only says, not discerning the body of our Lord. And yet it is much
more to be noted, that S. Paul names not any other meats: but only he names
the body of our Lord, showing thereby, y^ we must discern it not only from
other meats, but from al other creatures in the world. As if he said, he that
eats unworthily, considers not whose body he comes unto.

For as S. Chrysostom says, The receauer needs to consider In 1. Co. Hom. 28
nothing else: but only, qui sit propositus, who is set forth. Et magnitudinem
propositorum, and the greatness of the things set ^oorth. If the body were not
present, we ought rather to consider, who is in heaven, and where the truth of
this image is: then who, and what is set before us. Which (as the
Sacramentaries falsely teach) is bread and wine: but (as the holy Scriptures
and Fathers affirm) it is the substance of Christ's body.

No ^igure, which is not in substance Christ's The xi. Chapter.
body, can make any man, by eating it negligently gilty of Christ's natural
body.
IN all this question of unworthy recea^ing the holy mysteries the chief refuge
of the Sacramentaries is to say: that seeing the An ^ction.
bread eaten, and the wine drunken are the figures of Christ's body and blood,
who so takes them unworthily, he is gilty of the body and blood them selves,
which those figures do signify. This pretensed excuse of theirs, I will now
cons^te God willing.

When a man by wilful contempt does break or defile y^ image The answer.
of a great Prince, it is reputed all one, as if he had stryken the Prince
himself: not because the deed is one, but for that his will is thought to be no
less uttered against the Prince by his demeanure toward the sign: then if he
had (...) touched the Prince him self. But S. Paul speaks not of any such
matter in this place, as who makes his argument rather upon y^ real fact it
self: ^hen upon the will or mind of the doer. Neither does he reason upon
presumption, surmise, or any like far fet interpretation: but absolutely
pronounces him to be gilty of Christ's body, who eats this bread unworthily.
Therefore he meant not, that the image or figure of Christ's body was eaten: but
the true substance thereof.

He spoke not now only of wilful contempt, but of negligent doing. of not
examining a man's self* and of despising the poor.

Secondarily, they that say the sign, image, or figure of Christ's body is
abused, must show wherein that figure does consist. Figures.
Figures and images be either external or internal. Those be judged by the
eye, these by the understanding. Those are most commonly made by act, these by
nature or grace.

No manifest external sign is made in Christ's supper sufficient, to show or
to express his body and blood outwardly unto our eyes: albeit some likeness and
similitude be kept outwardly between the figures and the things figured.
otherwise (as S. Augustine reasons) they should not be Sacraments or holy
Epist. 23.
signs. But (as Epiphanius well notes of this Sacrament) Videmus, quod non
aequale est, neque simile, non imagini in carne, In Anco rato.
non inuisibli deitati, non lineamientis membrorum: hoc enim est rotundae
formae, and insensibile quantum ad potentiam. We see, that this thing (he
means the Sacrament of Christ's supper) is not equal nor like, either to the
shape in flesh, or to the invisible Godhead, or to the proportion of his
members. for this thing is of a round form, and insensible concerning the
power of feling or moving.

Seeing then the things consecrated upon the (...), be not so like Christ's
nature, and person, that thereby they may be in deed his image in any part of
their outward shape: it appears, that the figure made in them, is not so much
seen in the outward form: as it is to be sought for in some inward virtue of
them.

Internal figures be either natural, or typical. The Son Internal figures.
is a natural image or figure of his Father: and the serpent lifted Number. 21.
up in the desert, was a mystical image of Christ. Joan. 3.


There is likewise no mere natural image of Christ in his last supper, because
there is nothing, which proceeds from him by the way of birth or of
generation: and yet a certain proportion is kept in the Sacrament of Christ's
supper with this kind of figure also.

Typical signs be dubble, some of the old law, which did Typical images.
signify (as it were in a shadow) y^ truth absent in substance, which was to
come in Christ: others of the new Testament, which do evidently give us the
truth it self, which they by visible ^ormes both signify and contain. Those of
the old law are called in Heb. 10.
Theodo retus in 10. Heb.
S. Paul, vmbra futurorum bonorum: the shadow of the good things to come:
these of the new law are named ipsa imago reru^, the self image of the things.
of which matter I have spoken before Shadows.
Self images.
at large.

The supper of Christ belongs to the new Testament, the chalice whereof is
the new Testament in his blood. Therefore In the (...). book the x. Chap.
the figure which is made in Christ's supper, is ipsa imago reru^, The self
image of the things: as also Baptism conteyneth really 1. Co. 11.
Leo de not. Do. ser. 4. 5.
the grace of regeneration, which it gives to him, that is worthily baptized.

There is an image, and a self image. The image may be of a thing, whose
substance is absent, as it chances in all artificial images. The self image
is it, which has the truth joined with y^ Ipsa ima go.
image: or else, which is an image rather through that self substance which it
has common with the truth, then in his outward resemblance. Heb. 1.
Colos. 1.
Such an image is Christ of his Father, and Christ's Artificial figures.
Natural figures.
supper of him self: Having after the rate of artificial and external figures,
(by breaking of the bread) a resemblance of the natural flesh broken with
nails and scourges: but much more having the propriety of a natural image in
being that substance, whereof it is the figure. And whereas it has the
properties of ^the kind of images or figures, yet it is neither of both, but
far passes both: and therefore is called not only a typical figure (such
Typical figures.
as those of the old law were) nor only a mystical figure of y^ new Mystical
figures.
Testament (as other Sacraments of Christ's Church are) but it is called
singularly the Sacrament of Sacraments, the perfection, Sacrifice
and the unbloody sacrifice: which who so receaueth unworthily, he is worthy to
be gilty of no less punishment, then the thing is great, which he (...). He is
gilty of the sacri^iced body of Christ, because he really eats it.

But if it were the image of a truth absent in substance (as the figures of the
old Testament were) the negligent eating thereof could by no means make a man
gilty of violating Christ's body: partly because no image of the old law did by
eating it make any man gilty of laying (...) hands upon Christ's body, and yet
they were all figures of his body: partly because any Heb. 10.
other Satrament of the new law should likewise make us gilty of missordering
his body. For as bread and wine do signify the spiritual nourishment, which
Christ gives to our souls: right so Baptism does signify the spiritual
birth, which we receive of Christ in our souls.

But seeing it is a thing never heard of, that either Manna or the show bread
unworthily eaten, or baptism unworthily taken, made any man gilty of Christ's
own body and blood: certainly there is some other heavenly substance under the
form of bread and wine, then either Manna or the show bread had, or baptism
now has. He that did eat Manna unworthily might Number. 21.
be gilty of contempt, disdain, lothsomnes, or negligence, according as his
fault was, wherewith he did eat it: but the thing eaten made him not gilty of
Christ's body and blood. Otherwise the Jews must have prepared and examined
them selves every day: least they should have committed a new sin against the
body of our Savior: which as it is a thing not readen of, so it had required
more perfection in the law, then now is used: for so much as we receive our
maker perhaps but once a year, and surely at the most but once a day, whereas
they did feed upon Exodus 16
Manna so often, as hunger or custom provoked them by the space of forty years.

What shall I say more? As the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is really
and in deed it self the bread, which (through the substance thereof united to
God) is able to make the worthy eaters live for ever: so it is the body, which
through the substance thereof (whereunto power of judging and co^demning is
given) Joan. 5.
does make the unworthy receauers thereof to be damned, even for the only
negligence used in eating it. Death and life comme from the substance of that,
which is eaten: and therein it differs Cyrill. in Ioa^. c. 19.
from Manna, exceeding it so far, as the body it self is more worth, then the
shadow thereof: whereas otherwise one slesh and blood of Christ were signified
by both, but not really present in both.

The real presence of Christ's body is confirmed by the often rep^rting of the
name of flesh, body, blood, eating, drinking and such like words.
THat, which Joseph said unto Pharao concerning that his Genesis 41.
dream seen y^ second time, was an assured token of Gods will in bringing the
matter to pass, I may much more ^ustly allege at this time: since (touching the
real pres^ce of his body and blood) Christ was not content to say it the
second or third time, but he has by him self or his Apostles, and Evangelists,
repeted it above twenty times: to the intent it might at the least wise sink
at the length into some of his disciples mind. And how much less should I
either think it long, to dilate this argument, either the Reader be weary
thereof? S. Paul says, eade^ Ad Phil. cap. 3.
vobis scribere, mihi quidem non pigru^, vobis autem necessarium. To write the
same things unto you it is not lothsom unto me, but truly necessary unto you.

Even so Christ for our great profit always repeted, that he Joan. 6.
would give meat which should not perish, a bread which was his flesh. And
that we should eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, that
who so did eat his flesh and drink his blood should have life everlasting. for
his flesh is meat in deed and his blood is drink in deed, who so does eat
his flesh and drink his blood does tarry in Christ and Christ in him, and he
that does eat him should live for him, and that this is the bread which came
down from heaven, an other manner of bread then Ma^na was. He that does eat
this bread shall live for ever. Thus about ten times we find, that in S. Ihon
he said one thing, though not in one words: Sometime calling it flesh, sometime
blood, sometime him self, sometime this bread, sometime meat.

Put now here unto that he took bread and wine, blessed, gave Matt. 26.
thanks, brake and gave, and said, take and eat, this is my body, and drink
ye al of this, for this is my blood, and make or do this thing for the
remembrance of me. Remember farther that three Evangelists wrote the history of
the supper in diverse years 1. Cor. 10 and 11.
all after one sort, yt S. Paul wrote the same adding more terror to it, by
showing that some died at Corinth for the unworthy receiving the body and blood
of Christ, with all the rest which the Apostle says in that epistle, and we
shall find, that the holy ghost has confirmed and verified the known and
litterall understanding of the words, flesh, blood, body, meat, without any
figurative speech or meaning.

Albeit God meant not his body and blood to be eaten and drunken after the
common and usual manner of eating roasted flesh, or drinking raw blood, but that
we should eat it and drink it under ye forms of bread and wine. For which
cause he also used y^ name of a certain kind of bread. A bread, I say, which
came done from heaven, because it is united unto y^ son of God, who was for
ever equal with his Father in glory, nature, and honor. This repeting of one
thing so many times is a great argument of speaking plainly without all figures
or parables.

This argument (to begin with the weaker) the greek author Euthy. in6. c. Io.
Euthymius makes. who upon those words: my flesh is truly meat, says: hoc
dixit confirmans quod non aenigmatice, neque parabolic^ loqueretur. This he
has said, co^firming that he spoke not (...), either else in the manner of a
parable. Which observation Euthymius borrowed of S. Chrysostom, who says that
S. Chry. in Joan. hom. 48.
Christ affirmed his flesh to be meat in deed, to confirm his disciples
least they should think him to have spoken obscurely in parables. But the often
repeting is of it self the confirming and assuring us, that he spoke not so.

Oecumenius also use th the same reason in a like matter. Per O^cum. in Epi. 1.
hoc quod frequenter ait, (corporis and sanguinis domini) manifestat, ad Cor.
cap. 11.
quod non sit nudus homo qui immolatur, sed ipse dominus and factor omnium: vt
videlicet per haec iplos exterreat. in that he many times names the body and
blood of our Lord, he shows, that he which is offered is not a bare man (as
the Nestorians did falsely teach) but the Lord him self and maker of all
things. to thend he might verily put them in a terror by these words. if the
often naming of (Lord) did show it to be the body not of a bare man, but also of
God, how much more does it show, that it is not the bare substance of bread,
but the body it self of Christ who is our maker?

S. Basile notes in the Apostle S. Paul concerning this very Basil. de
baptis. li. 2. cap. 3.
matter: Veheme^tius simulque horribilius proponit ac declarat condemnationem
per repetitionem. The Apostle sets forth and declares more vehemently, and
to the more terror of the unworthy receauers, the condemnation by repeting it.
S. Augustine in his book which he made concerning the working of muncks,
perceauing that some thought y^ Apostle to speak figuratinely, when he
requires that all men should labor and work who would eat: among other
arguments, wherewith he disproueth these figurantiue Aug. de (...)
workers, uses this also.

Neque enim aut vno loco, aut breuiter dictu^ est, vt possit cuiusuis
Monachorum cap. 13.
astutissimi tergiuersatione in aliam traduci peruertique sententiam. ^t is not
said in one place, or in short words, so that it may be (...) and perverted
into an other meaning, by y^ ouerthwarting of never so subtle a sophist. Thus
reasons S. Augustine upon the ost repeting of work, of labor, of mini^ring
with hands, proving thereby that the Apostle meant in deed bodily work, and
not only working with mind, or tongue.

But I am assured there is not more in the new testament concerning the precept
of working with hands, then is of the body Joan. 6.
Math. 6.
and blood of Christ, of his flesh, of the meat which perishes not, Matt. 26.
of such substanciall bread: of taking, eating, drinking, communicating, Marc.
14
and partaking the body and blood of Christ, of making the Luc. 22.
same, of giving, breaking and distributing, of not discerning it, 1. Cor. 10
1. Cor. 11
of being gilty for unworthy eating: of true meat, true drink, o^ Ephesians. 5.
reising up him that eats it, of his abiding in Christ, and living for
Christ, of the Church and Christ being twain in one flesh, of being one bread,
one body all that partake of the one bread: of living for ever, if any man
worthily eat this bread which is the flesh of Christ, which he will give for y^
life of yt world. it is not said in one place, neither in short or few words.
therefore it ought not be drawn into an other meaning, then the words do
sound, ^y the ouerthwarting of never so subtle a sophist. To conclude S.
Cyrill. in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Cyrillus writes in the same sense: Non obdurescamus toties a Christo
veritatem audientes. non est enim ambigendu^ quin summa supplicia subituri
sunt, qui saepius haec a Chisto iterata non capiunt. Let us not harden our
selves hearing the truth so often of Christ. for it is not to be doubted, but
they shall suffer most ^reme pains, who receive not these things which are
so many times repeted of Christ.

The preface of the sixth book.
BEcause the adoration of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Altar is a matter, which most manifestly conuinceth the real presence of
Christ under the form of bread: I thought it best to handle it a part by it
self, a^ also being one of those things, which does principally declare the
says of the whole Church in this behalf. For no man would adore the body of
Christ in the Priests hands or upon the altar, if it were not really present
there.

The Chapiters of the sixth Book.
1. The adoration of Christ's body is proved out of the Prophet David in the
Psalm 21. 2. Item of the Psalm 98. 3. It is proved out of the Prophets, that
it can be no idolatry, to worship the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament
of the altar. 4. The adoration of Christ's body is proved out of the new
Testament. 5. That the Fathers of the first six hundred years after Christ, did
honor the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar. 6. The
adoration of the body and blood of Christ is proved by the custom of the
Priests and people of the first six hundred years. 7. The real presence is
proved by the doctrine and consent of the ancient Fathers. 8. Item by the
faith of the people. 9. That no man can be condemned for believing the real
presence of Christ's body and blood under the forms of bread and wine.
The adoration of Christ's body is proved out of The first Chapter.
the Prophet David.
OF this adoration due to the body of Christ the holy ghost Ambros. ^erm. 3.
forewarned us by the Prophet David in that psalm, which Christ him self
hanging upon the Cross declared to be literally meant of him self: and that as
well concerning his Matt. 27.
death, whch he suffered for us, as also concerning the memory of ye same
death, which he instituted in the night wherein he was betrayed. Christ
therefore having she wed in that psalm the cruelty Psalm. 21.
of Jews in killing him, most humbly asks of his Father through his manhod:
that his soul may be delivered by resurrection from the mouth of y^ lion,
promising or vowing therewithal, The (...).
that he will open the name of God unto his brethren, and praise him in the
midst of the congregation: And when I cried unto him, he heard me. If God
has favorably heard Christ, as there can be no doubt but he has: Christ is
bound by his own promise, to praise his Father in a great Church, and
therefore says, he will do so, adding thereunto: I will render (or perform)
my vows in The performance.
the sight of them that fear him. By what mean will he perform them? It
follows immediately, Edent pauperes and caet. The poor The mean of performi^g
the vow.
shall eat, and be silled: and they that seek him, shall praise the Lord: their
hearts shall live for ever, all the ends of the earth shall remember and be
turned to the Lord. All the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight.
Because the kingdom is the Lords, and The king dom of the Lord.
him self shall bear rule among the nations. All that be fat on the earth,
have eaten and adored: al they that go down into the earth Adoration.
shall fall down before him.

1. Christ then ^or his resurrections sake, 2. made a vow, to praise God, 3. in
the great Church of all nations: 4. the performance whereof should be
stablished by the means of eating, filling, (...), (...), (...), and
worshipping.

^ose, that after baptism by y^ grace of God are preserved from (...).
(...), (...) the body of Christ in the Sacrament of y^ altar, (...) be filled,
(...) praise God for ever. Eating is the act of the Eating.
(...), spiritual (...) is the heavenly effect thereof, the praising of God is
the fruit of the (...). For we (...) (...). (...).
to be (...), and are filled to the end we should praise God for ever.

(...) that after (...) fall into great (...), partly they (...).
so fall, that they rise (...), and then they remember in y^ memory Remini^.
of Christ's (...) ((...) his last supper is) that Christ died for them, and
so the (...) of (...) forces and presses them by penance 1. Cor. 11
to return: Partly they so fall, that they care not to return to 2. Cor. 5.
(...).
God, but lie wallowing still in their sins: and yet they depart not by
(...) or infidelity out of the Church, but keep still the bare belefe of Gods
truth, without performing his ^dementes.

Such men eat and worship, but because they will not remember and be (...) to
God, but come to the table of Christ unworthily, they are not filled by their
eating. But there are two other kinds of men, who sometime have been of
Christ's church, but now are not of it: of which two the one does eat and not
worship, because it beleu^th not the thing eaten to be the flesh of God (such
are the Sacra^ (...). Unf^ithfull
Zinglians) the other does neither worship, nor eat, which are the unfaithful
Jews: who are not only departed from the Catholic Church, but also from y^
confession of Christ our true Messiah, of whom S. P^ule says: we have an altar
whereof they have Jews.
no power to eat, who serve the tabernacle.

Christ being absent in the visible form of his body, and sitting Hebr. (...).
therein at the right hand of his father, rules his Church and reig^eth Domini
est regnu^
in it, not as the unfaithful Jews thought he would have done, by ex^ising
violent in^isdiction and subduing the bodies Joan. 8.
of men by force: but he reigns in y^ hearts through faith and charity, Luc.
17.
which he gives us. This invisible reigning among visible men requires for
convenient ma^tenance thereof, an invisible The king don^e of God in his Church.
kind of presence (concerning the person of the king) b^t yet visible
concerning the for^ies of bread and wine, to the^d his members may know, where
to worship him. For as his Church is visible through the bodies of them, whose
souls do inuisibly serve him: so his body is visible through the forms of
bread and wine, under the which it lies inuisibly, distributing the fruits of
his death and resurrection

All this eating, adoring, filling, reigning, and praising, does chie^ly belong
(in this place) to the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Through those
mysteries Christ the bread of life is Joan 6.
really eaten, we are filled with grace, God is praised in good works,
reigns in our hearts, we bow down to his body, and Math. 5.
worship him for our maker, our King, and our Lord. And that this
interpretation is not of mine own making, it shall now appear. S. Hierome
upon those words, vota mea reddam, I will render my vows, (which I promised)
says.

Vota Christi, natiuitas vel passio, vota Ecclesiae, opera bona: vel, Hiero^.
in Ps. 21.
mysterium corporis and sanguinis mei offeram cum his, qui in eius timore haec
celebrant. The vows of Christ are, his birth or passion: the vows of the
Church are good works: or else, I will offer (says Christ) the mystery of my
body and blood with them, who celebrate these things in his fear. First S.
Hierome takes the vows of Christ to have been the promises, that he The ^owes
of Christ.
made to be borne or to die: but afterward he gives an other sense, which is
more agreeable to the letter. For Christ had spoken before of his passion, and
had made petition for his resurrection, and says: he will now perform the
vows which he made for the obteining of his resurrection.

Those vows were to have Gods name told, and his (...) published. To that
end serves the mystery and sacrifice of his body and blood: for God is
thanked in the Eucharist, and praised 1. Co. 10
in the cup of blessing, as in y^ public sacrifice instituted by Christ 1. Co.
11.
to remain in his Church, until his second coming. Therefore, when he says,
I will perform my vows, he means: I will offer the sacrifice of my body and
blood, as S. Hierome expounds it.

And therein S. Augustine fully agrees with him saying: Quae Aug. comment. 2.
in Ps. 21.
sunt vota sua? Sacrificium, quod obtulit deo. Nostis quale sacrificium? Norunt
fideles vota quae reddit coram timentibus eum. Sacrificium.
And before. Sacramenta corporis and sanguinis mei reddam coram timentibus eum.
What are his vows? The sacrifice which he In comment.
has offered to God. Know ye what manner of sacrifice? The Sacrifice Uowes.
faithful know the vows which he rendereth before them, that Sacraments.
fear him. I will render the Sacraments of my body and blood before them,
that fear him.

Cassiodorus consent^th, saying: Vota mauult intelligi Sacrame^ta Cassiod. in
Ps. 21.
corporis and sanguinis sui, and caet. He rather would, the vowe^ Uowes.
be understood the Sacraments of his body and blood, the Sacraments.
which are rendered those being present, which are subject to him in holy
fear. To be short, see what follows: the poor shall eat Eating.
and be filled. These are the vows whereof he spoke before. ^eda in Psalm. 21.


S. Bid also writes: Vota quae feci, cum meipsum in ara crucis obtuli, illa
reddam in Ecclesia magna, id est, iterum per quotidiana sacrificia meorum in
sacramentis offeram. vota dico eadem vere, in co^spectu timentium eum, id is it,
quantu^ ad intellectum bonorum: etsi non sint eadem in conspectu malorum, qui
nihil in Sacramentis, nisi quod exterius apparet, intelligunt. The vows (...).
which I made, when I offered my self on the altar of the cross, those I will
render in the great Church: That is to say, I will Sacraments.
offer them again in the Sacraments, by the daily sacrifices of my
(ministres.) I mean the same vows in deed, in the sight of Sacri^ices.
them that fear him, to wit, concerning the understanding of the good men:
albeit they be not the same in y^ sight of evil men, Understanding.
who understand nothing in the Sacraments, but that which Appering
appears outwardly.

Here S. Bid expounds the rendering of the vows of Christ to be the
offering of the very same body and blood, which was offered upon the cross:
And that the good see by faith, and understand by believing more, then the eye
sees. But the evil men will understand no more, then they see: judging that
which The subgement of evil men.
seems bread and wine, to be still in deed bread and wine. But the truth is,
the same substance of Christ's flesh and blood is offered in the Sacraments:
which was offered on the cross.

Concerning my purpose S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Cassiodorus, Bedafull well
agree, this place to apperteine literally to Arnob. in Ps. 21.
the Sacrament of the altar. Yea Arnobius, who was elder then all they, says:
that Christ being upon the Cross prays for them that crucify him, that his
praise may be in the great Church, and that he may render his vows before
them which fear him. Dum edunt corpus eius pauperes Spiritu, whiles the poor
in spirit shall eat his body. Neither do the Latins only expound this place
after that sort, but also the Grecians.

Euthym^s having expounded the vows to be the promises Euthy. in Ps. 21.
of praising Gods name, and the eating of the poor men to be their feeding
upon the doctrine of the Apostles, adds also the other interpretation,
saying: Vel aliter, comedent fideles Saluatoris corpus cum quo and sanguinem
eius bibent, etc. Or else, according to an other meauing, the faithful shall
eat the body of our Savior, wherewith they shall drink also his blood. And
shall be silled, verily filled with the holy Ghost, and shall extol God with
hymns and praises in that table. So that the former versicle may conteyne not
only a prophecy of the Gospel, but also the mystical Sacrament of that table.

In which interpretation the Fathers agree so thoroughly, that they confer
those words of the p^alme, their hearts shall live for ever, with those of
Christ, I am the bread of life, and, if any man Psalm. 21.
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. Now if this psalm do literally
Joan. 6.
speak of the offering and eating of the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament of his supper, (as ye see plainly it does) it can not be avoided, but
the same place shall prove, that the body and blood of Christ must be adored in
the Sacrament. For y^ same yt is eaten is here prophesied also as a thing to be
adored.

It is said manducauerunt and adorauerunt, they have eaten and have adored.
Both be referred to one thing. But they have eaten is referred to the Sacrament
of the altar, therefore they have adored, is referred to the same Sacrament.
Apostoli vel caeteri sancti (says S. Hi^rome) manducauerunt corpus Christi.
The Hieron. in Ps. 21.
Apostles and other saiutes have eaten the body of Christ: whereupon it
follows that they have adored it also.

S. Augustine expresses it more plainly: Manducauerunt corpus, and caet. Even
the rich of the earth have eaten the body of the lowlines of their Lord. They
are not filled so, that they will follow (as the poor men were) but yet they
have adored. Behold three verbs, which all belong to the very body of Christ,
eating, adoring, The verbs.
filling. The poor in spirit have eaten and adored (because al nations have
adored before him) and they are filled. The rich have eaten and are not
^illed, but yet they have adored.

What have they both eaten? The body of Christ Wherewith The cases belonging to
y^ verbs
are the poor filled? With the body of Christ. What have yt rich adored? The
body of Christ, but yet they are not filled therewith because they will not
follow the humility of Christ. And seeing this eating p^rteyneth to the
Sacrament of Christ's supper (as it was before prourd) the adoring also
apperteyneth to the same Sacrament. That is eaten which appears to be bread,
therefore that self substance is adored, which appearing bread is in deed the
truth of Christ's own body.

S. Bid expounds the adoring thus: Adorabunt, quia cum (...).
quadam exteriori veneratione accedent. They shall adore, because they shall
come with a certain outward worshipping. Behold, the worshipping of the rich
is outward and not from the heart, whereas it ought to have beue both outward
and inward, both in spirit and in truth. But through their hypocrisy it
consists only in bowing their bodies, because other men do so, and not in
true and perfect charity of God.

Moreover S. Augustine speaks in an other place of the same Aug. in ep. 120.
matter: Supra dictum est, edent pauperes and saturabu^tur, hic vero, ad Hon^
ratu^ c. 27
manducauerunt and adorauerunt, and caet. It was said before, the poor shall
eat and shall be filled. But here it is said, all the rich The table of Christ.
of the earth have eaten and have adored. For they also are brought to the
table of Christ. And they take of his body and blood. But Adoration.
they adore only, and be not filled also, because they follow not. For although
they eat (Christ the poor man) yet they disdain to be poor. And again,
quia Deus excitauit eum a mortuis, etc.

Because God has raised him from the dead, and has given him a name the which
is above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should be bowed of
heavenly, earthly, and of What brin geth the rich or ye earth to adore.
things under the earth. They also moved with the fame of his highness, and with
the glory of his name (which glory is spread round about in the Church) they
come them selves to the table, they eat and adore, but yet they are not
filled, because they do not hunger and thyrst righteousness. Hitherto S.
Augustine, who speaks of eating the body of Christ from the table.

The rich men come to the table of Christ thence to eat his From the table
they eat and adore.
body. There also they adore that which they take from the table, and that
which they eat. And how is it possible, but that this worshipping and adoring
(whereof S. Augustine speaks) must belong to the table of Christ, that is to
say, to his body and blood which is eaten from his table, when the Priest
gives it to us? And yet it might not there be rightly adored, if it were not
rea^ly present upon the table. And there it can not be present, unless it ve
under the forms of bread and wine, which only stand upon the table. Therefore
this prophecy as well proves ye adoration, as the real presence of Christ's
body and blood. Is it not a great blindness in our new preachers, that whereas
the word of God says even the rich of the earth have eaten and have adored,
or shall eat and shall adore, (for so one tense does stand for an other in the
holy Scripture) yet they will have ye eat, and not adore, to the intent ye
should be more unkind, th^n those earthly rich men were?

The adoration of Christ's body is proved again The second Chapter.
out of the Prophet David.
THe Prophet David speaking of the Kingdom of Christ, which he exercised upon
the cross by conquering the devil In Ps. 98
and sin, requires us, to gene praise to him for it: and not only to him,
but even to his footestole, writing thus: Exaltate Dominum Deum nostrum, and
adorate scabellum pedum eius quoniam sanctum est. Exalte the Lord our God, and
worship his footestole, because it is holy. The Hebrew reads, because he is
holy.

It is to be understood, that Christ in one person has two natures: to wit,
the nature of God and y^ nature of man. David wills both to be adored, and
first he speaks of the Godhead, God is to be adored absolutely Adoration is
dew to yt manhod through y^ union.
saying: Exalte the Lord our God. Next after of his humane nature, in those
words: Adorate scabellum pedum eius, worship his footestole, for Godly honor
is due to his flesh also, because he is holy: That is to say, because his
person is the second person in the Trinity: where unto the manhod is united.
And through that union, the nature of man is worthy of Godly honor.

The Jews accounted the footestole of God to be the Arc The fotestole.
and temple of Jerusalem: toward which they bowed and adored God in their time
of prayers. But as well the Arc, as the The Arc.
Temple were the shadows of Christ's flesh, and that not only as he was in the
visible form of man: but even as he is mystically under the form of bread.
For the Arc did foreshadow the Angelo. in 2. Re* cap. 6.
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, as Angelomus has noted. Sacerdos qui
Arcam, and caet.

The Priest (Oza) who touched yt Arc with unadvised rashness, purged the fault
of his bold enterprise with death before his time: wherein we must needs
consider, how much he synneth, The body The Arc was the figure of our Lords
body.
who comes gilty to the body of our Lord, seeing yt devout Priest is punished
with death: who with less reverence then he ought, hastily handled that Arc,
which was the figure of our Lords body. Again the Arc contained Manna in it,
which was an express figure of the flesh of Christ in that respect, as it is
to Heb. 9.
Joan. 6.
be eaten of us: as both Christ him self has declared in S. Ihon, Cyril. li.
4. cap. 19
and S. Paul in the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Likewise the Temple was a figure of Christ's body, according 1. Co. 10.
as him self said: Dissolve ye this Temple (of my body) and The Temple.
and in three days I will raise it up again. The Arc therefore and Joan. 2.
the Temple being the footestole of God, toward which y^ Jews prayed, did
signify: that the flesh of Christ should be adored not only in heaven, whether
Christ is entered as into the everlasting Heb. 9.
(...), and most holy of holies: but also in the Sacrament of the altar, which
is the Arc, Temple, and ^essell, containing the self same substance of Manna,
which sits at the right hand of God the Father.

The holy Prophet David requiring us to adore the footestole of God, requires
us to adore the flesh of Christ, as well in the Arc of the new Testament
(which is the Sacrament of Christ's body) as in heaven it self, because he that
has ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of his Father, said
also in his last supper: Take and eat, this is my body: Do and make (...). 22.
this thing for the remembrance of me. Neither do I make, or first invent such
interpretation: but the Fathers of the first six hundred years left it unto me,
saving that they expound y^ footestole to be, not only the Arc and Temple of
^ierusalem: but The ^arth is y^ (...).
also the whole ^arth in respect of the Godhead, because Esate says: Heaven
is my seat, the ^arth is the settle of my feet. But E^ai. 66.
herein we may rest in S. Hieromes authority, who upon this place writes
thus.

Multae de scabello opiniones sunt, and caet. There are many opinions Hieron.
in Ps 98.
concerning the ^orestole, what it should be. But here the Prophet means our
Lords body, wherein the majesty of the The body of Christ is the (...).
divine nature stands as it were on a (...). How so ever then we interpret
the fotestole, concerning the literal and first meaning: yet the natural
flesh of Christ, which he assumpted of the virgin, is the spiritual truth,
whereunto the Prophet directed his words. That flesh, where so ever it be, is
the fotestole of God, and therefore it is every where to be adored.

But as the Arcke deserved a special reverence among the Jews, although it
was the bare figure of Christ's flesh, in so much that Oza, who touched it
rashly, died for it: even so the Sacrament 2. Reg. 6
of the altar, which is both the truth and the figure of Christ's visible body,
must by the force of this Prophe^y be adored De spiritu sancto li 3. ca. 13
among all faithful Christians. Therefore S. Ambrose disputing of this
fotestole says: Per scabellum terra intelligitur, per terram autem caro
Christi: quam hodieque in mysterijs adoramus. By the fotestole the earth is
fotestole, by the earth ye flesh of Christ, which this day also we adore in
the mysteries. Adoration of Christed flesh in the mysteries.


When he says, we adore the flesh of Christ even at his day in the mysteries:
what other thing says he, then, we adore the flesh of Christ at mass, or in
the supper of Christ, or upon the altar, or upon the holy table? For all these
names mean^, that the flesh of Christ is worshipped after consecration under
the forms of bread and wine.

S. Augustine likewise considering yt David wills us to adore Aug. in Psalm.
98.
the footestole of our Lord, and that (...) says in the person of E^a. 66.
God, heaven is to me a seat, the earth is my footestole, and doubting how we,
that profess to adore one God, may worship earth, finds at the last, that
Christ took earth of earth, to wit, flesh of the Took. walked.
virgins flesh: and because Christ walked in the very same flesh here, and gave
us the very same flesh to be eaten to salvation, and Gave.
no man eats that flesh, except he first has adored: it is found how such a
footestole of our Lords may be adored, and how we may not only not sin by
adoring: but how we may sin by not adoring.

Behold, the flesh which Christ took of y^ virgin, in the same he walked, and
the same he gave to be eaten. He took true flesh and real flesh, he walked in
the substance of natural flesh: therefore he gave us the substance of the same
flesh to be first adored, and then to be eaten. If you say, he gave it in a
figure: then he walked in flesh in a figure, he took flesh in a figure, For
the same substance, which he took and walked in, he gave us: albeit he gave it
so, as it might be most conveniently eaten under the form of bread, whereunto
all men are most used.

S. Augustine considering the foolish understanding of the In Psalm. 98.
Capharnaits worthily says (as it were to them) in Christ's person: ye shall
not eat this body, which you see, nor drink that blood which they shall shed
who shall crucify me. Sacramentu^ aliquod A Sacrament.
co^mendaui vobis, I have commended a certain Sacrament to you* spiritualiter
intellectu^ viuificabit vos, being spiritually understood it will make you
live. Et si necesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportettame^ inuisibiliter
intelligi. Although it must needs be celebrated visibly, yet it must be
understood inuisibly.

The last words of S. Augustine must agree with the first, We must eat the
bodytake^, but not the body seen.
and then it shal^e true, both that we must eat the self same flesh, which
Christ took of the virgin: and yet not that body, which the Capharnaits saw.
why? Did not the (...) see the body, which Christ took of the virgin? How then
must we eat the flesh which he took, and not that body which they saw?

If men will not affect blindness, it is easy to understand: that all
corporal natures consist of an invisible substance, and of a visible form.
The form of Christ's body was that, which the Capharnaites The body seen.
saw: but the substance o^ Christ's body is that, which we must eat. Christ
took not that greatness and quantity of flesh of his mother, wherein he
walked: for his greatness increased The body taken.
from the state of an infant to the state of a per^ite man. That Lucae 1.
increased quantity the Capharnaites saw, but the substance of his flesh was
neither increased nor diminished. That same standing The body taken, walked in
and eaten.
substance Christ took of his mother, in that he walked, and that he gave us
to eat unto salvation. That substance we how unto before we eat it.

But the form and shape of that substance we eat not: for Christ has given
it us under the form of bread, and his blood under the form of wine. Now this
gift, wherein y^ truth of substance is really given without the visible form of
flesh and blood, is the gift of he Sacrament: that is it, which being
spiritually understand ed Spiritual understand ding.
will quicken us to life enerlasting. That was the understanding, which being
denied to the proud and stubborn Chapharnaits (who Joan. 6.
would not believe) was reveled to the humble Apostles, who tarried Cyrill. li.
4. in Ioa^. cap. 14.
with him until his last supper.

There they learned, how the same body was given them to be eaten: which was
taken of the virgin, and which was betrayed for us: And yet not that, which the
Capharnites saw: the same in The same and not the same.
substance, but not the same in appearance. For Christ taking bread said, This
is my body, which is given for you: take and eat. There Luc. 22.
the Apostoles saw that, which seemed still bread: but under the form of the
bread Christ gave the self same flesh, wherein he walked in this life: and he
so gave it, that it might be adored not only whiles it was eaten, but before:
for no man eats it, nisi prius adorauerit, except he adore it before. That
word, before, shows, Before.
that it is the flesh of Christ before we eat it, and consequently y^ it is
consecrated by the Priest speaking the words of Christ over the bread and wine.

S. Augustine was so fully persuaded, that the flesh of Christ was to be
adored under the form of bread after consecration: that he teaches the
Christian people to adore it, not as common flesh, but as the flesh of God, for
whose sake we adore it* therefore Earth, that is to say Christ's flesh.
he says: Cum ad terram quamlibet, etc. When thou bowest thy self, or fallest
down before any earth, look not upon it as earth: but look upon that holy
one, whose fotestoole it is which thou adorest. for thou adorest for his sake.

S. Augustine calls the flesh of Christ earth, because flesh was made of
earth. And Christ took flesh of our Ladies flesh. This flesh he calls earth.
And for as much as he had said, that no man did eat that flesh, except he had
adored before: he shows, how we must adore, verily not resting upon the
earth, to wit, upon the flesh of Christ: but looking to his person, in whom
that earth rests, as if he said: the footestole is to be adored for his sake,
that sits on that stool.

But now, good Reader, I beseech thee, as thou have care of thy salvation, and
do desire to be informed of the truth concerning the adoration of this
Sacrament, to ponder well these words, Ad terram qua^libet cu^ te inclinas
atque prosternis. when thou bowest or laiest thy self prostrate before any
earth. What mean these Terra quaelibet.
words, Ad terram qua^libet, before any earth? Has Christ more fleshes then
one? For by earth, thou know, he means Christ's flesh.

What is it then to say, before any earth? Doubtless before any host
consecrated. Doubtless before any flesh of Christ, made under the form of
bread and wine. that is called any earth, not because Christ has any more then
only one body and one blood and The only one flesh of Christ is under many
forms of bread.
one earth, which is to be adored: but because that one earth is in many
places, after the sort I said before: to wit, under many forms of bread.

That is it, which S. Augustine says: when thou bowest thee, or do cast thy
self prostrate before any flesh of Christ, in what soever Church, house, or
place, in what soever altar, pix or table, where soever thou fallest down
prostrate before the Sacrament of the altar: adore it, so that thou remember
the flesh is to be adored for the persons sake, whose flesh it is.

By this place it is inuincibly proved, that it was the custom The only sense
of S.
of all Catholic people in S. Augustines time to be prostrate, to August.
words.
bow down, and to adore the blessed Sacrament of the altar. But Prosternere.
that should never have been suffered in Afrike no more then now it is suffered
in England: except the real substance of Christ's flesh Inclina^.
had been certainly believed of all men, to be present under the forms of bread
and wine.

Therefore be thou assured, as those, y^ now sorbid thee to adore the Sacrament
of Christ's supper, do not believe the flesh of Christ to be really present
under the form of bread and wine: so they, who willed all Christians under
pain of syn to adore the earth and flesh which they received, before that
they rec^aued it, did undoubtedly believe the real presence of Christ's ^lesh
under the visible forms of bread and wine. This was the faith of the first six
hundred years, which dured from the Apostles time till this our days, and yet
dureth in all Catholic countries.

It is proved out of the Prophets, that it can be no The third Chap^ter.
idolatry to worship the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the
altar.
MAny things are to be abhorred, which are in these our days taught against
the truth of the Gospel: yet never was any thing so maliciously invented, so
blasphemously uttered, so foolishly maintained, as to say, that it is idolatry
to worship with godly honor the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of
the altar. Idols not taken away


For that saying presupposes, external idols not to have been taken away by
the coming of Christ: which is against the express word of God. It
presupposes also, that idolatry should be Idolatry maintained.
maintained among Christians them selves, not only in gro^es, hills, and
corners: but even openly, in the midst of the whole Church by public
doctrine, and universal practice, which never chanced, no not among the Jews.

And (which is most abominable of all) it presupposes, that Christ, who came
to end and overthrow all idols, and specially Christ ge ueth the occasion o^
id^try.
those, which were made by hand of man, now him self should give occasion, why
his own people should worship bakers bread and wine of the grape, and that this
idolatry should be committed by pretense of his own word: yea that it should
be done unto him self in his own mysteries falsely and wickedly, if by any
means Christ may be falsely adored.

Can there yet a more lewd and foolish point be added to this opinion? Yea
verily. They that teach the worshipping of the Sacrament of the altar to be
idolatry, say: the Bishop of Rome was the cause of that worshipping, they teach
also the Bishop of Rome to be Antichrist: which Antichrist is well known to
impugn by all means the honor of Christ. And yet they confess, yt 2. These. 2
both only Christ made and instituted the same Sacrament, and that the Bishop
of Rome him self worshippeth the same. Thus at the length it comes about,
that Antichrist finding this great mystery made by Christ, sets it up to be
worshipped of others, and him self worshippeth the same, all together
pretending the honor of Christ, and yet intending thereby (as they say) to
debate his honor. Who ever saw a doctrine so evil hanging together?

Antichrist (as S. Paul says) aduersatur, is an adversary, that 2. These. 2
Antichrist
is to say, he is one that sets him self against Christ, and adua^ceth him
self above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does
sit in the temple of God, showing (or boasting) him self, as if he were God.
Behold, Antichrist sets him self The pope is not like Antichrist
against Christ, and much less would he be content (as the Pope is) to call
him self the vicar of Christ, or servant of his sernants.

Again, Antichrist is advanced above all that either by nature or by deceit
of the Devil is worshipped. His pride is so great, that he will not only
disoaine to bow to any external ydoll (for that comes of a superstitious
fear and pusillanimity) but also he will not yield to God him self. When S.
Paul says, he is advanced 2. These. 2
above all that is called God: He means above all false Gods, who are Gods by
name and not in truth: As Iuppiter, Mars, Uenns, Minerua were. So that we are
assured by the express word of God, that Antichrist shall set up no ydoll
besides his own self.

He shall say him self to be God, and shall show false signs and miracles
able to deceive those wicked me^: who disdayning the Who sh^be deceived by An
tichrist.
fellowship of the known Church, and the says of their fathers, think them
selves able to plant a new faith according to the understanding which they
conceive of Gods word. That is the chief way for Antichrist to preua^le, if
the preaching of nine hundred years, and the says of so many Christian
countries may be despised, and consequently a new religion sought out: at the
devising whereof, ye may be sure, y^ devil is president of the counsel.

To come to our purpose, Antichrist is advanced by him self above all idols:
therefore he shall set up no idol besides him self. And consequently if the
Pope be Antichrist, he sets not up any idol besides him self. But our
adversaries confess, the Pope to The pope adoreth y^ Eucharis^
set up the body and blood of Christ to be adored of all men, and him self to
adore the same: herefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

You will say, he may be a limme of Antichrist, although he be An objection.
not Antichrist, him self. I answer, every lymme of Antichrist The ^swere.
is like his head and the rest of the body, whereof he is a lymme: Antichrist
is he, that professes him self an adversary to Christ, and goes about to
diminish his honor. But the Pope professes him self to have all his whole
honor of Christ, and gives all the whole honor he can devise, to Christ. He
worshippeth the Sacrament of the altar, because it is the body of Christ. He
reuerenceth the sign of the Cross, because it is sign of Christ. He prays
to the Saints, which are now in heaven, because they are 1. ^or. 12
members of Christ, being assined, they hear his prayer in Christ their head,
with whom they make one body. The lymmes of An tichrist.


Those are the lymmes of Antichrist, who can abide neither the godly
worshipping of Christ's body, nor the reverent using of his holy Cross, nor
the invocation of his dear frindes and members. For if that, which is done to
the lest of Christ's ^ocke, be done to him self: how much more is that honor,
which is done to the Sacrament of his own body and blood; most directly done to
him self? wherefore it is out of all peradventure, that to honor the
Sacrament of the altar, it can be no idolatry, except Christ him self be an
idol.

But if Christ be God (as S. Paul says) blessed for ever above Romans 9.
all thigs: then surely the honoring of his dody is the worshipping of God, to
who^ that body is joined in o^e person. And unreasonable is it to think, that,
whereas Christ has by the taking of his body, delivered the earth from idols,
now the Sacrament of the same body should becomme it self the greateste idol
that ever was?

The kingdom of God, for the coming of the which we daily make petition in our
Lords prayer, is perfitely come when it is Matt. 6.
The king do^ of God.
evident to all men, that there is but one God: who both made and rules all
things, and who by the incarnation and passion Deuteronomy. 6.
of his only begotten son redeined and saved all the elect, which 1. Tim. 2.
shall be most perfitely seen at the day of general judgment. And therefore
Esaias speaking of that day says: Eleuabitur dominus solus in die illa, and
idola penitus conterentur. The Lord alone Esa. 2.
shall be advanced in that day, and idols shall be utterly destroyed.

In the mean time they are so in part destroyed, as the kingdom of God is
begone in part. For John Baptist said, the Matt. 3.
Kingdom of heaven is drawn nere: and Christ expressly tells Luc. 17.
the phariseis, Ecce enim regnum Dei intra vos est. For behold the Kingdom of
God is within you. And in S. Matthew Matt. 13.
in maine parables he shows, the present Church gathered in his name to be
the Kingdom of heaven. Contrari^wise Babylon, The king dome of darkness.
Samaria, Egypt, Edom, Tyrus, and Sydon stand in holy scripture to betoken the
Kingdom of the devil, of the world, of Darkness, of heresy.

Now when the Prophets will show, that the idols and false religion, which the
Devil has procured to be set up, shall be destroyed by Christ: they use to
say, the idols of Babylon, or of Iere. 50.
Egypt shall be overthrown. In which forte Jeremy says: Tell tidinges among
the Gentiles, and make your voice heard: lift up a sign, cry out, cease not,
but say: Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded, Merodach is overcome, His graven
Gods are confounded, their i^ls are overcome. Ezec. 30.


Ezechiell writes in the person of God: I will destroy y^ counterfeit images,
and make the idols of Memphis to cease. Micheas Mich. 1.
uses the same phrase concerning Samaria: All the graven images thereof shall be
broken, And all the rewards of it shall be Soph. 2.
burned with fire. And I will bring destruction to all the idols thereof. In
Sophonias it is written, that God shall bring down all the Gods of the earth.
Zach. 13.


Zachary also witnesses, that when the font (of Baptism) shall be open to
wash away the sins of Judah and Jerusalem: it shall come to pass in that
day (says the Lord of hosts) I will destroy the names of idols from the
earth, and they shall ^omore be had in remembrance: and I will take away from
the earth false Prophets and the unclean spirit. Psalm. 9.


Last of all David says to Christ, thou haste sitten upon the D^ Devil is
perished
throne, who iudgest righteousness: thou haste reproved the Gentiles, and the
wicked is perished thou haste blotted out their Idols are the sword of the
names for ever and ever, the swords of the enemy have failed, thou have
destroyed their Cities, the memory of them is lost De^l.
with the sownde, and our Lord tarieth for ever. Thus much may (...) for
showing the destruction of idols and of the power of the Devil. howbeit a
great book might be made out of the holy scripture of that argument.

S. Augustine confesses: praedictum esse a Prophetis, quod vnu^ August. in
lib. de diuinatione daemonum.
Deum essent culturae gentes, exterminatis dijs falsis, quos antea colebant.
That it was forspoken of the Prophets, that the nations should worship one
God, the false Gods, whom they worshipped before, being cast out.

Athanasius writes thus: Vbi nominatur vel Christus vel fides Athanasius de In
carnatio neverbi.
eius, inde omnis idololatria depellitur, and daemonum insidiae patefiunt.
Where either Christ or his faith is named, thence all idolatry is driven: and
the deceitful guiles of the devils are detected and made open. Lo, the name of
Christ puts away all idolatry.

I am sure, it can not be denied, but the name of Christ is and The Pap^ts be
no idolatours
ever has been among the Papists: how then are they burdened with so foul a
kind of idolatry, as to worship bread and wine instead of our makers body and
blood? S. Hierome affirms, Hieron. in li. 2. in Esaiam. cap. 41.
Post aduentum Christi omnia idola conticuisse, all idols to have holden their
peace, after the coming of Christ. It is therefore so true, that all idolatry
has by the coming of Christ been removed from his Church: that lightly not so
much as any heretic (how so ever he devised new spiritual fornicatio^s and
idolatry) Spiritual idolatry.
yet has professed to worship any artificial idol made with the hands of man.

The Manichees in deed adored the visible Son, which The Ma nichees idolatours
we see shine, as a part of the light, wherein God dwelt: but yet it were more
gross, to adore bread: since the Son is at the least a heavenly creature,
above the reach of men, and in great admiration. But the husband man first
sows the corn, and repeth, puts it in his (...), the ^llet grindeth it,
and the baker Bread is not the God of y^ Papists.
makes it into a loaf. And is this at the length our God? Are we become so
insensible, after the light of the Gospel: as to adore the work of bakers
hands? Did not S. Augustine see at y^ least Psalm. 98.
the danger of this idolatry, when under pain of synning he pronounced: that
en^ry man ought to adore any earth or flesh of Chr^, before he did eat? Did
not S. Ambrose understand this De spiri. sancto. li. 3. ca. 12
idolatry, when he said: to this day we adore the flesh of Christ in the
mysteries?

But we so many hundred years brought up in the faith of Christ are so foolish,
as to adore a dead piece of bread, as our adversaries belie us. S. Chrysostom
writes, that in his time very In li. co^tra Gentiles.
few Cities were left, where idolatry was used. And yet do all the Cities not
only of Mahomete, of the Tartarians, of the ^ores, but do all the Cities of
Christendom still commit open idolatry? For, I am sure, no Protestant alive
ca^ devise any City of the Christians under the Son: where Christ's body and
blood was not worshipped (as it shall appear also hereafter) under the forms
of bread and wine, openly, as well in the Greek as in the Latin Churches these
many hundred years together.

Where was then y^ Church of Christ? Was our Savior, who was promised to
inherit al nations, brought to that straightes: Psalm. (...).
that he had not one chapel reserved to him in all the world, where idolatry
was not outwardly committed? And how committed? by pretense of his own
Gospel, of his own word, of his own deed. It was Christ, that said: This is
my body. It was Math. 26
he, that said: Ye believe in God, believe also in me. I and my Father Joan. 14.
are one thing or substance. If it be so, we must worship him: as Joan. 10.
we adore his Father. And his body is united to his divine person.

Yea, say you, but it is not his body: but bread still, appointed An objection.
to figure his body. Well Sir, he said, it is his body, and all the The answer.
Church has so far believed him: that all Christians have worshipped it for
ever, as being his true body. That faith of theirs 1. Co. 15.
joined with those words of Christ prove to me, that it is his body, and
therefore no idol. Moreover, I think my self bound, to believe the Prophets:
who said, Christ should destroy y^ idols of the earth, which literally is by S.
Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine, and by many others
expounded of external idolatry: whereby men fell down giving Godly honor to
creatures. Such a worshipping, after the iucarnation External idolles be
destroyed.
of Christ, is decayed in the whole world even among infidels: much more it
ought to be decayed among the faithful. And yet, if our idolatry be any, it
is external.

What say we then? Is there now a days no idolatry in Christendom? Are there
no false Gods worshipped? yes doubtless Outward idolatry.
to many. But idolatry partly is outward, partly is inward. The outward
idolatry is decayed by the outward and visible coming of Christ into the world:
The inward is decayed by the faith and charity of good people. But because not
al, yt be outward Christians, Inward idolatry.
be the true servants of God: therefore they still worship idols in their
hearts. They adore money, for the desire where of Gal. 5.
they sell benifices and cure of souls without fear, and are content Ephesians. 5.
to rob even Churches and monasteries: although they think well enough both
of Priests and Monks, as they use to say.

These inward idols be not taken away, but where Christ is inwardly professed.
And for as much as likewise y^ outward idols be taken away, where Christ is
outwardly professed: it can not be, that those, who bear the name of
Catholics and Christians, should adore by common consent any outward idol. Is
there then no outward idol at all? Noue surely made with the hands of men among
Christians. But yet there lack not invisible idols made by the wit of men,
whereof S. Cyprian speaks in this wise.

Christi aduentu detectus ac prostratus inimicus, videns idola Cypria. de
vnitate Ecclesiae.
derelicta, and caet. The enemy detected and thrown down by the coming of
Christ, seeing the idols forsaken, and his seats and Temples left void through
the great multitude of beleuers, devised Idols forsaken.
a new guile: that under the very title of Christ's name he may deceive the
unwary. He has found heresies and schisms: Heresies and schisms are y^ idols
after Christ's coming.
whereby he might overthrow faith, corrupt truth, and cut of unity. Lo, the
heresies and the schisms are the idols, that be invented since y^ coming of
Christ. If you will know a true mark of an idolatour: note him y^ divides
unity, that makes parts, that goes from agreement.

Fifty years past there was but one body of the whole West Church. All
worshipped one God, one Christ, one body and one The vn^tie of our fore Fathers.
blood of his. Al were under one shepherd the Bishop of Rome. Al spoke one tongue
in public service of the West Church, all kept Luther y^ first idola tour of
our age ann. 1517.
one faith, acknowledged one truth. Luther arose, and said: The Pope was not
our head. Straight unity was divided. For one withdrew him self from the rest.
Ergo Luther was the first idolatour. Anon after he had fellows, and a pretty
flock of idolatours very visibly seen and known to dwell at Wittenberge. Within
Ann. 1522
four years zuinglius divided him self, not now from y^ Pope, but even from
Luther, and made two idols of one. After which Two idols.
time y^ idols have been multiplied to the number of above three Three score
idols
score that canbe named in Germany: as it may appear in Fridericus Staphylus.

And as for the Sacramentaries in England, although they The Sacrame^tary
English idol.
have received into the number of their Gods, y^ chief idols both Auther and
zuingli^s: yet they worship the idol of Taluine above them both. For as S.
Hierome says. Sicut idola fiunt manu Hierom. in Zacha ria^. ca. 13.
artificis: ita Haereticorum peruersa doctrina, quodcunque simulauerit, vertit
in idolum: and facit pro Christo adorari Antichristum. As idols be made with y^
hand of the craftsma^, so what so ever the overthwart doctrine of Heretics
cloketh: it turns it into an idol, and causes Antichriste to be adored instead of Christ. As for example.

Martin Luther, or John Calvin being fully determined to The framing of an
Idol.
break of from the rest of the Church, sit a devising, since they are at a
point, not to teach the old doctrine, what new doctrine they may teach. Then
has the Devil power upon them, for so much as they are finaly agr^ed, not to
be subject to any master or preacher in the whole Church of God: no, though it
were a whole general Council gathered out of all the men in y^ earth. For
that intolerable arrogance the Devil may rule them, as he ^. Tim. cap. 2.
list: and therefore sends some wicked opinion into their minds, such as he
has plenty of. They a little while pondering it, perhaps i^dge it impossible
to be admitted of men: as Luther In Epist. ad Argen toratenses.
judged of the denial of the real presence, wherein he labored a certain
time, and in that case the Devil inspireth a new devise.

But when they are once agreed upon that they will go foreward withal: they
have a strong imaginacion how certain that opinion is, and with an excessive
pride acknowledge them selves the Prophets of God, and imagine, what glory they
shall come unto among fools and mad men. Albeit they must take them for The
folowers of heretics.
no fools, who soever will forsake the faith approved fiftene hundred years
together, and follow the new blast of their trompet. But are they, trow ye, no
fools, because they think them selves none? Thus, when they have gotten a
sufficient schole and audience, they publish their doctrine under y^ name of
Gods word, and so er^ct a fantastical idol.

But to say that the blessed Sacrament of Christ is an idol, The Eucharist
set forth only by Christ can be no Idol.
seems necessarily to employ: that Christ iustituted an idol. which to
think, it were no small idolatry. For he and noman else made or published this
Sacrament, to thend idolatry should cease: whiles we did only adore that body
and blood, which is united to the Godhead in one person. But yet if our Fathers
did, and we do worship wheaten bread and wine: our idolatry were more gross
not only then that of the heretics, but also then y^ of the Gentiles. But that
is utterly against the word of God, therefore we do not worship any creature
at all, as wherein the honor may rest: for the honor that we give to the
body and blood of Christ, which was taken of the virgin, is according to the
doctrine of S. Augustine given to his holy person: In Ps. 98
who is the natural Son of God, and one substance with his Father; true God
and true man.

Thus we save the truth of the old Prophe^ies, the faith of our forefathers,
the propriety of Christ's words in his supper, the honor of his Church, the
glory of his name: who gave no occasion of idolatry neither in word, nor in
deed.

The adoration of Christ's body in the Sacrament is proved out of the new
Testament. The iiij.
Chapter.

S. Paul speaking of Sacramtal eating, says: he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to him self, not discerning our Lords
body. that is to say, August. in Joan. tracta. 62
not putting a difference between it, and other meats. For S. Hierome, S.
Augustiue, Sedulius, and Primasius expound The others in 1. Cor. 11
those words in that meaning.

The difference, which is to be made between the meat of Two differences.
Christ's supper, and other meats, consists in two points: in one, that the
receauer of Christ's Sacrament must prepare him The first.
self before hand, to be apt to receive the grace of God in which point
Baptism, penance, holy orders and other Sacraments agree with the supper of
Christ. For we may not come (being of lawful age) to any of those or such
like holy mysteries, without due disposing our selves to repentance for our
sins, and to amendment of our life.

The second point of the difference between Christ's supper and The second.
other things is: that in the Sacrament of his supper we must examine our
selves, even for the respect of the substance of that meat, which we receive.
In baptism we try our selves not for any honor, which is due to the water:
but for the obteyning of the grace, which is given in that Sacrament. But in
the supper a farther difference is to be made. What is that? The very
substance, which is taken, is to be honored and adored.

That is it, which S. Chryso^ome says: Non considerans (vt In 1. Co. Hom. 28
oportet) magnitudinem propositorum, non reputans muneris magnitudinem. He
eats unworthily, says S. Chrysostom: Who considers not, as it behooves,
the greatness of the things set forth, not weighing diligently the greatness of
the gift. He speaks not of the effect, which comes by the Sacrament: but of
the substance of the things set forth. What are they, but such as appear
Bread and wine, and yet in deed be Christ him self. There fore it follows in
S. Chrysostom. If thou do lern diligently, who is set worth.
qui sit propositus, who is set before thee: thou nedest to account nothing
else. Behold, the person and substance set forth is to be considered only,
Nullius alterius indigebis ratione: Thou shall need make no account of any
thing else.

For out of that substance, which stands before thee, comes the grace and
all other effects of worthy eating: as if he said, provide to receive worthily
the person set forth to thee under the forms of bread: and thou may be
secure. So that the difference properly belonging to Christ's supper is, to
make a difference of this substance from al other substances. That is the
difference, whereof S. Ambrose says:

He that will receive worthily this meat, must judge, that he Ambros.
is the Lord whose blood he drinks in a mystery. What other 1. Cor. 11
meaning can these words have, but that he must judge him self to drink not
wine, but blood: not the blood of an earthly man, but his blood, who is God
also. and that he drinks his blood in a mystery, to wit, not in his own
form: but under the form of wine, for he speaks of Sacramental drinking,
and of that which is taken by mouth. Therefore the very substance, which he
drinks, must be disseuered from all other creatures.

Now, I say, he that is willed so to judge of the substance of this Sacrament,
as the substance of him, who is God, ought to be judged of: he is willed to
adore the substance of this Sacrament, (...).
since his substance ought to be adored, who is God. For, as In 1. cor. hom. 24*
Ipsa me^^a.
S. Chrysostom says: the very table (to wit, the very meat standing upon the
table) is the strength o^ our soul^, the synewes of the mind, the bond of
confidence, our foundation, hope, health, light, life Thus to judge o^ this
Sacrament, and by adoring it with true ^oue, in it to adore God, yt is to adore
not only in spirit and figures, as y^ Jews did adore: but also to (...) in
spirit and truth, as Christ Joan. 4.
said we should do, because our Sacraments co^teme y^ truth, which they
signi^ied: ^ot only signifying our Savior (as y^ old Sacraments did) but also
giving salvation, as S. Augusti does witness.

And for as much as the Sacrament of the body and blood of In Psalm. 7^.
Christ is the Sacrifice of the new ^aw, willed by him to be made Luc. 22.
for the rem^brance of his death: we must both in our spirit and in the truth
of natural conjunction be v^ted and made one with the substance thereof, and
also in the truth of Christ's flesh externally cons^crated adore God, offering
him that reasonable and divine sacrifice: to the end we may render and pay the
worship of thanksgeuing due for our redemption, in none other substance then in
the same, which redeemed us. For as it is nostrum holocaustum, Cypr. de coena do
min.
our sacrifice wholly burnt by death of the Cross: so is it nostra hostia
pacifica, our sacrifice, wherewith we both give thanks for peace made between
God and us, and also apply to our selves the fruits of that one burnt
offerin^ and truse made Heb. 10.
upon the Cross: which was and is the propitiation for our sins, 1. Joan. 2.
and for the sins of the whole world.

This kind of adoration proper to the new testament, is due to God of our
behalf, by the Sacrament and sacrifice of Christ's body and blood. And herein
stan^eth all that, which the Apostle 1. Cor. 11
speaks of worthy or unworthy receiving: if the true substance of this
Sacrament be uprightly esteemed, and both outwardly and inwardly honored. And
so does S. Augustine expound y^ Apostles mind, as now it shall appear.

Ianuarius had asked, what S. Augustine thought concerning holy days, fasting
days, or such like customs of the Church: which are diversely kept in diverse
countries. Among other questions it was also moved, what were to be more
approved: whethere to receive daily the Sacrament of the altar, or else to
abstein Aug. in epist. 118 Sacrame^ tu^ honorare.
sometimes? To this question S. Augustine makes answer, that neither of them
both depriueth the body and blood of our Lord of honor: if each of them
strive, who may honor best the most healthful Sacrament. For as well the
Centurion, as Zacheus did honor our Savior in manner by contrary means: the
one by receiving Luc. 19.
him with joy into his house the other by saying* Lord I Matthew. 8.
am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof.

And as among the Jews (...) tasted to every man, according Sapi. 26.
l. 2. Retr. cap. 20.
to his own will, in the mouth of the faithful: even so it is to be judged
conce^ing the receiving that Sacrament (of the altar) into every Christians
mouth. For both one man for honors sake, dares not take it every day: an
other, for honors sake, dares not once to take it in any day. As Manna would
no lothsomnes, so this meat will no contempt. For the Apostle for that cause
says, it to have been unworthily received of them: Qui hoc non discerneba^t a
caeteris cibis, vendratione singulariter A worshipping singularly (...).
debita. Who did not discern this thing, or make a difference of this thing,
from other meats by a worshipping singularly (...). For straight, when he had
said, he eats and drinks damnation to him self: he said moreover, Non
diiudicans corpus domini, not discerning our Lords body. the which appears
suf^iently in all that place in the first epistle to the Cori^thians, if it be
diligently marked.

Thus far S. Augustine, whose words I have rehearsed the more fully: to
the intent by the whole argument the Reader might the better judge his mind. His
answer in effect is: the honor of Honour^
the Sacrament is the thing chefely to be attended: which since it is honored
both of him, that for honors sake does receive, and of him, who for honors
sake does not receive: each of the^ auoideth the contempt thereof, and
sufficiently puts a difference Making a (...).
between it and other meats: which difference being not put, was the cause,
that some Corinthians did eat this meat unworthily. Note well, good Reader,
what I shall say: for this place is marueilouse notable.

First S. Augustine speaks evidently of the Sacrament of Sacrament.
Christ's supper, and of Sacramental receiving.

2. He signifies that this Sacrament must not be dishonored No dishonouring.
by any means, nor despised in mind or fact.

3. By dishonouring or despising he means the omitting to give it due honor
in thought or deed, so that by all means the honor thereof must not be
neglected, or left undone. (...)


4. We must strive, to honor this Sacrament: but whether it be done by this or
by that mean, it skilleth not, so it be honored.

5. It is a kind of honor done to it, sometime to receive it into our mouths
for honors sake: sometime, for y^ same honors sake, not to receive it. Put
these two notes together, and it must needs be: that he means the honoring
of that thing, which is The thing in y^ mouth is honored.
received into our mouths. Then the honoring of y^ Sacrament is the honoring
of that, which seems bread and wine. but if it were in deed the substance of
bread and wine, he would ueuer exhort us to be so careful, how to honor a
mere creature, were it never so great a sign. But let us yet go forward.

6. The Sacrament, which is taken into our mouths, is also (...) That meat.
called a kind of meat, cibus ille, that meat.

7. It is that kind of meat, which the Apostle would to be separated, for
honors sake, from other meats. Diiudicare.


8. What call ye separating for honors sake? He answers, it was a fault, not
to separate it, veneratione singulariter debita, with a worship singularly due.

9. what is a worshipping singularly due, but such a worshipping: Singular
^orship.
of which sort there is but one? For that is singular, which is alone, and
which has no fellow.

10. Such a worshipping that only is, which is due to God: for as he has no
fellow in nature, so he has no partaker in honor and worship. Therefore the
Sacrament, or that meat, which sometimes Godly ho^our.
for honors sake we receive into our mouths, and sometimes for honors sake
we abstain from: that self same substance is to be honored of us with a
singular duty of worshipping, or with a worshipping due in a singular manner.
that is to say, with godly honor.

I seek not hereby to declare only, that S. Augustine is of the mind to have
the Sacrament and the meat received into our mouths to be worshipped with a
singular duty: but much more to show, that he affirms S. Paul to mean so.
For the fault of the Corinthians was not, to discern this meat with a
worshipping singularly due. For if they had worshipped it, as it ought to be
worshipped: they would not have taken it in their mouths without they had
first prepared them selves for the receiving of such a meat, so singularly to
be worshipped.

What figurative interpretation will now serve? Is not Sacramentum honorare,
good latin? Is not the English of it, to honor the Sacrament? Is it not
plainly said, cibum illum discernere a caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter
debita, to discern that meat from other meats by a worshipping singularly
due? Is that a worship, which may be given to any creature, which is not united
to God? The meat in y^ mouth must be so honored, therefore that in the mouth
is y^ real, substa^cial, natural body of Christ. The Sacrament must be
honored, therefore the substance therein contained is the body of Christ.

Otherwise, shall we think, that S. Augustine, who so diligently Aug. de ciui.
Dei li. 10. c. 1.
always disce^eth y^ kind of worshipping God, shall we think: that he will have
material bread to be discerned and separated from meats, by a worshipping
singularly due? Did that great Clerk so little understand, what singular
worship was: that he gave that name not only to holy men, or to the just
Angels, but even to the insensible creatures of bread and wine? No, no. S.
Augustine never doubted, nor none of all the faithful: but that the Sacrament
of y^ altar was to be adored with godly honor, even by the doctrine of S.
Paul: because it contains, under the forms of bread and wine, the natural
substance of Christ's body and blood.

It is worthy to be remembered, that S. Augustine uses in this (...) tum.
place the word Sacramentum, for the substance of Christ's flesh (...) under
the sign of bread: otherwise he would never have taught, that either the
substance of material bread, or the form thereof, ought to be honored. For
honor can be given to no unreasonable creatures. If this kind of understanding
the word Sacrament, be well considered: many places in S, Augustine, otherwise
very hard, will be much the easier to perceive.

Last of al, what should it mean y^ S. Augustine says: y^ Sacrament may be
honored by our absteining sometimes from receiving it into our mouths? It
Were surely no honor done to God, if we should at any moment abstain to feed
upon him in faith or spirit. Why is it then some honor to his Sacrament, not
to be received in certain cases? Was it not counted a virtue in y^ Centurio^,
Matthew. 8.
when he said him self to be unworthy, that Christ should enter under the roof
of his house? And yet the same Centurion did not refuse, to receive y^ effect
and grace of Christ's word into his house. There is therefore a difference
between the corporal coming of Christ into our house or body: and between the
coming of his grace into our hearts. His grace can not come, except we first be
made mete to receive it: but his body may come to our bodies, and so may
condemn our souls, before that we are made mete to receive it.

His grace therefore must come first to us by faith and charity, that we may
thereby have power to receive worthily afterward his blessed body: least if we
receive it unworthily, we take it to our damnation. But so great preparation
should not be requisite, if our bodies received none other substance beside
bread and wine: for they are of baser degree, then eating by faith is. But now
we may sometime abstain from the Sacrament even for honor and reverence,
which we bear to it: and yet we may not abstain from eating by faith or
spirit. Therefore it is a worthier kind of substance, which is received in the
Sacrament: then the grace is, which is the effect of spiritual eating.

And seeing it should not be a worthier thing, if it were the substance of bread
and wine: we may be assured, the substance of the Sacrament to be that self
body, whereof the Centurion said: Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should
enter under my roof.

It is the honor of that body, which S. Paul and S. Augustine Origin. hom. 5.
in diuersos Euang.
respect, and not the honor of bread and wine: in so much, that the faithful
as well in the Greek as in the Latin Church have used alwa^s the very same
words in adoring the Sacracrament: In liturg.
which the Centurion used to Christ. one prayer to one Chrysostom. and missall.
Lord, the same reverence to the same God and man. Roman.


That the Fathers of the first six hundred years after The fyfth Chap^.
Christ did adore the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar.
Dionysius Areopagita, scholar to S, Paul, made a prayer to the Sacrament of
the Altar in these words: Sed o tu De eccl, Hierar. cap. 3.
diuinum sanctumque Sacramentum, etc. but o thou divine and holy Sacrament,
open and display clearly to us, as it were the veyles and clokes, wherewith
thorough the signs of obscurities thou art covered: and fill the eyes of our
understanding with such clear light, as may no more be dymmed.

Thus did that ancient Father pray, not to bread and wine, ye may be sure: but
to that blessed body of our Lord, which is present in the mysteries. Upon
which place Pachymeres notes, Pachyme res in his gre^e Pa r^rasis.
that S. Dionisius speaks unto the Sacrament, as being a thig which has
sense and life. and that worthily. For so the great divine Gregory says: But
o passover, that great (I say) and holy passover. For, that our passover, and
this self holy Sacrament, our Lord Jesus Christ him self is, to who^ the holy
man sp^aketh. Lo, this self holy Sacrament is Christ. And as nothing in the
world is our great and holy passover, beside Christ him self: so The substance
of our passo^er and Sacram^t is on^o
this holy Sacrament has none other substance at all, beside the substance of
Jesus Christ: who covers him self, as it were, with the veyles of bread and
wine.

As you have heard the most direct words of S. Dionysius Christ.
adoring this blessed mystery, and of Pachymeres giving the reason why he did
speak unto it, as the which is Christ him self: now you shall perceive, that
all the other Fathers did believe the same: in so much as all men will grant,
that they must needs adore that thing, which they confessed to be either
Christ, or God, or one in person with the son of God. Cyp. li. 2 epist. 3.


S. ^yprian writing of the Sacrament of Christ's supper says: In sacrificio
quod Christus est, non nisi Christus sequendus est. In the sacrifice, which is
Christ, only Christ must be followed. It is know^ll well, what sacrifice we
offer: how we take bread and wine, co^secrating them by the words of the last
supper, wherein it was said: This is my body, and this is my blood: do and
make Luc. 22.
this thing for the remembrance of me. This consecration of bread and wine into
the body and blood of Christ, is our sacrifice, and Our Sacrifice.
because Christ is not divided nor dies any more, but where his body and blood
is, there him self is: therefore S. Cyprian says: Our sac^ifice is Christ.
Romans 6.


Neither does he speak of the death and passion, where Christ was our
sacrifice bloodily: but he speaks of the s^pper of our Lord, where we daily
sacrifice Christ vnbloodily. For he speaks of y^ matter of consecration,
which (he says) must be wine mingled with water, and not water alone: because
Christ made his own blood of wine mingled with water. Now says S. Cyprian, In
the sacrifice, which is Christ, none must be followed, but Christ. If our
sacrifice be Christ, because of bread and wine which we bring forth the body
and blood of Christ is made by his word: is it possible, that Christ should
not be worshipped of S. ^yprian (...) is to be (...).
with godly honor?

If Christ be so worshipped, and our sacrifice be Christ: our sacrifice must be
worshipped with Godly honor. our sacrifice (I say) because the thing, that is
made by consecration, is none other beside that body of Christ: which is the
price of the world, and the only sacrifice for mankind. The same thing S.
Ambrose De ijs qui mit. mist. c. 9
says, even as expressie of the Sacrament, which S. Cyprian speaks of the
sacrifice. In illo Sacrame^to Christus est, quia corpus Christi: in that
Sacrament Christ is, because it is the body Ignat. in epist. ad Romans
of Christ. To the same purpose apperteine the words of S. Ignatius calling
this Sacrament, the bread of God, the heavenly bread, the bread of life: which
thing (says he) is the flesh Amb. li. 6. de Sacram. c. ^ Eusebius. li. 10. ca. 10.
of Christ the Son of God. And of S. Ambrose, calling it the nourishment of
the divine substance, And of Eusebius Pamphili calling it Sacrificium Deo
plenum. And again, horrore^ afferentia mensae Christi sacrificia. a sacrifice
full of God: and the sacrifices of the table of Christ making men to tremble
and quake. Cyril. li. 3. in Ioa^. ca. 37.
And of Cyrillus saying, those that receive those mysteries, to be made diuinae
naturae participes. Partakers of the divine nature. And again, corporaliter in
nobis Christum habitare, and participatione Lib. 4. cap. 18.
naturali, that by these mysteries Christ dwells in us corporally, and by
natural partaking. And of Isychius, calling the Isych. l. 6 in cap. 22 Leuit.
same mysteries the bread of life, and panes mysticos and viuificantes, and
mystical loaves, and those which quicken us to life everlasting.

And is it to be thought, that Christ, that the bread of God, of life, the
divine substance, the sacrifice full of God, which makes men tremble and
quake, that y^ mysteries, which cause Christ corporally to dwell in us, y^ the
nature of God, whereof we are partakers by eating, that the Sacrament of
Christ's supper, being all this: yet should not have godly honor done to it?
Did all the Fathers, who wrote thus of that mystery, honor and worship it
according to their own doctrine and writings?

If all they and all the rest did profess that, which was upon y^ table of
Christ, which was received at the holy communion, which dwells bodily in us,
to be not only y^ flesh and blood of Christ (for those words should be eluded
with figures and signs) but The God head can not be corporally ^aten but in
the Sa crament.
to be the substance and nature of God (which nature is not possible to be
eaten of us corporally, otherwise then as it dwells (...) in the flesh of
Christ, which we eat corporally in the Sacramen^) seeing the nature and
substance of God must be adored: it is not possible to imagine, but all y^
Fathers gave Godly honor to the mysteries of Christ's holy table. But yet let
us Chrysostom. in 1. Cor.
hear a more full witness. S. Chrysostom exhorting his people to come to
this Sacrament with zeal and most vehement love, Hom. 24 Hoc.
writes thus: Hoc corpus in praesepe reueriti sunt Magi, etc. The wise men
(commonly called the three kings) reverenced this body in the manger, and being
men without good religion, and barbarouse, they worshipped it with fear and
much trembling, after a long journey taken.

Let us therefore, who are the citizens of heaven, at the least wise follow
those barbarous men. For when they saw y^ manger and cottage only, and not any
of those things, which thou now Id. In the altar. The Chri stian is better
instructed.
see: they came with most great reverence and quaking. But thou see that
thing, not in the manger, but in the altar: not a woman, which might hold it in
her arms: but the Priest present, and the holy Ghost copiously spread upon the
sacrifice, which is set forth. Neither thou look barely upon the body, as
they did: but thou know the power of it, and all the order of dispensing
things. And thou art ignorant of none of those things, which were done by him:
and thou have been diligently instructed in all things. Let us be stirred up
therefore, let us quake, and let us prose^e openly a greater denotion, then
those barbarous (...) if we come barely and coldly, we ieopard our head into a
more ^ehement fire. Hitherto S. Chrysostom.

If there were any other refuge left for our adversaries, they would never admit
this place: they would say in words y^, which the masters of them must needs
sometime think in heart. They The Sacramentaties refuge.
would say, what care we for Chrysostom? He was a man, he might err, he did
err in this matter. But now they may not flee to this miserable refuge. for
seeing they lack the Gospel, and the faith of Christian people for nine hundred
years together, (as them selves confess: there is no place for them, to hyde
their head in, but only among the Fathers of the first six hundred years.

For this cause they ca^ not reject S. Chrysostom, who is one of the chief
lights of the East Church. His books also they can not deny, and least of all
his commentaries upon the blessed Apostle. What shift then find they to avoid
this place? In truth they can find none, but they must needs pretend to say
somewhat out of their common places of Khetoricall figures: y^ use whereof they
can father upon whom they list.

S. Chrysostom in these words expressy teaches as well the Note those com
parisons.
real presence, as the adoration of Christ upon the altar. He compares the
holy mysteries with Christ in the form and truth of a child. He compares the
altar, where upon the mysteries stand, with the manger, wherein Christ lay. He
compares our blessed Lady (which sometime held Christ in her arms) with the
Priest present at the altar, who sometime handles the holy mysteries. He
compares the three wise men (who came out of y^ East) with the Christian
people, who come to hear Mass. He compares the adoration and worshipping,
which those three wise men used, with the adoration and worshipping, which
faithful men ought to use at the time of o^r Lords supper. He says, the body
of Christ to be the same in both places: but y^ cause of worshipping to be
greater in them, who come to the holy mysteries. He says by the body, Hoc
corpus in (...) sunt Magi, This body the wise men worshipped in the manger.
which this body? surely, whereof he said before: Quando id propositum videris,
dic tecum: The body set forth.
propter hoc corpus non amplius terra and cinis ego sum. When thou see it,
set before (thee) say with thy self: for this bodies sake I am no longer earth
and ashes. Behold, he speaks of the body, which is set before us. Uerily of
that, which at Mass time all men see upon the altar. And again he said of the
same, The body holden and ^ten.
Quod etiam nobis exhibuit, vt teneremus and manducaremus. The which also he
has given to us, that we should hold (it) and eat (it). This body then, which
is put before us in y^ Church, which is holden and eaten, This body the wise
men worshipped in the manger.

If our figurative divines expound, this body, for the sign or the
representing of this body, as they are wont to do: then the wise men adored in
the manger the sign of Christ's body. But if they adored not the sign, but
the truth: then, this body is mea^t ((...))
this true body of Christ. And seeing S. Chrysostom says, that the wise men
adored this body, meaning by the pronoun (this) that, which we have in the holy
mysteries: it is clear, that he puts it for a most known and certain
verity: that, we have present before the time of receiving, the real body of
Christ vp^ the altar: And so have it present: that we are bound to adore it
being upon the altar.

Tu vero non in praesepe, sed in altari vides. Thou see (this body) Vides.
not in the manger, but on the altar. Lo, it is upon the altar, and not only
comprehended by faith, but by the mean of y^ form of bread it is seen. (...)
S. Chrysostom brings four reasons, why Chrystian people should rather
worship the body of Christ at Mass: then those wise men did worship it in that
homely cottage.

First, because they were not Godly men, for so S. Chrysostom does call them,
because they had not the knowledge of al true devotion and Godliness: although
in that act they showed them selves Godly. But we are instructed in all true
religion, and therefore should souer worship this body of Christ, then they
did. Secondly, they were Barbarous men: but S. Chrysostom spoke to (...), who
were most civil and lest Barbarous of all people in the world. So much the
rather they ought to know it to be their duty, to worship the body of their
maker.

Thirdly the wise men saw Christ in a manger, where such things are not wont
to lie, as must be reuere^ced and worshipped: but thou see this body upon the
altar, which is a place made for holy things to stand on. And so much the more
ought we Christians, to adore the body of Christ being set before us upon the
altar: then those wise men did adore it in a manger.

They saw it also in the mothers arms, which was a woman: neither is any
thing, which a woman holds and brings forth, wont to be worshipped with
Godly honor. Seeing therefore, thou see y^ priest present, who is wont to
handle Godly things: it were a far more impiety for thee, not to adore
Christ's body at the time of mass, when thou art assured by the word of God
Luc. 22.
(who said to his Apostles, and in them to al priests) do and make this thing,
that the holy Ghoost fails not at the consecration to work the body of
Christ really present.

All this considered, it is not possible for any man, that lies not wittingly
and willingly, to say, but that S. Chrysostom ^aught and believed, the body of
Christ to be really present, and that it ought to be really adored upon the
altar it self, or in the In 1. Co. Hom. 24
priests hands. And therefore he says afterward, Quod summo honor dignum est,
id tibi in terra ostendam. I will show thee that in the earth, which is worthy
of the highest honor.

How can S. Chrysostom show any thing in earth worthy of the highest honor,
beside the body and blood of Christ under the forms of bread and wine? For by
that, which is worthy of highest honor, he mea^eth expressly Christ's body:
because it is The showing of Christ.
the body of the Son of God. And in saying, he will show it thee, he can
possibly mean none other thing, but that showing, which is by the forms of
bread and wine. For if any man should require him, to show that most high
thing, which he promised to show: questionless he would lead him to y^ altar,
and there would show him, that which had been consecrated by the Priest, and he
would say unto him, pointing to the mysteries: this is the body of Christ, and
this is his blood. For by that means only were he able, to perform his
promise of showing that thing, which is worthy of the highest honor.

It follows yet more plainly in S. Chrysostom by an other similitude. As in
the palacies of kings (says he) not the walls, not the golden roof, but the
kings body sitting in the seat of majesty, is the worthiest thing of all: so
is the body of Christ the The body of Che^ste in earth.
worthiest thing in heaven. quod nunc in terra vide^dum tibi proponitur. the
which (body of Christ) is now set forth to thee in earth to be seen. Good
Lord, what can be required more of the greatest papist in Europe, then S.
Chrysostom says?

Again yet it follows: I show thee not Angels, not Archangels, not the
heavens, not the heavens of the heavens: but I The Lord she (...).
show thee, the Lord of all these things. S. Chrysostom says, he shows y^
Lord, and that in earth, and upon y^ altar: and yet is there a figure to escape
his most evident words? In faith and truth by such figures they may defend, y^
I also am of their opinion: but (...) wise men such wily shifts will not
prevail. There is noman alive, but (...) he will co^^ue y^ words of S.
Chrysostom, as they stand in order: he must co^se, y^ both he speaks of y^
body of Christ really present in the Sacrament of the altar: and also teaches,
y^ upon y^ very al^ar it ought to be adored, much more justly of us Christians:
then it was once adored in the manger or stable, of the three kings.

Here will I detect an other shift of our Adversaries, who perceauing S.
Dionysius, S. Ambrose. S. Augustme and S. Chrysostom with diverse other
ancient Fathers, to be so plain in the matter of adoration, have devised to
say: that those Fathers A shift of the Sacr^ m^s.
attribute that unto the signs of Christ's body, which is proper to the body
it self: and therefore when they speak of adoring that upon the altar, they
mean, that we should adore y^ truth of that thing: the sign whereof stands
upon the altar.

This interpretation is in deed necessarily to be made of them, who have
determined not to believe the word of God, where in it is said: ^his is my body.
But I say, that interpretation is foolish, The Fathers gilty of ^dolatry.
and should make all the Fathers gilty of idolatry: for they preaching to the
common people teach them expressly, that, which stands after consecration upon
the altar, to be the true body and blood of Christ: and therefore that it must
be adored much more of us, then the visible body was adored of the wise men.

If the interpretation of the Heretics should be admitted, Theodo retus dia
log. 2.
they might say the very same of Christ's incarnation: and so expound, what so
ever is said in y^ Bible or in y^ Fathers touching his flesh, to be meant of a
fantastical appering of flesh, but not of true flesh. But now let us bring
against these Signifiers an other plain authority, which was by the
providence of God written (as it were of purpose) to destroy this imagined and
figurative adoration of the Sacrament, whereof they speak.

Theodoretus disputing with an Eutychian, who would Christ Theodo retus dia log.
2.
now to consist of the only nature of his deity, and not any more of the
humane nature, which he took of the virgin, does reprove him by the example of
the Sacrament of Christ's supper, in the which Sacrament two things are found:
one, which is seen, and that is the sign of bread and wine: the other is not
seen, but understood and believed, and that is the true body and blood In
substance.
of Christ. That which is seen, is said to remain in his former substance,
nature, and figure, and kind. In his substance, because the forms of bread and
wine subsist by the power of God, and have their being now by them selves, as
they had it before, in the nature of bread and wine. The same forms remain in
their In nature.
former nature, because they norish no less, then the substance of the bread
it self would have done, if it had remained. They remain In shape.
in their former shape and kind, as being things that may be seen and touched,
as they might before.

Theodoretus then having said thus much for the one part of the Sacrament,
comes also to show the other part thereof. For his mind is to declare, y^ as
there be two kinds of things in one Encharist: so the two natures of God and
man are in one person of Christ. Therefore the other nature (beside the forms
of bread and wine) is the real substance of Christ's body and blood. Dial. 2.
of which part thus he speaks (...). intelliguntur autem (esse) quae facta
sunt, and creduntur and adorantur, vt pote quae illa sunt, quae creduntur. The
mystical signs are understood to be those things, which they were made, and
they are believed and they are adored: as being those things, which they are
believed to be.

Note, good Reader, that the mystical signs (which Theodoretus calls mystica
symbola) are understood to be (...), (...).
that they were made. But what? are they (...) ^o be that, which they are not?
Nay Sy^, y^ were false understanding, which falshod ca^ not be in the mysteries
of Christ. they are then in deed that, which they are understood to be. What
is that? Theodore^us showed a little before, that they were after consecration
the body and blood of Christ. Therefore the mystical signs are understood
Made.
to be the body and blood, not because they be not so: but because they are so,
for that they were made his body and blood. and so they are believed to be, and
are adored, or ^neled and bowed unto. But how? percase as bearing the image and
signs of the body and blood of Christ? No Sir. but as being in deed the body
and blood of Christ.

(...), as being those things, which they are understood and believed to be.
They are adored, because they are the body and blood of Christ. (...), as
being: and the word (as) means As.
in that place a truth of being (as if it were, vere existe^tia quae creduntur,
being in deed things, which they are believed to be. So speaks S. Ihon saying
of Christ, vidimus gloriam eius, gloria^ Joan. 1.
quasi vnigeniti a patre, we saw his glory, a glory as of the only begotten of
the Father: to wit, we saw the glory of him being in deed the only begotten of
his Father.

Upon which place Theophylact says. (...), etc. This Theoph. in 1. cap. Joan.
particle (...), in English (as) is not a word that betokens a similitude or
likeness: but that confirms and betokens an undoubted determination, as
when we see a king coming forth with great glory, we say, that he came forth
as a king: that is to say, he came forth as being in deed a king. So that by
the judgment of (...),
Theophylact, that particle (...), which Thedorite uses, does betoken an
undoubted being and determinate truth of that thing, whereof we speak. The holy
mysteries are adored, as being those things in deed, which they are believed to
be.

This place is such, as can not be reasonably answered unto. For the reason of
adoring or giving godly honor to the Sacrament of the altar is, because it is
in deed the body of Christ, as it is believed to be. But it is believed to be the
body of Christ after consecration, therefore it is adored as being y^ true
body of Christ. For Theodorete before having confessed the mysteries to be
called Dial. 2.
after consecration the body and blood of Christ, when it was demanded farther:
do thou believe? that thou receauest the body and blood of Christ: he
answered to that question (...), ita credo. I do believe so. Now therefore he
affirms those mystical The be^.
signs to be in deed, after consecration, the body and b^ood of Christ: which
they are believed to be, and so believed, that they are received of us.

Every word must be weighed, because we have to do with Heretics, who must
find shifts, or else their deceit will appear to all the world. First therefore
let it be marked, that after consecration the mysteries are called the body and
blood. Secondly, that the mysteries are understood to be the body and blood
of Christ. Thirdly, that they are made so. Fourthly, they are believed to be so.
Fi^tly, they are adored, for that they are in deed those things, which they are
believed to be. And last of all they are received. The first saying, the second,
and the last, the Sacramentaries can bear ^ithall: to wit, that they are
called the body and blood, and are understood to be the body and blood, and
that the body and blood are receaned.

For they would have them called so, and not be so: thereby making the namer of
them a myssecaller, as one that calls them by a wrong name. Secondly, they
would have them understood to be the body and blood, and yet not to be so:
thereby showing, that they delight in false understandings: for no good men
would have a thing understood to be that, which in deed it is not. Again
they would, the body and blood to be received. How trow you? In the faith of
the man, but not in the truth of the body, thereby declaring: that they divide
faith from truth, as men that have a presuasion of things, that in deed be not
so.

But to calling, understanding and receiving Theodoret joins also believing,
adoring and being. And the bele^e which he speaks of, is not referred to
heaven: but unto the holy mysteries. They are believed, they are adored: as
being those things which they are believed to be. The thing that is called or
named Christ's body and blood, is in deed that thing which it is called.
Christ can missename nothing at al.

For if he should call that, which were before aier, water, or earth, by the
names, of fire, stones, or bread: aier, earth and water would sooner cease to
be, and fire, bread, stones, would come in their place, the^ God should call any
creature by a wrong name. He called bread his body, therefore bread is
understood to be made ye body of Christ. You say, the understanding of man
takes his beginning ^ndersta^ ding.
of senses., which tell me, it is bread. I say, in matters Se^ses.
belonging to faith, my understanding is informed by Gods Faith.
word: which tells me, it is the body of Christ: and Theodorete Gods word.
says, it is believed so to be, and it is worshipped, for that it is so.

And he gives the same very word of worshipping to the holy (...).
mysteries, the which in the same sentence he gives to the immortal body of
Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father. And no wonder. For seeing it is
one body, whether it be worshipped in heaven, or upon the altar: one worship is
always due to it.

Thus we have witnessed by Theodoretus, that the holy mysteries of Christ are
worshipped and adored: not as the signs of his body aad blood, but as being in
deed his body and blood. Therefore worship is not given to them, as to images
which represent a thing absent: but as to mystical signs, which really
contain the truth represented by them.

The adoration of the body and blood of Christ is The sixth Chapter.
proved by the custom of the Priests and people of the first six hundred years.
FRom the Apostles time to this day, the very same holy mysteries, which were
consecrated by the Priest upon the altar, were adored of the saithful people:
which thing is evidently proved out of the Massebooke of the primitive Church.
For the Liturgies or Massesbookes of S. James the Apostle, of James.
S, Clement Bishop of Rome, of S. Basil Bishop of Cesarea, of Clement.
S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, and the exposition Basil.
which both S. Dionysius Bishop of Athens and of Paris, Cyrillus Chrysostom.
Bishop of Jerusalem, Germanus Bishop of Constantinopl^, Dionysius.
Maximus the munk, and diverse others have made upon the holy mysteries, do al
with one accord teach and confirm: that first Cyrillus Germanus.
the Deacon said, Let us be attent with the fear of God and with reverence.
And straight therevppon (even before the time of receiving Maximus.
the body and blood of Christ) the Bishop or Priest, who said Mass, holding
and lifting up the consecrated host, said with a loud voice: Sancta sanctis.
the holy things for holy men.

The quere and people answered, Vnus sanctus, vnus dominus, vnus Jesus Christus
in gloria dei patris cum Spiritu sancto, Amen. one holy, one Lord, one Jesus
Christ in the glory o^ God the Father with the holy Ghost, Amen. The Priest by
lifting up the holy consecrated host, pro^oketh the people to adore and
receive the body of Christ under the form of bread, saying (as it were) Cyrill
li. 12. in Ioa^. cap. 50.
These holy things are not for profane sinners, or those, who are not
baptized, but for holy Christians: whereby the Priest meneth, as well to show,
where the holy things be that he speaks of, as for whom they be. Uerily they
are those, which he has in his hands, which he lifts up, and shows to
them. Which I do so much the more earnestly press upon, because now a days
the Sacramentaries would make us believe: that the holy things, which must be
adored to sanctisy us, and which must be adored, be still in heaven, and not
upon the altar under the form of bread.

Why does then the Priest hold up the sanctified host, and cry, holy Sancta.
things: if those* which he shows, be not the holy things? Why does he add,
holy tbings for holy men: if those men, that be holy, shall not content them
selves with those holy things: but must look for a new supper from heaven at
the same time? But the people of the primative Church well knowing the things
that were showed to be the most holy of all holies (because they are the body
and blood of Christ) yet will not acknowledge them selves to be holy: and
therefore do answer, that there is one holy, and he their Lord Jesus: which
words Cyrillus of Jerusalem expounds thus:

Sacerdos dicit, Sancta sanctis. Sancta scilicet ea, quae in ara proposita
Cyrill. in catech. mystag.
sunt, aduentu Spiritus sancti sanctificata: Sancti and vos cum sitis, sancto
spiritu donati, atque ita sancta sanctis conueniunt. Vos deinde respondetis,
vnus sanctus, etc. 5.


The Priest says: holy things for holy men. Uerily the holy The holy things.
things are those, which are set forth in the altar, consecrated by the
coming of the holy Ghost. And seeing ye are holy indewed with the holy Ghost:
by that means holy things are mete for holy men. But afterward ye answer,
one holy, one Lord Jesus Christ. In deed he al^ne is holy, as who is holy by
nature. For although ye are holy, yet ye are not holy by nature: but by
partaking, by exercise and by prayer.

Behold, the holy things ^re not only in heaven, but also upon the altar. S.
Chrysostom says: Cum dicit Sancta sanctis, hoc dicit: Ad pop. Antioch. 51.
Si quis non est sanctus, non accedat. When he says, holy things for the holy,
he means this thing: If any man be not holy, let him not come. And in an
other place, Consydera quaeso. Mensa regalis est apposita, Angeli mensae
ministrantes, ipse rex adest, and cae. 61. ad po. Antioch.
Mark, I pray you, the kingly table is set before thee, Angels minister at
the table, the king him self is present: and thou stand Adora, and
communica.
by idle, thy garments are foul, and thou carest not. But if they are clean,
then adore and receive.

By conference of these places we understand, that the Priest by saying, holy
things for holy men, warned: that none should comme, but those, that were
clean from sin. And yet those, that were holy, might not receive: before
they had acknowleged and confessed by their fact and word the king to be
present. The confession by words, was to answer the Priest: one holy, one
Lord, Jesus Christ. The confession in fact and deed, was, to bow down bodily,
and to adore the holy things: which are the body and blood of Christ, and
Christ him self. Adore (says Chrysostom) and communicate: worship, and receive.

The elevation of the consecrated host was made for these two purposes: that
the king of glory should be worshipped under the form of bread, and received of
holy men. By worshipping we con^esse, him to be holy by nature in his Godhead
and person: by communicating, we partake the fruits of his passion. Of this
lifting up of the holy host Dionysius writes: Pontifex laudatis De eccl.
sacris dei operibus, ea quae diuinissima suut (...), sacrificat vel Hierar.
cap. 3.
consecrat and laudata oculis subiicit per symbola quae rite proponuntur. The
Bishop having praised the holy works of God, does offer up in sacrifice, or
consecrate the most divine things: and after praise given to them, he shows
them to the eyes by means of the signs, which are duly set forth.

The consecrating or offering up in sacrifice of the most divine things, does
show the real presence of the body and blood: which Consecra ting.
only are the divine things, and only may be consecrated, or finally offered in
the state of the new testament. The praising of the^, Praising.
which is made of the Bishop, does witness: that they are not creatures
without life, as they were before consecration: but such as may receive of a
reasonable man praise and thanksgeuing offered up to them.

The showing of them declares, that other men are provoked Showing
to the like praising and honoring of them. The showing of the^ by means of
the signs, declares their presence not to be intellectual Signs.
only, albeit the manner thereof be spiritual: but their presence to be real
under the forms of bread and wine. For those are the signs, whereof
Dionysius speaks. Neither must one of these things be considered alone,
without the other, as some men consider them: who suppose, they are lifted up
to be only, as it were, a watcheword of lifting up our hearts to heaven: whereas
they are first said to be consecrated, and then to be lifted up.

If the divine things, that were consecrated, be lifted up, they be not now a
sign only: but they are made the divine things the^ selves, and those divine
things are showed to us by the signs. Things, and signs.
Lo, there are divine things showed, and signs also: but the divine things
being praised are showed by the signs. What is that to say, but under the
signs of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ are showed: to be
praised and honored of other men, as the Priest him self has already praised
and honored them?

The word signifying the praise of them is (...). things Hymns.
praised with an hymn: which word (hymn) is most peculiar to the things of
God: for hymns are specially dedicated to God in the praise of his works.

S. Basil speaking of the same matter says: Inuocationis verba, dum ostenditur
panis Eucharistiae and poculum benedictionis, quis De spiritu sancto cap. 27.
sanctorum scripto nobis reliquit? which of the Saints has left in writing to
us, the words of innocation: whiles y^ bread of thanks giving and the cup of
blessing is showed? The word, which S. Basile uses, is such, as betokens
showing and lifting up, (...), does properly betoken such a showing, as is
made by listing up.

It is much to be noted, y^ S. Basil asks what Saint, to wit, what Apostle or
Evangelist has left in writing to us the order of saying Mass, and the
prayers, which therein we use? Non enim iis contenti sumus, quorum and caet.
For we are not content with those things, whereof the Apostle or Gospel has
made mention: but both before and after we say certain other things, as having
(...).
great strength about the mysteries: which are taken out of the doctrine, which
is delivered without writing. The Apostle and Gospel has only told the
substanciall points of the Mass: but the rest has been left unto us (as S.
Basil says) by secret doctrine: yet by the same auctority which gave us the
substanciall points.

Well, seeing that S. Basil speaking of the whole Mass, yet names it,
ostentionem Eucharistiae, the elevation and sheing of the Ele^atio^.
(...): he gives us to understand, the elevation to be (next unto the
consecration) a most principal part of the Mass: in so much as the whole may
be named by it.

While the bread of y^ Eucharist was showed, these were and, among the Breeks,
are the words of invocation: Vnus sanctus, The words of In^ocation.
etc. one holy, one Lord in the glory of God the Father, Amen. These words, if
they did not belong to the holy things which are showed: why are they spoken at
that time? why are they called the words of invocation? the words that
acknowledge, so holy things to be showed and holden up, that they are the only
holy, and one Lord Jesus, who is in equal deity and glory with his Father.

Maximus in his notes upon S. Dionysius, after some other Maxim. in scholijs
Graecis in iij. places.
interpretations made upon the showing of the divine mysteries rests in this:
that Dionysius means, the lifting up and elevation of the one blessing (which
is y^ of the divine bread) which the Priest lifts up, saying: Holy things for
holy men. And as it may appear by Maximus, in the primative Church the
mysteries were twice showed: at the first time the divine bread alone was
listed up, and before the communion, as well yt divine bread as also
therewithal the chalice.

Germanus writes thus, Elatio autem in altum diuini corporis, In Theoria rer.
repraesentatcrucis elationem and mortem in ea, and ipsam resurrectionem. The
lifting up a high of the divine body, does represent Eccles.
the lifting v^ on the cross, and the death in it, and the very resurrection.

After the lifting up of Christ's body and the adoration thereof, Emissen.
the holy communion followed: of the which Eusebius Emissenus Hom. 5. in Pasch.
writes in this manner: Cum ad reuerendum altar salutari cibo potuque
reficiendus accedis, sacrum Dei tui corpus and sanguinem fide respice, honora,
mirare, mente continge, cordis manu suscipe, and maxim haustu interiore
assume: when thou come to the reverend altar, to be refresshed with the
healthful meat and drink: look with faith upon the holy body and blood of
thy God, honor it, wonder at it, touch it with thy mind, receive it with an
inward swalowing.

The first thing to be noted in these words is, that he, which is desirous to
receive the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body, must know where to have it. The
second, how to take it: and last of al, Altar.
how to use it profitably. Concerning the place Eusebius says, when thou
come to the reverend altar, to be fed with y^ healthful meat and drink:
Doing us to understand, that the body and blood Honor.
of Christ (which only is our healthful meat and drink) stands Heart.
upon the altar, thence to be distributed to the faithful people. Concerning
the manner of taking the said body, Eusebius bids us honor it, and wonder at
it. Concerning the profitable use thereof, he bids us take it with our heart
and mind: for if we took it with our bodies alone, we should rather take it to
our damnation, then to our profit.

The English homilies rehersing this place in the second tome, have translated
altar the communion: and, salutari cibo potuque Fol. 217.
spiritual meats. whereas, altar is an altar: and salutare is Altar, a
communion.
healthful. But the brethern, who (...) overthrown altars, were loath by naming
them, to recite their own damnation.

Eusebius begins with the altar, as the which is the ground of all the rest.
Upon the altar the healthful meat is consecrated, and made ready for the
faithful people. There it is looked on, not by the bodily eye (which sees
nothing beside the outward forms) but by faith: which is taught, the body and
blood of Christ to be present upon the altar under those forms. There yt meat
is honored, thence that is taken, which refreshes us. To that meat the
receauer said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof.

For he that sees the divine food lifted up unto him, and afterward speaks
these words: seeing he takes corporally yt bread into his mouth, and only in
respect of that corporal receiving, says: I am not worthy that thou should
est enter: Doubtless he speaks to the bread it self, and calls it his
Lord. For none other Lord enters under the roof of his mouth, beside that
bread. It is lifted up, to receive it, he comes, to it he speaks, it enters
under his roof. It is therefore a fond prete^se, to say: those words were
spoken to God in heaven, and not unto y^ holy Sacrament.

Cyrillus of H^erusalem describing yet more particularly the Catech. mystago 5.
gesiures of them, who receive the holy communion, bids them to take the
King and the body of Christ in the hollow of the right hand, saing, Amen. And
to sanctify their eyes withal, using all The hand takes the King.
diligence: that no crum thereof perish or fall away. But what neded that
precept, if it were the substance of common bread? Surely, Amen.
seeing no such diligence was used in Baptism, we may well No crum may perish.
perceive: that as, because yt substance of water does still remain it
skilleth not where it fall: so for so much as no crum of bread must be lost, it
is not the substance of wheaten bread, which is so carefully kept.

After the communion of the body Cyrillus bids the people Bowing.
Adoring.
come to the chalice of Christ's blood, bowing down, and saying in the manner of
adoring and worshipping, Amen. Here the right hand receaueth the King, surely
not by faith, which y^ hand has not: therefore the King of glory was meant to
be taken in the hand by mean of the form of bread, under which our King Jesus
Christ is really present. Here is bowing down and adoring at the very instant,
when the holy communion is received. As therefore when we read, that the
Disciples went back from the place of Christ's ascension adorantes adoring: we
may well conclude, Luc. 24.
that they adored Christ him self, and not only God y^ Father in him or by him:
As again, when the Centurion said of Christ, who was coming to his house,
Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should est enter under my roof, we thereby
know that he spoke to Christ and called Christ his Lord, and not only God in
heaven: so when we read, that the receauers of the holy communion Math. 8.
did say at the time of receiving the Sacrament, Lord, I am not worthy, that
thou should est enter under my roof, and yt they did bow down, adore and
worship at the same time: we must undoubtedly conclude, that both the Sacrament
was spoken unto, and called Lord, and also bowed to, and adored.

Thus I have proved the adoration of Christ's body and blood, even as it is a
Sacrament, out of the Prophets, out of S. Paul, Ps. 21. 98 1. Co. 11.
out of the anncient Fathers, out of the public seruire of the primitine
Church, and out of the custom of the faithful people. Al which proufes I have
applied to this end: that the body and blood of Christ should be known
thereby, to be really present in that self Sacrament, which we take into our
mouths. And for so much as that is so, every faithful man ought to believe most
constantly the said real presence: and to detest the contrary doctrine as a
most perniciouse heresy.

The real presence of Christ's body and blood under The vii. Chapter.
the forms of bread and wine, is proved by the testimonies of the ancient
Fathers.
IF every man is to be credited, and ought to have authority in Every man to
be leued in his own (...).
his own art and faculty, if when we build, we call a Carpenter to counsel,
and when we make gardens, a gardener: how much more must we esteem the holy
Doctors of the Church, who are not only cunning by long labor bestowed upon
the science of divinity: but also have so virtuously used them selves, that
they have been abundantly instructed in all knowledge, by marnailons
inspirations of the holy Ghost. whose names are so great, that the very
Heretics can not deny them to be holy Saints in heaven: and therefore they
pretend to have the first syx hundred years on their side.

It is then a good sure way, to work with the advice of those ancient
Fathers: whose sayings because I have particularly alleged and examined in
every article and chapter of my former books (as occasion suffered) I thought
good not to prosec^ them now again at large: but rather to show briefly, by
what general chapiters a man may be undoubtedly assured of their belefe and
doctrine.

First, very many Fathers speaking of Christ's words or deeds, when after bread
taken and thanks given, he said this is my body, allege the almighty power of
God to defend the verity (...).
of those deeds and words. Therefore the same Fathers believed those words,
this is my body, to be true in so wonderful a manner, as they sound at the
first sight. And seeing they mean according to their most usual sound, that
(this which is pointed unto (though it seem still bread) is notwithstanding y^
substance of Christ's body: we ought to think, that those Fathers believed the
real presence of Christ's body. Otherwise, they would never have alleged his
Godhead, or almighty power and omnipotency for the instituting of a figure
and sign of his own body: since for the institution of signs and figures such
an authority Heb. 3.
might have served, as God gave to Moses: who yet was but the feruant of Jesus
Christ, and not almighty God.

S. Ireneus: How can they be sure, the bread, whereon thanks Lib. 5. cap. 34.
are given, to be the body of their Lord, and the chalice of his blood: if they
say not him to be the Son of the maker of the world?

S. Ireneus was so sure, that Christ through his divine power made the bread,
wherein thanks were given, his own body: that if the Godhead were denied
which should work that presence, no man could be sure of the presence of
Christ's body: and yet he might have been sure of a figurative presence, though
Moses had been the minister of the Sacrament, and not Christ. S. Cyprian:
That bread which our Lord gave to the Disciples, In sermon. de coena Domin.
by the omnipotency of the word was made flesh. What neded omnipotency be
alleged for a fact, that were not supernatural? S. Hilary speaking of the
Sacrament says: By the profession Li. 8. de Trinitat.
of our Lord it is truly flesh, and truly blood. Is not this thing the
truth* It may in deed chance not to be true to them, who deny Icsus Christ to
be true God. As who should say, if his Godhead may stand, his flesh must needs
be truly present.

S. Basilius, to show y^ these words, This is my body, make In Rog. bre. quae.
172.
full persuation, allegeth out of S. John the glory or Godhead, and also the
incarnation of Christ: because, except he were both true God and true man,
this is my body, should not make full Joan. 1.
persuasion: since, if he were not man, he should not have a body whereof those
words might be verified. If he were not God, we might dout, how he were able to
make his word true: but seeing he is God and man, and said, this is my body,
there is no dout of the presence of his body. De ijs qui init. cap. 9. and lib.
4. de Sacra. c. 4. and 5.


S. Ambrosius: Our Lord Jesus him self cries, This is my body. he has said,
and it is made.

S. Chrysostom: O miracle. He has sits above and caet. And again: Let us
every where give credit unto his words, specially in the mysteries. Eusebius
Emissenus: Let the very power De Sace, lib. 3.
of him that consecrateth, strengthen thee.

S. Cyrillus of Alexandria: Seeing God works, let us not ask Hom. 5.
in Pasch.
how. Damascene: We know no more, but that the word of God In Joan. li. 4. ca.
13
is true, strengthfull, almighty: but the manner is inscrutable.

No wise man requires us earnestly to believe the words, Lib. 4.
which himself does think to be figurative and parabolicall: but cap. 14.
he rather should bid us beware, that we mistake them not, as In Genesis
S. Chrysostom upon those words (God repented) cries out: Hom. 22.
See a gross word. not that God repented. God forbid: but God speaks to us
according to the custom of man. Likewise S. In Joan. tractat. 4
Augustine says in respect of those words, (John Baptist is Elias) Our Lord
spoke figuratively. but S. Ihon, saying (I Math. 17
am not Elias) answered properly. Joan. 1.


If now these words, This is my body, were figurative: we should have ben'e
warned by the watchmen of God, to beware of them, and not require d to believe
them, as now we are required. yea we are so required to believe them, that it is
wonderful In Reg. breuior. q. 172. fides.
to see and to consyd er: how earnestly the Doctors speak in that behalf. S
Basilius: The certeintie of our Lords words who said, This is my body, which is
geu en for you: make this thing (...).
for the remembrance of me engender full persuasion. Surely figurative words
can not make full persuasion. because the^ selves are imperfite, as lackin g
their proper signification: which is the chief virtue of words, whereby they
should fully inform us. for no figurative speech is so plain as a proper
speech is.

Epiphanius: Who so believes not the saying to be true, as In Anco rat. sermon.
him self spoke it, is fallen from grace and salvation.

Cyrillus Hierosolymitatus: Seeing Christ him self affirms so, and says of
the bread, This is my body: Who hereafter may be so Catech.
bold, as to doubt? Mysta. 4


S. Ambrosius: Our Lord Jesus him self gives witness unto De Sacr. lib. 4. c. 5
us, that we take his body and blood. Ought we any thing, to doubt of his
fidelity and witnesbearing?

S. Chrysostom: Because our Lord said, This is my body, let In Math.
Hom. 83
us be entangled with no doubtfulnes: but let us believe and see it with the
eyes of understanding.

Eusebins Emissenns: Let all doubtfulnes of infidelity depart, Hom. 5. in
Pasch.
for so much as the author of the gift, him self also is witness of the truth.

S. Cyrillus of Alexandria: Doubt not whether it be true, since Ad Calo syrium.
Christ says manifestly, This is my body: But rather take y^ word of our
Savior in faith: for seeing he is y^ truth, he lies not. And In Joan. li. 4.
c. 13.
again, Let us take great advantage by the sins of other men: Giving
steadfast faith unto the mysteries. Let us never in so high How.
matters either think or speak that word, Quomodo? How? S. Gregorius
Nazianzenus: Eat the body and drink the blood ^n orat. 4, in. Pascha.
without confusion or doubt, if at the least thou art desirouse of life:
Neither do thou withdraw faith from the sayings, which concern the flesh.

The same thing S. Hilary, Leo, Isychius, Theophylact, Paschasius and diverse
others have spoken, requiring us not to doubt of the truth of this mystery,
and that specially: because Christ's words make full persuasion, and take away
al occasion of doubting. But if they be figurative, it is not so: for then one
The doutes of Christ's words, if they be figurative.
may understand this kind of figure, an other that kind. One may think it to
be a Metaphore. An other, that it is Synechdoche. The third, that it is
Metonymia. The fourth, that it is altogether an Allegory or parable, and
without all ground of History. Others doubt not to expound, This is my body,
as if it were said: in this, with this, or under this, or about this my body
is. Yea from that day, wherein the proper and natural sense of those words was
denied, I think never any words have been more uncertain, and more doubted of
then, This is my body. Yet the Fathers were so far from this uncertainty,
that they counted him an infidel and ^allen from grace and salvation: who so
did not believe them, even as Christ spoke them: To wit, even so as they sound
at the first sight.

If the truth of Christ's body be the real substance thereof, they that
entreating of the Eucharist, affirm y^ truth of his flesh, must needs mean:
that his substance is really present in that Sacrament, whereof they speak.

S. Hilarious speaking of the holy mysteries says: There is left Lib. 8. de
Trinit.
no place of doubting of the truth of flesh and blood. Yet surely, if the
substance of flesh and blood were not present: not only some place, but the
chief place of doubting were left.

S. Ambrosius: It is the true flesh of Christ which we take. Doubt ye nothing
at all (says Leo) concerning the truth of De Sacr. li. 6. ca. 1.
Christ's body. By like he spoke to Catholics, for doubtless the De ieiunio
me^sis 7. sermon. 6
Sacramentaries doubt so vehemently thereof: that they believe the truth of
Christ's body to be only at the right hand of his Father.

Isychius: He receaueth by ignorance, who knows not this In Leuit. li. 6. c.
22.
to be the body and blood, according to the truth.

Damascenus: The bread and wine is not the figure of Christ's De Orthod. fide.
lib. 4. cap. 4.
body and blood. God forbid. But it is the self deified body of our Lord.

The like assertion Theophylact, Euthymius and diverse other In. 6. Io^ In. 26.
Fathers have.

They that name the supper of Christ a figure, a Sacrament, or Matthew.
a remembrance, do not thereby exclude the true substance of Christ's flesh: but
they mean to show, that it is present under the sign of an other thing, after
a mystical and secret manner.

S. Cyprian: The divine substance has unspeakably infused it In sermon. de coena
Domini.
self in the visible Sacrament.

S. Hilarious: We take in deed the flesh of his body under a Lib. 8. de Trinitat.
mystery. Lo, the flesh, the substance of God is present in truth, but under a
sign.

Ty^illus Hierosolymitanus: Under the figure of bread the body Cateche si
mystago.
is given to thee. Who now knowing the Sacrament to consist of two parts, will
wonder: that sometime it is named of the one, and sometime of the other.

S. Augustine: The body and blood of Christ shall then be life De verbis Apost.
sermon. 2.
to every man: if that thing, which is visibly received in the Sacrament, be in
the truth it self eaten spiritually. B^holde, there is a Uisiblye rec^aued,
spiritually e^ten.
thing in the Sacrament, and so really it is there: that it is visibly
received. Therefore it is not a spiritual thing only, for no such matter is
visibly received: but it is there, and thence it must be eaten spiritually, and
in y^ truth it self: That is to say, it must not only be taken into the mouth,
but into the heart also, and then it shall be life unto the receauer. This thing
so received in the Sa crame^t must needs be the body of Christ under y^ form
of bread: for nothing else is to be eaten spiritually. It were to rediouse to
allege all, that S. Augustine has written in this behalf: but his other words
being conferred with these, will make it plain, that whenever he names it a
figure: he means the truth hidden under a figure, which is more shortly named
a mystical figure.

He that allegeth cause, why the flesh and blood of Christ is not seen in the
mysteries, presupposes (albeit an unvisible) yet a most real presence thereof.

S. Ambrose says, it is not seen in his own form: Vt nullus De Sacr. li. 4.
c. 4.
horror cruoris sit, and precium tamen operetur redemptionis. To the end there
may be no loathsome abhorring of raw blood, and yet that the price of our
redemption may work. So that by his judgment the truth of blood is present, to
work in us the effect of Christ's death: and yet the foorm of blood is not
seen, because we should not abhor to drink it.

Theophylact: Although it seem bread to us, it is changed by In 2. 6. Matthew.
unspeakable operation. Because we are weak, and abhor to eat raw flesh
(specially the flesh of a man) and therefore it seems bread, but in deed it is
flesh. If these words can be glosed with a figure, then I know not, what shall
escape the hands of these figure Figure makers.
makers.

They that acknowledge a change of the substance of bread into Christ's body,
must needs mean a real presence of that body, whereinto the change is made.

When Justinius Martyr denies us to take the things consecrated as common bread
and drink, showing also that we have In Apol. ^.
learned them to be not only sanctified in quality, but to be the flesh and
blood of Christ, which is an other substance: he does us to understand, that he
means them not to be after consecration the substance of common bread and
wine: but to be that substance, which Christ took of his mother, when the
word was made flesh.

S. Cyprian shows the bread, which our Lord gave to the De coen. Dom.
Disciples, to be changed not in shape, but in nature: Therefore as the form
remains, so the substance is changed.

S. Ambrose: It is not that, which nature formed: but that, De ijs qui
initiantur cap. 9.
which the blessing has consecrated. If nature formed the substance of common
bread, and the words of blessing pronounced, This is my body: It is not
afterward any more the substance of bread, but of Christ's body. Grace is
affirmed with the denial of nature.

This argument is in manner as large, as that of the real presence: but who so
lists to see more therein, let him read Gregorius Nyssenus in Oratione
Catechetica, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus in Catechesi mystagogica 4. Eusebius
Emissenus, in Oratione 5. in Pascha. Isychius, in ca. 6. Leuitici, Theophylact,
Euthymius in Euangelia, Damascene li. 4. cap. 14.

All that affirm the external sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, must needs
teach the real presence thereof: since that thing, which is absent, can not be
externally sacrificed.

S. Dionysius Areopagita says: The Bishop excuses him self De Eccles. Hi^
rar. ca. 3. Luc. 22.
for that he offers a sacrifice above his worthynesse or power, crying out
decently: Thou (o Lord) sayedst, Make this thing for the remembrance of me.

Heretics admit no Eucharists or offerings, says S. Ignatius Dialo. 3.
in Theodorete: because they do not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of
the Savior. A man would have thought, this had been made in our time against
the Sacramentaries. It agrees to them so well: or rather they agree with the
old Heretics so Libro. 1. demon.
much. Euagel. cap. 10.


Eusebius Pamphili: We offer a sacrifice full of God, and dreadsull, Can. 18.
and most holy. We sacrifice after a new manner, according to Li. 4. c. 32
the new Testament, a clean sacrifice or host. Li. 2 ep. 3


Concilium Nicaenum: Let us understand by faith that Lamb De ciuit.
of God, who takes away the sins of the world, being situated Dei. li. 17
cap. 20.
in that holy table to be offered vnbloodely of the Priests: and 8.
that we take in deed his preciouse body and blood. And again: In the. 6.
book. 8. the. 4. 5. 6. chap.
Neither rule nor custom has delivered: that they who have no power to offer
sacrifice, should deliver the body of Christ to them 9.
who offer. Hereof S. Ireneus, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine and al In the. 2. book
the. 7 chap. the. 5. book the. 9 chap
the rest may be readen: for it is a known matter, handled of the Fathers
most frequently. What shall I say, that the Fathers teach, that the Sacrament
ought to be adored with Godly honor, 10
as I showed before? the. 2. book C. 5. and. the 3. book. 15. (...). chap.


That they teach, evil men to receive and to touch the body and blood of
Christ, and thereby to be gylty of the^, as Judas was? *11.


That they teach, our bodies to be nourished with Christ's The. 5. b. 5. chap.
flesh and blood: which can not be nourished with a thing absent?.12.


That they teach, us to be naturally united to Christ: whiles The. 2. b. the.
5. chap
he dwells corporally in us? 13.


That they affirm, Christ's body to be upon the altar, upon the Chryso.
holy table, in the hands, in the mouths, and the blood to be in Hom. 24 in.
1. Co.
the Cup?

That they give it such names, as only may agree: o the substance Cypria. de
coena Domini.
of Christ: calling it, salvation, light, life, Lord, Christ, an offering
wholly burnt, a Sacrament which qui^keneth and makes 14.
us live for ever? The. 1. b. c. what is the (...) the 4. c. 12


That they teach, every man to receive the same substance, one measure, equal
portion: which is true neither of spiritual nor of corporal gifts, but only
of y^ flesh of Christ really present under 15.
Cypr. de coena.
the form of bread. Hieron. in. 26.


That they use in showing, how it is sanctified, the verbs: creating, making,
working, consecrating, representing or making Matthew.
16.
present, and such like: which are not verified of a matter only Augu. de
ciuit. l. 10 cap 5. and in Ps. 39.
spiritual, or absent in substance?

That they speak of it covertly, saying: Norunt fideles, the saithfull know,
because if they should plainly declare the truth Chryso.
thereof, the infidels would mock at it, as now the heretics doc. Hom. de
prodit.
For it is a mystery above all reason of man. which scoffing were not to be
feared: if it were a mere figure. for all kinds of religion Iudae.
have ceremonies and figures? 17.
Augu. li. confess. 9 cap. 13.


That they have applied it to the helping of sowles departed, as being the very
self substance, which ransacked hell?

That they have taught, it to be the truth which has succeeded Cyp. li. 1.
in place of the old figures? Epist. 9.
18.


That they have used by the known truth thereof to prove, Augu. de ciuit. l.
17 cap. 20.
that Christ had true flesh and true blood in a visible manner, and two
natures in one person. against all the old Heretics?

That they have so far preferred it before Baptism, and the 19.
Ireneus li. 4. c. 34
other Socraments: that no crumme might be suffered to fall down, or to be
lost? which was not so in the water of Baptism: Theodo retus in Dialo.
for men were baptized in the running water of the flood.

That the Catechumeni, who were admitted to the preaching 20.
of the Ghospel (which is an excellent sign of Christ's flesh and Cyri^us
blood) yet might not see the Eucharist: because it was also the Catech. mysta.
4.
truth it sell. under a sign? that no man might eat it, except he Actor. 8.
were first baptized, and kept the commandments: and yet the 21.
Cathechumeni had a sanctified bread also given to them, which Dionys. ^e Eccl.
was a sign of Christ, as S. Augustine does witness. Let now Hierar. cap. 3.
the discrete Reader weigh uprightly this doctrine so grounded in holy
scriptures, and ancient Fathers, and he shall perceive: L. 2. c. 26 de pecc.
mer. and remiss.
that what soever our adversaries bring for the other side, it may prove the
Sacrament to be a figure, which we deny not: but it can not disprove the real
presence of Christ's body and blood under that figure, which is the thing that
we stand in against them.

The real presence of Christ's body is proved by the The vij.
faith of the whole Church of God in all times and Chapter.
ages.
S. Paul disputing against them, who said that our bodies 1. Co. 15.
should not arise again, has these words: Si Christus non resurrexit, inanis
est praedicatio nostra, inanis est and fides vestra. The faith of the Church
can not be in vain.
If Christ be not risen, our preaching is void, and your faith is in vain. The
like may be said concerning the Sacrament of the altar, in which if the true
substance of Christ's body be not contained, the Apostles preaching is in
vain, and our faith is nothing worth. But S. Paul acccompteth it a great
absurdity, that either of them both should be void or in vain: and yet
prosecuting farther that argument he adds, that if Christ be not risen, Qui
domierunt in Christo, perierunt. those that have slepte ^. Co. 15.
in Christ, are perished. Those I say, that have slept in Christ, that have
believed in him, loved him, suffered martyrdom for him, those are perished. Right
so it is, if Christ's body be not under the form of bread, all our forefathers
that have slept in Christ are perished. All their faith, watching, prayer,
almose deeds, all their charity, and their co^slict against the devil, the
world, and the flesh is lost. They were more miserable then any men. For they
lived more hardly in this life, then any of our age does, and yet all is lost.
They were idolatours, they worshipped a false God, they are condemned for ever.

This could not S. Paul abide, this he accounted for wonderful absurd: that a
man who is called to the faith and baptized in Christ, who does his best to
serve God with all his heart and thought, that he should be condemned for
believing that: which al men preached, all taught, all professed. For surely the
real presence All the Church believed y^ real presence.
of Christ's body and blood under the forms of bread and wine was believed
through out all the Church: in so much that Calvin, Decolampadius, Zuinglius,
Luther, Wyelefe, yea Berengarius did once every of them with all their scholars
believe the said real presence.

For they were baptized and christened al, to be made members of that member of
faithful men, all which did believe, that Christ in the Sacrament of his last
supper had left to them under the forms of bread and wine his own body and
blood. Whiles the^ they were made by baptism of that Catholic company, them
selves also had the same Catholic belefe. and no marnayle: since all they being
baptized when they were infantes, and therefore having no actual faith of
their own, must needs have only that faith which the Church had, whereof by
baptism they were made members. but the whole Church East and West belened the
real presence of Christ's body, so that when Beringarius Berengarius.
began to say otherwise, he was reproved of all the Preachers of y^ age, he was
condemned by three Councels of Bishops kept at Rome and Uercels in Italy, and
at Tours in France. He was impugned by Algerus, Laufra^cus, Gui^undus, and
afterward Mark y^ Berenga rius had none to be leave his doctrine, except he
changed his ol^ faith.
by Rupertus, Petrus Cluniacensis, and other excellent Clerks of that time.

The faithful Princes and people abhorred him, and to be short, no man believed
his doctrine, except that he changed his old faith to take a new of
Berengarius. For if any other man in the whole Church before Berengarius had
openly taught or believed, that Christ was ^ly by a figure in the Sacrament:
then could not he only have been made r^cant, nor had not been accounted the
father and first open preacher of that faith. Again, if the Princes and people
had been of his belefe, they had surely done, as the princes and people of our
time (who believe the doctrine of Berengarius) daily do. They had thrown down
altars, overthrown Churches, denied all outward Priesthod, changed Bishops
into superintendents, Priests into ministers, altars into tables, y^ chaste
clergy into the vnlau^ul marriage of ^otaries, they had not preserved the
Sacrament of the altar for soden necessities, they had not adored the flesh of
God and man under the form of bread and wine, they had not been content with
one kind at the holy Like doctrine like fruits.
communion, one (...) should not have said Mass without an other to receive
the communion with him, the sacrifice of the Mass had not been applied to the
live and dead, monasteries, chantries chapels had not been so fast erected,
and to speak briefly, all that now is mislyked had been then misliked, if the
princes and people of that age had thought, as Princes and people (such as now
follow (...) his doctrine) do think.

For it can not be otherwise, but that the same faith will bring forth the same
works: as one manner of tree brings forth alwaise the same manner of fruit.
But if it be euid ent to all men, Matthew. 7
that five hundred yers past and upward, even to y^ days of Constantine the
great (under whom Christ was openly worshipped) Niceph. li. 8. c. 13.
Churches, monasteries, altars, chapp^lles were built, if Priests were esteemed,
the body of Christ reserved, and adored, it Masses were in use and in price
every where, and said for the living and the dead: out of all controversy
neither Bishops (who kept Councels against Berengarius) neither preachers and
doctors (who taught and wrote against him) neither princes and people (who did
and followed the contrary effect to his doctrine) none* I say, of all the
Christian men a^ ^ublikely professed B^rengarius opion: which was, to deny the
real ^ce of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar.

So that only those, whom Berengarius seduced, began then B^ rius ^cached his
doctrine, not being sent of any successo^ of the A^o stl^s.
first to think as he did. wher^by two things are manifest, the one that
Beringari^s went from the doctrine of all the Church, and from that faith
wherein he was baptized: An other, that for so doing he was a seducer and false
teacher, to whom none of the Apostles successors (who for that time ruled the
Church) gave any commission to preach such doctrine. And yet how could he Romans
10.
preach, if he were not sent? or how could he be sent, since no man would
authorize him to preach that doctrine, y^ contrary whereof him self believed?
Therefore of such false preachers as Berengarius was, God said by the Prophet
Jeremy: I sent them not, Iere. 23.
and they ran. For if God sent him, he can show his commission: he can name
y^ mean, whereby he was sent: he ca^ bring forth, what successor of the
Apostles willed him to preach that doctrine. But if he can not do so, he
comes of him self, he preaches without authority, and consequently he is a
thief, a robber, a murdrer: Joan. 10.
and so are all those, that follow him. ^owbeit for so much as he recanted, it
may be well thought: that by penance he was reconciled to God again. And so may
his folowers be reconciled, if Berenga rius recanted.
according to the example of their master they will repent.

It was then the vni^ersall faith of the Church before the ti^e of Berengari^s,
that Christ's body and blood waspresent really under the forms of bread and
wine. which being so, if that faith came not to them from the Apostles: who
taught it them* If faith Romans 10
^ome of hearing the word of God preached: the whole Church could not believe
that, which was not preached. If it were so preached, either that preaching
came by lawful co^ission, and then Joan. 20.
it was of God, and the doctrine good: or else it came of private Acto. 15.
(...), and it must be showed who were those vs^pers, that preached otherwise
t^ ^ey had received. Or how is it possible, t^t it (...) a private usurping,
which was generally received every where? Or if those that preached the real
presence, were men that went by schism or hereseie out of y^ Church: let y^
Church 1. Joan. 2.
and faithful cumpanie be named, whence they went. Let us go from step to
step.

First, six hundred years past all the known faithful on the ^arth believed the
real presence, as it appeared evidently, when Berengarius afterward began to
teach otherwise. For then all preachers, and prelates and people resisted him
both in word and deed, as I showed before. Well then, those doc^ours and
preachers of six hundred years old, how came they by their belief? Had they it
not of those, who were above seven hundred years past? And they again of their
forefathers? May we not by that means go upward until we come to Christ* or
where shall we stay? whether in the ninth hundred year numbering upward? how then
came that self hundred age by this faith?

If it had it not of the tenth hundred age, it must make a new faith: and then
it must have new preachers and Apostles. But what? Did they of the tenth
hundred age send any man to preach or no? If they sent none, all the faith must
needs cease at once, when all preaching ceased. But if they sent also
preachers, and made Bishops and consecrated Priests, as before time had been
used (as it can not be denied but they did) I suppose they sent men of their
own faith, and not of a contrary belefe. It they did so, the preachers of the
ninth hundred age must needs preach the same: that they took of their
ancestors, which was the tenth hundred age. And that, which I say of the
tenth hundred age, I mean likewise of the eleventh, and so upward until we
come to Christ.

For in every age the Bishops, who ruled the Church, sent forth preathers, and
willed them always to preach the same Gospel: Galat. 1.
which they had received, and in case they did otherwise, they corrected Acto.
15.
them, excommunicated, and deposed them. Thus has always the faith been
preserved from hand to hand, until these our days: in so much that never no
heresy was begun, but y^ man was known who began it, and much more they were
known, who impugned the heresy, and defended the truth. For as it may appear
by S. Paul, heresies must be, to thend those that are tried 1. Cor. (...)
and perfect, may be known. For in all divisions and schisms the one part
begins a new trouble, the other mainteineth the old order and custom, and
he that tarieth in vuitie is a tried faithful man. But, as I said, he that
begins the heresy, is known, and the place where he preached it, and the
Bishop or Patriarch is known who reproved it, and the assemble known, where
it was cons^ted, and the scholars known, who ^ainteined the heresy. And above
all the Churches are most openly known, from which ^he heret^ke departed. When
Val^ntinus began, it could be said to him: thou go from the known doctrine
of the Roman Ireneus de haeres. lib. 3. c. 3.
Church, of the Corinthian Church, of the Ephesian Church, and so forth.

Let it then be showed of the Sacramentaries, when that heresy of the real
presence began: which was so riue a hu^dr^d years before Berengari^s published
his new doctrine. Let them show, where those Churches remained, from which
they depar^d: who taught the real presence* Let one Bishop be named in the A
large scope to detect an heresy.
whole earth, who before that time reproved the teachers of the real presence
as heretics, in the seventh, eigth, ninth, tenth, eleue^th, twelueth,
thirtenth, fourtenth or fyftenth hundred age* The teachers of y^ real presence
can not be schis^atiks.


What shall I say more i^ so plain a matter* They have lost their faith,
their memory, their understanding, their common sense: that will have the
teachers of the real presence to be schisma tiks, or false preachers, or
misbeleuers: who can neither show when they began, nor whence they departed,
nor where, nor of whom they were reproved.

If we be no schisinatikes, who teach and believe the real presence: they must
needs be schismatiks and misbeleuers, who teach the contrary. Yea but, say
they, ye are gone from the Apostles, and An objection.
from y^ ancient Fathers. For thus generally they would entangle the matter.
But seeing to be accused of the schism, it is more The answer.
greuouse, then to be accused of treason: let us sce, whether it were An exam^.
enough in a judgment of treason, to say to a man of our age: you have denied
your obedience to the king, and yet could name no king, whom the pa^ie had
disobeyed. Would not the party accused say: name the king whom I have
disobeied? Mary (says y^ accuser) you have disobeyed William Conqueror, and
Const^ tine the great. Would not the party accused answer* Why sir, I lived
not with them, nor under them: and therefore I could not depart from their
obedience. No but (says the accuser) thou art the son of him, that
disobeied William Conquero^. The other answers: No sir not so. My fathers
also were obedient always to the kings, under whom they lived, and kept their
laws from time to time. If now the accuser could go no farther, what should
the Judges do, I pray you? should they condemn the party accused of treason?

^ight so we are accused of schism. but from whom did we We are neither
heretics nor the sons of heretics.
depart? from the Apostles? Ue live not under them. Well, but we are the sons
of them, who departed from the Apostles. May surely. For all our fathers obeyed
always the successors of the Apostles, and kept all their laws, and
traditions. What say ye now? (...) ye bring forth auy of our forefathers, who
disobeyed the prelates, which lived in their time?

Yea but you go from the doctrine, from the writings, from the preaching of
the Apostles, If we do so, either we now first begin to do so: or else it
must be showed, when our forefathers began to do so. For we keep the preaching,
the doctrine, the Gospel, which we received: and we preach it as we received
it. We 1. Tim. 6.
find, that S. Paul said to Timothe: Depositum custodi, keep that which was
committed to thee. We find, This is my body, four times written, with many
circumstances, which importe a real prosence. Beside, we have always from the
Apostles time taken the understanding of those words to be: that, this is the
very substance of my body. In so much that our forefathers have allwaies adored
it, and called it a sacrifice for the living and for the dead. In this faith we
were borne, in this we live, and exc^pt ye show when and how we went from an
other Gospel, or an other faith: we can be no schismatiks.

Yea but S. Augustine, say you, and men of his time did otherwi^ S. Augustine
is not again us.
ex^ound the Gospel. No sir. that can not be so: for then the preachers whom
S. Augu^ine and other (...) fellow Bishopes sent forth; would not have
deliuer^d to our aunce^stours this belief. Either show, when we or our
forefathers renosiced the communion of S. Augustine: or believe no longer that
blessed man, who teaches even as we believe: And so he delivered to his
successors, and they to us. Yea but his books have contrary doctrine. No
verily nor his, nor any man's else, that is elder the^ Berengarius: al^eit
Bertram perhaps disposed him self to miscredit Bertra^ suspect^d.
somewhat, which yet he could not determine, nor has not plainly uttered. But
as we keep the faith preached by S. Augustine, so we keep and reverence his
books, and know what they mean. But if they did speak any thing against the
vniuer In epist. fundamenti. c. 5. (...). 19.
^all says, him self has in many places declared, that he would us not to
believe them. Therefore in this behalf, we are clear, as who never departed
from the Apostles, nor from their (...)*

But your departing is known. I (...) that it (...) Berengarius about the year
of our Lord. 1000. I can tell when 1000.
(...) renewed the same heresy, when Luther, when Zwinglius 1400.
began. Who knows not where the Churches are, whence they 1517.
1522.
dep^rted? To wit, in Italy, in France, in Spain, in Germany, and so forth. I
can tell the Councils wherein it has been condemned. At (...), at Uercels, at
Tours, in the great Council of Lateran, at ^iemia in Feance, at Basil, at
Constance, at Florence, at Trent. All things are known so manifestly
concerning the begiuning and proceeding of the Sacramentaries, that they can not
be denied.

To couclude, our faith is (...) by the testimony of y^ Church, which in all
ages has believed y^ real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, in so much that
S. Hilary says: there is no place left of Hila. li. 8 de Trin.
douting of the verity of Christ's flesh and blood. why so? nun^ enim and
ipsius Domini professione, and fide nostra, vere (...) est; (...) The faith of
the (...) Church.
vere sanguis est* for now both by the profession of our Lord him self, and by
our faith, it is flesh in deed and blood in deed. Lo, By our Lords profession
and by our faith.

S. Hilary confesses that all Christians believed, that the Sacrament of
Cjro^tes body and blood (whereof he there spoke) was his flesh in deed, and
his blood in deed. for he had spoken before of the Sacrament, which be called
also a mystcrie, and our Lords meat, and the Sacrament of his flesh to be
communicated to us: which Sacrament is Christ's flesh in deed, and being
received makes the same flesh naturally and corporally to dwell in us. This
was not only the mind of S. Hilary, but he says, it was Two chef (...) of
(...) truth.
the profession of our Lord, and the faith of the Church: which two gro^ids
are so sure, that no place of douting is left. For the faith of the church does
expound, declare, and witness, how Christ our Lord meant: when he said, my
flesh is meat in deed.

This faith can not be vain or void: for by it we ouercomme the world, the
devil, and hell gates. By it we know the difference 1. Joan. 5.
between these words, This is my body: and these, I am the door, Matt. 16.
the vine, the way. the rock is Christ, John Baptist is Elias, and The faith
full never believed these ^iguratiue speeches.
such like. For no man taught in any age, neither Christian people did at time
believe: that Christ was a material door, vine or way, neither that any rock was
turned into Christ, neither that Ihon Baptist was Elias in person. Faith always
did understand these propositio^s and such like, to be a phrase of speaking
without any effect of working any farther thing. But when a lawful Priest
says upon bread at the altar, This is my body: then no faith^ul man ever
douted, but there was wrought the body and blood of Christ. and so our fathers
and great grandfathers delivered to us that belefe. Certainly a surer rule to
understand the word of Iere. 13.
God then faith is, never was heard of: for it is the life and gra^ Heb. 8
of the new testament, which the holy Ghost has given into the whole Church of
God. It is the gift of knowledge to every good beleuer, which directs him to
al truth.

S. Augustine showing that the Manichees thought the visible Aug. in Ioa^.
tra^. 34.
son to be Christ, although he might by many means have impugned that
error: yet he specially chose to say, Catholicae Ecclesiae recta fides
improbat tale commentum, diabolicam doctrinam esse cognoscit credendo. The
right faith of the Catholic Church disproued that fable, and knows it by
believing to be a de^ylish doctrine. Even so by believing the Sacrament of the
altar to be Christ's true flesh, we know the doctrine of the Sacramentaries to
be a fable and an heresy.

Epiphanius writing of purpose against figurative and allegorical
interpretatious, gives likewise a most clear witness of In Anco.
the belefe of all the Church in his time, and before him. For disputing what
it is, for man to be made according to the image of God, He shewith at the
last: whatsoever it be, once it is true, because God through grace has given
man that image: Though we can not tell, wherein it stands. And for example he
brings how Christ took at his last supper bread and wine, and when he had
given thanks he said: This is my body, and this is my blood. (...) Epiphanius
names not these things, because the (...) should not by his books understand
our mysteries: and co^seque^tly he shows, yt the thing consecrated is not
like neither to the manhod of Christ, nor to his Godhead. For it is of a shape,
and (to look unto) a dead or insensible thing: yet Christ by grace has said,
This is my body, and This is my blood. Et nemo non fidem habet sermoni. Qui
^nim non credit esse ipsum verum, sicut Every (...) believes.
ipse dixit: is excidit a gratia and salute. and every man believes the saying.
For who so does not believe the saying, as him self said it: he is fallen from
grace and salvation.

If the word and saying be, this is my body, and this is my blood: If every man
believe the saying: if he that believes not the saying to be true, and so to be
true, even as Christ spoke it, as he sounded it, as he uttered it, if he that
believes not these things, be fallen from grace and salvation: who will now
believe, that this is the sign of my body, and not the truth thereof? and then
he must say likewise, that in deed we are not made according to the image of
God. Every man in the time of Epiphanius did believe not only y^ truth of
Christ's body and blood in heaven, nor only the dwelling thereof in us by
faith: but every man did bele^e this self saying, this speech, and this
proposition, This is my body. The saying it self is believed
If this saying must be believed, it must be true: if the speech it self be
true, the thing thereby signified is true. But the words do signify the
substance of Christ's body (for his body is a substance) therefore it is true,
y^ this is the substance of Christ's body.

But if it be still bread, it is not so. for material bread is not the body of
Christ: therefore it is so the substance of his body, that it is not bread or
wine, which is the sign of his body, as the Sacramentaries teach. In this
saying, This is my body, no bread is named, no sign, no figure: ^ut only the
self body of Christ which is one certain substance. Therefore all the Church
in the time of Epiphanius, and always before, did believe: the thing pointed
unto in those words, to be the substance of Christ's body. For how so ever it
seemed insensible (as also it is not seen, how we are made according to y^ image
of God) yet y^ saying was believed, even as Christ said it, sicut ipse dixit, as
him self said it, As Christ^ said it.
without glosing, without additio^s, without figures, orparables: even as
Christ spoke it, so it was believed, and believed of every man. And who so did
not believe it, was rekoned a damned person, without grace, without salvation,
without life everlasting.

Thus have we heard two notable witnesses of the faith of the whole Church,
the one a Latin, S. Hilarious: the other a grecian, Epiphanius. But now I will
bring forth not (as before) the old Fathers bearing witness of the belefe of
the people: but I will bring forth the whole people it self, yea the people
of ye primatine Church. You shall hear all the citizens of ye house of God
through out the world witnessing with one voice, in one word, their most
constant faith touching ye Sacrament of the altar.

Amen is an hebrew word, which partly wishes, and partly affirms, signifying
as it were at once, be it so, and it is so. It Amen.
signifies be it so, when it is joined with prayers and petitions: It
signifies it is so, when it follows any part of Christ's doctrine, which is
already pronounced or affirmed. Thence we read so often in holy scripture: Amen,
amen I say unto you: which is to In the ^iturgies.
say, verily, verily. S. James the Apostle, S. Justin the martyr, S. Clement,
S. Cyrill of Hicrusalem, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom do witness:
that the people used at Mass time to answer: Amen. Which thing they did
specially twice, once at the consecration as well of the body as of the blood:
and again at the time of communion.

At the consecration the Priest in the person of Christ pronounces most
determinatly over bread: This is my body, and over wine, This is my bloood.
Therefore when the people answer to those blessed sayings, Amen: they affirm
the same, that is affirmed, as though they said with one voice: It is verily
the body of Christ, and, it is verily the blood of Christ, whereof you speak.
And least you should think this comment to be of mine making, S. Ambrose
expounded y^ same word before me, saying: Ipse clamat Ambros. de ijs qui init.
mysterijs cap. 9.
dominus Jesus, hoc est corpus meu^, our Lord Jesus him self cries, this is
my body. He calleeh the crying of our Lord, when his minister cries so in his
name. For of that crying he speaks, as it may appear by the word following.

Well: Our Lord Jesus him self cries out, this is my body. before the blessing
of y^ heavenly words, it is named another kind, after consecration yt body is
signified. him self calls it his own blood. before consecration, it is called
an other thing, after consecration it is called blood. and thou say Amen:
that is to say Amen.
(as S. Ambrose him self expounds it) verum est, it is true. The sound of y^
speech is to be believed.
That the mouth speaks, let the inward mind confelse: that the speech
sounds, let the heart think. Hitherto, S. Ambrose, who would not bid the
people think that, which the speech sounds: if the speech were
figurative. for a figurative speech sounds otherwise, then we ought to
think thereof: as when we say, God is sorry, Christ is made sin, the rok is
Christ.

As it was the custom of the primative Church for the people to say Amen,
straight upon the consecration of the body and blood, whereby they showed them
selves to believe the words of Christ, and the work of the Priest: even so was
it also the custom, Clemens Apostol.
that when the time of communion came (as S. Clement, and di^erse others do
witness) the Bishop should give the oblation cons ^ 8. cap. 20.
to the people, saying* Corpus Christi, the body of Christ: and he y^ took it,
should say, Amen, it is true, And y^ Deacon when he delivered Cyrillus Catech.
y^ chalice, did say: sanguis Christi, calix vitae* y^ blood of Christ, 4. Ambr.
y^ chalice of life, and he that drank said Amen, so it is, or that is true. de
Sacr. li. 4. ca. 5


To which custom, being in use at his time, S. Ambrose alluding writes thus:
Dicit tibi Sacerdos; corpus Christi, and tu dicis De Sa^r. li. 4. ca. 5
amen, hoc est verum: quod confitetur lingua, teneat affectus. The Priest says
to thee, the body of Christ, and thou say Amen, that is true: that which thy
tongue confesses, let thy heart keep. But what speak I of S. Ambrose? Would the
Apostles have made all the people to cry amen to that, which had not been so,
as the word did sound? Would they have made the simple men to wit^esse their
belefe to such words, as neded a farther comme^t or interpretation? It is
rather to be thought, yea to be most assuredly believed, that they ordained that
custom: to thend all men might know, that the thing consecrated upon the
altar was in deed the body of Christ?

S. Augustine bears witness to the same custom saying: Aug. con tra Faust.
Habet magnam vocem Christi sanguis in terra, cum eo accepto ab Man. li. 12.
ca. 10.
omnibus gentibus respondetur, Amen. the blood of Christ has a great voice in
earth, when after it is taken, all nations answer amen. Haec est clara vox
sanguinis, quam sauguis ipse exprimit ex ore fidelium eodem sanguine
redemptorum. This is the clear voice of the blood, the which voice the blood
it self forces out of the mouth of the faithful being redeemed with the same
blood. Leo ser. 6. de ieiun. 7. mensis.
Pope Leo the great agrees with S. Clement, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine. Sic
sacrae mensae communicare debetis, and cae^.

Ye ought so to communicate of the holy table, that ye doubt nothing at all of
the truth of the body and blood of Christ: for y^ thing is taken in the mouth,
which is believed in faith. And Amen, is in vain answered of them, who dispute
against that The (...) dispu ted in
which is received. This place declares that some disputation was moved by
some of the heresy of Manicheus (who lived in Rome against the Sacrament.
Rome under Leo) against the real presence of Christ's body and blood under the
form of bread. For seeing the Maniches believed not Christ to have a true body
at all, they might well doubt of the truth of his body and blood in the
Sacrament of the altar.

But that holy Bishop bids the people not doubt thereof, showing that we do
not eat the body of Christ only by faith, but also by mouth. Now because Leo
sets the receiving of the truth of Christ's body by mouth, against the
receiving thereof Heretics are ever ready, to deny an ex ternall truth in
Christ's works.
by faith only: we may conjecture, that heretics even in those days were of
the mind, that their offspring is now of. verily to draw as much truth from
Christ's works, as may be, and to set all things upon faith, spirit, and
understanding. But Leo proves his doctrine by the general custom of the
whole Church* wherein the people answering Amen, did in open words witness
them selves to believe, that it was true, which the Priest said, concerning the
body of Christ.

Now because some of them, who used to say Amen, disputed whether the substance
and truth of Christ's body were present in the mouths of the receauers, or no:
that Shepherd of Christ's Ore su^itur.
flok says, that if it were not his true body, and received in the mouth: it
were in vain to say Amen: It is true. For seeing the Priest bringing meat unto
their mouths, did say: The body of Christ: if notwithstanding it were only to
be received in heart, and not in mouth also, it were in vain to say, Amen, or
to answer, it is so, it is true, and yet to think in heart otherwise.

To end this matter at the length: The whole Church before Berengarius believed
the real presence: and they took that their belefe of their ancestors from
hand to hand even until we come to the Apostles, and by them to Christ. In the
primative Church the Priest cried out at the altar, This is my body, and this
is my blood: All the people answered, it is so: It is true. S. Ambrose bids
them think as they speak: yea even as the word sounds. S. Leo says they say
in vain, it is true: if they dispute against the truth thereof. And he
teaches the truth to be, that the same thing is received in the mouth, which
is believed in faith. S. Hilary says, No place of doubting is left, since both
by our Lords profession, and by our faith it is verily flesh and verily blood.
Epiphanius witnesses, that every man believes our Lords saying, wherein he
said, This is my body: And who so does not believe it eue^ as him self spoke it,
he is fallen from grace and salvation.

Seeing all these things do evidently prove the faith of the whole Church to
have been, that Christ's body and blood was really present in the Sacrament of
the altar, and really received into the mouths of the faithful people: it
remains that thos^, who have been deceived in this behalf, do return agai^e
to their former belefe: and that, as well in all other points as i^ this, 1. Tim.
3.
they do for ever believe the Catholic Church, the pillar of truth: Knowing for
surety, that it can not be a Catholi^e doctrine, which is begun in our age, or
any time after the preaching of the Apostles, and that specially, when it is
contrary to the faith always preached and believed.

That no man possibly can be condemned, for believing The ix.
the body of Christ to be really present in the Sacrament Chapter.
of the altar.
WHen Christ had almost ended his talk at Capharnaum, and showed his words
to be spirit and life, perceauing all the fault, why the Jews thought his
sayings so absurd, to be, for so much as they esteemed him no more then a
natural man, weighing his doctrine by their senses and earthely reason: he for
declaration of their incurable dyssease, and Joan. 6.
for the detection of the cause thereof, said: Sed sunt quidam ex vobis, qui
non credunt. But there are some of you, who believe not. Belefe is the chief
thing.
For Jesus knew from the beginning, who they where which believed not. Here we
may see the chief fault in all matter and question of the supper of Christ to
consist in not believing. He that believes, is safe: but woe to him, that
believes not.

S. Peter believes, and confesses Christ to have the words of everlasting
life. Judas believes not, and therefore he is called a The almighty power of
Christ.
devil. The chief point of Christian belefe is, to acknowledge Christ to be God,
to be almighty, to be able to make and to do what soever pleases him. This
point he lacks, who so denies Christ to be able to make the substance of his
own body present in diverse places at once, under diverse forms of bread and
wine. If therefore any man will not believe this, he may be assured his portion
De pass.
is rekned with Judas, who (as Leo has witnessed) believed Domin. sermon. 1.
not the almighty power and Godhead of Christ. But if all men agree (...) this
point, it is very well: then let us pass to the next.

Christ said* The bread which I will give, is my flesh the which The will of
Christ
I will give for the life of the world. Now are we come from the power of
Chist, to the will of Christ. We all were agreed, that he was able to make the
substance of his body present under diverse forms of bread, and wine. Now
these words affirm, that he will give a kind of bread: the substance whereo^
is his own flesh, even that flesh, the which he will give for the life of the
world.

And if we go to his last supper, we see bread taken, and after blessing and
thanks given, he said, This is my body which is given for you. And he gave his
twelve disciples twelve fragme^tes or pieces bidding every one of them, take,
and eat: in which The deed of Christ
deed he shows him self to make the substance of his body present under the
forms of bread in diverse places at one time, allthough not after the manner
of local situation: because his body has not in the Sacrament actually that
natural dimention and occupying of place, which it has otherwise. But as he
has ordained it to be: so is it under twelve diverse forms of bread.

Here I am sure many will stand with me and say they believe The (...) of belefe.
not so, to whom I answer: y^ by so saying they have condemned them selves to
be of those, of whom Christ said, there are some of you who believe not. For if
Christ said by y^ which was bread before his blessing, which still seemed
bread, if Christ said thereof this is my body, and gave it under twelve pieces
or forms: seeing they confess him to be able to make his body present under
diverse forms, and to have promised to give his flesh, and to have said, this
is my body, and to have given it to twelve: how can they deny that his body was
present at that supper under twelve diverse forms of bread, being whole and
all under each form?

The confessing of that which Christ said, is a thing that apperteineth unto
faith, because the speaker is God, to whom all faith Joan. 14.
belongs. To believe this that God says, must needs be a virtue: An objection.
and to discredit it, is a great vice. You will perhap allege, that flesh
profits nothing, the words of Christ are spirit and life* The answer.
that is true, and therefore I believe, that when he said: take, eat this Genesis
1.
is my body, he gave his body not without life and spirit: but yet as really,
as ever, by saying, Let the light be made, he made y^ light. for his words be
not dead flesh (which profits nothing) but quicken and give life, how, and
when so ever it pleases him, much better: then the spirit and soul of man is
able to quicken and make lively the body wherein it is. These two sayings,
this is my body, and, my words are spirit and life, stand so well together,
that I believe the one for the others sake. Christ's words never lack spirit
and life and power to quicken other things, even as his flesh never lacked al
kind of spirit in it self: for when the soul was out of it, yet the godhed
remained and corporally Colos. 2.
dwelt in it, and the soul returned to it again the third day.

Therefore when Christ says, This is my body which is given for you, I am
bound to believe, that his body is neither without soul, nor godhead: for else
it were not truly said, it is given for us, if it were not profitable to us.
Thus you se, that I believe al yt words of Christ together, and that you not
doing so, are (without ye do repeut) certain to be condemned, for not believing
these words: take, eat, This is my body. You will say, ye believe these An
objection.
words, yet not carnally, but spiritually: as it is mete for Christ's words to
be believed. O sir, he that assigns a mean, how he The aun^wer.
will believe Christ's words, in that very faut shows him self not to believe
them: for belefe inuenteth nothing of his own, but follows the authority of
God that speaks. I believe in deed, that Christ's words can not be carnal, as
you take carnal words for foul and gross meaninges. But I see it to be a very
clean and pure meaning, that the most pure substance of the flesh of Christ,
should he given under the form of bread, to thend it may be eaten of us: and
the chief and cleanest thing that we use to eat, is bread. To give therefore
the chief and most healthful flesh in the world, to be eaten under the form
of the purest eatable thing, is a very pure and clean work far from all
carnality.

You will say, it is more pure, if it be rather believed to be eaten An
objection.
only of y^ heart of man by faith and spirit, then by mouth and body. I
answer, that is no pure eating of a corporal thing, which takes away the
truth of corporal eating. Again both ways The answer.
of eating are better, then one of them alone. I believe his real flesh to be
eaten with heart and mouth, to be eaten with body and mind, to be eaten in
deed, and in faith. Here fails your belefe, because of two true things you
believe but one, the other you discredit.

To be short, let us imagine him that believes the real presence of Christ's
body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, to stand before the seat of
Christ's judgment, and that Christ asks him, why he did believe and worship
his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine.

May he not well answer in this wise? I believed so and did so, 1.
The belief of a Catholic.
because your majesty taking bread and having blessed, douted not so say, This
is my body: which words al my forefathers understood to be spoken properly, and
to be true as they sounded: and therefore at the commandment of my prelates I
adored your body under the form of bread. If Christ reply that he had preachers
2.
who tought him otherwise, and cried to him to beware, least he committed
idolatry: first that obiecti^ might not be made to any man that died above
fifty years past, because no preacher taught publicly any such doctrine.
Secondly, if so much were said to one of our time, he might answer that he had
(...) forefathers, 3.
and more preachers, and those much more anncient, and more honest men: who
required him to believe Christ's words, and to worship the body of his maker.

Well, now we are come to the point: all the Catholics have prea^hed with one
accord, that it is the true body of Christ, and the Gospel witnesses that
Christ (...), This is my body. Here is the word of God, and the tradition, and
preaching of man joined together.

I ask whether it be possible for Christ, who requires nothing Marc. 16
so earnestly of us, as brief^, to (...) that simple man: who (being otherwise
of good (...)) (...) his word and his forefa^, and the preachers agreeable with
both, or not Answer me, for what fault shall this poor man be condemned?

First, to believe Christ, it is no fault. Secondly, Christ faid: this 1.
is my body. Thirdly, he, being yet an infant, was of his parents 2.
taught: that to be the body of Christ, which was holden over 3.
the Priests head. Fourthly, as many and more preach unto him 4.
when he comes to laufull age, and say this is the body of Christ, as there
are that a^terward preach the contrary. Tell me then, what was his fault, for
which he may be condemned? If you say, his eyes told him, it was not y^ body of
Christ: he will answer, that for the reverence he bare to the word of God, he
denied the Chrysostom. ^om. 83. in Matt.
fensible instruction of his eyes, as giving more credit to Christ, then to him
self. Is that a fault? If you reply, that by that mea^es he might have
worshipped the ro^ in ste^de of Christ: he will answer, he knows not what you
mean, he never had any rok showed him by most grave authority, which was said
to be Christ. If any such thing had been taught him, he for his part was so
obedient to believe, so willing to adore Christ: that he would have done any
thing, which had been commanded to him under the name of Christ, or of his
religion. Is this a fault, why the poor man should be condemned? No surely,
seeing the Prophet David says, Vt iumentum factus sum apud te: I am become as
it were Psalm. 72.
a beast before thee.

It is ^andable (says Euthymius) that in the sight of God, we Euthy. in Psalm.
take our selves as beasts: which being so, I can devise no fault in this
poor and simple man. who if he be deceived, he is deceived by Christ, by his
forefathers, by diverse Catholic and virtuous Preachers, by y^ virtue of
humility, of obedience, and of pure love toward God. But on the other side, if
Christ call one of them before him, who denies his real presence, and ask
him why he did not believe the Sacrament of the altar to be the body of Christ:
what will he answer for himself*

Will he say? Sir I bele^ed your body to sit at the right hand The protestants
(...).
of God, the Father, and therefore that your body was not in the Priests hand?
Why then think thou, that I am not able to make the same, which is at the
right hand of my father, to be als^ present under the form of bread? Sir
whether you be able or no, I can not say, but I have hard many preachers tell,
yt one body ca^ not be at one time in diverse places. O how dreadfully would
Christ answer in this case? Did not those preachers, whom thou prete^dest to
follow, say always: they preached to thee the sincere word of God? Did they not
by that color overthrow monasteries, Churches, altars, images of Saints, and
mine own image and cros^e? Did they not deny the sacrifice of the Mass,
praing for the dead, and such like ancient vsages, only for pretense of the
word of God? And now see, how inexcusable they and thou art. I said, Take,
eat, this is my body. I said this to twelve men, I gave each of them my body,
and ^ad them make that thing, as it is written in the Gospel. I showed at
(...), that I was signed of my Father, and equal with him in power. they Joan.
6.
them selves believe that I made al creatures, places, times, of nothing: and
now is it doubted how I am able to make my body present under the ^orm of bread
in diverse places?

Yea to maintain the better yt argument against my allmighty power, they say,
I entered not into my disciples, the doors being Joan. 20.
shut: But either prevented the shutting of them contrary to the words of my
Gospel, or came in by the window (as thieves do) or by some hole (as crepers
do) yea any thing is sooner believed then my divine strength and working. Thou
hypocrite, seeing the word of God has it written four times in the new
testament, This is my body: how come thou to talk with me of my (...) in
heaven, as though one of my works were contrary to the other. If in deed thou
had been humbly persuaded, that I were God, thou would not measure my
almighty power by thy simple wit. Thou art twice condemned: first, for
denial of a truth, and again for denying it against my express word: which
thou pretendest to es^e, and yet pronou^cest it false. If the pore m^n say, he
knew not so much, nor saw not the falsehod of that argument, and begin to
accuse the salse preachers who deceiu^d him: Christ may well say, that he was
not deceived. for before those false preachers began their false doctrine, he
had said, This is my body, and this is my blood, and all the world believed, and
taught the r^all presence of Christ's body and blood fiften hundred years
together. What cause now had thou, to believe a new Gospel, and new
preachers thereof? Forsooth Sir, they said the Bishop of Rome had deceived us,
and we hear say, he is a very evil man: therefore we thought he had deceived
us. If in this case Christ tell him, that the Bishop of Rome were y^ successor
of S. Luc. 22.
Peter, and so his vicar, having promise by him not to err in faith: and yet
that he alone taught not that doctrine, but that all the Bishops, doctors, and
p^ers of the whole Church taught the same from the beginning: and that Christ
him self had say^ the same: that all the (...), and the Apostle S. Paul had
written the same: that al faithful (...) believed the same: what excuse can he
have, who (...) Christ, the Apostles, the Bisshops, the Fathers, the preachers,
and the whole Church, to follow an vp^ (...), who began his doctriue so
amhitiously, and proudly, who ^ed so evil, and died so terribly: that his very
^ominable dealing with great Princes, his shamfull (...) and horrible death
might make any good man weary to think upon him, much less should so many
have followed him.

To (...) shor ^wer the pore man for him self* what he may, yet he can not
deny, but that both Christ said this is my body, and the Church taught the
same: and yet he believed not this to be the body of Christ, and therefore is
one of them, who believe not: and Hebr. 11.
without faith (which is but one) there is no salvation, no pleasing of God, no
part in the kingdom of heaven. Which thing if they that be alive will consider,
they may return again to the Catholic Church, and so be made lively
members of that body, whereof Christ is the Savior.

Hereunto is added the seventh book, containing a con* ^utation of the fifth
article of M. Iuels Reply against D. Harding, concerning the real presence of
Christ's body in the supper of our Lord.

The preface of the seventh book.
I^d thought to have ended my treatise of our Lords supper, with such matter as
had b^ne set forth in my former six boks. But when I had seen M. Iuels ^eply
against D. Harding, and had (...) not only contrary doctrine to that which the
Catholic Chruch believes, uttered therein: but also the same uttered with such
enormouse misconstruing of the word of God, and with such abusing of ancient
writers, that it seemed expedient to detect the falshod thereof: I took upon me
to answer specially to that article, which did unpugne the real presence of
Christ's body* whereof I had entreated.

And because I could neither well confute M. Iuels ^ply without some respect
had to D. Hardings answer, nor conveniently put both D. Hardings and M. Iuels
whole words in any book (which alredie was great enough) I was constrained
to take such order, that neither al their words might be at large laid
forth, nor the pith of them in any part dissembled. Wherein I have so behaved
my self, that M. Iuel shall have no (...) cause to complain of me. For I have
to my knowledge omitted no scripture, no authority, no argument of any force,
whereunto I have not answered.

As for y^ books of D. Harding and of M. Iuel, they being exta^t in most men's
hands, need not to be printed again by me. How fully M. Iuel is answered, the
discrete Reader shall judge, when he comes to the matter. This much I will
say, it was more pain to stay my pen in such abundance of stuff as the
good^es of the cause, and evil dealing of M. Iuel gave me, then to (...) at
any time, what might be (...) answered.

One thing I be^che the Reader to note most diligently, that in all this
treatise M. Iuel uses none other mean so co^on to prove his intent, as to set
one truth against an other: As though Christ's body could not both be in heaven
visibly, and in the Sacrament miraculously: or as though because the Sa^rament
is a figure, it could not also contein the truth which it sigureth: Or because
Christ is eaten by faith, his body might not be eaten also realy in the
Sacrament. But this thing is common to M. Iuel with other of his faction. Marie
to leave ont the true nominative ca^e, and to put in a false, to leave out the
(...) word which is the keie of all disputation, to conueye words of his own,
which the author never thought of, to mispoint and misenglish the testimonies
of the fathers, to (...) their meaning: that I can not tell whether any man has
used so much in so little a treatise, as in this one article of the real ^sence
^e is ^ound to have done.

Neither is it unknown to y^ learned, who has seen his book, y^ h^ has used
the like falshod in y^ other articles also, (...) by Gods grace the world shall
see or it be long. In the mean time judge. the rest by this which I shall set
before thi^e eyes. And pray un* to God, y^ either M. Iuel may see his dishonest
dealing and (...) him self, or else that his folly may be (...) to al men, to
the intent none may perish, beside those, who will not ^denour by all means to
learn, (...) follow and to embrace the true doctrine of Christ's Gospel and of
the (...)* tholike Church.

The Chapiters of the seventh Book.
1. Master Iuel has not answered D. H^rding well, touching the words of
Christ's supper. 2. That ye supper of Christ is a naked and bare figure
accordig to the Doctrine of the Sacrame^taries. 3. That Christ's body is
received by mouth, and not by faith only. 4. M. Iuel has not replied well,
touching the sixth Chapter of S. John, But has abused as well y^ gospel, as
diverse authorities of the fathers. 5. Item he has not replied well, touching
the Carpharnaites. 6. Neither conferred the supper with the sixth of Iolm, as
it ought to be. 7. Neither disputed well, touching the omnipoten^ie of Christ in
promising the gift of his flesh. 8. Whether the (...) or (...) expon^d more
vnpropertie or inconuenientlie ye words belonging to Christ's supper. 9. A
notable place of S. Augustine corrupted by M. Iuel. 10. Of the signification of
aduerbs. 11. Of the first author of the Sacrame^tarie heresy. 12. Of Christ's
glorified body, and the place of S. Hierom expounded. 13. A place of S.
Chrysostom examined. 14. The difference between baptism and our Lords
supper. 15. The answer to M. Iuel concerning the Nicene Council, S. Augstine
and caet. 16. Whether Christ's body dwells reallie in our bodies by his
nativity. 17. Item, whether by faith. 18. The contradictions of M. Iuel in
this article. 19. Whether by baptism Christ dwells reallie in our bodies.
20. Item, Whether by the Sacrament of the altar, or no. 21. Christ's body is
proved really present by S. Chrysostoms words. 22. Item, by the words of S.
Hilarie. 23. Item, of S. Gregorius Nyssenus. 24. Item, of S. Cyrill.
Master Iuel has not answered D. Harding well, touching the words of Christ's
supper.
IVel. fo. 316. The people was not taught in the first 600. years to The first
Chapter.
believe, that Christ's body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or
naturally in the Sacrament.

Harding. Of the terms really, substantially, corporally and coet. found in
the doctors.


Iuel. His answer is, that Christ's body is corporally united to 1.
us: but whether it be corporally in the Sacrament, he answers not one word.

Harding. The terms are found in the doctors treating of the true being of
Christ's body in the Sacrament.


Sander. Ergo M. Iuel said not truly. For as D. Harding now The first untruth
of M.
says it, so he proves afterward, Christ's body to be really in the
Sacrament. Iuel.



Iuel. In this matter he is able to allege nothing for direct prouf. 2.


Harding. Christen people has ever been taught, that the body of Christ is
present verily in the Sacrament, which doctrine is founded upon Christ's
plain words.


Sander. Ergo, M. Iuel* he was able to allege some what. The second untruth.



Iuel. It is marueil, the people should be taught without a teacher, 3.
or without* words* or those not written.

Harding. Christ's words are expressed by three Evangelists and S. Paul,
Take, eat, this is my body and this is my blood and coet.


San. Ergo M. Iuel has (...) plainly (...) whereby direct prouf The third
untruth of M. Iuel.
of Christ's real presence is (...)*

Harding. Neither says our Lord only, This is my body, but to put the matter
out of dout, he adds, which is given for you.


Iuel. 317. Hereup^ M. Harding fou^deth his carnal presence. 318. The iii^.
untruth.
in such gross sort really and fleshly in the Sacrament etc.


San. It is no gross sort of presence which is real, true, and miraculouse,
as being of Christ's own institution. Marcion and Apelles (herein your
ancestors M. Iuel) thought it a carnal, a gross, a fleshly thing for Christ
to lie nine months in his mothers belly. to be nourished there with blood and
humors. to be borne naked, to be wrapped in clouts. For a remedy of which
absurdities, the one of them devised that Christ was not really borne: but that
which Tertullian says against Marcion shall be Tertul. de carne Christi.
my answer to you. First God (says he) has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound men that are wise (in their own conceit) 2. Whatsoever is
unworthy of God, is expedient for man. 3. Be thou assured, Christ had rather be
borne then in any part to make a lie. Now if we apply all these sayings to
Christ's presence in the Sacrament, it shall be less carnal, less gross,
less fleshly to have the substance of Christ's corporal flesh in a spiritual
manner really present under the form of bread, then either to be corporally in
his mothers womb, or to think that he made a lie, when he said: take eat this
is my body.


Iuel. Christ uses not any of these words.


San. I will say with S. Augustine, although the word be not Epi. 174.
found, the thing is found.

Harding, 130. Though this manner of speaking be not thus expressed in the
scripture, yet it is deduced out of the scripture.


Iuel. Christ uses no leading thereunto. The fifth untruth.



Sander. The word ((...)) ^id lead the Apostles to that which was in Christ's
hands, or which lay before him: the words (is my body) showed the substance
thereof, as if I showing to a man that kind of beast, should say, this is a
lion: the word (this) leads him to that beast which he feeth and whereunto I
point. is a lion, shows the substance of the thing pointed unto. This odds
only there is, that a man by pointing and speaking can show only that which was
before: but God, who spoke and it was made, Psalm. 148
by pointing and speaking does make that to be the substance of his body,
which was not so before. Now, as when it is truly said this is a lion, it will
follow thereof, under this visible form which I show, a lion is substantially
contained: so seeing Christ points to the Sacrament, saying, This is my body,
it will follow thereof: in this Sacrament my body is contained substantially,
corporally etc. Thus Chris^es words lead us to his body substantially present
in the Sacrament: ergo M. Iuel must subscribe by his own promise.


Iuel. 317. D. Fisher says: this sense can not in any wise be gathered The
sixth untruth and a forged (...).
of the bare words of Christ.


Sander. Well fisht I promise you, if he fish well, that catches a lie. 1. The
blessed B. of Rochester had said, that the understanding Contra Capt^it.
of the Gospel is more certainly obtained by the interpretation of the Fathers
and by the practice left by them, then by the bare Babyl. cap. 10.
words of the Gospel. For example hereof, he says, no man shall prone by the
bare words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these ij.
In these da^es.
days does consecrate the true body and blood of Christ. (Mark good Reader
whereof he speaks) For although (says he) Christ A^l these are y^ words of
D. F^sher.
him self did in deed make his body and blood of bread and wine, yet except the
like be promised and granted to us, we can not be sure we do it. but no such
thing is promised. For in S. Matthew iij.
(now follows one of the places alleged by M. Iuell) iiij.
No word is put, whereby it may be proved, that in our Mass the In our Mass.
very presence of Christ's body and blood is made. S. Matthew v.
then proves it not, neither S. Mark. And whereas S. Luke and S. Paul
witness that Christ said, make this thing for the remembrance of me: albeit
that was spoken to the Apostles, yet it is not thereby proved, that the
successors of the Apostles may do it. Then comes he to the later words,
which M. Iuel cites. vj.
Non potest igitur per vllam scripturam probari, quod aut laicus aut sacerdos
quoties id negotij tentauerit, pari modo conficiet ex pane vinoque Christi
corpus and sanguinem, atque Christus ipse conficit, cum nec istud in scripturis
contineatur. It can not therefore be proved by any scripture. what can not be
proved M. Iuel: g^ue me the nominative case to the verb non potest, it can
not. What can not?


Iuel. D. Fisher says, the carnal presence can not be proved The vij.
untruth.
neither by these words (this is my body) nor by any other.


San. Then you make carnal presence the nomninatiue case to the verb, Potest.
but D. Fysher spoke not thereof. The whole speech which follows is that
whereof he speaks, to wit, that either a lay man or a priest shall (when he
attempteth it) make the body and blood of Christ of bread and wine as well as
Christ did. that thing can not be proved, for as much as it is not contained in
the scriptures. But it follows after, that by y^ interpretation and practice
of so long time, the holy ghost has expounded to us these words: Hoc facite
make this thing, in such wise, that Luc. 22.
the successors of the Apostles may consecrate Christ's body and blood. How
many enormouse faults have you committed here in, M. Iuel? first D. Harding
affirmed these words: This is my body to teach a real presence. But B.
Fisher spoke of these words Make this thing, and not of the words This is my
body. 2. D. Harding spoke of the real presence which will manifestly be
proved, if any sacrament at all be commanded to be made by Christ. D. Fisher
spoke of this point, whether any man had authority by the scripture to make
any sacrament at al, or no. 3. D. Harding spoke of Christ's words. B. Fisher
of our doings. 4. B. Fisher never doubted but that these words, This is my
body, when they were spoken by christ or his Apostles, made and proved the re
al presence of his body and blood. But he asks of heretics, how they can
prove by only scriptures, that any man after the Apostles is able to make the
supper of Christ, (not that he douted of the thing it self) but he asks for
the prouf thereof out of the new testament. Now for M. Iuel to cite B. Fishers
M. Iuels faleshod.
words leaving out the nominative case which immediately followed, and to supply
a false nominative case never thought of by B. Fysher: it is a figure of a man
that has repelled al good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.
and therefore it is no wonder if he have erred in faith, not caring what he
writes, so he may be counted learned in their eyes that know neither greek
nor latin, neither verb, nor nominative case.


Iuel. M. Hardings friends. D. Smith. D. Stephen Gardener, etc. 4.
can not agree upon the terms naturally or sensually etc.


San. Where is the word of god, M. Iuel, whereof you boast so M. Iuels
Evangelists.
much? are B. Fysher, and D. Smith, and D. Gardener your Evangelists? to them
now you fly to answer S. Matthew, S. Mark. S. Luke, and S. Paul, you have
forbidden us all the fathers of these nine hundred years, and shall it be
lawful for you to answer the words of the blessed Evangelists by a cauil
moved upon men of our age? al who are well known to have condemned your opinon
for heresy, and al these believe that natural presence which you impugn. And
that which you bring concerning the sense of the terms naturally, sensually,
or so forth, is (...) ke moved only concerning the manner of signifying
Christ's real presence, which is no weighty matter when the real presence it
self is once agreed upon.


Iuel. This article cannot be proved by the old doctors, as M. 5.
The viij. untruth.
Harding grants by his silence.


Sander. If it be proved by Christ, whom D. Hardinge cites, what need a
better doctor? and yet he briugeth also more doctors then you have answered
to, as it shall appear afterward.


Iuel. The question is not of Christ's words, but of his meaning 6.
which must be considered chefely, as the Lawiers and S. Augustine The ix.
(...).
say. Christ meant not this to be his body reallie.


Sander. S. Hilarie disputing against the Arrians, whom he intended to confute
by the natural presence of Christ's body taken by us really in the sacrament,
made this preface to his talk, Joan. 17.
concerning y^ words wherein Christ prayed that the faithful might Lib. 8 de
Trinit.
be one, as God the Father is in Christ, and Christ in him. Aut forte qui
verbu^ est, significatione^ verbi ignorauit? et qui veritas est loqui vera
nesciuit? et qui sapientia est, in stultiloquio errauit? et qui virtus est, in
ea fuit infirmitate; ne posset eloqui, quae vellet intelligi? loquutus plane
ille est vera and syncera fidei Euangelicae Sacramenta. neque solu^ loquutus
est ad significationem, sed etia^ ad fidem docuit, ita dlcens: vt omnes vnum
sint, sicut tu pater in me, et ego in te, vt et ipsi vnum sint in nobis. Either
perhaps does he which is the word, not know the signification of the word? and
does not he which is the truth know to speak true things? has he, which is
the wisdom, erred in folish speaking? and is he which is the power, of such
(...), that he can not utter those things, which he would have understood? he
has spokeu plainly the true and sincere mys^eries of the faith of the gospel.
Neither has he spoken only for significations sake, but also he has taught
for faiths sake: saying thus, that all may be one, as The application of S.
^ilaries words unto y^ supper.
thou O Father art in me, and I in thee, they also may be one in us. If then
Christ much more in his last supper spoke in such sort, that he did not only
signify his mind, but also taught us the faith of the Sacrament: what a folly
is it, to pretend that he spak otherwise then he meant? Specially since in this
place we are so far from any circumstance, which may hinder the proper
meaning of Christ's speech, y^ these words: which is given for you, do put y^
matter out of al dout, as D. Harding has told you before. and that is further
proved inuincibly after this sort: This is my Luc. 22.
body which is given for you: but my body given for you is real, substantial,
natural, therefore this is so. This argument can not be answered, except ye say
the sign of Christ's body was given to death for us. For y^ participle (...)
in greek, in english give, and the relative quod in latin, in english,
which, does so restrain the noune corpus body unto that only meaning, wherein
it is said the true body is given for us, that no escape may be had beside
infidelity and heresy, whereof I have spoken at large in my fourth book, the
6. chapter. the 18. circumstance. If now this which is pointed unto, be the
real, natural, and s^bstantial body of Christ which died for us, seeing this
that he points unto, is meant of the Sacrament, Christ meant, that in this
Sacrament his body is really, naturally, and substantially present. And
therefore M. Iuel must subscribe. vij.



Iuel. Christ was the rock, but yet not reallie. 1. Cor. 10.



Sander. First these words were not spoken of S. Paul with Aug. leu. 9. 57.
the intent to make any Sacrament, or any other thing. 2. Two The diffe rences
betwenethis is my body, and the rock was Christ.
diverse natures are named in them, which can never be one i^ substance, but
only in quality, or in similitude, but this is my body names one substance
only, and signifies it alone really present. 3. It was not any one certain
rock in number, whereof S. Paul spoke. for the water flowed out of two rocks,
in two diverse Exo. 17.
parts of the wilderness. Either of which did signify Christ, Number. 20
and they both are only one rock in meaning, and in the substance figured. 4.
Therefore S. Pa^le meant only by the name of the rock, the spiritual rock which
in substance was Christ him self. They drank (says he) of the spiritual
rock. But, this is my body, 1. Cor. 10
is spoken of a real truth made present at Christ's supper, and showed
outwardly aparte from Christ's own visible body.

5. He said not this rock pointing to it, but the rock. 6. Not, is Christ,
but was Christ. 7. Such effectua! words followed not to show, that any real
rock was meant: as these words are, which Luc. 22.
is given for you: which follow and expound the other words, This is my body.


Iuel. D. Harding must seek help of 16 or more sundry figures The x. untruth.
not known to the old Fathers. Vi^.



Sander. 1. You seek one figure for all, which takes away the substance of
Christ's supper from his external table, from his hand, from his word, and
from the Apostles bodies. 2. D. Hardings figures be to defend Christ's words,
yours to destroy the^. 3. It is not true that he is constreined to seek either
sixten, or six figures, as it shall appear in due place. jx.



Iuel. the old Fathers thought it no heresy to expound Christ's The xi.
untruth.
words by a figure.


Sander. They thought it here^ie to expound these words, This is my body by a
rhetorical or gra^matical figure, as by Synecdoche or Metonymia, or any other
which may exclude the substanciall presence of the thing figured.


Iuel. Christ gave his disciples (as S. Augustine says) the figure In Psalm. ^
of his body and blood.


Sander. He did so. 1. but he gave such a figure of his own body, which is also
the substance of his body, as him self being a figure of his Fathers
substance, is also the self same substance with his Joan. 10.
Father. 2. He gave a true and not a false sign. And yet it were false, if
this which he points to and affirms to be his body, These things are
handled before.
were not in deed his body, seeing the words signify so much, as I have
declared in my second book, xij. chapter. 3. He gave a miraculouse, and not a
common figure, in the second book xiij. chapter. 4. A divine, and not a
rethorical figure, in the second book xiiij. chapter. 5. A mystical, and not
an artificial or natural figure, in y^ fifth book sixtenth chapter. 6. He gave
at his supper a figure of the new, and not of y^ old testament, that is to yas,
a figure which has the truth in it, and not of that kind which only both
betoken the truth Aug. in Psalm. 39.
absent from it, which thing S. Augustine declares most evidently, saying: The
old Fathers did celebrate the figure of the thing to come; when as yet the true
sacrifice (which the faithful know) was The true sacrifice.
foretold in figures. these sacrifices (being as words that promise a thing)
are taken away. Quid est quod datum est completiuum? What is it which is given
as accomplishing or performing the old figurative sacrifices, which promised a
true sacrifice? S. Augustine The body which ye know is the Sacra meant.
answers, Corpus quod nostis, quod vtinam non ad iuditium noueritis. The body
which ye know is the accomplishme^t of the old figures, the which body I would
ye might not know to your damnation. And again, exhibita est veritas promissa,
the promised truth is presently brought forth. In this body we are, of this
body we are partakers, we know what we receive. Here M. Iuels abusing of S. Aug.
S. Augustine manifestly calls the body, which we receive in the Sacrament,
the very truth promised, which accomplished the the old figures.

7. He gave a figure, but he spoke not a figure. You bring this authority to
prove that Christ's words be expounded by a figure, as though S. Augustine
thought the speech to be figurative. For so your word, expounded by a sigure,
must import, but this authority proves not your intent. For S. Augustine
speaks of In Psalm. ^
Christ's deed, and not of his words.

8. The names of body and blood (as they are usually taken of men) do signify
such a visible a corruptible, and mortal nature as al we have, which thing S.
Augustine well knowing, and of Aug. de Trin. lib. 3. cap. 10.
all men most depely po^dering the same, in so much that he was afeard, least
childern would think, that Christ had walked none otherwise upon the earth,
then in the shape of bread: for that respect he always teaches, that the body
of Christ in the Sacrament is the sign and figure of Christ's visible body.

After such sort S. Paul speaks of Christ's flesh, saying: Although we
have known Christ according to the flesh, yet we 2. Cor. ^.
know him not. In which words he means not that Christ now lacks his flesh,
but that he now is no more visibly seen in his former mortal shape. These
answers must be noted as y^ which serve through a^ the article of this
treatise.


9. Your abusing of S. Augustine in this behalf, if it come of ignorance, ye
are not worthy to be a preacher, as who understand not your book: if it come
of malice, you are not worthy to be a man, as who delights in leading souls
to damnation.


Iuel. Tertullian says: This is my body, that is to say, the figure of mie
body. Lib. 4. contra Marc.



Sander. He means so, as I said before S. Augustine did mean. which solution
might serve all this whole article of the real presence. but the truth is so
well armed, that every word you bring may be turned upon your own head.
Tertullian does Lib. 5. contra
witness, that the Marcionites brought forth a place of S. Paul Marc.
where it was written of Christ's manhood, accepta effigy serui Phil. 2.
(non veritate) the shape of a servant being taken, not the truth (said the
Marcionite) and in similitudine hominis, non in homine, and in the likeness of a
man, not a man. and figura inuentus homo, non substantia, id est, non carne,
and found a man in figure not in substance, that is to say not in flesh. Thus
did the Marcionite reason out of the word of God it self, to prove that Christ
was M. Iuell like a Mar (...) in his reasoning.
not true man, as M. Iuel now, because the Fathers name the figure of the body,
would disprove the true body of Christ in the Sacrament. But what answers
^rtullian? Quasi non and figura and caet. as though the figure, and likeness and
shape be not also joined to the substance. So say we, the figure whereof we
dispute is joined to the substance of Christ's body so, that y^ body and sign
of the bread make both but one perfect Sacrament or mystical figure. And that
I will prove yet more plainly out of this very Libr. 4. contra Marc.
place of Tertullian, who speaks most literally of bread as it was an old
figure of Christ's body, whereof in Hieremie it was said, let us put the word
(of the ^rosse) into his bread, to wit, upon Iere. 11.
his body. Christ the^ fulfilling the old figures, fecit panem corpus Christ
made the bread his body.
suum. made the bread his body, as Tertullian says. If he did so, it could not
tarry bread any longer. For as air being once made fire, tarieth no more air,
so can not the bread, which is made Christ's body, be any longer the substance
of bread. This ground being put (which is most true, and it is expressed in
Tertullian Note that the self substance of Christ secretly present is the
figure.
himself) go you forward and say, this is the figure of my body, as long as
you will, yet the ground of that figure can not be the substance of bread (since
it is made alredie the body of Christ) and consequently the substance of
Christ it self being made of the substance of bread, and mystically contained
under the form of bread, is that figure (of Christ him self walking visibly
and suffering death) where of Tertullian speaks. By this mean the word is
fastened into his bread, as Hieremie said, because his bread and his body is
all one.


Iuel. After consecration (says S. Ambrose) the hody of Christ Demyst. cap. 9.
is signified.


San. S. Ambrose does speak of that signification, which is (...).
made whiles the Priest pronounces, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body. Our
Lord Jesus him self, says S. Ambrose, cries out, this is my body. Before the
blessing of the heavenly words it is named an other kind, after consecration
the body is signified. The which place well understood does utterly overthrow
your figuratine opimon. For S. Ambrose presses upon the signification of these
words, this is my body, and this is my blood. The Nucup^ tur.
body says he is signified, the blood is named by mouth. and this
signification is made, when Christ or his minister does consecrate by these
heavenly words. Now immediately before he said, Quid dicimus de ipsa
consecratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa domini Saluatoris operantur? What say we
of the self consecration of God, where the self words of y^ Lord our Savior
do work? Now put together M. Iuel. The words of our Savior do signify his body
and blood, and y^ self words do work, and verily them selves ca^ work none
other thing then they signify: therefore the words of our Savior, which do
signify Christ's body and blood, do work and make the same body and blood.
That is the signification, M. Iuel a dissembler.
whereof S. Ambrose speaks. The which his meaning when you dissemble, you
show your self to be an enemy of the truth.


Iu. I am oppressed with the multitude of witnesses. The xij. untruth.



San. As for these witnesses that say the Sacrament is a figure, M. Iuels
witnesses.
be no witnesses to your belefe, because they prove your intent as well, as if
a man would prove by solen^e witnesses that I had no soul, because I hauc a
body. For whereas a Sacrament consists August. epist. 23.
of two parts: of an ^uisible grace and of a visible sign, and whereas the
invisible grace of the Sacrament of Christ's supper is the substance of his
body made present to unite us to him, and the visible sign thereof, is the
form of bread: whosoever names that Sacrament a sign or a figure, whether he
mean both the grace and the sign, or the sign alone, certainly he n^er
means to deny the substa^ciall presence of Christ's body, which is the chief
part of the same Sacrament.


Iu. It is a bondage and death of the soul (says S. Augustine) to take the
sign in steed of the things signified.


San. It is more a miserable bondage and death to exponud the things them
selves for the signs, as you do. S. Augustine means De doct.
of such a kind of signs, when ^ither the thing that appears Christ. li. 3.
ca. 5.
to be signified is not at all true according to the letter (as when God is
said to be angry, or to repent) or else when the thing signified is absent in
substance, as it was in the old sacrifices August. in Psa. 39
(which yet the Jews esteemed, as if they had been the truth) As therefore he
that being athirst if he come to the yuie bush it self and go no further, he
should thereby never the more be filled with drink: so if a man come to an
improper or to a bare sign, he is miserably deceived (as those are who come to
you for holy orders who were not your selves laufully ordained Bishopes) But as
if a glass of wine stand in the window to signify what kind of wine is to be
sold, he that comes to that sign, may quench his thirst, because the
substance which is signified to be sold is also there contained: so he that
comes to y^ holy signs instituted by Christ, he shall have the truth of the
sign really present and really given to him. He that comes to baptime is in
deed borne by the virtue of that Sacrament, and ^e that comes to our Lords
table shall ^ate by his mouth therein the bread of life really present.


That the supper of Christ is a naked and bare figure, according to the
doctrine of the Sacramentaries.
HArding. The Sacramentaries hold opinion, that The second Chapter.
the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, but in a figure, sign or token only.

Iuel. M. Harding unjustly reports of us.


San. I must say to you in this case M. Iuel, as S. (...) said 10.
to the Arrians, who called Christ, Dominum, the Lord, but yet The xiij.
untruth.
denied him to be God: Dominum licet nuncupes, dominum tamen esse non dicis,
quia tibi ex communi genere potius, and familiari Hilar li. 8. de Tri.
nomine, quam ex natura sit Dominus. Albeit you name him Lord, yet you mean
him not to be the Lord. Because he is a Lord to you rather by a common kind
and a familiar name, then by nature. Even so, pretend what honorable opinion or
doctrine you list of Christ's supper, as long as by nature and substance you
think not that external gift to be his body, which him self called so: you
rather (...) it by a better name, then mean it to be any better thing, then a
bare sign and figure.

Ebion although he denied Christ's Godhead, yet (as Epiphanius (...). haeres. 30
tells) he affirmed him to rule Angels, and all that ever was made by God. and
his scholars called him a Prophet and the son of God. which notwithstanding,
for so much as they believed (...) not to be God by nature, the Catholics never
douted A bar^ man.
to say, that they taught him to be nudum hominem, a naked and bare man. Right
so whatsoever holiness be annexed to bread and wine, be it the sign of never
so great a virtue and efficacy, be it called never so much the body and blood
of Christ: yet if it remain still in the former substance, if the truth which
it is appointed to signify, be absent, it is bare bread and bare wine, A bare
token.
and a bare token of Christ's body and blood. Amend your belefe M. Iuell, if
you will have us to amend our terms.


Iuel. We feed not the people with bare figures.


San. The question is not how ye feed the people by your doctrine, The xiiij.
untruth.
but what sign you teach the Sacrament it self (...) be: whether it be such
a sign as has present in a secret manner the truth signified thereby, or else
whether it be the sign of a truth absent in substance. For two kind of signs
there are: one which Two (...) of signs.
by the truth of his own substance considered and well understood, does
signify an other manner of truth belonging to it self, Rich signs.
as when a loaf of bread being true bread in substance is set to signify true
bread also, but yet in that respect as bread is there to be bought and sold: An
other sign there is, where the truth signified is absent in substance: As
when an iuy bush does signify wine to be sold. This later kind of signs or
figures is utterly Bare signs.
naked, bare, and without the truth which is signified.

The question is, whether of these two kinds of signs is in the Sacrament of
Christ's supper. The Catholics say the best and richest kind of signs is
there, because there is Christ's body 1. Cor. 11
realy present to signify, and as it were by seal to witness his own death
and passion. You teach the substance of the Sacrament to be still bread and
wine, but our sign is more worthy of Christ's Godhead, and more properly a
sign or a seal in truth of nature, then yours.

For as S. Hilary and S. Cyrill teach, Signaculorum ea natura Hilarious li^ 8.
de Trinit.
est and caet. Such is the nature of signs or of seals, that they set forth
the whole form of the kind of thing printed in them, Cyrill. in Joan. lib. 3.
cap. 29.
and have no less in them selves, then those things have whence they are
sealed. After this sort God the Father signed Christ, and Christ thereby was
the form, the print, the sign, the figure, the Joan. 6.
image of his Father. But as S. Hilarie shows, Imago authoris Lib. 9. de
Trinit.
and veritas. He was the image of him whom he represented, and also the truth.

I warrant you, M. Iuel, you feed the people with no doctrine of any such sign
or seal present in Christ's supper. For you say afterward, that the bread is
an erathly thing, and therefore a figure. I pray you can bread be other then a
bare figure, if it ^il remain earthly and corruptible? I say further to you, M.
Juel, and ye^ bear no false witness at all, that your (...) be more bare, The
signs of the Sacrame^taries are more bare then y^ old shadows
then euerwere any even in the old testament. For they at the least wise did in
appearance of true flesh and in true blood shedding, foreshewe the flesh and
blood of Christ which should die for us. Melchisedech likewise had beside his
bread and wine the real body of Abraham present, whom he offered to God, and
in him Genesis 14.
Gal. 3.
Jesus Christ his sede. But you having bare bread and bare wine without any
real flesh at all either present or offered, must needs Genesis 4.
have a naked sign and a bare figure, such as only Cain had and his brood.


Iu. We teach that in the ministration of the Sacraments Christ is set before
us even as he was crucified upon the cross, and that therein we may behold
remission of sins.


San. Admit ye ^ache so. then is your sermon better then your Sacrament. For a
man may look long inowgh upon the substance of bread and wine, before he can
pick out of their earthly nature The (...) of the Catholics not bare.
Christ crucified. But if that blessed belefe were maintained according to the
truth of the Gospel, which after consecracion worshipped the real body of
Christ under the form of bread: the^ the token (which contains the true body
that di^d for us in it) is no bare token, but the truth it self in substance,
and a token of the visible manner thereof.


Iu. We teach that Christ's body is verily given to us, and that The (...).
untruth.
we verily eat it, and live by it, and are flesh of his flesh.


San. How well you teach it, the thing it self will try* but all this proves
not, that your Sacrament has ever the more in it, unless you say, that you
receive all this under y^ forms of bread and wine. A goodly matter: your
words in preaching (to hear 1. Cor. (...)
the which infidels may be admitted) shall be better then the Sacraments
instituted by Christ. How we are flesh of Christ's flesh, I have showed in the
fifth book, the fifth chapter.


Iu. Yet we ^av not the substance of bread and wine is done ^way, or that
Christ's body is let down from h^uen, or made really present.


San. That is the cause why your Sacraments are still bare and naked. For all
the rest which you talk o^, is told to men's ears, but nothing is wrought in
the S^ents. As for your nicke naming of things, as of doing away bread in
steed of changing, and of letting down Christ's body from heaven, we must
pardon you therein. It is your grace to rail, or rather the lack of grace in
you. We teach bread to be changed into Christ's body through his power.


Iu. He must mount on high (says Chrysostom) who so will The xvi. (...).
reach to that body. 1. Cor. hom. 24.



San. You ouerreached your self, when you turned accedere to reach* it is to
come unto, and not to reach. For S. Chrysostom spoke of coming to the holy
visible table which stood in the visible Church, and meant that who so
comes to receive then^ the holy meat, he must in good faith and life climme
up to heaven, and not that he should go thither to receive the mysteries. Ipsa
Chrysostom.
namque mensa. For the very table, that is to say, the meat upon 1. Cor. hom.
24.
the table, is our salvation and life. And again: This (...) makes, that
whiles we be in this life, earth may us heaven to us.


Iu. Send up thy faith (says Augustine) and thou have taken him. In Joan.
tract. 50.



San. The place is by you abused, and drawn from a misbeleuing Jew (to whom
it was spoken) to the Christian (...) See, good Reader, my second book, xxix.
chapter.


Iu. In deed the bread tha^ we receive with our bodily mouths The xvij. (...).
is an earthly thing, and therefore a figure, as the water in (...).


San. The water in baptism is no figure, but the (...) is the word coming to
the (...). Those ^wo (...) (...) figure: and (...) no words (...) spoken
whereby the (...) should c^ase to be that it was, yea because it is said, I
baptize or Matt. 28.
wash thee (which is not done without water) we are forced to believe, that
the substance of water remains. But it is said Matt. 26.
over the bread, This is my body. And after that words spoken and fully past,
that which seems bread, is yet still a mystical figure, as it may well appear,
in that, a good time after consecration y^ holy figure of Christ's body being
reserved upon the altar, has been received of the Christian people always in
the Church of God at y^ end of the service. Therefore the figure which is made
in the supper, must be so made, that it must remain when the words are past.
Now that remanent substance is the body of Christ under the form of (...).
But if the earthly substance of bread did ^ill remain (as M. Iuel sa^eth)
there is nothing at all which Bread i^ not the figure of Christ.
may be a figure. For as the water is no figure when the words are absent: so
the bread could not be a figure any longer, when the words were fully past.


Iu. The body of Christ is the thing it self, and no figure. The xviij.
untruth.



San. You know not what you say. The body of Christ under the form of bread is
it self both the thing, and also a figure of the mystical unity of the
Church. SoS. Hilarie teaches, saying: Lib. 8. de Trinit.
Naturalis per Sacramentu^ proprietas perfectae Sacramentum est vnitatis. The
natural propriety (or, which is al one, the personal substance or the proper
nature of Christ) by the Sacrament (or sign of bread) is the Sacrament of a
perfect unity. The body of Christ it self is a sign as well as the truth,
but yet a sign, not only by it self, but by y^ sign under which it is. Hereof
I beseech thee, good Reader, to see my fi^t book the fifth chapter. The thing
it self which is no figure, is the grace of corporal union, which is wrought
in this Sacrament with Christ him self.


Iu. In respect of the body we have no regard to the figure* wher^nto The xix.
untruth.
S. Bernard alluding says: The sealing ring is nothing worth, it is the
inheritance I sought for.


San. What a desperate custom is it for you, to (...) always the Fathers of
these last nine hundred years, whom you have already condemned? If they be
idolatours or false preachers, why bring you their witnesses, as to build any
thing upon the^? either you will ^and to S. Bernard, or else you in vain allege
him. If you stand to him even in those words which you take out of him, you are
utterly overthrown. He says: Many things be done for The doctrine of. S
Bernard.
them selves only, as if I give a ring to a man only to give it without any
farther meaning. other things be done to signify, and those are De coena
Domini.
called signs, and be so: As when a ring is given to put a man in possession
of an heritage, in this case the ring is not respected for it (...), but for
the heritages sake. So, says S. Bernard, our Lord drawing nere to his passion
provided to adorn his disciples with grace. Thus by him grace is the end or
effect of the sign: but The grace The (...)
what is the sign it self? M. Iuel says, bread. But I pray you, says S.
Beruard so? No verily. what says he the^? Vt securi sitis, Sacrame^ti dominici
corporis and sanguinis pretiosi inuestitura^ habetis. That ye may be without
fear, ye have the inuestiture of our Lords Sacrament his preciouse body and
blood. Behold, the body and blood of Christ is the sign it self wherewith we
are invested, or put in possession of grace. As therefore the ring or the book
is present whereby we are put in possession of the heritage or of the preb^ed:
so the body of Christ is really present wherewith M. Iuel t^keth y^ bread does
put us in possession of grace.
we are put in possession of grace. It is not bread, that is the sign of
grace: it is the substance of Chistes body and blood, which is the holy sign,
whereof S. Bernard speaks. and therefore he makes not the body of Christ the
thing it self, as M. Iuel corruptly allegeth. The thing is the grace of God
the substance of Christ under y^ form of bread is y^ sign. For Christ comes
in his own corporal presence to sease and to indue us with grace. Hence it
comes, M. Iuel, that S. Augustine so often calls this Sacrament a figure,
because the body it self is here not for it self, but to put us in possession
of so great a grace, as the union with God is.


That Christ's body is received by mouth, and The third Chapter.
not by faith only.
IVel. We put a difference between the sign, and the thing it self 11.
that is signified.


Sander. In the consideration of a reasonable understanding there is always a
differnce between the sign and the thing, but Heb. 1.
not always in substance. For Christ is the figure of his Fathers Joan. 10.
substance, and withal the same substance. but not called a figure in the same
respect or consideration. For as he is the figure, so he differs in person
from his Father: but in truth of nature he is also one substance with him.
Even so the body of Christ, as it is under the form of bread, differs in the
manner of being from the body of Christ, which died for us in form of man. But
in substance it is all one. Even as Christ being transfigurated had an Matt. 17.
other manner of being then he had before, his own substance tarying still one
and the same.


Iu. We seek Christ in heaven. xj.



San. So do we to, and yet believe him also to be with us until Matt. 28.
the worlds end.


Iuel. And imagine not, him to be present bodily upon the earth.


San. Neither do we imagine him present in his bodily shape, but we believe
and by assured faith know, him to be present in bodily substance, whent the
bread and wine are consecrated. Our affirmative belief is grounded upon the
express word of God, and upon the continual practice of the Church. Your
negative Matt, 26.
^gination is an ^ool, ^ormed in (...) by the (...) idolatours (...), (...),
Calvin, (...) Martyr (...).


Iu. The body of Christ is to be eaten by faith only, and none The xx. untruth.
other wise.


San. In so saying (if you will also defend it) you are the mainteiner of a
blasphemouse heresy, and (...) otherwise. and that I will prove, because your
words are directly against the Gospel, and the ancient fathers, and affirm
the same which the Arrians did affirm being condemned for it of old time.
Christ after bread taken and thanks given, said: take, eat, this is my body.
But Matt. 26.
Christ spoke of eating by mouth, and not by faith alone, and he says the
thing eaten to be his own body: therefore his body is not eaten by faith only,
but by mouth also,

I go farther with you. All that was eaten by mouth or by faith at Christ's
supper, came from Christ. how could else any man have it? and it is described
in the Gospel: how could we else know it? But all that he is written to have
given came from his hands, when he said, take, eat: therefore either his body
was not eaten by faith at all (as by his gift there made, and by the
Evangelists rehearsed) or his body came then from his own hands. Can you prove
that he gave his body at his supper, otherwise then by his own hands? where is
that written: For though he ^wel in us by Ephesians. 3.
faith, yet no such thing was spoken of at his last supper. Answer the Gospel,
M. Iuel, or else blaspheine no more.

What soever was given at Christ's supper came from the hands of Christ. show
me else an other gift, and show me where it is witnessed. He gave (says the
(...)) and said, take, eat. nothing was eaten at his table, but that which
was there taken. Nothing was there taken, but that which was there given:
nothi^ was there given, but that which Christ prepared and gave. (...). (...).
Christ can be known to have given nothing, but that which the Evangelists
tell and have w^ten. They witness that he gave such a t^ing, which at the least
he called his body.

Now if in that external food he gave not his own real body (as you say) his
body was not eaten at all by the gift of his last Joan. 13.
supper, not so much as by faith. If it be so, where or when shall his body be
eaten by faith? but if it was eaten by faith (as undoubtedly it was by the
eleven Apostles. who were al clean as Christ said) if that eating of theirs
can be proved by the gospel, it must be proved by these words, take, eat: but
these words were spoken of that visible thing, which Christ gave to their
mouths: therefore all the eating by faith, that can be showed to have been
made at Christ's supper, depended at that time upon the eating by mouth.
Therefore the body of Christ which at Christ's supper Cypria. sermon 5. de lapsis.
must needs be eaten by faith (if it shall be eaten worthelie as it ought to be)
was in the hands of Christ, and thence came to the mouths of the Apostles.
and so M. Iuel has affirmed a proposition directly (...) the verity of the
gospel.

Sec^dly the (...) teach y^ we eat Christ's body by our ^thes, and no^ by
(...) only. ^. (...) speaking of evil (...) uing denied Christ, yet came (...)
meats (...) up to (...), unto o^r Lords table, faith: (...) mod^ in dominum
manibus atque ore delinquunt, quam cum dominum negauerunt, they (...) more
again^ our lord with their hands and mouth, (...) when they denied our Lord.
Consider well this saying. An (...) man (...) Christ with his tongue before the
tyran for fear of death, and eats of things offered to idols. The same man
without (...) comes to Christ's ^able. he synneth in both places, and that
with his mouth: (...), by denying Christ, and by (...) polluted meats: here by
touching and eating ^ur lords b^die. S. (...) says the (...) committed in
(...), is the more (...)* Why so? Is there a^ie (...) more (...), (...) to deny
Christ, and to communicate with idols? How is it then a more gr^uouse fault to
come without repentance to Christ's supper, then to deny him both in word and
deed? Study M. Iuel as long as you will, you shall never find any solution
wherein you may (...), but only this, because he that comes unworthily to
Christ's table touches the real and substantial body of Christ, inuading De
lap^s ^erm. 5.
and doing violence (as S. Cyprian there says) to our Lords body and blood. So
that the only cause why it is more heinouse to communicate unworthily, then to
commit idolatry, or to deny Christ, is the substance of Christ, which is
unworthily touched. Take away the real substance from the hands or mouth of
the receauer, and it is not possible that it should be a greater sin to
receive unworthily a piece of bread, the^ to deny Christ in word, and to
commit idolatry in deed. But as the treason that is committed against the
kings own person is the greatest of all: so the greatest sin that can be
bodily committed against Christ, is the touching of his own substance with a
polluted mou^h. therefore S. Cyprian believed our Lord him self and the
substance of his body to be received into the mouth of the communicant.

S. Chrysostom likewise witnesses us to take in our hands, Hom. 82 and 83. in
Matt. and 24. in 1.
in our mouths, to touch, to eat, to receive into us Christ's sleshe. Is all
this done by faith only? Pope Leo writes thus of this matter: Ye ought so to
communicate of the holy table, that ye ad Cor. and 60. ad pop. Ant. Leo. de
ieiunio 7. men's. sermon. 6.
doubt nothing at al of the truth of Christ's body and blood. Ho^ enim ore
sumitur, quod fide creditur. For that thing is received in mouth, which is
believed in faith: but y^ true substance of Christ is believed in faith,
therefore the true substance of Christ is received in mouth. Whereupon it
follows, that M. Iuel falsely affirms Christ to be eaten by faith only, and
none otherwise. Diverse other testimonies I will bring hereafter, as occasion
shall serve. Cyrill. li. 10. ca. 13.


Last of all S. Cyrill reports, that a certain Arrian said: Patet quia
corpora nostra non dependent ^ carne Christi, and (...). (...) is evident, that
our bodies hang not of the flesh of Christ, as branches of the vine. Neither
is the fruit of y^ Saints bodily* but rather spirit^all: therefore the
Godhead of the son is the vine whereon we depend by faith. Thus said the
heretic. To whom S. Cyrillus making answer, says: because he thinks us to
be joined with Christ by faith and love, and not in flesh, let us say somewhat
herein. Does he think us not to know the virtue of the mystical blessing?
The which when it is in us, does it not make Christ to dwell corporally also
in us, by communicating of his flesh?

Here, S. Cyrill places corporal being, against being by faith and love.
Christ by communicating of his flesh dwells corporally in us, and not by
faith and charity alone: and yet our communicating is made by mouth. Therefore
M. Iuel does communicate with the Arrian, in saying that we eat Christ's body
by ^aith only, and none otherwise. For S. Cyrill of purpose to destroy that
heresi^, shows us to (...) Christ corporally also. Xij.



Iu. We place Christ in the heart: M. Harding places him in the The xxi.
untruth.
mouth.


San. D. Harding places him in the h^rt and mouth: you place 1.
him, touchi^g his corporal presence, neither in heart nor in mouth. And
touching faith, in heart only, and not in mouth. D Harding 2.
teaches the flesh of Christ to be joined to our flesh for the increasing of
spiritual grace: You teach bread to be united to our flesh, affirming (beside
the word of God) that our bodies eat bread, as our souls are fed with
Christ. D. Harding teaches the meat 3.
of Angels, which is the Godhead, to be eaten of man really, whiles man eats
that flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwells. You teach the Godhead to
be eaten by faith alone, as it was eaten before the incarnation of Christ, and
none otherwise. Colos. 2.



Iuel. Christ's body is meat of the mind, not of the (...), (...) (...). (...).
S. Cyprian.


San. I find no such words in S. (...). (...) it who soever does speak these
words of the Sacrament, it will follow that the meat he speaks of is not
material bread (for then it should be meat of the belly) but it is only the
bread of God, and flesh of Christ. Which in (...) is not (...) to fill the
belly, but rather to tame it, and to make us more temperate and chaste. The
23. ^truth.



Iu. Believe and thou have eaten, says S. Augustine, of Christ's blessed body.


San. Thou have eaten by faith: but not yet in Sacrament. Those words were
spoken of spiritual and nor of Sacramental eating. Therefore do you (...) to
apply them to y^ Sacrament, albeit faith is necessary also to receive the
Sacrament worthily. 13.



Iuel. It is better to use the word figure, then the words really, The 24.
(...).
corporally.


San. It is better to use the word body, flesh, blood, which are the words of
scripture then the word figure, which is used of the fathers only to show, in
what sort the body and blood of Christ is present under the forms of bread
and wine: b^t not to change y^ words of scripture, flesh, body, blood, into
other words, figure, sign, toke^ (God forebid y^ men should vnplace Gods
words) but they added unto the words of scripture other words to expound, that
this is not Christ's visible body, but the (...) thereof, because it is the
substance thereof under an other form* but you M. Iuel, are content to forget
the word of God at this time, and to name the Fathers. Are they then above the
word of God? How long will you halt? Come home to the word of God, to y^ Gospel,
to the holy scripture, which M. Harding alleged out of the Eua^gelistes, and
out of S. Paul: and you wandering in (...) and seeking phrases of speech have
not alleged out of the word of God (...) that effect of the Sacramental
presence, not so much as one syllable. So well you love the Gospel, whereof
you talk so much. The 25. untruth.



Iu. The old Fathers used not these words corporally, substancially, in case of
being really in the Sacrament.


San. It is an impudent mouth which so speaks. I will construe the Fathers
words to you in due place.


M. Iuell has not replied well touching the 6. Chapter The (...).
of S. John, but has abused as well the Ghospel, as diverse Chapter.
authorities of the Fathers.
HArding. The promise of giving the flesh which The (...) division.
Christ would give for the life of the world, being only performed in the
supper, proves the same very substance to be in the Sacrament of the supper,
which was offered upon the Cross for the life of the world. 1.


Iuel. This principle is false in it self. The 26. untruth.



San. It is a true principle, as it shall appear afterward.


Iuel. It is full of dangerous doctrine, and may lead to despe^tion. The 27.
untruth.



Sander. It is dangerous to you, because it shows that you must either
sub^cribe, or despeire: but otherwise it is not dangerous. The 28. untruth.



Iuel. M. Harding supposes no man may eat the flesh of Christ, but only in
the Sacrament.


San. You misr^port the meaning of D. Harding, who denies not but that
Christ's flesh may be eaten spiritually, both by faith (as the just Patriarchs
and Proph^s had already eaten it) and also by baptism, according to the which
way those had eaten it, Joan. 6.
whom Christ before this talk (made at Capharnaum) had baptized Joan. 4.
by the mean of his disciples. Which two way^s notwiths^anding, Dabo, I will
^ue.
for so much as Christ prom^h at Caphar^m to g^ne his ^she afterward to be
eaten, that giste must differ both from eating by faith and by baptism. And
therefore D. Harding worthily says, it was only performed in y^ last supper,
the which way of giving his flesh was only to come. and it is not only
spiritual, but also real.


Iuel. The words be plain and general: Unless ye eat the flesh The xxix.
untruth.
of the son of man, ye shall have no life in you.


San. It is not said in S. John, habebitis nullam vitam, ye shall have no
life, but, non habebitis vitam, ye shall not have life in you. I think it
escaped you without malice, but yet it chanced not well, to put the negative to
the noune, which should have been joined to the verb. Christ means, that no
man shall have life, who being of discretion to prove him self, refuses to
(...) the Sacrament of Christ's supper.


Iu. Seeing Christian children receive not the Sacrament, by M. The xxx. untruth.
Harding it will follow, they have no life.


San. It will follow, that they have not in them selves the flesh of life, as S.
Cyrillus expounds these words, non ^bitis vitam, Lib. 10. cap. 13.
id est, carnem vitae, ye shall not have life, that is to say, the flesh of
life, in vobis, id est, in corpore vestro, in you, that (...), in your body.
But you make an untrue sequel thereof, to say, they shall have no life at all.
For he that is borne again in baptism, has the life of spiritual birth,
which suffiseth him if he die before the years of discretion. but afterward he
is ^und to com^ for the maintenance of his spiritual li^e to the Sacrament of
life, which is the supper of Christ. The xxxi. untruth.



Iuel. Christ gives his body not only in the Sacrament, as M. Harding
imagines, but at al times to the faithful.


San. You (...) a pleasure to (...) upon D. Harding without a plain song D.
Harding grants, that Christ g^th him self by faith and (...), but gives not
his flesh by sacram^nt and Cyril. li. 10. cap. 13
natural participation, which (as S. Cyrill says) is obtained by partaking
the mystical blessing: but only in the supper.


Iuel. S. Ambrose says: Christ gives this br^ade to all men, In Psalm. 118.
daily, and at all times.


San. S. Ambrose may well mean either of the gift, which is made in spirit
to them that believe and love god, or in sacrament to them that come to the holy
table, which is always (...) for good men. For he teaches the Sacrament of
Christ's supper to be our Ambr. de Sacra. li. (...). cap. 4.
supersubstancial and daily bread, And would men daily to come unto it.


Iuel. Then it is false that Christ perfor^ (...) promise, and The (...).
untruth.
gives his body only at the ministrat^ of the Sacrament.


Sander. It is an dishonest thing, thus to misreporte D. Hardings meaning. You
mingle the performing of one certain promise of Christ made in S. Ihon, with
ge^g his body any way at al. D. Harding spoke not of every giving his body,
but of y^ giving wherein he performed only yt promise made in. S. Ihon.
Whereafter y^ promise of giving, he says, his flesh is verily meat, Joan. 6.
and his blood verily drink: therefore y^ substance of Christ's flesh is
promised to be eaten verily, and not only by faith, but also in a sacrament.
That kind of promise was only performed in the last supper, when he said:
Take, eat, this is my body which is given Matt. 26*
for you. There was every word literally performed. For the particular
declaration whereof I beseech the reader to consider that which I have written
upon. S. Ihon in the 3. book the 2. Chap.


Iuel. S. Augustine says: They eat Christ's body not only in the The 33.
untruth.
Sacrament, but also in very deed. Behold, not only in the Sacra^ente. De
ciuit. li. 2. c. 20. (...).



San. To (...) out a piece of the sentence of. S. Augustine, and such a piece
as utterly changes the ^eaning of his words, is it not the sign of one that
has cast of all fear either of god or of De ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 20.
man? S. Augustine says thus: some men promise pardon to Catholics (though
they live noughtily) because they have eaten y^ body of Christ not only in y^
Sacrament, but in very d^de. But how y^ body of Christ is (...) in very deed,
that M. Iu^l would not write. and yet it is a piece of the very same clause.
The rest of the words are, in ipso eius corpore constituti, de quo Apostolus
dicit. Vnus panis vnum corpus multi sumus. Being stablished in the (...)* Cor.
10
self body of his, of the which. S. Paul said: we being many are one bread,
one body. which yet is again expounded afterward: (...) i^ co^pore Christi, id
est, Ecclesia Catholica sumpseru^t baptismum Christi, and manducaueru^t corpus
Christi. Evil Catholics (...) not coudemned (as some men said) because they
have received the baptism of Christ, and have eaten Christ's body in the body
of Christ, that is to say, in the Catholic Church.

This false opinion proponed in the xx. chapter, is impugned Lib. 21. ca. 20. 25
by S. Augustine in the xxv. of the same book. Where he shows that none
other are to be accounted the members of Christ, beside those, that tarry even
to yt ^d in the unity and charity of his mystical body the Church. But M.
Iuel plays the Sophist by taking the word (body) otherwise then S. Augustine
meant it. for (...) body.
as the cumpanie of Merchants in London make a certain feloship among the^
selves, and therefore may right well be called a collegiate body: even so the
cumpanie of faithull men who believe and live well, make a certain body of
Christ, which is called his flock, his elect, his fold, and most often of al,
his mystical body* Now M. Iu^ takes y^ word body (which signifies both
Christ's natural and mystical body) as if it signified only his natural body.
He will prove the body of Christ to be eaten without the Sacrament, and therein
he takes it for the natural body which (...) at the right hand of God. He
proves it by S. Augustine, who speaks of the mystical body, which is the
cumpanie of the elect, and the holy Church of God. Is not this man worthy to be
a preacher*


Iu. S. Augustine contrary to M. Hardings doctrine, so far forces The 34.
(...).
this difference, that he makes the eating of Christ's body in the Sacrament,
to be one thing, and the very true eating thereof in deed, to be an other thing.


San. Why then do you mingle the one with the other? Why The contr^y o^ (...).
Iuel.
(...) you against D. Harding (who speaks of the Sacrament ^ly) that place
which sp^th o^ an another thing, that is to say, of the mystical body? You
(...) him unjustly, and condemn your self most ^ly, He denies not the
mystical body, and therefore is not contrary to S. Augustine: but he shows
that Christ promised a real eating beside al other kinds of eating. The promise
of that real eating you would exclude, by showing y^ Christ may be eaten by
other wa^s, then by the Sa^ment* as if when you had d^d a ^an to have in his
house y^ armor which he is bound by law to have ready, you would afterward
acquit your self, if you proved that he had hors^s in his stable, and oxen in
his pasture: As though the having of the o^ proved the lacking of the other.
For how many ways o^ ^ating Christ so^r there are, yet the ^ating of his real
flesh which was promised at Capharnaum, is thereby rather co^ed then ^isproued.


Iu* S. Augustine says* the Fathers of the old law received the The 35.
untruth.
(...) same body, that is now received o^ the faithful.


Sander. You leave out some words of S. Augustine, you add De vtil. pen. ca.
(...)*
other of your own. S. Augustine says: the old Fathers di^ eat Spiritual*
left out by M. Iuel.
the same spiritual meat which we eat: and you leave out the wor^ spiritual
wherein he chefely (...). His (...) 1. Cor. 10*
upon S. Paul's words is, that the ol^ (...) eat the (...) spiritual meat.
the same (says he) I can not find how I may understand, but, the meat which
we also eat. Some man then will say, was this which I now take manna? is there
nothing then at this time come, if it was before? is then the slander of the
cross made void? How else did the Fathers eat the same meat, but that the
Apostle added spiritalem? the same spiritual meat? Again: Eundem ergo potum
quem nos, sed spiritalem, Spiritale^
id est, qui fide capiebatur, non qui corpore hauriebatur. The old Fathers
drunk the same drinck which we do, but, the same spiritual drinck. that is to
say, which was taken by faith, not which was drunck by body. Is it plain
enough, M. ^uel, that S. Augustine speaks not generally of the same meat,
but of the same spiritual meat? why leaft yo^ that word out? why said you instead thereof, that the old Fathers did eat the self same Words falsely put
in by M. Iuel.
body, that is now received of the faithful? What delight have you to
misreport the ancient Fathers? where is it written, the self same body? says
not S. Augustine eundem potum quem nos, sed spiritalem? they drank the same
drinck which we do, but spiritual? did he not expound the word spiritual,
saying the which was taken by faith, and not drunk by body? Note well those
words, M. Iuel, no^ qui corpore hauriebatur, they drank not that which we do,
concerning the drink which is taken into the body. that is to say, they took
not the blood of Christ into their bodies, as we now do. they took a sign of
Christ's blood, as we do, and among other figures, they had also bread and
wine. (...). euit. 2.
At the time of which figurative bankets the just men did feed in Exodus 29
spirit upon Christ: but we feed upon him also in body. we eat Number. 15.
the same in spirit, and also in body, which they did eat in spirit only. We
meet with them in the meat as it is spiritual: but we differ in the same and
far pass them, as it is corporal. Therefore Tract 26 in Joan.
S. Augustine says upon S. Ihon: Spiritalem vtique eandem, (...) corporalem
^lteram, quia illi manna, nos aliud* they did eat the same spiritual meat,
but an other corporal meat they did Our ^ly meat differs from the m^at of
y^ old Fathers.
eat manna, we ^ate an other thing. What is that other thing? where might we
learn the name or nature of it? let us not go^ to any other man, but to the
same blessed S. Augustine, who never had any fellow in the Church of God for
his (...) knowledge in holy scripture. but the more profound he is, the less
he is able to be understood at the first sight, of those who read him not ^o
great dilige^^e. Thus he writes: Quid est manna? etc. Tract. (...) in Joan.
what is manna? I am, says Christ, the living bread which came down from
heaven. and again: It is known what God had rayray^ed Exodus 16
from heaven. And know not the Catechumeni what the Christians take? let them
blush then, because they know it not. let them pass over by the read sea. Let
them eat manna, that Jesus is eaten bodily of us after Baptism.
even as they have believed in the name of Jesus, so Jesus may commit himself to
them. Thus S. Augustine does teach, that Jesus himself is our corporal meat
in the manna of the new Testament. For of corporal meat* now he speaks, of
that I say, wherein we differ from the old fathers, and not of that wherein we
communicate with them. Christ eaten by faith, is their and our meat al in
common. yea the Catechumeni may so eat of him. But Christ neither being
received into the bodies of the old Fa there is, nor now of yt Catechumeni who
lern their faith, is only y^ corporal meat or true manna of the faithful
baptized. which is Exodus 16
no less really taken into our mouths under the form of bread, then the
Jews did really eat manna forty years together in the desert.


Iuel. Every faithful man is made partaker of the body and Apud Be dam 1. Cor.
10. (...).
blood of Christ in Baptism, whiles he finds that unity which is signified by
the Sacrament. therefore the faithful eat Christ's body otherwise then in the
Sacrament.


Sand. Who denies but that Christ's body may be otherwise ^aten, then in the
Sacrament? But it is not therefore eaten there really? That only D. Harding.
affirmed, and you prove that he is otherwise eaten. but yet that other eating
(whereof S. Augustine and Beda spoke) proves the real eating, which D. Harding
defends. For if the body of Christ it self were not under y^ form of bread,
he that is baptized should not partake at all of the Sacrament of Christ's
supper* because he neither partaketh in Baptism of bread nor of wine, but is
only made a member of that mystical body, which in the Sacrament is signified.
And how is it signified? let us hear S. Augustine expounding that unto us: who
speaking of heretics and schismatiks (which are out of the Church) says: Non
sunt in eo vinculo pacis, quod in illo exprimitur De ciuit. l. 21. c. 25
Sacramento: they are not in that bond of peace, which is expressed in that
Sacrament. The bond of peace expressed in the Expressed
Sacrament, is not only the wheaten corns molded into one loaf (for that bond
is in every loaf, and not only in that of Christ's supper) but the bond of
peace is the body of Christ present under the forms of bread and wine: whereof
I have spoken at large in my v. book in the v. chapter.


M. Iuel has not replied well touching the Capharnaites. The v. Chapter.

HArding. If Christ in S. Ihon had spoken tropically, The 3. division.
the Jews and disciples who were used to figures, would not have said: this
is a hard saying.

Iuel. His reason hangs thus: The Capharnaites understood The 36. untruth.
not Christ: ergo his body is really in the Sacrament.


Sander. No sir. but thus: They understood Christ to speak without parables,
and Christ's words appertin to the Sacrament (as it was said before) therefore
his body is really in the Sacrament. ^ark the words of the Capharnaites, and
you shall find by their answers and by their demands, that they understood what
Christ promised, but believed it to be a thing either not possible, or not
convenient. Therefore Christ said: there be some of you who believe not. He said
not (says S. Augustine) Tract. 27 in Joan.
there be some among you, who understand not, but he told the cause why they
understood not: there be some among you who believe not, and therefore they
understand not, because they believe not.


Iuel. He said* The bread which I will give, and caet. of spiritual iij.
eating. It is the spirit that quickens. Understand ye my words The 37.
untruth.
spiritually, says S. Augustine.


San. There is a spiritual eating without the Sacrament of Christ's supper,
either by faith, or by Baptism. Of that Christ spoke not now, because it was
not to come: but was already given (at the least concerning faith) to all the
just men from the beginning of the world. There is an other both spiritual or
worthy, and also real eating of the Sacrament of Christ's supper it self.
Thereof he now speaks, promising to ge^e it, and at his supper he gave it
both really and spiritually, that is to say, not in a gross manner, but
divinely and miraculously: whereof ye may see in my third book, the. xix. and.
xx. Chapter.


Iuel. Ye shall not eat, says S. Augustine (with your bodily The 38.
untruth. In Ps. 98
mouth) this body that you see, and caet. I give you a certain Sacrament.


San. Of this place I have spoken at large in my vi. b. the. i^. Chapter, and
in my. 3. b. the. xiiij, Chapter. I will now briefly note the chief points.
First M. Iuel does abuse this place, because S. Augustine had said before, that
Christ gave yt same flesh to be eaten, wherein he walked, and which he took of
the virgin. Whereunto M. Iuel has no regard at all. Secondly he taught, that
it ought to be adored before it was eaten. Thirdly he names it the Sacrament,
willing us to consider it spiritually. Fourthly he names it quamlibet terram,
any earth, calling* the ^sh of Christ earth. now in saying that we adore any
earth, he manisesily declares that he speaks of the adoration which is made
in diverse places or altars. Whereas otherwise the flesh o^ Christ in heaven is
but one earth in one place. These things presupposed (all which are in the
place of S. Augustine which M. Iuel now allegeth) it will ^olow that S.
Augustine meant, both that Christ's flesh is eaten with our bodily mouth in the
Sacra meant, and also adored. Therefore when he says ye shall not eat this
body that you see, he means ye shall not eat it in such form as you see
it, in such mortal quantity, or in such a corruptible sort. But if it should
be meant, ye shall not eat the substance of my body (as M. Iuel takes it) S.
Augustines own words were clean contrary to them selves for the causes
alleged before.

Beside this great dissembling of M. Iuel (who knew the other words of S.
Augustine, and yet only would have these to be (...) tra^ (...).
considered) he has also misordered and misenglished diverse words.

1. He has translated commendaui, I give. Whereas the Sacrament was not yet
delivered, but was only commended, and set forth in words unto the Jews, when
Christ said: the bread which I will give is my flesh. 2. I^ commendare were
Latin to give, yet it should have been translated, I have given.

3. For viuificabit, M. Iuel reads, viuificat, it does give life, for it
shall give life.

He was ^oth to have any commendation past, or any giving of life to come. For
he would so understand Christ's words, that the gift and the quickening might be
present, lest it should apperteyn to the supper: Whereas the commendation of
the gift was past, in those words (I will give, and the giving of life to come)
verily, because the Sacrament should then give life when it should be received.
These are miserable shifts to save your self from subscribing.


Iu. We have a spiritual mouth, a spiritual taste, eyes, ears, as The 39.
untruth.
Basil, Leo, Origin, Tertullia say, Christ is to be digested by faith, he is
the bread of the mind, not of the belli. to believe in him, that is to eat the
living bread: therefore Christ's meaning is spiritual, and not real.


San. What gross ignorance is this, to think that the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament hinders my spiritual mouth, A false reasoning.
taste, ears, eyes, faith, or mind? All these must go together. Christ took
his body to bring to our bodies the meat whereof our soul might spiritually
eat. It is the fondest kind of reasoning in the world by one truth to deny an
other, seeing both stand together. Is my faith the less because Christ was
bodily seen in earth? How is then my spiritual feeding the worse, because the
food of life is in my mouth? Does not Tertullian say, the flesh De resur rect.
car.
is fed with the body and blood of Christ, to thend the soul may be made fat
of God? 4.



Iu. M. Harding will say, eating with mouth and grinding with The 40. untruth.
teeth, is a work spiritual. And so he is a good proctour for the Ca
pharnaites.


San No that h^ will not say, except the meat be so eaten, that the manner of
eating it be so clean and spiritual, that although it enter into the mouth,
yet the ^aith both may and do work upon it, by adoration, and participation,
as it chances in Christ's supper. And therefore Christ said: work the meat
which perishes Joan. 6.
not which the son of man will give you. And he means work it by soul by
believing, and in body by eating. And the Prophet David says: They have eaten
and worshipped. This Psalm. 21.
understanding neither y^ Capharnaites had, nor the Sacrmentaries have, and
therefore they grind now common bread with their teeth, where^ they shall
bitterly gnash, if they repent not y^ sooner.


Iuel. Chrysostom will not suffer this evasion, who says to understand In Joan.
carnally is to understand plainly as the things be uttered, Hom. 47
The 41. (...).
and to think upon nothing else.


San. We understand not so. For we seeing the form of bread, think upon the
body of Christ which is under it. Therefore S. Chrysostom is not against our
evasion.


Iuel. S. Augustine says, the saying of Christ is a figure or manner De doct.
of speech. Christ. li. 3. ca 16



San. What you mean by your manner of speech, I can not The 4^. (...).
tell. S. Augustine uses not those words. But except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, is in deed a figure, and the speaking thereof is figurative,
because it was not meant that a man should be visiblie eaten, as flesh is eaten
at common tables. But yet that he should be really eaten. Albeit the manner of
eating be figu ratiue as we know. And therefore when Christ had consecrated the
bread into his body and said, this is my body, that speech was not figurative,
because as the truth of the body was to be eaten, so the manner of the eating
it, was determined. And the^ all was plain to good beleuers, but not to Judas
and his companions, who believe no more then they see bodily.

S. Augustine then calling those words, except ye eat my flesh figurative,
refers the figure to the manner of eating. But not to the substance which is
to be eaten. For else if by no mean the flesh of Christ might be eaten, it
should not be eaten by faith. But if it may be so eaten, it may be eaten by
mouth also in that pure manner as it is given us.


Iuel. The figure commands us to be partakers of Christ's The 4^. untruth
in translating.
passion.


San. It had been more truly translated, that we ought to communicate with
Christ's passion. Communicare is to partake in the fullest manner that may be.
And how can you possibly communicate better or more fully with Christ's
passion, then to eat worthily the self body that suffered? Whereof S. Paul
says: 1. Co. 11.
How often so ever ye eat this bread, and drink the chalice of our Lord, ye
shall show his death until he come. That is the communicating, whereof S.
Augustine speaks.


Iuel. And with comfort and profit lay up in our memory, that Christ has
suffered death for us.


San. The perfect laying of this matter in our memory, is with Luc. 22.
Penance and love to eat the thing which is made for the remembrance of
Christ. Thence comes power to live through, or for Christ so really, as he
lives through or for his Father, with whom he is one thing and nature. Of this
whole saying of S. Augustine I have entreated more fully in my 3. b. the.
xiiij. Chapter.


Iuel. This therefore is Christ's meaning and the very eating The 44. untruth.
of his flesh.


San. Not this which you mean. But this it is, M. Iuel, as I have told you.
The whole, man must eat, as well in body as in soul, because the whole is
taken and assumpted of Christ, the whole is incorporated by Baptism, the whole
redeemed by death, and the whole shall be crowned with glory: therefore the true
eating is to eat that meat, which of it self consists of body, soul, and
Godhead, to eat it, I say, in body, soul, and spirit, and not by faith only.


Iuel. The Capharnaites understood Christ grossly of eating 5.
with teeth that which Christ spoke spiritually: and so would M. The 45.
untruth.
Harding teach the people.


San. D. Harding (...) no more then he took of Christ and of the Evangelists.
It is no grosie thing under the form of bread to eat the bread of life. The
Capharnaites went no farther then to their teeth and belly. But we make the
teeth to serve the mind also. That of Origenes, S. Dierom, S. Augustine makes
not against us.


Iu. Tertullian says the Capharnaites thought his speach^ was 6.
hard and intolerable, as though he had determined to give them De resur rect.
car. The 46. untruth.
his flesh verily and in deed to be eaten (with their mouths) therein, says
Tertullian, stood their error.


San. You know they thought not of eating it under the form of bread. For S.
Augustine says in Christ's person: Quis modus Tract. 26 in Joan* Cypria.
sit manducandi istum panem, ignoratis. Ye know not what way there is of
eating this bread. Therefore the word vere, verily* does not show that they
took it to be eaten in substance, without al gross humors or carnal division
of his members, but y^ they thought they should eat it carnally, as the flesh
of oxen is eaten, with the destruction of Christ's flesh. Tertullia^ did not
refer the error to the mouth (as you say) but unto y^ manner of taking into
De resur rect. car.
the mouth. For him self teaches in the same book, that our flesh is fed
with the body and blood of Christ.


Iu. Nicolas de Lyra says: these words of Christ in the sixth The 47.
untruth. in Ps. 110
of S. Ihon pertein not unto the Sacrament.


Sa^. Ye shall never have honesty by alleg^g y^ gloses, which your self have
condemned. But I know your disease: saine you would M. Iuel is a gloser
have a witness that the 6. of S. John pertains not to the supper. I will
give you in y^ third chapter of my third book above twenty honest witnesses
to prove, that Christ in S. John spoke of his last supper, and all they shall be
elder then Nicolas of Lyra. M. Iuel belyeth Nicolas of Lyra.
But what? says he as you report? He never in his life thought upon that
which you attribute unto him. What seek you to know his mind upon the 110.
psalm, since he has written upon the whole sixth chapter of S. John? Perhaps
he speaks not of the matter upon the psalms, or if he do, it is but by the
way, and not of purpose. Well, it will serve you, whatsoever it be, your hunger
and need is such. Let us then here Nicolas de Lyra, upon those words, Memoriam
fecit: Our Lord has made a memory Lyra in Psalm. 110.
of his marueilouse things. Thus he writes: Eucharistiae cibus sapidus est
gustui spirituali, propter quod dicit Saluator: Si quis manducauerit ex hoc
pane viuet in aeternu^. The meat of the Eucharist is a sauerie meat to the
spiritual taste. Wherefore our Joan. 6.
Savior says, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. Is
Eucharistia the Sacrament, or no? Are the other words in S. John, or no? It is
then perceived by his comments upon that psalm, that you speak falsely of
him, and in very deed so falsely, that he is wonderful plain i^ al his
works, concerning that the sixth of S. Ihon pertains to the last supper. As
for the Replica which of late is printed with Nicolas of Lyra, remember that it
is no part of Lyra, and that you are conversant in gloses neither with truth,
nor with diligence.


M. Iuel has not conferred the supper with the sixth The vi. Chapter.
of S. Ihon as it ought to be. 7.

IVel. Christ in S. Ihon speaking of spiritual eating by faith of the iij.
division. The 48. untruth.
made no mention of any figure. but in his supper he added an outward sacrament
to the same spiritual eating, which the Fathers often call a figure.


San. You can not tell what you say. For if in S. Ihon spiritual eating by
faith, be only spoken of, why is it said, dabo I will give? Joan. 6.
Whereas spiritual eating was already given to all that ever believed, and
therefore it was not to come. But the bread which Christ will give is his
flesh, and the gift thereof is to come: therefore it is more then a spiritual
eating by faith, which was both M. Iuel is cast by his own (...).
past and present. but there is no mention of any figure (say you) in S. John.
Therefore (say I) seeing the promise of his flesh which is to come, is not a
promise concerning the figure thereof, it is surely a promise concerning the
substance thereof. If it be so, and yet it must needs be more the^ a promise of
eating by faith (which was not come) it will follow, that it was a promise of a
bodily eating, as well as by faith: As if Christ said, the bread which I will
give to be received bodily at my last supper (as I have and presently do give
the same to your souls that do believe in me) that bread is my flesh.

But lest I should leave this matter only in confutinge your surmise, it is to
be known, that when a promise, and a performance The performance does expound
the promise.
of God belong to one thing, the promise is made plain by the performance
thereof: and seeing this word, dabo, I will give is a word of promise
(concerning Christ's flesh) we must seek the performance of it, which will
never be found to be fulfilled any where, but only in the last supper: and
there the old Fathers sought the performance of it, as in my third book I have
declared. Therefore as all the promises made before Christ's coming, were
plain, when he had taken flesh, and when God from heaven said of him, This is
my derebeloued son: so is the promise made Matt. 3.
in S. Ihon very plain, when Christ having taken bread and Matt. 26.
given thanckes brake and gave, saying: take, eat, This is my body. The words
this is, does answer y^ word dabo, I will give: for as Tertullian well notes,
this is, ar words af performing and of fulfilling the promise. Thus he writes
of God the Father, who having promised his son, did also perform his promise
in giving Tertul. l. 4. cont.
him really: Itaque iam representans ^um: Hic est filius (...), vtique
subadditur, quem repromisi. Si enim repromisi aliqua^do, Marcio^em.
and poste^ dicit, hic est, eius est exhib^ntis voce vti in demo^stratione
promiss^, qut aliquando promisit. God therefore making him present (says)
this is my son. surely it is to be supplied, who^ This is.
I have promised. For if he promised him at any time, and afterward says, hic
est, this is he, it belongs to him who sometime made the promise, to use the
word of bringing forth really Exhibe^ti^.
or of deliverance, in showing the thing promised.

Apply this now to our purpose. Christ said, the bread which Joan. 6.
I will give, is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world. At his
supper after bread taken and blessing used, he says, take, Matt. 2^.
e^te, This is my body which is given for you. This is, are words, This is*
which show present and bring ^oorth really, and deliver the flesh before
promised. But these words: take, eat, this is my body, make present, and
show, and deliver Christ's body to us bodily: therefore the promise wherein
Christ said, I will give, was also meant, I will give to you bodily, even by the
ministry of mie hands, and you shall receive it with your hands or mouths, or
with both together. Which being so, the Fathers who call Christ's supper a
figure, must needs mean such a figure as was promised. But when the promise
was made at Tapharnaum, M. Iuel confesses (as the truth is) that no mention
was made either of bread, or of wine, but only of Christ's own flesh: therefore
in the last supper, the self same substance of Christ is called of the
Fathers a figure, because it is in such sort present. Origin. in canti.



Iuel. M. Harding puts no difference between things perteining severally to
the body and the spirit. The 49* untruth.



Sander. Origines does speak of them, who reading the book of Canticles
(which you against his judgment there set out in the vulgar tongue to be
readen of every wanton boy or girl) would perhaps apply the names of love
(there used) carnally. But that it should be any carnal thing to eat Christ's
flesh either by ^aith, or (as we do it) by mo^th, that was never thought a
wanton or fleshely thing, as the practice of the Catholics can witness, who
never came so wantonly to any ca^nal banquet, as they came devoutly to receive
Christ's body into their mouths, preparing them selves with contrition,
consession and satisfaction. The spiritual deeds of them show, that they
understood Chri^ stes supper most spiritually. Therefore D. Harding has not
erred in saying, that Christ's body is to be ^ceaued into our bodies.


Iuel. The bread is a figure. The 50. (...).



San. Before consecration S. Ambrose confesses it to be a figure, but not
after the words (this is my body) are said ouevit. Vbi verba Christi
accesserint, corpus est Christi, when the words of Christ are come thereunto,
it is the body of Christ. Again Damascene expre^y says: Non est figura panis
and vinum corpori^ De orth. fi. lib. 4. cap. 14.
and sanguinis Christi. absit enim hoc. The bread and wine is not a figure of
the body and blood of Christ. God forbid that thing. sed est ipsum corpus
domini Deificatum, but is the self Deified body of our Lord. Deified is to
say, made glorio^se and immortal as God is by nature. M. Iuel never brought
nor can bring any Doctor who said, that bread tarying in his old substance is
after consecration the body of Christ. and yet he teaches that doctrine, as
bold therein as blind bayerd.


Iuel. The bread is subject to corruption, Christ's body is immortal, The 51.
untruth. Lib. 1. cap. 31.
therefore Rabanus Maurus says: The Sacrament is received with the mouth, with
the virtue of the Sacrament the inner man is repaired. The Sacrament is turned
into the nourishing of the body, by the virtue of the Sacrament we get
everlasting life.


San. This place is alleged that noman is the nere where to 1.
find it. For (...) has written more books then one or two. Again he is no
Doctor to be alleged of M. Iuell. Who estemeth 2.
^one of them, which have written these last nine hundred years. and yet seeing
he brings them for him self, wheusoeuer he is able to make any color to
pe^ade his own doctrine thereby, he does us to understand, that his resolution
is, that no writer of these last nine hundred years should be brought against
him, but yet that he may bring what him list against us. Think you, M. Iuel,
that this (...) condition shall be taken at your hands? 3.
are you not ashamed to cite them, whom you have (...)? if you did cite them to
mock at them only, or to show their folly and 4.
errors, it were tolerable in a man of your profession. But to 5.
allege them in earnest, to build upon their words, and to prove your doctrine
by some one of them, and that where he disagreeth 6.
perhaps from his sellowes, and yet not to admit them where they al agree
together, it is (to speak all in brief) the very point of an heretic, who
seeks singularity wheresoever he can find it, and leaves always universal
and Catholic consent.

But these words we must take as you give them us. be it so, 7.
Rabanus says: The Sacrament is taken with the mouth. is not that against your
doctrine M. Iuel, who said the body of Christ is to be eaten by faith only, and
none otherwise? did you not speak of the body of Christ, as it is eaten in the
Sacrament? But your own Doctor says, the Sacrament is taken with the mouth.
therefore the body of Christ is so taken. and that is expressly proved by the
words which follow in Rabanus. With the virtue of the Sacrament 8.
Faise ^slation.
the inner man is filled. For so you should have translated satiatur, is
filled, and not, is repaired, as you have done. But how is the inner man
filled with the virtue of the Sacrament, if wheaten bread be the Sacrament?
does wheaten bread fill the soul of man?

Moreuer is the virtue of any thing absent from it? is not that 9.
virtue in the Sacrament, whereby the inner man is filled, since it is called of
Rabanus the virtue of the Sacrament? but the only (...) of (...) is the virtue
which in this (...) fills (...) souls. Therefore the body of Christ is in
the (...): (...) the body of Christ is (...) with our mouths. Yea but (say
you) the Sacrament is turned into the (...) of the body. I answer, that the
Sacrament is necessarily there 10
meant to be the form of bread or of wine. which in deed nonrisheth our
bodies by the power of God, but under those forms the virtue lies, whereby
(as (...) says) we get everlasting life. What have you won now by your Doctor?
truly nothing else but your own confusion. For he says not, that the bread
remains still, as you do falsely teach.


Iu. The Sacrament (says S. Augustine) is received from the (...), (...).
(...). 14.
Lordstable. Of some unto life of some unto destruction: the thing it self
whereof it is a Sacrament (that is the body of Christ) is received of every man
to life, and of no man unto destruction, whoso^ be partaker of it.


San. Here is a heap of falshodes and lies. To disprove the which, I must
first open the Catholic faith which teaches, that (...).
the Sacrament of Christ's supper is our Lords own body under the form of
bread. The thing of the Sacrament is not the body (...) Christ, as your words
put in among those of S. Augustins do False (...).
falsely (...), but the thing here meant by S. Augustine, is the (...) of the
Church of God and the mystical body of Christ, (...) of the (...).
which he knitteth together into one lump by unspeakable meaues of (...), love,
(...), flesh and blood. And that is so plain in S. Augustine, that I can not
sufficiently wonder at your enormous either blindues, or (...), (...). Iuel.
Thus he writes in y^ August. tract. in (...). (...).
self place where you cite him: Hunc cibum and caet. Christ wills this meat
and (...) to be understood the fellowship of his body and of his (...). And
again, Huius rei Sacramentum, id est, (...) corporis and sanguinis Christi.
(...) sacrament of this thing, that is to (...), the Sacrament of the unity of
the body and blood of Christ, (...) where every day, somewhere certain days
coming between, is prepared in our Lords table, and is received (...) our
Lords table to some men unto life, to other unto destruction. But the thing it
self (whereof also it is a holy sign or Sacrament) is received of every man
to life, of no man to destruction, who soever be partaker of it. Hitherto S.
Augustine.

M. Iuel says, the thing it self is y^ body of Christ: but if he had not
falsely and miserably divided S. Augustines words, the very contrary would have
appeared to the eyes of the Reader. The (...) case left out.
M. Iuel left out two genitive cases, vnitatis and huius rei, which being
repeated in S. Augustine makes all the matter exceeding clear. S. Augustine
affirms the fellowship of the saints to be the body of Christ, whereof S.
Paul says, we being many are 1. Cor. 10
one bread one body. The Sacrament, says he, of this body (which body is the
cumpanie of the elect) is received from our Lords table. Huius rei
Sacramentum: The Sacrament of this thing. Of which (...). M. Iuel says, of
the body of Christ, and means the natural body which sits in heaven: for
M. Iuel said before in the same very paragraph, Christ's body is the thing it
self. Christ's body is in heaven, and gloriouse and subject to no corruption.
And he made the bread which is in earth, a figure of that body.

But says S. Augustine so? No douttesse. His words be: Sacramentum huius rei,
(...) est, vnitatis corporis and sanguinis Christi etc. The Sacrament of this
thing, that is to say, of the unity of Christ's The (...) the (...) of
Christ's (...).
body and blood, is prepared in our Lords table, and thence received. The
unity of Christ's body is not his natural body, but his (...) body the
Church, which before S. Augustine called Societatem Sanctorum, the feloship
of the holy men. Now the Sacrament of this feloship and of this union is
received from our Lords table.

Therefore we see two things noted of S. A^gustine, the one is the Sacrament it
self: The other is that thing whereof it is the Sacrament. The Sacrament is
such a substance which may be either life or destruction to us, because it is
the natural and true body of Christ, which being united to God can make us
li^e, if it be worthily received: and that by his own virtue (which thing Joan.
6.
manna the Sacrament of the Jews could not do) and the same being unworthily
received, destroieth us, for that we touch and violate the real substance of
our maker. But the thing, whereof that Sacrament is the sig^e, is hurtful to no
man. Why so? Because it is the ^nioying or fruition of that feloship, which
being not entered into but by virtue and grace, can not possibly make any man to
be destroyed. For we can not abuse the virtues them selves. All substances we
may abuse, and God we may offend* but we can not take hurt by faith being
faithful, chaste, humble, charitable, temperate, modest, by which virtues we
are incorporated to the mystical body of Christ. This thing therefore which is
the ^ffect of the Sacrament being wrought in faithful men, is called in S.
Augustine res ipsa, the thing it self. And was called The (...) of the
Sacrament.
before, societas Sanctorum, the feloship of the saints, and straight after,
haec res, this thing, and again, vnitas corporis and sanguinis Christi, the
unity of Christ's body and blood. This thing is destruction to no man,
whosoever be partaker of it.

M. Iuel does most ignorantly, and I can not tell with what greater Fine worcester des
left out.
malice, leave out, huius rei, and, vnitatis, and says, Sacramentum de mensa
dominica sumitur. The Sacrament is received from our Lords table. But S.
Augustine said, the Sacrament of this thing, that is to say, of unity is
received. All those words huius rei, id est, vnitatis, were left out of M.
Iuel. The which thing does clean alter the whole sense of S. Augustine.

Again, whereas S. Augustine said: the Sacrament of this (...) is prepared in
our Lords ^able, (...) Iuel left it (...). But Other words left out.
(...) much for me to show to the reader, that Christ's Sacra meant is not only
received from his table, but also prepared in his table, and first prepared
before it be received. Prepared by consecration, received by communion. It is
not common bread as ^, I^el, wickedly preaches. For that was prepared before
we came to our lords table: but Christ's Sacrament is prepared in his table:
it is there first made and thence it is received. Well if the Sacrament be one
thing, and the thing of the Sacrament (whereof S. Augustine speaks) be the
cumpanie of good men, what will follow hereof? Surely, that the Sacrament is
the substance of Christ's body under the foorme of bread. How so? It is not
possible, that the body of Christ should be excluded (...) the Sacrament of his
holy table: but al y^ is there prepared, or else received, Note.
either it is the Sacrament it self, or the thing of the Sacrament: but Christ's
body is not now called of S. Augustine the thing of y^ Sacrament, as it has been
proved: therefore it is called the Sacrament it self. But y^ Sacrament is
prepared in Christ's table, and received thence, therefore Chr^stes body is
prepared there and received thence. That which is received thence appears
bread, and that only is prepared by consecration, and received by communion:
Therefore under that visible foorme the body is made present by consecration,
and received into our mouths by communion. Was there not cause trow you, why
M* Iuel should leave out the genitine case i^yned with Sacramentum, and take it
absolutely for a sacrament, that is to say, for bread? And so to make the thing
of the Sacrament to be the body of Christ in heaven? By such falshods
maintained must be maintained, otherwise it would fall to the ground.


M. Iuel has not disputed well touching the omnipotency of Christ, in
promising the gift of his The vi^. Chapter.
flesh.
HArding. Christ by shevving his divine power, The 4. division.
whereby he will ascend into heaven confounds the unbelief of the
Capharnaits, touching the promised substance of his body.

Iuel. Christ makes mention of his ascension into heaven, ergo The 55.
untruth.
(says M. Harding) his body is really in the Sacrament.


San. You leave out the omnipotency of Christ, where upon D. Harding grounded
his whole reason, and so you play with him the pelting Sophist.


Iuel. If he conclude not thus, he concludes nothing. The 56. (...).



San. He concludes that the Capharnaites be confounded for their unbelief, as
you also be. For seeing Christ said of his flesh I will give: And the whole
stay why the Capharnaites believed him not, was because they knew not his
Godhead, which was able to do it by so excellent a means (as now we
Catholics know that he has done it, and ye will not know) when both they and
you here that Christ is God and will asce^d where he was before, you are both
confounded, as who measure his works by your own (...) reason, and not by his
almighty word. For his words are spirit and life: and therefore do work Joan. 6.
really whatsoever they speak.


Iuel. When ye see Christ ascend whole, ye shall see that he gives Aug. in
Ioa^n. tract. 28.
not his body in such ^ort as you imagine. His grace is not wasted by morsels,
says S. Augustine, using Christ's ascension, The 57. (...).
to prove that there is no such gross presence in the Sacrament.


San. True it is that Christ is not present to be wasted by eating, but yet he
is really eaten. And that is clearly mea nt of S. Augustine, when he says, He
will not give his body in that manner as you think. As who should say he will
give it one way, but not that way as you Capharnaites imagine. He will not give
a shoulder to one, and a leg to an other. But the supper Math. 26
shows the manner of the giving: Where bread was taken and (...).
after blessing and the words pronounced, Christ's body was in 1. Co. Hom 24
given to the mouths of the Apostles.


Iuel. This is the table for Egles, and not for Iayes, says Chrysostom.


San. I have answered your iangling talk of Iayes in my. i^. book the. xxvi^.
Chapter. And have tur^ed it upon your own head.


Iuel. S. (...), let us go up with the Lord (into heaven) The 58. and 59. 60.
untruth.
into that greatparlar, and receive of him above the cup of the new ^estament*


San. Certain men had imagined that Christ should reign corporally in earth a
thousand years together, and drink a new kind of wine, who grounded their
heresy upon these words of Christ: I say unto you I will not drink from
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until the day, when I will drink it new
with you in the Hieron. ad Hedi. quaest. 2.
Kingdom of my Father. S. Hierom calling that (...) Iudaicas fabulas, Jewish
tales, therewith declares what kind of wine we must drink in the Kingdom of
God, which is the Church, saying: Si ergo panis qui de coelo, and caet. If then
the bread which came down from heaven be the body of our Lord, and the wine
which he gave to the Disciples be his blood of the new Testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of sins, let us repel Jewish fables, let us
ascend with our Lord unto y^ great parlar spread and made clean, and let us
take of him above the cup of the new Testament. Hitherto S. Hierom. whose auth^
ritie M. Iuel has abused diverse ways. First you add to S. Words falsely
added.
Hierom these two words (into heaven) without cause. For it followed in S.
Hierom, whither we should ascend, coenaculum magnum, unto the great parlar,
there to take of Christ the bloo^ of the new Testament, above, that is to say,
not in the stalenes of the letter, but in the newnes of the spirit, as it
follows afterward. And yet again more plainly, in regno Ecclesiae, in the
Kingdom of the Church. And last of all: Impleamus opus eius, and Christus
nobiscum bibet in regno Ecclesiae sanguinem suum. Let us fulfill his work, and
Christ will drink with us in the Kingdom of the Church his blood.

Thus it is plaiue that S. Hierome spoke not of going into heaven by faith to
drink the cup of the new Testament, but o^ going up into the great parlar,
which is the Church and Kingdom of God. S. Hierom alluded to the History of
Christ's last supper, which was kept in a parlar spread and strawed (as it is
Dama sc. li. 4. c. 14
thought) in the mount Syon. Let us go thither, says S. Hierom, and there let
us receane the new wine whereof Christ spoke. S. Chrysostom also alluded to the
same parlar saying, y^ Christ Hom. 38 in Math.
makes this supper, (which now his Priests do consecrate) as well as he made
that, wherein he delivered his own banquet. Hoc est illud coenaculum, and caet.
This is that parlar wherein Christ was then with his Disciples. Hence he went
to y^ mount of Olives* which since it is so, it was very evil done of M. Iuel
to divide the verb from his accusative case, and to put an other ^oun between,
against all reason, grammar, and honesty.

S. Hierom said, ascendamus cum Domino coenaculum. (...) us go up with our
Lord to the parlar. M. Iuel puts the noun (in coelum) into heaven, between.
As if when a man said, let us go up to the chamber, he would put an other word
be^ and say, let us go up into the sliple into (that) chamber. For after he
had conveyed into S. Hierom his words (into he^ That ^sely added by M.
uen) he secondly turned coenaculum, that parlar. where is (that) in S. Hierom,
M. Iuel? (That) was of your putting in, to Iuel.
make us believe that heaven is the parlar, whereof S. Hierom spoke.

Thirdly M. Iuel left out these*words which went immediately Other words of
importance left out.
before and show in what respect S. Hierom spoke of going up: Iudaicas fabulas
repellamus. Let us put away Jewish fables, and so let us goc up with our Lord
to the great parlar, by keeping that which Christ instituted, and by leaving
other fables.

Fourthly whereas in the same very question it follows, that Christ gave the
true broad
not Moses but our Lord Jesus gave us the true bread, himself eating, and
being he that is eaten: How can M. Iuel find in his heart to allege this place
of S. Hierom against the real presence? For how is our bread more true then
the bread of Moses, if at Christ's supper we must go up into heaven to eat
it? Might not Moses eating Manna do the same? How is Christ the Conuina and
co^ uium.
maker of the feast and the meat it self, if common bread be eaten and not
his flesh? Is common bread the maker of the feast? If not the maker of the
seast, neither is it the meat: for all is one, says S. Hierom.


Iuel. Cyrillus says: our Sacrament anoucheth not the eating The 61. untruth.
of a man, leaving the minds of the unfaithful in ungodly manner to gross (or
flesh) cogitations.


Sand. A man would scant believe how wickedly this place is abused. First these
are not the words of S. Cyrill* next, he never mea^t not so much as by dream
any such thing, as M. Iuel does father upon him. His own words are spoken upon
such occasion: Nestorius the Heretic said that Christ had two persons, Nestor.
and that his ^hod was not ^nited (...) one person to the son Cyril. ad Enopt.
of God. Against whom S. Cyrill says in that place: proprium ^orpus dicimus
factum esse verbi, and non hominis alicuius seorsum Anathe. 11.
and separatim, we say the body of Christ to be made proper of the word, that
is to say, to be the words own body. and not to be the body of any man apart or
separated. Nestorius replied out of Christ's words: He that eats my flesh
tarieth in me. what eat we (said the heretic) the Godhead or the flesh?
meaning thereby to conclude, that seeing the Godhead can not be eaten with our
mouth, and yet the flesh was really eaten, that there was one person of the
Godhead, an other of the flesh. Cyrillus answers: Do thou then affirm,
that there is an other son and Christ, beside the word (coming) from God, the
which has appeared, and to who^ alone the matter of Apostleship may be
committed? Now follow y^ words corrupted by M. Iuel. Number hominis comestionem
nostrum hoc sacramentu^ pronuncias? do thou pronounce Homo in S. Cyrill does
signi fie a man that is not God.
this our Sacrament (to be) the eating of a man? M. Iuel turns these words,
as though S. Cyrillus had set forth a doctrine of his own, without any respect
to the heresy of Nestorius. but the words of S. Cyrill mean, do not thou
affirm that in the Sacrament (where we eat real and natural flesh) that
therein we eat a bare man's flesh, and not also his flesh that is God? Et
irreligiose ad crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt mentem? and
do thou vndenoutly press the mind of the faithful to gross cogitations?
And the words which follow M. Iuel thought good to omit, because they would have
showed hi to be a corruptour of good authors. It follows. and atte^tas etc.
Ibidem.
and do thon attempt to handle those things with man's thoughts, which are
understood by only pure and simple faith? whether The nature of the Godhead
is not ^ate^
because the nature of the Godhead is not eaten, therefore should a man say,
the holy body of our Lord to be a common body? Quoniam autem est corpus vitae,
but because it is the body of life, it does g^e life. for thereby it gives
life to our mortal bodies. hitherto S. Cyrillus, who by all means a^irmeth the
Note.
real body of Christ to be eaten, and so to be eaten, as the nature of the
Godhead is not eaten. Therefore S. Cyrillus speaks of eating Christ's body by
mouth, and not by faith only: but the fault which he found with Nestorius was,
for that Nestorius would have it to be the body of a man only, and not the
proper and peculiar body of God the word. Now M. Iuel worse in that behalf then
Nestorius, would have our Sacrament to be no flesh or body at all. Nestorius
plucked the nature of God from o^ Sa crament, leaving us yet the flesh of a
bare man. But M. Iuel Bare man bare bread
de^ieth any flesh at all to be present, leaving us only bread and wine, which
thing Nestorius durst not say. Nor the devil durst not then utter such
blasphemy by him: because the scriptures were so plain, and the faith of the
whole Church was so much addicted to Christ's real presence, and the practice
thereof so general, that it might by no means be openly oppugned. I have
spoken more of this matter in my ij. b. in the xxv. chap.

Hereof I must needs warn M. Iuel: As he would persuade that we eat not
Christ's flesh because S. Cyrill says, we do not eat the flesh of a man: so
he might say Christ was not born of the virgin, because a man was not born. For
S. Cyrill will not Cyril. ad Theod. de recta fide per totu^ lib.
grant him, that according to proper speech a man was born. for he was God
and man, but the person was the person of God, and not the person of a man. O
the great ^ty of M. Iuel so abusing S. Cyril, and not caring what he says.

S. Cyril plainly affirms these four things. 1. That Christ is not born a
pure and bare man. 2. That Christ is not adored as a bare man. 3. That we do
not believe in Christ as in a bare man. 4, That we do not eat Christ as a bare
man. If now (...). Iuel will conclude, that we eat him not therefore (...) all
really and corporally in the Sacrament, he may by the same force conclude, y^
he was not really borne at al, nor is to be really adored nor to be really
believed in. This extreme blasphemy of M. Iuel requires alone a whole book to
be made against it, as y^ which piketh ou^ of the Fathers (opp^gning y^
Nestorian heresy) such conclusio^s, which take away the whole incarnation of
Christ and the belefe thereof. we eat not a man, says M. Iuel, therefore we
eat not Christ, we adore not a man, says S. Cyril: therefore says M. Iuel we
adore not Christ. O pestilent instrument of Satan born Ad Theod. de rect. fid.
coll. 278.
in our days, to deny Christ to stablish Antichrist. Christ (says S. Cyrill)
does give us life as God, Sed and manducabilem app^ nens assumptam carnem filij
hominis, but (he gives us life also) putting before us the flesh of the son
of man assumpted, made apt to be eaten. Is it not plain here, that we eat the
flesh assumpted? but in deed it is no man's flesh, but the ^esh of God. for De
rect. ^id. ad re ginas
our lady is thereof called, not hominipara, the bringer forth of ^ man, but
Deipara, the bringer forth of God, who had assumpted Deipara.
man's nature. And that S. Cyrill, when he said the flesh of the son of man to
be set before us apt to be eaten, meant of eating by mouth and not by faith
alone, it is clear by that which follows, Colum. 279. vbi supra.
non est autem esibile verbum. the word (that is to say, the son of God as
God) is not able to be eaten. what M. Iuel? is it not able to be eaten by
^aith? yes verily. But God the word is not able to be eaten by mouth of it
self. How then is it eaten? secundum dispensatiuam vnionem. according to the
dispensation of the union, wherein the word is made flesh: and so whiles we
take the flesh into our mouth which is able to be eaten, we take also the word
into our mouth, because it dwells in that flesh. and so we eat not the flesh
of a man in our Sacrament, but the flesh of God.


Iuel. D. Harding will say Christ made mention of his omnipotent The 61.
untruth.
power, and therefore in the Sacrament there must needs be a fleshly presence.


San. What unhonesty is this to reason all this while against A vile custom of
M. Iuel.
D. Harding upon a false ground, and now to conjecture (as it were) what he
will say? as though his words lay not before you, as though he made not mention
five times of Christ's divine power. Yet come you again to frame his argument,
as if you were a ^ester or scoffer, whose office it is captiously to suap at
words. The 63. untruth.



Iuel. Nycola^ de Lyra says: Christ's words perteine nothing to the Sacrament.


San. That lie is answered before to your shame, who delight so in abusing
authors.


Iuel. If Christ's body be not in the Sacrament, is not God omnipotent? The 64.
untruth.



San. If D. Harding make no such argument, be not you a good reporter? He
says Christ's plain promise joined with his omnipote^t power, and with the
offense of the Capharnaits, does show his words to have been proper: and
consequently does prove his real presence. You divide them apart, and so play
your part in i^sting.


Iuel. The old Fathers, Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo, acknowledge The 65. untruth.
Gods omnipote^cie in Baptism, yet is not Christ really there. Therefore it was
vain labor to allege his omnipotency for the real presence.


San. But Baptism had no promise to be the flesh of Christ: Therefore you have
lost your labor in all that you allege in that behalf. For D. Harding said
not, wheresoever Gods omuipotencie is spoken of, that there his real presence
is proved, except Joan. 5.
the promise be joined withal. Christ said, the bread which Math. 26
I will ge^ is my flesh, and after bread taken and blessing made he said: This
is my body. And being omnipote^t he was able to perfoorm his word: therefore
his will and word joined make his real presence, and not his omnipotency
alone, as you ca^ill.


Whether the Catholics or Sacramentaries expound The viij.
Chapter.
more improperly or inconueniently the words belonging to Christ's supper. The
v. division.

HArding. Because these places report that Christ gave at his supper his very
body, the Fathers say it is really in the Sacrament. The 66. vntruth^.


Iuel. A thing is taken to make prouf which is doubtful, and the antecedent is
unproven.


Sand. Said not Christ: take, eat, this is my body? Say not the Evangelists,
that he gave unto his Apostles? How then is the antecedent unproven?


Iuel. The Fathers call the Sacrament a figure, a token, a sign, ij.
The 67. untruth.
an image, and caet. Therefore Christ's words may be taken with a Metaphore,
trope, or figure.


San. It stands well together to be a sign and the truth: As Christ is the
image of God, and yet also God. The higher Colos. 2.
every sign or image is, the less it differs from the truth: and therefore
the figure of Christ's body and blood differs in form, but not in substance
from Christ him self, and so albeit the Sacra meant be a figure, yet the words
(this is my body) be not trop^call or improper.


Iuel. Even Duns saw that following the bare letter we must Doutfull.
needs say, that the bread itself is Christ's body.


San. Think you any man does believe you (without allegi^g the place) who have
abused so many Fathers already? Or ^row you we spend so much time in reading
Duns, that we know all that is in him?


Iuel. So the words stand. This (bread) is my body. The 68. untruth.



San. Where stand they so? Is it written in any place of the Gospel, this
bread is my body? And yet you say the words stand so. I think it be so in your
Gospel: but surely it is not so in ours.


Iuel. They sa^ (this) meant not, this bread, but one certain The 69. untruth.
thing in general.


San. I have showed how it is taken in my. 4. book in the 4. 5. and. 6.
Chapter. it can not signify bread by any means. Neither does it only
signify in general as you say, but it signifies that which is contained
under the form of bread.


Iuel. Est, they expound, erit, it shall be. The 70. untruth.



San. It is a shameful pleasure that this man has in falshod. For we believe
that Christ took this word est, is, to consecrate his Chryso.
body withal, because of all words it signifies a most present Hom. 60 ad pop.
being of a thing. And for as much ^s God works in a moment, Antioc.
or at the instant of his word, he chose to say this is my body: Nysse. in
orat. Ca thec.
forth with making it so, as S. Chrysostom and Gregory Nyssen affirm. But he
would not say, this shall be my body, which had been a promise only, and not the
working or making of the mystery. Hoc.



Iuel. Erit, they expound: the substance of this uncertain general The 71.
untruth.
one thing shall be changed.


San. These interpretations be false, neither is the substance uncertain which
is changed. For the substance of the bread is changed: and that because Christ
affirms that, which was bread before he spoke, at the end of his speech to
be his body, to whose voice the substance of bread gives place to what him
list.


Iuel. Is given, they expound, shall be given. The (...). vnt (...).



San. What a vain tale is this? seeing we upon the present gist show an
unbloody sacrifice even pre^ently made, and therefore we urge always: this is
my body which is given for you. Although it be also true that it shall be given,
and both are true together, the one in the supper, concerning the unbloody
sacrifice, the other on the cross, concerning the bloody sacrifice, but yet
against heretics we urge most the present gift. This man by mocking us seems
to say, that Christ's body was not given at all. For at the supper he will not
grant a sacrifice. And he mocketh at datur for dabitur. Yet if it be meant of
the cross, it must be so expounded of him self, it is given, that is to say,
it shall be given. it is broken, is in the same condition with, is given.


Iuel. Do ye this, they expound, sacrifice ye this. The 73. untruth.



San. Nay Sir. They having first controuled your English as imperfit (though
not false) afterward will have hoc facite, also to signify make this thing, to
wit, make my body. The making of which sacrificed substance must needs be
always a sacrifice. I have spoken hereof in my. iiij. book the. xiij. Chapter.


Iuel. This bread, they expound, this that was bread. Doutful.



San. You should name the place where we so expound it. For according to the
circumstance it may be so taken. But much rather we take it for this food,
which is the body of Christ after consecration.


Iuel. These verbs he took, he blessed, he brake, he gave, stand The 74. (...).
together and rule one case.


San. They stand together in order of writing, but not in order of doing. For
if Christ had not said: this is my body, before he had broken, S. Paul would
not have said: the bread which we break is the communicating of Christ's
body. For it comes 1. Co. 10.
of the word of God (this is my body) that it is the communicating of Christ's
body. If then the words of (...) were spoken before the breaking, what wonder
you, (...) the thing that was taken being changed, we change the construction
of those verbs which follow the change?


Iuel. He took bread, he blessed it away. The 75* untruth.



San. You jest: But in deed we teach not the bread to be annihilated or done
away, but to be changed into a better substance. Blessing.
For blessing bestowed upon a creature is the abettering of it. Which is not
done without some change. Now if the thing pronounced at the time of blessing
by God, be an other substance, the former nature by blessing is then changed in
substance. God bless me from such a man, who sco^th at the holy mysteries.


Iuel. He brake the accidents.


San. That is true, because there was none other thing left after consecration
to be broken. And that you would confess, if you thought Christ to have used a
proper kind of speech, which allways you ought to think, if it may possibly be
defended as it may and must in the words of the supper. So that the chief
question is of those words, this is my body: The rest must be ruled by them.


Iuel. He gave his body.


San. We believe it a meter gift for Christ, then to give common bread.


Iuel. Upon these few words of Christ thus many figures and The 76. untruth.
more they have imagined.


Sand. Is it not (...) said of you, upon these few words of Christ? as though
all these were Christ's own words. whereas the four verbs be all written of the
Evangelists, but never a one of them spoken by Christ. which thing S. Ambrose
also has noted. but D. Harding spoke only of Christ's words, wherein he (...)
his body. in all which you have yet found never a figure. for this is my body,
which is given for you, make this thing: are all proper words and signify most
properly.


Iuel. Besy de these figures they have imagined many more. The 77. untruth.



Sand. We have imagined none, but we teach as we received. But will you give me
leave, M. Iuel, to repete a few of your figures, Here begin the false figures
of y^ Sacrame^ taries.
or of your absurd doctrines in this behalf? and then let the discrete reader
judge, who does more contumely to Gods words, you, or we.

1. First ye join together, this, bread, otherwise then the Gospel has don:
where it is not said, this bread is my body, Hoc. this.
but this is my body. 2. Ye have don it cleave against the Gospel. for hoc
(this) is of the newter gender, but panis bread is of the masculine gender. 3.
You have iterated the same fault in joining hic (this) being of the masculine
gender, to vinum, wine, being of the ^ter gender. 4. You have divided the
pronoun (this) both (...) the body and blood of Christ, with which substantives
only it may agree in right construction. 5. You expound the same pronoun
sometime for bread, sometime for the body, when ye say, this is my body, are
words of promise. For I In the 2. come of y^ homilies the leaf 213.
dare say you mean not, that bread is promised to any man. If the^ the body be
promised by these words, this is my body (as Calvin and your homilies say)
doutlesse in that interpretation (this) does appertein to the body, and not to
bread. 6. Est, is, you expound Est. is.
for significat, it does signify. and that without any example. For that verb
(In this is my body) stands not between two several natures, as in these
words (the rock was Christ) but it only (...) 1. Co. 10.
meth one substance of Christ's body. 7. You take the very same verb est is
properly, referring it to the body of Christ, which (...) every maus heart you
consecrate by preaching these words, this is my body, as Calvin teaches. 8.
Some other of you will have the verb est always to stand properly even in
respect of the bread, because it is a sign of Christ's body. and in deed it
must needs stand so. for you know that the verb substa^tiue is n^cessarily
either expressed or supplied in every proposition, in so much y^ these words,
this does signify my body, must be resolved, this is signifying my body. 9.
When the verb est, is, in greek is left Luc. 22.
out by S. Luke, ye supply it by force of common use, which leaves In the
words of the (...).
out that verb as being easy to be understood: and when you have supplied
it, you cast it out again, as though it were superfluouse. 10. The ^oun (body)
you take properly, when you Corpus.
Body.
have taken, est, for significat. 11. The same noun you take improperly, for
the figure of Christ's body, when (est) is taken properly. 12. You expound the
relative quod which so, as it Quod.
which.
can not agree with his antecedent, and with the verb solowing together. for
when body is taken for the sign or figure of body (as you take it most
commonly, and therein pretend to follow Tertullian and S. (...)) then the
relative (which) must needs repete his antecedent in his whole sense. and so
the sense is: This is the figure of my body, the which figure of my body is
given for you. Now as you will say: this is the figure of Christ's body. whereof
he said, this is my body: so you can not say, that the s^gure of Christ's body
is given for us. Thus, quod the which, stands between corpus body and datur,
is given, in such sort, that it can not agree with both: except ye say with
Marcion, that a figure is given or offered up to God for us.

13. Datur, is given, you expound dabitur, it shall be given, denying Datur. is
given.
that it is presently true, that it is given at the supper. We say it is given
at the supper, and shall be given also upon the cross, Facite. do and make.
not denying one truth by an other. 14. You expound facite, ^oe ye only,
whereas it is also, make ye. we grant both, ye deny the one sense. 15. Hoc,
ye English, this, and expound it in your Hoc. this thing
homilies, thus do ye: as if it were said fic, or ita, do ye so, or do ye thus.
whereas the true English is, this thing. (...). In meam In (...) for the re^.
commemoratione^, ye english in the remembrance of me, whereas in with an
accusative case, does signify rather, for the remembrance of me. as we say, in
meam gratiam fac hoc: do this thing for my sake, and not in my sake.

17. When you have expounded est, is, for significat to signify, Hic. this.
then remains the pronoun hic, this in the confecration of the blood without
a noun substantine. For Hic significat sanguinem meum, can have at all no
substantive with whom it may agree in case and gender. sanguinem is the
accusative case, and vinum is the neuter gender. 18. If in these words, this
cup is the new In my blood.
Testament in my blood, ye take the noun blood, for the sign of my blood, the
new Testament is established in a figure of blood: and so is worse the^ the
old, which was established in true blood Exo. 24.
of oxen. 19. If there you take the name of blood properly and without a
figure, likewise in these words, this is my blood of the new Testament, it must
stand properly, which is against your doctrine. 20. The construction of these
words, this cup is shed for you, in S. Lukes words, does import this sense, The
thing with in this cup is shed for you. but you say, the thing within the cup
is win^: therefore you teach wine to be shed for us. but we teach the thing
in the cup to be real blood: therefore we teach blood to be shed for us.

21. When Christ said, the bread which I will give is my flesh: You so expound
(I will give) that it means also I have given, and I do give. For you take it
spoken only of a spiritual giving which was both past and present, and therein
ye break the nature of the word.

22. In S. Paul (the bread which we break is the communicating of Christ's
body) you expound, signifies the communicating: As though the Jews figures
did not the same. and yet there S. Paul distin^eth our Sacra^ent from theirs.

23. The cup of blessing which we bless, you will have to be a 23.
blessing.
cup of wine still, as though the blessing wrought nothing in it. For if it
work any thing, it works the blood which at the consecration is affirmed
present.

24. You make Christ give thanks to his Father in beginning 24.
thanksgeu^g.
the state of the new Testament, in better words, then deeds: for his words be,
this is my body. Yet you will have him in deed to offer no body at all to his
Father in that thanksgeuing, but bare bread and wine still to remain.

25. You teach Christ to be an instituter of shadows, and to 25.
Bread wors: the^ Manna.
give externally, that is to say, to our mouths and bodies less then Moses.
For Manna was better then common bread, and a gist more miraculouse.

26. Ye expound, to be gilty of Christ's body and blood for eating, 26.
that is to say, for not eating or resusing to eat. For you 1. Cor. 1^
teach evil men not to eat the body of Christ, which is against S. Paul.

27. Ye will not have Christ's supper to be an external sacrifice, 27.
A Sacrifice.
but to be worse in that point then the Jewish or idolatours altars and tables,
who both did sacrifice, and also S. Paul compares 1. Cor. 10
Christ's table with theirs.

28. Ye so expound the showing of Christ's death, by eating 28.
The showing of Christian death.
bread a figure of him, that you rather show him not to be truly dead,
because your figure is yet empty and void, which can never prove Christ's
death truly past.

29. Ye expound the not making a difference between Christ's 29.
body eaten, and other meats, in such sort, that ye will not have (...) ^ting.
the body present, wherein the difference is to be made.

30. Ye deny our union with Christ's flesh by corporal participation, 30.
Union.
which S. Paul teaches by the example of Adam and Eve Ephesians. (...).
being two in one flesh.

31. Whereas S. Pauie says Christ to be so much better then 31.
Heb. 1 The name of body and blood.
Angels, by how much he had a more excellent name the^ they: you regard not y^
name body and blood given to y^ mysteries of Christ, but affirm them to be
still, that they were before, and therefore not to be that excellent substance,
which they are named to be.

32. In all the scriptures so great and often mention being made of 32.
The promise made to body and blood.
Christ's supper as there is, yet no promise can be found made to him who
eats material bread and drinks wine. But all the promise is made for
eatinge Christ's flesh and drinkinge worthily his blood. Therefore you affirm
bread to be eaten and wine to be drunken in Christ's supper beside the word of
God.

33. Although David prophesied of cating and adoring, yet you 33.
Psalm. 21.
will grant no such meat to be given to us which may be external ly adored.

34. Notwithstanding that the prophets teach, that by Christ's 34.
Psalm. 9.
coming al external idolatry shall be taken away, yet you fear Zach. 13.
not to say, that Christ's own Sacrament bearing the name of his own body and
blood, is it self an idol, which was left with us to keep us from all
idolatry.

35. The son of man came as to save, so to feed the whole man: 35.
why then deny you the food of life to our bodies, affirming them to eat
common bread, and to drink common wine, whiles the soul is fed by faith with
the body and blood of Christ?

36. If in the Sacrament of the altar we feed upon Christ by faith 36.
alone, why is that Sacrament called a supper more the^ baptism, where also we
must feed on Christ by faith?

37. Seeing a figure may also be the truth it self whereof it is the 37.
Heb. 1.
figure, as Christ is the figure of his Father and yet the same substance, what
reason have you, why you would rather detract this ho^our from Christ's
Sacrament, then give the same unto it? 38.


38. Christ being equal with his Father made promise to us of his ^oan. 6.
^ne flesh, which his Father had ge^en. Why then deny you the gift of Christ
to be as real to us, as his Father gave him real flesh?

39. How teach you the words of Christ, which are spirit and life, 39.
Joan. 6.
to be notwithstanding figurative, and consequently dead and void of al life
or strength?

40. Because y^ word of God (who was only able to be fed upon 40.
Psalm. 77.
by faith, and so was the food of Angels or souls) would be also the meat of
man (in respect of the body) it took flesh and at his supper said to us: take,
eat, this is my body. And yet you make him still to be only the meat of the
mind, whereby we are excluded from having God corporally in us through the
flesh of Christ.

41. To conclude, whereas ye find flesh, body, blood joined with (...).
eating, drinking, taking, partaking, giving, breaking, distributing,
communicating, d^udicating: ye expound all those words figuratiuelie, as though
God by so many ways repeating those words had not strengthened the common and
proper significatio^s of them. Let this suffice for this time to show, that you
observe nor gender, nor number, nor nominative case, nor verb, nor antecedent,
nor relative, nor the condition of the maker of the supper, nor the nature of
the sacrament, nor the state and perfection of the Gospel, nor the sayings of
the prophets, nor the ^ulfilling of the old law, nor the often repeting of the
matters belonging to Christ's supper: but only to serve the eye and the senses
deny all the marvelous Psalm. 110.
works of the new testament, y^ remembrance of al which this one mystery is
affirmed to be. ^rag no more, M. Iuel, of our figurative expositions: since you
have thus erred in gra^mar, in Logic, in Divinity, in truth, in faith, in
common sense.


Iu. If in these words: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, Origin.
hom. 7. in Leuit.
ye follow the letter, it kills.


San. To follow y^ letter is to take words as they sound to an in^del, as to
have flesh torn in to pieces and so eaten: but he that takes them as Christ in
his supper by his fact did expound them, does follow y^ spirit and not the
letter.


A notable place of S. Augustine corrupted by The ix.
Chapter.
M. Iuel.
IVel. S. Augustine says The Sacrament of Christ's body after iij.
a certain phrase, or manner, or trope, or ^igure of speech is the Epi. 23.
body of Christ. The 78. untruth.



Sander. This place is wickedly abused, because it is nakedly alleged, and
falsely englished, whereas it depends wholly upon the words going before,
which are these: Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in se ipso? and tamen in
Sacramento and caet. Was not ^mmola ri populis, id est, ^d vtili^atem po pulorum
Christ once offered up in him self? and yet in the Sacrament he is offered up
for the people not only at every feast of Easter, but every day. Neither
surely does he lie, who being demanded, Eum responderit immolari. Does answer
that he is offered up. For if the Sacraments had not a certain likeness of those
things whereof they are the Sacraments, they were not at all Sacraments. Out
of this likeness, they take also for the most part the names of the things the^
selves. As therefore according to a certain ^anner the Sacrament of Christ's
body is the body of Christ, the Sacrament of the blood of Christ is the blood
of Christ: so the Sacrament of faith, is faith.

In these words of S. Augustine it is to be seen evidently, that he puts a
difference between the thing, and the Sacrament of that thing. The thing
therefore it self must be first known, and then we shall see how the Sacrament
thereof is both like vn^ it, and takes the name thereof.

The thing it self (in ou^ question) is Jesus Christ, and not only The thing.
so, but the true body of Jesus Christ: neither only true in substance, but
even true in shape, in form, in quantity, and quality. Christ was made man in
deed, borne in deed, he grew and walked upon the earth in deed, according to
the true and visible nature and form of man. He suffered death in the same
form, and did shed his blood apart from his flesh. Now mark, when it pleased
him to depart out of this world, he would have all these things believed of
us, remembered of us, and followed, as our weakness through his grace might
suffer.

In consideration whereof he iustituted a Sacrament of his own The Sacrament.
body and blood. Of which body? Of that which he had taken, and which was but
one. The first point of this Sacrament must be (says S. Augustine) that it
have a certain likeness or similitude with Christ's own body and blood. and
consequently that likeness shall make it to have the name it self.

What is the likeness (in the sacrament of Christ's supper) between The likeness
of both thigs
it and the natural body of Christ? Seek as long as you are able M. Iuel,
pry, and search never so intierly, you shall find the likeness to be in this
point specially, that the substance of Christ's body and blood not having any
outward image made of them, are made present under the form of an other thing:
and are so made present, that thereby all the high mysteries of Christ's
visible body are mystically set before the faith of the true beleuer.

Christ being the son of God was made man by turninge The inc^ nation.
some of the purest blood of the virgin Marie into his own flesh Justin. in
Apol. 2.
and blood, and that was done without the sede of man, by the Damas^. li. 4. c.
14.
virtue of the word and power of the whole Trinity, through the ministry of
the Archangel Gabriell: even so the purest creatures of bread and wine are made
the body and blood of Christ, and turned into the substance of them, not by
generation and corruption, but by the virtue of these words, This is my body.
Which thing y^ whole Trinity works by the ministry of the Priest, who is
the Angel of Christ. Mala. 2.


Christ thus borne and having walked in his flesh, came to die The passion.
upon the cross, where his blood was divided from his flesh, the Amb. in 1.
Cor. 11
soul from the body: but the Godhead tarried still with both. right so this
sacrament has the body consecrated under one kind, the blood under an other
kind, and they are adored of the saithfull a part: yet the person which is one
whereunto they are united, and the Godhead in that person causes the two
parts to make but Eusebius.
one Sacrament, and the whole to be under each kind. Emis. 5.


Thus the likeness which is not in form, but in substance and Pascha.
in the consecration of true faith between Christ him self and this The name
given to the Sacra meant.
sacrament, makes this sacrament to be called his body and blood, although in all respects it be not so. Upon which ground, S. Hierom says: Dupliciter
sanguis Christi and caro intelligitur etc. Ephesians.
The flesh and blood of Christ is understood two ways. either Capi. 1.
that spiritual and divine, whereof him self said, my flesh is truly meat, and
my blood is truly drink, and except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood ye
shall not have everlasting life: or else the flesh which was cru cified, and
the blood which was shed with the spear of the soldiour.

Thus have we one flesh and blood in substance considered and Two
consyderatio^s of one flesh
understood two ways. and that not falsely understood (as the
Sacramentaries imagine) but truly and in deed. For a false understanding is
hated of God. This difference and this likeness is also noted in the present
words of S. Augustine, when he says: Christ was once offered in him self. Note
the word in him self, to wit, in his visible shape, form and truth as well of
substance as of quantity. the same Christ is daily offered in a sacrament. Are
not these S. Augustines words* Christ is offered in him self, and Christ is
offered in a Sacrament. is it not all one Christ? or is Christ divided? No,
no, al is one substance, but the m^ner is not al one.

And farther note very dyligently, good Reader, that of the One only chief and
bo die ^lation.
two immolations or offeringes, the one is referred to the other: The one is
the sign, token, figure, Sacrament of the other. And therefore the one is but
once done, because it was y^ great immolation Heb. 10.
which absolutely fulfilled all the law and prophets, and it was made upon the
Cross. The other being made in the Sacrament 1. Cor. 10 and 11.
shows, keeps, preserves and applies daily the fruits of that one
oblation: but Christ is always one in both. Now this likeness of the
Incarnation and passion of Christ made and represented to the faithful by the
Sacrament of the altar causes it to be called the body and blood of Christ.
And therefore S. Augustine concludes: The Sacrament of Christ's body according
to a certain Epist. 23.
manner, is the body of Christ. M. Iuel englisheth these words (according to
his manner) falsely, corruptly, and ignorantly. he turns, Secundum quendam
modum, after a certain Phrase, or Modu^.
manner, or trope, or figure of speech. True it is that modus does signify a
manner or mean. Again it may be sometime y^ the manner is tropicall or
figurative: but now it is not so meant. And that is proved two ways. First
because S. Augustine says: the Sacrament of the body of Christ according to a
certain manner est, Est corpus Chri sti.
is the body of Christ. he says not only it is called the body after a certain
manner, but it is the body. Therefore the manner that that he speaks of, is
in the Sacrament, in the thing it self, in the substance thereof, and not only
in the phrase, or trope, or figure of speech, as M. Iuel would have it.

Again, the name which the Sacrament takes, is given (as S. Augustine says)
according to a likeness, which is between the (...) follows (...) thing.
Sacrament and the thing it self. That likeness then must be first in the
Sacrament really, and afterward (in respect of priority of nature, though not
in respect of time) the name is given. Seeing then the likeness of things goes
before the likeness of names: When S. Augustine says: the Sacrament of Christ's
body is the body of Christ according to a certain manner, that manner must
respect the likeness of the things, before it respect the likeness of names.
Therefore M. Iuel has erred altogether in translating False translation.
modum, a phrase or manner of speech. But first he should have sought wherein
the things were like. for in deed the likeness in dinerse things is diverse: In
one thing it is in substance, as God the Father and his son are like equal,
and one in substance: Yet because there is some difference in that they are
diverse persons, Joan. 10.
the son is the figure of his Fathers substance according Heb. 1.
to a certain manner, to wit, as he is a diverse person, but not as a diverse
substance. In other things the substance may differ also, 1. Cor. 10
as the rock and Christ, and the quality alone may be like. As when Christ is
called the vine, the door, the way. But to conclude Joan. 15
with this place of S. Augustine, he says the holy signs which are like unto
the truth take also the name of the truth, and he brings that rule to show,
that a child baptized may well be called ^aithfull, because although he believe
not actually, yet he has faith in y^ he has baptism, which i^ the Sacrament
of faith. For says S. Augustine: Sacramentum fidei quodammodo fides est. The
Sacrament of faith after a certain manner is faith. He says not only it is
called faith after a certain phrase of speech (as M. Iuell would have it) but
it is faith after a certain manner of being, and not only of speaking. and
that being or truth which y^ infant has ^eceaued is so great, that (as it
follows in S. Augustine) Epist. 23.
the Sacrament shall be of strength to defend him from the power of the devil,
and from everlasting damnation. And judge you, M. Iuel, that to be only a name
and not a truth, which is able to bring the child to salvation? It is faith,
and it is not faith, as the Sacrament of the altar is Christ's body, and not
Christ's ^ody. It is not faith in actual consent of the will: It is faith in
the virtue of that power which the Sacrament printeth in the Habitus fidei.
soul of the iufant. it is the habit of faith, and not the act. even so the
Sacrament of y^ altar is the substance of Christ's body, and not the outward
form thereof, the thing it self, and not the shape thereof. The name
therefore of faith is given to y^ child in respect of a truth which by baptism
is wrought in the child, although it be not all the truth which is requisite to
actual believing. And the Sacrament of Christ's supper is called the body of
Christ for the substance of the body which is present, although it be not
visibly present according to all the manner of a true natural man's body.


Of the signification of aduerbes. The x.
Chapter.

HArding. By these words, really, substantially, and cae. The Fathers meant
only a truth of being, and iiij.
not a mean of being after carnal or natural wise.

Iuel. Al aduerbes taken of nounes signify ever more a quality, The 79.
untruth.
and never the substance.


Sander. An aduerbe has his name because it is joined to the Aduerbium.
verb, and it does make plain and fill up the signification thereof: so that if
the verb, whereunto it is joined, do signify the substance Aug. de gramat.
lib. 1.
of a thing, the aduerbe makes it to signify the same substance more
perfectly: as when the king Nabuchodonosor said to Daniel: Dan. 2.
Vere deus vester, deus deorum est. Your God is verily the God of Gods: The
aduerb verily does not signify a quality (as M. Iuel reports) but it does
affirm most vehemently the substance of one God above all other Gods, or
judges and rulers. And when the Centurion said, this man was verily the son
of Matt. 27.
God, it is not to be meant, that Christ was the son of God in ^alitie at
all, but only in substance.

Now concerning that some aduerbes be taken of nounes, it ^uerbs taken o^
nounes.
is to be known, y^ if they be taken of such nounes as import rather a
similitude of a substance, then a real truth thereof. in that case M. Iuels
resolution will serve, that they shall signify the manner and quality of the
thing, as virilter, does signify manly, because it comes of virilis, which
signifies manlike, and it comes of vir, which does signify rather the sex
then the substance of a man. But when the nounes do signify the substance it
self, the aduerbes derived of them must needs draw with the the signification
of the same substance: as corporalis, carnalis, substantialis, and naturalis,
be nounes which signify a thing that belongs to the body, the flesh, the
substance, the nature of y^ whereof we speak: and the aduerbes coming of them
of necessiti^ must signify the truth of that nature whereof we entreat.

But whether it shall signify the quality also with the truth: that
depends of the circumstance of the thing which is in hand. For example:
Christ walked corporally upon the water. that saying must be understood, in
the truth of a man's body, but not in any such accustomed manner, as other men's
bodies are wont to walk upon the water. For there is no such manner of walking
at all. And whereas the aduerbe must be referred wholly to the verb whose
signification it makes perfect, that saying must be this resolved: Christ's
bodily walking upon the water, was a Cyril. ad Theod. de rect. fide. ambulabat
mire vt Deus.
true walking concerning the truth of the flesh which did walk:
notwithstanding the manner of the walking did excede the quality of a mere
^atural body. Thus the aduerbes shall signify the truth of the substance of a
body walking, and yet not the manner of walking belonging to a natural and true
body.

Even so when Syrill writes, that Christ dwells corporally Lib. 10. cap. 13.
also in us, and not only by right faith and charity, the meaning of him
shall be, that Christ in the true substance of his body dwells in us, although
he dwell not in us after such manner, as other natural bodies of men dwell in
the places where they are. Thus M. Iuel is cast in his grammar also, whereof he
i^iteth D. Harding. But to thend his ignorance or malice may appear y^ better,
I beseech the discrete Reader to consider the ods between D. Harding and M.
Iuel.

D. Harding says: when the Fathers teach Christ to be in us carnally,
corporally, or naturally (for all these terms S. Hilary and S. Cyrill have)
then they mean that Christ is in us by the true substance of his flesh, and
not in such manner as common flesh is wont to be any where. This saying of D.
Harding is so true, y^ he never thought it nedeful to pro^e it: yet M. Iuell
says y^ the Fathers must mean, that Christ is in us after a corporal,
carnal, and natural manner, and not in substance. For he says aduerbs taken
of nounes signify evermore y^ quality, and never y^ substance. M. Iuell
excludes y^ signific^ tion of sub stance from aduerbs.
Well how think you then M. Iuel? is Christ after a carnal sort in us or no? It
is well seen by your work y^ you think nothing less. For he y^ gra^teth the
manner of body or flesh, much more should grant, if he were wise, the nature
and substance thereof. because it is not possible, that the quality or manner
of flesh should be without the truth of flesh: Since no quality ordinarily
consists qualities can not be ordinarily without substance.
of it self, but only rests in the substance of that thing, whose quality
it is. But a substance may be without qualities, as the substance of God is
without all manner of accidents.

Now D. Harding affirms at the lest wise, the truth of body and of flesh to
be meant by the Fathers without the common Substa^c^ may be without qualities.
quality thereof: Which thing may right well be so. M. Iuel will have their
sayings meant so, that the substance of flesh and blood shall be excluded by all
means. And as for the quality of Christ's flesh, he will have it corporally
in our bodies without any substance thereof wherein that quality may rest.
which his opinion is against all the course of nature.

Again, when S. Hilarie says that Christ tarieth naturally in Lib. 8. de
Trinit.
us, what quality will M. Iuel assign to that aduerb? shall he tarry in us in
the manner of a natural tarying, and yet shall not his true nature be in us? let
us go a little farther. S. Hilary says: Christus natualiter secundum spiritum
in se patrem habet, Christ has the father in him according to y^ spirit
naturally. How will M. Iuel expound the word, naturally? whether, that C^riste
has a quality of his fathers nature in him, and not the whole true substance?
Last of al S. Hilarie expounds his own words even as D. Harding has done.
For as he says in one place: Ipso in nobis naturalitr permanente, he tarying
in us naturally: so he says in an other place a little before, Est ergo in
nobis ipse per carnem. Therefore he is in us him self by flesh. And again:
Naturaliter secundum carnem per eum viuimus, id est, naturam carnis suae
Naturaliter is resolved by S. Hilary (...) self.
adepti. We live by him according to the flesh naturally, that is to say,
having obtained the nature of his flesh. Consider good Reader that naturaliter
viuere, to live naturally is by S. Hilarie thus resolved, to live by having the
nature. And to li^e naturally according to the flesh, is to live by having y^
nature of Christ's flesh. Who is now the more ignorant in grammar, D. Harding,
or M. Iuel? And yet M. Iuel, in that childish eloquence of his, triumphs upon
D. Harding, and says childern are taught these things.


Iu. God regards not the doing of any thing, but the manner The 80. ^ntruth.
of doing. But M. Harding will ouerloke the grammar rules.


San. That rule is to be understand in matters belonging to manners. But now
we dispute of substances, and not of doings. We say Christ's body is in our
bodies naturally. this truth is to be discussed, and not any moral action of
ours. The 81. untruth.



Iuel. Our childern must learn a new grammar for th^se men's pleasure: otherwise
these men's d^initie can not stand.


San. Priests childern may (...) a new grammar, but as the old faith, so the
old grammar will ^erue other men's childen. It is verily a very new gra^^r to
say, that aduerbes taken of nounes never signify the substance. Good
Scholmasters will not adm^e such rules.


Iu. Have these old Fathers nor names nor words? The 8^. untruth.



San. As though you know that they follow hereafter. when you are come to
them, you will be quickly werie of them.


Of the first Author of the Sacramentarie he^sie.
HArding. Berengarius first began openly to show The 6. (...).
the Sacramentarie heresy touching the verity of Christ's body in the
Sacrament.

Iu. Before M. Harding said, the Messalians were the first fathers 2.
of this heresy. and so his tales hang not together. The 83. untruth.


Harding. The Messalians opinion Was, the Sacrament of the altar did nor good,
nor evil. And therein they Were the first parents of the Sacramentarie
heresy.


San. That which the Messalians did begin privily by general disgracing the
Sacrament, Berengarius began openly by denying this special virtue thereof,
which is the real presence. and so there is no contradiction at all, and you
are found but a cauiller.


Iu. Ioannes Scotus and Bertram maintein^d the same doctrine The 84. untruth.
before Berengarius.


Sander. If these men did bark in privy corners at any ceremony (which
thing yet is not evident to us) but if it were so, yet they maintained it not.
For then they had been condemned of heresy: But if that also were true, you
have gained little more the^ two hundred years, and those but by surmise without
knowledge thereof left in any good history. And what is that to (...) hundred
years of continual practice, and open doctrine, such as we Catholics have had?


Iuel. For farther declaration hereof, it shall be necessary to open Berengarius
judgment.


San. Nay Sir, it is enough to us, that you are at a stay, and can De consecra.
dis. 2. ca. ego Bereng.
bring your faith no higher then to Ihon Scote, and Bertram. If your faith
began privily almost eight hundred years after Christ, shall we here the
declaration thereof? if that may be permitted, the heresy of the Arrians may be
heard again, who was before Bertram.


Iuel. Thus Berengarius wrote.


San. I care not what he wrote, since he reca^ted y^ same. The (...) will
stands in his force, and no wise man knowing that he repeuted his folly,
will afterward allege his authority for that, which he recalled.


Iuel. But his judgment is confirmed by the Fathers. The 85. untruth.



San. It is not possible, that the Fathers should confirm his judgment, who
impugned their universal tradition, in so much that he him self (...) his
own judgment. For seeing he recanted his whole opinion, he recanted also that
very error, which he had conceived as by pretense of y^ fathers words. What a
mad^es is it for you, to allege any of both in his name? for he in his
recanting has answered his own authorities alleged before out of the Fathers.


Iuel. Let us see the confutation hereof.


San. Seeing Berengarius is the co^futour, his own true word is enough to undo
as much as his word had falsely stablished before.


Iuel. Berengarius was forced to recant in this wise. The 86. (...).



San. Force is not done to the free (...) of man.


Iuel. I believe that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ sensibly The 87.
untruth.
and in very deed is touched with the hand of the Priest, and broken and rent,
and ground with the teeth of the faithful.


San. You have englished the words very spitefully. you have added (rent) of
your own head. and atteri, does signify to be broken in pieces, or to be
wasted, which may be done without grinding. You are so accustomed to falsify
things, y^ no man's words may escape your poison.


Iuel. The very gloss says: unless you warily understand these words of
Berengarius, you will fall into a greater heresy, then ever he heald any.


San. The gloss warns us, that all the touching, breaking and wasting or
co^suming is to be referred to the forms of bread and wine: the which thing if
you had not left out, you had alleged some one gloss without falsifying the
same.


Iu. These Fathers redress the less error by the greater. The 88. untruth.



San. The cause why Berengarius recanted by those words (rather the^ by any
other) were two: the one, for y^ he had taught in the time of his error, the
body of Christ not to be before our eyes. Against which words he now says, it
is sensibly handled. The second was, for that the body being under the form of
bread, and touched by the Priests hands, and broken by reason of the same
form, is thereby showed most really present. to witness the which real
presence, S. Chrysostame had used the same kind of In Joan. hom. 45.
speech before, saying: No^ se tantum videri permittens desyderantibus, sed and
tangi, and manducari, and dentes carni suae infigi, and desyderio sui omnes
impleri. Christ permits him self not only to be seen of the^ that long after
him, but also to be touched, and eaten, and the teeth to be fastened to his
flesh, and all men to be filled with the desire of him. Which notwithstanding
M. Iuel writes in the The 89. untruth.
margent of Berengarius his cons^on: This is an horrible blasphemy, not
knowing that the denying of this real presence v^der those forms of bread and
wine, is that horrible blasphemy, whereof he speaks: And not to speak as S.
Chrysostom and other holy Fathers have spoken.


Iuel. Bertram and Ihon Scotus wrote openly against it with The 90. v^truth.
the contentation of the world.


San. Against which it did they write?


Iuel. Against this, if it be the Catholic faith.


Sander. Which this? Whether against the confession of Bereugarius? You say
the^ were two hundred years before hun what then? wrote they against the
Catholic faith? if they did so, how could the Catholic world be content
therewith? again, where are the words which the world was contented withal?
thinck you it lawful to feign or gloss what you list?


Iuel. That M. Harding calls the Catholic faith, is in deed aCatholike The
91. untruth.
error.


Sander. No error can be Catholic, because Christ said hell Matt 19. and 15.
gates should not prevail against his Church. And it is a city built upon a
hill, which can not be hidden. The rest of your words shall hereafter be proved
vain.


Of Christ's glorified body, and the place of S. The (...).
Hierom expounded. Chapter.

HArding. The body which was before the death The 7. (...).
thereof thrall and frail, is now spiritual.

Iu. M. Harding in the end concludes against him self. The (...). untruth.



San. You say so, but you prove it not.


Iu. Only Stephen Gardener gives the world to understand, that The 93. untruth.
Christ is not yet fully possessed in this glory. thus he says: the time of
the despensation or service of his h^militie remains still, until (...)
deliver up the Kingdom unto God his Father.


Sand. B. Gardi^er dot noth say, that Christ is not fully possessed in his
glory for his own part. that is your addition. Again the word ( service) was of
your putting in, least any authority might escape you uncorrupted. How be it B.
Gardener seems to mean no more therein, then S. Paul said before him,
witnessing Heb. (...).
that Christ sits at the right hand of the majesty in heaven, minister
sanctorum, the minister of holy things. for he is yet a minister still by
reason of his mystical body. If it were any part of our principal purpose to
stand upon that matter, I would show you what holy things they were, and how he
ministered them by dispensation of his humility during the time of the
peregtination of his members, notwithstanding his own glory at the right hand
of his Father, wherein he is fully possessed.


Iuel. To what end allegeth M. Harding the spiritual state of The 94. untruth.
Christ's body? Eutiches said it is changed into the very substance of God:
which heresy is like M. Hardings, if it be not the same.


Sand. I know not what you mean by burdening D. Harding with the heresy of
Eutiches: since the defense of the real presence is as directly against that
heresy, as may be. for how can the natural and substantial flesh of Christ
be present in the Sacrament, if his flesh were turned into the substance of the
Godhead, as E^tiches said? could that be in the Sacrament, which were not in it
self? Therefore the places alleged out of S. Augustine, S. Dionysi^s, S.
Cyprian and other holy Fathers, concerning the truth of Christ's humane
substance and nature ^ill remaining and not changed into the divine substance,
or else concerning our ^mitation or likeness of God, is wholly confessed of us.
neither does D. Harding mean by the body dei^ed, other then y^ body immortal
and spiritual: yet so far above our bodies, as the v^ion in y^ person of the
natural son of God, excedeth our adoption by grace.

But for so much as you doubted not, M. Iuel, to burden D. Harding with the
Eutichian heresy, I will briefly show, that your opinion is far more like unto
it, then D. Hardings belefe.

As Eutiches destroyed the truth of humane flesh in the person of Christ, so
the Sacramentaries destroy the truth and real presence of the same flesh in
the Sacrament of the altar. And yet the old Fathers proved, that as the
Sacrament of the altar consisted Cypria. de coena Dom. and de cons. did. 2. c.
of two things, of the sign or foorm of bread, and of y^ body of Christ: so
Christ consists of two natures, the one divine, the other humane. But seeing
the Sacramentaries take away y^ real presence from the visible sign of bread,
they falsify the argument Hoc est quod dicimus.
of the old Fathers, and further the cause of the Eutichians. For as the
Eutichians turned the natural flesh of Christ into the Theod. in dialo.
Godhead: so the Sacramentaries turn the Sacramental eating of natural flesh
into mere divine and spiritual eating, which is made by faith alone. But as
the old Fathers proved against the Eutichians, that Christ who truly suffered
death could not suffer it in his divine nature: so I tell the Sacramentaries,
that Christ who said, take, eat, this is my body, can not be taken into our
Math. 26
hands, or eaten with our mouths, by faith and spirit aloue. We must have such
an eating, as may prove Christ to have had real flesh, because we eat by
mouth his real flesh. So S. Hilarie Lib. 8. de Trin.
proved our natural union with Christ's flesh against the Arrians: S. Gregory
Ny^sen, that Christ had taken true flesh of the In vita Moysis.
Uirgin. For how can a thing (says he) which has no body, be made meat unto
the body? So S. Cyrill proves, that there is but one person, because the flesh
which we receive does give lif^ to our souls and bodies: which it could not
do, except it were Ad Euo.
the proper flesh of God, who only gives life. Thus M. Iuel Anath. 11
may perceive, that his opinion agrees with the Arrians, Ualenti^ians,
Ne^orians, Eutichians, And the like might be said of the Marcionites,
Manichees, Apellians, and briefly of all those heretics, who denying a real
truth of Christ's di^ine or humane nature, were always confuted by the Fathers
by the real truth of Christ's manhod and Godhead confessed of the Catholics
in this blessed Sacrament.

Harding, S. Hierom shevving two vvays of understanding Christ's flesh, one
spiritual (as it is verily meat) an other, as it was crucified, declares
the manner of eating it only to differ from the manner of it being crucified, the
substance being all one. 5.



Iuel. He speaks neither of the Sacrament, nor of any real The 95. untruth.
presence.


San. He means both.


Iuel. S. Hierom speaking of the dubble understanding of Christ's The 96.
untruth.
flesh, means that we have our salvation in Christ eating him and living by
him, not for that his flesh was mortal only and crucified upon the cross, but
for that it was spiritual and divine, that is to say, the flesh of the Son of
God.


San. Your gloss, M. Iuel, is stark naught. For whereas S. Hierom rekoneth up
two ways of understanding one and the same flesh, you make such an
interpretation, which does confound those (...) understandings. For if Christ's
flesh be called of S. Hiero^ di^ine and spiritual, because it is the flesh of
the Son of God, the^ his flesh was divine and spiritual upon the cross
also. For even there it was the flesh of the Son of God. But he calls it
spiritual one way, and crucified an other way: therefore his meaning is, that
it is spiritual and divine flesh, not only for respect of the union, but under
the form of bread, where it is present to be eaten in a divine manner, and, as
if it were a spirit, utterly invisible, and able to be perceived by no (...):
and yet for all that true and real flesh, even the same substance which was
crucified. Any other sense you can not apply to the distinction of S. Hierom:
and whatsoever else you bring out of S. Augustine or Angelomus, it is not to the
purpo^.


Iuel. S. Hieroms meaning is, that the same flesh being thus divine The 97.
untruth.
and spiritual, must also spiritually be received, and not fleshly, as M.
Harding imagines.


San. As though D. Harding brought not the distinction of S. Hierom, to prove
that his assertion is not carnal and fleshly, but spiritual and divine. And
yet you still call it as you list, and huddle up places of the Manichees and
Messalians nothing to the purpose.


Iuel. S. Hierom him self says: Of this oblation which is marueilously De*
consecrat. did. 2. c. de Sac.
made in the remembrance of Christ, it is lawful to eat: but of that oblation
which Christ offered upon the altar of the cross according to it self, it is
lawful ^or noman to eat: That is to say, in gross and fleshly manner.


San. Who could speak more against your self, then you do now? The fleshly
manner of eating is to eat flesh visible, palpable, and corruptible, and in
that manner as it was upon y^ cross. This place brought by you (although it be
thought to be the saying of Origenes, and not of S. Hierom) yet confirms
excedingly the former distinction. For the same substance is eaten which was
crucified, even as the Host or thing offered is one in both oblations, but the
manner is diverse. Both these places are in deed very like. Both name the
cross, both name eating. Both make a difference between the thing crucified
and eaten, but yet not in substance, but in the manner of the presence thereof.


Iuel. By these words S. Hierom ^weth a great difference between the sacrifice
that is made in the remembrance of Christ, and the very sacrifice in deed that
Christ made upon the cross.


San. The difference is so great, that the thing offered is all one in
substance, but upon the cross it is offered as an oblation wholly burnt, and
therefore not eaten. In the supper it is offered, as an oblation to keep the
redemption of the cross in continual remembrance, and to thank God for the
redemption purchased, and to make us partake the fruits of Christ's death by
eating worthily the body which died. But if the thing or substance offered be
not one and the same, what oblatio^ is that, M. Iuell, which Quae (...)
rabiliter fit.
is marueilously made in the supper? What is that wherein we remember and show
Christ's death? Is bread and wine y^ marueilouse oblation? (...) they made
(...) in the remembrance of Christ? What marueilouse making can you find in
them? Except (which is the very truth) they be made the body and blood of
Christ? That is in deed a marueilouse making, a marueilouse sacrifice, a
marueilouse showing of Christ's death? You had lost your wits when you brought
forth this place, which makes so fore all against you.


Iuel. If a man take it fleshly (says S. Chrysostom) he gains In Joan.
nothing. Hom. 47



San. It follows in S. Chrysostom immediately: what say we then? is not flesh,
flesh? yes doutlesse. And again these words (the flesh profits nothing) were
not spoken of the flesh it self, but of fleshly understanding. Whereby it is
clear, that he understands fleshly, who deuiseth a gross and fleshly manner
of eating Christ's flesh: but not he, who says the flesh it self must be eaten
in his true substance, if the manner be divine and spiritual, as in our
Sacrament it is. De doct.



Iuel. It is a figure or foorm of speech (says S. Augustine) Christ l. 3.
cap. 16.
^illing us to be partakers of Christ's passion.


San. You are taken M. Iuel. If you had not brought this place, I would have
brought it. for if Christ in S. Ihon wills (...) to be partakers of Christ's
passion, seeing that partaking mu^ be at the lest by faith (for it may also be
in a more (...) both by faith and Sacrament) but seeing we must partake of the
passion at the least by faith, and you say we eat Christ's body none otherwise
in the supper, but only by faith: how then can you avoid the place brought by
your^lf ou^ of S. Hierom, where it was said, it is not lawful to eat of that
oblation according to it self which Christ offered upon y^ altar of the cross?
Is it not lawful to eat of Christ by faith even as he hung crucified* will you
not then believe upon him, as he hangs in that base and humble condition? I
know you will. but your eating is believing: therefore you eat that oblation
according to it self, even according as it is there spread and co^tumeliously
handled. But S* Hierom says: noman may eat it so, therefore he means eating
by mouth, and not by faith. go on with me, M. Iuel: but of that oblation which
is made maruelously in the remembrance of Christ, it is lawful to eat* and
how to eat, but by mouth? for as lawful eating stands against unlawful
eating: so in the one place it is unlawful to eat by mo^th, in the other it
is lawful to eat by mouth. Therefore S. Hierom speaks not only of eating
Christ's divine and spiritual flesh by faith, but even by mouth also in the
Sacrament.


Iuel. S. Hierom calls the eating of the divine and spiritual The 98. (...).
flesh of Christ the remembering that he died for us.


Sand. If that be so, then the oblation it self is eaten of, which Christ
offered upon the cross, and that secundum se, that is to say, according to it
self. How is it possible swetely to remember that Christ died for us, and not
to eat by faith his very death, and the sensible manner thereof? but his ^esh
offered ou the cross though it may be eaten by faith, yet according to it self
it may not be eaten in that corruptible foorm and shape. And contrary wise the
divine and spiritual flesh is so (...) appointed to be (...), that the (...)
Christ said, my flesh is verily meat: therefore S. The di^ flesh is cate^ by
mouth.
Hierom speaks of eating the divine and spiritual flesh by mouth, and not
only by faith. eating by faith is rather more due to the flesh of Christ as it
hangs crucified, then to any other manner of the same slesh. For we must
swetely remember his death, and be partakers of his passion by faith: but not
by mouth. On the other side we must eat Christ's divine and spiritual flesh,
as it is understood in another way distinct in manner from his cross and
passion: therefore that other eating is an eating by mouth, and not only by
faith.


Iuel. Cleme^s Alexa^drinus says: there is a fleshly blood wherewith In paeda.
(...). 2. ca. 2.
we are redeemed, and a spiritual wherewith we are anointed. and this is to
drink the blood of Christ, to be partaker of his immortality. As Christ's blood
is not really present to anoint us, The 99. untruth.
^o it is not really present to nourish us.


San. Clemens Alexandrinus dividing Christ's blood into carnal and spiritual,
agrees with S. Hierom in the former part of the division, that is to say, in
carnal blood, but in the later part he speaks of an other thing. For whereas
S. Hierom took spiritual flesh and blood for the substance of them, as they
are eaten and dronken in the Sacrament (which thing may appear, for that he
cites these wdrds of Christ: my flesh is verily meat, and except you eat my
flesh, ye shall not have life euerla^ing, which words are meant of the
Sacrame^tal eating) Cle^e^s Joan. 9.
does not respect so much the Sacrament of the altar it self, as the effect and
fruit of Christ's carnal blood, how soever it be partaken. and that is
evident by his own words where he says, this is to drink the blood of
Jesus, to be partaker of his immortality. To partake the immortality of
Christ, is an effect which may rise of faith, of Baptism, of penance, of the
Sacrament of the altar, and of all other means or instruments, whereby the
salvation of Christ may be derived unto us. Cleme^s therefore speaking of an
effect which may ^e wrought by one meritoriouse cause only (that is to say, by
the death of Christ) but understanding the means to apply that cause unto us
to be diverse, he spoke not directly of these m^anes, but of that spiritual
fruit, which either one or more of them do bring forth in us. For the
oynting, whereof Clemens does speak, is to be referred to the Vnctio. 1. Joan.
2.
spiritual grace which is g^en to the soul, and not to the substance of the
Sacrament whereof we dispute.

It will not therefore follow, that because the blood whereof Clemens does
speak sometime, is not really present when through grace we are ointed with
it, that the blood also whereof S. Hierom speaks should not be really
present: since they two speak not of one kind of spiritual blood.


Iuel. This nouris hing and this anointing are both spiritual.


San. That is true, but not both after one sort. For S. Hiero^ speaks of the
spiritual blood in the substance thereof, as it is verily drink in y^
Sacrament: Clemens, as it is fruitfully partaken of us, and not as it is
considered in his own substance. S. Hierome speaks of the Sacrament, Clemens
of the end and fruit of al our belefe. That S. Hierome speaks of the
Sacrament it is proved, because he cites such words out of S. John, Joan. 6.
as all y^ Fathers and manifest reasons and conference of the scriptures prove
to appertein, by the way of promise, to the Sacrament of Christ's supper. Which
thing I have proved in twenty chapters together in my third book. to which
reasons until M. Iuel has answered, he shall give me leave to put it for an
undoubted truth, that Christ in the later part of the sixth chapter of S. Ihon
speaks most literally of the gift of his flesh and blood to be made at his
last supper. But Clemens does speak of that spiritual drinking Christ's blood,
whereof S. Augustine says: Hunc cibum and potum societatem vult intelligi
corporis and membrorum suorum, Tract. (...) in Joan.
quod est sancta Ecclesia. This meat and drink Christ wills to be
understood the fellowship of his body and members, which body the holy Church
is. Now to be partaker of the unity and spirit which is made in Christ's
my^ical body, that is to be partaker of the immortality and glory of our
Lord. For as Ephesians 5.
S. Paul says, he is the Savior of his body. Cont. li^. Petil li. ^* cap. 8.



Iu. S. Augustine says, Judas betrayed Christ carnal, thou hast^ betrayed
Christ spiritual. For in thy fury thou betraiedst the holy Gospel to be burnt
with wicked fire. These words of Clement The 100. (...).
and Augustine agreing so nere in (...) and phrase with the words of Hierom may
stand for sufficient exposition to the same.


San. These words go so nere y^ one to the other, that in sense they differ
exceeding much. For now S. Augustine takes Christ spiritual an other way
cleave diverse from Clement or S. Hiero^. and that may be easily seen, if a man
will read the line which follows next in S. Augustine. For he says: Judas
betrayed the lawmaker unto the perfidious Jews: thou have betrayed to me^
Christ's relics are y^ holy Bib^.
as it were reliquias eius, his relics, to wit, the law of God to be
destroyed. S. Augustine then takes Christ spiritual, for certain relics of
Christ, which although they be no parts of his corporal body, yet they belong
to him, for y^ of his great providence toward us he lest the^ to be devoutly
readen and kept. what mean you, M. Iuel, to mi^gle things impertine^t
together? Think you, wheresoever you find y^ word spiritual, y^ by and by it
pertains to your purpose? or do you only inte^d to abuse yt not learned reader?

The word, spiritual, being maned of spiritus, a spirit, m^ste Joan. 4.
needs be taken ^s many ways, as y^ word spirit is taken which Matt. 4.
does signify God, that is to say, the whole Trinity. For God is Romans 8.
a spirit. 2. The holy Ghost of whom Christ was lead into the deserte. Heb. 1.
3. Christ him self, as S. Cyrillus has noted. 4. Angels. 5. Psalm. 47
(...) 6. Spiritual gifts. 7. The soul. 8. The imagination. 9. ^. Cor. 14
The breath of man's ^outh. 1^. Anger or punishment. and many Joan. 19.
other things. By which diverse taking of this one word, a^ of ^. Cor. 14
diverse others in the holy scripture, such difficulty rises to a man Genesis 6.
(though not unlearned) that without the help of vni^sal tradition he can not
understand them. That which you bring out of Athanas^s appertemeth to the
Capharnaites, and to no man else.


Iu. Thus M. Harding reasons we eat not the flesh of Christ, The 101. ^truth.
that was crucified, ergo Christ's flesh is really in the Sacrament.


Sander. You leave out the chief part of the argument. We eat Christ's divine
and spirtual flesh, and yet we eat it not so as it was crucified: therefore S.
^icrom spoke of that eating, which is not only made by faith (for so the
crucified flesh may be eaten) but of that, which is made by mouth also.


Iu. We can notthen eat the flesh that was crueified: ergo we The 102. ^truth.
can not really eat^ Christ's flesh, ergo Christ's body is not really in the
Sacrament.


San. Your argument is like to that sophis^: You eat not raw ^sh, but you
bought raw flew, ergo you do not eat that which you bought. S. (...) says:
we do not ^ate the flesh crucified, ^o wit, as it was crucified, ^en as he that
eats flesh does not (...) it as it was raw. but as he does ^ate that in
substance which was in quality raw: so we eat really y^ same substance that
was crucifi^d, but not in the sam sort, but in a spiritual and in a divine
mauner. not by faith only, but also by mouth.

Harding. The Fathers used the words really, substantially The 8. di^ision.
and caet. to put away all dout of the being of Christ's very body in the
holy mysteries.


Iu. He diuineth what they mean, before they speak. The 103. ^ntruth.



San. Nay, because he is sure of their words, he (...) their mind.


A place of S. Chryso^ome expo^nded. The xii^. Ch^piter.

HArding. The Sacramentaries teach our Lords body to be represented only in
figure, sign, and token, being absent in deed.

Iu. All the holy Fathers have used those terms. The 1^4* (...).



San. It is a vain ^ster of names without truth. They never v^ed the term^ of
only figure, nor said not, that the truth was absent.

Harding. Under visible signs invisible things be delivered.


Iu. Ergo Christ's body is really in the Sacrament. The 10^* untruth.



Sander. You lea^e out one pe^ce. For in deed so it must needs be in that
Sacrament, where it is signified really present: otherwise the sign should be
false. For after it is once said over bread* this is my body, that sign of
bread during, the body therein (...) present, does dure.


Iuel. Chrysostom says, in the same homily: if Christ died not, The 10^*
^ntruth.
whose sign and token is this sacrifice? therefore he may be also charged with
the Sacramentary quarrel.


San. You prove it a sign hereby, but not that the truth is abse^t from the
sign, which thing you should have proved. But I will prove hereby, that the
thing or truth signi^d is really present: otherwise this sign could not be a
sacrifice. ^rsed might ^e be, that defends bread and wine to be the final
sacrificed s^bstance of the new Testament. But this that S. Chrysostom
demands of, is a sacrifice* and that of the new Testament, and used in
Christ's Church: therefore it is the real body of Christ, and yet withal a
sign, because it is given inuisibly present, to make us (...) the visible
sacrificing thereof upon the Cross* 2. It is said there (...) S. Chrysostom,
^at Marcio^, Vale^tin^s, Ma^ichens (...).
(w^ de^ied Christ's real flesh an^ (...)) are confounded by these mysteries.
How can that be, if the true flesh of Christ be not really contained in them?
For a figure of flesh without the truth does rather help those h^iks, then
confound them.

3. S. Chrysostom s^ith even there, that it is evident by these 3.
mysteries, that Christ has been already sacrificed. which saying can not be
true, if his real flesh be not pr^sent. For as a figure of Christ's flesh
offered up in all the sacrifices of the old law, did not prove that Christ was
already off^red, but that a^terwarde he should be offered: so a figure of
Chris^es sl^sh now of^red, can not prove that Christ has been offered, but
only that he shall be O^li Chri st^s real flesh proves his death to be past.
offered hereafter. But his real flesh being eaten under the form of bread
proves i^incibly, that he has been already o^ered, because no flesh is eaten
in any holy sacrifice, before it has been offered to God: of which point I
have spoken in my fifth book the first Chapter.


Iu. How light occasions these men take to deceive the simple? The 107. untruth.



San. What a light occasion took you even presently, to deceive the simple by
the name of toke^? which yet so proves against you in that place, that it is
not possible for you to avoid it.


Iu. M. Harding knows, that Chrysostom speaks generally The 108. ^ntruth.
of al other mysteries. for it follows: even so ^n baptism the water is a
thing sensible, the regeneration is a thing spiritual. Wherefore if M. Harding
upon the occasion of these wo^ds will force his real presence in the one
Sacrament, he must likewise force the same in the other.


San. D. Harding brought that place only to show, that the body of Christ is
not visiblie present. But oth^rwise baptis^e and the Eucharist agree herein,
that in sensible things other things invisible and spiritual are given. And
the things given, are given in both, but they are in them selves diverse. In
baptism the grace of regeneration which is given, is contained and given,
when the word comes to the water. For the water and the word has the grace
of Christ working by it. but in the Sacrament of the altar, the grace contained
is the natural body of Christ, which ly^th hidden under the form of bread.
Thus each Sacrament has the gift pre^nt, but not each r^all presence of
flesh: for as flesh belongs only to the supper of Christ: so regeneration
belongs only to baptism. and each grace is present in the visible sign, but
after a diverse manner, because those Sacraments are of a (...) nature, as now
I will declare.


The difference between Baptism and our The xii^.
Lords supper. Chapter.

Iuel. For as much as these two Sacraments be both of force like, The 109.
untruth.
I will touch what the fathers think of gods working in baptism, The fathers in
the Counsel of Nice bid us think, that the water is De san^. baptis.
full of heavenly fire, and cae. Basil, the kingdom of heaven is set open. In
Matt. hom. 51.
Chrysostom: God himself in baptism by his invisible power holds thy head.
Ambrose: in the water is the grace of Christ and the De sacr. li. 1. ca. 5.
presence of the Trinity. Bernard: let us be washed in his blood, Sermon. 3.
super missusest*
and caet* By force of which words M. Harding may prove, that the power of
God, the heavenly f^er, the grace and the blood of Christ is really present in
baptism.


Sander. Many of these things and other ^oe are in deed said of baptism, but
yet the real presence of them all, is not proved thereby. And note, good
reader, y^ cause thereof which is very (...) table, an^ shall bring great
shame of ignorance to M. Iuel.

When a thing is affir^ed of a Sacrament, it is not by and by present really
therein, except it be signified present in the words ^ituted by Christ which
^ake the Sacrament, or of (...) inferred upon them: as when it is said, I
baptize and (...) (...). 28.
thee in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost: none
other thing is signified reallie present besides the eff^ctuall wasshing. For
thereof it is sai^d in the present tense: I baptize thee, that is to say, I
wash thee: Therefore real baptising or washing as well of the soul as of the
body is made in those words. The Trinity is named, but not signified as
really present in y^ water (otherwise the^ as it is present in all places) but
only as working by his power. For in the name of the father is to say, in y^
power and strength of y^ father. Thus the power and virtue of god is really
present, and (...) or renewig is really made.

But if it were said at the time of washing by the institution of Christ: This
is Christ who baptiseth or washes thee, the^ doubtless Christ should be
believed really present. Albeit therefore some Fathers say, God holds thy head
at the font, and other say, the water is full of heavenly fire, and so forth:
yet these are manners of speech without real or natural operation according
to the letter, because they be not words instituted of purpose by Christ to
work a special effect in the Sacraments: Although they show by similitudes,
that a real working of diverse graces is made in the Sacraments. But Christ
say^ in his Matt. 26.
supper, this is my body. In which words the body is affirmed present under
that sign of bread, whereunto Christ points. If M. Iuel knew not this ods,
he may be ashamed to teach that he knows not. If he knew it, why does he
lead men to hell willingly?

But because this man goes about every where to abuse the holy communion, by
showing like phrases used sometimes of, Baptism, as are used of Christ's
supper: I will give him a copy of certain phrases, which either he must find
in the holy Scri^tures and in the holy Fathers, or else he shall be co^rayned to
confess a more corporal and real presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the
altar, then in Baptism.

First the name of Baptism differs from the name of Christ's The di^e rences
between baptism and the E^charist.
body and blood. Baptism signifies an action of a washing, and therefore it is
no work tarying or during in his own substance, but only the effect thereof
remains. But the name of Christ's body and blood is the name not only of
making a work, but even of a substanciall work it self: as when we say, a
house, a pillar, a tree. Whereof it follows, that when Christ has done
washing, baptism is past. But when Christ pointing to a visible thing has
said: this is my body: The body tarieth still after the speaking is done, so
long as the visible form dureth, which is to Heb. 1.
us the sign of the body present. Now as S. Paul notes that Christ so far
pass^th the Angels, by how much his name is more excellent then theirs: right
so the Sacrament of the altar so far passes baptism, as Christ's own body is
a name of more excellency, then the name of washing or cleansing.

2. Baptism must go before the Eucharist, as Justinius y^ mar^yr 2.
says, which thing is done to thend we may come clean and pure to the blessed
body of Christ. Therefore the Eucharist passes In Apol. 2.
it as far as baptism passes the virtue of penance, which prepa reth m^n of
discretion to be baptized.

3. Baptism may be ministered of d^o^s, of lay men, yea of women 3.
in the time of necessity. The Eucharist is consecrated only of priests, who
have special power given them to make Christ's body, accordingly as him self
said: make this thing for the remem In Epist.
braunce of me. And S. Hierome excludes Deacons from this ad Euag.
high office.

4. Baptism may be ^inistred at any time of the day, but S. 4.
Augustine shows, that the holy Ghost has taught the who^ In epi. ad (...)
Church (for the honor of so great a Sacrament) to receive it only fasting,
without a case of necessity.

5. In Baptism the water must be of necessity believed to remain, 5.
because washing is not made without water: nor it shall never be found, that
it was taught to be changed. but in the Euchariste no bread or wine remains,
because no such thing is signified at the time of consecration: and the Fathers
teach ^oncil.
them to be changed into Christ's body and blood. Lateran.


6. Baptism was administered in the running water, and no 6.
regard had of the material water, when the act of washing was Lib. 6.
Cate. my stag. 4. in martyro logio
done. But the Eucharist was ever so warily administered, that no crum thereof
was suffered to fall, as Optatus, Cyrillus of Hicrusalem, S. Bid, and others
do witness.

7. Baptism was never adored, though it were reverenced: Tarsi.
7.
the Sacrament of the altar was always adored with the highest Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. hom. 24.
honor due to God alone, as I have showed at large in my sixth book.

8. As Baptism is the first Sacrament and most necessary, 8.
so the Eucharist is the last, and most honorable. That to cleuse us, this to
feed us. That to marie us, by consent of minds to Christ, this to join us to
his flesh and blood by real copula^io^ of bodies. That prepares to this, and
this makes yt in all degrees perfect. That without this is a true marriage, but
yet it is without the last end of marriage which is carual copulation. This
coming to that, and to all the other Sacraments, makes us to be most
perfitly v^ted with Christ.

For this cause S. Dionysius Areopagita says: Dicimus ergo, De eccl.
Hierar. cap. 3.
and caet. We say therefore other (Sacraments) or signs of holy things (whose
communion is granted to us) to be finished ^y the divine and perfiting gifts
of the Eucharist. And holy Ephren also writes thus of the most per^ite and
consummated Li. 4. de similitudine platat^ arbo ris etc.
union which is made in the same Eucharist, saying: Anima nostra sponsa
estimmortalis sponsi, copula autem nuptiarum coelestia Sa cramenta sunt: quia
cum manducamus corpus eius and sanguinem bibimus, and ipse in nobis est, and
nos in ipso. Our soul is the spouse of the immortal Bridegroom: that which
coupleth them in marriage are the cele^iall Sacraments, for that, when we eat
his body and drink his blood, he is in us and we in him.

9. Moreover we are by Baptism united to Christ, and not at 9.
Union.
all to Baptism. But by the Eucharist we are said to be united to the very body
which is in the Sacrament, because it is all one with Christ himself. Of which
difference I will speak more hereafter.

10. Last of all, the perpetual custom of the people of God, 10.
and the universal tradition has always observed great difference between
these two Sacraments. And thereby any wise man may know what belongs to the
one, and what to the other.

If now M. Iuel will prove Baptism and the Eucharist to be of like force,
concerning the mean of uniting us to Christ, he must bring forth such
phrases, where Baptism may be called of 1.
Christ him self the body of Christ. Where the Eucharist may be 2.
said to prepare us to Baptism, as well as Baptism to it. Where 3.
Baptism is said to be worthy the highest honor, as it is said of Christ's
body in the Sacrament. Where the last and highest 4.
cop^latio^ is assigned to Baptism, as it is to y^ Eucharist. Where special
consecration of Priests, special prerogative of time, special warmesse in
using the matter is no less required to the substance of Baptism, then of the
Eucharist. But when some things be like, and some things be different in two
Sacraments, it is great ignorance to reason from the similitude which one way
is between them, to destroy an other way those points, wherein they differ.
After which sort M. Iuel does reason.


M. Iuel replieth not well, touching the authority The xv. Chapter.
alleged out of the Nicene Council.
HArding. We behold (says the Council of Nice) Division (...).
the Lamb of God (...), put or laid on that holy table, and we receive his
preciouse body and blood (...), verily and in deed. Which is to say really. 5.


Iuel. (...) is not found in the Greek nor in Tunstal. But devised The 110.
(...).
by M. Harding.


San. It will not follow that because the common Greek edition or B. ^unstall
has it not, that therefore D. Harding faineth that Greek word. It is found in
the acts of the Council Gaspar
of Nice, which are not yet all printed, but they are extant in diverse
Cassalius
libraries. And this place is in many print books, where Lusitan.
commonly they have the Greek word (...), translated into decalice.
Garet. in centen. 4
situm, situate or put. Your self also in the Apology did allege certain words
out of the same acts of the Council of Nice. Yea you have done the like even
in this very article: therefore you ought not to be angry with D. Harding for
doing the same. The 111. untruth.



Iuel. Must (...), which signifies to be set or placed, needs sound a real
presence?


San. It must needs prove a real presence of that thing, which if it were not
present, it could not be set upon the table. Or can you have a capon set and
placed upon your table, which is not really present? Ephesians. 3.



Iuel. Christ dwells in our heart by faith, and yet not really.


San. No wonder, since a thing may dwell somewhere by faith, Apoc. 5.
where yet it is not in deed. As Christ was killed (in the says of inst men)
from the beginning of the world, yet not in deed, until he was nailed to the
cross. A being by faith is a l^sse p^ite being, then a being really. And
therefore the fewer and the less does not infer the more and the greater. But
the Lamb of God is not said to be upon the holy table by faith, but to be s^t
or laid there.


Iuel. S. Hierom says, as often as we enter into the sepulcher, Ad Marc^llam.
we see our Savior lying in his shroud. Yet he lay not there really.


San. Not then truly when S. Hierom entered: but he spoke in respect of that
true place, which Christ's body had sometime occupied. But if the things upon
the holy table neither be now, nor at any time were the body of Christ, how
said the Council we behold the Lamb placed upon the holy table?


Iuel. In the Council of Chalcedon it is demanded, in what Act. 1.
Scripture lie these two natures of Christ. it is the same word (...), yet they
lie not really in the scriptures.


San. The heretic Eutiches, who asked for those two natures in the Scripture,
asked for very material and real words, which being seen and readen might lead
him to these two natures. De recta fide.
For the words which signify two natures have a real place in holy Scripture,
and they have been at large declared by S. Cyrillus. But I pray you sir: If a
man should ask you where you find that Greek word (...), could you show a
sufficient discharge thereof? I think scaut so good as D. Harding can bring for
(...). Once it is not extant in the common book of the Councels.


Iuel. That word signifies a natural situation of place and order The (...).
untruth.
of parts, such as D. Harding in the next article says Christ's body has not
in the Sacrament.


San. Although Christ's body in it self has not any such extensiue (...)
locally in the Sacrament, yet it has such Op. de coena Do mini. loan. 14.
a situation as the foorm of bread requires, which suffiseth to declare a
real presence. For as his Godhead might be showed in his manhod (he that sees
me, sees my Father) so his body is placed under the foorm of bread, and there
may be showed to a faithful man.


Iuel. The Council is plain, that we consider not basely the bread and the
wine that are set before us.


San. He considers them basely who says they remain still in their earthly
substance, notwithstanding that Christ after blessing Romans 4. and 9.
has called the^ by greater names, whose calling is the making the thing to be
that, which it is called.


Iuel. It is said: lift up your hearts, so that there is nothing in The 113.
(...).
the action to be considered, but only Christ.


San. It is meant, not only to lift them up to God, but also to lift them from
earthly thoughts of infidelity, and to believe that, which Christ says and
does in his holy mysteries, as S. De Dei na^ura.
Chrysostom notes. I have spoken of this matter at large in my Hom. 4.
second book, the. xxvi^. Chapter. Of Egles I have spoken, the second book,
the. xxvij. Chapter. Uerily the thing made, (whereof Christ said, make this
thing) is to be co^sydered in the my^ries, and not only Christ in heaven.


Iuel. S. Ambrose says, it is better seen that is not seen. De mist. cap. 3.



San. Therefore y^ body of Christ which Christ points unto saying, this is my
body, is better seue to a faith^ull Catholic, the^ bread and wine, which the
unfaithful Sacramentarie says he s^th.


Iuel. For the same cause S. Augustine says: In Sacraments we The 114. (...).
must consider not what they be, but what they represent. sor they Co^t. Ma
xim. li. 3. cap. 22.
are tokens of things, being one thing, and signifiyng an other, as S.
Augustine says.


San. As they be tokens, they be one thing and signify an other: and therefore
the substance of Christ's body is not his death, or passion, or the unity of
his Church (which things under the foorm of bread it does signify) but it is
an other manner of thing, to wit, a body immortal, impassible, and out of al
danger of corruption. how be it S. Augustine disputes not there, of those
which are ye peculiar Sacraments of the Church (as your words, for the same
cause, would seem to signific) but generally of all sigues, which commonly
differ in substance from the things signified by them. But (as S. Chrysostom
well notes) we must believe In Math.
God in all things, yet specially in the mysteries. As therefore Hom. 83
when God makes a sign by water or oil, or any other creature, we ought to
mark, not what substance that thing is, but what it is set to signify: so when
Christ took bread, and after blessing said, this is my body, which is given for
you, make this Luc. 22.
thing for the remembrance of me, we must note, that he did not appoint any
creature to signify his body, but made a new sign. he made, I say, a sign
which might signify his death. and he said to his Apostles, hoc facite, make
this thing. Thus we see good cause, why this sign should differ from all other
signs: because a natural thing was not appointed at the supper to signify
Christ, but a supernatural thing was prepared and made there a new, to signify
his wonderful death and resurrection. The 115. untruth.



Iuel. Touching our beholding Christ in the Sacrament S. Augustine says: it
wo^keth such motions in us, as if we saw our Lord him self present upon the
cross.


San. You care not what you heap up together, so it may make a show. S.
Augustine there speaking properly of the solemnity Easter kept in S.
of Easter (which now in England is wholly taken away) (...) age with (...).
says, although death shall no more bear rule over Christ, yet Anniuersaria
recordatio repraesentat quod olim factum est. the yearly remembrance does
represent that which was done in old time, and it works such motions in us,
as if we saw our Lord present upon the cross. those signs were external,
and (as it may appear) were made to the senses by preaching and showing some
image of Christ, and by creping to the cross, and by such like godly
ceremonies as the Church of God has always used at Easter. but in our
Sacraments (as S. Chrysostom says) Omnia quae tradidit insensibilia sunt, al
things which Christ hat^ delivered are without y^ cumpasse of y^ se^ses. S.
Augustine therefore spoke not of y^ Sacrament, but of other external
ceremonies. De cons. did. 2. c. quia cor pus.



Iuel. This is it that Eusebius writes, that the body might be worshipped by a
mystery. and that everlasting sacrifice should live in remembrance and be
present in grace for ever, in this spiritual The 116. untruth.
sort, and not fleshly, Christ is laid present upon the table.


San. Beside that you omit the beginning of this sentence, you have also left
out four lines even in the midst thereof, which do show, that because a
daily redemption and such as never faints did still run on for the salvation
of men, the oblation of the redemption should be everlasting. By which words
Eusebius The mystery.
declares, what kind of mystery the Sacrament of Christ's body is: verily such
as offers up that continual redemption which Christ has purchased for us.
For as Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven by his real
presence there, makes continual intercession in his manhod for us, and
causes the redemption of mankind to be always in his force and strength
before God: so the mystery which is consecrated according to his institution in
earth, does from hence offer and present unto God the same self redemption by
the very same substance of flesh, which is in heaven. To this end Eusebius
says: the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is consecrated. and in
Transubsta^ation.
what sort consecrated? The invisible priest (says Eusebius) by secret power
turns the visible creatures with his word into the substance of his body and
blood. and again, before y^ creatures be consecrated by the invocation of the
highest name (or power) the substance of bread and wine is there: but after the
words of Christ, it is the body and blood of Christ. This was the homily which
M. Iuel thought good to allege, that all men might think, that there was
nothing written that made not for his purpose. Joan. 2.
Is that no real presence, where consecration is so made, that the creatures
be changed into the substance of Christ's body and blood? was not the wine
really present at Cana, into which the water was changed? Well, consecration is
made, the creatures of bread and wine are thanged into the substance of
Christ's body and blood. and in that body and blood, the redemption of mankind
is offered to God, and is preserved in the remembrance of men: and yet all this
while that body and blood by M. Iuels verdit is not present. The change is made
by the word of God, and yet that word is figurative, if we may believe M. Iuel.
yea but In sermon. ad infan.
he has a phrase in store, I warrant, you to plai^er this wound.


Iuel. S. Augustine says: you are upon the table, you are in 1. Cor. 10 apud
Be dam.
the cup. as the people is laid upon the table, so and none otherwise, the
Council of Nice says, the Lamb of God is laid upon The 117. untruth.
the table.


Sand. What, M. Iuel, is the table turned into us, as Eusebius says the
visible creatures are turned into the substance of Christ's body and blood? I
have showed an other where, in my v. book, the v. chapter, that even that our
being on the table and in the cup does prove Christ's real presence. For we
should not be there, if our head Jesus Christ were not under that form of
bread and of wine, wherein we are signified.


Iuel. The Greek word (...), verily, by D. Hardings judgment sounds no less
then really; but these two words truly and fleshly have sundry meanings: and in
the sense that Christ The 118. untruth.
spoke unto, the one does utterly exclude the other.


San. If you take fleshly for the substance of flesh, it is all one in speaking
of flesh to say truly, and fleshly. but as concerning the corruplible qualities
of flesh, so it is not al one. If it had pleased your malice to have denied
Christ's presence in heaven (as you deny it in the Sacrament) you might as well
have mocked all the places brought against you for his real presence there. M.
Iuel ^eth to a term ^or lack of a good answer.
with this word, fleshly, as now thereby you mock at his presence in the
Sacrament. This licenciouse wantonness in taking advantage by a fleshly term,
when soever you be pressed with a good argument, shall get you never the more
credit among wise men. The real presence which we defend in the Sacrament, is
not carnal and fleshly, but clean and pure. in so much that Angels wonder at
y^ marue^lous and unspeakable mystery of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament. Yea S. Chrysostom says: Quod angeli vide^tes, etc. That thing at
the sight whereof Angels quake because of the brigthnes which shines out of it,
therewith we are fed, thereunto we are united, and we are made one body of
Christ and one flesh. And yet is this a ^eshly kind of presence, M. Iuel?


Iuel. He that eats most spiritually, eareth most truly: as The 119. untruth.
Christ is the true vine, the true manna. and we are ve^ily one bread, and the
Apostles verily the heavens, and these are the paschall feast wherein verily
the Lamb is slain.


San. In comparison of bodily eating alone spiritual eating is more true, and
of a better sort. But a thing both eaten in body and in spirit (as the
Sacrament is eaten) is far more truly eaten both ways, then by one wa^e
alone. Again, when the name of any thing affirmed of Christ, apperteineth to
the true nature of his manhad which he has assumpted, it is to he verified of
him, not only by a metaphor, but in very deed. Christ is no natural The
(...) rence between Christ being a true ^ine and truly (...).
^ine, because he assumpted not that substance to him. Likewise he is not
Manna: Albeit he be spirituallie the true vine, and the true Manna. For seeing
he was not these things really, they can not be said of him really. But he is
man in deed, and therefore offered in deed, killed in deed, buried in deed, and
eaten in deed. For now as we believe the real death of him: so must we believe
the real ^ting of him, because the truth belonging to each of them is to be
taken according to the true nature of man, which he took. And as it was mete
for him to be killed in the shape of man, so he would be eaten in the shape of
bread. The 12^. untruth. in Joan. tract. 26.



Iu. S. Augustine utterly remoueth the natural office of the body: What
preparest thou thy teeth? Believe and thou have eaten. Believing in him, is the
eating of the bread of life.


San. You are one of y^ most impudent men that ever any creature had to do
withal. S. Augustine spoke these words to the faithless Jews, with whom
Christ talked at Capharnaum, who gaped for bodily meat and belly chere. Now
when Christ had said, work the meat which tarieth to life everlasting, S.
Augustine Joan. 6.
says to the Jew, who sought to have his belly filled, what preparest thou
thy teeth? M. Iuel knows, that when Catholics come to the Sacrament of the
altar, they whet not their teeth, as if they came to a carnal banquet: but they
believe, and eat first by believing, to thend they may afterward eat by mouth
worthily. And therefore S. Augustine confesses us to receive Christ by mouth
also: but by a faithful mouth, and not by a gloto^ouse mouth. His words are:
Hominem Christum Iesum and caet. Aug. co^t. aduersariu^ legis and prophetaru^.
fideli cord atque ore suscipimus. We do receive with a faithful heart and
mouth the man Jesus Christ giving his flesh unto us to be eaten, and his blood
to be drunk, although it may seem more horri^le to eat ma^s flesh, the^ to kill
it, and drink man's blood, then to shed it. When S. Augustine says: we receive
Christ with a faithful mouth, he shows that ^his meaning is not to remove
utterly the natural office of the body (as M. Iuell most impudently says) but
he means we should not come to the Sacrament for to satisfy our bodily
hunger, but with a faithful heart and mouth. Where if he spoke not of real
drinking by mouth, he would never have said, it is more horrible to drink man's
blood then to shed it: but now although it be so horrible to drink man's blood
in that corruptible sort which mortal blood has, yet Christ's blood is given
to us in a miraculonse manner without corruption, or lothsomnes, and is
received even in the mouths of the faithful. But I can not so leave you, M.
Iuel. Did S. Augustine utterly remove the office of the mouth? Said he not,
that for the honor of so great a Sacrament it pleased the holy Ghost, Vt
prius in os christiani corpus dominicum intraret, quam caeteri Epi. 118.
cibi, that our Lords body should enter into the mouth of a christian man
before other meats. and yet is the office of the body removed, and that
vttterly removed? Where is, M. Iuell, your mind, your wit, your sense? Where is
your care of God, regard to your good name, or the fear to abuse the holy
mysteries?

Harding. Buce^ taught the body of Christ to be The 9. division.
truly and substantially present, exhibited and taken.


Iu. Hitherto M. Harding has alleged nor ancient doctor, The 121. untruth.
nor old Counsel.


San. As though we had not disputed this long time of y^ Nicene Counc^l, where
318. ancient Fathers were gathered together.


Iu. What reasons lead him to yield to the other side for quietnessake, Galat. 2.
I remit unto God. De praescript. aduersus Haeret.



San. In a matter of such weight he ought not to have yielded for quictnes
sake, since S. Paul resisted S. Peter for a matter of much less importance, as
wherein they rather disagreed in fact, then in doctrine, as Tertullian
witnesses.


Iu. If M. Harding had found any other doctor, he would not The 122. (...).
have made his entry with Bucer.


San. Beside the Nicene council which you have heard already, ye shall hear
other doctors anon.


Iu. The council of the eight Cardinals at Rome might rather The 123. ^ntruth.
have been scoft at, then this brotherly conference.


San. The Cardinals sought not a new faith (as Bucer and Luther did) but the
purging of old faults. they came not together to set forth a new doctrine, but
to amend the life of evil men. Tertullian says well: hllic and scripturaru^
and expositionu^ adulteratio De praescript.
deputanda est, vbi diuersitas inuenitur doctrinae. There the cou^terfeting
both of the scriptures and of y^ expositio^s is to be assigned, where y^
diversity of doctrine is found. such diversity is between the Lutherans and
Zuinglians, but not between the Catholics. The 124. untruth.



Iuel. If we compare voices, they of wittemberge were more in number.


Sander. Nay sir, all the Catholic nations of Christendom communicated with
the Cardinals. but your doctrine was then scant sixtene years old, and had
never a city, town or village in the world that wholly communicated with it at
that day. The 1. Tim. (...).
number must not be tried by the men gathered in a house together, but by the
men agreing in the church together. For y^ whole Church is one house o^ god.


Iuel. If we compare knowledge, they were better learned. The 125. untruth.



San. Of new sprung teachers (...) said: Omnes tument, De praescript.
^mnes scientiam pollicentur. Al of them do swel (with pride) and every one
does promise knowledge. But on the other side, Nemo sapiens nisi fidelis, No
man is wise (...) faithful. The Cardinals therefore being faithful were also
^etter learned, then your men of witte^berge. Again, Tertullian shows that
certain men are wont to say: why did this woman, or that man being most
faithful, most wise, most practiced in the Church, go into tha^ side? that is
to say, hold this or that new opinion? But he answers: they are neither to
be counted wise, nor faithful, nor men of practice, whom heresies can change.
Therefore those that cam^ together at witte^berge, seeing they changed their old
faith, and sough^ out a new, they could not be learned as they ought to have
been.

But otherwise also, thinck you, M. Iuel, that any wise man will grant you, that
Luther and Bucer with their companions were better learned, them Contarenus,
Sadoletus, Polus, and Theatinus with their fellows? Is it enough for you to
have said it in bare words, without any proof at all?


Iuel. If we compare purposes, they sought peace in truth and ^he 126. ^utruth.
the glory of god.


Sander. Call you that peace, when they divided Germany from the rest of
Christendo^? You are of those who would cure the sores Iere. 6.
of the people by v^ine words, saying to them, peace, peace, when as in deed
there was no peace.


Iuel. If we compare issue, god has blessed their doings, and The 127. untruth.
given force unto his word.


Sander. Touching your case Tertullian says: Deverbi administratione. De
praescript.
etc. What shall I speak of the administration of the word, since their whole
endeavor is, not to convert Ethniks, b^t to pervert our men? they rather covet
after this glory to overthrow those that stand, then to raise up those that
are fallen: because y^ very work of theirs comes not of their building, but
of the destruction of the truth. They undermine our works, that they may build
up their own.

Thus Tertullian said of you, before you were borne. It is the^ small issue
that you have hitherto obtained, by overthrowing as outwardy monasteries,
Churches, altars, schools, hospitals: so inwardly faith, hum^tie, cha^tie,
obedience, and all (...) love of God or of our neighbors.


Iuel. These Cardinals espied such faults as every child might The 128.
untruth.
have found.


San. Never a Priests child in England is able to understand in iij. tomo
conciliorum Anno D. 1538.
them now that they are found, much less every child would find them, if they
were to be sought out.


Iu. They never redressed any of the same.


San. You say not truly. which thing as it might be declared in The 129.
untruth.
many other points, as well of making Priests and of giving beuefices, as also
in other faults there named: so is it most evident to y^ eye concerning y^
harlats, which neither rid in coche, nor dwelt in any palace since that time,
nor went in the tire of any honest matrone.


Iuel. If M. Harding had been in the Apostles times, he would The 130. untruth.
have made some sport at their Counc^. (...) where or in what house assembled
they together?


San. They assembled in the house of S. John, as Nicephorus L. 2. (...). hist.
ca. 1. Act. ca. 1. Act. 15.
thinks, when they chose Mathias into y^ number of the Apostles. Again, they
assembled to decide the controversy risen coucerning the obseruances of the
law of Moses, and in diverse other places. Whereat D. Harding will make no
sport, because wheresoever Matt. 28. Joan. 20.
they assembled, they were laufully assembled, being sent to y^ whole world by
Jesus Christ. But any such cou^sion Luther and Bucer can not show.


Iu. What Bishop or Pharisee was among them? The 131. untruth.



San. They had one Bishop (...) the lest among (...), and him Joan. (...)
appointed by Christ, to whom he committed both his sheep and lambs. But in
deed all the Apostles were also Bishopes, as it may apere, in that S. Mathias
took the Bishoprike of Judas, Psalm. (...)
according to the Prophecy of David. Were Luther, Bucer and Act. (...).
Melancthon so made Bishopes? Or will you have the Church begin again in our
time, as it began or rather took his perfection in Christ? Shall Luther be
Christ, and will you be new Apostles to us? Hear what Tertul^an says hereof
also: Probe^t se nouos De praescript.
Apostolos, etc. Let the^ prove them selves to be new Apostles: Let the^ say
that Christ has descended again, and y^ he has taught again, been crucified
again, dird again, risen again: for so he was wo^t to make Apostles, and
more over to give the^ power to do those things, which he him self did. I would
therefore declare their power and virtues, but y^ I know their chief power to
be in y^ they do follow the Apostles peruersly. For they did make those y^ were
dead, to live: but these do make those that live, to die. Hitherto Tertullian.
Thus (...), (...) (...) lacked Bishops in their assembles (as being all sent
with full authority into the (...)) ^or your assemble had (...) Bishop at al:
Because since Christ's assension (...) had authority to Romans 10
preach or to call ass^bles, must needs (...) of them, or of their successors
to whom Christ gave such authority. But Luther being sent of no man who
(...) ordinarily to the Apostles, must needs be a false Pr^, as who ran
before he was sent. Ior. 23
And truly since Christ (...) no^ him self to the authority of Apostleship,
but was called of God thereunto, and proved his commission by his manifold
wor^es and miracles: it is an intolerable Heb. 5.
pride for Martin Luther at (...) word without any Joan. 10.
other miracle ((...) y^ he was the most fyithiest man both of mouth and life
there lightly was in ^he earth) to require all the world to to believe his new
(...).


Iu. S. Augustine (...) conference and disputation with ^tius (...). 178.
the Arrian at Hippo, in a private house of one Anitius.


San. But I (...) you it was kept of S. Augustines part to maintein the known
(...) faith, and not to overthrow if. Yea it was kept to maintein y^ word
homusion, which y^ heretic Pascentius alleged, not to be in the holy
scripture: and therefore that it ought not to be admitted.


Iu. There be ever some, that laugh at the repairing of Jerusalem, The. 13^.
untruth.
as Origin says.


San. You are of that sum: for you laugh at S. Augustine, who brought the
faith into England, and at the eight Cardinals, who went about to repair the
walls of the Church. But Origenes In Ca^tica Can. 4,
speaks of idolatours and Gentiles, who euuied at y^ rising and not at the
repairing of the walls of the Gospel, because it grieved them to see more new
Christians daily made of iufidels.


Whether Christ's body dwell really in our bodies The xv^.
by his nativity. Chapter.

Iuel. The old Fathers speak not any one word, that serves to M The 133.
untruth.
Hardings purpose.


San. This lying brag can not face the matter, as it shall appear hereafter.


Iu. M, Harding proves Christ's body to be really in us, and The 134. untruth.
not in the Sacrament, thereby altering the question.

Harding. Christ dwells in us truly, because of our receiving his body in
this Sacrament.


San. Ergo M. Iuel said not truly, that D. Harding has altered the question.
For that which he now says, he also proves.


Iu. Four special means there be, by every of which Christ's body The 135.
untruth.
dwells in our bodies, not by imagination, bu^ ^ally, substancially,
naturally, fleshly and in deed.


San. You had been better to have subscribed sour (...), M. Iuel, than for
gredines of denying the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, to
have made an assertion so vain as this is.


Iu. Christ's body by his nativity whereby he (...), The 136. (...).
dwells in our bodies really, substancially. and caet.


San. If you had only said, that Christ by his incarnation dwells naturally
in us, or we naturally in him, that saying might have had a true sense: for
that Christ by taking y^ nature which we are, might have been said to dwell
among us, and to be (...) of us. But to say not only that Christ, but that his
body, not only dwells in us, but in our bodies, and that not only naturally,
but also really, substancially and in deed, to affirm constantly so much it
seems to me very hard.

First Christ's nativity no more caused his body to dwell really in our bodies,
then his incarnation. For when the word was (...). 1.
made flesh, even then it dwelt in us. Secondly his incarnation (...).
may be considered three wa^es: one way, as if he had taken (...) by thought or
imagination only, and not in very deed, of which opinion you are not, as it
may appear by diverse places of your 2.
book. Another way the incarnation may be considered according Damasc. de
orth. fi. li. 3. c. 6. and 11.
to that nature, which is generally common to all men: As that they consist of
bodies, of souls, of reason, and of certain accidents. The question is,
whether Christ at his incarnation took al man kind after such sort, that he is
now the common substance of us all, or no. Here I know not what M. Iuel would
answer, if he were namely put in mind thereof. But his words draw to the
affirmatine sense altogether. For he says Christ's body dwells in our bodies
by his nativity. which saying seems to have no real truth in it: except
Christ be common man kind which is in (...) man. If he be that universal
substance: then I see that as reason, as life, as sense, as flesh and blood
are no less in one man, then in an other: so Christ who is supposed to be
that general reason, life, sense, flesh and blood, is supposed likewise to be
really in every man's own body. But this kind of opinion is foolish and vain,
as it shall appear anon.

The third way of considering the incarnation is, to say, that Christ took not
y^ common substance of al mankind, but only the whole particular nature of man:
so that the (...) of God has assumpted so much into his own (...), as any
other (...) ever had in his (...) and corruptible (...). to wit, he has
assumpted the mind, the (...), the body and the (...) shape of a true man.
According to (...) ((...) only is true) S. Paul says: that he is not (...) to
call us his brethern, Heb. 2.
and that because the children (whom God (...) to him) had (...) and blood
common among them, and ipse similiter participauit eisdem, and he also likewise
(...). (...), he took part, that is to say, he took to himself flesh and
blood for his own part, as they had the same for their parts. And therefore as
they had a particular (...) and generation, so Christ was not gathered or taken
generally out of the bodies and souls (...) 4.
of al men, (...) he was born of the virgin Marie alone, the son (...). h. 1.
of David and of Abraham according to the flesh. which being so, his body was
no more really in our bodies by his nativity, then one of our bodies is in the
body of an other man. For when we speak of our bodies, we speak of that,
which is particularly proper to every man in his own person: and not of that
which is common to all mankind.

But yet certain general benefits are deri^ed out of Christ's (...) even to
every man. Due is, that our nature is in him marucilously honored and auanced,
in so much that it is truly said, man is God, and God is man.

Moreover S. Cyrillus affirms, that every particular man In Joan. li (...).
c. 12.
shall rise in his own body at the later day, because of the mystery of
Christ's resurrect^on, who as man contained all men in him self. But seeing they
that have done evil shall rise to be punishe^, and that more grievously then
death it self is (as there Romans 8.
S. ^llus witnesses) and yet since no damnation is unto them who are in Christ
Jesus, we may well say, that Christ does not only not dwell in every, man's body
by his nativity, but also that he dwells not in their bodies or souls, who
either did not partake of his flesh at al by faith, or else did unworthily
partake thereof either by Baptism, or by the Eucharist, or any other way.

All this notwithstanding, M. Iuel will prove that Christ's body dwells even
really in our bodies by his nativity. And when all is done it will prove
either an heresy, or no^ing, or a dwelling rather in the whole truth of man's
nature assumpted, then in any man's body after that sort of dwelling, which is
properly called real or substanciall. But let us hear his proof. The 113.
vniruthe.



Iuel. S. Bernard says: the body of Christ is of my body, and is now become
mine.


San. S. Bernard says: Corpus Christi de meo est, the body Sermon. (...). de
Epip.
of Christ is of mine. He says not of my body, as you tra^^ate it. But of
mine, y^ is to say, of the same kind of stuff whereof I am. Of the same stock
and (...), of like flesh and blood, but not of my proper flesh and of my proper
blood: not really dwelling in my bowels, or in the parts of ^y body. Again
when he says, and (...) est, and the body of Christ is mine, he means, it is
mino to take commodity thereof, mine to use, mine to (...), mine to offer, to
enjoy: but not mine through this only condition, because it is born, but
because I am joined to it by faith, by Baptism, by Penance, and by r^auing it
into my body at Christ's holy table, and by such like means.


Iuel. A babe is born to us.


San. That is to say, to the end we should take (...) by the birth of it. But by
the only birth it is not really in our bodies. (...) it (...), and not only to
us, or for us.


Iuel. A Son is given unto us.


(...). Unto (...) who (...) in him, but not to them who received Joan. 1.
him not. For he came into his own, and his own received him not.


Iuel. S. Basil: We are partakers of the word by his incarnanation, Ad Caesa
rienses.
and (...) called all his mystical conversation flesh and blood.


San. We partake him in his nature coming to ours, and in ours communicated to
him, but not yet in our bodies co^ing to his body, except we also be joined to
him by some other mean beside his nativity. The 138. untruth.



Iuel. Nyssenus says: His body is all mankind, whereunto he is mingled.


San. You have abused this testimony, turning the due construction M. Iuel
has erred in constru ction.
of the words* and have put that before the verb, which should have come after
the verb. The true construction is: The whole nature of man, whereunto he is
mingled, is the body of In dictu^ Apostol. tunc and filius sub ijcietur.
Christ. And he means not the natural body of Christ, which he took of the
virgen by his nativity (whereof you entreat) but he means the mystical
body of Christ, whereof he said before: The subjection of the body of the
Church, is referred to him, He speaks still of the mystical body
which does inhabitie the body. And immediately before y^ words (...) out by
you: Our Lord is the life, by whom it does happen to all his body, that it is
brought to the Father.

Again: Si Pater diligit ^lium, and caet. If the Father do love Note.
the Son, and we all (that through faith, whereby we believe in him, are made
his body) be in the Son: consequen^e he that loves his own Son, loves
also the body of his so^e, even as he loves his Son himself. And we are
that body. Lo, we are that body. He spoke not therefore of Christ's natural
body.


Iuel. Christ being in the womb of the blessed virgin, be^ The (...). untruth.
^esh of our slesh, and bone of our bones.


San. Of the same kind of ^sh and bone: but not thereby really dwelling in our
bodies which belong to our persons.


Iuel. In that sense S. Ihon says: the word was made flesh, and The 140. (...).
dwelt in us.


San. In what sense? Whether that Christ's body by his nativity dwells
substantially in our bodies? for so you said. but S. Joan. 1.
Ihon said not so. God gave men power to be made the sons of God, to such as
believe in his name, and to such as are borne of God. and when S. John had said,
we had power to be the sons of God, if we were borne of God, he consirmeth
that power given to us, saying: And y^ word is made flesh and has dwelt (...)
us. Therefore Hom. 11. in ^oan.
says S. Chrysosto^, he has dwelt in us, that it might be lauful to come to
him self, and to speak and to be c^uersant boldly with him. He was not in our
bodies really straight upon the incarnation, but when he dwelt (...) our
nature, when he was a true man as we are, then might we come to him. Priusipsu
verbum voluit Aug. tractat. 2. in Joan.
nasci ex homine, vt tu securius nascereris ex deo. The word would first be born
of a woman, to th^d (...) might be born of God without fear.


Iuel. Therefore Christ calls himself the vine, and us the The 141. untruth.
branches.


San. It is untruly said, (...). Iuel. For albeit Christ by his humane birth be
as it were the (...) of the vine for his own part, yet he is not to us the
vine, nor we be not the branches, (...) Joan. 15.
we are graffed into Christ, which is don by says and Baptism. S. Augustine
says, he is made man, that the nature of man should In Joan. tract. 80.
be a vine in him, whereof we that are men might be also the branches. If his
only birth had made us branches, what neded a new birth in Baptism?

When S. ^yrill would show, that Christ according to his humane Lib. 10. cap. 13.
nature was the vine (which thing the Arrians denied) he went not for the
matter to Christ's birth only, (for then Judas and ^ain had been branches) but
he went to the Sacrament of Christ's supper, to prove that we depend of
Christ's flesh, as branches do of the vine. The (...). untruth. Ephesians. 4.



Iuel. S. Paul calls Christ the head, and us the body.


San. S. Paul speaks of Christ's mystical body: and you should prove that
his natural body is really in our bodies. Now if to make his body to dwell
really in our bodies, more then his birth be necessary: it is not true, that M.
Iuel with such vain brags has hitherto said, that his body by ^is nativity
dwells really, or substancially, or naturally in our bodies. But only that he
dwells in us, to wit, in our nature: being made Emanuell, nobiscum Deus, God
with men. But thereby Christ dwells Math. 1.
but in one body really, to wit, in that which he made to himself out of the
virgins most pure blood. Wherefore S. Cyrillus says: Prou. 9. In Joan. li. 1.
ca (...)
Habitauit in nobis Dei verbum in templo vno, quod propter nos and de nobis
sibi condidit, vt omnes in seipso habe^s in vno corpore patri reconciliaret:
The word of God has dwelt in us or among One temple natural.
us in one temple, y^ which he made to himself for our sakes, and out of us:
that having al in himself, he might reconcile them One body Ephesians. 2.
to the Fath^ in one body.

One thing, M. Iuel, I must put you in mind of. You (...) that Christ's body
may not be in many places at once. which doutlesse you mean of his natural
body. and his body is by no means more natural, then by the nativity thereof.
But you say now, that Christ's body by his nativity dwells really, substan
cially, and fleshly in our bodies. and certainly our bodies dwell M. Iuels
contrary doctrine.
in many places: therefore you are against your own doctrine, as who confess
Christ's body by his nativity to dwell naturally in all our bodies, which are
not only in many places of y^ earth, but a great number also are under the
earth: in all which Christ's body, according to your doctrine, must dwell
corporally. and therefore it must be in many places together.


Whether Christ's body dwell in our bodies by faith The xvij.
really, or no. Chapter.

IVel. Towching faith, S. Paul says: Christ by faith dwells in Ephesians. 3.
our hearts.


San. The word (heart) in holy scripture does not always signify that fleshly
part of a man's body commonly so called, but S. Paul means, that Christ
dwells in our minds and wills by faith and charity: which is made very
plain by the words Ephesians. 3.
going before secundum interiorem hominem, according to the inner man.
Therefore no dwelling of Christ's body really or substancially in our bodies is
proved by this place of S. Paul, except we shall say, that Christ has no real
and substanciall body of his own. For if is be a real substance, what means
M. Iuel to affirm it dwells really and substancially, where the real
substance thereof it not? if it be a real dwelling of Christ's body in M Iuels
phrase defends Joan of kents heresy.
our bodies in that we believe in Christ, and yet Christ have but one real and
substanciall body: by M. Iuels phrase of speech that body may be said to have
dwelt really in y^ virgins ^omb, in that she only believed in Christ. and by
such worthy interpretation the truth of the incarnation is utterly taken away.


Iuel. S. Peter says: Hereby we are made partakers of the divine Petr. 1.
nature.


San. Those words generally pertein to all the gifts of God, and specially to
y^ incarnation of Christ, whereby we communicate most perfitly (if yet we be
faithsull) with the nature of God. For when we believe in Christ, who is man
with us, and God, with his Father, then we communicating with his manhood
communicate also with the Godhead, which dwells corporally in Christ. But
that communicating may be made, either by faith, or baptism, and other
Sacraments. And as the Godhead dwel^eth incomparably more excellently in
Christ's own body ^then it does in any other thing which depends thereof: so
the union with his nature is made far better by the mean of the Eucharist
(with faith and Baptism joined together) then by one or two of them alone. And
that this place of S. Peter does pertein to the communicating of Christ's flesh
in the Sacrament also, Cyrillus of ^ierusalem does witness, writing thus:
Under the Catech. mystic. 4
form of bread the body is given, and under the form of wine the blood is
given, etc. And so we shall be made partakers of the 2. Pet. 1.
divine nature, as S. Peter says.

Now M. Iuel has most improperly placed this Testimony in the second kind of
Christ's dwelling in us, since it apperteyneth to all four ways generally, but
most especially to that communion or joining, which is made by the holy
Eucharist. Ad Tral.



Iuel. So says Ignatius: By his passion and resurrection (that The 143.
untruth.
is, by our faith in the same) we are made the members of his body.


San. S. Ignatius in two places o^ that Epistle speaks of Ad T^allianos.
such a matter as M. Iuel would have, but because his words did not serve the
turn, it pleased this corruptour of all good authors to give him new words. The
first place in S. Ignatius is, vt credentes in mortem eius per Baptismu^,
participes resurrectionis eius efficiamini. To the intent ye believing in his
death through Baptism, should be made partakers of his resurrection. Here is
not that for which M. Iuel seeks, because Baptism is also named, whereof as
yet it is not his course to speak. Again, here is no real or substanciall
dwelling spoken of. The other place is: Vos ver^ inuitat Christus ad suam
incorruptibilitatem per passionem suam ac resurrectionem, qui estis membra
eius. Christ inuiteth you, who are his members, to his immortality, by his
passion and resurrection. But this place w^ not serve M. Iuels (...) ^ying.
purpose. For it is not said, we are made the members of his body: which is the
thing that M. Iuel must prove. That word, body, was not in S. Ignatius, but is
cast in by M. Iuel.

2. Moreover though it had been expressed: it had been meant of Christ's
mystical body (^oncerning faith) and not of his natural body, whereof we now
dispute.

3. S. Ignatius speaks not of our incorporating to be now first made by faith
in Christ's passion, but he says Christ inuiteth us (...) being his members:
he speaks not of that (we are made) his members. that word (made) M. Iuel
(...) ^ying.
made of his own head.

4. S. Ignatius spoke of this point, how those that are already the members of
Christ (which thing they were not by faith alone, but by Baptism and the
Eucharist) how those, I say, were invited not now to be made members, but to be
made immortal with Christ their head. Thus M. Iuel does order the holy Fathers
words.


The contradiction of M. Iuel concerning Christ The (...) Chapter.
really dwelling in us by fai^, and not really dwelling in us by faith etc.
WHat shall we say of M. Iuel, who in one and the self Contradi ction in M.
Iuel.
same division affirms two propositio^s clean contrary? For as here he
says, Christ's body dwells in our bodies by every of the four means (of
which one is a dwelling 341. lin. 4 (...). and 10.
by faith) so afterward expounding out of S. Augustine the very same words of
S. Paul, which he now brings for the dwelling of (...) body in our bod^es
really: Thus he ^aith. 341. lin. 26. 344. lin. 24. and 25.
Christ is in thee (not really or bodily, but) because his ^aith is within
thee. And those words, not really or bodily, are not the words of S. (...),
but the words of M. Iuell. Who within the c^mpasse of two leaves affirms
more co^tradictions never able to be rec^ciled. The one place says Christ's
body is in our bodies by faith. The other says, Christ is not really in us,
but by faith. If there be any ods between Christ and his body, it makes
altogether against M. Iuel. For whereas Christ may be said to be where his
body is not, and may be said to be in us, when his body is not in our bodies:
M. Iuel (...) in the one place, not only the body of Christ to be really in
us, but also he denies that Christ is really i^ us. and in the other he
affirms not only Christ to be really in us by faith, but also his body to be
really not only in us, but even in our bodies by faith. You pretend some
contradiction, M. Iuell, here and there between D. Hardings own words, but I
(...) you no such is to be found as this is. You note in this article, that D.
Harding is contrary to him self, because he sai^th in one place, Ber^ngarius
first began 317.
81.
openly to sow the Sacramentarie heresy, and in an other he said, the
Messalians were the first parents of this heresy. But what a poor
contradiction is that, since one may be the first parent of an heresy in giving
secret occasion thereof, the other may begin it first in professing it openly
and publicly, as D. Hardings own words expressly say. But if D. Hardinges
contradiction were like yours, it should say, Berengarius began this heresy
first openly, and Berengarius began it not first openly. The same terms being
kept, the one should have affirmed the same thing, which the other had
denied. No no, it is for M. Iuel to have such contradictions, and for no man
else. But what credit shall any man give to your words, since yo^ do not only
say these two contradictiones, but you teach them both? You hold that Christ
is in us by faith, and therefore that his body is really in our bodies. You set
it forth as a doctrine of yours, you make a preface to it solemly, and say:
for answer hereunto it shall be M. Iuels ^oroes.
necessary first to understand how many ways Christ's body dwells in our
bodies, and thereby afterward to view M. Hardinges reason. Four special means
there be, whereby Christ dwells in us, and we in him. His nativity, whereby
he embraced us. Our faith, whereby we embrace him. The Sacrament of baptism,
and the Sacrament of his body. By every of these means Christ's body
dwells in our bodies, and that not by way of imagination, or by figure or
fantasy, but really, naturally, substantially, fleshly and in deed.

Are not these your own words, M. Iuel? Are they not spoken of you, not only in
the wai of answering (wherein sometime a man uses some shift) but are they not
your own words setting forth a doctrine, which you would have believed and
embraced? Well. Why then say you afterward the contrary, and that not only
once, but in diverse places? For again in an other place before, 336. lin. 10.
you said, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: must he needs mean, that
Christ is really and fleshly placed within our hearts? Mean you not there to
say, that though Christ dwell in us by faith, yet he is not really placed in
us? What means this contrary doctrine? Surely thus it means, y^ you know
not what you say, you understand not whereof you dispute. You provide only to
contrary D. Harding, and through him the Catholic Church, and that by all
means possible to be devised, by phrases of speech, by the authorities of
schole me^, by falsifying y^ ancient Fathers. And now through vehement bending
your self against our real receiving of Christ's body into our bodies (which
the Catholics believe) you have invented three other your self, in the mean
time assuredly believing, that there is never a corporal conjunction at all
with Christ's natural body. Of other petie contradictions I speak in other
places.

Whether Christ dwells really in our bodies by The (...).
baptism, or no? Chapter.

IVel. To increase this union God has specially appointed his holy Sacraments.


San. Not only to increase it, but also to make it. For partly August.
now all men be baptized being yet infantes (when they do not Epi. 2^.
actually believe) partly though they did believe, their says may be to weak
to work the incorporation, as S. Augustine saeith, Aug. ad Simplic. quaest. 2.
and specially of al Christ has appointed baptism to be (after his coming) so
necessary a mean for our incorporatio^ to his mystical body (whereof he is the
Savior) y^ except a man be born again of Ephesians. 5.
the water and of the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom Joan. 3.
of heaven.

Again, some Sacraments are appointed to reconcile us to god, Joan. 20.
if we sin after baptism. For except we do penance, we shall Luc. 13.
perish all together.


Iuel. They that are baptized are planted into Christ. Impertinent.



San. You should show, that Christ's body is planted into their bodies, and
that really and substantially. (...). Have you forgotten your promise?


Iuel. They have put Christ upon them. Impertinent.



San. You should show, that Christ's body is put within their bodies even
fleshely.


Iuel. By one spirit they are baptized into one body. Impertinent.



San. You should show, that the natural body of Christ is by baptising really
in their bodies. For the body, whereof S. Paul speaks, is the mystical body.


Iu. S. Augustine says: This is the use of baptising, that they that be
baptized, may be incorporate into Christ. False (...).



San. It would have been englished, hereunto baptising is available, that is to
say, this is the strength and the force of baptism. But you believe baptism to
be only a seal of an incorporation alredie made, and not in deed to
incorporate us into Christ: and therefore you falsified S. Augustine, according
to your sham^ul custom.

Well: we are incorporated by baptism, yet the body of Christ is not thereby
showed to dwell really in our bodies. A man may Incorporation.
be incorporated to the cumpanie of Merchants in the city of London, and yet
the cu^panie of Marchantes shall not dwell really in his body. All this does
not prove your principal proposition, that by baptism the body of Christ
dwells really in our bodies.


Iuel. Being baptized we are turned into God, says Dionysius.


Sander. The word that he uses is (...), which imports a participatio^ of
divine nature howsoever it be brought to pass, insomuch that the Angels may so
be made (as it were) gods, or be made like to his nature: Therefore it is not
proved by y^ words of Dionysius, that Christ's body dwells in our bodies
really or substancially by baptism: nor he names not turning, but rather a
False translation.
deification, or a coming to be like unto god.


Iu. Pachimeres says, we are graft into Christ, and made one nature The 144
untruth.
with him by holy baptism.


Sander. You have turned him falsely. For (...) does not False translation.
signify one nature, but diverse men of one nature, kinsmen, as it were, and
men of the same stock, or of the same route or graffinge.

It is not al one to be made one flesh, and of one flesh. In baptism ^sticall
^eshe.
we are al made of one flesh, and we al are graft into one mystical flesh of
Christ: but by y^ Sacrament of the altar we are (during y^ time of the
conjunction) one self flesh with Christ's natural flesh. There we are two in
one flesh, as I have showed, in my (...) (...).
book, y^ v. Chapter. But seeing you crane aid of Pachimeres, you Ephesians. 5.
shall hear his mind co^cernig y^ blessed sacrament of the altar, and the^ In
eccl.
judge you, whether he say or mean the like of baptism. The bishop Il^er. c. ^
(says he) believes, that even the things which are set forth Par. 2.
(he means the bread and wine) were changed into the preciouse (...).
body and blood of Christ, by the holy ghost who works all. If then the bread
and wine be changed into the body and blood (...).
of Christ, yea and that, (...) into the first paterns (sor so he called them
before, and the word (...) makes relation (...).
to all that went before) if then the bread and wine be changed into those first
examples of flesh and blood, which were taken by Christ of his mother: seeing we
partake those holy mysteries aster the change, it is easy io judge, that
Pachymeres taught otherwise of one union to god concerning the mean of
Christ's supper, then ever he taught concerning baptism.


Whether Christ dwells really in our bodies by the The xx. Chapter.
Sacrament of the altar, or no.
IVel. Thus much may sufsice to discry M. Hardings slender argument. The 145
untruth.



San. Not so, M. Iuell: you must expound the fourth member of your division.
You have told that Christ's body dwells really in our bodies by his
nativity, our faith, and by baptism: come now and show how it dwells in our
bodies really by the Sacrament of the altar. Was not all the other talk made
for that M. Iuell breaks promise.
end? why fly you, when you are come to the very point? but who would not
laugh to see this man's doing. He says Christ's body dwells really in our
bodies, and that four ways. And when he has endeavored to show, that it is so
in three of the first (in the which in deed it is not so) then comes he to
declare in the fourth way (by which only Christ's body dwells really in us,
when we receau^ the Sacrament of his body) there he spends M. Iuel. (...)
against him self.
al his strength to declare, that Christ's body is not really dwelling in our
bodies. Why Sir? Did you so forget your self, that you have ^mitted your
principal part? You will say perhaps, that D. Harding has done that for you,
and that the places which he brings, do show so much. be it so. At the lest
then, you should not impugn D. Harding as you do. If his places prove not y^
Christ's body dwells really in our bodies (as you say they do not prove it)
then it is your part to prove so much. for you a^cmed it before.


Iuel Notwithstanding by the Sacrament of baptism Christ be The. 146 untruth.
naturally in us, yet M. Harding may not therefore conclude, that Christ is
naturally in the Sacrament of baptism.


San. It is false, that Christ by the Sacrament of baptism is naturally in us.
For as the father who begets a child, is not thereby naturally dwelling in
the child (albeit an effect of his nature was one of the causes of the childs
nature) so Christ by regenerating us in baptism by his word (which is in
place of Chry. ad To. Ho. 16.
the seed) and by water (which is as it were the womb of the mother) does
not thereby dwell naturally in us, albeit we have an effect of spiritual grace,
which came to us by means of his flesh.


Iuel. Bonauentu^a says: well, we may not in any wise say, that (...) place
falsified. The 147. untruth.
the grace of god is contained in the Sacraments as water in a vessel. For so
to say it were an error. But the are said to (...) gods grace, because they
signify gods grace.


Sa^. Bonaue^tn^a was a Cardinal of Rome, a scholastical writer, a man less
then three hundred years old, one that said mass: and yet with M. Iuel now he
is a good author, and says well. But yet (...) word (...)
what (...) you in englishing his words to leave y^ aduerb essentialiter,
essentiallie vnenglished: in which word y^ greatest weight of his iudge^ent
rests. For he intends not to deny, but that the sacraments of the new law
contain and give grace, but he says: They contain it not ess^ntially as a
ve^el co^teineth water, or as a box holds a medicine. Which notwithstanding
he shows two other ways how they contain grace. But I pray you to what end
allege you Bonauenture, if not to disprove y^ real presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament? For (say you) though Christ's body were in our bodies
really, it would not therefore be concluded, that it is really in the
Sacrament. and how is that proved? forsooth by S. Bonauenture. did he then say,
that Christ's body though it be really in us, yet it is not r^allie in the
Sacrament? Did he mean any such thing? You shall now in 4. sent. did. 1.
hear his own words in the same very place concer^ing the con ference of the
Eucharist with other Sacraments: In illo Sacramento quaest. 3.
est transubstantiatio. Vnde illud quod significatur ibi, vera est substantia,
quam congruit esse per se. In that Sacrament there is (...): whereby that thing
which is signified there, is a true substance, which substance is fit to be by
it self.


That Christ's body is proved to be really in the The xxi.
Sacrament by S. Chrysostoms words. Chapter.

HArding. By this Sacrament (says Chrysostom) Christ reduces us, as it were,
into one lump with himself. And that not by faith only, but he makes us his
own body in very deed, Re ipsa. Which is no other to say, then really. the
148. untruth. For it could ^ot (...) said so.


Iuel. This place would have stand M. Harding in better stead, if Chrysostom had
said, Christ mingleth his body with the Sacrament, and drives himself and it
into one lump.


San. If the Sac^ament of Christ's supper were a thing so distinct from
Christ's body, as Christ's body is distinct from us: S. Chrysostom might have
said perhaps, that Christ mingleth himself with the Sacrament. But now it is a
great ignorance, that M. Iuel marketh not, the Sacrament of Christ's supper to
be of it self the real body of Christ under the forms of bread and wine:
therefore to say, Christ is mingled with the Sacrament, were to say, that
Christ is mingled with him self. S. Chrysostom was wiser then to say so. but
speaking of the Sacrament he says, that Christ mingleth himself really with
us, who worthily receive that Sacrament.


Iuel. Neither will M. Harding say, that Christ mingleth himself The 149.
untruth.
with us simply, and without figure. Whereof it follows, that much less it
is so in the Sacrament.


San. This is a fine kind of Rhetoric, to make D. Harding believe he will not
say that, which he does say. He means, that Christ's own real body is joined
to our bodies, and that simply (concerning the substance thereof) and without
any figure of Rhetorike, or of grammar. but not without a mystical figure,
because it is given under the forms of bread and wine. The (whereof) that you
infer upon your false surmise is ^louse insensible and fond.


Iuel. It is a vehement and a hot kind of speech, such as Chrysostom The 150.
untruth.
was most delighted with.


San. To speak without sporting, it is so hot, that if you amend not your
opinion, it may help to promote you to the (...) of hell: but to good faithful
men it is a mild and calm saying.


Iuel. It is a speech far passing the common sense, and course The 151.
untruth.
of truth.


San. I thought you would bring it to a phrase or figure of speech. But he
(...) it for a truth, as we shall see anon. The 152. (...).



Iuel. Himself thought it necessary to correct and qualify the rigor of the
same speech, by these words, vt ita dicam, which is, (...) it were, or, if I
may be bold so to say.


San. You stand altogether upon phrases and (...): but S. Chrysostom meant not
to correct or qualify the doctrine, which he taught concerning Christ's real
joining with us. But only he showed himself in teaching it, to (...) or rather
to allude to a similitude What cor^ S.
and Metaphore, at the use whereof he stayed somewhat: As if he had said at
large, even as many grains of corn are by (...) used.
the baker brought into one lump of dough: right so Christ and they that do
communicate are made all one with Christ, and (...) with him in this Sacrament.

Now because this similitude is not set forth at large, but briefly alluded
unto, therefore S. Chrysostom says (vt ita dica^) that I may so say, to wit,
that I may at this time use this allusion, and this briefsimilitude. So that,
the correction is referred only to the word Massa, which is a lump of dough, or
of any like thing: and not to the correction of the doctrine which is
maintained both by S. Chrysostom and others, without any correction or
qualifiyng.

He writes upon S. Ihon, that Christ said, he that eats my Hom. 46
flesh, and drinks my blood tarieth in me, to show, cum ipso se admisceri:
That himself is mingled with him. Again he says: In Joan.
It is brought to pass by the meat which he has given us, Hom. 45
that we should be turned into that flesh not only by love, but by the thing it
self. Again: Cum suum, and caet. When Christ would show In the same (...).
his love toward us, he mingled himself with us through his body. And he
brought (himself) into one with us, to the end the body should be united with
the head. Many like words he has in his sermons to the people of Antioche, in
the which he never Hom. 60 and 61.
uses the phrase ( vt ita dicam, that I may so say) because he used not the
similitude of the lump of dough, whereunto that correction perteyneth. Yea what
shall we say, if even in this place Vt ita dicam* is no^ in the greek.
S. Chrysostom use no such qualifying, nor say not (vt ita dica^) for albeit
the Latin text read so: yet the edition of Parise does wi^nesse, that his
Greek words are (...), seipsum miscet nobis, he mingleth himself with us. Where
is now M. Iuels discrete phrase? Where is his corr^ction? His qualifying of the
rigor of the speech? To be short, where is his answer?


Iuel. In such phrase Anacletus says, the power of the holy The 153. untruth.
Ghost is mingled with the oil.


San. Merciful God, whither will not this man run for phrases? He now
appeleth to a Pope, whose Epistle he estemeth as much as his show sole: only
meaning to make some (not of the wis^ sort) to believe, y^ he has answered
well, when he has written somewhat, although himself believe not that which he
writes. Do you believe this very sentence, M. Iuel, which you allege? How say
you? Is the i^isible power of the holy Oil.
Ghost mingled with the oil? If you thought so, you would use holy oil more
then you do. One thing I must tell you, which I had almost forgotten, it is
not in Anacletus, in oleo, in y^ oil, as you name it, but sancto Chrismati, to
the holy Chrism. It Cha^ging^ (...) words of the Fathers.
was not for naught that you talked of a phrase. His phrase was such, that you
were afeard to use it. The Chrism had such virtue of the holy Ghost mingled in
it, that one who was not of the holy Ghost could not abide to name it. No not
so much as when he had ^ede to use the words of the same sentence to serve his
turn.


Iuel. Alexander says, the passion of Christ must be mingled The 154 untruth.
with the oblations of the Sacraments.


San. Yet shall we have an other Pope? I fear me this man will be come Popish
shortly. The world goes hard with his note book, when he flees to these
Decretall Epistles for the proof of any thing, and specially for ^atine
phrases. But one thing I promise you, M. Iuel. You may better prove Masses o^t
of that Epistle, yea (I go nere you) out of that self sentence which you
allege, then you may pro^e any other phrase which shall presently serve your
purpose. But if you had not lest out the middle words (which he speaks of
Mass) your brethern would have been so angry with you for bringing this
testimony, that they would altogether have misliked your phrase. The words of
Pope Alexander be these: In Sacramentorum quoque oblationibus, word^s left out
in y^ midst of the sentence.
quae inter missarum solennia Domino offeruntur, passio Domini miscenda est. In
the oblations also of the Sacraments which are offered unto God at y^
solemnities of masses, the passion of our Lord is to be mingled. And farther
expounding his own meaning, he says, that his passion may be celebrated, whose
body and blood is made. If now as the passion of Christ being absent in quality
(concerning that Christ's body s^ffereth nothing at this present) is yet
present in his whole value (concerning that the felf same substance is here,
which suffered death for our sakes) if, I say, as the passion is in this wise
presently mingled with the Sacraments and offered unto God: so M. Iuel The
applying of Alexander his words.
w^ grant, that Christ's body being absent in shape and quality (concerning
that it is not seen presently in his own foorme) is yet present in his whole
valu^ (^oncerning that the self same substance is under the foorme of bread,
which walked visiblie upon the earth) if, I say, M. Iuel will grant such a
presence of Christ's body, through which it may be mingled and really joined
to us: then the phrases of S. Chrysostom and of Alexander shall be somewhat like,
and he shall gain nothing at all.


Iuel* Nyssenus says, S. Stephen was mingled with the grace of Against (...)*
the holy Ghost.


San. Which saying of his does right well pro^e, that the grace of the holy
Ghost was really in S. Stephen, and not only imputed unto him, even as Christ's
body is really mingled with our bodies. The 155. untruth.



Iuel. Chrysostom meant, that we should consider that wonderful conjunction,
which is between Christ and us, even in one person.


San. This man den^ed hitherto, that Christ is really mingled with us by the
real presence of his body: and now he confesses Contrariety.
more then we ask. For the conjunction which is made in on^ person, is much
greater then ever any other could be. in so much that the ioyni^g of our nature
to the Godhead in the person of the son of God, is the highest mystery that
ever was heard of. 1. Cor. 12
I am not ignorant, that S. Paul calls as well the head of the Church, as
all the members, by the only name of Christ: nor that S. Cyrill says, we are
all in Christ, and that the common In Joan. li. 1. ca. 16 Ephe. 5.
person of mankind was re^ed in Christ: nor that S. Paul says of Christ and
the Church, two shall be in one flesh: nor that Christ concludes thereof,
therefore they be not now twain but Math. 19
one flesh: but all this does not import that Christ is in us, and we in him,
even in one person. For S. Cyprian says, our conjunction De coena Domini.
with Christ does neither mingle the persons, nor unite the substances.
Therefore seeing we stand now upon precise truth of doctrine, not writing at
pleasure, but disputing of a matter in controversy, in this case you might
have forborne this your more bold then wise phrase of speech. For as Damascene
has well Damasc. de Orth. (...). li. 2. c. 3
noted, whereas the blessed Trinity is one substance, and we of one substance,
and Christ one with God, and one with us through his dubble nature: yet
according to his person (which he calls Hypostasim) differt and a patre and a
spiritu, and a matre and ^ nobis, Christ in his person, differs from the
Father, from the holy Ghost, from his mother, and from us. And yet M. Iuel will
bring us even into one person. (...). (...) d^ pa^*



Iuel. Leo says* the body of him that is regenerate, is made the flesh of him
that was crucified.


San. Here is the thitd Pope, in whose phrase M. Iuel does solace himself. He
says that by Baptism we are made the flesh of Christ: and I believe the same.
But he speaks of his mystical flesh, whereof no question is between us, and
M. Iuel. For we only dispute now of Christ's natural flesh which is not in
Baptism, but only in the Sacrament of the altar. In Io^. tracta. (...)



Iuel. S. Augustine says* we are made Christ etc. and both he and we are one
who^e man.


San. Albeit the matter be not great, yet S. Augustine says One is not there.
not one whole man (as M. Iuel does ^nglish it) but the whole man. for he now
speaks not of any one ma^in number nor of any one singular person: but of a
mystical body, which consisting of diverse persons as of diverse members is made
up and perfited into a whole collegiate body. but S. Chrysostom speaks of
Christ's joining him self to every faithful man one by one at the time of
receiving his body into our hands and mouths, as I will show anon.


Iuel. As we are by baptism made Christ's flesh and Christ, in The 1^. untruth.
the same sense Chrysostom says, we are made one lump with Christ, and Christ
has tempered and mingled himself with us.


San. If we will without fraud understand the mind o^ S. Augustine, of Leo, and
of S. Chrysostom, we must not only consider, that they speak of our vnio^ and
joining to Christ, but also by what means they utter that their mind.

S. Augustine speaks generally of every kind of uniting us In Ioa^. tracta*
(...).
to Christ. Leo does not only say we are made the flesh of Christ, but showing
the mean, he says: (...). The body of him that is regenerated is made the
flesh of Christ. The name of regeneration imports the mean of Baptism, by
which we are grafted into Christ. S. Chrysos^ome speaks of an other mean,
which is the Eucharist. But what is that mean? Baptism Mat* 28.
al men confess to be the wasshing with water in the name of the Trinity.
What is then the Eucharist? What is the substance, I sa^e, which in the
Sacrament of the a^ltar works our union with Christ? Is it water? No. Is it
bread and wine? Yea, says M. Iuel. No, sae^ we. Now then let us mark y^
point, and consider (...).
the whole discourse of S. Chryso^, who writes thus: Because Christ has said,
this is (...) body, let us be ^gled with 2.
no dout. Thou (says Chrysostom) desire to see his garments, but he
delivers him self to thee: Vt tangas, and in te habeas, so 3.
that thou may touch him, and have him in thee. Beware therefore 4.
lest after so great benefits, thou begiltie of his body and blood, by
receiving with an unclean soul. For it su^ed him 5.
not to be made man, to be scourged and crucified, but he mingleth him self
with us (or brings us into one lump with him) and that not by faith alone,
but he makes us his own body, by the thing it self. This is the true
discourse of S. Chrysostom in that Reipsa.
place, as it may appear to any man who shall read it. We are the^ made one
with Christ: to work the which thing, it is common to faith, and to baptism,
or to the Sacrament of ^ance. But S. Chrysostom says farther, that the mean
of this making us one, is, in that Christ deli^eth him self to us. Ipse se
ipsum (...) self.
tibi tradidit, he delivers his own self to thee. And by that means he is
mingled with thee: not by faith alone, but by the thing it self. By which
thing? By him self, or by his own body: so that the excellency of Christ's
love consists as much in the (...) of the vnio^* ^s in the union it self.

God might have saved us without sending his son to take flesh: but when he
sent his only begotten, and made him in his own humane nature (which he
assumpted) the mean to save us, Joan. 3.
then his love appeared most singularly. Even so at this time, the Note not only
the union, but y^ mean th^of.
mean of the union is that, whereof S. Carysostome speaks. For whereas there
is a mean by faith to unite us to God, he says, Christ was not content to be
made man, neither to die for us, by which points the faith of the old Fathers
was fulfilled: and therefore it might have suffised for Christ to have rested
in his na^tie and in his death, letting our faith through his grace to make up
the knot of union without going any farther: but that mean suffised not.

He has brought us into one lump with him, not by faith alone, to wit, not by
the mean of faith alone (after his nativity and Cross) he was not content
with the mean of his birth, death and faith, but he mingleth him self with us
by the thing it self. Faith The constructio^ of the place.
is one word, y^ thing is an other. Fide, is the same case, y^ re ipsa is: one
verb does serve both. As therefore it must of necessity beenglished, efficit
he makes, nos, us, suum corpus, his own body, non solum not only, fide, by
says: so must it be englished, sed, but, re ipsa, by the thing it self. The
union therefore is made by faith, and by the thing it self.

I come nere you, M. Iuel. I say the thing it self is neither water, nor
bread and wine, nor ^th, nor any other creature, but only the real substance
of Christ's body and blood. The which Thethin^ it self.
^bstance is y^ mean whereby we are united: yet y^ same snbsta^ce is not the
mean exept (...) be delivered in the Sacrament of the altar. for of that
Sacrament, and of the worthy communicating, and of the (...) thereof, S.
Chrysostom now speaks: it is called not only the body of Christ, but Christ
him self. and Being. touch^. (...).
therefore Christ is said not only to be seen, but to be touched, eaten, and
to be within us.

That body and blood of Chri^, being consecrated (...) the holy table, and so
seen under the form of bread, being delivered by the priests hand to us, and
so touched, eaten, and being within us, that is the thing it self, whereby we
are now made the mystical body of Christ. That hody and blood was made present
by changing the bread and wine into the^. And therefore S. Chrysostom In Matt.
Hom. 83
says in y^ same homily: Qui haec sanctificat and transmutat, ipse est. It is
Christ him self, who makes holy and changes The change.
these things. That body and blood is offered and partaken. and therefore it
follows immediately after the words whereof we now chefely dispute, that he
ought to be cleaner then any thing, Qui hoc sacrificio participaturus est, who
will partake this sacrifice. The sacrifice.
That hand which breaks in pieces this flesh, the mouth Hand.
which is filled with spiritual fire, the tongue which is made red Mouth.
Tongue.
with this wonderful blood, ought to excede the son beams. *

What can be devised of man more plain, then to name changing, sacrifice,
hand, mouth, tongue, seeing, touching, eating, having within us? Al these words
are affirmed of these marueilouse gifts of Christ's supper. It is not therefore
bread and wine, which is res ipsa, the thing it self, but it is the body of
Christ: and that body being made in the Sacrament of Christ's supper, is the
mean to make us one mystical body. therefore that body is really present in
the Sacrament of the supper. How could it otherwise be seen, touched, taken
into the hand, into the mouth, and be received with the tongue, and be in us, and
(which is the chief of al) how could it be the mean to make us one body?
Note the mean of the vnton.


For as when by faith or Baptism we are incorporated, faith is present really
with us, and Baptism is really present: so when we are united by the body of
Christ, it must needs be really present. Hom. 60 ad pop. (...).
And how present? If thou were without a body (says S. Chrysostom) God had
given thee his gifts naked and without bodies. But because the soul is knit
unto the bo die: In sensibilibus intelligibilia tibi praebet. In things y^ are
s^sible, he gives thee things which are intelligible, or such as may be
atteined only by understanding. The body of Christ therefore as it is the
thing it self which unites us in his Sacrament: so is it given us in
sensibilibus, in things which may be seen, felt and touched. And to speak all
in one, the real body is given really to us under the forms of bread and wine.

Moreover when we are united by faith and Baptism, we are not united unto
faith, or unto Baptism, but by them unto the flesh of Christ. But of this
Sacrament it is said, not only that we are united by it, but also unto it, in
so much that S. Chrysostom Hom 60 ad pop. Antioch.
says: That thing at the sight whereof the Angels quake, neither dare boldly
behold it, for the brightness which shines out of it, therewith we are fed,
thereunto we are united. Lo, we are united to the thing wherewith we are fed*
and straight S. Chrysostom shows, that whereas no shepherd fedeth his sheep
60. Hom
with his own blood, yea whereas some mothers give out their childern to be
nourished: Christ does not so, but he fedeth us with his own blood, and by all
means he joins us to him self. If by faith and Baptism only Christ joined
us to him self, then as it were he should put us forth to nurse: for neither
faith nor baptism is Christ him self. But when he fedeth us with the real
substance of his own body, and with it not only apprehended by faith, but
received by mouth: then he fedeth us by his own self, and by him self unites
us to him self.

To conclude, S. Chrysostom says writing upon S. John, Hom. 45
Cum suum, etc. Christ intending to show his love toward (...), has mingled
him self with us, by his body, and has brought Per corpus suu^.
him self into one with us, to thend the body should be united to the head.
Here are four things to be noted. First that Christ works the union.
Secondly, that love causes him to wor^ it. Thirdly, that the mean whereby he
works it is affirmed to be his own body. Fourthly, that so the body, which
is the Church, is united to the head, who is Christ. In which consideration
Christ as sitting in the glory of his father, is the worker of the union: His
body as present in the Sacrament, is the instrument 1. Cor. 10
whereby he works. Christ as the Savior of his body, which is the Church,
is the end whereunto the union does Ephesians. 5
bring us. And herein appears his love, that he him self in his own
substance is the beginning, the middle, the end of the vnio^. The fondation,
the wall, the top of the spiritual building. The carpenter, the instrument, the
dweller in the house of his own^ handy working.

Now, M. Iuel, I will give you certain phrases to pick out, whereof you shall
never be able to rid your hands. 1. You prove 1.
right well, that by faith we are dwelt in of Christ: prove now that such
dwelling is made by the thing it self, and not by faith only* for else, Christ's
dwelling in us by faith is not so real a dwelling, as that whereof S.
Chrysostom speaks, which is not by faith only, but by the thing it self, to
wit, by the real body of Christ.

2. You say in Baptism we are made Christ's flesh, and so we 2.
are made in deed his mystical flesh: prove now that we are made also his flesh
in baptism per corpus Christi, by the body of Christ* for else the union of the
Sacrament will be more real, because the mean is more real and more excellent.

3. You prove that we are united to Christ by faith and Baptism: 3.
prove now either that we are united unto faith it self, and unto Baptism it
self, or else the union made in this Sacrament, will far pass the joining
which is made in the other. For here we are united to the same body, wherewith
we are fed, and which we see and touch: but there we be not united to the
water wherewith we are washed.

4. You say we are made Christ by Baptism: but prove now 4.
that Christ is there delivered in sensible things to your hand, to your mouth,
to your tongue, so, that you may have him within you, as it is done in Christ's
supper. These phrases you must prove to be verified by faith and Baptism, if
you will have as real a joining made by faith, or by Baptism, as is made by
the Sacrament of the altar.


Iuel. As the breaking of this bread is the partaking of the body The 157.
untruth.
of our Lord, even so the bread of idols is the partaking of Primas. in 1. Co.
10.
devils: and if we eat one bread with idolatours, we are made one body with
them.


San. You falsify the words of S. Paul, who is not reported by Primasius to
say, that the breaking of this bread is the partaking 1. Cor. 1^
of the body of our Lord, but the bread which we break is the partaking of
the body of our Lord. That which S. Paul spoke of the substance of the bread,
which is the communicating of Fals^ ^ying.
our Lords body, that thing you assign to the action of breaking. And whereas
Primasius says, the bread of Idols is also the partaking of devils, as the
bread which we break, is the partaking of our Lords body: it shows y^ he
took not y^ name of bread materiallie, for wheate^ bread, but for all kind of
meare and drinck which the Idolatours used. And therefore he meant likewise, y^
the bread Brea^.
which we break is no material bread, but a ki^d of meat which Christ has
prepared specially for us. Again, as the Idolatours did offer their meat unto
devils, so much more the Christians did offer theirs unto god. And sei^g the
Idolators did in will and consent of mind partake with the devils, to who^ they
offered: the Christians did partake with God not only in will and mind (those I
mean that were faithful) but also in body and mouth, by receiving the natural
flesh of Christ into their bodies. For Christ herein specially had honored his
Church, to the^d the external sacrifice thereof should be no more any earthli
creature, but (...) his own body and blood, the only propitiatory sacrifice
for all mankind.


It is proved that S. Hilarie taught the body of The xxij.
Christ to be really in the Sacrament.
HArding. If the word be verily made flesh, and we receive verily the word
being flesh in our Hilar. de Trini. l. 8
Lords meat, how is he to be thought not to dvvell in us naturally, who both
has taken the nature of our flesh now inseparable to himself, in that he is
born man, and also has mingled the nature of his own flesh to the nature of
euerlastingnesse, under the Sacrament of his flesh, to be received of us in the
communion.

Iuel. M. Harding has not hitherto found, that Christ's body The 158. untruth.
is naturally or corporally in the Sacrament.


San. You found such a devise, M. Iuel, to call for Fathers, for their names,
and their words before their place was come, that M Iuels disse^bling.
a man would have thought, when they were once come, you would have examined
their sayings most diligently. But now, your first shift is, to heap them up
altogether. And whereas in matters 1.
of less weight you did di^ide D. Hardings words into a competent number of
lines, here you will not answer to the testimonies one by one, least your
nakedness appear, but lay them all in one, so to hyde your ignorance in
answering. Your second shift is to entreat of things out of order, speaking
now 2*
of one, now of an other confusely. But I will bring your words to their due
order, as nigh as I can.

Your third shift is, to let go S. Cyrill and S. Hilarie, and to 3.
r^ne to i^pertinent sayings of S. Augustine, of S. Bernard, and of Cyrillus,
which are already answered.

The fourth shift is, to say ^alsely that M. Harding finds not 4.
Christ's body to be naturally or corporally in the Sacrament. The which point,
God willing, I will now declare against your dissembling assertion.

1. S. Hilarie disputes against the Arrians, which thing also 1.
M. Iuel in this article confesses.

2. The Arrians alleged against the Godhead of Christ diverse 2.
arguments, the which I must needs repete and set forth, with the co^tation of
them used by S. Hilarie, because M. Iuel takes part with the Arrians against
S. Hilarie (not in deed concerning the profession of their heresy) but in that
he takes away the strength of S. Hilaries answer: And applies that answer to
one part of the Arrians argument, which S. Hilarie did use to a^ other.

3. S. Hilarie first professes, that he will refell them ex his 3.
Lib. 8. de Trinit.
ipsis quibus vtuntur, out of the very same things which they use.

4. The first argument of the Arrians, is this: Of the multitude 4.
of the beleuers there was one soul, and one heart. Lo, said Act. 4.
they, this is the unity of will, and not of nature.

5. S. Hilarie answers two ways. the first answer is, that 5.
even this unity which is by faith, comes not only of the will, but also it
has an unity of nature joined withal. what nature is that? Forsouth the
nature of faith. For the faith is one, as S. Ephesians. 4*
Paul says. And therefore it is one certain nature: which being promised, S.
Hilarie concludes thus: Si ergo per fidem, id est, per vnius fidei naturam,
and caet. If all they were one by faith, that is to say, by the nature of one
faith, how is it that thou understand (...) not a natural unity in them,
who are one by the nature of one faith?

6. Now for Gods sake, good Reader, see how M. Iuel applies this gear unto
his purpose, and know him to be a very desperate man.


Iuel. Against the Arrians Hilarious reasoned thus. 1. Christ is Page 346
as really joined unto the Father, as unto us. 2. But Christ is joined unto us
by nature. 3. Therefore Christ is joined to God the Father by nature.


San. In deed S. Hilarie makes such an argument. But how 8.
does he prove, that Christ is joined unto us by nature?


Iu. He proves it thus: We are joined unto Christ by faith, that 9.
is, by the nature of one faith, and that is to say, naturally.


San. If ever any man spoke ignorantly, falsely, impudently: 10.
this man is guilty thereof at this time. Note, I beseech you, the number of
faults committed by him.

First he makes S. Hilarie to bring such kind of proof, as 11.
The 159. ^ntruthe.
he does not bring for proof of that proposition, which M. Iuell has set
forth. For S. Hilarie did bring that, which is said of the nature of faith, to
answer the argument taken out of the Acts Actor. 4.
of the Apostles, which I now have proponed.

Secondly, M. Iuel omitted the true and only argument which 12.
S. Hilarie brings in deed to prove, that Christ is joined unto The 160
untruth.
us by nature. The which proof of his I will hereafter prosecute at large.

Thirdly, M. Iuel does make S. Hilarie a very fool in the 13.
The 161. untruth.
kind of proof which M. Iuel assigns him. For whereas by M. Iuels consession
he should have proved, that Christ is joined unto us by nature: M. Iuel makes
him to say, that we are joined unto Christ by faith, and so that we are
naturally joined to him. Where is your memory, M. Iuell? It is to be proved,
that Christ is joined to us, and not only that we are joined to him. And that
he is joined to us by his nature, and not only that we are joined to him by a
nature of faith, which is not in him. For Christ has no faith, because from
the instant of his incarnation Christ had not faith but more then faith.
his soul and understanding was illuminated with the vision of God, to whose
nature it was joined in one person. and where clear vision is, there is no
faith: in so much that faith shall cease when we come to see God in his glory.
And how is Christ joined 1. Cor. 13
to us by that faith, which he has not at all?

Fourthlie M, Iuel overthrows wholly the true argument 14.
of S. Hilarie, whose intent is only as yet to show, that faithful The 162.
vntrut^.
men are one among themselfes by the nature of faith also, and not only by will
and consent, as I have declared before. He speaks I say, of our joining one
to an other, and not as yet of Christ's joining to us, or of ours to Christ.

Fifthlie M. Iuel falsifieth the words of S. Hilarie. for he makes 15.
The 163. untruth. Falsifying.
him to say, that we are joined to Christ by faith naturaliter, naturally. and
he writes that word in such letters, as he is wont to write the words of the
fathers in. But S. Hilarie says not, nor never mea^t, that we are joined to
Christ by faith naturally. There is no such word in him. What honest nature
though heretofore 16.
he did believe M. Iuel, will now any longer stick unto him, since he is found to
be without al wit or conscience? Truly Simon Magus was no more filthy in his
iuggling knaks, the^ this man is. But let us go forward in S. Hilarie.

The second answer of S. Hilarie to the first arg^ment of the 17.
Arrians is, that the Christians are one also by the nature of one baptism, and
not by Will only.


Iuel. Likewise he says, we are joined unto Christ by the regeneration 18.
of one nature. and again: we are joined to Christ by the nature of one
baptism. hereof he concludes: therefore are we naturally joined unto him.


Sand. In so few words it is hard for a man ^udued with reason, to make so many
faults, as M. Iuel has now committed.

First he will make S. Hilarie prove, that Christ is joined unto 19.
us by nature, because we are joined to him by regeneration of The 164 untruth.
one nature: Which argument will not hold. for it will not follow y^ because we
are joined to an other by some inferior means, y^ he therefore is joined to
us by a higher mean. To be joined to 20.
us in nature is a higher thing, then for us to be joined to Christ in Baptism.
How can then the baser conjunction infer of necessity a higher kind of joining?

Secondly, M. Iuel does falsify S. Hilaries words, reporting 21.
that he says we are joined to Christ by the nature of one Baptism. S. Hilarie
says it not, but only that all the Christians are one among them selves by
these things, and not one naturally with Christ. His own words are: Whereas in
so great diversity of nations, of conditions, of sexes (the faithful) are
one, Lib. 8. de Trinit.
comes it of the assent of will, or rather of the unity of the Sacrament,
because both Baptism is one unto them, and all they have put on them one
Christ? Therefore what shall the concord of minds do here, for as much as they
are one thereby, because they are clothed with one Christ by the nature of one
Baptism? 22.


Thirdly, it is most impudently affirmed of M. Iuel, that S. The 166. untruth.
Hilarie concludes hereof: therefore we are naturally joined unto Christ. S.
Hilarie has no such conclusion, neither could he have any such, because it is
not yet his purpose to open, how Christ is joined unto us by nature.

You will say, is it not then true, that we are joined to Christ Note well.
by faith and by Baptism? Yeas Sir, and by will also. But note the point we
stand upon: we are not joined naturally to Christ, nor he is not joined by
nature unto us by our faith or Baptism. Naturally.
It is y^ term naturally, which M. Iuel denied at S. Poules cross, and that
te^n D. Harding has found to appertein to the Sacrament, as it shall be be made
most manifest. That term M. Iuel would wrest to faith and Baptism. And for that
terms sake he is almost become a wicked Arrian, or a natural.

The second argument of the Arrians, is: He that planteth, and 23.
he that waters are one. Ergo, said they, the unity of will is in both them:
and they meant of will only, and not any other unity.

S. Hilarie answers, that they are one, because to them being 24.
born again in one Baptism, one ministry or dispensation of the one Baptism,
which does regenera^e, is granted. So that they are on^, because they have one
ministry, and not only because they (...) of one mind.

At the last S. Hilarie gives a general rule: qui per eandem 25.
rem vnum sunt, natura etiam vnum sunt, non tantum voluntate. Those who are o^e
by the same thing, they are one by nature, and not only by will.

The third argument of the Arrians, is: Exemplum vnitatis 26.
istius (says S. Hilarie) and caet.

The Arrians have brought forth an example of this unity Joan. 17.
out of our Lords words also, to the end all may be one: As thou O Father in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be in us.

To this argument S. Hilarie answers, declaring now first 27.
that, which M. Iuel spoke of before out of place. Now first begins S.
Hilarie to show, how Christ dwells naturally in us, and we in him. And
consequently, how we also dwell in his Father by the mean of him.

To this matter should M. Iuel have applied his solutio^. For upon the
discourse made by reason of this argument, D. ^ding did ground his proof of
Christ's real presence in the Sacrament. What says M. Iuel to this matter?


Iuel. Thus it appears by S. Hilarie, we may have Christ naturally The. 167
untruth.
within us by three other sundry means: and therefore not only (as M. Harding
holds) by receiving of the Sacrament.


San. Thus it appears, say you, but I have showed that no such thing
appears. For S. Hilarie never said hitherto, that we were naturally in Christ.


Iuel. Like as Christ is naturally, corporally, and carnally in the 168.
untruth.
us, by faith, by regeneration, and by Baptism: even so and none otherwise, he
is in us by the Sacrament of his body.


San. First you begin with a thing not confessed, nor agre^d upon, and thereof
you conclude a manifest falshod. Christ is in us by faith and Baptism, but not
corporally in our bodies. But by the Sacrament of his body he is both in us,
and in our bodies in the true and corporal substance of his own flesh and blood.

Secondly you distinguish regeneration from Baptism, as The 169. (...).
though Baptism were not the Sacrament which does regenerate us even by S.
Hilaries own doctrine alleged before. N^. 24. in t^is (...).


Thirdly if Christ be none otherwise in us by the Sacrament of his body, then
by faith or Baptism, why do you make it a several way from the other named
before? Why is that counted by your self a fourth mean of Christ's being in
us, which disfer^th not at all from the other three?

At the length it is ty^e that I prove out of S. Hilarie (which thing you, M.
Iuel, dissemble and deny) Chrisles body to be really present in the Sacrament.

It is to be remembered, that whereas the Arrians had said a^ 28.
vuitie of will to be only between God the Father and the son, as we likewise
are one with Christ by will only (for so they said) The vnit^ of Chri ^tes
birth (...).
S. Hilari^ does not in that case rest upon this answer, that Christ by his
birth is one with us in truth of flesh and blood, and therefore not in will
and assent only (as the Arria^s pretended, and as M* Iuel did before go about
to pro^) S. Hilarie, I say, rested not therein: because the unity of nature,
which was made with mankind by Christ's Incarnation, ^ight be thought to
pertein no more to the good, then to the evil, whereas Christ prayed for the
unity of good men alo^e, that they might be one, Joan. 17.
as God the Father is in Christ, and Christ in him. Therefore S. Hilary seking
an other mean of our natural unity with Christ, The (...) of S.
thereby proves, seeing the faithful men are one with Christ not H^ary.
only by faith, or Baptism, but by natural conjunction, and by corporal
partaking of his own substance, that much more Christ is one with his Father in
nature, and not in will alone. S. Hilarie then must prone, that we are one with
Christ naturally. which thing he does after this ^ort.

The word is verily made flesh, and we take verily the word 29.
being flesh in our Lords meat: therefore Christ is to be judged to tarry is in
us naturally. Thus does S. Hilari reason, as I The conclusion.
have now showed. his conclusion is: y^ Christ tarieth in us naturally. y^
mean to prove it is dubble: one because Christ has true the prou^
flesh and blood, whereby it is showed to be possible, that he may dwell
naturally in us: the other is to show, that Christ gave unto us, and that we
take verily the same word being flesh in our Lords meat. whereby the flesh
that was able to be given to us, (because it was really assumpted of Christ)
comes in deed Cibusdo minicus.
reallie unto us by his gift* our Lords meat whereof S. Hilarie speaks is
the Sacrament of Christ's supper, wherein only he ^ed us corporally with the
word being flesh. therefore S. Hilarie does us to understand, that in the
Sacrament we take the (...).
word made flesh. and so verily take it, as the word was verily made flesh*
Page 343.



Iuel. That we verily and undoubtedly receive Christ's body The 170. untruth.
in the Sacrament, it is neither denied, nor in question.


Sa^. You said before. page 323. that Christ in his supper added an Confuse and
contrary doctr^.
outward Sacrament to the spiritual eating named in S. Ihon: which Sacrament
you said, was commonly called a figure: and again you said the bread is a
figure. Last of all, you said out of Rabanus, that the Sacrament is received
with the mouth: but now you say, it is not denied, y^ we verily receive
Christ's body in the Sacrament. whereof I say it must needs follow, that
Christ's body is received with the mouth. For it is received in the Sacrament,
as here you confess. and the Sacrament is received with the mouth, as you
taught before: therefore by your doctrine Christ's body is received by mouth.
which is against your third conclusion page 319. Who can tell where to find
you? But to return Not: the word vere.
to my purpose, the aduerb, verily, does signify in this place naturally,
really and substanciallie. For as the word is made flesh^ really: so we take
really the word being flesh in our Lords meat. The word was not made flesh
only by our faith, but in truth of his substance: therefore we take the word
being flesh not by our faith only, but in truth of his substance. If M.
Iuell will have us receive Christ's body verily, and yet by faith only, it
must be made flesh verily, and yet by faith only.


Ivel. It is the bread of the heart* hunger thou within, thirst thou within.


San. If Christ being in his divine nature took real flesh, and yet may be
hungered within, and is much y^ better to us bread of y^ heart The 171. untruth.
by natural slesh: right so it is extreme madness to make us believe, that
Christ's body gene^ under the form of bread, is therefore the less hungered
within, or the less the bread and food of the heart.


Iuel. The thing that is received in spirit, is received in deed. The 172.
untruth.



San. If it be to be received corporally as well as in spirit, (as Baptism and
the Eucharist) then it is false and foolish to say, that it is received in
deed, when the outward deed lacks. This man will cloth the naked, and feed the
pore in spirit: and yet he says it is done in deed, albeit they die for cold.
Spiritual receiving is true and good, when it shuldreth not out real
receiving. as spiritual resurrection is good and true, but yet it is not al y^
truth of resurrection. S. Bernard is alredie answered, and S. Cyril. 344.
The 173. untruth.



Iuel. It is a holy mystery, and a heavenly action, forcing our minds up into
heaven, and there teaching us to eat the body of Christ, not outwardly by the
service of our bodies.


San. Is not vere sumimus, we verily take, spoken of taking by the service of
our bodies? can it be otherwise meant? Again 30.
it follows in the same sentence, that Christ has mingled the nature Under.
of his flesh to the nature of euerlastingnesse under a Sacrament of his flesh
to be communicated unto us. Mark these words, M. Iuel, which you passed over,
as if you had been utterly blind. The nature of Christ's flesh is, I trow, real,
it is communicated Sub.
to us under a Sacrament. know you not, that sub, is under? is not the
Sacrament received by the service of our bodies? did Before page 323.
not your self gra^nt the Sacrament to be taken by mouth? If then the nature of
Christ's flesh be under a Sacrament: when the Sacrament is received by the
service of our bodies, the nature of Christ's flesh is received by our bodies,
and not by faith alone. The 174 untruth.



Iu. The truth hereof stands not in any real presence, but as Hilarious
says, in a mystery, which is, in a Sacrament.


San Whereas S. Hilarious said: We receive verily the flesh of 31.
(...)
his body under a mystery, you report him to say, in a mystery. Is that no
false dealing? Well: he says we receive Christ's flesh under a mystery: and
by your own confession a mystery is a Sacrament: therefore we receive the
flesh of Christ's body under the Sacrament. And the Sacrament delivered in the
last 323. lin. 30. 33.
supper is by your confession also outward, and commonly called a figure:
therefore we verily receive the flesh of Christ's body under an outward
figure. and the outward figure is known by our eye to be the figure of bread:
therefore under the figure of bread we receive the flesh of Christ's body,
albeit by the figure you mean the substance of bread.


Iuel. Our regeneration in Baptism in a certain bodily sort The 175.
untruth.
teaches us the purgatio^ of the mind, as Dionysius says: so it is in the
Sacrament of Christ's body.


San. Can you have the mind better tanght by an outward action, then if you
eat the same flesh in body, which we do eat in faith? Is it possible to have
a greater co^formitie, a more vehement figuring, and lively expressing of al
truth? And albeit I have showed differences before between Baptism and the
Eucharist, yet omitting y^, I will now say (...) S. Augustine: then y^ body and
blood De verb. Apo. ser. 2.
of Christ shall be lise to every man, if y^ thing which is visiblie taken in
the Sacrament, be eaten in the truth spirituallie, and be drunken spiritually.
M. Iuel would have one thing ou^wardly taken, and an other thing eaten
inwardly. But S. Augustine says, that must be eaten in the truth it self
spiritually, which is visibly taken in the Sacrament.


Iuel. Although Christ be not bodily ^resent, yet that does not: The 176.
untruth.
hinder the substance of the mystery.


San. The substance of the mystery must needs be hindered when it is absent.
For it can be no mystery without the substance thereof. The substance of the
mystery is the natural substance ^2.
of Christ under the Sacrament. therefore S. ^ilarie says: The natural
propriety by the Sacrament is the Sacrament of the perfect unity. Of this
place I have often times spoken, and I would gladly hear M. Iuels mind in it.
For then should I be sure to know, how I might dispute against him. I can not
construe it otherwise, then thus: Naturalis proprietas, the natural propriety,
Proprietas.
which is to say, the natural substance, and he means the substance of
Christ. For S. Hilarie uses the ward, proprietas, very much and ost for the
substance or personal being of God or of Christ. Well then: Christ's natural
substance: Per Sacramentum, by or through the Sacrament. est, is, Sacramentum
the Sacrament, The word Sacrament is twice named.
perfectae vnitatis, of perfect unity. The substance of Christ is a Sacrament
by or through the Sacrament. these words can have none other literal meaning,
but this: the substance of Christ through the form of bread, wherein unity is
figured, and under which it is, by that mean, I say, it is the Sacrament of
perfect unity. how can else the natural substance of Christ be a Sacrament? Of
it self alone it can be no holy sign, but by the form of bread it may be a
Sacrament. and yet M. Iuell can not find the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament in all S. Hilarie.

Moreover, S. Hilarie making a preface, that we must not 33.
Joan. 6.
speak otherwise in Gods matters, then we have learned of him (who said: my
flesh is verily meat) and y^ there is no place of douting of y^ truth of flesh
and blood, concludes thus: For now both by Vere.
the profession of our Lord him self, and by our faith, it is flesh in deed
and blood in deed. Answer I pray you, M. Iuel. What is flesh in deed? what
is the nominatine case to, est, is? I know The thing taken into our mouth is
flesh in deed.
none other beside the word Sacramentum, the Sacrament, or some like word
which does import the Sacrament: as to say, that which the faithful receive
at Christ's supper. For of that thing S. Hilarie now speakethe. That then is
verily flesh: and that is meant by S. Hilarie of an outward thig: for he says
immediately Haec accepta, these things taken and drunk do bring it to pass,
that both we may be in Christ, and Christ in us.

Beside this, it follows, Est ergo in nobis ipse per carnem. 34.
Christ is him self in us by his ^leshe: Note how he is in us, and By flesh.
by what mean: not by the mean of bread and wine, but by the 35.
By the mysterics.
mean of his flesh. And afterward: he is believed to be in us by the mystery
of the Sacraments: ipso in nobis naturaliter permanente. 36.
Him self tarying naturally in us, which is the effect of the Naturally.
Sacraments. At the length he concludes his chief intent against the third
argument of the Arrians, saying: Si ergo nos naturaliter 37.
fecundum carnem per eum viuimus, id est, naturam carnis The nature of his
sleshe.
suae adepti, etc. If then we live naturally according to the flesh by him,
that is to say, having obtained the nature of his flesh, how can he but have
the father naturally in him self according to the spirit, seeing he lives for
the Father? Out of which place it appears, that as the substance of God the
Father is really in the person of Christ: so S. Hilary meant, that Christ's
natural substance by mean of the Sacrament received, is within our own
persons. For the natural being of Christ through the Sacrament in us, is the
mean to prove, that God the Father is naturally in Christ. But if Christ
through the Sacrament were in us as only eaten by faith, God the Father should
be proved to be in his son by faith only, and not by nature. which thing the
Arrians would have concluded, whom M. Iuel does help all that he may, and
hinders the prouss of the consubstantiality of Christ with his father.

But S. Hilary says: By the Sacrament of flesh and blood the 38.
propriety of natural communion is granted. Again: by the 39.
son tarying carnaliter, fleshely (to wit) in truth of flesh in us.
Carnaliter.
Last of all, the mystery of true and of natural unity is to be 40.
preached, in eo nobis corporaliter and inseparabilirer vnitis: We (...).
being united in him corporally and inseparably.

Thus S. Hilarie has proved most directly, and has affirmed by diverse words
of one meanig about twelve times, that Christ is joined to us by nature of his
flesh: And not by the nature of faith or of baptism, (as M. Iuel most
desperately affirms) For Christ neither has any faith in him, which may
be of the nature of our faith: Nor any baptism of the same nature of forgeuing
sins, which our baptism is of. it is the nature of flesh and blood only
whereby Christ is naturally, carnally, and corporal^y joined unto the faithful
men at what time they re^aue his mysteries. This point so evident when M. Iuel
dissembled and forged an other, had he not don better if he had subscribed te^
times?


Iuel. These words, that Christ corporally, carnally, and naturally The 177.
untruth.
is within us, in their own rigor seem very hard.


San. They must needs seem hard to him who believes not. a De verb.
hard talk (says S. Augustine) but to hard hearted me^. incredible, Apostol.
sermon. 2.
but to them who believe not.


Iuel. Hilarious says: We are one with God the Father and the The 178. untruth.
Son, not only by adoption or consent of mind, but also by nature, which
according to the letter can not be true?


San. Why bring you not the latin words where he says it? will you now spet
(...) your poison of lying also against that bl^ssed father S. Hilarious? He
teaches, that Christ and his Father are one nature, and likewise that we and
Christ are one nature, because he took our flesh of the virgin Marie, and gave
us the same flesh in the Sacrament, whereunto we being joined, prosiceremus ad
vnitatem patris, might go forward to the unity of the sather. And again he
says, that he rehearsed these things (concerning our natural unity with
Christ, because the here^ikes falsely affirming the unity of will only between
the father and the son, did Note all the words of S. Hilarie.
use y^ example of our unity to god, as though we were united to the son,
and by the son to the father by obedience only and devout will, without any
propriety of natural communion being granted to us by the Sacrament of flesh
and blood: where both by the honor of the son of god given unto us, and by
the son tarying fleshly in us, and we being united in him corporally and
unseparably, the mystery of true and natural union is to be prea ched and
taught. It is answered therefore of us to the folly of suriouse me^. Hitherto
S. Hilarie, where he teaches in deed yt we are Our joining is by the son.
joined to the Father, but per filium manente^ in nobis carnaliter, by the
Son tarying in us carnally, to wit, in truth of flesh: which thing he also
teaches to be do^e per Sacramentu^ carnis et sanguinis by y^ Sacrament of
flesh and blood. But yt we are one with God y^ Father by nature, or one with
God y^ Son in his divine nature, it is a most impudent lie forged upon S.
Hilarie: and you that do forget it, have passed herein all the bounds of
honesty to accuse S. Hilarie of so blasphemouse a saying, as that had b^ne.
The 179. untruth.



Iu. The Fathers hauebene fain to expound and to mollify such violent and
excessive kinds of speech.


San. Now you show your self in your own colors, M. Iuel. Whatsoever you have
hitherto pretended, you think in your M Iuels true mind of the Fathers.
heart, that the Fathers do not speak well. for violent speeches be no good
speeches, and excessive speeches be not literally true. You would not call them
hyperbolicall speeches, least any man should think, you inteprete and excuse
their words by a figure Hyperbole.
o^hetorike. But yet al is one to them which understand greek, to say, their
speeches are more then true, and to say, they are excessive. But I must needs
call you and account you a wicked man for such (...) speaking. and I require you
by the force of this confession of yours to subscribe. For it is enough y^ the
Fathers do speak so plainly against you, that you are constrained to call it
a violent and excessive speech. It stands not now in you to say, that they
spoke more then is true. You have promised to subscribe, if any one sufficient
sentence were brought forth out of M. Iuel has yielded himself gilty.
the first six hundred years. S. Hilarie is nere upon the first three hundred
years. He says, that Christ is naturally in us by his flesh communicated in a
Sacrament, and received under a mystery, and carnally and corporally tarieth in
us. Therefore you must subscribe, not only through promise, but to save your
soul from hell fire. But what say we? does S. Hilarie speak more then is
true? Could the Arrians have wished a better Patron for their faction, then M.
Iuell is? or is not Christ much bound to M. Iuel, whose diui^e nature S.
Hilarie defending is said to speak excessiuely? Is not God y^ Father much
beholden to M. Iuell, who impugneth y^ Patron of his own son? Shall not M.
Iuel be swetely rewarded for this gear, if he die in this excessive opinion?
Hear, I pray you, what S. Hilary says of his own doctrine in this very book:
Cura est nobis vt primum. It is our care first to teach those things which are
holy, and perfect, and sound, and that our talk not wandering by certain by
turnings and windings, About the beginning of the 8. book.
and suddenly appering out of not haunted and creping holes should rather show,
then seek the truth. Thus did he profess to teach perfect and sound things
and undoubted truths, which M. Iuell calls excessive, beause they excede the
cumpasse of his heresy, and contein y^ Catholic truth. And when S. Hilarie
comes to y^ very matter, whereof we speak at this time, he does not only say
it is sound, perfice, holy, and true doctrine, but he says he learned it of
Christ him self: Even concerning this very point, that the natural verity of
Christ is in us, for that he said: My flesh is verily meat.

But all the Fathers, all the scriptures which resist M. Iuels De doct.
fancy, are hot, violent, exces^iue. and as S. Augustine most truly Christ.
l. 3. cap. 10.
faith: If the opinion of any error has first possessed the mind, whatsoever
the scripture affirms otherwise, figuratum homines arbitrantur, men think it
figurative.


That the place of (...) ^erteineth to the Sacrament of Christ's supper.
HArding. Gregory Nyssene speaking of the bread The (...). Chapter.
which came down from heaven, says: by what mean shall a bodiles thing be
made meat to a De vita Moysis.
body?

Iuel. Gregory Nyssene is newly set abroad with sundry corruptions. The 180.
untruth.



San. If this vain fable may be admitted, every man shall be corrupted when it
pleases you. If he be corrupted, he is corrupted by your faction. for his
works have been no where so fully printed, as at Bale called in Latin Basilea,
which is a city of your profession. 3. Moreover you very often bring his
authority: and how are you sure that he was not corrupted at all in those
places, which you allege? 4. Yea farther you allege for your purpose this very
treatise, and this very side of the leaf, whence D. Harding took this
authority, and that as well before the words brought by D. Harding, as after.


Iuel. He speaks not one word, neither of Christ's natural The 181.
untruth. The 182. untruth.
dwelling in us. 2. Nor of the Sacrament.


San. Out upon this impudency, M. Iuel: you have taken upon you the forhead of
a harlot, and are without all fear, shame, or ho^estie. Does not Gregory
Nyssene speak in that place one word of the Sacrament? he speaking of Moses
life, by occasion thereof comes to show the wandering of the children of
Israel In vita Moysis.
in the desert: where he says, after that they had drunck of y^ stone, all
nourishment which they had brought out of Aegipt failed the^, Manna.
and a simple meat to look unto, but di^erse i^ taste, was rained down to
them. which thing did signify (says he) that we must cleanse our minds by
says, by Baptism, by tra^aile, by all virtue, by doctrine of the Gospel: so
that al Aegiptia^al kind of li^ing, to wit, all the multitude of sins failing
us, we must receive ^oelestem cibum, quem nulla nobis satio agriculturae
artibus The heavenly meat.
produxit, the heavenly meat, which no sowing has by the art of plowing
brought forth unto us. but it is bread prepared for us, without sede, without
plowing, without any other work of man. that bread flowing from above is found
in the earth.

Hitherto he has said, that we have a true manna which we must receive. and
how, I pray you, but as the children of Israel did receive their manna? and
then we must receive it by mouth, as they did receive their ma^na by mouth. But
what is our manna? Forsooth a meat which came down from heaven (as the old
manna did) a meat not gotten out of the ground, but rainig from heaven? What
raining is that? The Incarnation of Jesus Christ who taking flesh of the virgin
without the mean of the sede of man, came down from heaven, and was in the
earth man among men. No (says the heritike Uale^tinus for example, or
Manicheus) Christ took no true flesh of y^ virgin. Yes says Gregorius Nisse^:
Panis enim, et caet for the bread which came down from heaven, The occ^ sion of
Nyssen^ talk.
which is the true meat, which is obscurely signified by this history (of
Manna) is not a thing bodilesse. Thus much he said against the heretics who
denied the truth of Christ's body. well, go forth sir, I pray you. For the
heretics will not admit your bare word. prove that which you say. Quo enim
pacto res incorporea corpori cibus fiet? For by what mean shall a thing, which
lacks a body, be made meat unto the body? Here Gregory Note the point.
Nyssen presuppo^eth, that Christ incarnated is made meat unto our bodies,
because he is our true Manna. But, says he, y^ could not be so, if Christ had
no true flesh. for a thing without a body can not be made meat unto the body:
but Christ is so reallie made meat unto o^r bodies, yt thereby Nyss^s proves
he had a true and real body: so that all the principal matter in that place is
of this Sacrament, and of Christ's natural dwelling in our bodies.

Therein Manna is fulfilled. Which Manna rained from heaven 1.
into the earth, as Christ came from his Fathers bosom into 2.
the Uirgins womb. The same Manna was afterward eaten by the Jews corporally,
as Christ after his incarnation was corporally eaten at his supper of the
Apostles. Before y^ Jews 3.
did eat Manna, they were prepared with passing over the red sea, with labor
and with water of the rock. And before we come to Christ's supper, we are
prepared by Baptism and good life and preaching.

S. Gregory Nyssene does make eating by faith a preparation 4.
to eat the last supper worthily. Oportet fide, Baptismate, and caet. We must
cleanse our souls by faith and Baptism, and demum and He speaks not of
eating by faith.
so at the length with a purified mind receive the heavenly meat. It is not
eating by faith, M. Iuel, that he speaks of. Faith goes before it, and the
receiving of this heavenly meat is a farther kind of eating. This meat being
y^ bread brought forth 5.
of the virgin without tylling, is made meat unto the body. Do Corpori cibus
fit.
you hear, M. Iuel? It is made meat unto the body. Not only to the
understanding, but to the body. It is so really made meat unto the body, that
of necessity thence it is deduced, that it self is 6.
a bodily and corporal thing. Which argument were none, if it Note this
discourse.
were not corporally received into our bodies. For by faith God the Father, and
the Son, and the holy Ghost dwell in us, and Ioa^. 14.
make their mansion in our hearts, as it were in houses, and our bodies are the
temple of the holy Ghost. But such dwelling, as 2. Cor. 6.
it proves not God the Father or the holy Ghost to have bodies: so does it not
prove that Christ has a body. But Christ is so made meat unto us, that the
real truth of his body is proved thereby: Therefor it is taught, that his
body is made meat to our bodies in a corporal truth of his natural
substance. This only is the discourse of S. Nyssenus.

This meat sauoreth to every man who receaueth it, as Manna 7.
did. Therefore it is meant, that it is received to fulfill the figure of
Manna, which can not be thoroughly fulfilled, without the self meat, which came
from heaven being received into our mouths and bodies, give thence that
spiritual taste and savor. Sap. 16.
for Manna gave his sweet taste in the mouths of the Israelits. 8.


This kind of bread which is able to be turned to all things, Nescit la befieri.
and yet not able to be wasted, is no material bread, but the food which was
born of the virgin.

He that prepared this table was Christ, who never prepared 9.
for us any table so literally, as at his last supper. Qui ha^c nobis me^ sam
praeparauit.


Yet all this to M. Iuel is not one word concerning the dwelling of Christ
naturally in us, or concerning his real presence in the Sacrament. Nay, here
is not one word touching the Sacrament 10.
at all, beside that where he names herbs and milk. For those words M. Iuel
thought mete meat for his divinity, and therefore spied them out, and uttered
the same to destroy all the discourse of Gregory Nyssen: whereas they signify
the effect of grace proceeding from the real ^esh of Christ.

Tell me, good Reader of thy conscience, if thou saw a mad man running with
a naked sword in the streat which were full of children, slaying, and killing
all that ever he could come by, tell me I say, would you not cry out to all men,
to beware of him? Would you not run to save y^ poor babes? would you not, if
need were, rather lame the mad man* the^ he should so destroy a number of
persons? God is my judge, I have no quarrel to the person of M. Iuel. But for
as much as I see him run mad, and to M. Iuel is mad.
kill innumerable souls of poor men, with greef of heart I cry out against
him, and say to you all: beware the mad man. who is so much the more (...) mad,
because it appears not outwardly. But what shall we (...)? If wh^ he came to
read Gregory (...), he saw never a word of that which I have now declared,
and which every man may see if he will open the book: If he (I say) saw not
one word thereof, do you not (...) is (...).
perceive, that his eyes are poss^ed with seem horrible spirit of blindness? Is
not all reason and understanding taken from him? But if he saw all that which I
have told, and therein found so many words spoken of the Sacrament, and those
so effectual against his error: what shall we then think or say? Is it
possible Extreme malice.
that so great a malice may be in any man, as to delight in deceauing willingly
poor and ignorant men, and to lead them al to infidelity? If such malice may
be in man, whom shall we trust, and in what danger are the simple and (...)
people? Whether it be blindness or malice in him, take this rule to thy
comfort against all (...) that ever shall chance: Trust no A rule for y^
simple.
one man alive. Trust no one generation of men, the beginning of whose doctrine
thou have known or heard of. Trust only the whole body of Christ, the whole
Catholic Church, the whole cumpaine of the faithful, the whole succession of
Bisshops, of Ep. 118. insole^tissimae insaniae.
Priests joined also with the faithful forefathers. That which has once
pr^led through all the known Church, that believe in Christ's name. For to
dispute against it, S. Augustine says it is the point of a most proud (...).
But the whole Church Math. 5.
can not fail. It is a city built by God upon a hill, which can not be hid.
It is the pillar of truth, as S. Paul says. To that 1. Tim. (...).
universal practice and belefe if thou commit thy soul, and do as it
commands, it shall be saved in that (...) body of Christ, whereof only he is
the Savior. Leave Iuel, Cranmer, Ephesians. 5.
Ridley, Latymer, leave all that tarry not in the tried faith, and stick only
to that interpretation of Gods word, which the Ca^ received and delivered even
from the Apostles time to this day.


Iuel. The purpose of Gregory Nyssen was only to speak of The 183. untruth.
Christ's birth.


San. His purpose was to speak of the miracles done in the wilderness under
Moses, of y^ which Ma^na being one of y^ chief, Exodus 16
it did both signify the birth of Christ by the falling of it from heaven upon
the earth, and the Sacrament of the altar, whiles it was afterward taken into
the bodies of the Israelits, as we eat really the flesh of Christ which he
took of the virgin. The 18* untruth.



Iu. In like manner of speech S. Hierom says: the wheat whereof the heavenly
bread is made, is that, of which our Lord said, my flesh is meat in deed.


San. I mar^le what you mean to say the manner of speech is like, whereas by
your assertion Gregory Nyssen speaks only of Christ's birth. But S. Hierom
speaks not thereof, but of In Esa. cap. 62.
Christ's body and blood, as it is received in the Sacrament. Thus you are
against your self. For in deed as S. Hierome speaks of that wheat and of
that wine, which is Christ himself, not only being borne of the virgin, but
also eaten at his supper: even so does Gregory Nyssen speak as well of the
supper as of the birth of Christ.


Iu. And to this purpose says Amphilochius, unless Christ had the 18^. (...).
been borne carnally, thou had not been borne spiritually.


San. To what purpose did he say it? For I see not how your words hang
together, but only that you patche up a number of sent^nces. as soon as one is
done, you bring in an other, with M. Iu^ (...) o^ (...).
a therefore, or in like manner, or to this purpose, or in this sense, and he
says: and so forth. But if they were particularly (...)* it is but a heap of
words without order, dependa^ce, or any good reason. To what purpose, I pray
you, (...), (...) Christ had been borne carnally, thou had not been borne
spiritually? I see no^e other purpose therein, but that Christ's birth is
necessary to our salvation: and that because if the birth had not gone before,
we could not have eaten that body in the Sacrament, which had not been at all
borne. The 186. untruth.



Iu. As Nyssen says, Christ is made our bread: so he says, he becomes
strong meat unto the perfect, herbs unto the weak. etc.


San. Here you presuppose that Gregory Nyssen says: Christ is made our bread,
and nothing else. But I have showed you that he says, how can a thing
bodilesse be made m^ate unto the ^ying.
body? As for the words which you name, I find them not in Gregory Nyssen
so uttered, as you report them. He says Christ is bread, but D. Harding forced
not his argument upon that word alone. For he may be bread, and herbs, and
milk unto us both in the Sacrament, and without it. but he is bread, herbs and
milk to us in our mouths, as Manna was unto the Jews, only in the Sacrament.
The 187. untruth.



Iuel. Gregory Nyssen holds, that we receive Christ's body otherwise then
in the Sacrament. for he says: who so has abunda^tlie drunk of the Apostles
springs, has already received whole Christ.


San. You miss in your prouf: For you should prove, that whosoever drinks of the
Apostles spring, he receaueth Christ's body: and you prove, that he receaueth
Christ. A man may receive Christ in his heart, and yet not have Christ's body
in his body. Christ being the name of the person may be verified as well of
the divine, as o^ the humane nature. But there Gregory Nyssen spoke of his
divine nature: which thing is most clear, because he speaks of eating by
faith so, as it agrees to the whole Trinity.

And therefore it follows: I and mie father will come unto him. Joan. 14.
Lo, he will come so as his father comes, to wit, by his divine nature. But
beside that, S. Nyssen speaks of his birth, and of his being meat unto our
bodies, which is o^lie done in the Sacrament of the altar. The 188 untruth (...)



Iuel. M. Harding reasons thus: Christ was borne, ergo his bo die is real in
the Sacrament.


San. O dissembler. he reasons clean contrary, with Gregory Nyssen. Christ
is made meat to our bodies in the Sacrament: Therefore he was reallie born, as
I have already showed.


Iuel. This conclusion is childish. The 189 untruth.



San. Yours is childish: But D. Hardings is so strong, that if the eating of
Christ prove his birth, it will follow, that as he is born reallie, so much
more he is eaten really. otherwise, if he were only eaten by faith, thence we
could conclude no more but a birth by faith: which is against Gregory Nyssenes
purpose.


Iuel. If he conclude not this, he concludes nothing. The 190. untruth.



San, If you speak as you think, you are byside your sell. For as by the real
eating of Christ's flesh, his birth is concluded of S. Nyssen: so ^y D.
Harding the real eating is noted as a most known truth presupposed by S.
Gregory Nyssen.


That M. Iuel has not well answered the places of The (...) Chapter.
S Cyrillus.
HArding. Cyrillus says: when the mystical blessing is become to be in us,
does it not cause Christ to dwell in us corporally, by receauinge of Christ's
body in the communion? The same thing he says in diverse other places.

Iuel. Cyrillus expounds him self natural union is nothing The 191. untruth.
else, but a true vnio^, we are by nature the childern of anger, that is, in
deed, and truly.


San. The words, which you allege as out of Cyrillus, be (...) (...).
in him. His words are: Si naturalem vnionem dixerimus, (...) dicemus, If we
call it a natural union, we shall call it a true (...). But you have put in a
certain phrase of your own, addinge these (...).
words non aliud quam none other thing but, that is nothing, M. Iuel, but
alitle falshod. There is ods whether it be said, a natural union is a true
union, or else, a natural vnio^ is none other thing but a true union. For that
which is natural, is true: but there is sumwhat more contained in the name of
nature, which the name of truth does not express. We are the true sons of
God, but we are not y^ natural sons of god. wheresoever thereforea thing
Natural.
is called natural, it is at the lest true, but not by and by, nothing else but
true. That which you said of S. Augustine: Corporaliter, no^ vmbraliter sed
vere et solid, I could not find it upon y^ 67. psalm. But think you, M. Iuel,
that when S. tyr^l teaches Christ to be the natural son of god, he would be
contented if an Arrian should slep forth and say, that to be the natural son
of god, is nothing else but to be the true son of god? Which being once
granted, he that is a child by adoption, is also the true son of god:
Therefore the Arrian will conclude, that Christ is the son of god by adoption.

But let us come nere to the purpose. let natural dwelling stand for true
dwelling. What of that? says S. Cyril only that Christ is naturally united
unto us? says he not also, that y^ mystical blessing makes him to dwell
corporally in us? will that word, also, Corporal^.
be excluded by a true dwelling, or has M. Iuell an other phrase to answer it
withal?


Iuel. S Paul says: the Heathens are b^come concorporal, and partakers of the
promise in Christ Jesus, in the same sense. Ephesians. 2.



San. In whith sense, M. Iuel? mean you, that as natural so The 192. ^truth.
likewise corporal con^t^io^ means nothing else, but a true con^ction True in
deed it is, but true in the truth of nature and of body, but not (...) true in
the truth of faith and speaking. S. Ephesians. 2.
P^e says: The Heathe^s are co^corporal with the Patriarchs and Prophets,
that is to say, of one body mystical, of one society and (...): Theresore,
says M. Iuel, when S. (...) Christ to dwell corporally in us by reason of the
holy communion, he means, that Christ and we are all of one mystical body.
Meant he nothing else, M. Iuel? as though it went not before: Non negamus and
caet. We deny not, but that we are joined spiritually Spiritually.
to Christ by right faith and sincere love. Lo, there is the By faith.
conjunction which makes us one way members of that body, whereof Christ is
y^ head. But S. Tyrill goes to an other higher mean of the same conjunction,
adding, that the mystical blessing (which is the Eucharist) makes Christ to
dwell also in us corporally Corporally als^.
by communicating his body. S. Cyril names dwelling, in comparison of joining:
corporally, in comparison of spiritually: by communicating Christ's body, in
comparison of these words: by right faith and sincere charity. Therefore it
must needs be, that the corporal dwelling of Christ in us according to his
flesh According to flesh.
(which also S. Cyril names) is an other kind of union, the^ faith and
charity love. But the gifts are corporal with the faithful Jews not by
faith alone, but as S. Hilarie declares, by the nature also of baptism, and by
the nature of Christ's flesh. For they are grasted into the cumpanie of the
elect by all these mean^s which Christ provided for y^ end. they believe in y^
same God, are baptized in the same fount, are reconciled by the same Sacrament
of penance, fed, nourished, and consu^mated by eating really the same flesh of
Christ. What does that word corporal help you now, M. Iuell? It signifies
no more, but that the Jews and Gentiles are of one feloship. but the means of
making them one remain notwithstanding to be declared.


Iu By the words, corporally and naturally, a full perfect spiritual The 193.
^ntruth.
conjunction is meant, excluding all manner of fantasy.


San. So that with you corporally and naturally does signify nothing else, but
not fainedly. How say ye then, when we are knit to God by right faith and
sincere charity, is it a fained coninnction, or no? If it be a true, and not a
fantastical conjunction, then the words which affirm Christ to be joined
also unto us corporally and naturally, being added over and above the ioyuing
by right faith and sincere love, must not only ^ane a true joining (which was
already made) but also an other manner of ioynig, which is both true in effect
(as y^ joining by faith was) and also true in the corporal mingling of
Christ's flesh to our flesh. Otherwise, what meant the aduerbe, quoque, also?
We be joined Quoque.
by faith, and also corporally. Is that (also) nothing?

Furthermore, if corporally be nothing else to say, but truly and without
imagination, how construe you these words of S. Paul? Colos. 2.
All the fulness of the Godhead dwells corporally in Christ? is it only to
say, it dwells truly in Christ? well: but it may dwell truly in Christ,
though Christ be not man: therefore by your exposition a phrase is found,
whereby y^ truth of Christ's body may be wiped away, whenever it pleases the
Protestants. Consider, M. Iuell, that you are not Captain general of the
whole army. Satan him self had taken that cure upon him, before you were
borne. It is he that directs all y^ soldiers of his camp. What place in his
army do you occupy, I do not know. This I am sure of, your Captain
intends fully to displace Christ as much as lies in him, not only from
dwelling corporally in our bodies by the blessed communion, but also from
taking real flesh of the blessed virgin. Satan him self would have an other
Messiah to be prepared for. Judge you, whether you help toward his coming,
or ^o. He coueteth to persuade, that corporally does mean truly and nothing
else: wher^ore it follows, that corpus is latin for the truth and for nothing
else: and seeing Christ took of our lady corpus a body, by you it is meant he
took t^ truth of With M. Iuel
our lady, and nothing else. Or can you avoid the yoke, the ^dance, corpus, is
(...) for truth.
the mutual respect that is between body, and bodily, corpus, and
corporally? Whatsoever one of those names, which are in one yoke, does
signify, the other does signify after the same rate. If bonitas be goodness,
bonus is good, and been is well* corporally is of the same yoke with, corpus,
body. If bodily does mean truly, corpus does mean truth, so Christ took truth
of our Lady: and what is that? forsouth it is whatsoever it pleases M. Iuel.
So that it be no fantasy, it may be then faith or charity, or else bones
without flesh, or skin without flesh and bone. To this point M. Iuels
divinity leadethvs. O miserable time, O cor rupted manners. The noun corpus
body, and the aduerb corporaliter corporally do not only signify a truth,
but a truth of body: and in Christ it signifies a truth of flesh and of
blood.


Iuel. Otherwise there must needs follow this great inconvenience, that our
bodies must be in like manner corporally, naturally The 19^ untruth.
and s^eshly in Christ's body. For Hilarious says we also are naturally in him.
and Cyrillus: we are corporally in Christ.


San. It is most true, that both we are in Christ corporally, and he in us
during the time of the conjunction. For when a joining of twain is made, it
must needs be, that y^ one is joined to y^ other: which is no absurdity at
al, because that twain, to wit, Ephesians* 5.
Christ and his Church, should be in one flesh. it is the doctrine of S. Paul.
And as flesh is made one with him who really eats and digesteth it: so is
Christ joined most really to him, that worthily receaueth his body.


Iuel. That we be thus in Christ requires not any corporal The 195* untruth.
being.


San. That were a fine kind of being, M. (...), that Christ's body should be in
us corporally, and yet the being should not be corporal. In deed the manner is
not corporal. But if you exclude the truth also of corporal being, you speak
contrary to the word it self. For the word corporally can signify no less
then a corporal truth.


Iuel. It requires not any local being. The 196. ^ntruthe.



San. It is a local being, in respect that the substance of Christ occupies
the same place under the form of bread, which the substance of bread did
occupy before. And when we have that kind of bread in us, even so Christ's
being is local in us.


Iuel. Christ sitting in heaven is here in us, not by a natural, but The 197.
untruth.
by a spiritual mean of being.


San. The being of Christ in us by spirit is also natural concerning the
nature of his Godhead, which is every where. But co^c^rning the grace which is
created in us, it is a spiritual being after the rate as every cause is in his
effect.


Iuel. S. Augustine says: After that Christ is ascended he is in Imperti^nt.
us by his spirit. And S. Basil, and again S. Augustine says the like in
diverse places. And Christ spoke in S. Paul, and caet.


San. You are now in a common place, M. Iuel. Who denies but Christ being in
heaven, is here in spirit? Will that take away his being here in body, when
bread is turned into his body: Shall one truth always displace an other with
you? These be sowters arguments to say, Christ is God: therefore he is not man.
He is in heaven: ergo he is not in earth, etc.


Iuel. This conjunction is spiritual, and therefore needs not The 198.
^truthe.
neither the circumstance of place, nor corporal presence.


San. The conjunction is spiritual, but the (...) of working it is brought to
pass by the corporal substance of Christ. M. Iuel has forgotten that we now
(...), whether Christ be in the Sacrament corporally, for th^nd to make a
spiritual coni^ction by this mean of his own flesh, or no: as if a man to
co^^t an heretic, do not only write unto him, but also do come him self and
by disputation of mouth do persuade him, the conversion is spiritual, but the
mean of working it, is by corporal pr^sence.


Iuel. The conjunction that is between Christ and us, neither Evil vn^.
does mingle persons, nor unite substances. But it does knit our De coena Domin*
affects together and join our wills, says S. Cyprian.


San. S. Cyprian in the same place expounds himself to mean^e, that we are
not made by this union, the second person in (...): for (says he) the only S^e
is consubstanciall, or of the same substance with hi^ Father. But we by eating
his real flesh in this Sacrament, are made (...) unto the Son of God:
Atteyning thro^ the flesh vsque ad participationem spiritus Ephesians. 5*
even to the (...) of the spirit of Christ. Again, whereas our union with
Christ is (...) in the holy Scriptures to y^ union which is in (...): as in
matrimony the wife and husband tarry ^oth (...) persons, and each of them keep
their several substances, notwithstanding that ^or a time they are united in
flesh: right so is it in this blessed mystery, where Christ's flesh is joined
to our flesh for a time only, (...) '^nd y^ spirit of Christ by so excellent a
mean (as his own flesh is) may be more fully partaken.

Thus it is clear, that S. Cyprian says the same thing with us, who likewise
de^nd our union with God to be made in will, and heart: and not that we be at
any time made consubstanciall with the blessed Trinity. But the means of
uniting us to God are not our (...) only, but the nature of faith, the
regeneration of Baptism, and the real flesh of Christ received under y^ form
of bread, The which real presence of Christ's f^esh S. Cyprian so plainly
teaches, that I can not su^iclently m^e at the ^dencie of M. Iuel* Who knows
him, to teach, 1. That the bread is changed in nature, and not in form. 2.
That under ^ (...) Sactame^to.
Sacrament we eat the bread of Angels in earth, the which self same we shall
eat more manifestly in heaven without a Sacrament. Sine Sa^ame^to.
3. That this doctrine came newly from Christ alone, that Christian men should
drink blood, which thing was forbidden to the Jews: and seeing it was not
forbidden them to drink Christ's blood in faith, but only to drink common
blood in their mouths, it follows evidently, that the Christians by this new
order of Christ, drink blood into their mouths also, and not by faith alone.
Al these arguments, beside many other which are in the same sermon, declare
evidently, that S. Cyprian utterly abhorred from this blasphemouse heresy of
the Sacramentaries.


Iuel. The conjunction because it is spiritual, true, full, and perfect, The
199. untruth.
is expressed by this term corporal.


San. As though God because he is spiritual, true, full, and perfect, he might
therefore be called corporal. Who ever heard of such divinity? Because it is
spiritual, it is termed corporal. Because it is red, it is called grene.
because it is chalk, it is named chese, Need these words any confutation? Were
not the writer of them worthy to be rebuked rather then to be refelled?


Iuel. Corporal conjunction remoueth all manner light and accidental Contrary
to himself.
joining.


San. If all accidental joining be removed, only substancial joining
remains. A substancial joining requires the substances to be present which
are joined together. If then we are substancially joined to Christ's body, our
bodies and his must be present. For the substance of our souls is not without
the cumpasse of our bodies: Neither can they be substancially joined to
Christ's body, as long as they are absent from the real body of Christ. As for
the joining which is made by faith or charity, it is made by an accident, and
not by substance.


Iuel. It is utterly untrue, that we have Christ corporally within The 200.
untruth.
us, only by receiving the Sacrament.


San. Never a Father by you named says as you do. and therefore you speak of
your own head, whom no man that wise is, will believe. For seeing we can not have
him corporally within us, without his body be within us, and yet none other
thing is his body beside y^ which is delivered at his supper, by that mean
only he may be corporally in us.


Iuel, By M Hardings construction, the child is damned, who The 201. untruth.
dies without receiving the Sacrament of Christ's body.


San. Neither he, nor no Catholic teaches so. Baptism suffiseth, as we
believe, until a man come to the years of discretion.


Iuel. Without natural participation of Christ's flesh there is The 202.
untruth.
no salvation.


San. If it be so, it is you that teach the damnation of al those who receive
not the Eucharist. for only in the Eucharist we partake the nature and
substance of Christ's flesh in it self. But we partake the grace thereof by
faith and Baptism.


Iuel. S. Chrysostom says: In the Sacrament of Baptism we The 203. untruth.
are made flesh of Christ's flesh, and boan of his boanes.


San. Those words you have not in S. Chrisostom, Who in that place confesses
plainly, that those who are partakers of the holy mysteries can tell, how they
are foormed Germane ac legitime ex In epi. ad Ephesians. hom. 20.
ipso. properly and lawfully out of him. Moreover he gives an other sense
expounding ex ipso, for secundum ipsum according to him, saying: as Christ was
born without the sede of man, so we are made the same thing in baptism. Thirdly
he shows that we were taken out of Christ's side, as Eve out of Adam. But the
proposition that you have framed in his name, is not in him, but although it
were in him, yet it is not to the purpose. For it is one thing to be made of
the flesh of Christ, which may be meant of his mystical flesh, and an other
thing to partake his flesh naturally. We are made of his flesh by spiritual
means. For to be of his flesh it is to belong to his flesh, that is to say, to
be members thereof by any mean at al. But when we speak of natural or cor
poral partaking of flesh, we exclude al mystical flesh, and restrain the talk
only to Christ's own real flesh, which he took of the virgin Marie.

Last of al, y^ reason why certain places of holy scripture are interpreted
sometime of baptism, and sometime of Christ's supper, is, because in the old
time in many countries y^ Sacrament of Chrites body was given straight after
baptism, as it may appear in. S, De eccl.
Dionysius Areopagita, and in S. Ambrose: in so much that sometime Hierar. ca.
2. and 3.
these two Sacraments are so entreated of in S. Cyprian, Eusebius Emissenus,
and S Augustine, as if they were one Sacrament, De Sacr. li. 4. ca. 3.
for that they were ministered together. But in so weighty a Ad Quir. li. 3.
ca. 25 hom. 5. epi. 106.
matter as we now entreat of, it was not vprightlie done of M. Iuel to make a
proposition of his own, and to set it out in the name of S. Chrysostom.


Iuel. M. Harding is not yet able to find, that Christ's body is The 204
untruth.
either corporally received into our bodies, or corporally present in the
Sacrament.


San. It is you that are not able to find it. for D. Harding has found it, and
showed it many ways. and as I have showed it in S. Chrysostom, in S. Hilarie,
and in S. Gregory Nyssen: so would I show it at large out of Cyrillus, but that
partly this book is grown alredie to great, partly a marueilouse number of
places in S. Cyrillus do prove, both Christ's body to be corporally received
into our bodies, and to be corporally (...) in the Sacrament.

1. Concerning us, he says: It behooved this earthly body should 1.
be brought to immortality cognato cibo. by meat of his own In Joan. li 4. c.
14.
substance. for so himself expounds the word afterward, saying: Ad Euo.
anath. 11.
that Christ's body is cognatum nostris corporibus, hoc, est consubstantiale.
It is of kin with our bodies, that is to say, of the same substance.

2. As two waxes being melted are mingled together: so he 2.
that receaueth Christ's flesh and blood, is mingled with Christ. Lib. 4 cap. 17
It is not possible to understand the mingling of two waxes to be other, then
real and substanciall. For wax has neither faith nor spirit.

3. D. Harding has alleged five or six most plain sentences, 3.
which may ^e seen in his book. To none of all which M. Iuel Cyril. li. 10.
ca. 13. li. 11. c. 26* and 27.
has justly a^swered, or scant said any word. read also S. Cyr^l, in Joan.
li. 3. cap. 36. lib. 4. cap. 18. etc.

Now touching the corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, it is to be
understood, that S. Cyrillus calls the Sacrament Benedictio.
of Christ's body and blood, mysticam benedictionem, the mystical blessing.
and therefore he exhorts the faithful people to come to receive it, and to be
partakers thereof, as the which In Joan. li. 4. c. 17.
puts away both death and disseases. Of this benediction and Sacrament thus
he writes.

1. It differs from Manna, because the benediction is verily 1.
meat: whereas Manna was a figurative bread. But if the Sacrament Lib. 4. cap.
16.
con^sted of material bread, and were not Christ's flesh, it were no more the
true bread, then Manna was.

A little blessing (to wit a little piece of the consecrated food) draws the
whole man to it: Et sua gratia replet, and fills him 2.
with his own grace. Therefore the Sacrament has grace of his Lib. 4. cap. 17.
own, and is no common bread: because then it should not draw us unto it, but
it should be turned into us* but now the benediction, that is to say, the
Sacrament draws us to it: therefore it self in his own substance is the flesh
of Christ. Ad Euo. anath. 11.


He declares the word of God to be life according to nature, and y^ it has
made his flesh able to give life. Et hac ratione facta est nobis benebictio
viuificatrix. And by this mean the Sacrament is made of power to give us life.
Mark the degrees: the life it self is first in the son of God, and
afterward in the flesh assumpted, and so is the Sacrament able to give life.
how hangs this discurse? but only because he presupposes it for an undoubted
truth, that in the Sacrament the flesh of the son of God is really present.

After he had showed that the Catechumeui can not partake of In Joan. l. 12. c.
50
our mystical benediction, he says: The ministers cry with a loud voice to
those who come to ye mystical blessing, Sancta sanctis, holy things for holy
men. Meaning the touching and ye sanctification of Christ's body to agree only
to those, who are sanctified with y^ holy Ghost. He calls the mystical
blessing the body of Christ, and shows, that those who come to it, do touch
Christ: which is of necessity understood by the mean of the foorme of
bread, under the which Christ is. But if Christ were not really under that
form of bread, why are the Catechumeni kept from it? For (...). (...) of the
faith.
seeing they confess the faith with a loud voice (as there S. Cyrillus does
witness) and seeing they may by their faith ^eed upon Christ in heaven, show
me a reason, M. Iuel (if you be able) why he that may eat Christ in faith,
may not eat the bread (as you ^i. 2. de peccat. me and re mis. c. 26
term it) which is the sign of him. Specially since S. Augustine confesses,
that they also had a kind of hallowed bread (but not y^ body of Christ) given to
them. We give this reason hereof, because in the Sacrament of the body of
Christ, his own body is really present, which is of such honor, that no
mean sanctification should su^ise for the admitting thereunto. And for as much
as the Catechumeni, who be not yet baptized, have not that grace of the holy
Ghost which is given in baptism, they are not sufficiently prepared to receive
this marueilouse sacrifice, and dreadful my^erie: which you not withstandinge
repute so vile, that you crum your potage dishes with it, and sometimes cast
that, which is left in the cup of your own blessing, upon the ground, as I my
self saw it done in king Edwardes time at a communion in Gloceter shere. You
make in words much of it, but your deeds do show your blasphemouse hearts.

Harding. The Catholic fathers sithence Berengarius, The 11. (...).
have used the terms really, substancially, etc. to exclude Metaphores and
figures, and to confess a most supernatural union with Christ by mean of
his natural flesh, really (though not locally) present.


Iuel. These Doctors lived within these three hundred years, The ^50. untruth.
and are such as M. Harding thought not worth the naming.


San. He named none that were since the six hundred years after Christ,
because he saw your impudent proclamation to have bound him to y^ time. But
otherwise he neither lacked sufficient witnesses, elder then Berengarius, nor
judged them unworthy the naming. And because by these your insulting words,
you s^e to look for some witnesses above three hundred years old, I will give
you a taste even of the best that were from the first six hundred, until the
last three hundred years after Christ. Within which time many notable fathers
have lived.

How think you by Damascene, who says: the bread and wine Damasc. de Orth.
^d. li 4. cap. 14.
and water is superturally changed by the invocation and the coming of the
holy Ghost into the body and blood of Christ. And that he proves, because our
Lord said: this is mi^ (not figure of body) but body, and (not figure of blood)
but blood. in (...)* (...).


Says not Theophilact, that the bread is with secret words by mystical
blessing and coming of the holy ghooste changed 26. in Matt. and in 6. Joan.
into our Lords flesh? says he not, it appears bread, but in deed is flesh?
again, why does it not appear flesh? because we should not abhor from the
eating thereof. For if it had appeared flesh, w^ had been unpleasantly affected
toward the communion. Is there any dout, but he who tells that the bread is
changed into flesh, and shows why yet it does appear bread and not flesh, did
verily believe the real presence of Christ's flesh under the form of bread? or
is he not more impudent then any ha^lot, who will stand in de^nse, that
Damascene and Theophilact believed not t^ansubstantiation, as we do? and yet
these two are not only above three hundred, but also above seven hundred years
old.

Says not Haymo, licet panis videatut, in veritate corpus Christi in 1. Cor.
10.
est, although it ^me bread, it is in truth the body of Christ? Says not
^igius, that after consecration it seems bread and in Cano. Missae. in lib. de
corp. D. in Sacra.
wine, but in truth it is the body and blood of Christ?

Says not Paschasius, although the figure of bread and wine be h^re, yet after
consecration they are to be believed to be nothing at all, but the flesh and
blood of Christ?

What shall I speak of Lanfrancus, Iuo, (...), Anselmus* Most of the^ wrote
a^st Be (...).
(...), Algerus, Euthymius, who were al notable men for lerning, and al above
three hundred years old? I come to S. Bernard, whom you have alleged many ti^s
in this your Bernar. in s^rm. de Sa^cto Martino Not car^lly co^cer ning the
(...) of (...).
work. Thus he writes: Even to this day the same flesh is exhibited to us
(which the Apostles had sone in his manhod) but yet spiritually forsooth, not
carnally. For there is no cause why we should say either y^ apparitio^, which
was made to the fathers of y^ old testament, either that presence of his flesh
which was exhibited to the Apostles, to be d^nied in these our days. For to
them who faithfully consider the matter* it shall be clear that neither of
Carnis ipsius vera substa^ tia in Sacrame^to.
both lacks. For the true substance of the flesh it self is present now also
to us no dout verily but (that it is so) in the sacrament. Here is, M. Iuel,
the true substance of Christ's own flesh affirmed to be no less present (in a
spiritual manner, but not in a carnal manner of being) as it was present to the
Apostles who saw Christ in flesh. I omit Nicholaus Methonensis, and (...), and
Phot^s Grecians, Albertus Magnus, Alexander de Ha^s, I^nocentius the third,
with diverse more above three hundred years old.


Iu. Their doctrine is without comfort. they hold that the body of The (...)*
untruth.
Christ remains no longer in our bodies, but only until the forms of the
bread and wine begin to alter.


San. That doctrine, M. Iuel, is not without comfort, in so much as the
Sacrament serves as a mean to bring to us the body of Christ: which when it
has delivered unto our bodies, a conjunction is made by touching and eating
Christ: out of which conjunction made by flesh* rises a marueilouse
commodity to our spirit and soul. So that albeit when the forms of bread
and of (...) be altered, the body of Christ can not be affirmed to be
corporally in our bodies any longer: yet a grace, virtue and strength is left
still with us of inestimable operation toward life everlasting. If this do seem
absurd to M. Iuell, how thinks he of al those Luc. 8.
whom Christ healed by touching them with his flesh? was it not a corporal
and real touching, because Christ ceased to touch any more, when the health was
once procured? was not all Christ's Matt. 28.
coming and walking in flesh, true, real, and corporal, because when the
time of his humble dispensation ^as (...), he departed bodily out of our sight,
and tarried with us in his godhead and power?

Moreover I have said often times, our co^^ton with Christ Ephesians. 5.
in this Sacrament is like the carnal copulation between the wife and husband,
where twain are in one flesh. A great mystery says S. Paul, in Christ and
his Church. As, therefore the man and wife being corporally joined tarry not
always together, but after a time depart a sunder, and yet for all that, of
their conjunction i^ue comes, and they keep yet always the bond of wedlock
and of love in each of them: so after that Christ has united him to us under
the foorme of bread, he departs in bodily presence when those foormes cease
to be, under which it pleased him to comme to us: but the virtue of that
conjunction tarieth still. The 207. untruth.



Iuel. Some others say, that as soon as our teeth touch the bread, straight
ways Christ's body is taken up into heaven. The words be these: Certum est
quod quam cito species dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum rapitur corpus
Christi.


San. Have you not yet done with gloses, M. Iuel? I marueil not. For the
greatest flour of your garden lies in gloses and phrases. But yet if the
gloses ^e of them selves not at al times most wary (because they were made in
great security of y^ faith, the authors of the^ never thinking y^ such a
desperate generation of ^leuers should have sprung up) surely you ought not to
make the^ (...) tra^^ation.
more odiouse then they deserve, by false and corrupt translation. You have
englished now, teruntur, touched, and species, bread, for you say, as soon as
our teeth touch the bread, the body is taken into heaven. But species, do
signify the forms of bread and wine, teruntur does signify, are wasted or
consumed. The which word Terere.
in Berengarius confession you could turn, by the word, grynded. thus at one
time terere, is to grynd with you, at an other time it is, to touch. Why M.
gloser of gloses, is terere latin to touch and to grind? But you have a new
kind of malice in your heart which can make new latin, new english, new
Gospel, new faith and a new Church at your pleasure.


Iu. Here a man may say unto M. Harding, as he did before to the The 208.
untruth.
Arrian heretic.


San. You can not so speak to D. Harding, as he spoke to the Arrian heretic,
to whom he spoke not by his own authority, but by the authority of S.
Cyrillus, who disputing against an Arrian heretic, said unto him, as D.
Harding may right well say unto you. An fortassis putas and caet. What troweth
this Arrian Cyril. in Joan. lib. 10. c^. 1.
heretic parhaps, that we know not the virtue of the mystical blessing?
Which when it is become to be in us, does it not cause Christ to dwell in us
corporally also, by receiving of Christ's body in the communion? Thus far S.
Cyril, whose words touched M. Iuel a thousand years before he was borne,
because his heresy is one in this behalf with the Arrian heresy, who taught
us not be corporally joined by natural participation to Christ (as branches
are joined to the vine) but ^aughte, even as M. M. ^uell agrees (...) y^
Arrians
Iuel does, that we depend of Christ by faith, and none otherwise. And troweth
M. Iuel now, that he may talk to D. Harding by his own contemptible
authority, as D. Harding talked to him out of S. Cyrillus? Bring, if you can,
M. Iuel, a saying of above a thousand years old, where D. Hardinges doctrine
may be accused of heresy.


Iuel. Comes Christ to us from heaven, and by and by forsakes The 20^
untruth.
us?


San. As Christ at his incarnation came not from heaven by forsaking his
glory, but by assupting flesh of the virgin: so now at the time of the
consecration his body comes not down from heaven, but the bread is changed
into his body, and by that mean his body is present with us. and as after his
resurrection he ascended into heaven: so after the communion the forms of
bread and wine being consumed, Christ caeaseth to be corporally with us, to
thend we should again desire his presence, and well know these two chief
points of our belefe: the one, that the end of the joining consists in
spirit, rather th^n in flesh: the other, that the flesh of Christ really eaten
is the mean, whereby we have access to the spirit of God with trust and
confidence.


Iuel. Or that we eat Christ and yet receive him not? or hau^ The 210.
untruth.
him not? or that he enters not, and caet.


San. We eat him, and receive him, and have him, and he enters into us. Who
teaches the contrary, but that your own shadow troubles you?


Iuel. He says, this presence is known to God only: then it follows, The
211. vnruthe.
M. Harding knows it not.


San. He said not, this presence, but the manner of the presence is known to
God only: and so is it in deed. But why do you (...) his words?


Iuel. So this article is concluded with an Ignoramus. The 212. untruth.



San. Not so, because the question is not of the manner of Christ's presence,
but of his real presence, though the manner be unknown. But did you call that
an ^gnoramus, if we know not how Christ Ignoramus
is under the foorm of bread? I am sure, you know not how the union was made
in the virgins womb, are you therefore reproved as ignorante? In deed if ye
bel^ue not Christ's presence, ye Non cre di^us.
have concluded this article with a Non credimus, which is a worse fault, then
Ignoramus. For he that believes not, shall be con Marc. 19.
demmed.


Iuel. The old learned Fathers never left us in such doutes. The 213. untruth.



San. S. Cyrillus in this very matter, wills us to give strong faith to the
mysteries, but to leave the way and knowledge of his lib. 4 in (...). c. 13.
work unto god. the first part you have broken. The first and last D. Harding
has observed, and you shall be concluded with a dam naberis, if ye repent not.
S. Chrisostom says, it is the part of a scholar, not to search out curioufly
the things which the master affirms, In ^oa^. hom. 45.
but to here, and to believe, and to look for a convenient time of soyling the
question.


Iuel. Emissenus says. Christ is present by his grace. The 214. untruth.



San. You have put a false nominative case. (...) does say, that Christ
consecrated the Sacrament of his body and bl^od to thend: Perennis illa
victima viueret in memoria, et semper praesens esset in gratia, that euerlastig
sacrifice should live in remembrance, and be always present in his grace. It
is victima, the oblatio^ or sacrificed host which is present in grace. for in
deed the act of crucifying is utterly past, but the sacrifice is present in
his grace: for so much as it is present in that flesh, which suffered death.
Again, he says not y^ it is present by his grace (as you have turned it) but
in his grace. You would have grace to be the mean of presence: but it is not
so. Grace is the effect of presence: But the mean of the grace in this
Sacrament is the presence of Christ's own body.


Iuel. S. Augustine says: Christ in us by his spirit. Impertinent.



San. That is true also, when he is in us by his flesh: for in that flesh his
spirit dwells. And he that denies Christ to be in us by his own flesh,
takes away the chief way, by which the spirit of God may be in us. the 215.
untruth.



Iuel. Ye shall not eat this body that ye see: it is a certain Sacrament that
I deliver you.


San. The words of S. Augustine are, I have commended or Comm^ daui. psalm 98.
set forth a certain Sacrament to you, and not, I deliver you a c^rtain
Sacrament. For this was spoken of S. Augustine in Christ's person in respect of
the talk had a^ Capharnau^: Where the Sacrament was commended, before it was
delivered. But Joan. 6.
that which was commended at Cap^naum, was only the same flesh which (...) for
us: Therefore that flesh must be delivered not in a visible and sensible manner,
but yet in truth of giving by body, and of taking by body. For of such giving
and taking Christ spoke, as by the last supper it may appear, where he
per^oormed Math. 26
his promise. But M. Iuel was loathe, that relation should be made to the talk
had at Capharnanm. For then he saw, that the very real flesh must be the thing
which should be delivered. again he would not have either the commendatio^ past,
or the gift to come: and therefore he turned, commendaui, into, trado. I have
commended, into, I deliver. Indede, M. Iue^, Christ delivered his flesh as well
at Capharnaum, as at his supper by Falsi^ying.
your doctrine. But not so by the doctrine of the Gospel: Where the promise
is showed to be made at Capharnaum, and the perfoormance at the last ^upper. In
which supper neither the body which the Jew s saw was delivered, and much less
bread or wine, which was not promised: but under the form of bread and wine,
that flesh and blood was delivered, which at (...) was promised. The 216*
untruth.



Iuel. Thus the holy Fathers say: Christ is present, not corporally.


San. Both S. ^yril and S. Hilarie have the word corporally, as I have showed,
concerning the Sacrament. The 217. untruth.



Iuel. Not carnally.


San. S. Hilarie has the word carnally in the 23. chapit. the number 37. of
this book. The 218. untruth.



Iuel. Not naturally. In Joan. li. 10. c. 13 and 11. c. 26



San. S. Hilarie has the term naturally diverse times, and S. Lyrill calls
it natural partaking, and natural union.


Iuel. But as in a Sacrament, by his spirit and by his grace. Impertinent.



Sa^. Here appears what stuff you have fed the reader with all in your whole
book. For partly you deny a truth which is, that Christ is not corporally
present, and that you do against the express word of God, and the Fathers, as
I have showed: partly you prove that your heresy by an other truth, which
rather stablisheth then hinders the real presence. For Christ can not be
better present in spirit and grace, the^ if he be present in his flesh, therein
to convert to us his spirit and grace. for the cause of his taking flesh was,
to make his flesh an instrument to deliver his spirit and grace to our flesh,
to thend no mean of providing for our salvation might be omitted by so loving
a Father. In consideration whereof S. Ambrose says: Ambros. lib. 6. de Sacram.
cap. 1.
Thou that take his flesh, art made partaker of his divine substance in that
food. Note that the spirit and substance of God comes to us by taking Christ's
flesh.


The Conclusion.
COnsider first, good Reader, that of more then twenty articles, there is but
one answered, and y^ not the longest. wherein if above two (...) faults and
vntrut^es (without curiouse searching) be (...): what may a man think of the
whol^ book of M. Iuell? how many hundred, yea (...) M. Iuels k^d of rea so^
thousand untruths may you think to be contained therein? who when he proves
his matter b^t, and least of all abuses himself, his proof is none other,
then to say one thing is not true, because fo. 319.
another is true. Thus he teac^th Christ to be eaten by faith and 337.
324:
spirit, and thinks that thereof he may conclude, Christ is not eaten in the
sacrament by mo^th. Christ is corporally in heaven: 323.
therefore his body is not under the form of bread. The Sacrament is a
figure, and therefore by his judgment it is not the truth. As well he might
say, a man has a soul, and therefore no body: or Christ, is man and
therefore not God. Abusin^ of the holy scriptures


In Disputinge of the holy scriptures he never answers to these words (which
is given for you) being the most principal point of D. Hardings answer: he
never considers the promise 316.
made by Christ in y^ time to come, Dabo I will give: but talks of it, as if
it were past and present. He has Englished non habebitis vitam, Ye shall have
no life. He expounds that we are flesh 320.
of Christ's flesh and bone of his bones by his nativity: whereas 320.
thereby Christ is of us, because he took our nature, rather then we of him:
except by faith we begin to depend of him. Moreover he thereby makethe Christ
the vine, and us the branches: after 341.
which r^te (...) and Judas are branches of the true vine which is Christ.
For Christ's nativity pertains to their nature also. 341.
He t^neth out of Pri^asius, instead of, the bread which we break, the
breaking of the bread: attributing that to the actio^ of 343.
breakinge, which S Paul did attribute to the substance of the bread which we
break.

He brings late writers, to buyld his doctrine upon their 4.
M Iuels Doctors
words, such as he has refused to admyt against himself, as S. 317.
Bernard, Scotus, Nicolaus de Lyra, Bonaue^ture, D. Fisher, 319.
B. Tunstall, D. Smith, and the gloses of the Cannon law: and 324.
yet he lea^eth so to their authority, that in the matter of church 156.
^eruice, he has no higher doctors to prove that in the primitive church y^
prayers were in a known tongue, beside, S Thomas and Lyra, whose resolution
notwithstanding he will not follow therein. 5.


He sets all divinity upon phrases of speech, thinking he Phrases of
speech.
has answered sufficiently, if he can show a speech any thing 341.
like, used in an unlike matter: by y^ which order he may disprove 342.
the divine nature of Christ, because men are also called Gods. etc. 343.
344.
And the unity of substance in the Trinity, because the faithful Joan. 10.
are called one, as Christ and his Father are one. He may defend y^ word to be
none otherwise made flesh, then he grants bread Joan. 17.
Joan. 1.
to be made Christ's body. And y^ water at Cana of Galile none otherwise to be
made wine, then he grants the wine of Christ's 342.
425.
supper to be made blood. To be short, he has begun the high way to set all
the mysteries of Christ only upon phrases. And consequently to bring the most
helthfull knowledge of divine matters, to a talk and manner of speech. But in
handling his phrases he never makes any discourse out of y^ Scriptures, to
show like reason between diverse places by him self alleged: but as children
in grammar schools pick Latin phrases out of Plautus, Terence, or Salust, not
being able to judge how y^ one phrase differreth from the other: so has he
most ignorantly done in the Scriptures and in the Fathers. 6.


He compares the Eucharist to Baptism, both for like presence False com
parisons.
of Christ in both, and for like adoration of both, and would 341.
have most things like between them: Whereas though in somewhat they agree, yet
in most things they di^fer excedig much, as I have declared. He allegeth
phrases concerning the holy Chrism, 342.
and yet he believes not the phrase which himself brings.

He missexpoundeth y^ sayings of the Fathers, interpreting spiritual 7.
False comm^ts.
flesh (whereof S. Hierom entreats) to be so named because it is the flesh of
the Son of God, thereby denying (if that 332.
interpretation be true) the flesh of Christ (as it was crucified) to be the
flesh of God. For it is said of S. Hierom to differ (after that manner) from the
spiritual flesh. He takes y^ word flesh 342.
in Leo, and the word body in S. Augustine, and the same word 320.
body in Gregory Nyssen, for Christ's natural flesh, and natural 341.
body, which were spoken of his mystical flesh and his body the Church. 8.


He missenglisheth many words: Atteri at one time to be grinded, False
tra^slatio^s into English.
at another to be touched, Which is properly neither of both. Accedere, he
calls to reach. And in the same sentence he turns 328.
hoc corpus y^ body, because he would have it thought absent, 347.
whereas it ought to be englished, this body: which pronoune 319.
(this) does declare, that S. Chrysostom spoke of the body which 341.
was present upon the altar. Valet, he turns, this is the use: (...), one
nature, whereas it is of one planting, or perteyning to one nature. De meo est,
it is of my body. Secundu^ quendam modum, after a certain phrase and manner of
speech. He repor 326.
teth of S. Hilarie who said, sub mysterio, as if he had said, in a mystery:
Whereas it is to be englished, under a mystery. but that sub, under, greaueth
him to the heart, because it betokens the 344.
presence of Christ so real, that it is under the mystery, which we Slaun^ers.
take into our hands and mouths at the holy communion.

He slaundereth us in saying we expound est, for erit, and erit, 9.
for transubstantiabitur, and datur, for dabitur, benedixit, for, he 326.
blessed it away, and in place of it, he puts another substance. For we
teach the changing, and not the putting away of a substance. 328.
He burdeneth D. Harding with contradiction, which is none: 331.
With Eutiches heresy, which heresy is directly against y^ which D. Harding
defends. He says D. Harding will have children condemned who receive not the
Sacrament: which he never meant, nor said. 10.


He calls for Doctors before the time and place, and when ^sting.
they are come, he heapeth them altogether, and disputes co^fusely 327.
of their sayings: so that any man may perceive his evil conscience, 341.
and vain bragging. For where the points are most easy, 342.
there the staieth longest, where they are most hard, there he iuggleth, and
runs in and out, hoping to cast a myste before the Readers eyes. 11.


He denies adverbs taken of nounes to signify the substance Childish errors.
of any thing, which is a childish ignorance: as likewise in the 326.
words of Gregory Nyssen to begin the construction with corpus, and to make
humana natura to follow the verb est, 341.
whereas he should have done the contrary in his construction, though the
words there be placed out of order. 12.


He adds words of his own between the Doctors words, Cra^y conve^ce
not only such as may expound things otherwise hard, but even 324.
such as weigh down the question between us and him: which 344. and caet.
thing is so common with him, that almost no long sentence escapes a
parenthesis of his own patchinge in.

He missapplieth things, attributing that to the Sacramental 13.
False applications
eating, which S. Augustine spoke to an unfaithful Jew. not 319.
regarding how he mingleth unlike things. and that which Cyrillus In Joan.
tract 26. and 50.
spoke against the heresy of Nestorius, concerning that we eat the flesh of
no bare man, but of God, he reports as if it had been a Catholic doctrine
taught without disputation, and as if the sense were: we eat not by mouth at
all the flesh of Christ.

And that which S. Augustine speaks either of the figures 318.
of the old law, or generally of all signs, he makes serve against the holy
mysteries of Christ's supper, which do far excede other sig^es and figures.
It were to much to recko^ up, how often he erreth in this behals: yet this may
not be omitted, y^ he applies the answer made by S. Hilarie concerning the
union between 346.
our selves by faith, as though he had said it of Christ's union with us. a
matter of great weight is so shamefully belied.

He writes things expressly contrary, as that by faith Christ's 14.
body dwells in our bodies really and corporally, and that Contradictions.
Christ dwells in us not really or bodily, but because his faith 341.
is in us. Again what contradiction is it to say, all accidental 344.
345.
conjunction is removed, and yet not to gra^nt a real and substantial 323.
conjunction? to say, the Sacrament is taken with our 343.
mouths, and that we vndontedly receive Christ's body in the 319.
345.
Sacrament: and yet that Christ's body is not received into our mouths really,
but by faith only? That our conjunction with Christ is called corporal,
because it is spiritual? 15.


He uses a point of so great and shameful dishonesty, as one A most shameless
shift.
boy in schools would not use in reasoning against an other: Making D. Harding
to reason so, as he never thought os: as to say, 321.
1. The Capharnaites mistoke Christ's words. 2. Christ speaks 324.
of his ascension. 3. We eat not the flesh that was crucified. 333.
Upon every of which propositions, and many such like, he makes D. Harding
conclude, ergo Christ's body is really in the Sacram^nt: Either falsifying the
whole argument, or leaving out a principal part, or putting that in one part,
which should have stood in an other. And when he has done his feat, then to
amend the matter he is wont to come in, with a But M. Harding will say, and
cet. A man of good conscience and of learning will rather make his adversaries
reasons stronger, and then answer them when they are at the worst, then to
dissemble the strength of them, and only to blere men's eyes with defacing his
Adversaries strong argument by falsifying his proof. D. 324. and caet.
Harding requires only, that men of understanding will vouthsafe to read his
words again, after M. Iuel has made his argument, and then to consider his
dishonest report, a witness of his evil conscience.

He falsifieth the doctors, by making them to say more, then 16.
False additions to the Fathers words.
they do say. He puts into S. Hierom these three words (into heaven) that,
which do utterly change the sense. He reports that S. Augustine teach th
the old Fathers to have eaten the self same body that is received now of the
faithful: all the which words are forged. In the words of Cyrillus he did put
in these 324.
321.
three words, non aliud quam. He makes S. Hilarie to say, that 344.
we are one with Christ by faith naturally. 346.


He leaves out certain words of the doctors, which were of 17.
importance touching the principal question. The nominative Words of
importance falsely left out in the doctors words.
case in the B. of Rochesters words, conueying in also a false nominative case
in steed of the true. In S. Augustines words in one place he left out the
genitive case vnitatis, and, huius rei, and in the same place the verb,
praeparatur in mensa Domini. In the 317.
third place, the noune adi^ctiue spiritualem, wherein the whole 323.
weight of the cause rested: in the fourth, the ablative case, in ipso 321.
320.
eius corpore constituti. In Anacletus he left out Chrismati, putting 342.
in oleo for it. In Alexander, he omitted Missaru^ solennia. In 342.
341.
englishing y^ words of Bonaue^ture, he left out the adue^ essentially. 324.
In S. Hiero^ he left out repellamus Iudaicas fabulas, which 336.
would have showed whereof he spoke. In alleging ^usebins Emissenus, he left out
three linesin y^ mi^dest, joining y^ foormer part with the later.

He affirms Gregory Nyssen not to speak one word of the 18.
343.
Sacrament, and therein forms D. Hardings argument: Christ Most im^ude^t lies
is borne of the virgin, ergo his body is really in the Sacrment. whereas
Gregory Nyssen said clean contrary: Christ is made meat to to the body,
ergo he was borne of the virgin. and thereof D. Harding concluded, ergo he was
as really made meat to our bodies in the Sacrament, as ever he was really
borne, sith his being real meat proves his birth. He says, one John Scote
and Bertram wrote openly against the real presence, with good contentation of
the world. a more impudent lie was never uttered 329.
by man.

He disgraceth S. Hilarie, and privily fathereth upon him a 19.
great blasphemy: as though he taught that we are one with God False accusing
of S. ^ilary
the Father and the son in nature of the Godhead: whereas his mind was
nothing so, as I have declared before. 344.


He calls the Fathers words, spoken in the matter which is 20.
in question between D. Harding and him, hot, violent, rigorouse, Gilty.
excessive: therein plainly yelding him self guilty that he ought to 344.
By this point he ^eldeth himself gilty.
subsribe, as who would not find fault with those three most learned and
ancient Fathers words, Hilarie, Chrysostom, Cyrill, unless he clearly saw
them to speak utterly against his doctrine. I beseech God to give him grace to
amend these enormouse faults. It is better, M. Iuel, once to subscribe heartily,
then to be damned for ever.

Now to leave M. Iuel, and to speak these few words to thee (good Christian
Reader) I chose to speak so copiously of this 1.
argument, partly because it is the safer way to offend in that side, partly
because this one question is the ground of a great number ^oe, which depend of
it. For if the body and blood of Christ be really present under the forms of
bread and wine (which thing now is most fully pro^d) there is no doubt of
transubstantiation, as the which is the most conue^ient way to make the body 2.
present. Again, wheresoever that body is, it can not be but a propitiatory
sacrifice: since it is the substance once bloodily sacrificed, wherein the
merit of that sacrifice still remains. Thirdly, 3.
seeing that body being risen from death, dies no more, the whole must needs be
under each soorme: and therefore albeit the consecration must be necessarily
made in two kinds, to represent the death of Christ (where his blood was apart
from his flesh) yet no less merit, virtue, and grace comes to him, who
receaueth worthily one kind alone, then if he received both together. Fourthly
4.
there can be no dout, but the body of the son of God both ought to be
adored, and being present for us may be preserved for our necessity. So that
all these truths and many more depend of this one, wherein the real body of
Christ is proved to be present in the Sacrament.

And seeing it is proved present by the word of God (as it has been declared in
the third, fourth, and fifth books) seeing it has been taught to be adored (as
it is declared in my sixth book) seeing it is (...) to be taken into our (...),
mouths, and bodies, and to nourish our very flesh to resurrection, and to be
made meat to our bodies, which have neither faith nor spirit, but only flesh
and bones to receive it withal: seeing the doctrine taught by M. Iuell and his
fellows against the real presence is by the word of God found to be vain,
false, wicked, and is directly confuted in the first, second, and seventh
books: last of a^l, seeing as in this one article M. Iuels (...) are in part
discovered, so (...) many other they shall be shortly (God willing) laid (...)
the (...) of all (...): it remains that the whole Catholic faith so (...)
defended and justified, be most eruestly b^leued, and according to the
commandment of Christ, most strongly confessed, to the end he that confesses
now this truth of Christ before men, may be acknowleged of Christ before his
Father at the day of judgment, where God send us a comfortable sentence, that
we may live with him in glory for ever,

Amen.
Approbatio septimi Libri.
QVoniam Librum istum legerunt, and approbant (...) Theologiae and idiomatis
Anglici eruditissimi, quibus ego summam hac in re fidem deberi iudico, tuto and
vtiliter emitti potest.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti Petri Louanij. 20. December. Anno. 1565.

A brief table of the whole work.
1. First, because the whole book does concern specially the real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, if the Reader will see any thing perteining
thereunto, he shall find it in the chapiters which are prefixed before every
book. 2. Secondly, of adoration it is entreated in y^ six first chapiters of
the sixth book. And that the Sacrament of the altar can be no idol. 292. 3. Of
transubstantiation as occasion served, he shall find. fol. 234. etc. item 314.
B. and 315. 4. Of the sacrifice of y^ mass, fol. 32. 33. 34. 197. 217. 216.
217. 223. vsque ad 233. 5. Of reservation, 35. b. 36. 37. 6 How the Sacrament
of the altar is a figure 59. 60. vsque ad 72. and 137. b. vsque ad 146. and
280. 7. That evil men eat Christ's body in the Sacrament. 43. vsque ad 50.
and 276. 8. Of the mystical body of Christ, which is the Church. fol. 260.
vsque ad 269. 9. Of the figures and prophecies of the old Testament. 214. b.
vsque ad 223. 10. The faith of the whole Church concerning the Sacrament of the
altar. 316. b. vsque ad 324.
Faults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. (...), 5 1. 7. live. (...), 7 2 17 (...)
mean^, 11 1 4 name is more like, 17 2 29 is it more like. above, 19 1 24 alone.
doctrinethis, 20 2 11 doctrine of this. a truth less, 21 1 21 a truth no
less. ^che, 28 1 24 such. ready by deed, 29 2 12 ready either by deed. divine,
ibidem 31 living. saying, 50 2 13 saving. that fills, 73 2 20 that he
fills. denies part. 82 1 8 denies any parcel. made meat, 86 2 9 made
meet. now came, 87 1 9 now come. us ne^, 89 2 15 us a new. manner prices eode^
that ye son, 18 other prices. 107 1 28 y^ which the son of his bread, 108 1
20 of this bread. be said, 112 1 5 be saved the ^ycal, ^15 1 2 mystical. weth
howhe 118 2 2 shows that he. give ye flesh, 120 1 16 give that flesh. of
grace, 123 2 18 of glory. signa quo, 124 1 31 signa quae. mysteries 126 1 6
mysteries. Cyrillus beside that. beside, will give it. 127 2 29 I will give. but
one, 128 2 11 spoke but once. but teach, 136 2 31 but they teach. out al quest
137 2 31 out of al question. old fashon, 143 2 5 old falshod. word of life 147
2 17 wood of life. ^tem lin 18. not to be 148 2 3 Christ to be. where yet, 167
2 ^ well yet. and of God, ibidem 15 and if it be the honor of God. hoc, that
172 2 24 hoc this. seem to stand, 177 1 15 seem to sound. this Hieru. ibid. 2
15 this is Jerusalem. they should 179 2 7 as they sound. and really 180 2 11
and real. Chrystom, 182 1 ^ Chrysostom. means us, 184 1 5 moves us. (...),
ibide^ ^2 to change. Faults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. and gather, ibide^ 25 and
to gather. God man, ibide^ 2 7 both God and man miraculoush 186 2 19
miraculously. under your, 191 2 7 unto your. miserable 194 1 4 miserable
racking. taking. corpus 185 1 3 corporis. the cause, 198 2 4 the sense.
faithful when 202 1 31 faithful. when cup is the 203 1 6 this cup the same
member 209 2 6 same number. it is not, 211 1 7 is it not. by natural 212 2 3
supernatural. cord vos 227 1 24 certe vos of me and ibidem 30 of me to thend
in y^ (deed ye may be mindful of me, and I say under 233 2 16 I say ye body
that died under. d^edes that ^34 2 13 deeds in that am a vine, 252 2 28 am the
true vine. any mystical 266 1 12 only mystical. corpore vni. ibid. 25 capite
vniretut* but in the, 268 1 23 but by the. carnis Chri sti? ibid. 31 carnis
Christi etc. his Church. 269 1 24 All ye follows from these words (and his
church) to the end of the v. Chap. should come in at the end of the vi. chap.
did it 272 1 8 so did it. was dead? ibidem 9 was dead. else past in, 273 1 19
else in. (...) 274 1 4 Christ. Certainly. by act, 180 1 31 by art. not once to,
299 1 3 not omit to. Corinthia^s was not, 300 1 4 Corinthia^s was* not.
corpus 302 1 10 corpus est Chri sti. Christi, did all the, ibid 2 1 did not all the. in deed 306 1 18 in deed the things. things, that member, 317 1 12 that
number. or believe 320 1 ^9 or (...) no. no* ^aults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. of
a shape, ibid. 2 8 of a round shape. specially 322 2 31 specially twice.
awise, very faut, 325 2 15 very fact. no leading, 333 2 1 no word leading. is a
figure 332 2 15 is the sign. thee they 331 2 2 thee that they also. also,
sixte^th cha. 334 2 9 tenth chap. yas, ibidem 10 say. yet we, 335 1 12 yet now
we. the word ibid. 2 13 the wood. But it is 346 2 2 But is it. (or flesh) 356*
1 26 (or fleshly) to what, 359 1 31 to be what. Faults. Fo. Pa. Li.
Corrections. the co^secra 364 2 21 the consideration tion, the vine, 365 2 14
the true vine. speak unto 381 2 2 spoke unto y^ Jews the. the, and drink, 382
1 30 and to drink. be common, 385 2 26 be the common. (...) is be, 388 2 15 i^
it be. thereof it not* ibid. 17 thereof is not. more co^tra. 390 1 5 mere
co^tradiction^ one union 392 1 15 of our union. God or. 405 1 2 God the father
or. chariti love 412 1 21 charity alone. gifts are cor. ibide^ y^ ethniks are
co^corporal* superturally 417 1 29 supernaturally.

Other smaller faults in misplacing of letters and points, I leave to the
judgment of the discrete Reader.
LOVANII.

Apud Ioannem Foulerum*

Anno Domini 1566.

Mense ^anuar.


