EVROPAE SPECVLVM. OR, A VIEW OR SVRVEY OF THE STATE OF RELIGION in the
Western parts of the World.

Wherein the Roman Religion, and the pregnant policies of the Church of Rome
to support the same, are notably displayed: with some other memorable
discoueries and memorations,

Never before till now published according to the Authors Original Copy.

Multum diuque desideratum. Hagae-Comitis.

1629.

THE VVELL-MEANING PVBLISHER HEREOF TO THE UNDERSTANDING READER, of what rank
or degree soever.
WHereas not many years past, there was published in print, a Treatise
entitled, A Relation of Religion of the Western parts of the World, printed
for one Simon Waterson, 1605. without name of Author, yet generally and
currantly passing under the name of the learned and worthy Gentleman Sr Edwin
Sandys Knight; Know all men by these presents that the same Book was but a
spurious stolen Copy; in part epitomized, in part amplified, and throughout
most shamefully falsified and false printed, from the Authors Original: In so
much, that the asme Knight was infinitely wronged thereby: and as soon as it
came to his knowledge, that such a thing was printed, and passed under his
name, he caused it (though somewhat late, when, it seems, two Impressions were
for the most part vented) to be prohibited by Authority; and as I have heard,
as many as could be recovered, to be deservedly burnt, with power also to
punish the Printers: And yet, nevertheless, since that time, there has been
another Impression of the same stolen into the world. Now, those so adulterate
Copies being scattered abroad, and in the hands of some men, I (whoeuer I am)
though living here in these Transmarine Batavian Belgique parts, yet studious
of the truth, and a lover of my Country; and having obtained by a direct
means, of a dear friend, a perfect Copy, verbatim trans^ribed from the
Authors Original, and legitimate one, of his own handwriting, have thought
good to publish it unto the world; first, for the good of the Church; secondly,
the glory of our English Nation; thirdly, for the fame of the ingenuous and
ingenious and Acute Author, a Gentleman, who (as I have been most credibly
informed) has (heretofore) deserved right well of his Country, in service of
the Prince of Orange, and the Lords the States general, his Majesty of
Englands fa^t friends and Allies, yet etc. And lastly, that the world may be no
longer deprived of so rare a Jewel, in its own luster, nor abused by the
other counterfeit-one, before named.

It may be, I hereby shall incur some dislike from the learned Author, (if
He be yet living,) who happily in his modesty, and for some other causes best
known unto him self, (for some writers love not to have their labors
published in their life time) has so long obscured and suppressed his pregnan^
view, from the worlds public view, farther then now and than by communicating
it unto his friends, such as importuned him to have it copied out: And certes;
though I profess to honor him with all my heart, yet I think it better, he
be herein displeased, than the world longer wronged, and withal hoping
howeuer, that he will heartily construe it to be but amoris error.

I cannot see how any else should be offended hereat, but such as are sworn
slaves to their Lord God the Pope; whose Roman kingdom, and Babylonian
tottering tower, has such a blow given it hereby, as I know but few of such
force; and not many such blows more, will make the same Kingdom and Tower
fall down to the ground, with utter desolation. As for the Arminians, when
this Treatise was written, that sect, was either in the shell, or the cradle,
and their mungrell and squint-eyed Divinity s^arce known, or v^nted to the
world: yet they happily will be offended hereat, because savouring of the
Orthodox truth, and let that sect so be: But if there chance to be any other
moderate Christian offended hereat, of such I humbly* crave pardon.

Read it therefore, beloved Reader, for thine own solace, and much good may
thou learn and reap thereby; giving God the glory, the Author his deserved
due praise, and me thanks (if thou can afford me any) for my honest
endeavor herein, for thy benefit.

From the HAGH in HOLLAND. Vale in Christo, and fruere.
THE CONTENTS, OR THE several Heads (which may serve in steed of Chapters)
contained in this Treatise.
THe Preface, containing the scope of all. page 1 Of the Roman Religion. p. 3
Of the Superstitions and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome. p. ibid. Of their
Honor to Saints and Angels, p. 4 Of their Liturgies, p. 7 Of their Sermons, p.
ibid. Of their Penance and Confession, p. 10 Of their Life and Conversation, p.
17 Of their Lent, p. 20 Of their Ecclesiastical Government, p. 23 Of their
Head assertions, p. 24 Of their Means to strengthen them, p. 29 Of their Ways
to ravish all affections, and to fit each humor, p. 34 Of their particular
Projects, Monarchies, and Princes Marriages, p. 37 Of their Dispensing with
Oaths, p. 42 Of the Greatness of the House of Austria, p. 46 Of the Adulterous
or rather Incestuous Marriages of Austria and Spain, p. 49 Of the Nobility,
and their Confession, p. 50 Of the Choice of their Cardinals, p. 51 Of their
Variety of Preferments, p. 53 Of the Clergy and their Prerogatives, p. 55 Of
the Multitude of their Religious Orders, p. 57 Of their Providing for Children,
p. 58 Of their Nunneries, p. 59 Of their Multitude of Hearts and Hands, Tongues
and Pens, p. 63 Of their Readiness to undertake, and Resolutenesse to
execute, p. 66 Of their Very Multitude of Friars ready to be put in Arms, p.
67 Of their Spiritual Fraternities, p. 72 Of the Policies of the Papacy
against their enemies; and of their persecutions, confiscations, tortures,
massacres and hostility, p. 73 Of the Reformers o^ Protestants Preaching, p. 77
Of their well Educating of Youth, p. 80 Of their Offers of Disputation, p. 85
Of their Discovery of Blotts, p. 88 Of their Histories and Martyrologies, p. 96
Of the Policy of Papal News, p. 100 Of their utter Breach, p. 104 Of their
excluding of all access of the Religion, and of their Inquisition, p. 111 Of
their locking up the Scriptures, p. 114 Of their concealing the Doctrines and
Opinions of the Reformation, p. 117 Of their notorious Lies of England, and of
Geneva, p. 119 Of Papal Purging of Books, and of their Indices Expurgatorij,
p. 126 Of the present state of the Papacy, and their peculiar Dominions, p.
132 Of the Popes sucking from Foreign Parts, p. 137 Of the Clergy under the
Papacy, p. 144 Of the Pope himself and His Election, p. 146 Of the Pope
present, his race, name, and life, p. 149 Of the Nations which adhere unto the
Papacy, especially Italy, p. 156 Of the lives of the Italians, p. ibid. Of
Spain, p. 163 Of Germany, p. 169 Of the Low Countries, p. 176 Of France, p.
ibid. Of Loraine and Savoy, p. 186 An Estimate of the strength of the Papacy.
p. ibid. What Unity Christendom may hope for, p. 194 Of Unity of Charity, p.
196 Of Unity of Authority, p. 199 Of Necessity pressing to Unity, p. 206 Upon
what ground the Pope suffers Jews and Graecians in Italy, p. 216 Of the
Jews Religion and usage, p. 222 Of their Conversion in Italy, p. 227 Of the
Greek Church, and their Religion, p. 233 Of their Liturgies, p. 238 Of their
Government, p. 240 Of their Lives, and of the Muscovites, p. 242 The
Conclusion, touching only the Churches Reformed, p. 247
THese Heads only were not collected in the Authors Copy, but done for the
ease and better benefit of the Reader. And if any nevertheless shall find any
ambiguity or obscurity in the ensuing Work, let them know that the Authors
original was not in all places precisely printed with comma's, colons,
semicolons and periods: and the Transscriber followed punctually the Author.
And for Typographicall errata, (as few or no Books escape without some) The
Publisher hereof has collected the most material to be amended as follows;

A VIEW OR SVRVEY OF THE STATE OF RELIGION IN THE WESTERN PARTS OF THE WORLD,
ANNO, 1599.
TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST JOHN WHITGIFT ARCH. B: OF CANTERBVRY.
MY singular good Lord. Having finished now almost my intended course of
traveil, and drawing withal toward the expitation of the time praefined
thereto: coming to cast uppe as it were the short accounts of my labors,
employed chiefly (as was f^o^ the first my principal dessein) in viewing the
STATE OF RELIGION in these Western parts of the World, and the divided
Factions and Professions thereof; with their differences in matter of Faith, in
^^e Ex^rcises of Religion, in Government eccl^siast^call, and in Life and
conversation: what virtues in each kind eminent, what eminent defects, moreover
in what terms of opposition or correspondence each stands with other; what
probabilities, what policies, what hopes, what jealousies, are found in each
part for the adva^ncing thereof; and finally, what possibility and good means
of uniting at leastwise the several branches of the Reformed professors, if
unity universal be more to be desired than hoped, in such bitterness of
minds, and aequalitie of forces, as leaves on neither side either disposition
to yield, or doubt to be vanquished: In the midst of these thoughts the great
place which your Grace holds in our Church and Commonwealth next under her
Majesty did advise me in duty, as great worthiness joined with favor
toward my self in particular did press me in humble and serviceable
affection to yield unto your Grace some account of those my traveils in that
kind; not entending to deliver a full report of all those poincts, which would
too much exceed the proportion of any Letter to write, and perhaps of your
Graces leisure also to read; but restraining my self chiefly to such parts and
places, as may seem most necessary for our Country to be known, and give
your Grace also in likelihood most content in recognizing them.

THE Roman Religion, which of all other Christian, I suppose to have most
manifoldly declined and degenerated from the truth and purity of that divine
Original once so well published and placed amongst them; as having in those
middle times when there were none to control them, light into the hands and
handling of such men as made their greatness, wealth, and honor, the very
rules whereby to square out the Canons of Faith, and then set Clerks on work
to devise arguments to uphold them, seems notwithstanding at this day not so
corrupt in the very doctrine, as in Schools they deliver it, and publish it in
their writings; where manifold opposition does hold them in awe, and has
caused them to refine it; as it is in the the practice thereof, and in their
usage among themselves; wherein they are as gross in a manner as ever: so that
sundry whom the reading of their books has allured, the view of their
Churches has averted from their party.

For to omit the endless multitude of Superstitions and Leremonies enough to
take up a great part of a man's life to gaze on and to peruse; being neither
uniforme in all places, as some would pretend, but different in diverse
Countries: an huge sort of them are so childish also and unsavory, that as they
argue great silliness and rawnesse in their inventours, so can they naturally
bring no other than disgrace and contempt to those exercises of Religion
wherein they are stirring.

And to restrain my self in this part especially to Italy, where the Roman
Religion does principally flourish; the communicating Divine Honor to Saints
and Angels, by building Churches, erecting Altars, commending Prayers,
addressing vows unto them; by worshipping their Images, going in Pilgrimage to
their Relics, attributing all kind of miracles both to the one and other;
has wrought this general effect in those parts that men have more affiance
and assume unto them a greater conceit of comfort in the patronage of the
Creatures and servants of God, than of God himself the Prince and Creator.
And touching the blessed Virgin the case is clear, that howsoever their
doctrine in Schools be otherwise, yet in all kind of outward actions, the
Honor which they do her, is double for the most part unto that which they do
our Savior: where one does profess himself a Devoto or peculiar servant of
our Lord; whole towns sometimes, as Siena by name, are the Devoti of our Lady.

The stateliest Churches are hers lightly, and in Churches hers the fairest
Altars; where one prays before the Crucifix, two before her Image, where one
voweth to Christ ten vow unto her; and not so much to her self, as to some
peculiar Image, which for some select virtue or grace together with greater
power of operation of miracles they chiefly serve, as the glorious Lady of
Loretto, the devout Lady of Rome, the miraculous Lady of Provenzano, the
Annunciata of Florence; whose Churches are so stuffed with vowed presents and
memories, that they are feign to hang their Cloisters also and Churchyards
with them. Then as their vows are, such are their pilgrimages. And to nourish
this humor; for one miracle reported to be wrought by the Crucifix, not so few
perhaps as an hundred are voiced upon those other Images. Yea their Devils in
exorcisme are also taught (for who can think otherwise?) to endure the
conjuring of them by the name of God and the Trinity without trouble or
motion; but at the naming of our Lady to toss and torment; as feeling now a
new force of an unresistable power. Neither will I omit this no less certain,
though less apparent; where one fasts on Friday, which they count our Lords
day in devotion to him; many fast the Saturday; which there they count our
Ladies day; and in devotion to her. In all which the people do but follow their
guides, who as in the admeasuring of devotions by tale on beads, they string up
ten salutations of our Lady to one of our Lords prayers, so themselves also in
their Sermons make their entrance with an Ave Marie, yea and the solemnest
divine honor which I see in those parts, and which being well used were to be
highly renowned and recommended to the imitation of all worthy Christians;
namely, that thrice a day, at sunrise, at noone, and sunset, upon the ringing
of a bell, all men in what place soever they be, whether, Field, Street, or
Market, kneel down and send up their united devotions to the high Court of
the world: This honor is by them intended chiefly to our Lady, and the
devotion advised is the Aue Marie, and the Bell which rings to it has also
that name. And lastly their chief preachers do teach in Pulpit, that the
Church does very well whatsoever is found in Scripture spoken of Christ the
Son of God to apply it to our Lady also, being the daughter of God: that it
is the opinion of a learned man and not contrary to the Catholic Faith, that
though ADAM had not sinned yet Christ should have been incarnate to do our
Lady honor; that all the Angels and Saints of Heaven are vassals unto them
both, and cast down their crowns at the feet of both, and present men's
supplications kneeling unto both; that our bond of duty and thankfulness must
needs be exceeding to her; seeing it may be said after a sort, that Man is
more advanced in her than in in Christ himself, seeing in Christ the nature of
Man is exalted only, in our Lady, the very person also, which Christ has not;
Finally, that nothing passes in Heaven without her express consent, that the
style of that Court is Placet Domin^: yea they are taught that matters of
Justice come more properly from him, and expeditions of Grace from her; and
that some rare holy men have seen in vision, that certain whom Christ would
have condemned, yet in regard they were her servants by her intercession have
been absolved; so that no man need marveil if this doctrine and practice have
diverted the principal streams of affiance and love, from him, who had the
only right unto them; and turned them upon those, unto whom neither so great
honor is due, nor so undue honor can be acceptable.

Their Liturgies being not understood by the people, are not able to hold them
with any spiritual content. For supply whereof, they confine them to the
chamming of their beads in the mean season: which being so unsavorie a food as
it is (and they use it accordingly) when they are weary of it, they entertain
the rest of the time with talk and mirth, (which the Priests also themselves
at their leisure forbear not,) not forgetting yet to show devotion at certain
pauses by Spirits; wherein their outward gestures are decent, reverent,
significant. Howbeit I suppose in general I may truly say, that the Roman
Catholics are the most irreverent and wandering at Divine Service that a man
shall see any where, (the Jews only excepted; who are in that kind in all
places incredibly intolerable:) though on the other side that honor is to be
yielded the Italian Nation, that he is naturally not undevout were his devotion
well guided and duly cherished, and not starved and quenched in the dark mist
of a language, where he neither understands what is said to him, nor yet what
himself says.

The best part of their exercises of Religion are their Sermons: wherein much
good matter both of faith and piety is eloquently delivered, by men surely of
wonderful zeal and spirit, if their interior fervor be correspondent to
their outward vehemence. Howbeit they are sometime mingled with so palpable
vanity, that besides other pouerties, as forced allegories and unnatural
interpretations, wherein they are frequent, even those Legends of Saints and
tales at which children with us would smile; are there solemnly hystorized in
their Cathedral Pulpits. But certainly what religiousness soever is in the
peoples minds may wholly or chiefly be atributed to their Sermons, whereto the
better disposed people do very diligently resort: their Service being no other
than as a lamp put out, which bringing no light at all to the understanding,
can neither bring any due warmth to the affection, the one being inseparable
from the other: and were it not that their music, perfumes and rich sights,
did hold the outward senses, with their natural delight; surely it could not
be but either abandoned for the fruitlesness or only upon fear and constraint
frequented.

This one thing I cannot but highly commend in that sort and order; they spare
nothing that either Lost can perform in Enriching, or skill in Adorning the
Temples of God, or to set out his service with the greatest pomp and
magnificencie that can be devised, wherein notwithstanding it were to be
wished that some discreeter men had bin the contrivers and Masters of their
Ceremonies, to have affected in them more stateliness, reverence and devotion,
and to have avoided that Frierly busy baseness and childishness which is now
in them praedominant. And although I am not ignorant that many men well reputed
have embraced the thriftie opinion of that Disciple, who thought all to be
wasted that was bestowed on Christ in that sort, and that it were much better
employed upon him in the poor, yet with an eye perhaps that themselves would
be his quarter Almoners: notwithstanding I must confess it could never sincke
into my heart, that in proportion of reason, the allowance for the furnishing
out of the service of God should be measured by the skant and strict rule of
mere necessity, (a proportion so low, that nature to other most bountiful,
in matters of necessity has not failed no not the most unnoble Creatures in
the world;) and that for our selves no measure of heaping, but the most we can
get; no rule of expense, but to the utmost pomp we list; or that God himself
had enriched this lower part of the World with such wonderful variety of
things beautiful and glorious, that they might serve only to the pampering up
of mortal man in his pride; and that the service of the high Creator Lord and
Giver, (the outward glory of whose higher palace may appear by the very lamps
which we see so far off burning so gloriously in it,) only the simpler,
baser, cheaper, less noble, less beautiful, less glorious things should be
employed: especially seeing even as in Princes Courts, so in the service of God
also, this outward state and glory being well disposed, does engender,
quicken, increase and nourish, the inward reverence and respectfull devotion
which is due unto so sovereign Majesty and power, which those whom the use
thereof cannot persuade so, would easily by the want of it be forced to
confess. For which cause I must crave to be excused by them herein, if in
zeal of the Honor of the common Lord of all, I choose rather to commend the
virtue of an enemy, than to flatter the vice or imbecilitie of a friend.

But to return to the Church of Rome, and to come to the consideration of
their Penance and Confession, out of which so great good is promised to the
World, and the want whereof is so much upbraided to their opposites: I must
confess I brought with me this persuasion and expectation, that surely in
reason and very course of nature, this must needs be a very great restraint to
wickedness, a great means to bring men to integrity and perfection; when a
man shall as it were daily survey his actions and affections, censure with
grief, confess with shame, cure by counsel, expiat with punishment,
extinguish with firm intent never to return to the like again, whatsoever
has defiled or stained his soul. Neither doubt I but it had this fruict in
the first institution and has also with many at this day; yea and might have
been perhaps better restored in Reformed Churches to his primitive sincerity,
than utterly abolished, as in most places it is. Notwithstanding, having
diligently searched into the menaging thereof in those parts, I find that as
all things whereof humane imbecillitie has the Custody and government, in time
(decaying by unsensible degrees) fall away from their first perfection and
purity, and gather much soil and dross in using; so this as much as any
thing.

For this poinct of their Religion, which in outward show carries a face of
severitie and discipline, is become of all other most remiss and pleasant, and
of greatest content even to the dissolutest minds the matter being grown with
the common sort to this open reckoning; what need we refrain so fearfully
from sin, God having provided so ready a means to be rid of it when we
list again? Yea, and the worser sort will say, when we have sinned we must
confess; and when we have confessed we must sin again, that we may also
confess again, and withal make work for new Indulgences and Iubilies: making
account of Confession as professed drunkards of Vomiting: Yea, I have known of
those that carry a show of very devout persons, who by their own report, to
excuse their acquaintance in matters criminal, have wittingly perjured
themselves in judgment, only presuming of this present and easy remedy of
Confession: and other of more than ordinary note among them, who when their
time of confessing was at hand, would then venture on those actions which
before they trembled at; as presuming to surfeit by reason of neighborhood
with the Physician: which Physician also himself is perhaps more often
infected by the noisome diseases which his patient discloseth, than the patient
any way bettered by the counsel which the Physician gives; though this should
be the very principal virtue of that act. But this must be granted to be
the fault of the people* yet a general fault it is, and current with small
controulment.

Howbeit neither are the Priests or Pope to be more excused perhaps in their
parts. The Priests will tell the penitents that God is merciful; that what
sin soever a man commits, so long as he continues in the Church, and is
not a Lutheran, there is good remedy for him. And for Penance, it consists
ordinarily, but in Ave-Maries and Pater-Nosters, with some easy alms to them
that are able, and some little fasting to such as are willing; yea I have
known, when the penance for horrible and often blasphemy, besides much other
lewdness has been no other than the bare saying of their ^eads thrice over; a
matter of some hours muttering, and which in Italy they dispatch also as they
go in the streets, or rid business at home; making no other of it, that as it
is, two lips and one fingers work. But were the penance which the Priests
enjoyne never so hard and sharp, the holy Fathers plenarie pardon sweeps all
away at a blow. Now of these they have granted (and this man especially) so
huge a number, that I ween there are few Churches of note in Italy, which have
not purchased or procured a perpetual plenarie Indulgence; by virtue whereof,
whosoever at certain set yearly days, being confessed, and having communicated,
(o^ as in some pardons having intent only to confess and communicate in time
convenient) powers out his devotions before some altar in that Church, and
extends his hands in alms to the behoof thereof, (which clause in all former
graunts was expressed, but is now left out for avoiding of scandal, but still
understood and practiced accordingly) has forthwith free remission of all
sin and punishment. Yea if the worst fall out, that a man be so negligen^ as
to drop into Purgatory, at the time of his decease, (which but by very supine
negligence can hardly happen:) Yet few Cities are there wherein there are not
one or two Altars privileged Pro de functis, where for every Mass said a
soul is delivered: and so great multitude of Artizans must needs make their
ware cheap. I will not here warble long upon this untunable harsh string,
neither will mention perhaps the fourtieth part of what I have seen, much
less will I now rake up old rustie stuff out of the dead dust and darkness
wherein time and shame has suffered it to rest: Only for examples sake, and
for verifying of what I have said, I will set down some of that which is in
use at this day, which is printed on their Church-doores and proclaimed in
their Pulpits.

In the Eremitane at Padova, their Preachers very solemnly publish a grant of
plenarie* Indulgence from Baptism to the last confession, with twenty eight
thousand years over for the time ensuing. The pardon of ALEXANDER the Sixth for
thirty thousand years, to whosoever before the Altar of our Lady with Christ
and her Mother, shall say a peculiar Ave, importing that our Lady was conceived
without sin, is Printed a new in Italy, and pictured in fairest sort: But
these are for short times. At the Sepulcher of CHRIST in Venice, a stately
representation, whereon is written, Hic situm est Corpus Domini nostri IESV
CHRISTI, (yet inferring no real presence thereby, as I take it) with verses
annexed of Conditur hoc tumulo; there is hanging in a printed table a prayer of
St. AVSTINE, a very good one indeed, with Indulgence for fourscore and two
thousand years, granted from BONIFACR the eighth, and confirmed by BENEDICT
the eleventh, to whosoever shall say it, and that for every day toties quoties;
which yet is somewhat worth, that in a few days a man may provide for a whole
million of Worlds, if they did last no longer than this has done ^ithertoo. In
St. FRAVNCIS Church at Padova I heard a Reverend Father preach at large the
holy history of the divine pardon of SISA, Abomni culpa and p^na, granted by
Christ in person at our Ladies suit unto S. FRANCIS, extended to all such such
as being confessed, and having communicated should pray in St. FRANCIS Church
there of Sancta Maria de gloria Angeli; yet sending him for orders sake to his
Vicar Pope HO^ORIVS that then was to pass it, with many other re-apparitions
and delectable strange accidents of great solace and content to the pleasant
minded believers: Which Pardon is since in larged by SIXTVS QVARTVS and QVINTVS
(who both were Franciscans) to all lay brethren and sisters that wear St.
FRANCIS CORDON in what place soever. But to leave these Antiquities, but not to
enlarge in Modern graunts; but to restrain to one Pope of renowned fresh
memory even GREGORY the thirteenth and some few of his Graces, he has
granted to the Carmine at Siena for every Mass said there at the Altar of the
Crucifix, the deliverie of a soul out of Purgatory whose they list, the like
to many other. To the Carmine at Padova more liberally to every one that shall
say seven Aves and 7. Pater-Nosters before one of their Altars on the
anniver^ar^e Wednesday in Easter week, or else kiss the ground before the
Altar of the blessed Sacrament with the usual prayers for exaltation of the
Church extirpation of Hesie, and unity of Christian Princes, both plenarie
Indulgence for himself and the deliverie of what friends soul out of
Purgatory he pleases. To the Fraternity of the Altar of the Conception of
our Lady in the Duomo or Cathedral Church at Padova confessing and
communicating at their entry to that society full remission of their sins
at the hour of their death, naming Jesus with their mouth, (or if they cannot)
with their Heart. The like ordinarily granted to other Fraternities. To every
Priest so often as he shall say, five printed lines, importing that he will
off^r up the precious body of our Savior, so many fi^^ie years pardon. Yet
will I mention one also of the graunts of this Pope, among other innumerable,
namely to the Friars and lay Fraternity of both Sexes of the Carmine at Siena;
for every time they are present at their solemn Processions, plenarie
Indulgenee for all sins past, and Seven years and seven Quadragenas or
forty days over in store for the time to come, and this for ever: with extent
of like Grace to all other that with their presence shall honor those
Processions, but to last for them no longer than the year of Iubilee. Now
besides these and infinite other of this style, there are Indulgences more
free, and less restrained either for time place or duty to gain them: By
grant from Pope JOHN the XX.th every inclining of the Head at the naming of
JESUS gets XX. years pardon: a matter in Italy no not this day unpractised.
And to grace that Ceremony the more, I have heard sundry of their renowned
Divines teach in Pulpit; that CHRIST himself on the Cross bowed his head on
the right side, to reverence his own Name which was written over it. All Altars
of Station (which are in very great number) have their perpetual Indulgences
indifferent for all times. Sundry Crosses engraven on the pauements of their
Churches, have Indulgence annexed for every time they are kissed, which is so
often by the devouter sex, that the hard marble is worn with it. The third and
fourth Mass (as they say) of every Priest, is a preservatiue or ransom of his
Parents from Purgatory, yea though they should be song without such intention:
which causes many wary men that would be sure from Purgatory, to make some
one or other of their sons a Priest always.

The saying of their Beads over with a meadall or other trinket of the Popes
Benediction appendant, gets plenarie Indulgence, and delivers what soul out of
Purgatory one pleases. And it is lawful for one to substitute any other
medall in place of those blessed ones, which shall have like force with them. A
clause of consideration, and which serves at this day more turns than one,
and theirs especially which pass over Sea with double danger. All which with
many other like helps considered; I must confess for my part I am far from
their understanding, who blaze so much the severitie of the Roman Religion;
unless we account that a streit enclosure, which has a multitude of
posternes continually open, to let false people in and out, day and night at
their pleasure: and rather incline to a contrary conceit, that praesupposing
the truth of their doctrine as it is practiced; for a man that were desirous to
save his Soul at his dying day and yet deny his Body no wicked pleasure in his
life time, no such Church as that of Rome, no such Country as Italy.

For I must speak also somewhat of their Life and Conversation, but as briefly
as may be; being a theme I take very small delight to handle, neither being of
any great profit to be known. And yet is it known sufficiently to all men,
and too much to some, who not content to spott themselves with all Italian
impurities, proceed on to empoyson their country also at their return thither:
that we need not marveil if those rarer Villainies which our Ancestors never
dreamed of, do now grow frequent; and such men whom they would have swept out
of the streets of their Cities, as the noisome disgrace and dishonor of them,
and confined to a Dungeon or other desolate habitation, do vaunt themselves
now, and with no mean applause for the only gallants and worthy spirits of
the World.

But to touch so much of their lives in Italy as shall be necessary for this
purpose, and rather indeed the causes than the effects themselves: it is not to
be merveiled, if the glory of their Religion consisting most in outward
shows, and the exquisiteness in an infinity of intricate dumb Ceremonies; if
their devotions being not seazoned with understanding requisite, but prized
more by tale than by weight of zeal; if as the virtue of their Sacraments, so
their acts of Piety, being placed more in the very massy materialitie of the
outward work, than in the purity of the heart from which they proceed: It is
not, I say, to be merveiled though the fruicts also of conversation be like
unto those roots; rather such as may yield some reasonable outward obedience to
Laws than approve the inward integrity and sincerity of that fountain from
which they issue.

For although in their civil carriage one toward another they have especial
good virtues well worth the imitating, being a people for the most part of a
grave and stayed behavior, very respective and courteous, not curious or
meddling in other men's matters, besides that ancient frugalitie in diet and all
things not durable, which to their great ease and benefit they still retain;
and there be also among them as in all other places, some men of excellent and
rare perfection: yet can it not be dissembled; but that generally, the whole
Country is straungely overflowne and overborne with wickedness, with
filthiness of speech, with beastliness of actions, both Governors and
Subjects, both Priests and Friars, each striving as it were with other in an
impudentnesse therein; even so far forth, that what elsewhere would not be
tolerated, is there in high honor; what in some other places even a loose
person would be ashamed to confess, there Priests and Friars refrain not
openly to practice. Yea if any man forbear the like, they find it very
strange and hold integrity for little better than seelinesse or abjectnesse.
I cannot here forget the saying of an Italian Gentleman of very good quality
but in faction Spanish at my first entry into Italy; namely, that the Italians
were excellent men but for three faults they had: In their lusts they were
unnatural; there malice was unappeasable; and they deceived the whole world:
whereto as for rare Corollaries in those faculties he might have truly added,
they spend more upon other than upon themselves; they blaspheme oftener than
swear, and murder more than they revile or sclaunder.

Notwithstanding, this testimony I yield not only willingly but gladly to
them, (for what joy could it be, what grief ought it not be, to the heart of
any man, to see men fall irrecoverably from the love and laws of the
Creator?) that at one time of the year, namely, at Lent, they are much
reformed; no such blaspheming nor dyrtie speaking as before; their vanities of
all sorts laid reasonably aside; their pleasures abandoned; their apparel,
their diet, and all things else composed to austeritie and state of penitence:
they have daily then their preaching with collections of alms, whereto all men
resort: and to judge of them by the outward show, they seem generally to have
very great remorse of their wickedness. In so much that I must confess I
seemed unto my self in Italy to have best learned the right use of Lent; there
first to have discerned the great fruict of it, and the reason for which those
Sages at first did institute it. Neither can I easily accord to the fancies of
such, as because we ought at all times to lead a life worthy of our profession,
think it therefore superstitious to have one time wherein to exact or expect it
more than other: but rather do thus conceive that seeing the corruption of
times and wickedness of man's nature is now so exorbitant that an hard matter
it is to hold the ordnarie sort of men at all times within the lists of piety,
justice and sobriety; it is fit therefore there should be one time at least
in the year and that of reasosonable continuance, wherein the season it self,
the use of the world and practice of all men, (for even the Jews and Turks
have their Lents although different,) the commandment of Superiors, the
provision of fit means to assist therein, and in sum the very outward face and
expectation as were of all things, should constrein men how wicked and
recklesse soever, for that time at least to recall themselves to some more
severe cogitations and courses; lest sin having no such bridle to check it
at any time, should at length wax headstrong and unconquerable in them: and
that on the other side being thus necessarily inured for a while, though but to
make a bare show of walking in the paths of virtue, they might afterward
perhaps more sincerely and willingly persist, (as custom makes hard things
pleasant,) or at leastwise return more readily again unto them some other
time. And verily I have had sundry times this cogitation in Italy, that in so
great looseness of life and decay of discipline in those parts, it was the
especial great mercy and grace of God that the severitie of Lent should yet
still be preserved, lest otherwise the floods of sin growing so strong and
outrageous, and having no where either bound or bank to restrain them might
plunge that whole nation in such a gulf of wickedness, and bring them to that
last extremity, which should leave them neither hope of better, nor place for
worse. Yea and was so far from thinking the institution of Lent superfluous,
or the retaining of it unprofitable; that I rather inclined to like the custom
of the Greek Church, who besides the great Lent have three other Lents also at
solemn times in the year; though those other neither so long, neither yet of
so strict and general observation. Two things are farther to be added in the
honor of Italy. Their Nunneries seem for the most part greatly reformed of
that they have been, and of that they still are in France and other places;
where their looseness of government and often scandalls ensuing, do breed them
a reputation clean contrary to their profession. And the reason why the
Monasteries and Convents of Friars are not reformed there also, is a fear,
they say the Pope has, that over great severitie would cause a great number to
disfrier themselves, and to fly to Geneva in hope of more liberty, which he
esteems an inconvenience more to be shunned than the former mischief. An
other thing very memorable and imitable in Italy, is the exceeding good
provision of Hospitalls and houses of Piety, for Old persons enfeebled, for
poor folk maimed or diseased, for gentilitie impoverished, for travailers
distressed, for lewd women converted, for children abandoned; which the
devotion of former times has founded and enriched, and enriched, and this
present age does very faithfully and discreetly govern. And if it were not for
those Houses, in the number whereof, goodlinesse, great revenews, and good
order, I suppose Italy exceeds any one Country in the world; although it be
incomparably also the richest Nation at this day of all the West, by reason of
their long peace and their neighbors long wars: yet considering that the
wealth there is so ill digested, and so unequally divided in the body thereof,
(the infinite and ever sucking veins of their taxes and imposts carrying all
the blood to the higher parts, and leaving the lower ready to faint, to starve
and wither,) that it may be truly said, the rich men of Italy are the richest,
and the poor the poorest things that any one Country can yield again, both
which in well policed estate were to be avoided: were it not I say for those
Houses alone of Piety, there would be more misery to be seen in those parts,
(which all that notwithstanding is still great and excessive) than perhaps, in
the poorest peaceable Country of Christendom whatsoever. Besides these
Hospitalls, they have also their Montipij, for free or more easy loan to the
poor; seeing Italy as all other places is infected with Usury.

But to come now to the view of their Ecclesiastical Government, not so much
as it is referred to the conduct of souls to their true happiness, though
this be the natural and proper end of that regiment; but rather as it is
addressed to the upholding of the worldly power and glory of their order, to
the advauncing of their part, and overthrow of their opposites, which I suppose
be the poincts they now chiefly respect: I think I may truly say, there was
never yet state framed by man's wit in this world more powerful and forcible to
work those effects; never any either more wisely contrived and plotted or more
constantly and diligently put in practice and execution: in so much that but
for the natural weakness of untruth and dishonestie, which being rotten at
the heart abate the force of whatsoever is founded thereon, their outward means
were sufficient to subdue a whole world. Now as in every Art and Science there
is some one or few first propositions or theoremes on the virtue whereof all
the rest depend: so in their Art also they have certain Head Assertions, which
as indemonstrable principles they urge all men to receive and hold. And those
are, That they are the Church of GOD, within which great facility, and without
which no possibility of Salvation: that divine praerogatiue granted to them
above all other Societies in the world, does preserve them everlastingly from
erring in matter of Faith, and from falling from God: that the Pope Christ's
Deputy has the keys of Heaven in his custody to admit in by Indulgence, and
shut out by Excommunication as he shall see cause: that the charge of all
Souls, being committed to him, he is thereby made Sovereign Prince of this
world exceeding in power and Matie all other Princes as far, as the soul in
dignity does exceed the body, and aeternall things surmount things temporal
and seeing that the End is the rule and commander of whatsoever does tend unto
it, and all things in this world are to serve but as instruments, and the world
it self but as a passage to our everlasting habitation; that therefore he that
has the sovereign menaging of this high end, and the honor to be the supreme
Conductor unto it, has also power to dispose of all things subordinate, as may
best serve to it, to plant, to root out; to establish, to depose; to bind, to
loose; to alter, to dispense; as may serve most fit for the advancement of the
Church, and for the atchieving of the Souls faelicitie: wherein whosoever
oppose against him, whether by Haeresie or schism, they are no other than very
Rebels or seditious persons; against whom he has unlimited and endless power
to proceed, to the suppressing, ruining and extinguishing of them by all means,
that the commonwealth of God may flourish in prosperity, and the highway to
Heaven be kept safe and open for all Gods loyal and obedient people. In these
poincts no doubt or question is tolerable: and who so join with them in these,
shall find great connivence in what other defect and difference soever; this
being the very touchstone at which all men are to be tried, whether they be in
the Church or out of the Church, whether with them or against them. And by this
plot have their wits erected in the world a Monarchy more potent than ever
any that has been before it: a Monarchy which entituling them De jure to all
the world, lays a strong foundation thereof in all men's consciences the only
firm ground of obedience in the world; and such a foundation as not only
holds fast unto them whatsoever it seazeth on, but works outwardly also by
engines to weaken and undermine the state of all other Princes how great
soever; and that in such sort, as by possessing themselves of the principal
places in the hearts of their subjects, (as being those from whom they receive
their principal good, even the happiness of their souls) to incite them upon
very conscience against their natural sovereigns at pleasure and by writ of
excommunication to subdue or at the leastwise greetly to shake whom they list,
without fighting a blow, without leavying a Souldjer: and lastly a Monarchy
which as it was founded by mere wit, so needs not any thing but mere wit to
maintain it, which enricheth it self without toyling, warreth without
endangering, rewards without spending, using Colleges to a great purpose as
any other can fortresses; and working greater matters, partly by Scholars,
partly by swarms of Friars, than any else could ever do by great garrisons and
Armies; and all these maintained at other folks charges; for to that rare
poinct have they also proceeded as not only to have huge rents themselves out
of all foreign states, but to maintain also their instruments out of other
men's devotion; and to advance their favorites under the fairest pretense of
providing for Religion, to the very principal praeferments in foreign Princes
Dominions. That no man think it strange, if finding the revenew of skill and
cunning to be so great, and her force so mighty, especially where she
works upon simplicity and ignorance; they enclosed heretofore all learning
within the walls of their Clergy; setting forth Lady Ignorance for a great
Saint to the Laietie, and shrining her unto them for the true mother of
Devotion. And assuredly but for one huge defect in their policy, which was
hard in regard of their own particular ambitions, but otherwise not impossible
to be avoided; that they choose their Popes lightly very old men, and withal
indifferently without any restraint out of all families and nations, whereby
they are continually subject to double change of government; the successor
seldom prosecuting his antecessours devises but either crossing them through
envieor abandoning them upon new humor; it could not have been but they must
have long since been absolute Lords of all; which defect notwithstanding so
strong was their policy by reason of the force of their cordial foundation,
that no Prince or Pote^tate ever opposed against them, but in fine even by his
own subjects they either mastered him ututterly or brought him to good
conformity by great loss and extremity; till such time as in this latter age
the untruth of the foundation it self being stoutly discovered has given them
a sore blow; and changing in great part the stare of the question has driven
them to a reenforcement of new inventions and practices.

Howbeit those positions being the ground of their state, and the hope of their
glory, in them they admit no shadow of alteration, but endeavor still per fas
and nefas even by all Means in the world to strengthen them; and among their
manifold Adversaries hate them most of all other, who have labored most in
sapping of that foundation. And seeing that by reason of this bookish age, they
have not that help of ignorance which in times past they had: they cast about
gently to soake and settle them in men's persuasions and consciences another
way. They tell men that the very grounds whereon we build on our persuasion of
the truth of Christianity it self are no other than credible; that the
proofs of the Scripture to be the word of God, can be no other at this day
than probable only: it being unpossible for any wit in the world to produce an
exact necessary and infallible demonstration, either that St. PAVL had his
calling from above, or that those Epistles were of his own writing; so
likewise in the rest. And that the chief proof we have thereof is the
testimony of the Church: a thing which even their adversaries are forced to
confess. Now that this probable persuasion of the truth of Christianity does
afterward grow into an assuredness thereof, this issues from the inward
operation of Gods spirit; the gift whereof is faith: and that faith being a
knowledge not of Science but of belief; which searches not by discourse the
particular necessity of the verity of the things which are delivered, but
relieth in a general upon the approved wisdom, truth and virtue of him that
does deliver them: Surely whosoever will needs have necessary proof of the
several articles of his Religion does but wittily deceive himself; and by
overcurious endeavor to change his Faith into science, but lose that which he
seeks to perfect. If then without faith no possibility of salvation, surely
needs must this be the highway to perdition. Now seeing that Christianity is a
doctrine of faith, a doctrine whereof all men even children are capable, as
being to be received in gross, and to be believed in the general; the high
virtue whereof is in the humility of understanding, and the merit in the
readiness of obedience to embrace it, (for these have been always the true
honors of faith,) and seeing the outward proofs thereof are no other than
probable, and of all probable proofs the Churches testimony is most probable:
What madness for any man to try out his soul and to wast away his spirits in
tracing out all the thorny paths of the Controversies of these days, wherein to
err is a thing no less easy than dangerous, what through forgerie abusing
him, what through sophistry beguiling him, what through passion, partiality,
and private interest transporting him; and not rather to be take himself to
the high path of truth, whereunto God and Nature, reason and experience, do
all give witness, and that is to associate himself unto that Church, whereunto
the custody of this Heavenly and Supernatural truth, has been from Heaven
it self committed? So that two things only are to be performed in this case;
to weigh discree^ly which is the true Church: and that being found, to receive
faithfully and obediently without doubt or discussion whatsoever it delivers.

Now concerning the first poinct, some doubt might be made if there were any
Church Christian in the world to be shown, which had continued from CHRIST'S
time down to this age without change or interruption, theirs only excepted.

But if all other have had either their end and decay long since, or their
beginning but of late; If theirs being founded by the Prince of the Apostles
with promise to him by CHRIST, that Hell-gates should not prevail against it,
but that himself would be assisting to it till the consummation of the world,
have continued on now to the end of Sixteen hundred years with an honorable and
certain line of near two hundred and forty Popes all successors of St.
PETER, both Tyrants and Traitors, both Pagans and Heretics, in vain wresting,
raging; barking and undermining; if all the lawful general Councels that ever
were in the world, being the venerable Senats of Gods Officers and Ministers,
have from time to time approved, obeyed and honored it, if God have so
miraculously blessed it from above, as that so many sage Doctors should enrich
it with their writings, such armies yea millions of Saints with their
holiness, of Martyrs with their blood, of Virgins with their purity should
sanctify and embellish it; if their Church have bin a ruin always to them
that opposed against her; a stay, repose and advancement to all her followers;
if even at this day in such difficulties of unjust rebellions and unnatural
revolts of her nearest children, yet she stretches out her arms to the utmost
corners of the world, newly embrasing whole Nations into her bosom; if lastly
in all other opposite Churches wheresoever, there be nothing to be found but
inward dissension and co^trariety, but change of opinions, uncertenty of
resolutions, with robbing of Churches, rebelling against Governors, confusion
of orders, nothing to be attended but mischief, subversion and destruction
(which they have well deserved and shall assuredly have) whereas contrariwise
in their Church the Unity undivided, the obedience unforced, the unalterable
resolutions, the most heavenly order reaching from the height of all power to
the very lowest of all subjection, with admirable harmony and undefectiue
correspondence, all bending the same way to the effecting of the same work do
promise no other than continuance, increase and victory: let no man doubt to
submit him self to this glorious Spouse of God, on whose head is the blessing
of God, in whose hand is the power of God, under whose feet are the enemies of
God, and to whom round about do service all the Creatures of God. This then
being accorded to be the true Church of God, it follows that she be
reverently obeyed in all things without farther disquisition: having the
warrant that he that hears her, hears Christ, and whosoever hears her
not has no better place with God than a Publican or Pagan. And what folly
were it to receive the Scripture upon credit of her authority, and not to
receive the interpretation of it upon her authority also and credit? And if
God should not protect his Church always from error, and yet peremptorily
command men always to obey her, than had he made but very slender provision
for the salvation of mankind, to whom error in matter of faith is certain
damnation: which conceit of God (whose care of us even in all things touching
this transitory life is so plain and eminent) were ungrateful and impious.
And hard were the case, mean had his regard been of the vulgar people, whose
wants and difficulties in this life will not permit, whose capacity will not
suffice to found the deep and hidden mysteries of divinity, to search out the
truth of these intricate controversies, if there were not other whose
authority they might rely on. Blessed therefore are they which believe and
have not seen: the merit of whose religious humility and obedience, does
exceed perhaps in honor and acceptance before God the subtle and profound
knowledge of many other. And lastly, if any man either in regard of his
vocation or by reason of his leisure list to study the controversies, take he
heed that he come not with a doubtful mind unto them; for diffidence is as the
sin of Rebellion: let him bested fast in faith; let him submit his own
reason to the Churches authority, being the house of God, the pillar and
ground of truth; let him be fast and unmoueably built on that foundation; and
let his end be only this, to furnish and arm himself in such sort as to be
able to with-stand and overthrow those Haeretikes, whom he shall at any time
either choose or chance to encounter. This is the main course of their
persuading at this day, whereby they seek to reestablish that former
foundation.

In the unfolding whereof I have been the longer, because trial has taught
me, that not by some men's private election, but as it should seem by common
order, direction or consent, they have relinquished all other courses, and hold
them to this as the most effectual means in the way of persuasion to
insinuate their desire, and to work their desein. In considering whereof there
comes into my mind that diversity which a wise Philosopher has intimated in
the wits of men, that some are of so sharp, deep, and strong discourse, that
they yield not their firm assent to any thing till they have found out either
some proper demonstration for it, or some other certain proof whereon to ground
it assuredly: other are by nature so shallow and weak in that faculty, that
they fear always error in working with it, and therefore do more willingly
accord to whatsoever some of account for wisdom do barely affirm, than to any
thing that reason alone (which they suspect) enforces.

Now these later exceeding the other as far in number as in worthiness and
honor of nature they are exceeded by them: The Romanists taking a course so
fitting to the seeble and fearful humor of this sort, do greatly sway with
them: whereas if they meet with one of the former more tough constitution, that
will not be carried away with these plausible declamations, nor yield his assent
in gross, without particular examination, they bestow small cost on him, as
having small hope to prevail. Wherein I hold them wise in the rules of
policy; that having found by certain and infallible experience, that the
ignorance of the Laietie was the chiefest and surest sinew of their greatness
and glory, they now being not able to keep them longer in that blind
ignorance, do cunningly endeavor so to lead them out of the former, as to
enter them withal into a second kind of ignorance; that being not content to
see utterly nothing, at least wise they may be persuaded to resign up their
own eysight and to look through such spectacles as they temper for them.

This being the maine groundwork of their policy; and the general means to
build and establish it in the minds of all men; the particular Ways they hold
to Ravish all affections and to fit each humor, (which their jurisdiction and
power being but perswasiue and voluntary, they principally regard,) are
well-nigh infinite: there being not any thing either sacred or profane, no
virtue nor vice almost, no things of how contrary condition soever; which they
make not in some sort to serve that turn; that each fancy may be satisfied,
and each appetite find what to feed on. Whatsoever either wealth can sway with
the lovers or voluntary poverty with the despisers of the World; what honor
with the ambitious; what obedience with the humble; what great employment with
stirring and mettald spirit, what perpetual quiet with heavy and restiue
bodies; what content the pleasane nature can take in pastimes and jolitie, what
contrariwise the austere mind in discipline and rigor; what love either
chastity can raise in the pure, or voluptuousness in the dissolute; what
allurements are in knowledge to draw the contemplative, or in actions of State
to possess the practick dispositions; what with the hopeful praerogatiue of
reward can work; what errors, doubts, and dangers with the fearful; what
change of vows with the rash, of estate with the inconstant; what pardons
with the faulty, or supplies with the defective; what miracles with the
credulous what visions with the fantastical; what gorgeousness of shows with
the vulgar and simple, what multitude of Ceremonies with the superstitious and
ignorant; what prayer with the devout, what with the charitable works of
piety; what rules of higher perfection with elevated affections, what
dispensing with breach of all rules with men of lawless conditions; in sum
what thing soever can prevail with any man, either for himself to pursue or at
leastwise to love reverence or honor in another; For even therein also man's
nature receives great satisfaction;) the same is found with them, not as in
other places of the world, by casualtie blended with out order, and of
necessity; but sorted in great part into several professions, countenanced
with reputation, honored with prerogatives, facilitated with provisions and
yearly maintenance, and either (as the better things) advanced with expectation
of reward, or borne with how bad soever with sweet and silent permission. What
pomp, what riot, to that of their Cardinals? what severitie of life comparable
to their Heremites and Capuchins? who wealthier than their Praelats? who poorer
by vow and profession then their Mendicants? On the one side of the street a
Cloister of Virgins: on the other a stie of Courtizans, with public
toleration: This day all in Masks with all looseness and foolerie: to morrow
all in Processions whipping them selves till the blood follow. On one door an
Excommunication throwing to Hell all transgressors: on an other a Iubilee or
full discharge from all transgressions: Who learneder in all kind of Sciences
than their Jesuits? What thing more ignorant than their ordinary
Mass Priests? What Prince so able to prefer his servants and followers as
the Pope, and in so great multitude? Who able to take deeper or readier revenge
on his enemies? what pride equal unto his, making Kings kiss his pantafle?
what humility greater than his, Shriving him self daily on his knees to an
ordinary Priest? who difficulter in dispatch of causes to the Greatest? who
easier in giving audience to the meanest? where greater rigor in the world in
exacting the observation of the Church-Lawes? Where less care or conscience of
the Commandments og GOD? To taste flesh on a Friday where suspicion might
fasten, were a matter for the Inquisition? whereas on the other side the Sunday
is one of their greatest merketdayes? To conclude, never State, never
Government in the world, so straungely compacted of infinite contrarieties, all
tending to entertein the several humors of all men, and to work what kind of
effects soever they shall desire: where rigor and remissness, cruelty and
lenity are so combined, that with neglect of the Church to stir ought, is a
sin unpardonable; whereas with duty toward the Church, and by intercession
for her allowance, with respective attendance of her pleasure, no Law almost of
God or Nature so sacred, which one way or other they find not means to
dispense with, or at leastwise permit the breach off by connivence and without
disturbance.

But to proceed to the consideration of their more particular Proiects and more
mystical devises for the perpetuating of their greatness. There was never yet
State so well built in the world, having his ground as theirs has in the
good will of others, and not standing by his own maine strength and power,
that could longer uphold it self in flourishing reputation and in prosperity
than it could make it self necessary to them by whom it subsisted; all
callings of men, all degrees in commonwealths, yea particular great
personages, then waning in their greatness, when they decay in their
necessarinesse to them from whom they have it. Which the Papacy nothing
ignorant of, nor neglecting, has by secret and rare cunning so deeply engaged
and interessed from time to time the greatest Monarchs of Christendom, in the
upholding of that state that without the Papacy sundry of them have no hope,
and some no title to continue in their own dominions. For to omit things more
apparent and in the Eyes of al men, their praetended au^thoritie to
excommunicate and depose them, to discharge subjects of all oath and bond of
obedience, to oblige them under pain of damnation to rise against them, to
honor their murderers, with the title of Martyrs, (for to that degree of
eternity have some of their sect grown;) the effect of which proceeding some
great Princes have felt and more have feared, and few at this day list to put
it to the adventure: the tempering with so unlimited power in Princes Marriages,
by dispensing with degrees by the Law of God and the World forbidden, by
loosing and knitting marriages, by devise at pleasure, by legitimating unlawful
and accursed issue, and thereby advancing into thrones of Regalitie, oftentimes,
base, sundry times adulterous, yea and sometimes incestuous and perhaps
unnatural off spring; does not reason foretell, and has not experience
adverred, that both the partners in such marriages, and much more their whole
issue are bound in as strong a bond to the upholding of the Popes infinite
authority and power, as the honor of their birth, and title of their Crowns
are worth? It was a seely conceit in them who hoped that Queen MARIE would
not restore the Popes authority in England by reason of her promise, when a
greater bond to her than her promise did press her to it. What man ever in the
world stuck faster to his chosen friend than the late K. PHILIP of Spain to
the Papacy, (notwithstanding with the Popes themselves his often jealousies
and quarrels:) having ordained moreover that all his Heirs and successors in
the state of the Low Countries by virtue of his late transport shall for ever
in their entry into those Signories take an oath for the maintaining of the
Papacy and that Religion? Is not the reason apparent that if the Papacy
should quail his only son with whosoever descend of him are dishonou^ed and
made incapable as in way and right of descent of those great States and
Kingdoms which now he holds; yea and a fire kindled in his own house about
the title to them? Neither is it to be admitted into any conceit of reason but
that this young King will be as sure to the Papacy as his Father being borne
of a Marriage prohibited by God, abhorred hap^ly by Nature, disapproued by the
World; and only by Papal authority made allowable.

For for my part, I hold that opinion not unprobable, that the marriage of Uncle
and Niece (as it was in this case) is contrary to the Law of Nature, and not
Gods positive Law only: seeing the Uncle has a second right and place of a
Father. But howsoever that poinct stand, wherein I dare not affirm ought, it
is clearly contrary to such a positive Law of God, as the reason and cause
whereof must needs continue till the dissolution of the world or overthrow of
mankind; and therefore in reason and Law no way abrogable or dispensable with,
but by the same or an higher authority than that which first did make it: that
the Pope need not think they do him apparent wrong, who invest him with the
Title of that man of power, who sitting in the Temple of God, exalts him
self above God. For what may it seem else, bearing him self for Head of the
Church, to take upon him to cancel or authentically to allow of the breach of
Gods Law, without having his express and praecise warrant for so doing? Though
I am not ignorant, that they have distinctions for all this: which were a merry
matter if Sophistry were the proper science for Salvation. But by this and
some other marriages those strange relations of alliance have grown that K.
PHILIP the second, were he now alive, might call the Archduke ALBERT both
brother, cousin, nephew, and son; for all this was he to him either by blood
or affinity; being Uncle to him self, cousin-germain to his his Father,
husband to his Sister, and father to his Wife. And to come a step nearer home,
the same rule of policy made me strongly conjecture till that now God by death
has prevented that mischief; howsoever the Pope hitherto what for fear of
scandalizing, what for other respects, made show not to be forward to consent
to an intended marriage between a married King and his Mistress, much less to
legitimate the children adulterously begotten, by finding nullities on both
sides in the former marriages, (things made on purpose, as he knows, to cloak
a falsehood;) that yet notwithstanding him self or his successor would yield
to it in the end, if any color in the world could be laid upon the matter to
salve the credit of his not erring sea, and he might see good hope for that
race to prevail: yea and it may yet be that in some other match he will guide
that stream into the same course: that so deriving the succession also of this
other great Kingdom, upon issue, whose title must hold off his legitimation, he
may be better assured of it than he has been hitherto; and have them for ever
most firm and irreconcilable adversaries, to all such whether subjects or
neighbors or whosoever, as should oppose against his Soveraigntie and
unstinted power: so searching and penetrant is the cunning of that Sea; to
strengthen it self more by the unlawful marriages of other men, than ever
Prince yet could do by any lawful marriage of his own.

The Dispensing with Oaths and discharging from them, especially in matters of
Treaty between Princes and States; is a thing so repugnant to all moral
honesty, so injurious to the quiet and peace of the world, so odious in it
self, so scandalous to all men, that it may be they adventure not to play upon
that string in this curious age so often as heretofore, for fear of discording
all the rest of their harmony.

Clear it is that heretofore this made them a necessary help for all such
Princes, as either upon extremity were driven to enter into hard conditions,
or upon falsehood and dishonestie desired to take their advantage against their
neighbors when it was offered. Which Princes having no means to salve their
Credit with the World, but only by justifying the unholinesse of their act, by
the Popes holy authority interposed in it; were afterward tied firmly to
adhaere unto him. And this was the case of FRANCIS the first: with whom
immediately upon his oath given to CHARLES the sift, for performance of the
Articles accorded at his delivery, CLEMENT the seventh dispensed; and by
probable conjecture had promised him to dispense with his Oath before hand,
upon hope also whereof he took it. The effect was for the Popes behoof, that
ever after there was strict love and intelligence between them; testified
finally to the World by that famous marriage between the Son of the one and the
kinswoman of the other. And verily though I hold in general too much
suspiciousnesse, as great a fault and as great an enemy to wisdom, as too
much credulity; it doing often times hurtful wrong to friends, as the other
does receive wrongful hurt from dissemblers: yet viewing the short continuance
of sworn Leagues at this day, the small reckoning that Princes make of Oaths
solemnly taken whether to neighbors or subjects, not says but profit being
the bond of alliance and amity, which altering once, the other have no longer
during, it making me think not unpossible that the Popes unlimited fingers may
be stirring even at this day more often in secret, in uniting those knotts of
the bonds of conscience than the world is ware of, at leastwise that by
authority and imitation of his example Princes assume unto them selves a like
faculty of dispensing with their own Oaths. whenever they can persuade
them selves it is behooffull unto their kingdoms, as he when to his Church.
But howsoever that stands, this is very apparent, that by this doctrine and
policy the Popes opposites and enemies especially the States and Princes of
the Reformed Religion, are inestimably praejudiced; being reduced hereby to a
continual incerteintie and confusion in all their weightiest actions,
counsels and resolutions, there being a warrant dormant for all men to break
league and oath with them, and no need of particular dispensation from his
Holiness; their Church long since by her rules, and some of great reckoning
among them more lately by their writings, having published and preached to all
the world, that Faith given to Heretics is not to be kept; that leagues with
them are more honorable in their breaking than in their making; denying that
right unto Princes of Christian profession, which Christians unto Heathen, the
Heathen one to an other of how different Religion soever, yea all honorable
Princes unto very Traitors and Rebels have always, kept inviolable. And
surely if Father PARSONS at his late coming to Rome pretending to make peace
between the English Scholars and the Jesuits, (who were charged with much
indirect dealing and large imbeazeling) and setting down certain articles
between them to that purpose, whereby each part should be bound to desist
impugning of the other, did by handling the matter as is said with such slight
and conveiance, (imitating therein a rule of fast on the one side and loose on
the other in the ground of their order) as first to swear the scholars to
observe that which was their part, and afterward to leave the Jesuits
unsworne to theirs, effect his secret and ambitious intent, and to the great
grief of the scholars make the Jesuits their Governors: what other account
can be made of these peaces and leagues between those of the Roman and of the
Reformed Religion, but that the one side being tied by oath, and the other left
free: (for so are they taught;) they shall so far forth only have
performance and continuance, as shall prove to the advantage in ease or profit
of that party which esteems itself left at liberty.

The sacred, the sovereign instrument of justice among men, what is it, what
can it be in this world but an oath, being the strongest bond of Conscience?
this the end of strifes particular this the soder of public peace, and the
sole assurance of amity between diverse Nations: which being made here below,
is enrolled in his high Court whose glorious name does sign it; who has made
no grant of access to his Celestial palace, but to such as having sworn
once, though it redound to their own damage, yet swerve not from it; that
nothing but mischief can be praesaged to the world in this age most wretched,
wherein perjurie has so undermined the very tribunals of judgment, that it
has chased true justice out of the world, and left no place for a just man
where to stand against the crafty. But what may be said when he that sits
in the Temple of God, shall so far advance himself above God, as to dispense
with oaths made sacred by the most holy and high name of God? when he that
professes himself the sole Vmpire and Peacemaker of the World should cut in
sunder those only sinews that hold peace together: when the Father of Princes
and Prince of Religion shall carry him self with so wicked partiality and
craft, as in dissoluing oaths by afflicting therein the part he hates, and
making the other perpetually obnoxious to him, to work his own certain
advantage from both: and lastly by making that ancient bridle of the unjust,
to be now an only snare to entrap the innocent, shall impose that blemish upon
the name of Christianity, which Pagans in their natural morality have
abhorred.

I will not here omit one other great help, which casualiie rather than
cunning may seem to have wrought: it falling out often in the affairs of men,
that where wisdom has furnished out sundry aids and instruments, there some
also do frame themselves as it were by chance, springing out of the
concurrence of diverse accidents with the former. As at this day the Greatness
of the House of Austria, extending it self well near to all Quarters of
Europe, and confining with many of the Popes principal adversaries: who having
long since upon the rich purchase which they had of the West Indies devoured in
assured hope and conceipe the Monarchy of our Westerne-World. And finding no
sitter and more plausible means to enlarge their temporal Dominion, than by
concurring with the Pope in restoring his spiritual; have linked themselves
most fast with his sea, and investing them selves voluntarily witb an office of
their own erection have taken upon them to be the Executioners of the Papal
Excommunications; that having title from the Pope who gives his Enemies states
Occupanti, and distracting their subjects from them upon fear of his curse,
the rest they may supply out of their own force and opportunities. And for
this purpose has b^ne erected and by them highly cherished that super politic
and irrefragable order as they count it of the Jesuits, who couple in their
persuasions as one God and one Faith; so one Pope and one King; bearing the
world in hand that no other means for the Church to stand but by resting upon
this pillar; and by uniting in this sort all the forces of the Christians, this
the only means to vanquish that Archenemie of Christianity, That the
Italians may not brag to have been the only men who have subdued the world
unto them by their wit, the Spaniards having proved so good scholars in their
schools, that though they follow them in their grounds of pretending their
advancement of Religion, and in their Instruments of religious orders to
practice men's minds with* yet in this they out-goe them; that they use the
Popes weapons, lightnings, thunders, and terrors for instruments of their own
greatness; and his hope of re-establishing his spiritual reputation by them
to the immoderate increase of their secular power by him; that the Pope also
himself must in the end be constrained to cast himself into their arms, and
to remain at their devotion, acknowledging him thenceforth for his good Lord
and Patron, whom heretofore he has governed and comman ded as his son. A
poinct which as some of the ministers of Spain in the huffe of their pride
have not been able to hold in, but have braved the assembly of Cardinals to
their beards, that they hoped ere long to see the day that their Mr. should
tender half a douzen to the Pope to be made Cardinals at once, whereof he
should not dare to refuse any one, and that the Cardinals them selves should
as little dare to choose any other Pope than whom he named: so their importunat
pressing of the Popes in these latter times to serve all their ambitious and
raging turns, and the long praejudicing of the liberty of the Conclaue in
their elections, has given them good assurance that they speak as they mean,
that their braggs are hopes, and these threats are purposes. But howsoever the
great jealousy and fear whereof as being not now to learn the Spanish
hautinesse and insolence, (who in the pride of their Monarchy are grown also
to swear by the life of their King,) have extremely perplexed some of the
later Popes; and driven them to very extraordinary and desperate resolutions;
which they have paid for dearly; and in general have made it enacted for a
rule in that sea, not so much to seek the repairing of their foreign
spiritual authority, (if it cannot be done but by means of so huge
inconvenience,) as to strengthen and make themselves great in their temporal
estate at home: Yet now seeing France beyond all hope of man reuinited in it
self, and likely to flourish as in its former prosperity, whereby they shall
be able so to balance these Monarchs as to make that part the heavier, to which
they shall propend (an ancient rule and continuail practice of that sea) I
should not greatly doubt, but that they will be content again* henceforward
so long as matters stand in terms they do, to enterteine that good
correspondence with the House of Austria as to serve them with their
Excommunications, that they may be served by them with their Executions. The
sweetness whereof as the Spaniard has long since tasted in effect, having
seized on Navarre by that only pretense; and of later times in high conceit
and hope; trusting to have embraced both France and England by the same means:
so doubt ^ not but that other branch of the House of Austria in Germany,
which has engrossed and in a manner entailed to their house so many elective
States, the Empire, the Kingdoms of Bohemia with his dependances, and of
Hungary, and are likely also to draw in the Princedome of Transylvania;
whenever they should attain quiet and security from the Turk, (which has
no great unlikelihood to be compassed in short time) would take the same
course against the Protestants of Germany; having so many Praelates and other
there to assist them, (who by rooting out the Protestants out of all their
States have prepared a good ground for such a future exploit): Howsoever the
Pope himself do yet forbear his thunders, having learned by his loss
elsewhere, that it argues in these actions more courage than wit, to make a
noise ere the blow be ready. Now as these are the hopes of the House of
Austria, for the enlarging of their estate and molesting of their neighbors:
so for the enterteining of perpetual unity and love amongst themselves they
use the graund praeservatiue and help of marriage, the only sure bond of
amity in the world: in so much that by continual intermarying among
themselves, they remain still as brethren all of one family, and as arms of
the selfsame body. These take I to be the means, whereby the Papacy has
assured so many of the greatest unto it.

To descend from which to those that are next them in degree; the Nobility and
other persons of worth and quality; the Papacy is not disprovided of his
instruments to work upon these also; it has his baits to allure them, his
hooks to retain them. I will not stand much upon the benifit which their
Confession does herein yield them; whereby purging into the hearts and
consciences of all men, they attain knowledge of the secrets, they ^ound the
dispositions, they discover the humors of all the most respective and able
persons, of what Con^try, or calling, place or quality soever. A matter of
singular consideration in the menaging of affairs of principal importance for
the well-guiding of Counells: the ignorance thereof being cause of error in the
wisest deliberations, and of uneer^eine success in the most grounded
resolutions. To omit the great wealth which they heap thereby, persuading
their penitents especially in that only hour of agony and extremity; to
ransom their sins committed against God by consecrating their Goods unto the
Church of God: whereby they have prevailed in all places so far, the Jesuits
above all other, who are noted and envied by other order of Friars for
engrossing the commodity of being rich men's Confessors where good is to be
done; with whom their pranks in that kind have been so rare and memorable,
that most states at this day have been forced by public order to limit the
proportion of that kind of purchase. For in that case they can easily extenuate
those other helps of Indulgences and of Requiems at their privileged Altars,
and yet without touch of the Popes Omnipotency.

They count them but simple folk that cannot use their several devises
without crossing one the other how contrary soever. They can tell them that it
may be for want of contrition in themselves, those sovereign pardons wanted a
fit subject to work on: and so for the other after help; the want of
intention in the Priest, may frustrate the Mass of that prae^ogatiue of
virtue; whereby their souls may perhaps fry in Purgatory: when their friends
shall imagine they shine in glory. That the only sure way of having good, is
by doing good: and what good to be done at death, but the bestowing well of his
goods? and where better bestowing them, than upon him that gave them? and to
God they are given, when they are given to his Ministers.

Neither yet will I other than mention only the help which the choice of their
Cardinals does yield herein: whom choosing in great part out of the most noble
and potent families, that either voluntarily desire it, or can be induced to
accept it; they both give good satisfaction to all foreign Nations, but
especially hold Italy to them in deep devotion; and strengthen them selves
with the favor and support of those men's kinreds, whom they have placed in the
next step to the top of their glory: Yea and often times by means of these
Cardinals their assured instruments, they insinuate them selves into the
swaying of the government of those States wherein either by their Nobility or
other worth they bear authority. A policy of long usage and observed by
many. The same also though not in the same high degree they have wrought and do
still work in those Realms which acknowledge their Roman Supremacy by the
ordinary Bishops and other Praelats advaunced in them. Who on the one side
having sworn obedience to the Pope; on the other side having voice in the high
Courts of Parliament (as representing the first of the three estates of the
Kingdoms,) and otherwise also employed in weightiest affairs; have carried them
selves with that doubleness in their two fold duty, as that still the Popes
greatness has been upheld to their utmost power.

For which cause some States, as the Venetians by name, to countermine that
foreine policy with an inward provision, whenever any of their Gentlemen set
foot into that course, they dismiss them thence-forward even from those graund
Counsels, whereinto their very birth right and Family did give them entrance.

But Jewels are rare, and for few men's wearing. Such are the honors of
Cardinals, being made Kings Companions. The multitude and diversity of men of
spirit and quality requires store also and Uarietie of competent Preferments
to enterteine them with in good content and correspondence: a thing in all
States very necessary and chief regard. Wherein although the Papacy may
seem at the first blush to have no furniture extraordinary above other
Princes, save only in one kind, for men of Ecclesiastical calling; (by which
he is able to advaunce men of learning incomparably above any other Prince in
the world, as having well-nigh all the Bishoprics and Abbeys in Italy with
other Church Livings, almost half the benefices in Spain, very many
Ecclesiastical praeferments of all sorts in other Countries at his bestowing:)
yet if we look into the use and practice of these times, it will well appear
that even by Ecclesiastical Livings ^ee partly accommodateth and partly
suffers (as by his Grace) to be accomodated, all professions and ages, though
neither fit nor very capable of ecclesiastical order; what by dispensations or
tolerations to be administrators of Abbeys, Bishoprics and other benefices, as
is used in France; what as in Italy and Spain, by assignations of yearly
pensions out of their revenues: which being so great as there they are, they
may easily; and having hope of expiring, they may contentedly bear. And most
of this out of the dominions and territories of other Princes, and without any
charging or impoverishing of his own: A choice and refined piece of high
quintessence of wit, which never yet any State could so distill their brains
as to aspire to besides the Papacy. To let pass the infinite number of
honors and livings, what Ecclesiastical, what subordinate and ministerial to
them; and what also in part temporal, as belonging to the knights of the holy
orders, which are many: all which although not directly in his own donation,
yet in that they have their right either grounded upon, or greatly favored and
continued by his Religion, and in the decay of that (as experience has showed)
were likely also to quail; are strong props to the upholding of the glory of
the Papacy: arming so many tongues and hands in the defense thereof, as either
are or have hope to be advanced by it, and each drawing his kindred, friends,
and followers with him. A sweet enchaunter and deceiver of men is the hope of
honor and worldly profit, which ^ulling often, even in the better sort the
Conscience a sleep, does awaken withal and sharpen the wit, to find out
arguments for the proving of that conclusion which affection beforehand has
framed; and by custom and continuance engenders in them a persuasion that
they have done well in that, which at the first their own knowledge could say
was otherwise. How powerfully then may it sway with that other sort of men,
whose belly being their God, makes their appetite their sole Religion? which
if the experience of former times have not sufficiently affirmed; it were to be
wished perhaps that more fresh proof might have been given thereof once again
in this Kingdom of France: where some of the wisest and chief have thought,
that if the King should accord to the Clergies late supplication, to bestow
Church livings upon fit men and only of Ecclesiastical calling; those Princes
and Peers which now in regard of that particular commodity which they reap
from the Church in terms it stands, have unsheathed their swords in defense
thereof, would soon turn them another way, to the utter razing of it, that
they might satisfy their greedines with the spouse of that State, whose pay
they could no longer have.

But for the Clergy themselves, who are in all places under the Papacy great
in number and power, they are most firmly assured to that Sea; what by the
multitude of exemptions and Prerogatives above the Temporaltie, which under the
Popes protection they securely enjoy; what with expecting of no other than
utter saccage and ruin, if the opposites of the Pope should happen to
prevail: so undiscreet and violent has been their carriage in most places,
where they have been able either to bring or pull in also their Reformation.
Yea herein also it has befallen, as in some other things, that not only
casual, but even mere cross accidents have redounded to the Popes great
advantage and benefit* this great part which in this age has been raised
against him having wrought this effect, to make the rest more firm, more
serviceable, and more zealous toward him. In so much that whereas in France
in former times he was smally regarded of any, but stomacked at by the Princes,
impeached, abridged, and appealed from by the Praelates, and lastly either
despised or neglected by the people: the hatred and rancour conceived against
his adversaries, (which being first kindled by eagerness of opposition, is now
by long continuance therein most strongly settled have produced effects of
clean contrary nature: the Princes and Cities* have joined in holy league for
the upholding of him; the people with all fury have raged, have ^ought
against, have murdered and massacred his opposites in all places; and the
Clergy of France which heretofore has withstood him in many better Councels
does now call mainely for his late Council of Trent rejected over all the
world saving Spain and Italy, to be admitted and established over all that
Kingdom. A Council of all other most servile and partial to him, and carried
by him with such infinite guile and craft, without any sincerity upright
dealing or truth as that themselves will even smile in the triumph of their
own wits, when they hear it but mentioned, as at a Master stratagem. Yea so
strongly has this opposition fastened his Clergy to him, that the name of a
general Council is now the most plausible, which in former times was the most
fearful thing to him in the world; and whereunto he was never brought with
any better good will than an old bitten Bear is drawn to the stake to be
bayted by his enemies who dare tug him in Company, at whom in single they
scarce durst bake: so powerful is the nature of all opposition to increase
despi^e and hatred against the enemy; and to make friends especially those that
are interessed in the same cause, to cleave more close together. Yea rather so
wise is the ever admirable Creator even in all his works of what nature soever,
as to temper the very accidents of the life of man with such proportion and
counterpoise, that no prosperity without his inconvenience, no adversity
without his comfort, to chase out of man's life Security and Despair, the
only enemies of all virtuous and honorable courses.

To each thing has the goodness of that wise Architect imparted a peculiar
badge of honor, that nothing should be despiceable in the Eyes of other. The
Prince in Majesty and soveraigntie of power; the Nobility in wisdom and
dominatiue virtue, together with the instruments thereof, as Riches,
Reputation, Allies and followers, and the people in their multitude are
respectable and honorable. Which Multitude being of so great consequence in
matter of State; the policy of the Papacy has in no wise neglected; but
provided both reasonable enterteinment for them, and fit means also to practice
and work upon them. Here come in those heaps of their Religious Orders, that
multitude of Friars, which abound in all places, but wherewith Italy above all
does swarm. A race of people in former times Honorable in their holiness;
now for the most part contemptible in their wickedness and misery; always
praying, but with seldom sign of devotion; vowing obedience, and still
contentious; chastity, but yet most luxurious; poverty, yet every where
scraping and covetous: Which I speak not of them all, there being many among
them of singular piety and devotion in their way: but of the far greater
part as they are generally reputed wherever I have been. But to return to
the aid which the Papacy does reap from them. The only contentfull care that
the ordinary sort of men entertein in this World, is in Providing for their
Children, to leave them in good estate, and not inferior but rather above
their ancestors: which those that have many being not able to perform for
all; it is a great ease to them, (and such an ease as even Princes and great
Peers them selves some times disdain not but are rather glad of,) to
discharge their hands of some of them, especially of such as by disgrace or
defect of nature, are either more backward, or less lovely than other, at an
easy and small rate, and yet with honorable pretense, namely by consecrating
them wholly to the service of the Creator, and providing an higher place for
them in his celestial Kingdom. For such is their opinion of these orders of
religious and Angelical perfection, as they usual style them; the Friars also
them selves having names given them by their Governors, each according to his
meritts importing no less; and as they increase in their holiness, so
proceeding in their titles, from Padre Benedetto to Padre Angelo, then
Archangelo, Cerubino, and lastly Seraphino, which is the top of perfection. But
for their own high conceit of their perfection and meritts, this example may
serve. I have heard one of their most reverend Capuchins for zeal, sanctity,
and learning, preaching in principal place before the Bishop, in sharp
reproof of the forsaken crew of blasphemo^s Gamesters, pray solemnly to God
(though acknowledging him self first in humility a great sinner,) by his
meritts and discipline, by the tears which his Eyes had often shed, by the
chastisement which with his cord he had often given him self, by those many
sharp voyages which for the love of God he had made, because they did grieve
Animam pauperis, which was him self, that if there were any which should still
notwithstanding his admonitions persist in that wicked gamestrie, he would
strike them ere that day twelue-moneth with some markable punishment: The same
man another time in an ecstasy of Charity, (calling God, all his Angels and
Saints to witness it,) to strip him self of all his meritts (though few he
acknowledged) before the little Crucifix there, embracing and kissing it; and
to pray it to reward them upon his dearly beloved Auditorie; for whose sakes
he was content also to be reputed the greatest sinner of all the assembly.

Such being their perfection then, the desiring it must needs issue from an
honorable affection. Now although the Italian, being a thriftie menager, do
in his heart greatly repine at a Custom of their Nunneries have of late
brought uppe (being indeed constrained to it by the excessive multitude which
in the former respect are thrust upon them;) which is not to receive any
gentleman or merchants daughter without a dowry of two hundred Crowns, and
fifteen or twenty Crowns yearly pension during her life, and ten Crowns
yearly rent to their house for ever; neither admit they of any mean man's
daughter without some Crowns also in name of a dowry at their Spiritual
marriage to GOD, and those shall be but serving-Nunnes to the former: yet
finding of two charges this far the easier, they are content to swallow down
that, which by champing-on they cannot remedy. But the orders of religious men
bring them an other ease also. It disburdeneth their Country of an infinite
number of discontented humors and despayring passions: Whosoever in his dearest
loves has prooved unfortunate; whosoever cannot prosper in some other
profession which he has been set to; whomsoever any notable disgrace or other
cross in his estate has bereaved of all hope of ever rising in this world;
whosoever by his miscariage has purchased so many enemies, as that nothing but
his blood can give satisfaction to their malice: all these and many other
reduced to like anguish of mind and distress, or otherwise howsoever out of
taste with the world have this haven of content always open and at hand ^o flee
to; when they can find no other place of repose to stand-on* then resolve they
to go Friars as they phrase it. Yea whosoever by his monstrous Blasphemy or
other like villainy has deserved all the tortures and deaths in the world; if
before the hand of Justice lay hold upon him, he voluntarily profess him
self a Capuchine or Hermit, or of such like strict Order: the Pope does
forbid any further pursuit, as thinking his voluntary perpetual penance
sufficient: and of this sort is the greatest part of their gentlemen Capuchins:
for so are the most of that order by birth. Neither is this religious life
(save in some very few orders) so severed from the world and the commodities
thereof, but that it enjoys as many contents as a moderate mind need wish;
and immoderate affections can find means also to satisfy them selves at
pleasure: in sum they are rather discharged of the toils and cares, then
debarred of the comforts and solaces of this life. Neither is there almost so
mean a Friar among them, that has not some hope to be Prior of his Convent;
and then perhaps Provincial of that resort or Province; and lastly, not
unpossible that his good fortune may so accompany, or his merits so commend
him, as to attain to be General of all his order. The Generals are as fit
to be made Cardinals as any men: and finally sundry of them within the memory
of man, have been advaunced from the eminence of Cardinal dignity, to the
soveraigntie of Papal glory*

Hope is a sweet and firm companion of man, it is the last thing that leaves
him, and the highest things it promises him: it makes all toils supportable,
all difficulties conquerable. Now the multitude of these Orders and good
provision for them being so great an ease to all sorts of men in their private
estates, as they generally account it: it must needs be a great bond of their
affection to the Papacy, under which they enjoy it, as by whom alone those
orders are protected, and whom his Adversaries do seek utterly to exterminate
and ruin. That I speak little of the particular persons who enter those
orders, who draw thereby their whole race the more to favor that way which in
so infinite a number of them must needs be of great moment. And although
against this might be objected with great reason, the inestimable damage which
the public does thereby receive; as in Italy for example, perhaps half the
Land in many places thereof, and generally a full third, besides their other
availes, being appropriated to this sort of people and other persons
Ecclesiastical; yea and of the people themselves, perhaps a quarter of a
Million at least in that one Nation having withdrawn hereby from all service
of Prince or people, Commonwealth or Country, and confined themselves to the
Cloyster-life in Beads and Oraisons, living wholly upon the honey which the
toyling Be does gather; which perhaps with an other quarter million of an
other sect, (I may err in both numbers, but I aim as near the truth as by
conjecture I can, proportioning the places where I have not been with those
where I have) who have abandoned themselves to an other trade, as idle but more
wicked, devouring with men's goods their bodies and souls at once; may be the
cause that that Country though as populous as it can well bear, yet comes
manifold parts short of that strength which in former times it has had, either
for defense of it self, or offense of his neighbors, yet notwithstanding
these are theorems which few list to speculate; the whole World running mainely
to things sensible and perfect, and to that which profits them in their own
particular, though it bring with it a certain hurt and final ruin of the
public; without the safety whereof to them that judge things rightly neither
any particular estate can prosper.

But the benefit which the Papacy does draw from these Friars consists least
in this poinct in the accommodating and yielding content to other: it stands in
the Multitude of Hearts and Hands, of Tongues and Pens, dispersing in all
Countries, but united in his service, of men of most fiery and furious zeal,
who with uncessant industry and resolutenesse incredible, give over no
travail, leave no exploit so difficult and dangerous unattempted, for the
upholding of the Papacy, and advancing of that Religion, on which all their
comfort and credit in this life, all their hope of praerogatiue in the life to
come depends, being of the other side esteemed for the most lousie
companions, the most unprofitable drones, the most devouring* Locusts, the most
Reprobate Ignoble Ignominious and wicked race, that ever the world was yet
pestered with, in sum more vile than the very mire that they treadon.

There was never yet state so well plotted in this World, or furnished with
such store of instruments to employ in the service thereof as to be able to
practice and persuade with the multitude otherwise than in their public
assemblings or other meetings, the Papacy only excepted: who by reason of the
infinity of these religious people, all made out of other folks stuff, and
maintained at other men's charge, is able and does deal in particular and
private, as occasion requires, with men women and children of how mean estate
soever, instructing, exhorting, confirming, adjuring, kindling them in such
sort, as makes fittest for their dri^t and for the end they have proposed.

The difference in force and effectualnesse of operation between which private
persuasions, and those public preachings, where the hearers according to the
use of man's nature neglect that in particular which is commended to their
regard in common; though easy to conceive; Yet they only can sufficiently
perhaps esteem, who have seen a Friar an abandoner of the world, a man wholly
wrap^ with divine affections and ecstasies, his apparail denouncing contempt of
all earthly vanity, his countenance preaching severitie, penance and
discipline, breathing nothing but sighs for the hatred of sin, his Eyes
lifted upwards as fixed on his joys, his head bowed on the one side with
tenderness of love and humility, extending his ready hand to lay hold on men's
souls, to snatch them out of the fiery jaws of that gaping black Dragon, and
to place them in the path that conducts to Paradise; when such a man I say
shall address himself to a woman, whose sex has been famous ever for
devotion and credulousnesse, or to any other vulgar person of what sort soever*
persuading, beseeching with all plausible motions of reason, yea with sighs of
fear, and tears of love, instanting and importuning no other thing at their
hands than only this, to be content to suffer God to save their souls and to
crown them with everlasting happiness: which they shall certainly attain by
raunging them selves with the heavenly Army of God, that is by adjoining them
selves to the Church of CHRIST and his Vicar; and this again and again at
sundry times iterated and pursued with show of incredible care of their good,
without seeking other meed or commodity to himself, save only of being the
instrument of a souls salvation: is it to be mervailed though such a man be
received as an Angel of God, sent expressly for their salvation to whom he
comes: though he prevail and possess them in such forcible sort, that no
access remain for any contrary persuasion; that nothing so violent which they
will not attempt, nothing so dear which they will not bestow for the
advauncement of that Church, by which them selves hope finally to be so highly
exalted? And although all Friars being of so diverse metal are not able to
play their parts so naturally and with such perfection as some that I have
seen: yet being trained up in the same school they all hold one course; and
certainly by their dealing thus with men at single hand in private and
particularly applied persuasions (which though they use not continually, yet
neglect they not whenever opportunity does require,) they prevail as
experience does daily show exceedingly.

What may I now say of their Readiness to Undertake and their Resolutenesse to
Execute, what act how dangerous and desperate soever, that may tend to the
advauncement of their side or Order? I need not seek far back, nor far off
for examples. The late HENRY of France slain by a Iacobine, and this man
wounded by a Scholar of the Jesuits, the one for want of Zeal only in their
violent courses; the other as misdoubted of sincerity in his Conversion; may
show what measure their professed enemies were to attend, if they could obtain
as open and ready access unto them. At this present this King has gone in
danger of his life a long while from a Capuchine, having at the instigation as
is said of certain Jesuits of Lorraine undertaken to dispatch him: whose
Picture being brought hither by the MARQVIS DV PONT, caused search for him over
all Paris, and at length he is taken, and lastly also executed, together with
an other Iacobine convicted of the same Crime. And what may it not be thought
these men would do, being commanded by their Generals whom they have vowed to
obey, and in the Popes necessary service, and with his express desire; who are
carried with so desperate rage and fury, against whatsoever impediment their
bare conceits without warrant of higher Authority present unto them? And as
in violent attempts to be executed by them selves they are men resolved and
hardy; as having no posterity to be oppressed by their ruin, which of all
other things does contain men most in duty; so in exciting the multitude to
Sedition and tumult in favor of their cause and of their Catholic Religion,
they are as sedulous and secret; using the opportunity of Confession to
practice the vulgar, with annexing of such conditions to the absolution they
give them, as the turn which they intend to serve requires: a poinct very
remarkable in weighing of the manifold fruicts which at this day that Sacrament
does bear the Papacy.

Of late here at Paris it has been discovered, that certain Confessors having
taken a solemn promise of their penitents that they would live and die in the
Catholic religion, yea and die for it also if need should require: have
enjoined them there-upon to oppose by all means against the verifying of the
Kings Edict for the Protestants. Soon after ensued a general rumor and
terror of new Massacres, though upon no other great ground for ought I can
learn.

But among many other poincts to be regarded in these Friars, Their very
Multitude seems to me to be one not of least consideration; if the Papacy
being reduced to any terms of extremity should resolve to put them marmes for
his final refuge and succor. The Franciscans alone in the time of SIXTVS
QVINTVS their fellow and Father, are said to have been found by survey to be
XXX. thousand. The Capuchins a late branch of them do vaunt to be VIII.
thousand at this present. The Dominicans strive in competencie with the
Franciscans in all things. The Jesuits great Statists are withal exceeding
rich, mighty, and many: but for their greediness of wealth and rare practices
to get it, infamous in all places. The Carmelitans and Augustines have their
hiues in every garden, and everywhere swarm. The other Orders of Friars and
Monks being exceeding many, complain not of paucitie in their several
professions. In sum, other Countries are sown but Italy thick strawed with
this kind of people: whose number perhaps in the whole may pass a Million of
men: of which the one half at the least either are or would easily grow to be
of lusty able bodies, not unfit to be soon employed in any warlike service.
If the Pope having played away the rest of his policies, were brought to this
last hand to set uppe his rest upon these men, what should hinder him from
raising huge armies of them in all places? Their course of life perhaps, their
vows and profession? whereof him self has the Key to lock and open at
pleasure. Their unwillingnesse of mind or backwardness to such actions? which
cannot be imagined by them that know their eagerness of spirit, and consider
withal their standing only with his State, and falling with his ruin. Their
unaptnesse then and indisposition of body? which fasting, watching, lying on
the ground, enduring cold, exact keeping of orders, obedience to their
commanders, ought rather to make fit to all military discipline. The
difficulty then of assembling them in such case together? Here needs must I
celebrate the excellency and exactness of their order and government, being
such as needs not yield to any I know for that purpose. Each order has his
general residing at Rome for the most part, to advize with the Pope and
receive direction from him: who being men of great reputation and power, are
chosen though in show indifferently by all the Masters, that is Doctors, of
their order wheresoever; yet in an election so finely and cunningly contrived,
that the voices of Italy are far praedominant: even as in the election of the
Pope, the Italian Cardinals and in their modern General Counsels the
Italian Bishops, do far exceed all the rest of Christendom; that so the
safety of the Papal Sea and the greatness of Rome may rest assured. These
Generals have under them their Provincialls as Lieutenants in every Province
or State of Christendom: and the Provincialls have under them the several
Priors of Convents: and these their companies. A commaundment dispatched away
once from the General passes roundly by the Prouincialls to the Priors with
all speed. Being received by the inferiors, they address them selves to
performance: yea though it command them a voyage to China or Peru, without
dispute or delay they readily set forward.

To argue or debate their Superiors mandates, were presumption; proud
curiosity, to search their reasons and secrets; to detract or disobey them,
breach of vow equal to Sacrilege: so that as in a well disciplined Army, the
General guiding, the Soldiers follow; he commanding, they obey without
farther question or doubt; so these have no other care than to perform with
dexterity, what mandate soever their General in the plenitude of his
authority shall address unto them. This order, this diligence, this secretie,
this obedience in a people that may wander without suspicion in all places, and
find good relief and aid in their passage, will answer both the former and
many other objections: to which being added the good grace, wherein they are
generally with the vulgar, the means which they have to provide them selves of
all things necessary; what with their repositories of relics and silver
Images, what with Churchplate and Treasure: wherein some of them are exceeding
rich, and daily increase: unless the world should with general consent bend
against them, it may be if the times should enforce such employment, they
would be able being associated with such favorers as they should find, to make
a very strong part for the Pope in all places; especially considering that
these forces should be then raised out of his enemies Country, and so weaken
them, as blood drawn out of the veins of their own bodies. And that no man
may deceine himself with that error, that in these professors of peace,
there is no humor of war, that minds wholly possessed with sweet contemplation
can embrace no thoughts of so bloody resolution; let him view but a little
into the late French troubles, he shall find that the military Companies of
the Leaguers, were often times even stuffed with Priests and Friars, tall men
and resolute. He shall find that of these people there have served what in
Field what in Garrison at one time, suffcient to have made a great Army of
themselves only. He shall find that at Orleans, a Capuchine being expressly
sent to that purpose by his Prior, went up and down the streets with a great
wooden Cross, crying, Comeforth good Christian, destroy the enemies of the
Cross of thy Savior, and therewith put to the Sword at sundry times six-score
of the Religion, till he left none remaining.

Lastly he may understand if he please, that very lately in Paris some of them
in their Sermons have incited not obscurely to a new Massacre, complaining that
the body of this Realm is sorely diseased, being overcharged with corrupt
humors, as not having been let blood these five and twenty years as it
ought. To conclude, I conceive this force of Friars to be so great, what in
regard of their very multitude, what by reason of their deadly rage against
their opposites; that it would be hard for any State to bring in the Reformed
Religion, without discharging it self first of this difficulty and burden.

In Germany the first reformers of Religion in this age were Friars them
selves; who being men of great mark and reckoning amongst their own drew their
Convents and other troops of their orders with them; and thereby set the rest
in such an amazement and stand, that the Pope grew in a general great jealousy
of them all, as doubting their universal revolt from his obedience. In England
they were with great policy and practice dissolved before any innovation in
Religion was mentioned; whereas to have done both together, had been perhaps
impossible: but first clean preventing them of pretense of Religion, and after
finding their religion clean stripped of that succor, both they were quietly
ruined, and of this more quietly reformed.

In France this King upon that out rage against his person smoked the Jesuits
out of their nests in most parts of his Kingdom. If he had done the like also
at the same time to the Dominicans, (a most potent and flourishing order in
Spain above all other,) in revenge of the murder of the King his predecssour:
or if he would and could do it now to them and to the Capuchins, (who at this
day next the Jesuits are of greatest renown,) in punishment of these last
practices so fortunatly discovered; and so chastise the schools also when he
took their scholars in so enormous faults, there were great hope for the
Reformed Religion in time to prevail: which is now so prejudiced and
persecuted by these Friars, that hardly can it keep foot on the ground it has.
Thus much of the strength which these religious Orders do yield to the Papacy.

Whereto I must add the like invention of Spiritual fraternities and
Companies, perhaps equalling yea exceeding in number the orders of Friars: in
which under the protection and in honor of some Saint, or of any other holy
name or religious mystery, and often times annexing them selves to some of the
orders of Friars, the lay people of all sorts, both men and women, both single
and married, do enroll them selves into one or more of these Societies;
approaching so much nearer to the state of the Clergy, unto which sundry of
them are no other than mere appurtenances. Whereby as they tie themselves to
the Orders of them, consisting in certain extrordinarie devotions and
processions, bearing also at certain times some badge of their Company: so are
they made partakers of all such spiritual praerogatiues, whether partnership
in the Churches meritts, or interest in sundry Indulgences, some half
plenarie, some whole, some for the time past, some beforehand for sundry
years to come, and chiefly the avoiding or speedy dispatch out of Purgatory;
as the Pope and his antecessours for the encouragement and comfort of Christian
people in their devotion have thought good in their Charity to grant unto
them. These Fraternities are not yet grown into any great request in other
places: Howbeit in Italy they have so multiplied, that few especially of the
vulgar and middle sort of men, who either are or affect any reputation of
devotion, but have entered into some one of them, and sundry into many. The
assurance of whom to the Papacy must needs be doubled; since love grows
according to the proportion of hope.

Now come I to the last rank of Roman Policies arraigned against their
professed and feared Enemies, by virtue whereof they both seek to re-enter
where they have in this latter Age been disseised; and practice as well for
the wasting away of their opposites where they are; as for the shutting of them
and their doctrine out where yet they have not been. I will not here enlarge
upon things manifest and ordinary, being high ways so plain that a guide
were needless. Their persecutions, their confiscations, their tortures, their
burnings, their secret murders, their general massacres, their exciting of
inward sedition and outward hostility against their adversaries; their
oppressing and abasing them where them selves are the stronger, are things
whereof they were none of the inventours: though perhaps the commendation of
exact refining them, of straining them to their highest note of sedulitie and
perseverance in putting them in execution, may be more due and proper unto
them than any other. Neither yet will I meddle greatly with their art of
sclaundering their opposites, of disgracing their persons; misreporting their
actions, falsifying their doctrine and positions; things wherewith their
Pulpits do daily sound and their writings swell again. But they are not the
first neither that have run this black course, no more than the former red:
other have done it before them: yea the buying of men's consciences, by
proposing reward to such as shall relinquish the Protestants Religion, and
turn to theyrs; as in Auspurgh, where they say there is a known price for it,
of ten Florens a year; in France where the Clergy have made contributions
for the mainteinance of renegate Ministers past and to come; is a devise also
not fresh and of casie conceit. I will rather insist upon their inventions
less trivial, and more worthy to be marked. A wonderful thing it is to
consider the great diversity of humors or tempers of mind, shall I term
them, which this age has produced in this one poinct we speak of, touching
the means of growing onward upon the adversary part. A sort of men there
lives in the world at this day whose leaders, whether upon extremity of hatred
of the Church of Rome, or partly also upon some spice of selfe-liking and
singularity to value their own wits and peculiar devises, did cut out in
such sort their reformation of religion, as not only in all outward religious
services and ceremonies in government and Church discipline; to strive to be
as unlike to the Papacy as was possible, but even in very lawful policies for
the advantaging and advauncing of their part, to disdain to seem to any to
be imitators of their wisdom, whose wickedness they so much abhorred: much
like to a stout-hearted and stiff-witted Captain, who scorns to imitate any
stratageme before used by the enemy, though the putting it in exploit might
give him assured victory. Neither do those men's scholars as yet a whit
degenerate: yea perhaps that disease, (if with leave I may so censure it) has
tainted in some degree all the protestant party, who never could find the
means in all this age to assemble a general Council of all their side, for
the composing of their differences, and setting order in their proceedings; for
want I must confess of some opportunities, but of a great deal of zeal also
in their Governors, as to me it seems. Neither yet have they in any one of
all their dominions, erected any College of mere comtemplatiue persons, to
confront and oppose against the lesuites: but have left this weighty burden
of clearing the controversies, of perfecting the sciences, of answering the
adversaries writings of exceeding huge travail, either upon their ordinary
ministers, to be performed at times of leisure from their office of preaching,
(and they perform it accordingly:) or upon such as in Universities having some
larger scope shall willingly and of their own accord undertake it for some
time according to their abode.

Whereas on the contrary side the Papacy seems unto me very diligently and
attentively to have considered and weighed, by what means chiefly their
adverse part has grown so fast, beyond either their own expectation, or the
fear of their enemies; as in less than an age to have won perhaps a moietie
of their Empire from them; and those very means them selves to have resolved
thence-forward to apply in strong practice on their side also; that so as by a
countermine they may either blow uppe the mines of their adversaries, or at
leastwise give them stop from any farther proceeding: like a politic
General, who holds it the greatest wisdom, to out-go his enemy in his own
devises; and the greatest valu^e, to beat him at his own weapons. I will not
here presume to press in with my determination upon this great difference and
question; although it seeming to me to be no other than a plain quarrel
between stomach and discretion, a small deal^ of wisdom me thinks might
decide it; especially considering that all good things are from God, though
they be found in his very enemy; and whatsoever is not unjust, being used in a
good course is good.

The first and chief means whereby the Reformers of Religion did prevail in
all places, was their singular assiduitie and dexterity in Preaching,
especially in great Cities and Palaces of Princes; (a trade at that time grown
clean in a manner out of use and request;) whereby the people being ravished
with the admiration and love of that light which so brightly shined unto them,
as men with the Sun who are newly drawn from a dungeon; did readily follow
those who carried so fair a Lamp before them. Hereto may be added their
publishing of Treatises of Virtue and Piety, of spiritual ex*ercises and
devotion; which engendered a firm persuasion in the minds of men, that the
soil must needs be pure sound and good, from whence so sweet, so wholesome, and
so heavenly frui^ts had proceeded. Now though the opinions of the Papacy and
of a great part of the Reformed Religion be as opposite herein well-nigh as
heat and cold, as light and darkness; the one approving no devotions severed
from understanding to be a means often rather to divert or dazzle the devotion
than to direct and cherish it: and for Preaching in like sort the French
Protestants making it an essential and chief part of the service of God;
whereas the Romanists make the Mass only a work of duty, and the going to a
Sermon but a matter of convenience, and such as is left free to men's pleasures
and opportunities without imputation or sin: yet in regard of the great sway
which they have learned by their loss that these carry in the drawing of men's
minds and affections, they have endeavored in all places in both these kinds
to aequall yea and surmount their adversaries. For although in multitude of
Preachers they greatly come short, being an exercise wherein the secular
Priests list not distemper their brains much, but commend it in a manner
wholly to the Regulars and Friars: and these thinking the Country capacities
too blockish, or otherwise not worth the bestowing of so great cost on, do
employ them selves wholly in Cities and other places of greater resort; all
which they have great care to have competently furnished: yet in the choice of
them whom they send out to preach, in the diligence and pains which they take
in their Sermons, in the ornaments of eloquence, and grace of action, in their
show of piety and reverence toward God, of zeal toward his truth, of love
toward his people: which even with their tears they can often testify; they
match their adversaries in their best, and in the rest do far exceed them.
But herein the Jesuits do carry the Bell from all other; having attained the
commendation and working the effect, of as perfect Orators as these times do
yield. And of these beside certain drawn yearly by lot to go preach abroad
among Infidels and Heretics, and besides other times of the year wherein they
preach to their Catholics at Lent in especial, by order from their General
residing at Rome, their choice Preachers are sent out, one to each City in
Italy, with yearly change. And the custom of Italy is for the same man to
preach every day in Lent without intermission, if their strength will serve
them; whereof six days in the week to preach on the Gospells apportioned, and
the Saturday in honor and praise of our Lady. So in their yearly change,
there is the delight of variety; and in their daily continuing of the same,
the admiration of industry. Some such like course it is to be thought that
the Jesuits hold also in other Countries; their projects being certain, and
exactly pursued. But wonderful is the reputation which redounds thereby to
their order, and exceeding the advantage which to their side it gives.

For Books of Prayers and Piety, all Countries are full of them at this day
in their own language: both to stop in part the outcry of their adversaries
against them for emprisoning the people wholly in those dark devotions; and
specially to win the love of the world unto them by this more inward and lively
show of true sanctity and godliness. Yea herein they conceive to have so
surpassed their opposites that they forbear not to reproach unto them their
poverty, weakness, and coldness in that kind as being forced to take the
Catholics books to supply therein. Which as on this side it cannot be
altogether denied to be true; so on the other side it had greatly been to be
wished, that those books of Christian Resolution and exercise had been the
fruits of the Consciences rather than of the wi^ts of those that made them;
(which in some of them, as PARSONS by name, to have been otherwise besides the
rest of his actions unsuitable to those Resolutions, some of the more zealous
also in their way have not forborne to confess:) that by perfourming of so
good works with a good mind, to a good end, and conforming their own lives and
demeanours accordingly they might have prepared men's minds to an hope of a
thorough reconciliation; whereas now by using holiness it self for a mere
instrument of practices, and to win men to their party, they cannot but drive
the world into such a labyrinth of perplexities and jealousies, as to suspect
always their policies and despair of their honesties.

A second thing whereby the Protestant part has so greatly enlarged, has been
their well Educating of Youth, especially in the Principles of Christian
Religion and piety: wherein their care and continuance is even at this day in
many places very worthy to be commended of all, and imitated by them who have
hither to been more remiss in that kind than were requisite; the education of
youth and sowing in those pure minds the seeds of virtue and truth, before the
weeds of the world do canker and change the soil, being by the consent of the
most renowned wise men in the World, a poinct of incomparable force and moment
for the well ordering and governing of all kinds of States, and for the making
of Commonwealths ever-flourishing and happy.

And as good education is the preservation of a good state; so all kind of
education conforming to the Laws and Customs in being, upholdeth states in
the terms wherein they are: the first seasoning with opinions and
accustomances whatsoever, being of double force to any second persuasions and
usages: not comprising herein those nimble and quick silverd brains which itch
after change, liking in their opinions as in their garments to be noted to be
followers of outlandish fashions, as being of a more refined and sublimited
remper than that their Country conceits can satisfy. Herein then the Papacy
being taken short by the Protestants (even as in the former,) and mightily
overrun ere they were aware thereof: notwithstanding as difficulties do rather
kindle than daunt the generous spirits, and add that to their diligence which
was wanting in their timelinesse; so these men have bestirred themselves so
well therein, to follow the trace which their adversaries had led them, that in
fine they have in some sorts outgrowne them in it, and quoted them in all, one
only excepted, that they respect not much the instruction of the children of
the meaner sort; as being likely to sway title; whereas the Protestants seem
in religious instruction indifferent to both. But for the rest, what is it they
have omitted? what Colleges for their own, what Seminaries for strangers, to
support and perpetuate their factions and practices in their enemies dominions,
have they not instituted almost in all parts of Christendom, and maintain
still at their own and favorites charge? Is it a small brag which some of
their side do make that their English Seminaries abroad send forth more
Priests than our two Universities at home do Ministers? Behold also the
Jesuits, the great Clerks, Politicians and Orators of the World, who vaunt
that the Church is the soul of the World, the Clergy of the Church, and they
of the Clergy, do stoop also to this burden, and require it to be charged
wholly upon their necks and shoulders. In all places wherever they can plant
their nests: they open free Schools for all studyes of humanity. To these
flock the best wits and principal men's sons, in so great abundance, that
wherever they settle, other Colleges become desolate, or frequented only by
the baser sort and of heavyer metal, And in truth such is their diligence and
dexterity in instructing, that even the Protestants in some places send their
sons unto their Schools, upon desire to have them prove excellent in those
arts they teach. Besides which, being in truth but a bait and allurement
whereto to fasten their principal and final hook; they plant in their
scholars with great exactness and skill the roots of their Religion, and
nourish them with an extreme hatred and detestation of the adverse party. And
to make them for ever intractible of any contrary persuasion, they work into
them by great cunning and obstinacy of mind, and sturdie eagerness of spirit,
to affect victory with all violence of wit in all their concertations. Than
which no greater enemy to the finding of truth: which being pure and single in
his own nature and author, appears not but to a clear and sincere
understanding, whom neither the fumes of fiery passions do misten, nor
sinister respects or praejudices sway down on either side from the pitch of
just integrity. Neither think I any unfitter sort of men in the world to be
employed in the contemplation and search of truth, than these hot men and
headie, who being sudden in their actions, rise lightly on that which comes
first to hand, and being stiff in their resolutions are transported with
every praejudicate conceit from one error into another; having neither the
patience they should, to weigh all points diligently; nor the humility to
yield up their own fancies to reason; neither yet that high honorable
wisdom, as to know that truth being the mark they profess to strive at, in
the overthrow of their errors they attain the sum of their desires, and
remain Conquerours, by being conquered. Yea sundry times have I seen two
eager disputers loose the truth and let it fall to the ground between them,
which a calme-minded hearer has taken up and possessed. But these Jesuits
praesuming perhaps of the truth beforehand, and laboring for no other thing
than the advauncing of their party, endeavor, as I said, by all means to
imbreed that fierceness and obstinacy in their scholars, as to make them
hot prosecutors of their own opinions, impatient and intractable of any
contrary considerations; as having their eyes fixed upon nothing save only
victory in arguing. For which cause to strengthen in them those passions by
exercise. I have seen them in their bare Grammatical disputations inflame
their scholars with such earnestness and fierceness as to seem to be at
the poinct of flying each in the others faces, to the amazement of those
strangers which had never seen the like before, but to their own great
content and glory as appeared. Over and above all this, they have instituted
in their Schools a special fraternity or congregation of our Lady, with
certain select exercises and devotions: into which it being a reputation to
be admitted, it must cause in congruitie the forwardest of their scholars to
fashion them selves by all means as to content their humors: and so to be
received in show into a degree of more honorable estimamation, but in truth
into no other than a double bond of assurance. I shall not need here to insert
their singular diligence and cunning in entising, not seldom the most noble of
their scholars, and oftentimes the most adorned with the graces of nature and
industry: especially, if they have likelihood of any wealthy succession, to
abandon their friends and to profess their Order; (a thing daily practiced by
them in all places:) yea wher-ever they epsy any youth of rarer spirit, they
will be tempering with him, though he be the only son and solace of his
Father.

Whereby though they draw on them much clamor and stomach, yet do they greatly
enhaunce the renown of their society, by furnishing it with so many persons
of excellent quality or nobility; whom afterward they employ with great
judgment as they find each fittest. Neither yet do they here make an end
with this part; this order has also their solemn Catechizing in their
Churches on Sondayes and Holidays, for all youth that will come or can be
drawn unto it; that in no poinct the diligence of their adversaries may
upbraid them.

But this poinct of their Schools and instructing youth: is thought of such
moment by men of wisdom and judgment, being taught so by very experience and
trial thereof; that the planting of a good College of Jesuits in any place is
esteemed the only sure way to replant that Religion, and in time to eat out
the contrary. This course hold they in all Germany, in Savoy, and other
places: and the excluding it from France is infinitely regretted, and that
which makes them uncerteine what will become of that Kingdom.

A third course that much advantaged the Protestants proceedings, was their
Offers of disputation to their adversaries in all places; their iterated and
importuned suits for public audience and judgment: a thing which greatly
assured the multitude of their soundness, whom they saw so confident in
abiding the hazard of trial, being that whereof the want is the only
prejudice of truth, and the plenty the only discovery and ruin of
falsehood; they standing in like terms as a substantial just man and a
facing shifter, whereof the ones credit is greatest there where he is best
known, and the others where he is least. And by reason that the Romanists
were not so cunning then in the questions, nor so ready in their evasions and
distinctions as they are now grown: the effect of these disputations whether
received or refused, was in most places such, as to draw with them an immediate
alteration of Religion.

Hereunto may be added those admirable pains which those first Reformers
undertook and performed, in translating the Scriptures forthwith into all
languages, in illustrating all parts thereof with ample comments, in addressing
institutions of Christian Religion, in deducing large histories of the Church
from the foundation to their present times, in furnishing all common places of
Divinity with abundance of matter, in exact discussing of all controversed
questions, and lastly in speedy reply to all contrary writings: the greatest
part of these labors tending to the justifying o^ their own doctrine, and to
the discovery of the Corruption and rottenness of the other; that they might
overbeare those with the streams of the evidence of reason, by the strength of
whose power they complained to be over-borne. There is not scarce any one of
these kinds of writings (save the translating of the Bible into vulgar
languages,) wherein the Romanists have not already, or are not like very
shortly, either to aequall or to exceed their adversaries: in multitude of
works, as being more of them that apply those studies; in diligence, as having
much more opportunities of helps and leisure; in exactness, as coming after
them and reaping the fruicts of their travails; though in truth, they come
short; and in ingenuitie, being truths companion. But as for the Controversies
them selves, the main matter of all other, therein their industry is at this
day incomparable: having so altered the tenures of them, refined the states,
subtilized the distinctions, sharpened their own proufs, devised certain and
resolved on either answers or evasions for all their adversaries arguments,
allegations and replics; (yea, they have differences to divert their strongest
oppositions, interpretations to elude the plainest texts in the world,
circumstances and considerations to enforce their own seeliest conjectures,
yea reasons to put life into their deadest absurdities; as in particular, a
very fair case in schoole-learning and proportions, to justify their Popes
graunts of many score thousand years pardon;) that in affiance of this
furniture, and of their promptness of speech and wit, which by continual
exercise they aspire to perfect, they dare enter into combat even with the
best of their oppugners, and will not doubt but either to entangle him so in
the snares of their own quirks, or at leastwise so to avoid and put off his
blows with the manifold wards of their multiplied distinctions, that an
ordinary auditor shall never conceive them to be vanquished, and a favorable
shall report them vanquishers.

Whereupon they now to be quit with their adversaries, and by the very same art
to draw away the multitude, cry mainly in all places for trial by
disputations. This CAMPIAN the Jesuit did many years since with us: this as I
passed through Zurick did the Cardinal ANDREA of Constance and his Jesuits
with their Ministers, being by ancient ^ight within his diocese. Not long
before, the same was done at Geneva, and very lately the Capuchins renewed the
challenge. In which parts I observed this discreet valor on both sides; that
as the Romanists offer to dispute in the adversaries own Cities, which they
know their Magistrates will never accord, so the Ministers in supply thereof,
offer to go to them to their Cities, and that now is as much disliked on
the other part; each side being content that the fire should be kindled rather
in his enemies house than in his own. Yea there are not wanting some temperers
among them, that have been talking a long while (whether out of they^ own
dreams, or out of the desires of some greater persons, which I half
conjecture,) o^ a General solemn Conference to be sought and procured of the
choice and chief every way of both the sides; under pretense of drawing
matters to some tolerable composition; but in truth, as I conceive, rather to
overbeare and disgrace the contrary cause, with their variety of engines, and
strength of wit to wield them at all assayes at pleasure, than upon synceritie
of affection, or probability of any unity or peace to ensue. So great is
their hope of having cure by that very weapon from whence heretofore they have
had their wounds.

The fourth way that mightily afflicted the Papacy and consequently advanced
the Reformation in her proceedings; was a course in my opinion surely more
excusable where it cannot, than commendable, where it can be spared: and that
is the Discovery of the private blotts of an enemy, farther than the question
in hand constrains. Howsoever, the Protestants, at leastwise sundry of them,
by example of those ancient renowned Orators, ripped up to the quick the
lives of their adversaries in their particular actions, especially of the Popes
and of their Praelates, as also of their Votaries of all sorts and sexes.

Wherein the store of matter was so huge; the quality of it so enormous
loathsome and ougly, matchable in all kind of v^llanie to the veriest monsters
of the Heathen; the persons defiled with it of so eminent place in the steering
and upholding of their Church; and lastly the truth thereof so undoubted and
certain, being drawn for the times past out of their own stories and authors
printed and approved among them selves to be true, for that present being of
things done ordinarily for the most part and openly in the fight of all men at
Rome and in Italy, (even as they continue perhaps not much better in many
things at this very day): that the publishing and presenting it to the prepared
minds of the world, besides an extreme horror and detestation which it
brought, did work in them this persuasion also, that it could not be but
Hell-gates had prevailed against that Sea, whose Governors, whose Praelates,
whose Priests, whose Virgins, had lived most of them so long time in the very
jaws of the Prince of Hell; neither that it was probable they had been
careful in preserving the doctrine of Christianity, who had been so
careless of all parts of Christian life and honesty. And as in their lives so
in their writings also of doctrine and devotion, and in their actions
concerning them: their deifying of the Pope with most impious flattery; their
abusing of the Scriptures with all irreverence and prophanitie; their juggling
in their Images to make them weep, sweat and bleed, to raise in the people a
devotion toward them of Heathenish Idolatry; their forging of miracles in
exorcismes, in cures, in apparition of souls, for their Lucre and advantage;
their granting of pardons to some Prayers before Images for XXX, thousand long
years; their pardons for sins to come before they be committed; their
shameless and ridiculous tales of our Savior and their Saints, making
marriages here upon earth between him and some of their women-Saincts, with
infinite childish vanity and sottish absurdity, as to their adversaries it
seemed; (though themselves I must confess conceive otherwise of them, some of
their graver Doctors both preaching them still in Pulpit, and publishing them
newly in ample and elaborate hystories;) their promising to the use of certain
devotions to our Lady to have a sight of her some time before their
dying-dayes; adding to this and much more their falsifying and forgerie in all
matters of antiquity, thrusting in, cutting out, suppressing true, suborning
feyned writings, as their turns did require: all which though being in this
sort unto them: they had either their allegations of good intents to defend; or
at leastwise their commiserations of humane infirmity to excuse them: yet were
they not so washed away from the minds of the people, who could not conceive
this house to have been guided by the spirit of God, wherein they saw so many
foul spirits of Pride and Hypocrisy, of lying and deceiving, to have borne so
great office so long and without controllment. These things being perceived by
the favorites of the Papacy to have made so deep impression in the hearts of
all men, and to have greatly praejudiced them in their more plausible
allegations, men's hearts being aheady taken up and fraught with detesting
them; they have cast about for revenge and redress in the same kind; not as
the plain blunt Protestant, who finding all his matter made ready to his
hands; bestowed no other cost but the collecting and setting it in some order
together; but like a supernatural artisan, who in the sublimitie of his
refined and refining wit, disdaines to bring only mere art to his work,
unless he make also in some sort the very matter it self; so these men in
blacking the lives and actions of the Reformers, have partly devised matter of
so notorious untruth, that in the better sort of their own writers it happens
to be checked; partly suborned other postmen to compose their Legends, that
afterward they might cite them in proof to the world as approved authors and
hystories; as is evident in the lives of CALVIN and BEZA, written by their
sworn enemy BOLSACK, the twice banished and thrice renegate Friar and
Physician, for those names his often changes and hard chances have given him.

This man being requested by their side to write thus, is now in all their
writings alleged as classical and Canonical. But in this kind surely me
thinks the conditions of these parties are too too unequal. For the Protestant
whatsoever he say either in impeaching his adversary, or clearing his own
actions, unless he can directly prove it out of the adversaries own writings,
it is with them as nothing, and no better than are Testes domestici in the Law:
whereas the Romanist, whatsoever he sclaunderously surmiseth, unles the other
party be able by direct prouf to disprove it, (which being to justify the
negative is always very difficult, and for the most part impossible;) he
triumphs as in a matter of truth not to be gainsaid; and howsoever makes his
account, that in these kinds of blows, even where the wound is cured, the skar
lightly continues. At this present they give out that they have a book in
hand of the lives of the Ministers of England* amongst whom it were to be
wished, that some who by their examples in dissoluteness and corruption have
given occasion of offense against the Order it self, might by their exemplarie
punishment withal expiate the reproach.

Though at these men's hands, who in disgrace of our Praelats have cited
MARPRELATE in their late books for a grave Author and witness, and others of
like and less indifferency and honesty* the innocent and culpable are to
expect perhaps like measure. Then for the writings and doctrine of the
Protestants, the books of some of our own Countrymen besides many other are
famous; who have taken a toil, how meritorious God knows, surely very
laborious, out of infinite huge volumes which that part has written to pick
out whatsoever, especially severed from the rest, may seem to be either
absurdly, or falsely, or fondly, or scandalously, or dishonestly; or
passionatly, or sluttishly; conceived or written; for even in that kind having
the advantage of the homely phrase of one Country, and namely in those times,
they have not spared: and these with their crossings and contradictings one of
an other set cunningly together, they present to the vieu of the world; and
demand whether it be likely that these men should have been chosen
extraordinarily by God to be the Reformers of the Church, and restorers of his
truth, who besides their vicious lives and hateful conditions, in their more
sober thoughts and very doctrine it self, were possessed with so
fantastical, so wild, so contrary, so furious, so maledicent, and so
slovenly spirits. Wherein as they do in some sort imitate their adversaries; so
yet with this difference, that the one has objected that, which either as
being the approved doctrine of their Church was with public authority
delivered unto the people; or else which was so usual amongst their Canon^sts
and Clergy; as might plead uncontrolled custom to show it lawful. Whereas
the other part finding belike small store of that nature, have run for supply
to every particular man's writings: wherein in ^^ huge a multitude of authors
and works as in this over-ranke age men's fingers over-itching have produced; it
had been surely a great Miracle, if they should not have found matter enough,
either worthy to be blamed or easy to be depraved in their enemies writings*
one of the most renowned sages and Fathers of the ancient, having found so
much to condemn and retract in his own. And if the Protestants should list to
requite them in that kind, they might perhaps find stuff enough, I will not
say as one does to load an Argosie; but to over-lade any man's wit in the world
to reply to. But verily these courses are base and beggarly, even when
singleness of mind and truth does concur with them, and far unworthy of an
ingenuous and noble spirit, which soreth up to the highest and purest paths of
verity, disdaining to stand raking in these puddles of obscaenitie: unworthy
of that charitable and virtuous mind, which striveth by doing good to all to
attain the high honor of being an imitator of God; which is sorry of those very
thoughts that infect his enemy, and discloseth them no farther than is
necessary either for defense of impugned truth, or for warning unto the world
to avoid the contagion of the disease or seducement by the dangerously and
unapparently diseased. But if to this baseness of discoveries other injustice
be also added; if m^lice prefer them, if slight increase them, if falsehood
and sclaunder taint them: then do they not only abase men from the dignity of
their nature, but even associate them with the soul enemy and calumniator
thereof, whose name is the sclaunderous accuser of his brethren. I suppose
there was never man so patient in the world, that pattern of all perfection our
blessed Savior excepted,) but if a man should heap together all the choleric
speeches, all the way-ward actions, that ever escaped from him in his life, and
present them in one view all continuate together, (as is the fashion of some
men;) it would represent him for a furious and raving bedlam; whom displaying
all his life in the same tenor it was led, the whole world might well admire
for his courtesy, staydnesse, moderation and magnaminitie. They that observe
nothing in wise men but their oversights and follies, nothing in men of virtue
but their faults and imperfections, from which neither the wisest nor the
perfectest have been free: what do they but propose them as matter of scorn
and abhorring, whom God having endued with principal grace has marked out for
very patterns of honor to imitate. Yea this age has brought out those cursed
and thrice accursed wits, who by culling out the errors and shows of
errors, by formalizing the contrarieties; mis-interpreting the ambiguitie,
intangling more the obscurities, which in the most renowned authors for humane
wisdom that were ever in the world their envious and maliciously fine brains
could search; (imitating him therein who by his labors of the very same
nature, though with less and no ground at all,) against the sacred Bible
purchased the infamous name of the enemy of Christianity have done that hure
unto the studyes of learning, which nothing but utter extinguishing of their
unlearned works can expiate. But of this matter sufficient.

The last means I will here speak of that were used in setting forward the
Reformation of Religion, was the diligent compiling of the Histories of those
times and actions, and especially the Martyrologies of such as rendered by their
deaths a testimony to that truth which was persecuted in them. These memories
and stories presenting generally to the world, the singleness and innocence
of the one part, the integrity of their lives, the simplicity of their
devises, the zeal of their desires, their constancies in temptations, their
tollerancie in torments, their magnaminious and coelestially inspired courage
and comfort in their very agonies and deaths, yielding their bodies with all
patience to the furious flames and their souls, with all joy into the hands of
him that made them: on the other side representing a serpentine generation,
wholly made of fraud, of policies and practices, men lovers of the world, and
haters of truth and godliness; fighters against the light, protectors of
darkness; persecutors of marriage, and patrons of brothels, abrogators and
dispensers against the Laws of God, but tyrannous importuners and Exacters of
their own; men false in their promises, treacherous in their pretenses,
barbarous in their executions, breathing nothing but cruelty, but fire and
sword against men that had not offended them save in their desire to amend
them, which could not endure; (and much of this set out in sundry places with
pictures also, to imprint thereby a more lively sense of commiseration of the
one part, and detestation of the other): did breed in men's minds a very strong
conceit, that on the one side truth and innocence was persecuted, on the other
side violence and deceit did persecute; that the one part contrary to all
humane probability, being nourished with the only dew of divine benediction,
did flourish in the flames, and like Camamil, spread abroad by being trod under
foot; the other notwithstanding all human and infernal succors and devises
yet being cursed from above, did fade and would come to ruin. The Papacy
being netled extremely by these proceedings, has rel^oved first to give over
the kindling any more of those unfortunate fires, (save in places secure to
keep that law in usage,) the ashes of which they have perceived to have been
the seed of their adversaries: but rather by secret makings of men away in
their Inquisitions (for which purpose as some of their own friends in Italy
have reported, whether truly or falsely I am not able affirm,) they have
their trap-doores or pit-falls in dark melancholy chambers or such other
devises perhaps, and chiefly by general massacres to extinguish them. Then to
affront them in the same kind of Martyrologies and Hystories, they have first
caused sundry new Fryerly stories to be written also in their favor: making in
them a representation of authority and justice proceeding by politic
execution of law in the necessary defense of Gods Church and Priests, and of
Catholic states and Princes, against a company of ba^e Rebels and
vow-breaking Friars, of Church-robbing Politicians and Church-razing Soldiers;
of infected and infecting both Schismatics and Haereticks, innovators of
orders, underminers of government, troublers of states, overturners of
Christendom: against whom if they have not hitherto sufficiently prevailed, it
is to be attributed only to the force of popular fury, and not to any
strength and goodness of their cause, much less to any Celestial and divine
protection. Next for Martyrologies, they have England for their field, to
triumph in: the proceedings wherein against their later Priests and accomplices
they aggravate to the height of NEROES and DIOCLESIANS persecutions, and the
sufferers of their side, in merits of cause, in extremity of tormenes, and in
constancy and patience, to the renowned Martyrs of that heroical Church-age.
Whereof besides sundry other treatises and pamphlets, they have published a
great volume lately to the world in Italian, compiled with great industry,
approved by authority, (yea some of their books or passages illustrated also
with picturs:) in sum wanting nothing save only truth and sincerity.

An easy thing it is without growing to the extreme impudency of palpable
lying, by leaving out the bad on the one side, and the good on the other; by
enforcing and flourishing all circumstances and accidents which are in our
favor, and by elevating and disgracing of all the contrary; by sprinkling the
terms of Honor wholly on the one part, of hatred and ignominy on the other;
to make the tale turn which way shall please the teller. But writers of
Histories should know, that there is a difference between their profession and
the practice of advocates, pleading contrary at a bar, where the wisdom of
the Judge picketh the truth out on both sides, which is entire perhaps in
neither. And verily in this kind both the Protestants and Papists seem
generally in the greatest part of their stories, both too blame, though both
not equally, having by their passionate reports much wronged the truth, abused
this present age, and praejudiced posterity: in so much that the only remedy
now seeming to remain, is to read indifferently the stories on both parts, to
count them as advocates and to play the Judge between them. But partiality
seems to have been the chief fault of the Protestant, love and dislike some
time dazeling his eyes, and drawing him from an Historiographers into an
Orators profession: though some of them have carried them selves therein with
commendable sincerity; even as some also of the other part have discharged
them selves nobly. But surely the Priests and Friars which have meddled in that
kind have straungely behaved themselves, and disclosed how small reckoning they
make of truth, in any thing; their devising, their forging, their facing, their
piecing, their adding, their paring, having brought not only their modesty,
but their wits also in question, whether they forgot not what it was which they
undertook to write; a work of story, or of poetry rather; which Arts though
like yet ought they to know are different.

And for these Martyrologies, to speak of England as they do, (let the truth of
Religion lie indifferent on whether side;) unless difference be made between
men who suffer for their Consciences only, their very adversaries having no
other crime to ob^^ct against them; and those who either in their own
particular persons, or at leastwise in their directors whom they have chosen to
follow, and vowed to obey, are convinced to have attempted against the Prince
and State, and to have practiced the alteration and ruin of both; if no
difference be to be made between those men's sufferings; let all like, let the
persecuting of sheep and hunting of wolves be one. But enough and too much
perhaps of these comparisons and imitations.

I will add only hereto their policy of News, for some kind of resemblance
it has with the former. I must confess it could not settle in my conceit of
a long time, that men of their wisdom, so well furnished with better means,
should descend to that base and vain devise of inventing and spreading of
false News in their favor; being an odious kind of abusing the world, and
such also as in the end coming to be checked with the truth redounds to the
deep disgrace and discredit of the Authors; being accounted no other than the
trick of a bankrupt.

Howbeit finding by experience that this, frequent among them in other places,
at Rome above all other was a most ordinary practice; from whence during the
time of my abode in Italy, beside other less memorable, there came first
solemn News, that the Patriark of Alexandria with all the Greek Church of
Africa had by their Ambassadors submitted and reconciled themselves to the
Pope, and recorded from his Holiness absolution and benediction; there being
no such matter as I learned afterward of a Greek Bishop, who has particular
acquaintance and intelligence with that Patriarch:) An other time that the King
of Scotts amongst many acts worthy of a Christian Prince, had chased away the
Ministers, yea and executed two of them, confiscating their goods and bestowing
them upon the Catholics: which news was soon after recalled from the same
place: Not long after, that BEZA the Arch-heretike, CALVIN'S successor, drawing
toward his death, had in full Senate at Geneva recanted his Religion,
exhorting them if they had care to save their souls to seek reconciliation
with the Catholike-Church, and to send for the Jesuits to instruct them,
whereupon both himself by special order from the Pope was absolved by the
Bishop of Geneva, ere he dyed, and the City had sent to Rome an Embassage of
submission: a beginning of which news it was my chance to hear, (as being
whispered among the Jesuits,) two months ere it brake out; but when it was
once advertised so solemnly from Rome, it ran over all Christendom, and in
Italy was so verily believed to be true, that there were, as is said, who rode
on very purpose to see those Ambassadors of Geneva, yet invisible: And to make
up the full measure of that noble policy, I being afterward at Lions, and
understanding that the Post of Rome there then passing for Spain, gave
confidently out that he left the Queen of Englands Ambassadors at Rome making
great instance for agreement and with his Holiness, and to have her
re-catholized and absolved; (news as to me then seemed cut out purposely for
Spain, and to consolate their favorers and afflicted adhaerents:) Finding also
by the observation and judgment of some wise men, that the Jesuits are the
Masters of that worthy Mint, and that all these Chymicall Coins are of their
stamp: yea and that their glorious news of the miraculous proceedings of the
Fathers of their Society in converting the Indies are not thought much truer:
And lastly perceiving that the doctrine of all that side in their cases of
Conscience, making it lawful for them to aequivocate with their adversaries in
their answers, though given upon their oaths whenever their lives or
liberties are touched; yet the Jesuits are noted by some of their own
friends, to be too hardy aequivocators, and their aequivocations too hard:
(whereof they give example, of a Jesuit who instructed a maidservant in
England; that if she were examined whether she knew of any Priest resorting to
her Masters-house, she should swear if she were put to it, that she knew not
of any; which she might do lawfully with this secret intent, that she knew not
of any, viz. with purpose to disclose them; though other defend this as a point
of allowable wisdom.

All these things considered, it has made me to mitigate my former
imagination, and to deem it not unpossible, that this over-politick and too
wise Order may reach a note higher than our gross conceits, who think
honesty the best policy, and truth the only durable armor of proof; and may
find by their refined observations of experience, that news make their
impression upon their first reporting, and that then if they be good, they
greatly raise up the spirits, and confirm the minds, especially of the vulgar,
who easily believe all that their betters tell them; that afterward when they
happen to be controlled, men's spirits being cold are not so sensible as before,
and either little regard it, or impute it to common error and uncerteintie of
things; yea and that the good news comes to many men's ears, who never hear
of the check it has. And at leastwise it may serve their turn for some present
exploit, as Merchants do by their news, (whether imitatours or imitated of
these men I know not,) who finding some difficulty in accomodating their
affairs, have in use to forge letters or otherwise to raise bruits either of
some prosperous success in their Princes actions, (as our men they say at
Constantinople,) or of some great alteration in some kind of merchandise, (as
certain not long since have done at Paris,) which may serve for that present
instant to expedite their business.

Yet surely me thinks these learned Fathers should consider, that though lying
be held for a necessary fault in Merchants, (if any fault be necessary, which
for my part I hold not:) yet can it not be admitted an allowable policy for
Divines, being the offspring of that Arch-enemie of the Deity and Divinity.
And if as a dead Fly does vitiate a whole box of sweet ointment; so a little
folly may blemish greatly a very wiseman, and some falsehood discredit withal
the deliverie of much truth: then verily will I be bold to crave leave at their
hands, if admiring them in the rest of their super-subtill inventions, I
arrange this among the poor policies of the Hospital of the Desperari.

Now these being the weapons wherewith they fight against their adversaries,
they whetten them by framing an Utter Breach or separation in all religious
duties between their party and their opposites: not only in such poincts as
wherein they dissent, (which is the part of all men that list not to wound
their own consciences:) neither yet of all ecclesiastical duties alone;
(which sundry other Churches ancient and modern have done and still do, as
thinking that the good things which Haereticks retain, are vitiated by those
bad wherewith either their faiths or functions are stained; though perhaps
there be a dram more of Zeal than Charity in the ingredients of that Canon,
unless the Haeresie be capital, and directly opposite to the glory of God or
honor of our Savior:) but the Church of Rome at this day in their more usual
practice has so strained that string, as to stretch it out even to all divine
duties whatsoever though not Ecclesiastical, but performed by private persons
and in several as occasion serves; neither to such only as the Faith has
revealed unto us Christians; but even those which the light of Nature has
taught all men in the world, yea Pagans and Barbarians, as yielding glory to
God, imploring his aid and favor, rendering him thanks for his benefits; in
none of which actions do they willingly join with the Protestants; being so
though not publicly and universally commanded by the sovereign Lord and Law
of their Church, yet counseled (as the effect does show) in private by their
particular instructors, directors, and Confessors. If a Protestant begin to
settle him self to pray with that prayer which the lips of our Savior have
sanctified and taught, it is now so polluted by passing thorough his lips that
a Roman Catholic will hardly stay in the room. If he use that voice which all
the creatures of God in their several languages do daily sound forth and say
God be praised, or Glory to the highest, the Romanist alone is silent, and
will not join his assent. If at meat he yield thanks unto God for his
blessings, be it but with Deo gratias, which was ever in St. AUGUSTINES mouth;
though this chase not the Catholic away from his dinner (which were to his
loss,) neither make they it simply unlawful to add his Amen; yet commonly and
more willingly he does forbear it, where he may securely do so without farther
offense.

On the contrary side a Roman Catholic will not easily say Grace, though it
be at his own table, when a Protestant is present; thinking better to leave
God unserved, than that a Protestant join in serving him. Though the custom
of giving God thanks at meals is generally among those Catholics grown clean
out of use both in France and Italy for ought I could see; as not knowing that
a Popes pardon is gained by the use of Grace cupps.

In sum, they are more averse to join with the Protestant in doing honor to
God, than with the very bruit beasts; if beasts by proper speech could sound
forth Gods praise, as the Legends of their Saints in their favor do fancy.
Wherein how religiously they have proceeded for the amplifying and advauncing
of Gods service, that God does know: how charitably toward their neighbors,
that themselves do know: how politikely for the strengthening of their own
party among their enemies, that the world may know by these few considerations.

First by this course, they keep their lay-followers in a perpetual dark
ignorance of the Protestants faith and religion; having made it an high degree
of deadly sin, either to read their books, or to hear their sermons; or to
be present at their service, or almost any way to communicate with them in
religious duties whatsoever. Whereby whatsoever their lay-multitude conceives
of the Reformed Religion or of the poincts of doctrine which therein are taught,
is that only which the enemies thereof do tell them: who report it according
to the distaste of their own stomachs, and as may represent it in most odious
and hideous form to the hearers: so that now no more merveile (which
experience does teach) that seldom or never a lay-Roman-Catholike can be found
that conceives rightly of any almost of the Protestants positions: since seldom
or never was Romane-Priest yet to be shown, that has not falsified and
depraved them utterly in reporting them. Whereas if those lay-Catholikes should
once open their ears to know the Protestants opinions from them selves that
hold them, (which was the use of the old world in their ingenuous simplicity
and singleness of proceeding:) they would not be found either so absurd
perhaps, but that a reasonable; or so wicked, but that a religious mind might
embrace them.

Then secondly, by this means they do knit their own faction more fast
together, and unite them more firmly to the head thereof the Pope; since no
service of God but in his communion, and with him no conjunction without utter
separation and estranging from his enemies. Whereas if his party should but
join with the Protestants in such services of God as are allowed by both; this
concurring with them in some actions, might abate that utter dislike which they
have now of their whole way: yea and happily taking a liking of them in some
things they might be drawn still on by degrees to other, and so finally slip
away, or grow cold in their first affections. For factions as by disparitie of
minds they are raized, so by strangeness they are continued and grow
immortal: whereas contrariwise they are asslaked and made calm by
intercourse, by parlie they are reconciled, by familiarity they are
extinguished. A memorable example of the virtue of this policy, our own
Country in these latter times has yielded: where in the first Reformation
under King EDWARD, the Praelates and Clergy having before under King HENRY
discarded the Pope, did easily join with the Protestants, though not in their
opinions, yet in the public service of God in the Churches, being
indifferently composed and offensive to neither part. And but that the Pope
soon after upon extraordinary cause was restored to his former authority by
Queen MARY; that faction had in likelihood been long since ended. But after
that the Pope was once again admitted, and had liberty to temper with his
party at pleasure; in the second Reformation by her Majesty, not a Bishop of
his could be persuaded to come to our Churches but choosing rather loss of
living, and the greatest part also imprisonment, they laid thereby the
foundation of that faction of Recusants, which has since been continued by
their followers unto this day, notwithstanding our service be less offensive
to them than in King EDWARD'S time, and in no part opposite to any poinct of
their belief. But so has it seemed good to their politic Governors, by this
utter breach and alienation to preserve and perpetuate the remains of their
party; and that in the midst of their much more potent adversaries, though
armed with Laws, quickened with suspicions, yea and exasperated by their often
dangerous practices against them. Now in that they proceed also yet one step
farther, and not only inhibite their party the reading of Protestantbooks,
and repair to their Churches, but discounsell also all joining with them in
any service of God, by whomsoever and how lawful sort soever performed:
thereby do they engender in them (according to their desire) an extreme
hatred and bitter detestation of their opposites. For if the Protestants by
reason of their enmity with the Pope and swarving from his way, do stand in
terms of so deep disfavour with God that their Prayer it self does turn
into sin; that their humble thanksgivings are abominable praesumptions; that
to join with them in praising the Creator of the world is no better than
dis-service to his Majesty, then surely woe worth the hour wherein they were
borne, and blessed be that hand which shall work their bane and ruin; then
no stay or doubt, but what the Pope directs, that boldly to be executed
against the enemies of God. And this have they set up as a Crown and
accomplishment to the rest of their practices against their adversaries. For
now is their faction not only kept on foot and continually maintained without
decay: but inflamed also with such hatred of their enemies, that they are ready
to any violence that opportunity can advise.

For as diversities of judgments does grow into dislikes, and dislikes by
opposition do issue into factions: so hatred in factions, does break out into
seditions, and attends only advantage to use force against those they hate.
Whereas on the contrary side the Protestant being not armed nor quickened up
with such stings of hatred as his adversary, is more cold and careless in his
opposite desires, and exceedingly inferior in all strong attempts and
practices. But certeinely howsoever in this crafty kind of policy, which has
too much bewitched the wits of this age, and does too much tyrannize over that
ancient true wisdom wherewith the world in fore-times was more happily
governed, these courses may seem very fine and effectual for the atchieving
of that end whereto they are framed: yet I suppose it would prove very hard to
be shown, how they can stand with the principles and rules of that Religion,
whose root is Truth; whose branches are Charity; whose fruits are good deeds
extending and even offering them selves with cheerfulness unto all men, to
the encouraging of friends, and reclayming of enemies, to the mending of the
worse, and accomplishing of the better. For if a magnanimous and noble mind in
the high vertuousnesse thereof do carry it self in all actions with such
moderation and measure, as that it neither hate his enemy so much in regard of
his wickedness, but that it love whatsoever in him has resemblance of virtue;
neither yet fear him so much for his mischievous desirs, as to rage and grow
fierce upon him in his weakness; but contenteth itself so far forth only to
repress him, as may disable him thence forward from doing hurt unto others: how
much more may it seem reasonable, that the heavenly affection of a Christian,
rejoice for whatsoever goodness appears in any man, as finding there some
lineaments of his Creatours Image, detest nothing but impiety and wickedness,
the worlds dishonor; and lastly in the true and serious worshipping of God, do
join when occasion offers with whatsoever of his Creatures, with united
affections to cheer up his service, where scandal by show of approving that
which is evil in them does not hinder? But this world in the baseness of his
metal, now the last and worst, and in the weakness of his old and decayed
years, laying the ground of all his policy in Fear and Jealousy, issuing
from a certain consciousnesse of his own worthlesnesse and want of virtue;
holds those courses for the best, which work with the greatest and most
secret advantage against such as either are, or in time may become concurrents
or enemies; letting pass with some terms of formal commendation those
ancient more noble ways, which being derived from the high Governor of both
the Worlds, and having their ground on the unmovable principles of true
wisdom and virtue, must needs be of greater force, both for the upholding of
those that hold them, and for the effecting of all their worthy and honorable
desires, were there a firm mind to pursue them, and a strong arm to wield
them; both which to this weak world are wanting. But of these matters
sufficient.

It is now time that I come to the view of those means which are used by the
Papacy for the Excluding of all access and sound of the Religion, in those
places where their power remains yet unabridged. Wherein as in other like
cases before I will lightly pass over that which is apparent to all eyes: and
that is what service their Inquisition does therein: being in truth the
principle and most forcible engine in accomplishing that work: and such as
wheresoever it and the Council of Trent can be thoroughly planted and
established, as in Spain, and all Italy now save only some part perhaps of
the Kingdom of Naples, where the tyranny of Spain may be Inquisition
sufficient, (as the Inquisition of Spain is also of the two the crueller;) does
rid them of fear and their adversaries of hope, of letting in the Reformation;
unless perhaps in so me universal deluge of war, when the execution of Laws
and such serches shall be forced to cease. For this Inquisition, as a
sovereign preservatiue, and defective of no virtue save Justice and Mercy,
being committed lightly to the most zealous, industrious, and rigorous Friars
that can be found in all places, who leave no one rule thereof unpractised;
taking hold of men for the least suspicion of Haeresie or of affinity or
connivence with haeresie that may be, as the bare reproving sometimes the lives
of their Clergy, or the having of any book or edition prohibited (though yet
with some regard of the nature and quality of persons, seeing many a man makes
those actions suspicious, which otherwise would not make the man;) discovering
men by the pressing of all men's Consciences, whom they charge under an high
degree of mortal sin and damnation, (being a case reserved, and wherein not
any under an Archbishop or Bishop can absolve them, as I have seen in their
printed instructions at Siena,) to appeach even their nearest and dearest
friends if they know or but suspect them to be culpable therein: proceeding
against the detected with such secrecy and severitie, as that first they shall
never have notice of their accusers, but shall be urged to reveal their very
thoughts and affections; Secondly if by long inquiry they be taken tardy in
any one thing delivered in their examinations, or can be convicted thereof by
any two witnesses of how base or in different quality soever, without farther
reply they are cast and gone; thirdly if nothing fall out to be proved against
them yet will they hold them in their Holy house diverse years sometimes, in
great anguish and misery, for a terror to other, and for their exacter trial;
and lastly, besides all their tortures and scorns if one be touched the second
time, nothing but death without remission: this being the diligence, this the
violence of their Inquisition, it does so sweep all quarters and corners where
it walks that as a sheering wind it kills all in the bud, no wit nor
provision being possible to avoid it. Yea it is such a bridle to the very
freedom of mind and liberty of speech, which they of their own way would
otherwise use; and is converted in some places to such an instrument no less
of civil than Ecclesiastical tyranny: that as Naples and Millane did a while
vehemently withstand it and Spain would with the dearest things they have
redeem it; so most of their most zealous Catholics elsewhere which would dye
perhaps if need so were for their Religion, yet abhor the very name and mention
of the Inquisition, as being the greatest slavery that ever yet the world has
tasted. And the Venetians themselves could never yet be brought to admit it in
other sort, than with certain very favorable exceptio^s for strangers (who are
generally also in Italy little searched into for their consciences, by reason of
the gain which comes by their repair, but may pass well enough if they give
no scandal,) and with retaining the sovereign sway thereof in their own hands
at all times.

But to let this rack of men's souls thus rest, as an invention fitter for the
Religion of ANTIOCHVS and DOMITIAN, or for Mahomets Alcoran, than for the
clemency of his Gospel who was Prince of mildness and mercy: It is a
wonderful thing to see what curious order and diligence they use, to suffer
nothing to be done or spring up among them selves, which may any way give
sooting to the Religion which they so much hate. And first for the Scriptures;
for as much as the Reformation seems grounded upon them, the Reformers having
striven to square it out wholly and only by that rule, as far forth as their
understanding and wits could wade; and for as much as it is a thing which the
Romanists deny not, that a great part of their Religion has other foundation,
and would seem in many poincts to swerue much, yea and plainly to cross the
Scriptures, as an ordinary reader by his mere natural wit, not fashioned by
their distinctions nor directed by their glosses, would expound it: for this
cause though heretofore to stop their adversaries mouths, always yolping and
crying with hateful sounds, that they would not let the poor people hear
their Creator speak to them, that they starved and murdered their souls in
ignorance robbing them of the bread of life, the voice of Christ, and cramming
and choking them with their empty superstitions, their poisoned Idolatry;
that the Scriptures would show them that their worshipping of blind Images was
a thing detested, and even with threats prohibited in the Law of God; their
praying in unknown language and by tale plainly reproved; their invocating and
vowing to Saints a matter there never heard of; that their Ceremonies were
vanities, their traffike for souls very Sacrilege, their miracles delusions,
their Indulgences blasphemies; that it would discover their Church to be a body
strangely infected and polluted with all foul and pestilent diseases; and
finally that their not-erring and not-controllable Lord of Rome was no other
than that imperious bewitching Lady of Babylon: though I say as well to beat
back these irksome outcries of their adversaries, as also to give some
content and satisfaction to their own, that they might not think them so
terribly afraid of the Bible, they were content to let it be translated by some
of their favorers into the vulgar, as also some number of Copies to be
saleable a while at the beginning: yet since having hushed that former clamor,
and made better provision for the establishing of their kingdom, they have
called all vulgar Bibles straightly in again, (yea the very Psalms of DAVID
which their famous preacher Bishop PANIGAROLA translated) as doubting else the
unavoidablenesse of those former inconveniences.

To let pass those hard conceits which they breed in the multitude, as
touching the inextricable obscurity of the Scripture, the easiness to mistake
it, the daungerousnesse to err by it: having raised in some places such base
and blasphemous proverbs concerning it, as for my part I had rather them
selves would extinguish them, than that I list to give them give them life by
recording them in this place. Neither yet in their very sermons, though they
preach always in a manner on the Gospel of the day, do they read or any other
ways recite the text; but discourse only on such poincts of it as they think
fittest, without more solemnity; that no sound of Scripture may possess the
people: although the use in France be otherwise for that matter: yea some
parts of Scripture, as S. PAVLS Epistles, they are so jealous of, and think so
dangerous, that by report of diverse, (for my self did not hear it,) some of
their Jesuits of late in Italy in solemn sermon, and other their favorites
elsewhere in private communication, commending between them St. PETER for a
worthy Spirit, have censured St. PAVL for a hot headed person, who was
transported so with his pangs of zeal and eagerness beyond all compass in
sundry his disputes, that there was no great reckoning to be made of his
assertions; yea he was dangerous to read as savouring of haeresie in some
places, and better he had not written of those matters at all. Agreeable to
which I have heard other of their Catholics deliver, that it has been
heretofore very seriously consulted among them, to have censured by some means
and reformed the writings of St. PAVL: though for my own part I must profess
I can hardly believe this, as being an attempt too too abominable and
blasphemous, and for these times also too desperate a scandal. But howsoever,
he of all other is least beholden to them: whom of mine own knowledge and
hearing some of them teach in Pulpit not to have been secure of his preaching
but by conference with St. PETER and other of the Apostles; nor that he durst
publish his Epistles till they had allowed them. These orders have they taken
to avoid danger from the written word: advauncing in stead thereof the
amplitude; the sufficiency, and the unfallible certeintie of Gods Oracles and
word not written, but delivered to the custody of his holy Church by speech
only: which Church has now fully also delivered her mind in the late Council
of Trent; whereto all that are solemnly doctored in Italy must subscribe.

And as in the foundation of the Reformation which is the Scripture, so much
more in the aedifice it self the Doctrine and Opinions, they beat away all
sound and Echo of them: being not lawful there to allege them, no not to
glaunce at them; not to argue and dispute of them, no not to refute them. In
ordinary communication to talk of matter of religion, is odious and
suspicious: but to enter into any reasoning though but for argument-sake
without other scandal is prohibited and dangerous. Yea it was once my fortune
to be half threatened for no other faul^ ^han for debating with a Jew and
upholding the truth of Christianity against him: so unlawful are all disputes
of Religion what soever. And their Friars even in France in their endeavors to
convert others, will say it is lawful to persuade them, but not so to dispute
with them. But in Italy this is much more exactly observed: where in their
Divinity disputations in their Universities or Colleges, (as some such
disputations they have, but very slight and unfrequent;) I could not perceive
that they ever debated any question at this day controuersed, otherwise than
(as ever) among them selves and between their Schoolmen. And which was more
strange to me till I sounded the reason, in no place of Italy where ever I
came, could I hear any of their Preachers treat of any poinct in question
between them and the Protestants, save only at Padova; where, in respect there
are always diverse hundreds of strangers of the adverse party, it is
otherwise practiced, and I ween advised.

But in all other places for ought I could perceive, either they mention now no
adversaries; or if they do, which is very seldom, yet do they not unfold their
opinions and arguments, but either frame other Chimaera's of their own in
steed of them, and so flourish about or two in canvassing their own shadows,
as is usual in France also; or else dispatch them away with certain general
reproaches, and then (as I have heard some of them) will formally conclude; but
what do I name Haeretikes in an assembly of Catholics? Howbeit they are not so
forgetful and careless of their good cross neighbors, as this course might
seem at the first blush to import: but those offices they do, they do them to
the best purpose; teaching the people some times in pulpit, but much more in
private conferences and in their confessions, that the Lutherans and Calvenists
are blaspemers of God and all his Saints, and above all other that they
despise and vilify our Lady, saying plainly she was no better than one of
their own wives; that they abolish the Church-Sacraments, the only means of
salvation; that wherever they come, they either raze or rob Churches, and
make stables of them; that there is no kind of villainy which is not current
among them; that in England they have neither Churches nor form of Religion,
nor serve God any way; that the English-Nation since their falling away from
the Church is grown so barbarous that their soldiers are very Canniballs, and
eat young children. But that above all other places Geneva is a very professed
Sanctuary of roguerie, giving harbor to all the runnagates, traitors, rebels,
and wicked persons of all other Countries. By which speech very generally in
Italy spread and believed, some memorable accidents have at some times happened.
Sundry of their prigging and loose Friars, hearing of Geneva to be such an only
place of good fellowship, and thinking the lewder pranks they played with their
own ere they came thither, to find the better welcome at their coming; have
robbed their Convents of their Church-plate and Repositories, and brought away
the booty in triumph to Geneva, under the chaungeable colors of reformed
Religion: where their advauncement has been straight to the Gibet for their
labor: a reward much unexpected; and such as caused them to complain
pitifully of their wrong information; For such is the extraordinary severitie
of that City as to punish crimes committed without their state, with no whit
less rigor than as if they had been done within it. And not many years since
it was the lot of a Spanish gallant, who stood upon his state and carried a
mint about him, to repair thither to have stamps made him for the coining of
Pistolets. His defense was that he understood their City was free, and gave
receipt to all offenders. It was told him that it was true, that they received
all offenders, but withal when they were come, they punished their offenses. A
distinction which the good Gentleman had never before studied; and the learning
of it then cost him no less than his headpiece.

And as by these kind of sclaunders, so also the more to harden men's minds
against them, they will tell of strange miracles that have befallen them. A
Poinct wherewith the Pulpits of France also do ring daily: where in the siege
of Paris they were grown to that audaciousnesse, as to persuade the people
there, who generally believed it, that the thunder of the Popes
excommunications had so blasted the Haeretiks, that their faces were grown
black and ougly as Devils, their Eyes and looks ghastly, their breaths noisome
and pestilent. Much like to one of the Servi di Madonna at Bolonia, whom I
heard in Pulpit among a multitude of modern miracles, which had fallen out to
their punishment who were excommunicated, (the continuing wherein a year,
without seeking absolution, incur suspicion of Haeresie;) tell this also of
an haereticall gentleman of Polonia: who talking at a solemn dinner against
the Pope, the bread on his trencher grew black as ink, and upon his repentance
and conversion returned to his former whiteness. A thing happened but lately
and reported by the Polonish Ambassador to a Cardinal, by the Cardinal to a
Bishop, by the Bishop to this Friar: An imitation perhaps of that renowned
miracle of eating tables for hunger, threatened by that winged Prophetess, with
like deduction of credit;

Quae Phoebo pater omnipotens, mihi Phoebus Apollo.
Praedixit, vobis Furiarum ego maxima pando.
And these things are in steed of refuting the Protestants Religion: which are
not in vain.

For the vulgar sort, who believe, as they say, in God and the Pope think all
to be Gospel that their Friars tell them. And I have heard some conjecture at
others to be Lutherans, only by reason they were so monstrous blasphemers as
they were. But all are not of that stamp: those gentlemen and other who have
travailed abroad; and those also at home that are not passionatly blind, but
discreet and inquisitiue of the truth of all things; howsoever dissenting from
them, yet have no such hard conceit of the Protestants opinions or actions.
But the most strange thing as to me it seemed of all other, is that those
principal writers who have employed themselves wholly in refuting from point
to point the Protestants doctrine and arguments, are so rare in Italy as by
ordinary inquiry, I believe not to be found.

The Controversies of Cardinal BELLARMINE I sought for in Venice in all
places. Neither that nor GREGORY of Valenza, nor any of such quality could I
ever in any shop of Italy set eye on: but in steed of them an infinite of mere
invectiues and declamations. Which made me entertein this suspicious
conjecture, that it might be their care that no part of the Protestants
positions and allegations should be known they were so exact, as to make
diseurrent in some sort even those very books, which were constreined to recite
them, that they might refute them, in such wise as not to suffer them to be
commonly salable, but only to such or in such places as the superiors should
think meet. But the truth of this conjecture I leave to farther inquiry.

The conclusion is this: no sound of the reformed Religion, either stirring in
Italy, or by any human wit now possible to be raised. For to bring in from
foreign places any haereticall writing, though it were without malice, were two
years straight imprisonment as they say, if he so escaped. So far are they
from their adversaries, either simplicity, if their cause be bad; or honesty
if good: who not only in most of their replies print both together, to give
means of indifferency in judgeing to the reader; but even permit their
adversaries yet unanswered disputes to run current among them, so they be in
the latin, and not purposely written, as some are, to misdraw the multitude.
It remains now to restrain the Italians from going abroad to foreign
Country's, where those contagious sounds and sights might infect them. Herein
the nature of the Italian does supply: who wonders at us Englishmen that come
traueiling so far thither* him self having no humor to stir one foot abroad;
and indeed little needing, considering how all Nations of Christendom do flock
to him. But not so for Merchants: these fly abroad in exceeding abundance to
all places, and in wealth wherever they come overtop all other; such is
their skill, their wit, their industry, their parsimonie. Behold then this
Popes late exploit also for that poinct. He has by his printed Bull under
pain of excommunication forbidden them all repair for traffike to haereticall
countries: Whereupon some as I hear are retired from England, and other in
other places are said to have importuned and obtained some out-Chappell to have
their Mass in. Thus has every gap his bush, each suspicion his prevention.

One thing only remains as a garland to all the rest. It were an hard state
and a tyrannical, where the Superiors should assume to them selves all
license of doing, and not permit to the inferiors at leastwise liberty of
speaking: which is but a slender revenge. For so great a wrong as ill
government; yet such as by giving vent to the boiling fumes of hatred, does
evaporate and asslake that heat, which otherwise would flame out into furic and
mischief. For which cause the wisest men have been always best pleased, that
loosers should have their words* and they who have endeavored to bridle men's
tongues by sharp laws, whom they rather should have charmed, and held in tune
by their own integrity, have learned that things violent are seldom
permanent, and that the enjoining of too much patience makes men break into
madness. Yea I have heard men of great experience and judgment say, that the
best way to reconcile the Country enmities is to let the good men chide a while
heartily together; and their stomachs being once disgorged a peaceable motion
will find good audience: so necessary are these evaporations to the minds of
the multitude* which may serve for some justification of the wisdom of the
Papacy in those former free times, when they did, and other said, what each
humor advized. But little was it then feared which since has followed. Little
was it imagined, that the time should come, when the world awakened by the
cries of a Friar, should look about so broadly, and search so narrowly all the
plaits and hidden corners of the Papacy, what their doctrine had been, what
their lives, what their scopes, and what their practices. Not so many of the
consecrated divine Patrons of the Roman state, with thousands of prayers and
vows daily adored; nor so many of their enshrined and miracle-working Images,
to whom such store of lamps and pure candles were daily burning; so much
incense perfumed, so long and toylsome Pilgrimages performed, such abundance of
gifts and glad offerings presented; on whom lastly so many, so devout, so
humble both bowed knees, and hung-downe heads, and beaten breasts, and life
uppe eyes attended; did ever foretell so notable a calamity.

It was not then thought that there would arise a generation, who would allege
in good ernest, that diverse hundred of years since, as also more freshly,
sundry of their own Authors and ^ollowers had in bitter detestation of their
own monstrous abominations described out the Pope for the Antichrist
fore-prophecied; called Rome the Uery Babylon and temple of Heresies, the
corrupter of the World, the hate of Heaven, and in effect the highway and very
gate of Hell: that the lives of their Praelates, Priests, Friars, and Nuns,
not for some particular offenses, which will always befall, but for their
ordinary tenor and course of conversation, had been so reported by men of
their own Religion, that an honest adversary can not read them without
sorrow, nor a modest without shame and blushing: that the iniquity of their
chief Sea has been so exorbitant, as to have raised amidst them selves this
proverb or saying among many other concerning it, recorded in their own
books, that the worst Christians of Italy are the Romans, of the Romans the
Priests are wickedest, the lewdest Priests are preferred to be Cardinals, and
the baddest man among the Cardinals is chosen to be Pope. Neither was it the^^
fore-s^ene, that the world entering into these considerations, would think that
they had reason which called for a Reformation; and that it was not a fatal
calamity of this age, but a supernatural blessing of God from above, after
the kindling of many precursorie lights of knowledge and furnishing other
instruments to do service therein, to direct a mere accident of scandal on
their part, namely the undiscreet proclaiming and sale of their pardons, as the
wisest and worthiest of their own Historiographers reports it, to the
provoking of certe in men of more zeal and courage, than policy or skill, in
conducting their actions; who without any such praemeditated intent, yea and
drawn into the lists, and held in them against their will, by the violent
pressing and insulting of their adversaries; having been forced to sift
thoroughly the Romish doctrine and practice, have discovered therein those
er^ours and abuses, which it was high time to be purged and swept out of the
Church: and that the establishing of this Reformation how unperfect soever, to
be done by so weak and simple means, yea by casual and cross means, against
the force of so puissant and politic an adversary, is that miracle which in
these times we are to look for; wherein it pleases God, whose goodness all
times do speak out; to renowm his high wisdom in guiding this untoward world
by ordinary courses; as in fore-times his power, by admiring therein his often
extraordinary wonders. But the Papacy at this day taught by woeful
experience, what damage this license of writing among them selves has done
them; and that their speeches are not only weapons in the hands of their
adversaries, but ey sores and stumbling blocks also to their remaining friends:
under show of Purging the world from the infection of all wicked and corrupt
Books and passages which are either against Religion or against honesty and
good manners, for which two purposes they have their several officers, who
indeed do blot out much impiousnesse and filth, and therein will deserve both
to be commended and imitated, (whereto the Venetians add also a third, to let
nothing pass that may be justly offensive to Princes;) have in truth withal
pared and lopt of whatsoever in a manner their watchful eyes could observe
either free in disclosing their abuses and corruptions, or saucy in construing
their drifts and practices, or dishonorable to the Clergy, or undutifull to
the Papacy. These editions only authorized, all other are disallowed,
called-in, consumed; with threats to whomsoever shall presume to keep them:
that no speech, no writing, no evidence of times past, no discourse of things
present, in sum nothing whatsoever may sound ought but holiness, honor,
purity, integrity to the unspotted spouse of CHRIST, and to his un-erring
Vicar; to the Meistresse of Churches, to the Father of Princes. But as it
falls out now and then, that wisdom and good Fortune are to the ruin of
them that too much follow them; by drawing men sometime, upon a praesumption of
their wit and cunning in contriuements, and of their good success withal in
one attempt, to adventure upon an other still, of yet more subtle invention,
and more dangerous execution; which does break in the end with the very
finenesse it self, and over-whelme them with the difficulties: So it is to be
thought, that their prosperous success in pruning and pluming those latter
writers, effected with good ease and no very great clamor, as having some
reason, and doing really some good; was it that did breed in them an higher
conceit, that it was possible to work the like conclusion in writers of elder
times, yea in the Fathers them selves, and in all other monuments of reverend
Antiquity: and the opinion of possibility redoubling their desire, brought
forth in fine those Indices expurgatorij, whereof I suppose they are now not a
little ashamed, they having by misfortune light into their adversaries hands,
from whom they desired by all means to conceal them, where they remain as a
monument to the judgment of the world of their everlasting reproach and
ignominy. These purging Indices are of diverse sorts: some work not above
eight hundred years upward: other venture much higher even to the prime of the
Church* the effect is that for-as-much-as there were so many passages in the
Fathers and other ancient Ecclesiastical writers, which their adversaries
producing in averment of their opinions, they were not able but by tricks and
shifts of wit to reply to; to ease them selves henceforth in great part of
that wit-labour; (a quality indeed perhaps more commendable in some other
trade, than in Di^initie where verity should only sway, where the love of the
truth should subject or extinguish wholly all other passions, and the eye of
the mind fixed attentively upon that object should disturne from the regarding
of other motives whatsoever:) some assemblies of their Divines, with consent no
doubt of their redoubted Superiors and Sovereigns, have delivered express
order, that in the impressions of those Authors which hereafter should be
made, the scandalous places there named should be clean left out: which
perhaps though in this present age would have smally prevailed to the
reclaiming of their adversaries yet would have been great assurance for the
retaining of their own, to whom no other books must have been granted. Yea
and perhaps time and industry, which eat even thorough marbles, extinguishing
or getting into their hands all former editions, and for any new to be set out
by their adversaries there is no great fear; whose books being discurrent in
all Catholic Countries, their want of means requisite to utter an impression;
would disharten them from the charge: the mouth also antiquity should be
thoroughly shut up from uttering any syllable or sound against them. Then
lastly by adding words where opportunity and pretense might serve, and by
drawing in the marginall notes and glosses of their Friars into the text of the
Fathers, as in some of them they have already very handsomely begun, the mouth
of Antiquity should be also opened for them. There remained then only the
rectifying of St. PAVL, (whose turn in all likelihood if ever should be the
next,) and other places of Scripture, whose authority being set beneath the
Churches already, it were no such great matter to submit it also to her gentle
and moderate Censures; especially for so good an intent as the weeding out of
Haeresies and the preserving of the Faith-Catholike in her purity and glory.
But above all other the second Commandment, (as the Protestants, Graecians and
Jews reckon it,) were like to abide it: which already in their vulgar
Catechisms is discarded as words superfluous, or at least wise as unfit or
unnecessary for these times. And then without an Angel sent down from Heaven,
no means to control or gainsay them in any thing. But these are but the
dreams perhaps of some over-passionate desires, at least wise not likely to
take place in our times. But what is it which the opinions of the not
possibility of erring, of the necessary assistance of Gods Spirit in their
Consistories, of authority unlimited, of power both to dispense with Gods Law
in this world, and to alter his arrests and judgments in the other, (for
thereunto do their pardons to them in Purgatory extend:) what is it which
these so high and so fertile opinions are not able to engender, and do not
powerfully enforce to execute? carrying men away headlong with this raging
conceit that whatsoever they do by the Popes they do by Gods own
commaundment, whose Lieutenant he is on Earth by a Commission of his own
penning, that is to say with absolute and unrestrained jurisdiction; that
whatsoever they do for advancement of his Sea and Scepter, they do it for the
upholding of the Church of CHRIST, and for the salvation of men's Souls, which
out of his obedience do undoubtedly perish. And verily it seems no ca^sl^sse
doubt or fear, that these humors and faces, so forward, so adventurous, to
alter and chastise with palpable partiality, the works of former times in an
age which has so many jealous eyes on their fingers, so many mouths open to
publish their shame, such store of Copies to restore and repair whatsoever
they should presume to maime or deprave: that in former ages, when there were
few Copies, small difficulties, no enemies; as it is found by certain and
irrefragable arguments, that many bastard-writings were forged in their favor,
and fathered on honest men who never begat them; So also they might beside
other their choppings and changings, puttings in and puttings out, suppress
many good and ancient evidences, which they perceived were not greatly for
their purpose to be extant. But of all other in reforming and purifying of
authors, the care and diligence of this Pope does far exceed: who not
content with that which has been done in that kind before him, nor thinking
things yet so bright as they should be, causes much to be perused and scoured
over anew: yea and it is thought will cashiere some worthy authors, who as
yet though with cutts and gashes hold rank among them. And for a farther
terror not to retein books prohibited; I have seen in their printed
instructions for Confession, the having or reading of books forbidden set in
rank amongst the sins against the first Commaundment. And for farther
provision, The Jews (who have generally not any other trades than friperie and
usurie, loan of money and old stuff,) are inhibited in many places the
meddling any more with books, for fear least through error or desire of lucre
they might do them praejudice. Neither is it lawful in Italy to carry books
about from one place to an other, without allowance of them from the
Inquisitours or search by their authorities. Wherein as I confess they have
neglected nothing, which the wit of man in this kind could possibly devise: so
yet may it be doubted, that as too much wiping does in the end draw blood with
it; and soil more then before; so this too rigorous cutting of all Authors
tongu's leaving nothing which may favor any freedom of spirit, or give any
satisfaction for understanding times past; may raise such a longing for the
right Authors in the minds of all men, as may encourage the Protestants to
reprint them in their first ^nti^enesse, having hope given to vent them
although in secret. These have I observed for the complotts and practices of
the Roman-Church and Papacy, not doubting but they may have many more and much
finer than I can dream of: and yet in the surveying of these altogether, me
think they are such and so essential in their proof that it causes me in
generality of good desire so to wish, that either the cause which they strive
to maintein were better, or their policies whereby they maintain it were not
so good.

Now to take a brief view of the Present State of the Papacy or rather of some
poincts therein more requisite to be known: first to consider it in his own
proper and Peculiar Dominions, namely in the Signories and Territories which
the Pope holds in Italy; for as for Avignon with his County Ueni^ll^ne in
France, by reason of the ill neighborhood of the Protestants of Orange, it
has yielded him I ween in these latter times no great matter; yea rather it
has been an over-charge unto him; for which cause they like well to be under
the Pope, as bringing more in to them, than he takes from them:) I take it at
this day, of the four great States of Italy, by reason of the access of the
Dukedom of Ferrara escheted to him of late, to be clearly the third at least
and to surmount the great Dukes, which it has well-nigh surrounded also. Yea
question might be made concerning the second place. For although the Venetians
in amplitude of Terriitorie far, and in greatness of revenew not a little
exceed it: Yet beside other difficulties and charges of necessity to which
they are more subject; in military force they greatly come short; the Popes
men retaining still the brave hearts of their ancestors, and breeding among
them plenty of able leaders, (whereof at this present both the great Duke and
the Venetians do serve themselves;) whereas the Lombards, wherein is the flower
of the State of Venice are as heavy and unwarlike, as their soil is diepe and
fat; insomuch that the Venetians are driven to seek abroad and especially to
the Grisons, from whom they are ^o have at all times ten thousand at call. But
on the contrary side being to be alleged, that the Venetians are by sea
puissant, where the Pope can do nothing; I suppose they may still hold the
second place of greatness: the first even in Italy without other respect, being
incompa^ably due unto the Spanish mightiness. And this in possession. Besides
which all Italy holding partly of the Pope and partly of the Empire, (save the
Sign: of Venice, who acknowledge no Lord,) of the Pope, the kingdoms of Naples
and Sci^ily with their dependants, the Dukedomes of Parma and Placentia, and
Vrbin, besides other less quillets of these the Duchy of Vrbin (no great
thing, but full of stout men, and of some hundred thousand crowns revenew,) is
in great possibility to devolue to the Church ere long; the Duke being in
years and without heirs; though as now unmarried, by his old wives decease of
late? but the Jesuits labor hard that he so remain persuading him that
Biganne is not so acceptable an estate to God. There is also possibility of
the escheting of Parma and Placentia, there being but the young Duke* (who
remains still unmarried, being withstood, as is thought, in his long love at
Florence, both by Spain of old, and now by the Pope also, besides the great
Dukes not hastiness to forge his Neeces portion;) and the Cardinal FARNESI
his Brother, who in that case I believe should find as difficult a suit at Rome
for dispensation to marry; as the Duke of Ferrara did before him for a
transport of his tenure. Of Naples I can say nothing either of probability or
possibility, as things now stand. Only it is apparent that the Popes have a
very great desire unto it, and opinion of good title also even in present. But
the unfortunate success and fearful example of Pope SIXTVS QVINTVS has
given a fresh stop and great check both to their desire and title. This SIXTVS
QVINTVS having of a simple Friar been advanced to the Papacy by the ^avour of
Spain only, which of long he had served; foreseeing very plainly in his
changed discourses the inevitable bondage, which together with all Italy the
very Apostolic Sea and Lady-Church of the world was in short time to fall
into, if the greatness of his preferrour did grow as it began; whose
irreligious enchroachments upon the Church-rights, whose tyrannous importuning
them to serve his turns and humors, whose bravadoes, threats, insolences,
and lording over them his eyes did see daily and could not remedy; constrained
by these eminent dangers and present indignities, adventured to reviue and
harbor in his mind the afflicted and forsaken thoughts of PAVLVS QVARTVS his
praedecessor, and to embrace a desseigne of chasing the Spaniards out of Italy,
and especially of recovering the Realm of Naples to the Church, which has now
but a quit rent of four thousand Crowns out of it, (sent to them upon an
Hackney) being ^ the richest platts that is in the world. For ^ffecting of
which purpose by inha^^sing ^s all commodities after the example o^ ^ Princes
and States and his neighbors ^y other devises together with good m^n^g^^^n^,
in short time he raised five Millions of Tre^^ure, a good ground of war, and
moreover after the example of the same PAVLVS QVARTVS, who brought into very
Rome it self two thousand Alman Lutherans to oppose against the Duke of A^^a
King PHILIPS General in Italy, yea and was content to endure quietly those
abuses and despi^es which they daily offered to his Images and Sacrament and
sun^^y other devotions, as remains in a report of credit not to except
against; so this SIXTVS began covertly to seek strength from the Protestants
propending more to favor this French Kings labors, yea and desiring to
enterteine good correspondence with England also, as was strongly suspected,
commending her Majesty's government above all Princes in the world. By which
means and endeavors he drew upon him so great fear and hatred of the Spanish
party, and especially of the Jesuits, (from whom also as being too rich for
vowers of poverty he took away at one clap above ten thousand Crowns rent,
and bestowed on St. PETER, as I have heard reported;) that they styled him a
Navarrist, a Schismaticke, and Haereticke, an Allie of the Devils, yea and
protested they would farther proceed against him: and at this day they
ordinarily give out in Italy, that the Devil with whom he had intelligence
came and fetched him away, being in truth one of the ^^^thiest Popes this age
has seen, and of a ^ind most possessed with high and honorable enterprises.
But the unprosperous event as I said of this project for the uniting of Naples
again to the Papacy, and his precipitated ruin who dared to advance it;
having been poisoned by Spanish practice, as the wisest there say; (and while
my self was in Italy, a Priest one of the Popes subjects reported in secret,
that there was lately a supplication put up to his Holiness by a person
unknown, craving absolution at his hands for making away of a Pope, which was
thought could be no other than this SIXTVS) does deter them that come after
from embarking them selves in the like, and from imitating his actions whose
end they have cause to tremble at.

So Naples remains in his view that has most right to it; but in his hands
and arms that is strongest to hold it: And is like so to continue till some
stout Pope assisted with greater aids and opportunities, shall adventure to
send back that Spanish Hackney with a great Horse after him, as the Friar
advised. And this for the Popes temporal State: which may yield him perhaps
two millions of yearly revenew, by reason of the great increase Ferrar^ has
brought; and be able to make at home for their own defense some hundred
thousand fighting men or thereabout if need were.

Besides which rent arising from the Popes patrimony and state at home, that
which he sucketh from Forain parts is not small even at this day; though
nothing perhaps in comparison of those former ^^ch times, when money came in
daily so flush from all quarters, that their temporal, of which now they make
their principal, was then but an accessorie additament to their greatness.
For among many other blows which LVTHER with his long pen has given that Sea,
it has compelled them besides the entire loss in Countries revolted; even in
those which stick to them, to draw more moderatly than before, for fear of
offending. Yea they have been driven also in these latter times, to share or
yield up into the hands of great Princes (of France namely and Spain,) for
the better assuring them, a great part of those Fleeces which them selves wont
to sheere from the Clergy heretofore without any such partners. Howbeit in
Italy and some other few places, their Annates and tenths do still run
current; besides the Spoglie as they term them or strippings of Clergiemen at
their deaths, unless in their lifetime by yearly pension they list to
redeem them:) and amount no doubt unto a good round sum. His gain out of
Spain is thought matchable very near to that of Italy: which the Kings
thereof do and will more contentedly endure for the better assuring of the
Papacy to them; which otherwise were likely to run mainely with France. I
would not report it but that I have it from good place that PIUS QVINTVS under
pretenses after the Council of Trent for visiting and reforming of their
Clergy, with other Papal affairs was complained of to the Council of Spain
to have drawn fourteen millions from them out of that Kingdom. What gain
their pardons bring I cannot well estimate; they being not sold now to
particular persons after their former usage save in Spain and those
out-appurtenances; where also the late King himself was said to have the
greatest share, and in regard thereof to have enterposed his Regal authority
in pressing their sale upon all his people. It is to be presumed that such a
multitude of general perpetual and plenarie indulgences, for all times
persons and offenses, besides other more limited, as are granted to the
greatest part of the religious houses, and to some other Churches of Italy, and
to sundry in France also; yield somewhat to the holy-Father in way of
thankful acknowledgment, considering their gain by them is not nothing.

The Cordeliers at Orleans at the publishing of one Indulgence, picked up as
they say there four thousand Crowns at a blow* But howsoever the mystery of
that secret stand, this is plain and apparent, that the Papacy is content to
use these Religious houses, as very spunges to drink what juice they can from
the people, that afterward he may w^ing them out one by one in his own
Convents. The Convents have from him these indulgences of grace to remit sins
and free souls from the flames of Purgatory; at the anniversarie publishing
whereof in their Churches, there stands in eminent place the box of devotion,
with some poor begging Crucifix lightly before it, and two tapers on each side
to see the chinke to put money in. What man can be so unthankful, so stony
and dry hearted, as to give nothing to them who have forgiven them so much:
especially there never wanting some holy pretense to encourage nor many a dear
eye to observe their good doings* Besides this the Pilgrimages to their
miraculous images; (which draw great commodity to the Cities also and States,
wherein the people not ignorant thereof help to set them a working; a
consideration that brings contentment therewith no less to the Princes, so
sweet is the taste of gain from whatsoever:) the visiting of their holy
Relics; both which have their offerings: the purchasing of Masses both
auxiliatorie and expiatorie: their rewards for praying, their collections for
preaching, besides sundry other duties; among which their Obits; which are so
beneficial, that their account is from a rich man to draw Vijs and Modis some
hundred crowns at his funeral, or else it goes hard. Yea this is so certain
and so good a rent unto them, that if any man of sort should be buried without
their solemnities, and some of their orders to accompany his course; he should
be thought a very Haeretike, and be sure to have some odd bruit set abroach
concerning him. As fell out not long since to a wealthy Citizen of Lucca: who
willing by his Testament to be buried in the night without their attending,
tapering, censing or singing: had a rumor of him soon spread by the
belly-devout Friars, whom hunger and loss of hope had made wickedly irefull,
that he was haunted and infested with black ratts on his deathbed. A matter
of like truth to the Cordeliers spirit at Orleans. These means extraordinary,
besides their ordinary revenew, increasing often by inheritances descending
upon them, which happ'ning to any of their brotherhood go to the Convent for
ever, (such is the Law of Italy;) being granted or permitted by the Pope to
the Friars and all to enrich them; the Law of thankfulness requires, reason
and aequitie allows, and their vow of poverty advises, that when they grow
too rich, his Holiness should let them blood in their overfull-veynes for his
own necessary susteinance, as did SIXTVS QVINTVS; who pared away the
superfluities of sundry rich Convents, as fitter for his high State and
honorable desseines than for them who had poverty in recommendation. This
Pope deals more gently by way of loanes: which may perhaps in the end come
all to one ^: Besides which when war against Turks or Haeretikes, or any
other enemies of the Church or any other great affair requires employment of
the Church-treasure: there are taxes and subsi^ies imposed or requested to a
certain proportion, upon the revenew of all Abbeys and other religious
Convents in Italy, besides the rest of the Clergy, which can be no small
matter: as was done these last years for the service of Hungary. I might add
hereto the roll of his foreign Commodities, the fees of dispensations, chiefly
in prohibited degrees for marriage: There being few royal families at this
day in Christendom, which by reason of their often alliances and neerenesse in
blood, are able by his Canons to enter-mary without his License. Which fashion
of restraining of things lawful upon show of virtue, that afterward by
dispensing even with unlawful things they may raise their benefit, is the base
brood of the mixture of hypocrisy and coveteousnesse, borne to the common
calamity and pressure of them, for whose ease and ^^^^c^^ie all g^ment was
instituted. But by those and ^ other dispensations and expedi^ions, his Papa^^
Authority does accomodate and is accomodated ^lly of all Nations; the
particularities whereof I ^ not farther insist upon, this being sufficient to
v^fie this assertion, that even at this day those out-incomes are good helps
for an extraordinary od-chare, when need is. And yet all this notwithstanding
the treasure of the Church is small. SIXTVS QVINTVS left five Millions by his
great racking and husbandry. His successor GREGORY the Xiiij.th wasted four
of them in ten months and less, (above his ordinary revenew,) in pomp and
riot. This man is very charie over that one remaining, and distilleth all other
devises rather than set finger to that string; which yet his late prowesses
have caused him to assay. But were the Church rent and gain how huge soever,
two assi^uall horse-^eeches which never lin sucking it, will never suffer it to
swell over-greatly in treasure. The first is the high place of honor which he
takes far above all other Princes and Monarchs in the world: which draws
him to an inaestimable charge in all places, to carry it with countenance and
comeliness requisite; being forced thereby in his own train; in the
enterteinment he gives Princes; in the allowance to his Legates, Nun^io's and
other Ministers, which according to his own greatness are sent into all
Countries; and lastly in furnishing out to the multitude of his actions and
practices over the world; to raise his charge for the most part according to
the proportion of his high state. For honor and frugalitie are the unfittest
companions that can be. It is liberality and expense which both breeds and
mainteins honor. Neither can a judicial man perhaps wish worse to his enemy
than to have an honorable calling and a poor living.

An other thing which keeps the Papacy always so bare, yea and makes their
temporal state the worse governed in Italy, for so it is compted; is in their
often change of Popes by reason of their years, the infinite desire each has
to advance his kindred; his Children first if he have any, as PAVLVS tertius,
who left his base issue no less than Dukes of Placentia and Parma; and
GREGORY the Xiij.th more lately, who made his base son Duke of Sora and
Castellan of St. Angelo: and if they have no Children, or list not be known of
them, then their Nephews and other kinsmen which is common to them all. Yea it
often falls out, that those Popes who have not any known children of their own;
by extending their love larger to a greater multitude of Nephews, yet desiring
for their own renown and perpetuating of their name to raise them to as great
State and wealth as they can possibly; do consume more the goods and treasure
of the Church, than those other who have their loves, though stronger, yet to
fewer: as was appar^nt in the two GREGORY'S, the Xiij.th with his few Sons,
and the Xiij.th with the multitude of his Nephews and kinsmen. And these m^n
being raised often from the bottom of baseness to the height of pride and
power; having no hold in their hands nor scantling of their fortunes, as having
never been in the middle state, which is the measure of both extremes, do
fall into riot able to ruin any Prince; and rage and ravine in their Offices
and governments, as they that knowing their time short mean to use it to the
full proof, the examples whereof are both many and fresh, which for their
foulness and baseness I list not to repeat. For which cause it was a good
help for SIXTVS QVINTVS to be Pope, that he had small kindred: though that
ground is moveable; seeing Pedegrees change for the most part together with
men's fortunes; which as a conscionable A^bitratour, neither annoyes the poor
ever with multitude of kin^men, nor discomforts the rich with pa^citie.

For the ^ of the rest of the Clergy under the Pa^, it ^ as the Countries. In
Spain the ^ are exceeding rich in revenew: the Are^ of Tol^edo not inferior
to some Kingdom. In Italy the livings of the Praelates are comp^, considering
the excessi^e multitude: Yet with so great diversity, that some mere
Bishop^icks, are above twenty thousand Crowns rent, and other some under one
thousand. But the custom of Italy which avoydeth yea and blames multitude of
servants and great housekeeping in all sorts and degrees, makes a small matter
sufficient, and a great superfluous. Besides, there to have many livings, is a
matter of credit, not of profit only; though as wise men as they, have thought
otherwise of it, to be a private great burden, and a public great mischief.
The Pa^^sh Priests in Italy, who have not the tenths, (which in a Country whose
soil yields three harvests in sundry places all in a year would amount to an
huge matter, and considering the great rents and exactions would be
insupportable,) but have in stead of them certain farms as gleabland*
appropriate, and some certain quantity out of the increase of their
neighbors; are so provided for, that the meanest lightly which are their
Curati, have an hundred Crowns a year, and the Piovani, which are the Priests
of Mother Churches from two hundred to five hundred, and upward sometimes;
which they help out with Masses as occasion serves; which are still in Italy
as cheap as a groat. In Germany the Praelates are likely great Princes, and
great Nobility required to have those places. In France the Clergy has
been in fore-times most flourishing: their revenew amounting, when land and
all things were cheapest, to six Millions in the whole; besides their great
place and authority in their State, and their ample jurisdiction in their
several praecincts.

At this day they are fallen generally; especially the inferior part, into
great misery and beggerie, accompanied with all base and vile conditions;
whereby the Country people is grown also utterly without knowledge of God or
sense of Religion; being fallen into those terms that plenty which should
make men thankful, makes them but wanton; and affliction which should make
men repentant, makes them desperate; and nothing can better them. The whole
Realm in sum has been scourged with a three stringed whip, War,
Ill-governement, and Injustice particular: whereof the two lattet are like to
last still, whilst on the one side the places of Justice are sold as by the
Drum; on the other side the Church Praelacies and other governments of
souls, are made the fees and charges of mere Courtiers and Soldiers, who^e
merits would have rewards, but suiting to their quality: which in a Realm so
abounding with means could not be wanting but by too much want of
indifferency and measure, heaping all upon a few, and most where are least
deserts: whereas these so unfit and ill-suited recompenses, distemper that
harmony which should be in a flourishing state, and overwhelme the Land with
all kind of corruption and confusion.

But to return to the Papacy, or rather now to the Pope himself; and first
to His Election: the right whereof having been of Old in the Clergy and
people, and from thence transferred to the Emperors nomination, is now wholly
remitted to the College of Cardinals: so that two third parts of their voices
that are present are requisite to him, that either by adoration or in Scrutinie
shall win that glory. Which double porportion of voices to agree, makes this
Election of greater difficulty and gives occasion of rarer stratagems and
devises in it than I suppose are to be found in any other in the world. I have
heard that in these latter times a Cardinal of Sicilie, whose Holiness and
learning advanced him to that dignity, (for of some such always there is care
to make choice for diverse considerations,) entering the Conclaue to an Election,
and expecting that by incessant prayer as in times of old some divine
inspiration should have poincted out Christ's Uicar; but finding when he was
there nothing but practisi^^ and canvasing, promising and terrifying, banding
and combining; setting of some up for stales only to ease passage for other,
who were reserved till the last cast, when former hopes and angers being spent
and evaporated had abated the prime edge and strength of opposition; in sum
being him self also assaulted by all means yea tugged and haled now by one
part now by another, the good man aghast as in a matter so clean contrary to
his fore-framed expectation, Ad hunc modum, quoth he, fiunt Pontifices Romani?
and there withal so soon as that Conclaue was broken, retired to his Country,
and would never see Rome again. But the matter of greatest mark herein at
this day is the power of the K. of Spain in swaying those Elections: who by
pensions, by preferments, by hopes of the highest, having assured a great third
part of the Cardinals to him, and to be always at his devotion in all
elections; whereby having the Exclusive as they term it; no Pope can be made
but with his liking: he proceeds on by his Ambassadors to name also some
five* or six unto them, whereof please they to choose any he shall rest well
satisfied. Which course though it mightily distaste the rest of the Cardinals
who are hereby for ever debarred from their chief desire; yea and inwardly
much afflict the great States of Italy, who are loath to have their Pope of a
Spanish edition: yet is there no remedy one of those in fine they needs must
choose: the discretion they can have is only this, to choose such of them as
is likely to prove least to his purpose. A memorable example hereof in the
election of the last GREGORY: where a greater part of the Cardinals enflamed
against the King, and banding against him; yet in conclusion after two Months
imprisonment in the Conclaue were foreed to relent and to choose one of his
nominates, or otherwise a clear case no election at all. Which whether there
were or no made no matter to Spain: who stood upon the surer ground in his
exclusive obstinatenesse; The necessity of the Church, the State of the
Papacy, their own present condition, the disorders of the City of Rome and
of all their Territory, which in want of a Pope, and in this locking up of the
Cardinals, as it were, into a celler do swarm exceedingly, did mainely cry
out to have some Pope or other: which at last they yielded to by consenting
upon a favorite, yea and subject of Spain also; for such was that GREGORY.
Howbeit the maine matter runs not with him so clearly: they being not the
same men that are chosen, and that are Pop^s: but changing with their estate
both name and nature also. Yea sometimes not easy to find two diverse men of
humor more different, then is the same man in his Cardinalship and in his
Papalitie. Where of no man better witness than SIXTVS QVINTVS: the most
crouching humble Cardinal that was ever lodged in an Oven, and the most stout
resolute Pope that ever ware Crown: in his Cardinalship a mere slave and
vassal of Spain, in his Papacy the daungeroust enemy Spain had in the
world: in sum who in his Cardinalship was scorned as a base Friar, in his
Papacy was redoubted as a Prince of great worth and spirit.

Neither is there any mervaile to be made of this difference; seeing the hope
of obtaining and of maintaining the Papal honor are so clean contrary:
seeing in the one state they fashion them selves to all other men's humors; in
the other they look that all men should accomodate themselves to their
honors; and lastly seeing those Princes whose favor is the only means to
compass the place, their power is the only terror of quelling down the
estate. For which cause as in general the Cardinals do in their hearts
favor France above Spain, both as being the weaker part and the farther
neighbor, and the only hope to maintain counterpoise against the others
greatness: so let the King of Spain make what choice among them of a Pope he
can, he shall find that as long as those reasons continue; whosoever sits in
the seat will respect more his own saferie than the service of his pre^errour;
even as does this very Pope who for that cause is conceived to have made some
alteration of inward firm friendships, though holdi^g in good terms of love
and loyalty with both. But this uncerteintie and mutabilitie of the new Popes
affections, does cause both the King of Spain and other Princes of Italy,
above all things to aim at a man of a ca^me nature, and not stir^^ng metal:
that if they cannot make any great account of his friendship; yet this natural
disposition and temper may assure them, that he will not be a raiser of new
stirrs in Italy; as diverse of them to scamble somewhat for their own have
been: as on the other side an especial good inducement to the Cardinals, is
his age and sickliness, that the place may be soon void again; for the
gaining whereof there is always practicing and plotting a new immediately upon
the Election.

And thus is the Pope made: who has his Counsel of Cardinals to attend and
advise him; he chosen by them, and they created by him: Whose number may
amount they say, to Seventy two: but many p^^ces are kept void still to serve
for desperate pushes: and of those that are, some twenty lightly are the
younger sons of Dukes and Princes, who in case their auncesters states should
descend upon them, with dispensation from the Pope would resign uppe their
Hatts Among the Cardinals for their own honor, and for the gratifying of the
world, are sorted out and divided all the orders of Religions, and all the
Nations of Christendom; whereof they are appoincted the particular protectours
in the Court of Rome: as the Protector of England now is Cardinal Gaetane, a
stout man, of spanish faction; who has been Legate into France, and more
lately into Poland; but is now returned. Among this Counsel also, being
compacted of many Personages of very eminent sufficiency, what for their
learning, what for their experience: and weighty employments are parted is by
way of several Congregations, according to the use of the several Counsels in
Spain, all the important affairs, as well standing, as by daily new occasions
arising, of the Church and Papacy, by which means they both disburden the Pope
of much lighter business, and the greater causes by long and exact discussion
are ripened and made fit for his decissi^n. Such is the Congregation for
propagation of Christian-Faith; the Congregation of the Inquisition; the
Congregation for England; the Congreation of Bishops; for all Controversies
which happen between them and their Subjects; a Congregation for any
diversity of opinion in matter of Religion between School men or Friars;
with sundry such other. A course lately there begun, but of good importance,
and well worthy to be imitated.

Now for This Pope, who by race and name a Florentine, but his Father having
been chased thence upon a Conspiracy against Duke COSIMO, by birth became a
kind of Roman; I have little more to say than that which I have before
touched. He is reputed to be a man of a good calm disposition, and not too
crafty; yet close and suspicious, and thereby secured to hold his own well
enough; kind to his friends and denout in his way, and thinks without doubt
that he is in the right. He will weep very often; (some conceive upon a
weakness and tenderness of mind, habituated therein by custom; others say
upon piety and godly compassion:) At his Masses, in his Processions, at the
fixing uppe his Jubilees, his Eyes are still watering some times streaming with
tears; in so much that for weeping he seems an other HERACLITVS, to balance
with the last GREGORIR an other DEMOCRITVS for laughing: Touching his secret
life, the Italians speak somewhat diversely, especially for his younger years.
But men's tongues are always prone to attaint their Governors; and the worst
men speak worst, as hoping them selves to lurk under the blemishes of their
betters. For my part hearing no extraordinary bad matter against him, but
only by suspicion, I judge the best; and howsoever had rather preserve the
credit of an ill man, than stain or impair it in a good. For his years he
does little exceed Three seore and three: but is troubled with the dropsy, and
that caused some say or accompanied with a thirsty infirmity.

For a Praelat he has good commendation a favourer of learning, and advauncer
of them whose studies have been to the advauncement of his Sea: an enemy to
the licentious life of Friars, yea to the Pomp also and Secular bravery of
Cardinals; howbeit more desiring reformation in both, than daring attempt it in
either, for ought that yet appears: very magnificall and ceremonial in his
outward comportment; in his private, austere and humble, as his friends say: in
menaging the Church temporal goods rather thriftie than liberal; but of their
spiritual treasure of Supererogatorie works in Indulgences and Pardons, (which
he uses not only as charitable reliefes of the needy, but as honorable gifts
also to reward Princes that have presented him,) in these I should think him
very exceeding wastfull, but that where the treasure is infinite there the
spender in ordinary account cannot be Prodigal. For a Prince he has been
thought somewhat defective heretofore, as being neither of deep resolution nor
of great spirit. But fortunate-men are wise, and conquerours valiant. And
surely this man's projects and attempts have so well prospered, what in
reduction of the French King by prosecuting him to extremity; what in the
matter of Ferrara; what in working the great peace; (the honor whereof by the
most is wholly attributed to the Pope, though other say he was importuned to
deal in it by the Spaniard, being so tired and wasted out with troubling his
neighbors, that in fine no desire no hope but in peace only;) that it has
purchased him the opinion not only of a fortunate and wise Pope, but of one
who does sincerely affect the quiet of Christendom and thinks nothing
remaining to the height of his glory but to be the author of an universal
league and war against the Turk, against whom he has sundry times given
aid already. For which end it is conceived notwithstanding his ability and
opportunity extraordinary, what by his excommunications, and what by his
ready army, to have righted himself; that yet he has laid by his own
particular pretenses as well against the great Duke of Tuscanie, for Borgo di
San Sepulchro which belongs to the Church; as also and more principally against
the Venetians, for Rovigo and the Posesine, which they have rent by war and
retain from Ferrara; (not to mention that ancient quarrel touching the
Patriarchship of Aquileia, whose Territory even all Friuli their State is said
to have usurped:) that no private temporal commodity of his Church and Sea,
might give impediment to the public most necessary good, in withstanding and
repressing the graund enemy of Christendom. These thoughts surely are
honorable; neither unnecessary for his own future safety, considering how
near a neighbor the Turk is to him, and how often his State has been
afflicted by him, and sometimes enhazarded. But now for his near neighbors
the great Duke and the Venetians, as their States so their loves and his are
but neighbourly: they thinking his growing to be their stop and endaungering.
But the Venetians perhaps fear him, and the great Duke hates him more: the
Venetians as having still even painted in their great palace and daily before
their eyes, the extremity to which former Popes excommunications have brought
them; (having their State as ill seated in regard of potent neighbors, who all
gape after them upon any advantage, as any that I know again in the world; the
Turk confining and bordering with them on the East, the King of Spain on the
West, the Emperor on the North; the Pope on the South; who can never want
pretense, they holding that which they list not yield; besides some jealousies
and discurtesies passed lately between them and the Pope and his Cardinals:
the great Duke not only for that haereditarie enmity first, and that
personal discourtesie since, at what time affecting the Title of the King of
Tuscanie, (whereof his wife is written Queen by some already,) and having got
as is said the Emperors liking, the Pope denied him, putting him off with a
distinction, that he was content he should be King in Tuscanie, but not King
of Tuscany, which scholasticall subtilities plain suitors do not love; but
much more for that correspondence of Conference and favor which is thought to
be between the Pope, and those popular Florentines, who distasted with their
home government once free, now almost servile, live both elsewhere abroad and
at Rome in exceeding store; especially seeing not only this Pope in the
faction of his particular family, but all Popes in the affection which the
Papacy it self does engender, do naturally more desire that their neighbors
States should be popular; as having the ground of their greatness in swaying
the multitude. But generally the Dukes of Tuscanie will be always regardfull
to hold the best correspondence with the Popes that may be: as having their
State more open to assault on that side, the rest being surrounded by the
Apennine and the Sea. To conclude this Pope, where there is no private cause of
disfavouring his person, or disallowing his place, carries the name of a good
Pope: and they which do subtilize the points of goodness more curiously, will
say that PIUS QVINTVS was a good Praelat, but no good Prince; that SIXTVS
QVINTVS, a good Prince, but no good Praelat; GREGORY the Xiijth a good
Praelat, a good Prince, but no good man; this Pope both good Man, good Praelat,
and good Prince.

And so I leave him; wishing his daily increase in all parts of true goodness;
whereof his Church has too little I ween, and himself happily as other good men
nothing too-much; and return now to the Papacy.

The next poinct wherein which comes to be considered, is what power it is of
at this day in the world by reason of those Nations which either in whole or
great part still adhere unto it, which are Italy with his Islands; Spain with
his Indies, Germany with his Skirts, (which I account the seventeene Provinces
of the Low Countries on one side, the thirteen Cantons of Swisse and three
leagues of Grisons on an other, and Bohemia with Moravia and Slesia on a
third:) and lastly the great united, well seated, fruitful, populous Kingdom
of France, with his neighbors of Loraine and Savoy; (whom though Princes of
the Empire whenever them selves list and find it for their profit, yet in
regard ^f their greater affinity to France both in language and fashions,
which consociate also affections, I annex unto it:) of all which some brief
view seems necessary to be taken. For as for Poland and Transcilvania with
Ualachia and the remains of Hungary; by reason of their near and dangerous
confining with the Great Turk together with the multitude of Religions which
are swarming in them, in Poland especially, (of which it is said by way of by
word, that if a man have lost his religion, let him go secke it in Poland, and
he shall be sure to find it, or else make account it is vanished out of the
world:) there is no great reckoning to be made of their force either way. Then
England with the more Northern Kingdoms, Scotland, Denmark and Sweden:
(whose King notwitstanding is of the Roman says now, but has few there that
follow him:) they are accounted wholly to have cast of the Papacy. For albeit
they make reckoning of many favorers in them as of forty thousand sure
Catholics in England alone, with four hundred English Roman Priests to
maintain that Militia, (who upon quarrel with the Jesuits, affectors of
superiority, and disgracers of all that refuse to depend upon them, have
instantly of late demanded a Bishop of the Pope, to be chosen by them, and to
be resident among them, but are crossed in that desire by the countermine of an
Archpriest, obtru^ed upon them by the practice of the Jesuits:) yet this is
so small a proportion being compared with the whole, as not to be esteemed:
especially seeing in Italy compted wholly theirs, there are full forty thousand
professed Protestants that have exercise of their Religion also, in the Valleys
of Piemont and S^l^zz^, besides sundry Gentlemen in Piemont who live abroad and
resort unto them. In Lucca also a great part are thought favorers of the
Reformation: and some of that sort there are scattered in all places:
especially in the State of Venice. But their paucitie and obseuritie shall
enclose them in a cipher. So that for Italy we will account it wholly to stand
for the Papacy. True it is that the Princes and other free states of Italy
little favor the Popes enlarging in his temporal dominion at home; being
already of a large size in proportion with theirs; and especially for those
pretenses which his sea never wants, and those extraordinary advantages
which the concurrence of his spiritual supremacy by interdictions,
excommunications, discharging oaths of obedience, does give him above all other
Princes in the world. Which they also above all other men in the world have
greatest cause to fear; both in regard of the huge multitude of Priests,
Praelates, and Friars, wherewith he has fortified him self exceedingly in
all other states, and in theirs above all excessiuely; as also for that
discontent which their cruel and crying extortions and oppressions, by
monopolies and taxes, by impositions upon men's persons, upon their lands and
goods, upon their viands and markets, upon their trades and labors, upon their
successions upon their marriages, in sum upon all beneficial or easefull
actions, have bred in their own miserable and consumed subjects; who wish
rather that all Italy were reduced into the hands of some one natural
Potentate, whose greediness how great soever they were able to satisfy; and
of the Popes above all men's, who promises some more lenity by his late
example at Ferrara, where he remitted many imposts which their late Dukes had
raised; than to be thus daily racked, fleyed and devoured, by so many petie
tyrants as it were with their prolling Gabelliers: whose ambitions and
emulations, whose prides and pleasures, thirteen millions of yearly revenew
which Italy now yields them is not able to exsatiate. Howbeit though as I
said for these important causes, the Princes and States of Italy no way favor
the Popes strength in his temporal at home; (considering withal what swelling
and turbulent spirits mount sometimes into that chair, who have purposely set
Italy on a flaming fire, that in the sacking of many them selves might get
somewhat, for the advauncing of such as nature and blood did cause them to love
best:) yet on the contrary side for his spiritual power and soveraigntie
abroad, they wish it upheld and restored if it were possible; both for the
honor of their nation, which is thereby the tryumphant Queen of of the world;
and much more for the commodity which by vicinitie they and theyrs reap
thence in more abundance than all other together, what by sharing as occasion
serves in his booties abroad, what by being always in sight to receive
favors at home, what by that which necessarily sticks to them in very passing
through their territories. Then to exclude any innovation, their own safety
and not quiet alone persuades them, it being dangerous in a body so full of
diseased and discontented humors, to change or stir any thing, seeing all
alteration set humors on working: and one humor on foot quickneth up all
other, what allured by sympathy what by antipathy provoked: the end whereof is
either the dissolving of nature by length of conflicts, or the disburdening of
nature by expelling that which before opp^est it. For this cause no audience to
be given to the Reformation, as enemy to their peace, which is the nurse of
their riches and sole anchor of their ^atetie. For it were but simplicity to
think that conscience and love of truth did sway this deliberation: the world
having in most places done Religion that honor, as to remove it out of those
secret dark Cabinets of the heart, where the jealousy of some devout dreamers
of the gardens of Paradise had imprisoned it; and advanced it, to the fairest
sight and show of the world, even to make a very mask or vi^ard of it with
eyes and mouth fairly painted and proportioned to all pretenses and purposes.
And other of yet more gallant free spirit have given it a general pass to go
whether it self list, so it come not near them. It does grieve me to speak,
yea the thought of it must needs bring horror and detestation, what a
multitnde of Atheists do brave it in all places, there most where the Papacy
is most in his prime; what renouncers of God, blasphemers of his son,
villanizers of his Saints: and scorners of his service: who think it a
glorious grace to adore the King of a Country, but to name or think reverently
of the Creator of the World to proceed from a timorous very base mindednes and
abjectnes: of so deep reach and judgment are these pedlers in their
proportions, who know no other Magistrates but those of their parishes. These
men are favorable alike to all Religions: but can best endure that wherein
they are least checked, and may raunge with most impunitie. But for the
Souldiarie of this age; (a profession and exercise in old time reputed for an
only School of virtue, but now infamed with all vice and villainy; in old time
such that the wisest Philosopher thought it reason sufficient why the
Lacedaemonians were generally more virtuous than other Nations, because they
followed the wars more, at this day a cause in all places of clean contrary
effect:) these desperate Atheismes, these Spanish renouncings, and Italian
blaspheamings have now so prevailed in our Christian Camps, that if any
refrain them he shall be upbraided as no Soldier or gallant-minded man; that
the very Turks have the Christians blaspheaming of CHRIST in execration, and
will punish their prisoners sorely when through impatience or desperatnesse
they burst into them; yea the Jews in their Speculations of the causes of the
strange successes of the affairs of the world, assign the reason of the
Turks prevailing so against the Christians, to be their blasphemies and
blaspheamous Oaths, which wound the ears of the very Heavens, and cry to the
high throane of Justice for speedy vengeance. As for great persons and Princes
of whom it was said by the Spanish Friar, that few went to Hell, and the
reason, because they were few: it is a t^re thing and happy where ever it
falls out that any of them has any true and affecting sense of those first and
undoubted grounds of Religion, to what sort or sect soever it prop^nd. Their
examples, I speak of many of them, which were able to be the sovereign
restorers of virtue, and re-establishers of an happy world, with the endless
bliss of many millions now perishing through their great default; are at this
day the only ruin and despair of goodness: having forgotten whose
Lieutenants they are in the world, for what end they are placed, for what cause
they are honored; and most of all what a great account they have to pass at
the last Auditt, when their favorites and fancy-feeding flatterers shall all
shrink from them, and nothing but their own deeds and deserts accompany
them. But all these whether Atheists in opinion or in conversation, (between
whom small choice,) being reckoned or let pass to make uppe the number: yet
hold I that from Italy more wishes than other help to maintain the Papacy
abroad, by reason of the partition of it into such a multitude of States: where
the greater do nothing but limbick their brains in the Arts of Alchymie and
Ballancing; to enrich them selves by the one, drawing gold out of all things;
and by the other to peise their neighbors and keep them of aequall weight,
there adding some help of their hand where the Scales are lighter: and the
lesser States flee most to the protection of the Chief, as the Cities of
Genova and Lucca, the Duke of Urbine, the Signor of Diambino, with certain
other, who all recognize the King of Spain for their Patron; as casting by him
to be sufficiently secured from the encroachments of those other three; and
compting that from him the united consent of all the rest will still preserve
them, to whom his greatness is fearful, and his growing would be pernicious.
There have been of them also, as the last Duke of Ferrara, who have apparently
enterteined both amity and straight intelligence with sundry of the Protestant
Princes of Germany, on purpose to hold their neighbors, and especially the
Pope, in aw of calling the Protestants in to their succor, if they should
either assail or otherwise provoke them. And thus much for Italy.

The next is Spain, reputed wholly the Popes also; as having been a long time
governed by the most devoted King, and longer curbed in by the most cruel
Inquisition, that ever the world had for the upholding of that way. Howbeit the
state of Spain is not to be passed so lightly over: wherein though my self
have never been, yet by manifold inquiry and information from some of their
own, and from others who have been in it, men of knowledge and credit; thus
much do I conceive touching the state of their Religion. That as of a Nation
which aims so apparently at the Monarchy of the whole West, it is at this
day none of the most puissant to atchieue the same; their Country being so
generally exhaust of men, what eaten uppe by long war, what transplanted into
their huge number of Indian Colonies, that their Cities remain now wholly
peopled, with women, having some old men among them, and many young children,
whereof the grave attends the one, and foreign service the other, (a fit State
for an Amazonian Empire to be revived in:) so likewise for a Kingdom that has
the surname of Catholic, none in greater danger in the world, either wholly
or in great part to cast off Christianity; unless grace from above and better
wisdom do stay the increase of those pestilent cankers of Mahometisme and
Iudaisme, which threaten the final decay and eating out of Christianisme. And
to carry this matter with an indifferent course of report, neither aggravating
it so much as some do in their doubt and jealousy, nor yet extenuating it so
much as other some in their confidence and jolitie, seeing fear casts beyond,
and hope short of the very danger: there is in Spain a sort of people of the
Marrani as they term them, who are baptized Jews and Moors, and many of them
in secret with all circumcized Christians; who are spread over the whole Land,
but swarm most in the South parts confining with Africa; and are in such
store, that in many places as some say they exceed the true Christians by no
small proportion. They which say least and speak favorably for the honor of
Spain, will say there are of them an hundred thousand Families; in which at the
least an hundred thousand men able to bear arms.

All which though conforming themselves in some sort of outward show unto the
Christian Religion; yet are thought in heart to be utterly adverse from it, and
to retain an inward desire to return to that superstition, from which their
ancestors by rigor and terror were driven. And the Jews will say in Italy,
that there come diverse Spaniards to them to be circumcised there, and so away
to Constantinople to plant in the East. The State of Spain is in often fear of
these men rebelling, and especially that they would join with any enemies that
should invade them. For although they are forbidden to have any arms, and
yearly search be made for it over all the Kingdom, in an unknown and least
suspected instant, yet is there no doubt but armed they are, and have their
secret caves and devises to conceal them. This sort continually growing by
living quietly at home: and the other part decaying daily by forrayne
employment: what the issew may be, though reason may probably conjecture, ye
time only and proof can give assurance. That famous and fearful Inquisition
of Spain was i^stituted first on purpose against these Mongrell-Chri^tians,
some hundred years since: at what time when King FERDINAND by chasing the
I^wes, Moors, and Arabians out of his dominions merited the name of King
Catholic, great numbers of them choosing rather to make change of they*
religion in show, than or their Country in deed, consented to receive baptism:
which in secret they soon polluted or renounced by circumcision and other
superstitions, wherein the Arabians and Moors concurred with the I^wes; and so
continued with a false face and double heart, and have transmitted both the one
and the other to their off spring to this very day. But this Inquisition, being
first as I said brought in to chastise those miscreants; (besides that in
Arragon, a freer State than the rest, being received only for term of Eighty
years, it is in right long since expired, and holds only by Title of the
Kings pleasure and possession; and the Portugals also have lately renewed their
old suit, together with their old offer of an huge sum of money, to buy out
at leastwise the rigor and unjustice of it, in their countries and for their
persons, which it is thought this young King has meaning to accept, if the
sweetness of Tyranny, which by Courts of so voluntary and lawless
proceeding is principally supported, do give no hinderance:) the Eye and edge
of it has been so wholly of latter times converted to the rooting out of the
Reformed religion in all places, that the other sort by neglecting them have
grown in strength, and by their strength now begin to despise their
chastizers; whom fear, they say, enforces often to wink at many things,
which no eye open but needs must see. Thus fares it with gardens, wherein
greater care is taken to pull up the suspected herbs than to keep down the
apparent weeds: what farther hopes this Sect may have I know not. This is
clear, that a great part of the Spanish Nobility is mixed at this day with
Jewish blood, by marying of their younger brethren for wealthssake with the
Jews; upon whom in time, the elder sailing, the honor and house has
descended. But to leave these Marrani: An other pestilent Sect there was not
long since of the Illuminati in Aragon; whose founders were an hypocritical
crew of their Priests; who affecting in them selves and followers a certain
Angelical purity, fell suddenly to the very counterpoinct of justifying
bestialitie. But these men and their light are quenched some while since. The
last and obscurest sort are the poor persecuted Protestants, against whom all
Laws, all wits, all tortures are strongly bent. All which notwithstanding,
there are thought to be no fewer than twenty thousand in Sevil it self, who
in heart are that way: amongst whom certain books of the Religion being secretly
dispersed, the Inquisitours for their number-sake who were to be touched, were
required to forbear, and to provide some other way.

In sum, I have heard it acknowledged by some of their own Country and
religion, that among other things the scandalls of their Clergic and Friars,
especially in forging miracles in their Spirits and Images, do draw the people
to a loathing and suspicion of their way: and were it not for the Inquisition,
he thought generally they would fall away and turn Protestants in short time.
They have in Spain as he told me a Crucifix, whose hair and nails fall a
growing now in his old age, as in a dead man executed; the rest not stirring:
at which the devouter men of the Clergy jerk up their eyes, and the wiser of
the Laity wag their heads. The holy Nun of Portugal, of whom the Spaniards
taken prisoners in Eighty eight made so much vaunting; who had the five wounds
bleeding on her, and the print of the Crucifix in the skin of her breast; to
whom that Invincible Army repaired for Benediction to set forward their
Victory; is lately deprehended and condemned for a So^ceresse, upon a general
information of the whole Sister-hood against her; who hating h^^ for her
a^rogancie and watching her fingers, in fine discovered that the one was no
other than a forced rawnesse of the flesh procured by fretting herbs and waters
when she meant to show her s^l^e; and the other came by continual binding of
a little graven Crucifix to the part so printed. The famous Lady of Guadalupa,
who transporteth thorough the air such prisoners in Africa as vow them selves
unto her, is said by some other to have her credit empaired, by occasion of a
Fugitive servant, who being run from his Master was suborned by the Friars to
play that fleeing part, complaining that our Lady for the wickedness of this
age did restrain those graces, but yet that it was a godly act to maint^in men
in their devotions. In fine, he was disclosed and ceased on by his Master. But
this is more certain and of more general report, that for the weeping and
swea^ing of their Images, they have had a trick in all places to bore holes
behind them, and put into them the new-cut spriggs of a Vine; which being of a
bleeding nature, and dropping easily thorough the thin plaster remaining
unpierced, make show of tears or sweat as they list. Yea some of their Italian
Friars have confessed with all that their fashion is when their gimmalls are
all in tune for a Miracle, to enjoyne some seely old woman, in her confession,
to say her devotions before the Altar where the Image prepared to play a
miracle is se^ted: abusing the weakness of her sex and age to report that
confidently, which her pronesse to think our Lady might extraordinarily love
her, made her easily believe. Wise gentlemen who have been present at their
exorcising of Spirits have observed plain arguments of intelligence between
the parties, as in the actors of an interlude. Though that this should be
always so were hard to avouch; the multitude of Indemoninati (whereof most are
women) being so huge in Italy, (even as of witches in Savoy:) of which some are
daily cured in show by their exorcismes; but for one that is helped almost
twenty are either past their Curing, or otherwise (as in counterfeits)
unwilling to be cured. But in sum, the falsehoods in all these kinds are grown
so ordinary and palpable to them selves, that some of their better Praelates
have removed and with drawn an image of our Lady, upon the broaching of a
report that it discovered it self for a Wonder-worker. So unsavorie is the
food of fools to the taste of wise men: and such is Gods curse upon all
forgerie and falsehood, as in the end to overthrow that which chooses it for
his foundation: as has happened already in some places, and may with time in
other.

Touching Germany, I have seen an old aestimate of it by such as favored the
Papacy, that in the beginning of the Empire of FERDINAND, there was not past
one twelfth part remaining Catholic: which now in my understanding must needs
be otherwise. For comprehending in it Bohemia with his appurtenances, I should
think that near a sixth part were devoted that way: their number being
increased, and perhaps doubled since that time, by the Sedulitie of many of the
Praelats, and one other great Prince the Duke of Bavaria; who using the
advantage of the Interun on their part, have forced those Protestants which
were in their States to quit either Religion or goods or Country. The same
has been attempted by the Archdukes of Austria, and in some places as in
their County of T^roll effected. But in Austria it self not so; wherein the
number of Protestants exceeds and is fearful to their opposites: though the
exercise of the Reformed religion is there no where allowed, and in some chief
Cities, as Uienna wholly restrained. But the most part of the Country People
are of it; so are half the Nobility. The Duke of Cleves a third Prince
affected the same way, has showed himself a little more moderate than some
other, so advised by neighborhood. The Free-Cities, which are of very great
number and strength, have all save some very few, enfreed them selves from the
Pope either in whole or in their greater part. And thus stands the State of the
Empire for that poin^t: containing in it a very huge Circuit of Territory,
full of mighty Princes and well-fortified Cities: that if it were more
strictly united under one Monarch, and not so rent into factions with
diversity of Religions, breeding endless jealousies, hartburnings and
hatreds, it needed no other help to affront the great-Turke, and to repulse all
his forces ^^ the security of Christendom.

But ^s so unaequall proportion of adhaerents to the Papacy, two things there
are which give them hope of better, if prosperous success shall second their
well contrived projects. The one is the creating of the Emperors always of
their party: whereof they assure them selves by these considerations. First,
there is no House in Germany at this day of such greatness as is requisite to
with-stand the Turk in his encroachments the House of Austria set aside: who
by their alliance or rather mere entirenesse with Spain, and by sundry
elective Kingdoms, which run necessarily upon them, shall be always able to
make head against any power in the world; and by their own state confining so
immediately with the Turks, shall be necessarily enforced, laying other thoughts
aside, to employ the utmost drop of their blood to keep off. Next whenever
the matter grows to election of a new Emperor, they shall always have the
casting Voice with them or rather in them; having entangled the States of
Bohemia in such bonds and promises, (besides there is no other to make good
choice of) that they account of this Kingdom as of a State half haereditarie.
And lastly their late policy, now strengthened by usage, of declaring a King
of Romans in the Emperors lifetime, whilst his presence and power may govern
the action, assures them that it shall always pass with them roundly and
quietly. The other ground of their hope, is the division of the Protestants
into their factions of Lutherans and Calvinists as they style them: wherein the
Ministers on each side have so bestirred themselves, that the cole which a wise
man with a little moisture of his mouth would soon have quenched, they with
the wind of theyrs have contrariwise so enflamed, that it threatens a great
ruin and calamity to both sides. And though the Princes and heads of the
weaker side in those parts, both Paltsgraue and Lantsgraue, have with great
judgment and wisdom, to asslake those flames, imposed silence in that poinct
to the Ministers of their party, hoping the charity and discretion of the
other sort would have done the like; yet falls it out otherwise, both the
Lutheran Preachers rage as bitterly against them in their Pulpits as ever, and
their Princes and people have them in as great detestation, not forbearing to
profess openly they will return to the Papacy, rather than ever admit that
Sacramentarie and Predestionarie pestilence; for these two poincts are the
ground of the quarrel, and the latter more scandalous at this day than the
former. And some one of their Princes, namely the Administratour of S^xonie, is
strongly mi^doubted to practice with the Emperor for the joining the Catholic
and Lutheran forces in one, and by war to root out and extinguish the
Calvinists; the plausiblest motion to the Emperor that ever could happen.
Neither is there any great doubt, but if any stay or agreement could be taken
with the Turk, all Germany were in danger to be in uprore within it self by
intestine dissension. Howbeit all the Lutherans are not earied with this stern
humor, but they only which are called the Lutherani rigidi: the greater part
perhaps, which are the molles Lutherani, are quiet enough, neither account
otherwise of Calvinists than of er^ing brethren; whom the R^g^di have (as is
said) partly threaten to excommunicate as Schismatikes and Haeretikes. To this
lamentable extremity has the headiness of their Ministers on both sides
brought it; while in the peremptorinesse of their poor learning they cannot
endure any supposed error in their brethren, whereof themselves even the best
of them perhaps if they were sifted would be found to be full enough, (such
take I to be the condition of all men in this world;) and in their ignorance of
all actions save of their Schools and Books, make more accomp^ of some empty
ill-shaped ^yllogisme, than of the peace of the Church and happiness of the
world: the and whereof will be that their enemies shall laugh, when themselves
shall have cause to weep; unless the graciousnesse of God stir up some
worthy P^inces of renow^e and reputation with both the sides, to in^erpose
their w^sdome, industry and authority, for the uniting these factions, or at
leastwise for reconciling and composing those differences in some tolerable
sort: a work of immortal fame and desert, and worthy of ^one but them of whom
this wicked base world is not worthy. But hereof I shall have occasion to
speak in his due place. For this place it suffices that these i^trincicall
quarrels are that which makes their common enemies hold up t^eyr heads; which
quickneth their hopes to see the blades of these Reformers drawn one against
another; that them selves being called in to the beating down of the one
part, may afterward in good time assail also the other; in the mean season
planting in all places their Colleges of Jesuits, as the only corrosiue
medicine to fret out their adversaries. Now on the other party the hopes are
also not few; besides their over-topping them so much in multitude and power.
First the Germane bearing a natural stiff hate to the Italian for his winding
and subtle wit, which despises and would ra^sacke him, but that he opposes
a proud stoutnesse and intractible obstinacy, which serves always as a wall
of defense to simplicity, will hardly what tempering soever the Princes make,
be brought ever in heart to re-affect the Papacy; whose sleights and devises
they are thoroughly acquainted with, and have in more detestation than any
Nation whatsoever. And for their own inward diss^ions it is to be hoped that
though no course were taken to compound them, yet never will they be so mad as
to decide them by a general open war on both sides, having Turk, Pope, and
Emperor, to join them in friendship. For although the contentions of brethren
be ^itter^st, yet a common strong enemy always makes them friends again.
And as for the Administratour so much suspected, who prolls as some say in
these practices for his own greatness, his authority is but short, and to
expire within three years. Then for the having of an Emperor of some more
indifferent Family, though their desire be in that poinct of all other
greatest, yet their hope I suppose is least. And that which is seems to be
grounded upon the Elector ^^ Colen, either if the old Elector GEBARDVS
TRVCHESIVS should live so long, whom in that case they might by force restore
to his place, from which he stands now by force ejected, yet retains his
claim still and style of Elector: or if some other of that sea might be
induced to follow the steps of two of their antecessours, who have turned
Protestants; (of which course that place will be always in danger by reason
of such vicinitie and intermixing of their State with Protestant Princes,
besides that in Colen it self the Religion has already ^ooting;) or at
leastwise might be drawn to that civil indifferency, as in regard of
preserving their freedom of Election, to change once in an age that Family
of Austria, wherein the Empire having continued these seven descents may in
time be established as by praescription. And lastly for the Jesuits, their
great Patron and planter the old Duke of Bavaria, having now as is said retired
him self into their College, and resigned his state to his son MAXIMILIAN, who
it is thought does disfavour them as much as his Father doted on them; this and
other such chaunges may give stay to their proceedings. But to leave these
hopeful speculations on both sides, and to take matters in ^earmes they stand
now, and may so continue; the benefit which the Papacy may expect from the
Empire is rather to keep matters in that stay they are than any way to restore
it where it has been dispossessed. For although these Turkish wars should
cease, which is not unlikely, considering the calm nature of both the
Emperors, who take more delight in Chambers than Fields: yet shall our
Christian Emperor be enforced still, in fortifying and mainteining gariso^,
all along his frontiers, confining sundry hundred long leagues with the Turk,
so to exhaust his own treasure* and employ his people, as that he will not be
able to do els-where any extraordinary matter, without help extraordinary,
which is never too ready. And time which may produce many accidents in his
favor, may also produce in his dis^avour as many; and so many more, as the
ground out of which in those parts they may grow, is manifoldly larger against
him than for him.

Now for the Low Countries, the Papacy has two thirds with it; and of the
Swissers and Grisons, two thirds against it: of ^^e Swissers also the
Protestants are lightly the wealthier, and the Papists the more warlike; which
may suffice for those parts.

Of France, how much the better it is known unto us at home, so much the
less shall I need to speak much in his place. Neither is it very easy to
proportion the parti^^, ^son they of the Religion are so scattered in ^s. Yet
in Poieton they have a most all; in (...) an half; in Languedoc, (...). and
other West-mari^i^ Provinces, a (...) strong part; as likewise in sundry medi^e
^an, of which Delfinat the chief. But whatsoever be the proportion of their
number to their opposites, which is manifoldly inferior, not one to twenty;
their strength is such as their wars have witnessed; and especially that at
this day, after such massacring them, so general a rising of the whole Realm
against them, by the utmost extremity of fire and sword to exterminate them;
they are esteemed to be stronger than at any time heretofore; in sum so
strong that neither have their adversaries, I ^ow, any great hope, and
themselves no fear to be borne down by war. That the practices of peace by
partiality and injustice in their suits l^^igious, (which has already sorely
bitten and afflicted their estates; by depriving them of place of Office and
Honor in the Realm, by confining the exercise of their Religion into chambers
or remote corners; did not impoverish, abase, and disharten their party, and
so withdraw those from them, which would otherwise stick to them; this is that
which they have misdoubted, and which by the Edict now passed and verified they
have sought to remedy. But looking a little more attentively into this party
I find, that as conscience in what Religion soever, does even in the mists of
error breed an honestnesse of mind, and integrity of life and actions, in
whom it settleth, (of so divine and pure virtue is the love of the Creator,
which is the ground of all that merit the name of religious:) so also that in
them which affect the greatest singleness, and in a manner a very careless
simplicity in their Religion, as contenting them selves with the possession of
the rich treasure of truth, and for the preserving of it or them selves
recommending those cares to God only, yet tract of affliction, much misery,
often overreaching by subtlety of adversaries, does finally purge out those
grosse-witted humors, and engender a very curious and advantageous wariness
in all their proceedings; having learned by experience the wisdom of that
Aphorism, that a small error in the foundation and beginning of all things,
does prove in the proceeding and end of them a great mischief. As has fallen
out in these men: who do as far here out-goe their opposites in all civil
policies, as in other places they of their religion are lightly out-gone by
them. Which next unto divine blessing, which accompanies good causes, where
wickedness or wilful witlessenesse does not bar against it; I account the
chief reason of their present strength and assurance. By their providence in
their capitulations, by their resolutenesse in their executions, by their
industry and dexterity in all occasions presented, they have possessed them
selves of an exceeding great number of strong Towns and places: there is scant
any office or estate can fall void but they lay in by all means to get into
it; they have their Synodes for their Church-affaires their Conventions and
Counsels for their Civil: their people is warlike and so will they continue
the^. Their only want is of a Prince of the Blood to grace them. For as for
Leaders, a matter of so main importance they are still above their adversaries:
having besides those three of principal and known name, sundry other in
Gascoignie of less place and degree, but in skill and prowess not inferior
to the best. In fine, they have learned the wisdom of Spes sibi quisque, and
(...); the contrary whereof before brought them so near to their ruin. But
now touching the weakness of them of the Roman Religion, in comparison of
that strength which their multitude should promise much more may be said.
First one great part of them are in heart of the Reformed Religion, though for
worldly respects they hold in with the other: which also will begin to disclose
them selves daily, those things being now settled in reasonable good sort,
which have hitherto been but in motion. Secondly they are not all Papists that
hold with the Mass. But the Catholics are here divided into as different
opinions, and in as principal matters of their Religion as they esteem them,
as the Protestants in any place that ever I heard of: although their discretion
and moderation is such as not to interrupt the common Concord with private
opinionatiuenesse. The ground of which disagreement in opinion (as I take it)
is the ancient diversity between the Roman Church and the Gallicane; which
as in many of their Ceremonies it differs much from the Roman, (as to omit
sundry other in the Priests Lotions at Mass, and in their walking hymns at
solemn Matins and Uespers;) and in some of them rather runs with the usage of
the Greek Church, (as in their Holy-bread on Sondayes for them that do not
communicate:) so also in the very head-poinct of their Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, it holds the General Council to be above the Pope; which
opinion is at this day very current and strong, even among such Catholics as
favor the Papacy. Which I reckon for the first difference touching the State
of their Church: which calls into question in whom the very soveraigntie and
supremacy thereof is placed. An other sort are there which hold their Church
for the true Church, (although they acknowledge sundry errors and abuses of
less importance both in doctrine and practice:) but for the Pope they hold
resolutely that he is that Antichrist, which sitting in the Temple, that is in
the true Church of God, (for even by his very being Antichrist some prove they
are the true Church;) does advance himself above God; as they think apparent
by dispensing with the Law of God; by merchandising of souls in his purgatory
pardons, releasing them in an other world whom divine sentence has bound, as
also by his indulgences for sins in this world; and not least of all by his
arrogating the not possibility of erring, being a sacred property peculiar
unto God, and not communicated but only at times to his extraordinary
Prophets, as all Churches in the world besides the Roman acknowledge. This
sect spreads far, and as them selves will say, of the learned sort three
parts of ^oure consent in this opinion. And they which are most devoted to the
Pope, and in that respect do hate this crew above all other, confess that the
Lawyers are greatly infected with it: in which regard they also term these as
in way of disgrace the Parliament Catholics. These opinions thus prevayling
amongst the Catholics of France, it is not to be merveiled, that the Realm
was so ready upon the Popes refusal to reblesse the King upon his sudden
reconversion, to withdraw them selves utterly from the obedience of his sea,
and to erect a new Patriarch over all the French Church, the now Archbishop of
Burges; who was ready to accept it: and but that the Pope in fear thereof upon
a second deliberation did hasten his Benediction, it had been effected to his
utter disgrace and decay; as the very proffer and probability of it will
always hold him in awe, and in good temper of carriage toward this wavering
Kingdom, and content to bear indifferent sway with them in any thing. As on
the contrary side his great doubt of the French unsoundnesse to him at the
heart, will cause him the less to favor any of their footings in Italy. Now
these men though they dislike also of the Reformed Religion, as having brought
in an extreme innovation of all things, in steed of a moderate reformation of
what was justly blameable: yet will carry them selves always of likelihood in
an indifferent neutralitie, rather than by extinguishing the one extreme, to
over-strengthen the other. A third part of this side we may make the
Royalists; who as much as they dislike the attempts of the Protestants in
alteration of Religion; so much and more do they hate those mischievous
courses taken against them by their adversaries; which have threatened so near
a ruin to the whole state of the Kingdom, that it may seem half a miracle,
that it has ever recovered, being so long a time at the very poinct either of
shivering in pieces, (as has happened heretofore to other Countries in like
case,) or of rendering it self into the servitude of the hateful name of their
neighbors. This part having by experience learned the wisdom to know, that
the quarrel of Religion is but the cloak of ambition for the great ones at
this day; that many traitorous intents pass under Catholic pretenses; that
the Protestant will be always a sure enemy to the Spaniard, and to all his
Favorites, partisans, and pensionaries; that whilst he may be suffered to enjoy
liberty of Conscience, without any disabling or disgrace in the State, he will
be in all occasions ready to serve the King to his utmost, and forward by
deserts to maintein his favor; that it is no so easy a matter to extirpate
them as some think, having taken so deep root in the Realm as they have,
besides the favor of great Princes their neighbors abroad; who are engaged
and embarked in the very same cause; and that although it were to be wished for
the happiness of the Kingdom, which during this diversity and dissension in
Religion, shall breed greater security to their neighbors than to themselves,
that if it were possible some course were taken for a final reuniting of all
in one profession; yet this being not to be hoped for in this exasperation of
minds on both sides, must be commended to time, which works out many things; to
occasion, which effects even wonders on a sudden; and finally to some general
good way to be undertaken by the joint consent of wise and worthy Princes, for
effecting like unity over all Christendom if it may be: In these
considerations, this part which with his appurtenances is now the greatest,
will never advise the King to become head of a party again, so long as he
may be absolute commander of the whole; having found that siding course in
such strength of both parts to be a false ground and ruinous to them that take
it. To these may be annexed those moral men, as they call them, who think not
these diversities of opinions of any such moment, as that they ought to
dis-joyne them who in the love of God, in the belief of the fundamental
Articles of Christian Faith, in integrity of life and honesty of
conversation, (which are the greatest bonds,) remain united; much less that
they ought to enrage men's minds so far, as to cause them to take arms to
decide the quarrel; which are not those instruments wherewith either error
should be razed, or truth proved, or Religion planted. And finally to this
party may be added all those who affect a quiet world and peace above glorious
troubles: which is the desire of those lightly, who in a middle degree of
condition, possess also a moderate temper of affections; which is ordinarily
the greatest part in all well-ordred Co^mon-wealths; and withal the far
surest and firmest to the State. None of those will be easily drawn to enter
into any violent course against those of the Religion, so long as they have the
discretion by no jealousy to provoke them. The last part is indeed of their
vowed and sworn enemies, the Leaguers and Zelez as some name them; once the
greatest and most favored part of the Realm, at this day not so; their
plausible pretenses being now dismasked, and the disasterous success of their
disordred actions, which has brought things to the very counterpoinct of that
they aimed, and left nothing but a memory of much trouble and misery, of the
wasting of the people, the sacking of Cities, the harrowing and desolating of
the Country, together with the imminent danger of the utter overthrow of the
Realm for ever, making them hateful and despised in those very same minds,
wherein they were erst-whiles enshrined with all devotion, which reasons have
so abated also the haughtiness of their hopeless heads, who lately breathed
nothing but Crowns and scepters, but glory to their followers, but vengeance
to their enemies: that now they are content to raunge with their fellows, and
have turned their song of sovereignty into a more peaceable and calm tune, of
nec veterum memini latorve malorum. Howbeit the righ Zelez, men of the basest
sort lightly, and possessed with Friars, who fill them with very furies against
the Religion, are as malicious and ragefull against the Protestants as ever;
and thirst after nothing so much as to embrew them selves once again in their
blood; they stick not to profess and indeed had they heads and opportunities
to acccomplish. The number of these is exceeding great and desperate; but
impuissant, base and broken. With these join in heart in a manner all the
Clergy; who count the Religion and Reformation their bane, and the very
calamity of their estate for ever. A great error among other, as was observed
by the worthy Chancellor MONSIEUR DEL' HOSPITAL, in the plots and proceedings
of the first Protestants of France, to alienate so respected and so potent a
part of the Realm, by leaving them no hope of any tolerable condition under
their reformed estate; whom, by following the wiser courses of their moderate
neighbors they might have gained to them in greatest part as others did.

Now this part which are the only assured enemies of the Protestants, and of
whom they may make account, that they will not fail them at a need, does come
short of them perhaps in strength, though in multitude far exceed them.
Wherein this is also not to be left unconsidered, that as in the body of man
the humors draw still to the sore: so in a state all averse and discontented
do associate them selves lightly to the part grieved and persecuted.

This take I to be the present estate of the factions in France for matter of
Religion: submitting my opinion, as in all other things, to be censured and
reformed by whosoever with more experience and deeper judgment shall have
waded in and weighed these actions and considerations. But to make my far
reach of conjecture for the time to come that will I not be so saucy as to
do in French affairs; whose mines are so full of Quicksilver that their
nimble wits would take it perhaps in dudgen, that any should imagine they
would plod on in any one tenor, with that dull constancy which their heavyer
mettald neighbors do use; being able even in freshest experience to boast,
that their lightness of spirit; and mutabilitie of resolutions, has suddenly
recovered them from those terms of extremity, which in the hands of any
constant Nation in the world, had been a very long cure, if not desperate and
curelesse. But verily this diversity and dissension in Religion, is still a
very great weakness and disease in their state, and such as will be always a
matter of jealousy among them selves, of assurance for their neighbors, of
joy to their enemies.

For Lorain, and Savoy, with the Uallesi who confine on Savoy, they run
wholly with the stream of the Papacy: though in both parts there are store of
Protestants, and that of men of the better sort but without any public
exercise of their Religion, save only in some few out-skirts of Savoy near
Berna and Geneva. What Madam the Kings sister may affect in Loraine, or what
contrariwise her self may suffer, time only by trial is able to ascertein.

These particulars thus admitted, it will be no great difficulty to make some
comparatiue Estimate of the whole strength of the Papacy, in respect of the
Protestants, being the part now only on foot against them. For as for the
Greeke-Church, the case is evident, that though in number it be granted that
they exceed any other; yet are they so oppressed under Turkish tyranny, or
removed so far off, as the Muscovites and some others, that they come not
into any account in the survey of the strength which we now speak of.

But for the Western or Latin Church, in the general division into the part
Reformed and part Papal, admitting them in number and circuit of Territory to
be near aequall, (as considering the huge compass of Germany and that Empire
possessed so wholly in a manner by the Protestants, I can make no other
proportion:) in other poincts we shall find great odds and advantages for
strength in different kinds on both sides. First the Kingdoms and States of
the Romish part, lying nearer the Sun, are not only in riches, both natural
of their soil, and accessorie by greater opportunity of traffike to all parts
of the World, by manifold degrees superior to their Northren adversaries, but
also in a finenesse and subtlety of wit; which having that other instrument of
wealth to work by, does far pass in all ordinary and orderly actions, that
robustnesse of body, and puissance of person, which is the only fruict of
strength that those colder climes do yield. Though some times extraordinarily
it is known and to be granted, that those septentrional inundations; by
their very violence and multitude, as in people more generatiue, have so wildly
deliviated over all the South; that as a raging tempest they have ravaged and
ruined those powerful and flourishing Empires in the sodainnesse of an
instant, which had been many ages in rearing and spreading over the world.

But these have been no other than as torrents or brooks of passage; soon up*
soon down; soon come, soon over gone. Neither have the Northern people ever
yet for all their multitude and strength, had the honor of being founders or
possessours of any great Empire, so unaequall is the combat between force and
wit, in all matters of durable and grounded establishment. An other poinct of
great advantage in the selfsame side is the uniting of their forces into
fewer heads and mightier: which uniting is a very redoubling of strength in all
things. They have on their part first and principally the Pope himself, seated
royally and pontifically in the midst and chiefest, regarding the rich Sun in
his glorious rising, and the Moon in the height of her beautiful walk: on
his left hand, the Emperor, the ancient remains of honor; on his right, the
King of Spain, the new planet of the West; at his back, the French King, the
eldest Son of the Church; all mighty Monarchs, opposed as brazen Walls
against his enemies on all fides: round about him are the lesser Princes and
States of Italy, as matter rather of solace and honor than otherwise, and to
exercise him self upon, as his humors of favor or displeasure shall advise.
Whereas on the contrary part the only puissant Prince in any comparison with
those other, is Her Majesty of England: whose State is yet so divided from all
the rest of the world, that it is the less fit in that respect for the rest to
make head at. Again the other have the Pope, as a common Father, advizer, and
conductor to them all; to reconcile their enmities, to appease their
displeasures, to decide their differences, and finally to unite their
endeavors in one course, to instance, to press them, to remove stops, to add
encouragement, by aid from him self; and above all things to draw their
religion by consent of Counsels to an unity or likeness and conformity in
all places; a principal pillar of stay to the unlearned multitude, of glory to
them selves, of upbraiding to their enemies. Whereas on the contrary side, the
Protestants are as severed or rather scattered troops, each drawing a diverse
way; without any means to pacify their quarrels, to take up their
Controversies, without any bond to knit them, their forces or courses in one.
No Prince with any praeeminence of jurisdiction above the rest: no Patriarch
one or more to have a common Superintendence and care of their Churches, to be
sollicitours of Princes for correspondence and unity: no ordinary way to
assemble a general Council of their part, the only hope remaining ever to
assuage their contentions, and the only desire of the wisest and best minds
among them. Every Church almost of theyrs has his several form and frame of
government; his several Liturgy and fashion of service; and lastly some
several opinion from the rest; which though be in them selves matters of no
great moment, being no differences essential or in any capital poinct; yea
and some of them might serve perhaps to the Churches great benefit: yet have
they been are and will be, so long as they continue in their present terms,
causes of dislikes, of jealousies, of quarrels and dangers. In sum, what
unity soever is among them proceeds only from the mere force and virtue of
verity; which all parts seek for, which though it be incomparably the best
and blesseddest, and that which alone does unite the soul with God; yet for
order in the world, for quiet in the Church, for avoiding of scandal, for
propagating and increase of what great power that other unity is which
proceeds from authority, the Papacy which stands by it alone, may teach us:
in fine, both concurring attain the praise of perfection. These then are the
advantages on the part of the Papacy. But now one disadvantage (such is the
nature of all things) impeacheth and directs all other their forces; and that
is their vicinitie with their graund-Enemie the Turk; who by Land and Sea
presses hard upon them, both Emperor, and Pope, and Monarch of Spain; and
drives them often times to such ecstasies and devisies, that Spain has no
other shift to clear him self than by diverting him upon his own dear
brethren of Austria, and causing him to fall foul upon his friend the
Emperor, wherein he is driven yet to a twofold charge, both in bribing the
Basha's to draw their Lord to Germany, and in supplying then the Emperor with
money to withstand him. The Emperor on the other side calls for aid of the
Protestants, without which the whole Empire were in danger of wracking. The
Pope, who above all other is in deepest fear, though not yet in the nearest;
knowing that the final mark which the Turk shootes at is Italy, as thinking
that to be the lover now only remaining to be set up for the accomplishment
and perfection of his Empire; and that his Wars with the Emperor are but to
open that Land-passage, for as much as by Sea he has ever proved the weaker:
bestirrs himself on all hands, in the best sort he is able, both in sending
such aid as his proportion will bear, and especially in soliciting the
Princes of his part to enter into a common League and war against him; giving
over-ture of like desire for the Protestants also. But the Protestants would
know what security of quiet they shall have from him self first, their near
and stern and unappeaseable enemy; before they wast out them selves in giving
aid unto him, against a common enemy indeed, but one who is farthest off from
them of all other, who as now is desirous enough to entertein their friendship,
and who at the worst hand carries no more eruell hatred against them and their
profession, neither condemns their religion more then the Pope their
fellow*Christian.

Then for his Catholics the Polakers, they clearly slip collar; both for the
natural hatred which as neighbors they bear the Germans; and for that they
are in peace and amity with the Turk, paying him a certain tribute; and
although his near neighbors also, yet not in his way; which is not to the
North, but to the Sun and South parts and mainly and plainly to the conquests
of Italy. The Venetians are content also to live rather as free tributaries to
the Turk as they now are, than as slaves to Spain; who in joining with them
heretofore in league against the Turk with Pope PIUS QVINTVS, did contrary to
his oath and bond forsake them, and suffer them to be beaten, being left alone
to the Turks fury; and all this to the end that having their state utterly
maimed and broken by the Turk, they might be constrained wholly to cast
themselves, their Signorie and City into the arms and embracements of Spain
for safeguard. With this unchristian treachery have they charged him
heretofore; though now all being quiet, they are content to put an
un-acceptable motion to silence, by demand of impossible conditions of
security.

Then for France it is far off, and looks that the nearer be as they ought
most forward first; and requires also with reason some breathing time to reviue
himself, after his weariness by his late pangs. Lastly, Spain has so much
to do with England and the revolted Provinces, that he thinks the time gained
that the Turk forbeares him. So that the end is, the whole burden must rest
on the Emperor, with that small help which Italy and some other yield him. And
were it not his good fortune or rather Gods good providence that the very same
plagues, which have ruined the glory and grace of Christendom, should now also
infect the graund-Enemie thereof, namely Effeminatnesse and Avarice; whereof
the one is the corruption of all sound deliberations, and the other the quailer
of all manly executions; which prevailing in his state as they do at this day,
give hope that his tyranny draws toward his period: and for this present
provide so, that a weak defendant may shift better having but a cowardly
assailant: the matter would have grown to that extremity by this time, as
would have called the King of Spain with all his forces to some more honorable
enterprises than he has hitherto undertaken. And this is the bridle which
holds in the Papacy with all his followers, from any universal proceeding by
force against the Protestants: who herein are greatly advantaged above them, in
that either their opposites lie between them and the Turk, or their Countries
costing so much as they do toward the North are out of his way, and no part
of his present aim. But these advantages and disadvantages of the Papacy
aequally weighed I suppose this disadvantage more mischievous for the present
as proceeding from outward force in the hands of an enemy; and the other
advantages more stable for continuance, as springing from the inward strength
of their own wealth and order.

This then being so, and that all things considered, there falls out if not
such an indifferency and aequalitie, yet at leastwise such a proportion of
strength on both sides, as bereaveth the other of hope ever by war to subdue
them; (seeing as the Proverb is, a dead woman will have four to carry her
forth, much less will able men be beaten easily out of their homes,) and
since there is no appearaunce of ever forcing an Unity, unless Time which
eats all things, should bring in great alterations: it remains to be
considered, What other kind of Unity poor Christendom may hope for, whether
Unity of Verity, or Unity of Charity, or Unity of Persuasion, or Unity of
Authority; or Unity of Necessity; there being so many other kinds and
causes of concord. A kind of men there is whom a man shall meet withal in all
Countries, not many in number, but sundry of them of singular learning and
piety; whose godly longings to see Christendom reunited in the love of the
Author of their name above all things, and next in brotherly correspondence and
amity, as beseems those who under the chief service of one Lord, in
profession of one ground and foundation of faith, do expect the same final
reward of glory, which proceeding from the Father and Prince of peace,
rejects all spirits of contention from attaining it, have entered into a
meditation whether it were not possible, that by the travail and mediation of
some calmer minds than at this day do usually write or deal on either side,
these flames of controversies might be extinguished or asslaked, and some
godly or tolerable peace re-established in the Church again. The earnestness
of their virtuous desires to see it so, has bred in them an opinion of
possibility that it might be wrought; considering first that besides infinite
other poincts not controversed, there is an agreement in the general
foundation of Religion, in those Articles which the twelve Apostles delivered
unto the Church, perhaps not as an abridgement only of the Faith, but as a
touchstone also of the faithful for ever: that whilst there was an entire
consent in them, no descent in other opinions only should break peace and
communion: and secondly, considering also there are in great multitude on both
sides, (for so are they undoubtedly) men virtuous and learned, fraught with the
love of God and of his truth above all things, men of memorable integrity of
heart and affections, whose lives are not dear unto the^, much less their
labors, to be spent for the good of Gods Church and people; by whose
joinct-endeavors, and single and sincere proceedings in common conference for
search of truth, that honorable Unity of Verity might be established. But if
the multitude of crooked and side respects, which are the only clouds that
eclipse the truth from shining now brightly on the face of the world, and the
only prickles that so enfroward men's affections as not to consider the best, do
cause that this chief Unity find small acceptatio^, as is to be feared, at
leastwise that the endless and ill frui^ts of these contentions, which tend
mainly to the increase of Atheism within, of Mahometisme abroad; which in
obstinate the Jew, shake the faith of the Christian; taint the better minds
with acerbitie, and load the worse with poison, which break so out into their
actions which themselves think holiest, namely the defense of Gods truth which
each side challenges, that in thinking they offer up a pleasing sacrifice to
Gods, they give cause of wicked joy unto his and their enemy; that these
woeful effects, with very tediousness and weariness may draw both parts in
fine to some tolerable reconciliation, to some Unity of Charity, at
leastwise to some such as may be least to eythers praejudice. Let the one give
over their worshipping of Images, their adoring and offering supplications to
Saints, their offensive Ceremonies, their arbitrary Indulgences, their using
of a language not understood in their devotions; all which themselves will
confess not to be necessary, to be orders of the Church* and such ^s at
pleasure she may dispense with; yea Pope CLEMENT the vijth. gave some hope to
the French King that he would not be stiff in things of this quality, and
that respect of time might justify the alteration; and some of the latter
Popes condescend to them of Bavaria the Cup in the Sacrament, hoping that would
content them, which since they or their successors have again inhibited; on
the other side, let the Protestants, such at leastwise as think so purge out
that negative and contradictory humor, of thinking they are then rightest,
when they are unlikest the Papacy; then nearest to God when farthest from
Rome; let them look with the Eye of Charity upon them as well as of
severitie, and they shall find in them some excellent orders for government,
some singular helps for an increase of godliness and devotion, for the
conquering of sin, for the perfecting of virtue; and contrariwise in them
selves looking with a more single and less indulgent Eye than they do, they
shall find that there is no such absolute or unreproueable perfection in their
doctrine and Reformation, as some dreamers in the pleasing view of their own
actions do fancy. Neither ought they to think it strange, they should be
amiss in any thing; but rather a very miracle, if they were not so in many.
For if those ancient Fathers and Sages of the Church, with greater helps,
being nearer the times of purity; with aequall industry, so spending their
whole lives with less cause of unsinceritie, having nothing to seduce them;
notwithstanding were not able in the weakness and blindness of humane-nature
in this world, to sore up so high always in the search of truth, as to find
out her ^ight seat in the heigh^h of the Heavens; but some times took Error
dwelling nearer them in steed thereof; howlesse likely that our age, more
entangled with the world; farther removed from the usage of those faultlesse
institutions, and so bitterly exasperated with mutual controversies and
conflicts, should attain to that excellency and perfection of knowledge;
which it may be God has removed from man's reach in this world, to humble and
increase his longing desire toward another world? And as the present time does
discover sundry errors in the former, so no doubt will the future in that
which is now present* So that ignorance and error, which seldom go severed,
being no other than unseparable companions of man, so long as he continues in
this terrestrial Pilgrimage: it can be no blemish in them to revise their
doctrine, and to abate the rigor of certain speculatiue opinions, especially
touching the aeternall decrees of God, the quality of man's nature, the use of
his works; wherein some of their chief Authors have run to such an utter
opposition to the Romish doctrine, as to have exceedingly scandalized all other
Churches withal, yea and many of their own to rest very ill satisfied. The
seat of Truth is aloft, of Virtue in the midst; both places of Honor: but
neither truth nor virtue draw to an utter extremity. And as in some poincts of
doctrine, so much more in their practice; in order of government, and
Ecclesiastical degrees; in solemnities and stateliness in the service of God;
in some exercises of piety, devotion, and humility, especially in set
fastings accompanied with due contrition of heart and prayer; besides many
other Ceremonies; they might easily without any offense of conscience at all,
frame to draw somewhat nearer to their opposites than now they are. Which
yielded on both sides, a general and indifferent Confession and sum of
Faith; an uniforme Liturgy, or not repugnant if diverse; a like or at
leastwise not incorrespondent form of Church Government, to be made out of
the poincts which both agreed in, and to be established so universally in all
Christian dominions, that this all Christians should necessarily hold, this
only their Divines in pulpit should teach, and this their people in Churches
should exercise; which doing the Unity of Communion should remain unviolated.
For all other questions, it should be lawful for each man so to believe as
he found cause; not condemning other with such peremptorinesse as in the guise
of some men of overweening conceits: and the handling of all Controversies
for their final compounding, to be confined to the Schools, to Counsels, and
to the learned languages, which are the proper places to try them, and fittest
tongues to treat them in.

And all this to be done by some general Council, assembled and composed
indifferently out of both the sides; men's minds being beforehand prepared and
directed to this issue and conclusion. But now if either the obstinatnesse of
the Popes ambition, or the wilfulness or scrupulositie of any opinionatiue
Ministers, should oppose against and impeach this Unity of Charity; then the
Unity of Authority to be interposed to assist it; that is the Princes of
Christendom to press this agreement, to constrain the Pope to content him
self with that temporal state, which the skill of his Antecessors has got
and left him; and for his spiritual to be such as the ancient Counsels had
limited: and for all other gainsayers, to silence or punish them. Now for the
Princes with joinctly consent to do this, how many, how weighty motives do
induce them? the service of Christ, the honor of Christian Religion, and the
peace of Christendom, the strengthening of Christians, and the repulsing and
overthrow of all Turks and jnfidels. And these in general. In particular, the
assuring of their own lives and persons, which so many under pretense of
Religion daily conspire against; the quiet and secure enjoying of their rich
states and kingdoms; the transmitting of them to their posterity without
question or opposition; and lastly the delivery of their miserable subjects,
(which should be dear unto them as children,) from those extreme vexations
of spirit and body, and those in estimable calamities in their estates and
conditions, wherewith these dissentions in religion and effects thereof do now
afflict them. And this is in general the sum of the discourse of that kind
of people: which does show them as they are for the most part to be
Protestants, though perhaps not running jump with their side in every thing
although many of the other part are carried also with the same good zeal and
affection to the like desire and invention; but these are of the more moderate
sort of the Catholics, and not of their Clergy, and such lightly as have but
an indifferent conceit of the Popes claim and proceedings, of which sort
among the wiser part of the Laity there are very many. But now in exacter
consideration of this motion, there appear for the effecting of it sundry
difficulties so great, that they draw to be next neighbors to so many
impossibilities, whereof I will mention only two of the chief. For as for the
thing it self, I must confess for my own part, the greatest desire I have in
this world, is to see Christendom reconciled in the badge of their profession,
(seeing Unity is consecrated to Verity, and both to God;) and that without
the ruin and subversion of either part, which cannot be done but to the
unexpressable mischief and misery of both sides, and with the utter
enhazarding of both Christendom and Christianity; and think any kind of
peace were better than these strifes, which did not prejudice that higher peace
between God and men's consciences. Then for the way they purpose, it seems
for the generality of it, there is no other now left; seeing the opposition of
extremes is no way defeazable, but by extinguishing the one, or drawing both
to some temper and mildness of state. But in this case two things do clean
disharten this hope. The first is the untractablenesse of the Papacy to this
course, who in so many conferences as they have had in this age, have always
ere they departed very plainly discovered that they came not with such intentas
to yield any thing for peace, much less for truths-sake, but only to assay
either by manifold persuasion and entreatie to reduce, or otherwise by wit to
entrap and disgrace their adversaries, and if some one of them have showed him
self more flexible at any time, it has been his utter discredit with his
own party ever after. Which stern proceeding of theyrs admitting the
fundamental positions whereon the Papacy is built, is good and necessary. For
if divine Authority do concur with them in all their ordinances, Gods
spirit assist them in all their decisions, all possibility of erring be
exempted from their Pope and Church: what remains there but only that they
teach we believe; they command, and the world obey? Indeed in humane
governments, where reason is shut out their tyranny thrusts in; but where God
commands to ask reason is presumption, to oppose reason flat rebellion. To
this miserable necessity have those assertions tied them, which they have laid
for their foundation; miserable to them selves and miserable to the whole
world. For what can be more miserable to any ingenuous and good mind than to
have entangled himself in such a labyrinth of perplexity and mischief, as to
have lost no place of acknowledging his error, without ruining his estate;
when as error is only purged by due acknowledging, and doubled by denying it,
and to what a miserable push have they driven the World, either in their
pleading against them with such force of evidence or in their learning of them
and joining with them, as to stop the mouth of the one, and hang the faith of
the other, on this unnatural paradox; I and my Church cannot possibly err,
and this must you take upon our own words to be true. For as for their
conjecturall evidence out of the Scripture, there seems to be as much or more
for the King of Spains not erring, as there is for the Popes: it being said by
the wisest, that the heart of the King is in the hands of God, a divine
sentence is in his lips, and his mouth shall not transgress in judgment.

But now as by this means they have debarred themselves from acknowledging and
consequently from controlling any error in faith and doctrine: so on the other
side to reform any great matter in practice were to open the eyes and mouths
of all men against them; who now in the obedience of their blindness stick
fast unto them. Let them suspend from hence-forward the worshipping of Images,
the fleeing to the patronage of Angels and Saints by vows and prayers:
besides the great loss which it would bring unto the train in daily offerings
to their Saints and Images; what a jealousy would it breed in the heads of
their own that they had led the world all this while on the blind side, and
that other things perhaps were introduced for gain, and corruptly contrived,
as well as these. Then for their adversaries, their own saying is, yield one
thing to them, and yield all; since all hangs upon the same pin, and by the same
string that any one does. So that it seems not to have been unwisely
conceived by him, who said, that to persuade the Pope to any such reformation,
was to persuade him to yield up his Keys and Crown, and to return into the
order of his Predecessors and other Patriarchs: which to do as yet he shows
no intention.

And although some one Pope should happen to be better affected, yet would it
not prevail unto any great proof, being sure that his nearest both
Counselors and Officers, his Cardinals and Courtiers, yea his Church and
whole State would oppose against him. Then to hope that though the Pope and his
Sea should withstand it, yet the learned of his side might be induced in other
places to accept and to apply them selves to some treaty of accord; I dare
avouch they know them not which have that conceit of them. For although it
were perhaps not untruly said by a great Clerk of their own, that the Popes
not erring was but an opinion of Policy, and not of Theology; to give stay to
the Laity, not stop to the Divines; of whom in such infinite controversies and
jarrings, about interpretations of texts, and conclusions of science, wherein
many have spent a large part of their lives, never any yet went neither at this
day does go to be resolved by the Pope; as knowing it to be true which their
own Law delivers, that in holiness any old woman, in knowledge many a Friar
might out-goe the Pope, but in power and authority the whole World was under
him: yet at this day they do so generally all cling unto him and draw by his
line, (as having no hope either of standing against their opposites, but only
by him; or of unity amongst them selves, but only in him;) that touch him, and
touch them; yea they think at leastwise some of them, that rejected name of
Papist, to be as good a name and more necessary at this day than that of
Catholic; the one showing their Unity only with the body, and the other with
the head of the Church, which is now more needful. It remains that Princes
take the matter in hand, and constrein the Pope and others to yield to some
such accord. Indeed this were an only right way to effect it. For reason is a
good Orator, when it has force to back it. But where are these Princes? They
dream of an old world, and of the heroical times, who imagine that Princes
will break their sleeps for such purposes. If there were at this day a DAVID in
Spain, a JOSIAS in France, an EZECHIAS in Italy, a CONSTANTINE in Germany; the
matter were ended in very short time. But take men as they are, and as they are
like to be; being brought uppe in the midst of their factions and flatterers,
where they seldom hear truth, and if a good motion by mischaunce be set on
foot by one part, it is sure to be straight crossed thorough the watchful and
industrious envy of the other: the world may hold it self reasonably happy
and content, if the Civil state be upheld in any tolerable terms, and not
think that they should care greatly for reforming the Church, and much less
for the uniting of the State Ecclesiastical, the dissentions whereof have and
daily serve so many men's turns.

And although it is to be acknowledged and thankfully commemorated, that this
age has not been so utterly barren of good Princes, but that some have
deserved to be enrolled among those Worthies: yet the ambition and encroaching
humors of certain, and want of correspondence requisite in other, have stopped
perhaps those honorable thoughts and desseins, which might have else be
employed for the universal good of Christendom. In sum, there is small hope
remaining on this part; the world having extinguished the care of the public
good, by an over-care of their private; and each projecting to pass his own
time smoothly over in pleasure, and recommending posterity to the Stars and
destiny. These reasons together with the long continuance of this division,
whereby both parts are formalized and settled in their oppositions; in so much
that at this day they are but very few in comparison of former times that are
gained either way; do make me greatly despair of any success by that course:
and so esteem of that plot, as an honested hearted desire, but no probable
dessein; and as a cabinet discourse of speculatiue consideration, which
practice in the world and experience does need to rectify.

The next poinct is, whether Necessity, which overrules all frowardness, and
commands all sturdinesse of humors and passions, may not press to some
Unity; if the Turk still growing as hitherto he has done, leave no hope for
Christendom to subsist but in their inward Concord. It is true that a
foreign enemy is a reconciler of brethren, and that common danger holds
them, together, so long as it lasts, who else would flee a sunder upon every
light occasion. But herein me thinks it comes first to be considered, whether
the Turk be so* fearful a Monarch as is commonly conceived, especially since
his late so huge enlargement toward the East. That which most men estoeme in
him the grand cause of error, seems to me a chief argument of the
contrary, at this present: and that is the very hugeness of the Empires. For
Empires are not then always at their strongest, when at their biggest; there
being a certain due proportion in all things, which they breaking that
exceed, as well as they that come short of; may be compted to be huge and
vast, not great; since that is great properly, which is great in his actions,
which are as often impeached by unwildinesse in the big, as by weakness in
the little. But if to this be adjoined, as it sometimes falls out, that there
be but a little soul to moan this vast body, (which makes some of the
biggest men to be neither the wisest nor valiantest;) and that is, that the
government, which is the soul of a state, be scant and feeble: not able to
embrace nor to order so huge affairs: then is there no other greater praesage
of ruin, than very massinesse it self, which every strong push or justle
makes reele and totter, for want of that inward strength which were requisite
to hold it stedie. And this take I to be the State of the Turkish Empire at
this day: which being a mere tyranny, as aiming only at the mightiness and
security of their great Lord, the sole absolute commander, without any respect
to the benefit of the people under him, save only so far forth as may serve
to bear up his greatness; and for that cause he in his jealousy and
distrust of his own, keeping his Territories half desolate, wast, and
unhabited, his subjects without heads of Nobility to lead them, without hearts
to encourage them to seek deliverie, abasing them by all kind of bestial
education, and oppressing them by all sorts of extortion and outrage, giving
the Lands where he conquereth to his Soldiers and Timarri: which scattered
over all parts of his ample Empire, are the only contented people and only
strength in effect he has, as being bound by their tenures to serve in his
war, whethersoever he calls them: and without his charge: this being his
state, it is clear, that the wildness and lying wast of his Country; is to
the great diminishing of his own wealth and revenew: which is less than some
one of our Christian Princes at this day, though his Empire much larger than
all theyrs together: the unpopulousnesse together with the baseness and
feebleness of such as are, makes that no one Country is defense for it self
but must have the concurse of many of the rest to assist it; and lastly the
huge circuit of his soil and confines, embracing as is esteemed eight thousand
mile of Land, and of Sea as many, is cause that his Timarri cannot assemble
together but in very long time, wherein opportunities are often lost, besides
the tiring both of themselves and their horses, ere they arrive. And the truth
hereof is assured by fresh experience, he having done no great matter in all
this war of Hungary, though none to speak of but Germany, with some small
help of Italy, have opposed against him. But if we farther consider the
effiminatenesse of the education of their Great Lords in these times; a thing
which they are advised and constreined unto, even contrary oftentimes to the
manliness of their own natures, (and all to keep the Father from jealousy
of his own son, whose braveness of mind and warlinesse is still suspected;)
and use having soaked once into their bones in youth, does for ever after lose
the sins of their manly dispositions, and subject them to the softness and
baseness of pleasures: considering also the avarice and corruption which
reigns there; all peaces and wars, all friendships and enmities* all favors
and wrongs, all Counsels and informations, being grown to be saleable: if
these be as they are the signs of a diseased, and prognosticates of a dying
Monarchy, much more of a tyranny; then surely have we not now so great cause
to dread him, as to blame our selves and our wranglings and vilitie, who choose
thus in practicing to exterminate each other, to trace out an unhonourable and
fruitless life, at the end finding our selves in the very same or worse
terms than when we began; rather then establishing first a firm accord at
home, to attempt with united love zeal and forces, so just, so christian, so
honorable, so rich a war. And verily if but our Princes confining upon him,
though agreeing among themselves for the most in Religion, were not so
strangely infected with emulations, and home-ambitions, as to condescend to pay
tribute to the Turk in several, for so do they as a redemption each of their
peace, (which yet has no longer assurance than his pleasure, which with double
as much underhand bribes and presents must be daily sweetened;) and which is
yet worse, when his list comes to invade any one of them, (as he does for his
very exercise and avoiding tumults at home;) the rest to hold off from giving
succor to their neighbors, for fear of drawing a revenge upon themselves
some other time; which is the case of the Polonians and Venetians at this
present, who scarcely dare so much as pray against him in their devotions,
otherwise than in their hares, which I ween they do duly: were it not I say
that their private ambitions, fears and miscasts did drive them to make so
abject and unchristian a choice, rather than zealously and violently to join
and pursue one certain course for the rooting of him and his tyranny out of
this part of the world: it were not to be so much doubted but the fear now on
this side would soon turn to the other; seeing that one good blow to a body
so ill built and full of distempers, were able to put the whole in danger of
ruin and shivering. These reasons induce me not to think that the danger
from the Turk should be so great, as to enforce the Christians to run
mainly into an accord. And though it should, yet without other sounder working,
by perfect composing of all inward di^cention, this would be but a civil
accord, and only for the time; which the fear once past, would dissolve of it
self, and the former contentions reviue as fresh as ever. For the bond of
common fear, is the strongest indeed of all other, but the shortest withal;
which nothing during the danger is able to break, and the danger once passed
falls in sunder of his own unsoundnesse. Howbeit if the Turk should set foot
in Italy, and abate the Popes strength by possessing his state; then would I
not doubt much, but that both him self would be content, and all other Princes
forward, that some such unity as is before spoken of might be established. But
that is a case as unlikely in short time* as in tract of time not impossible to
happen, if some manly stout Turk should succeed these womanish.

There remains then the Unity by persuasion only, which both sides now seem
to rest on; each practicing and hoping in process of time to eat out the
strength of the other by his industry, in drawing away by persuasion his
followers and ad^aerents. Wherein the Protestant counts his advantage so much
the greater, in that the Unity of Verity is it which himself persuaded of the
persuades to others. And truth being so infinite degrees stronger than untruth,
having God to bless it, Heaven and Earth and all the Creatures of God to
witness it, and even falsehood it self (which is always his own cutthroat) by
his crossing and contrariety to yield confession unto it: unless the fault be
exceedingly in the handler and pleader, must needs in the end, (maugre the
malice of all enemies, and craft of all inventions,) prevail and have
victory: although the utter abolishment of the Kingdom of Antichrist, they
refer with the Prophecy to the appearance of our Savior in judgment and
triumph now shortly approaching. On the other side the Papists hope, that their
persuasion being seconded by so great Princes authority, insinuated and
farthered by so many collateral aids of motives and practices, leaving nothing
unaffaied which may prejudice, afflict, or annoy their opposites, and providing
as they do a perpetual succession of instruments, to be employed in each kind
over all parts of Christendom; they shall in the end tire, eat out, and
utterly consume the strength and stomach of their unpolitike and divided
adversaries. In the number whereof, though they score up all religions
especially Christian, that acknowledge not the Pope, and the threefold
plenitude of his supernall, terrestrial, and infernal power; extending to
Heaven in canonizing Saints; to the lower parts of the world in freeing from
Purgatory; over the Earth in being the univarsall guide and Pastor of all men:
yet are they not affected to all their opposites in like sort, speaking of such
as with whom they live and daily converse. For to omit the Jew whom they mock
with his Messiah. so long in coming; as also the Graecians, whom they pity
with their Patriarchs under Turkish slaverie: their hatred is to the Lutheran,
the Author of their calamity; but hatred and fear both of the Calvinist
only, whom they account the only growing enemy and dangerous to their
state. For as for the Lutheran, he was long since at his highest: and if he
itch and inch forward one way for an ell he loses an other, it is only by a
kind of boisterous force and violence against the Calvinist; as in Strasbourg
of late. The reason whereof besides the absurdity of their Ubiquitarie
Chimera, has perhaps been in part also, for that their opinion took up his
seat in Germany, a stiff people but an heavy; which cannot hold their own
well, but gain little upon other men: whereas the other falling upon a
liuelier metal, of the French especially, who are always stirring and
practicing upon their neighbors, and more vehement for the while in whatsoever
they affect; has had a very huge increase in latter time, notwithstanding
those Massacres which have been used to extinguish them, and is still growing
forward in all places where once it takes; and overtoppeth them now from whose
root at first it sprang. This therefore by all means they seek to repress,
giving some blind hope to the Lutheran of quiet and tolleration, so he will
join against these, the fretters out of both. But of all places their desires
and attempts to recover England, have been always and still are the strongest:
which although in their more sober moods sundry of them will acknowledge, to
have been the only Nation that took the right way of justifiall Reformation,
in comparison of other who have run headlong rather to a tumultuous
innovation, (so they conceive it:) whereas that alteration which has been in
England, was brought in with peaceable and orderly proceeding, by general
consent of the Prince and whole Realm representatiuely assembled in solemn
Parliament, a great part of their own Clergy according and conforming
themselves unto it; no LVTHER no CALVIN the square of their Faith; what public
discussing and long deliberation did persuade them to be faulty; that taken
away; the succession of Bishops and vocation of Ministers continued; the
dignity and state of the Clergy preserved; the honor and solemnity of the
service of God not abased; the more ancient usages of the Church not
cancelled; in sum, no humor of affecting contrariety, but a charitable
endeavor rather of conformity with the Church of Rome, in whatsoever they
thought not gain*saying to the express Law of God, which is the only
approvable way in all mere Reformations; yet notwithstanding in regard of the
power and renown of the Prince, and of their exemplarie policy in government
of the state in regard that they concurring entirely with neither side; yet
reverenced with both, are the fitter and abler to work Unity between them,
and to be an umpire also director and swayer of all, whenever there should
be occasion of assembling their Counsels, or of conjoyning their forces for
their common defense; and especially for that it is the only Nation of the
Protestant party, able to encounter and affront their King-Catholikes
proceedings for the rooting out of Haeresie, as their actions both by Sea and
Land have manifested: of all places in the world they desire most to recover
it, making full account that the rest would then soon follow, and apply to
them of their own accord one after an other. But to as high a tide as they are
risen in their desires thereof, to as low an ebb are they sallne in their
hopes, being less now for ought I perceive than ever, having seen her
Majesty so often and almost miraculously preserved; their treasons discovered;
their excommunications vanished; their Armies defeated; their cartalls and
books answered; their chief Champions discouraged, wasted, deceased, those
that remain, though many, yet few of ability; in so much but for some small
remnant of hope of alteration, which time and trouble as they imagine may yet
bring, their founders were likely to with draw from them ere long their
stipends, which get them but a vain name of fruitless liberality. And this
is all I can say for any hope or means of this general Unity, and so must I
leave and recommend it to God: as being both our best and now remaining only
policy, to address our united and general supplications to his divine power
and Majesty: that it may please him by that ever springing fountain of his
goodness and gracious mercy, even beyond all humane hope, if it may so stand
with his blessed will: and by such means as to his divine wisdom are ever in
readiness to effect those things which to man's wit may seem impossible, to
extend his compassionable and helping hand over his miserable, defiled,
disgraced Church; persecuted abroad and persecuting it self at home; confined
by Tyrants into a corner of the world, and therein raging and renting it self
in fitters; to purge out of men's minds that ambition and vanity, which so
bewitcheth them with the love of the pomps and glories of this perishing and
ending world, which in the breathing of a breath they will loath and despise as
nothing; and to ingraft in them a pure and single Eye, to behold that eternal
truth, which seen breeds love, and loved conducts to happiness; to root out
all gall and acerbitie on both sides, and to bend their hearts to Charity: that
being reunited in the Pilgrimage of this life, this country of our terrestrial
bodies; we may after our service and course therein accomplished, ascend under
the conduct of our Savior before ascended, to our everlasting rest in the
country of our celestial souls; there in Society and unity of Saints and
Angels, to enjoy the happy Vision of the all-glorious Deity, and to sing his
praise for ever.

I should here make an end concerning the Church of Rome, but that a question
incident to the matter which was last spoken of, being moved by many, and
diversely answered, does summon me to deliver up my conjecture also: and that
is Upon what ground of Equity or policy, the Pope should suffer both the
Jews and Grecians to have public exercise of their Religion in Italy, yea in
Rome it self under his Holiness nose: and only the poor Protestant must be
excluded or besieged yea persecuted and chased if it be possible out of the
world, no view of his Religion to other, no exercise of it to himself
permitted. For as for the Graecians, they have a Church at Venice, with an
Archbishop of Philadelphia, a Bishop of Cerigo, and sundry other inferior
Priests to govern it: and the Italians also do often repair to their Mass.
They have their Mass also in Greek, with leavened bread and other
schismatic Ceremonies, at Rome it self, and in Naples they say their
Priests retain their wines still, by permission from the Pope; in regard that
in those places they acknowledge in some sort the Popes praeeminencie and
power: which at Venice they do not, but a mere primacie of order, which the
ancient Counsels have thought good to give him. No more do the Graecians in
Apulia and Calabria, about Otronto and at Catlana, nor in Corfu and other
Islands adjoining to that cost, being the old remains of the Occidentall
Graecians, and who have always and do still follow the Greek Church in all
things: though those in Calabria and Apulia be subjects to the King of Spain,
and in his power to root out whenever himself lists. And yet even in Italy
it self does he suffer them and their Religion: who never could be induced to
tolerate the Protestant in any the remotest corner of his huge scattered
Monarchy: though the Graecians are condemned Haereticks even in matter of the
Trinity, and perpetual oppugners of the Papal right and authority. Then for
the Jews they even swarm in most of the chief parts of Italy: at Rome
especially; where the least number I could ever yet hear them esteemed at, is
ten thousand and upward, though other say twice as many. They have their fair
or at leastwise fine Synagogues both there and els-where; their circumcision,
their Liturgies, their Sermons in public; and all that lift may resort unto
them.

Yea in means of enriching them selves they are so much favored, that in all
places they are permitted to streine up their V^urie to eighteen in the
hundred upon the Christian (for among them selves they no where use it;)
whereas half that sum in a Christian is not tolerated: which causes many
greedy and consciencelesse Christians to use these Jews for their Brokers
under hand in improving their unlawful rents to the utmost proportion. They
have also in some places, and it may be in all a peculiar Magistrate, to decide
any controversy between Christians and them, with particular direction to
favor them in their trades. And lastly whereas France has banished that race:
in Avignon only the Popes City they are harbored and rete^ned. Some answer
to this demand in defense of the Pope, that the Church has no authority to
chastise the Jews, who never were within the Church, but are as enemies in even
terms: whereas the Protestants are either unnatural and rebellious Children,
who have flung out of the Church, or the issue of such; against whom her
authority is endless and unrestreined, to tak^ all courses possible to
reclaim them for ever. This answer seems faulty: both as short of the
question, seeing it extends not to the Graecians, who are in the very same
roll of Haeretickes and Schismatickes, flingers out of the Church: and for that
there is difference between exercising jurisdiction in punishing an enemy, and
not harboring and cherishing him, with his unlawful and scandalous religion
perpetually in our very bosoms; as is done in Italy, who have called the Jews
in thither, yea and still do entice them, whom, France and England and Spain
have banished from them long since.

Other leaving these quirks of justice, hold by the texts of Charity that it
is a Christian act to harbor a harmless enemy, and especially that it is of
all other most befitting the Church, who has hereby also better means to
reduce them to the Faith; and so in fine to save their souls, which is the
sum of her endeavors. And in fortifying this answer there is to be alleged
for the first poinct, that the Jews have their service in hebrew, and the
Graecians in greek, which Italy understands not; yea and that they have
purged the Hebrew Liturgy from all poincts wherein they did impugn or
scandalize Christianity: and for the second poinct, that the Jews are bound to
repair at some times to the Christian sermons, by which means some few of the^
have been converted, and more may be when God shall please so. But neither
seems this answer so perfect as were requisite. For the Jews make their sermons
or expositions of the Law in the Italian language; though the texts of
Scripture they cite in the original: and although they have purged their
Liturgies as they say: yet leaving them Circumcision, they tolerate that which
is now intolerable. And as for their gaining of any souls among them; if they
gained not more Crowns, that reason would not stand. For if any credit may be
given to the Hebrews them selves, as many Friars become Jews as Jews become
Friars: of both sorts some; but few of either. But of the good provision they
have taken to convert them, and of the fruits thereof, I shall speak hereafter.
In the mean time this I ask; would they suffer the English Protestants to have
an English Church there, none understanding their Language neither in Service
nor Sermons; yea and purging their Liturgy of whatsoever may seem to impugn
or deface their Religion, if there be any thing in it of that offensive
quality? as for my part I know nothing but think rather with great judgment it
was purposely so framed out of the grounds of Religion wherein both sides do
agree that their very Catholics might resort to it without scruple or
scandal, if faction more then reason did not sway. Then for repairing to their
sermons, they know by experience they will not be backward; especially having
the opinion of great Divines (is some say) that it is not unlawful. And
lastly, what reason why they should not be as hopeful to g^^ne English men's
souls, as Jews? yes their hope is greater: else would they not be at such
cost upon the one abroad, and bestow so little labor upon the other at home.
To this question they would answer first that there were more danger of
flocking away their people, if* they should have but a bare view of our
Reformed Churches, as being more infectious; and therefore no policy: and
secondly to what purpose the making of any such motion; what need unto us, and
to them what profit? This answer deduced from policy and profit I take to be
the right answer also to the first principal question; and neither of the
former drawn from Justice or Charity. For there is no cause of any fear at
all, either of the oppressed Grecian, or of the obstinate Jew, bearing a mark
of ignominy and reproach in all places. Yea they remain rather as examples
and spectacles among them of contempt and mi^crie, the one for his ungrateful
refusal of CHRIST himself; the other for his sedition against Christ's Vicar,
as they infer against him. Whereas to give the Protestants any foot among
them were the next way to leave them selves no foot to stand on.

On the other side by extending pity toward the afflicted and dismayed
Grecian* whom the hand of God has laid as low as the very dust we tread on,
they sow some hope of ranging him self again under their subjection: which
were to them a reputation and strength inaestimable, and such as cunningly by
^alse bruits they cause the world daily to feed on.

Then ^or the Jew, the profit by him is exceeding great, and greater in
proportion of number than by the very Courtizans; and that as well to the Pope,
as to other Princes of Italy; to whom they pay a yearly rent for the very heads
they wear, besides other means to ^acke and wrack them in their purses at
pleasure. Which gain, as it is a piece of the cause why the beastly trade of
the one, so is it the entire reason why the trade of the other is permitted:
they being used as the Friars to suck from the meaner, and to be sucked by
the greater: in so much that the Pope besides their certain tribute, does some
times as is said impose on them a subsedie of ten thousand Crowns
extraordinary, for some service of State.

Now to consider a little what probability of their conversion in those parts,
and by the way to touch somewhat of Their Religion and usage, thus stands their
case. They have a Religion though somewhat strange to our conceits, as being
framed not only out of the Law of the old Bible, but also out of sundry the
stranger opinions of the auncienter Philosophers, together with certain
capriccious fancies and fables of the Rabbis; yet so handsomely pieced and
glewed together, that one part seems to hang to the other not absurdly. And
that which they hold they are so perfect in, that they will give both a
profitable account thereof out of a certain moral Philosophy and reason,
wherein they are well seen; as also make some show for it out of the Bible it
self: wherein they are the skilfullest men I believe in the World: and needs
must be so, setting their Children to the Hebrew language at three years old,
and following no other study save of the Bible and writings upon it all their
life long, except certain few that betake themselves to Physic. Touching God
and his nature, their opinions are for the most very honorable and holy, save
that they deny the Trinity touching Angels, but weak, and soyled with much
poetry: touching the nature and condition of man very exquisite and for the
most part drawing near unto truth. But for the three States of the soul of
man they run some more strange courses; holding the creation of them all
together before the bodies, with sundry of the ancient both Divines and
Philosophers the (...) of PITHAGORAS, (though not to different species;) and
PLATO^S Purgatory. Of virtue and Vice and man's course in both they think not
much amiss^; save that to the expiation of sin they hold nothing necessary:
but the repentance of the sinner, and the mercy of the forgiver, which in that
case is always ready. For reward it comes wholly from the bounty of God,
without desert: yet different in degree according to the works of each man.
That the general Law of all men is the Law of Nature only, which who so
keeps, it shall lead him to bliss in what Religion soever; though the Hebrew
unto whom MOSES Law was peculiarly given by observing it shall have a greater
praerogatiue of glory. They prefer the civil life before the solitary, and
marriage before Virginity: as being to nature more agreeable, to mankind more
profitable, and consequently to God more acceptable. Their belief of the end
of the world, and of the final judgment, of the restoring of men's bodies, and
of their happiness everlasting in the height of the Heavens; is good in the
general. But as they think it a bad opinion, which some of great name have
seemed to hold, that God in his everlasting and absolute pleasure should affect
the extreme misery of any of his Creatures, for the showing of his Justice
and severity in tormenting them; or that the calamity, casting away, and
damnation of some, should absolutely and necessarily redound more to his
glory, than the felicity of them all; considering that his nature is mere
goodness and happiness, and has no affinity with rigor or mi^erie: so
contrariwise they think with ORIGIN, that Hell in the end shall be utterly
abolished, and that the Devils them selves, after a long course of bitter
repentance and punishment, shall find mercy at his hands that did create them;
that the world may entirely be restored to that purity, wherein God at the
first did make it; and to that perfection and happiness, whereto each part of
it in his several degree, was d^stined by him, from whom nothing but goodn^s
and blissfulness could proceed. Their Liturgy in the kind of it is not
different from ours; consisting of Psalms and Prayers, with sundry shorter
Hymns and responds; of lessons, one out of the Law, and read by some chief
person; and an other out of the Prophets, correspondent to the former in
argument, but read by some boy or meaner companion.

For they in no sort allow that degree of Honor, weither attribute they that
authority, to any other part of the Bible, that they do to their Law: which
they carry about their Synagogue at the end of service in procession, with many
rich ornaments of Crowns and Scepters, the children kissing it as it passes by
them; and sometimes make proclamation who will give most to their treasure to
have the honor for that time for taking out the Law. But for the manner of
performing their service, and their behavior thereat, it is different from all
other that ever I saw. They chaunt it in a strong wide hallowing tune; with
imitation some times of trumpets one ecchoing to the other, and winding up by
degrees from a soft or silent whispering, to the highest and lowdest note that
their voices will bear; with continual great wagging of their bodies and
exultation, as it were in some savage or raging solemnity; sometimes all
springing up lightly from the ground, and with as much variety as wild work
will receive. They were certain ornaments of embrodered linen cast mantle-wise
about their shoulders, which are their Phylasters edged with knotted fringe
according to the number of the Commandments, and serving as Local memories of
the Law. The reverence they show is in standing up at times, and their gesture
of adoration is bowing forward of their bodies, for kneeling, they use none, no
more than the Graecians, neither stir they their bonets in their Synagogue to
any man, but remain still covered. They come to it with washed hands; and in
it they burn Lamps to the honor of God. But for any show of devotion or
elevation in spirit, that yet in a Jew could I never discern: but they are as
reverent in their Synagogues as Grammar-boys in their schools when their
Master is absent: in sum, their holiness is the very outward work it self
being a brainlesse head and a soule-lesse body: For circumcision, they use it
to the dead as well as to the living: yet no way think it necessary for the
infants salvation. They are a subtle and advantageous people and wonderfully
eager of gain: in so much that who so deals with them needs let his wit go
with his belief, or else his findings shall come short of his expectings. As
earnest to make Proselytes, as ever their ancestors: and as obstinate against
CHRIST, as the Priests that condemned him. In other poincts they are perhaps
rather to be commended than otherwise. Their care of avoiding Fornication is
such that they marry their sons at Eighteen lightly. But Adultery they would
punish according to the Law with death, if they had such liberty. When they
break the Law they come voluntarily as penitents to their Rabbi for
punishment: yet without any particular disclosing of their fault. They keep
their Fasts and solemn Feasts very duly: but as the Christians fast the night,
so they the noone always. They are charitable among them selves, leaving no
poor unrelieved, no Prisoner unransomed; which makes them good prize upon
every pretense. And although for their Usury and guilefull dealing, they are
generally hated there and handled as very dogs: yet some of them I have known,
men of singular virtue and integrity of mind, seeming to want no grace but the
faith of a Christian. Each Synagogue has his Rabbi, to expound their Law; to
instruct their children; to decide their differences.

For their Messiah, they say now, seeing he stays so long, he shall be a
forerunner of the end of the World: and shall gather by his power all Nations
into one fold, and so resign them up into the hands of that aeternall Pastor.
But it seems they expect him out of the East, whether the Spanish Jews fled,
and have exceedingly multiplied. For those do they hold to be of the Tribe of
IVDA; and these other in Germany and Italy of the Tribe of BENJAMIN; who in
honor of the more noble Tribe and to correspond with them the better, do
learn the Spanish tongue, which those still retain.

But now to come to the poinct which I principally intended, which is, what
probability of their Conversion in Italy; three great impediments besides
their natural and inrooted obstinacy, I suppose there are which hinder it:
the scandalls of the Christians; the want of means to instruct them; and the
punishment or loss which by their conversion they incur, A scandal it is to
see man's law directly preferred before Gods: to see so great a matter made of
eating flesh on a Friday, and that Adultery should pass for so ordinary a
pastime. A scandal are those Blasphemies darted uppe with hellish mouths
against God and our Savior, so ordinarily and openly, that some of them are
become very interjections of speech to the vulgar, and other some mere phrases
of galantrie to the braver. A scandal is that forging and packing in miracles:
wherein the Friars and Jews concur in aequall diligence; the one in contriving,
the other in discovering them. And surely this is an exceeding great scandal
unto them; seeing truth is of so pure and victorious a nature, that it refuses
to be in league with any falsehood in the world, much more disdaineth to be
assisted by it: neither can there be a greater wrong done to a true conclusion,
than to endeavor to prove it by an untrue allegation. A scandal are the
alterations which they are forced by the Inquisitours to make in their Authors
and monuments of Antiquity: thinking that these devises are our best
evidences. But of all those alterations they keep a note for a freer time. A
scandal is the vowing and praying to Angels and Saints: which they hold to
be duties peculiar unto God only, and so has it been esteemed among them in
all ages. Yea and they note that the Christians pray more often and more
willingly to Christ's mother, than unto Christ him self or unto God. But the
greatest scandal of all other, is their worshipping of Images; for which both
Jews and Turks call them the Idolatrous Christians. Now this is so much the
greater and of more indignity, for that they generally conceive it to be a
thing which Christ himself expressly commanded; and that in the Gospel of
Christ written by the Evangelists them selves, the Decalogue should be recited
with omission of the second praecept; as one of their greatest Rabbis
contested with me, being induced into that error by some Catechismes of the
Christians which he had seen with that fault. Now when they come to conference
with the Priests and Friars, (as sometimes they do,) and upbraid this as a
peremptory exception against Christ those good men deny it not, for fear of
scandalizing their own, but letting it pass for current, that Christ whom the
Jews call a Carpenter, was also an Image-maker or howsoever an Author of the
worshipping of them; seek to salve up the gash which they have made in the
plain words of that Law which was written by the finger of God, with their
speculatiue playsters of distinguishing between the Images of the true God,
and the Idols of false Gods; of (...) and (...); of intention isntrumental
and final in worship.

All which are the unsavourest druggs to the Jew in the world: who says there
was never Nation yet so blockish under the sun, as to worship a stock and
stone as a final object; but only as a representation of some absent
divinity: and that the Heathen them selves call them every where the Effigies
and Simulachra of other; yet such Effigies as that the divine power by his
virtue did sometime inhabit and work miracles by, even as our Lady does in her
Images, in infinite places of Christendom: whereby if the poor Idiot were
deceived among the Pagans to think sometimes that very Image some divine
matter or person: as clear is it that the like befalls infinite simple
Christians, seeing their Images either to grow, or to weep and bleed, as they
do often, and so infinite cures wrought by viewing or touching them. And for
their degrees of worship between Gods Images and the Saints, they cannot
perceive them, they kneel to them alike; they pray to them alike; they vow to
them alike; they incense the^ alike; they burn candles to thm alike; they cloth
the^ alike; they offer gifts to the^ alike; the difference if it be any is in
their mental affections: which whether the blunt and undistinguishing wits of
the vulgar do observe, they suppose a small measure of discretion may
conjecture. In like sort for their distinction between the Images of the true
God and of false Gods; they tell them that in other cases that might have this
use but none in this Law; it being expounded in other places, as prohibiting
this base sensual and seducing kind of worshipping even God himself by an
Image, if any Image of God were possible to be made: that thus the Law it
self does plainly deliver; thus they which received the Law understood it;
thus all their holy Ancestors and learned Doctors have still interpreted;
and thus has their Nation in all ages believed. And therefore they say for
their coming to the Christian Sermons, that as long as they shall see the
Preacher direct his speech and prayer to that little wooden Crucifix which
stands on the Pulpit by him, to call it his Lord and Savior, to kneel down
to it, to embrace and kiss it, to weep upon it; (as is the fashion of Italy;)
this is preaching sufficient for them, and persuades them more with the very
sight of it to hate Christian Religion, than any reason that the world can
allege to love it. And these be the scandalls, which as I have heard them
selves allege, they take on that side; besides their Transubstantiation which
they can at no hand digest. The particular scandal from the Protestants, is
their mutual dissension which they hold to proceed from the want of the Unity
of truth in their foundation: otherwise save for their general exceptions
against Christianity, they hold their Religion very conformable to the Law of
Nature, which they account the principal. But were all the unneedfull scandals
in those parts removed, yet is there no good means there of the Jews
conversion. They complain first, that the New Testament being the ground of
our Religion, they cannot see it. That Italian translation which they had is
called-in and taken from them. It is printed in Hebrew letters, but not in
Hebrew language; at leastwise not such as they can understand. With Greek and
Latin their Nation never meddled. Besides which the Inquisitours have inhibited
and taken from them all Books that were published in that theme on either
side, as well those that have been written in defense of Christian Religion,
as the contrary against it; alleging they will have no disputing in matter of
Religion either way: much like to an Edict set up at Dola in the Franch County,
where the Jesuits reside; forbidding any talk of God either in good sort or
bad. Then lastly for those few Sermons they are bound to repaire-to, seldom
where I have been are they directed to the Jews or to the poincts they stick
on, but hold on their usual tenor, as respecting more the Christians. The
last encouragement to men especially of their metal, is that at their
conversion to Christianity they must quit their goods to the Christians. And
the reason is for that in Baptism they renounce the devil and all his works;
part whereof are the Jews goods, being gotten either by them selves or by their
Ancestors with Usury. Now this is such a cold comfort to a man set on the
world as that Nation is wonderfully: that for my part I have not heard of any
converted in those parts, save some few Physicians with some of their children;
who by friendship from the Pope have obtained dispensation to retain their
goods still, in as much as they were gotten by their honorable profession. But
if on the contrary side the Christians would again in their Charity give
somewhat for the competent enterteinment of such as for Gods sake did give up
their own; I could not but well commend that rigor of Justice, which the
bountifulness of this Mercy did intigate and assweeten. But being no such
matter there remains nothing fof a Jew converted, but to be Friered; a trade
which of all other they least can fancy, as being contrary, as they allege,
to nature it self, which has made man sociable, and each helpefull unto other
in all civil duties; a trade never commanded or commended by God; never
practiced or counseled by their renowned Ancestors, who received continual
instruction and inspiration from above, which none of their Patriarchs or
Prophets have given example of; only in three or four thousand years ELIAS and
some one other have been found upon very extraordinary cause to have taken also
an extraordinary course of life; though of other nature, and to other purpose,
than the Votaries of our times. And these are the terms that the Jews stand
in in those parts; and so must I leave them to the merciful cure of God: an
unblessed and forsaken people; obstinate with in and scandalized without;
indefatigable in their expectation, untractable in persuasion; worldly, yet
wre^ched; received of their enemies, but despised and hated; scattered over all
Countries, but no where planted; daily multiplying in number, but to the
increase of their servitude and not of their power; in sum, a long continued
and marked example of Gods just severity; to abate their pride that glory
even as they, in their Ancestors and Founders, Gods Temple and Oracles, many
promises and praerogatiues, long continuance in honorable estate and glory:
(which things were they sufficient to preserve any sea in the world, even their
seat had been preserved by them:) and to proclaim to the whole world that there
is no assurance of the favor, protection, and assistance of God, (without
which all falls to ruin,) but by believing in his Son, and in keeping his
Commandments. And this also may seem touching the Church of Rome sufficient.

Next follows the Greek Church, enthralled all in a manner save the
Muscovites and the Candians, with some few other of no great name and number,
under the Turkish-tyrannie. Of which Church, as their far distance from us
requires not to speak much, so their uniformitie in misery yields not much
to be spoken. For their Religion, except only their ancient error touching
the proceeding of the holy spirit from the Father alone, wherein they have long
dissented from all the Latin or West. Church; in other poincts they seem to
stand in some middle terms, of opinion between the Romanists and
Protestants, yet so that in the more, they approach to the Church of Rome: and
to the Protestants in the more weighty, or at leastwise more dominatiue. With
Rome they concur in the opinion of Transubstantiation, and generally in the
sacrifice and and whole body of the Mass; in praying to Saints: in auricular
confession: in offering of sacrifice and prayer for the dead: and in these
without any or no material difference. They hold Purgatory also and the
worshipping of Pictures. But for Images they will not so much as endure them in
their Churches; as well for that proclivitie they have to train away the
ignorant into crime of Pagan-errour; as also to avoid that similitude between
their Churches and the Heathenish Temples of Idols, which imagrie does cause.
And for their Pictures, they kneel to two only of Christ and our Lady: the
rest they pass over with an ordinary reverence. For Purgatory, they hold none
in Hell or in the skirts thereof, or by any outward torment: but that the
souls of the faithful are not received into glory, till by an extreme
compunction and anguish of mind, they have worn out those stains, with which
sin and the pleasures thereof in this life defile them. In sum, those
opinions which grew into the Church before that separation between the Greeks
and the Latins, and all those Ceremonies which were common unto both, they
still retain; as their crossings, and tapers, with certain other. But for
those superstitions which have crept in in fresher memory, or which were if as
ancient, yet not so current; and in general all those Canons of the Romish
faith, which have been thrust on them in these latter times, by the
unaccomptable power and pride of the Papacy, tending to the advancement of
their own sea, and to the exempting of their Church and doctrine from trial;
by those Anabaptisticall fancies of the spirit that moves them, and protects
them from error in their consultations and resolutions touching matter of
faith, extenuating the sufficiency and authority of the Scripture in
comparison of their spirit or Church guided by it; all these things they
abhor no less than the Protestant. They hold understanding requisite to
concur with affection for the accomplishment of devotion in praying to God: and
although their Liturgies are the same that in the old time, namely St. BASILS,
St. CHRISOSTOMES, and St. GREGORY'S translated, without any bending of them to
that change of Language which their tongue has also suffered: yet do they say
that alteration is not so great but that their people with small accustoming
understand the Liturgies well enough. But for praying by tale with St DOMINICKS
round compters, they esteem of it no better than those Heathenish repetitions
and unnatural lip-labours which our Savior censureth. Neither can they
believe that the Apostle St. JAMES the lesser, who is painted under the Papacy
with his great beads at his girdle, (even as MARY MAGDALEN lightly praying
before a Crucifix,) was St. DOMINICKS disciple; but a wiser man's far, and one
that introduced a better fashion of praying of the world could have been
content to have followed his prescript. In like sort for the holy water so much
used under the Papacy; they believe no such fear that the Devil should have
of it, nor such force in it to purge sin, as their neighbors do teach. They
repute it a very vain opinion that the Church cannot err, both in the whole
and every part thereof, and consequently that their neighbors of Rome had
bestowed that pains better, which they have spent in proving and persuading
that they cannot err, in providing and caring more not to have erred. They
acknowledge that there is sufficient doctrine in Scripture for salvation:
though to the ancient usages of the Church, and writings of ancient Fathers,
they yield due reverence. Three things in the Pope they condemn especially;
his pride, his cruelty, and his presumption most of all: his pride, in
arrogating so exorbitant a jurisdiction over all the Church, contrary to the
decrees of ancient Counsels, and upon no shadow of right or good foundation;
but chiefly in usurping that temporal tyranny over Princes and their States,
in de posing of the one, and disposing of the other, at his absolute pleasure:
his cruelty in persecuting other Christians with such extremity for their
different opinions: his praesumption in mounting up into the seat of God, by
dispensing with the Laws of God, and granting pardons for sin, and
Liberaties out of Purgatory; which they account to be of those royal
praerogatiues incident to God only. For as for the doctrinall foundation of
those Indulgences, the overplus of merits and satisfaction in some, being more
than they needed or than were to be requited with any joys of Heaven in their
particular persons, and consequently remain as a perpetual treasure to the
Church, to be conferred by the Pope on his weaker and less deserving or
rather less satisfying children, (for so is their opinion:) so far are they
from prizing merits at such an inaestimable value, that contrariwise they
concur in assertion with the Protestants, that it is unpossible for any
creature to merit as by way of right the least dram of reward at his Creatours
hands; the service of ten thousand millions of Worlds, being not able to add
any shadow of perfection to him, who is Perfection it self, having whatsoever
is good or desirable within himself, even from all aeternitie, in infinite of
degree, and with impossibility of any the least addition. But whatsoever
reward is bestowed on the creature* flows forth from the mere bounty and
graciousnesse of the Creator: who as in goodness alone and mere grace did
make him, so in goodness and mere grace also does advaunce him unto that
higher happiness.

That service intermediall which he requires at his hand, is a gracious
disposition of sweetest harmony from the unexplicable wisdom of a Lord and
Father, still abounding and still enlarging his hands, in all bounty and
goodness toward his sons and servants; and destined to no other than to the
creatures behoole, to his benefit and advauncement only: that by his requisite
endeavors in those honorable ways, of wisdom and virtue, of love and
thankfulness, and of imitating his maker in doing good in the world; he may
grow being assisted with divine grace and virtue, to an higher degree of
goodness, still perfiting more and more all the faculties and parts of his
unperfit soul and nature; whereunto also an higher degree of glory is
proposed, and reserved by the great Rewarder in the height of the Heavens, as
a full and final accomplishment of his whole desires, and as the Crown of his
celestial blessedness. Now as in this opinion they agree in general with
the Protestants; so do they mightily dissent from that doctrine touching the
aeternall Counsels of God; which CALVIN as some conceive first fully revealed,
or rather introduced into the Christian world; and since some of his friends
and followers have seconded; as thinking it very injurious to the goodness of
God, and directly and immediately opposite to his very nature. In regard whereof
one of their Bishops has written a book against it, which has been sent to
Geneva, and there received. Thus much of their doctrine; which though I know it
may be better and fullier had in their books, yet have I not thought it
unconvenient to deliver thus in brief, how I have found them also in speech
and conse^ence effected.

Their Liturgies for the substance are those three I have named: all which they
use for varieties sake, in the several times and feasts allotted for them. For
the form and caeremonies they resemble much the Latins, though of the two the
French Mass more tha^ the Italia^; not only in their holy-bread* but
especially in their Altar, which with great mystery as is said they both
enclose from the people, that the Arcana of those their ineffable crossings and
convertings may not be prostituted and polluted by unsanctifyed view; whereas
the Romans finding no such virtue in that mystery, lie fair and open on all
sides to all eyes. In their host they use Leven, which the Latins avoid: and
they elevate it forward; which the Latins do backward: and near the body of
the Church; which the other do at the Altar. In their crossings they are very
plentiful: but herein swarving from the Latins, that the Greek (who is more
nimble therein) begins his crosse-barre on the right side, and the Latin on the
left, each with his several mystery. They have also a mystery in shifting
and reshifting in one and the same Mass from one Altar to an other; which the
Latins have not: who contrariwise in one Church have a dousen Masses sometimes
all going at once to several Altars; which the Graecians use not for ought I
could see. They have much ado with their lights, in putting them out and in
again at several times and parts of their service. And their Liturgy is
intermedled much with singing; performed in a tune, neither very artificial,
nor altogether neglected; but grave, alternated, and braunched with diverse
parts.

At the Creed, the Priest comes forth at the door of the Chancell, and holds
up a little embroidered picture of Christ on the Cross: toward which they do
reverence and pronounce their belief. Their gestures of reverence, are the
very same with the Jews; standing up and bowing forward their bodies at times.
For kneeling they use none, save only as they say one day in the year. At
their coming in, they bow them selves thrice toward the Altar, and three
times cross them selves. At their departure, having taken their holy-bread,
with kissing the Praelats hand from whom they receive it, they finally salute
the Pictures of Christ and our Lady, kissing also their hands, which are plated
over with metal because of wearing. But the Graecians Pictures of Christ and
our Lady are nothing like to the Latins; but as different as any ordinary two
faces that a man shall see. The most uniformitie therein that I have seen, is
with us in England. For in Italy there is little, especially of our Lady: whose
very pictures which they say St. LVKE him self, partly did draw, and partly
began, and Angels did finish, may argue perhaps devotion toward her in the
drawers, but small acquaintance: unless her face were very variable, or very
sclender their skill: some where as at Loretto she is painted like a
blackmoore. In sum, they have so little knowledge of her countenance and
favor, that in some places they will assemble diverse of their fairest
Courtizans, (as I have heard it there reported,) to draw the modest beauty of
a Virgin out of the flagrancie of Harlots.

But to return to the Graecians, and to come now to their Government; which is
as the world knows, that ancient, by Patriachs, Archbishops, and Bishops,
with other Orders inferior. Unto whom the people carry exceeding respect and
reverence as it were to the public Fathers and Heads of their Nation,
notwithstanding that calamity wherein the Tyranny of the Turk has plunged
them. They have also a religious Order amongst them of St. BASIL, the great
founder of the East Monks; as Saint BENEDICT of the West. These only have
their vows of Chastity and austeritie and may not marry; which to the rest
of the Clergy is not prohited. They have also their proper habit: but shaven
they are not, for ought I could discern; no more are their Priests, being a
Ceremony so bald, that the very Priests in France are ashamed of the mark,
and few of them have it that can handsomely avoid it. But as in the multitude of
their Religions, they differ much from the West Church, the Graecians having
but this only one order of St. BASIL, and the Latins having multiplied therein
to greater store and variety, than there are professions in a commonwealth,
or trades in a City; so also in their use and course of life. For the
Roman-Monks, by the withdrawing them selves from the society of other men,
and living and dying within their solitary Cloisters; do bereave the world of
that benefit of duty and service wherein each man is bound to the behoof of
other; alleging in place thereof the blessings which their assiduitie and
fervor in prayer, not interrupted nor cured by secular conversements draw down
upon the world, as may be godlily believed without farther proof: where as
the Greeke-Monks seem to continue that auncienter and more approved
institution of them, by spiritual meditations and exercises, and by severitie
to make themselves fitter to serve in the Church of God in Ecclesiastical
calling with exemplarie holiness; and accordingly their Praelats and other
principal Priests, are chosen in most places out of their order in greatest
part. These guides of their Church have a wonderful care, continually pricked
with the acerbitie of much fear and grief of Heart, least their persecuted
flock, gasping as it were in the helpless and comfortless extremity of all
kinds and degrees of misery, having famine of soul and great blindness
within; for want of plasters and means to maintein them; without seeing nothing
but triumphs over Christ and scorns of his Religion; insolences and violences
against their persons, oppressions and extortions upon their goods, rapins and
murderings of the very souls of their children, (a case to be bewailed with
tears of blood by all Christian hearts that know it;) hearing the only Anchor
and flay of their souls, which is their expectation of the coming of Christ
and of future salvation, daily derided and blaspheamed by the pride of the
mighty; and finally, seeing no shadow of any hope of deliverie from this long
calamity, under the burden whereof they groan and are consumed: should in the
end fall away and revolt to Turcisme; inviting them unto it with all the baits
of ease, of wealth, of pleasures, of freedom, prosperity and worldly glory:
in which fearfulness of mind, the only remedy remaining, is the
vertuousnesse of their own example in constancy and patience, and the
avoiding of all scandal to their people. Which is the cause that they will not
hear of reforming any thing; not I suppose upon any presumption or obstinacy of
mind, as disdaining reformation; but as trembling at alteration which must
needs accompany it; lest their people perceiving so they had bin amiss in some
things might suspect the possibility of like error in the whole; and so fall
mainly whither the force of power and worldly prosperity, a chief argument to
the ignorant and vulgar minds, should sway them. As on the other side their
doubt of farther inaspererating the Turk in his Cruelty against them,
considering that in Greece and all those parts of Europe the Christians under
the Turk do very manyfoldly exceed in number the Mahometans them selves: may be
a cause why in their general they hold so small intelligence and
correspondence with the West-Church of one side or other; and are like to
continue so, whilst their thraldom and cause of that fear shall last: though
in their particular they will declare a brotherly affection to both, and desire
of the unity of all in one truth. But for the Turk him self he makes full
account that whe^soever the West-Christians should stoutly invade him; the
East-Christians under him would run to their aid, if they saw any likelihood
that they should prevail. And this has been seen already more than once by
example; and he provides accordingly.

The Muscovites are a great Church, a free and puissant; not schismatikes from
the Graecians, as some in disgrace of both deliver, though perhaps not fully
concurring in all poincts. Neither yet is it true which other of a contrary
conceit have rumoured, that the Patriarch of Constantinople has removed his
Seat to Mosco, whether he went only to erect that Sea into an Archbishopric,
which before it was not, and so returned. But the Turk to keep the Muscovites
from stirring against him; does cause the Tartarians to make often incursions
and roads into their Country; that so being always in inward awe from an other
side, they may have less leisure and with all less stomach, to embrace any
outward thoughts or desseines of enterprizing or combining with other
Christians against him. It were needless now to enter into any view of their
Li^es: neither could it serve either way, to the honor or reproach of their
Religion or government; being maimed, interrupted and stopped in his
operations of what quality soever, though his tyranny who striveth by all
means to plant barbarousnesse amongst them; as knowing that neither Civilitie
did found his Empire, nor with civilitie could it long continue. But the case
is general and experience shows it in all places, that although a sweet mind
and pure conversation be the natural fruicts of a sound belief and
persuasion; yet the afflicted in all Religions grounded upon truth, how
contrary soever otherwise, are in their far greatest part men of conscience
and honesty; save only where hopes draw other humors to them. For it cannot
proceed from less than a virtuous affection to prefer the sincerity of
conscience before worldly glory; howsoever it may be stained with other
erroneous opinions. As on the contrary side even the purest Religion in
prosperity, draws to it an infinite of good companions and time-se^vers, who
being trained up in the exactness of kitchen and cup*discipline, make their
Rendez-vows always where the best Cheer is stirring; and follow Christ upon a
sharp devotion, but to his bread not to his doctrine. In which regard the
fruicts of life in diverse Religions and governments, are not to be compared
but where their prosperity or adversity are aequall. And even so does it fall
out in this particular we now speak of; where the Grecian, who is compted by
the corruption of his Country to be naturally a false and crafty merchant, a
seditious and stirring person in all kinds of government; is now become
humble, obedient, grave and peaceable, and surely at divine service gives more
show of devotion than the Romanists in any place for ought I have yet seen.
But the lamentable calamity of this afflicted and distressed Church, once
flourishing in all worldly prosperity and glory, now such as it has pleased
the rage of the wild bore to leave it, able to melt and dissolve even a marble
heart into streams of mournful tears, does cause me in due sense of
campassion of their misery to press with the humble petition of a mind
pierced with grief to the just Judge of the world, the Redeemer of mankind,
and the Savior of his erring people; to cast down his gracious and pitiful
Eyes upon them; to behold on the one side his triumphant fierce enemy
persecuting without end or measure, on the other side his poor servants trodden
down and persecuted without help or hope or comfort; to break and dissolve
the pride and power of the one, and to comfort the astonished and wasting
weakness of the other with some hope of succor and final deliverie, to
inspre the ^ Christian Princes their neighbors, compounding or laying aside
their endless and fruictlesse, contentions to revenge their quarrel against
the unjust oppressor: to deliver now at length the Church of that bane, the
world of that ignominy, mankind of that Monster of Turkish tyranny, which
has too long ravaged and laid desolate the earth. A small thing were it, if
his revenew and treasure were only supplied and maintained out of their goods
and labors; or if their bodies and lives were only wasted and worn out in
his works and slaveries, it might be suffered. For goods are transitory and
death is the end of all worldly miseries. But to be forced to pay a tribute
also of souls to his Mahomet; to have their forwardest and dearest children
snatched out of their bosoms to be brought up in his impious and bestiall
abominations, and to be employed in the murdering of them that begat them; and
in the rooting out of that Faith wherein they were borne and baptized, and
which only were able to bring their souls to happiness: this surely is an
anguish and calamity insupportable, and which cries unto God in the Heavens
for release. How long shall the hateful name of that cursed Seducer, upbraid
the glorious and lovely name of our Savior? How long shall his falsehood insult
over our faith? how long shall his barbarism oppress civility, and his
tyranny affront the true honor of all lawful government? But how long
soever; this stands most sure for ever, that the judgments of God are just, and
directed ever in his sharpest and most rigorous chastisements to the benefit of
the world, and instruction of men; and sound to us besides other things, this
admonishment a loud, that if in those people among which our Savior himself
conversed, at what time his beautiful steps honored the world; i^ in those
Churches which his Apostles so industriously planted, so carefully visited: so
tenderly cherished; instructed and confirmed by so many peculiar Epistles and
for whom they sent up so many servent prayers, yea unto whom are remaining
those particular letters which the spirit of the highest endited in the very
Heavens, and sent down unto them for a fore-warning and preventing of that
plague which is since through their great neglect befalln them, if besides
these spiritual praerogatiues and graces, the puissance and glory of the
great Empire of the world, the Christian Empire of Rome, being translated unto
them, and seated in their lapps, with promise of perpetuity to their present
prosperity, such then was the strength thereof: notwithstanding when they fell
away from the first Zeal and Charity; when knowledge the right mother of
Humility, made them swell, when they envied each others graces, which they
ought to have loved; when abundance of all things bred wantonness in steed of
thankfulness; in fine, when they forgot the author of all their bliss, and
fell one to snarling and biting at an other, in steed of putting up and
forgiving offenses, if not for the reconciling name of brotherhood. yet for
his sake who was father and aequall Lord of both: it pleased God to suffer that
a base thief and a wicked, with a train of desperate and forsaken Vagabonds,
to the eternal reproach of all their wisdom and policy should advance him
self so by his industry and their security, and grow to such an height in
his successors and followers, as to be a terror and amazement to all the
world, to them selves in inexplicable and unsuccourable calamity to strip them
of all those graces and blessings, which ungratefulness would not acknowledge,
pride and wantonness did abuse; and to heap on them as much misery, as the
fury of a barbarous and merciless tyrant can inflict upon such as have no
means to appease him save their calamity alone, nor to with-stand him besides
their patience; then surely we, who come short of them so far in pledges of
favor, and aequall them in our faults; and they who have had in particular the
like threatening caveats of cutting off and not sparing, notwithstanding all the
virtues of their honorable Ancestors; may think it high time to enter into
a more serious cogitation of our ways; to turn all our policies and
contentions against others, into an humble and sincere examination of our
selves; that repentance and amendment may prevent those punishments which
wickedness has deserved, and obstinacy now highly does provoke.

It remains that I should proceed to the Churches Reformed: of which there are
many things also to be said. But the fear of having over-wearied your Grace
with my length in the former, drawn on by multitude and variety of matter,
still freshly presenting it self contrary to my opinion and first intention
does cause me to defer the rest till some other occasion. In the mean while
I praesume to offer this to your Graces good acceptance, as a testimony of
that duty and thankfulness which I bear and owe: so do I gladly also
submit it, to be censured and controlled by your Graces judgment and
wisdom. For however, I have waded herein with that uprightnes of mind I
trust, which becomes a lover and searcher of truth; and have also to my best
avoided that rashness and lightness in belief, to which they that are subject
swallow down much, which fills them with wind in steed of nourishment: yet
viewing on the other side in such a multitude at this day, who perhaps with
like integrity, aequall wariness, more diligence, and manyfoldly more means
of certain information, have delivered either hystories or other particular
Relations, how few have not stumbled upon many an error, where they thought
was nothing but plain ground and truth: I cannot have that affiance or
presumption of my good fortune, as to hope to be the man alone that should hit
truth in all things. But rather as foreseeing almost an impossibility of not
often erring in matter of this large and scattered quality, depending also so
much upon conjectures and reports: I do willingly subject whatsoever I have
said, to be gainsaid by the better information of any other; and shall be always
ready to make honorable amends to truth, by recalling and defacing whatsoever
may seem in any wise repugnant to it: as professing the truth only, which I
have sincerely and unpartially endeavored to deliver, to be the fruict of my
desire; and the errors which I have incurred to be the weeds of my ignorance.
So take I with all duty, most humble leave of your Grace.

From Paris. IXo. April. 1599. Copied out by the Authors original, and
finished, 2. October. An. M. DC. XVIII.
ERRATA.
Page 12. line 2^, for that, read than. page 15. l. 3^. r. Sancta Maria de gli
Angeli. p. 19. l. 31. r. their. p. 21. l. 10. r. as it were. p. 23. l. 1. r.
but for. ibid. l. 16. r. in a well. p. 26. l. 24, r. do by great. p. 29. l.
19. r. proofs. p. 35. l, 9. r. spirits. ib. l, 12. r. pleasant. p 46. l 27. r.
with. p. 50. l. 17. r. prying. ib. l. 24. r. Councels. p. 53. l. 7. r. of very.
p. 56. l. 30. r bark. p. 95. l. 10. r. magnanimity. p. 101. l. 30. r. and
amity with. p. 120. l. 30. r. incur. p. 129. l. 14. for also, r. of. p.
132. l. 19. r. desire to. p. 134. l. 10. r. Biganne. p. 139. l. 8. r. dis: p.
184. l. 31. for to, r. would. p. 187. l. 31. r. doluuiated.


