THE PRACTICE practiced by the Pope and his prelates. which they have used
since they came to their estates.
ALas alas, what shall I now do:
My kingdom is like, no longer to stand:
These Englysh men, will me undo:
And drive me quyte out of their land,
I may to them, hold up my hand,
And say a due, my friends all,
But specially, my priests of Ball,
Yet at the first, when that I hard,
How that my Pylgrimages, were put down,
And that my pardones, they did not regard,
Nor cared not for my triple crown,
All this, little minished my renown:
Hopyng to have it up again all,
By the craftye conueyaunce, of my priests of Ball.
And as for Scala celi, my Mass,
with idle holidays in the year,
For the loss of them, I did not pass,
Because they were, but sclender gere,
I have men lyeng. every where:
That can make them new again all,
By the wicked counsel, of my priests of Ball.
And than again, for my Peter pence,
The which came yearly to my purse.
They have little bated my expense,
Nor made my cofers, little the worse,
And though they do not regard my curse,
Nor yet my blessyng, amongst them all,
yet this will be recovered, by my priests of Ball.
And as for all my Abbayes and Selles,
with Charter houses and Monesteries,
That were thrust down. with hallowed wells,
Therein to wasshe, for fear of feryes,
All this, my kingdom little weryes,
Not doubtyng to have it up again all,
By the wicked counsel, of my priests of Ball.
My fat headed Monks, with my.iiii. orders of Friars
My stout Channons, and wympeled Nonnes,
which were driven out, as sellers and buyers,
All this with other, in again commes,
For I have store enough, in other kyngdommes,
And also in England, when so ever I call,
As knows full well, my priests of Ball.
And as for the name of Supreme head:
For that, I do not greatly care:
So long, as by my laws they are lead:
Let them despise me, and not spare,
All this can not make, me worse to fare.
Hopyng to have yt, up again all,
By the deuyse, of my priests of Ball.
But I may my self, both curse and ban:
And tear my clothes, for very madness:
That when I was, with every man,
Regarded much, in ernest sadness:
Then used I, such open badnes:
That the people, fled from me all:
Saving, my loving priests of Ball.
I had no measure, in selling of my wares:
But made them pay, I cared not what,
Which was the beginning, of all my cares:
But now to repent, it is to late,
I used such a geynfull common rate,
That the people, fled from me all,
Saving, my loving priests of Ball.
Also my Bishops, I trow they were mad,
That when they saw the Abbayes put down,
And that the King, their treasure had,
All this, mynisshed little their renown,
But one, as with his shaven crown,
Took counsel, with his fellows all.
Insurrection to make, by my priests of Ball
And when they saw, their evil chance:
How in that, they were over come:
Then sent they one, unto the King of France,
To carry him word, they were undone,
Desyryng him, with all and some:
That he would help. his subjects all:
To set up again, the priests of Ball.
And then an other, into Scotland was sent:
That they, on the other side should be doing:
So that, their subtle intent,
Must go forward, in every thing,
Continual wars, they did bring:
Which was to stop, Gods truth with all:
By the customed practice, of my priests of Ball:
And when these men, were set on work.
Having mind of nothing but battle:
Then did my men, together lurk,
Thynkyng, on their purpose to prevail:
Deuysyng a beast, with.vi. heads and a tail,
Desyryng the King, with his counsel all,
To license my beasts, the priests of Ball.
And when that license, then was granted.
They begane to brag, in every place:
And the new gospellers, by them were taunted:
Thynkyng there by, the truth to defase:
Alas there is an heavy case.
For down I must, with my baggage all:
Sparyng not me, nor my priests of Ball.
Still does the King, contynew in war:
And has almost spent, the riches of the Abbayes:
This gere, I fear me, will us clean mar:
Gatheryng of money, my power decays:
Colleges, and Chaunteries, in their rich arayes:
They are like now, to go down all:
And thus decays, my priests of Ball.
And when the riches, of them is wasted,
Then, have at the Bishops lands:
And Cathedral churches, shall be tasted:
The which, full gorgyously now stands:
I may lament, and wrynge my hands:
Geuyng up the soul titles all:
And take my leave, of my priests of Ball.
By this my darlings, shall be made so poor:
That they shall not be able, to do me good:
But shall go beg, from door to door:
With sad countenance, and careful mood:
To chafe, frette, or to be wood:
It will not help, nothing at all.
But farewell, my noynted priests of Ball.
Farewell mattens, with tunable notes:
Farewell euensong, done at night.
Farewell Diriges, with trentall grotes:
Farewell Idolles, now put to flight:
Farewell, my great god of might:
Farewell ones agyne, my god of all:
Farewell good night, my priests of Ball.
Farewell Pax, Pascalls, and Palms:
Farewell Alter, Ashes: and Aue mary's:
Farewell Portuous, Pystelles and Psalms:
Farewell Anteme of Alys: and Annes:
Farewell commendations, and also mortuaries:
Farewell my copes, and vestimentes all.
Farewell my shaven priests of Ball.
A dew my holybread, in howsell stead.
Adieu my holly water, for venial sins:
Adieu my crepyng, to the cross at need.
Adieu my belles, with all their gynnes.
Adieu cusshyons, knelynges, and crouchynges:
Adieu my sensores, and cruets all.
Adieu my full trust, in the priests of Ball.
Commend me to my seven sacraments.
But specially, to my good derlyng White cote,
And show to him, that my good intentes.
The christians, nothing regard or note:
Gods word, a mongest them is so hot.
That down I must, with my baggage all,
Sparing not me, nor my priests of Ball.
And as for the.vi. Gardiners Gospelles.
They are even suddenly, now decayed.
And also my.vi. Articles.
This makes me in deed, to be afraid,
I have but small trust, in fresh aid.
For surely my ceremonies: will go down all.
That out alas, my priests of Ball.
Thus with evil will, I take my flight.
Departing a way, with woeful chere.
Neuermore in England, to come in sight:
How say Lawyers, to this gere:
I wys I helped you, this menny year,
With keeping the people in blindness all,
But we trust no more to the priests of Ball.
Leave of your byndynge of heavy burdens,
Upon men's shouldres, to oppress them down:
Lest you and I, like idle lurdens,
Go labor about, from town to town,
I say trust no more, to my shaven crown,
But minister truly, amongst you all,
And have no more trust in the priests of Ball.
Now masters, you that did here:
The pitiful complaynt, of my song.
Would very gladly, see it appear:
Thinking the time, to be very long:
This prossesse of mine, will not prolonge.
For the breath of God, will down with all:
Shortly not to see, a preeste of Ball.
God save the King, his noble grace,
And send him to spy, the subtlety of the bysshoppes
And that he may in any case,
Once thrust down, these forked tops:
For as long as the pie, in ye Kings chamber hoppes,
The silly sheep, and lambs all,
Are like to be devoured, with the priests of Ball.
Do not think here, that I discommende,
Any of the sacraments, that Christ did institute:
For I did never so pretend,
My mind was, nothing but to confute,
The abuses of things, therein to dispute,
Which I would were taken away ingenerall,
No more to be mainteyned, by the priests of Ball.
Finis.
Wyllyam Samuel.

Imprinted at London by Humfrey Powell, dwelling above Holburne conduit.

And are to be sold by Hugh Syngleton, at the sign of saint Augustine, in
Poules church yard.


