GODS ARROWE Of the PESTILENCE. By JOHN SANFORD Master of Arts, and Chapleine
of Magdalen College in Oxford.

PSALM. 64.7. God will shoot an arrowe at the evil doers suddenly; their
stroke shall be at once.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Crown by Simon Waterson. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT WORshipful the Vicechancelour, the Doctors, Proctours, and
Heads of Houses, and to the rest of the Students of the most famous University
of Oxford Grace and Peace be multiplied.
REverend and Right Worsh: Fathers and Brethren, beloved in our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus. Having of late been induced and persuaded (upon former
trial of my strength in private exercise) to have delivered some part of this
Treatise in public place; and afterward finding my self prevented by that
infirmity which at other times had overtaken me in your hearing, to my no
small discouragement, and the grief of many my good friends; I was enforced
to forbear the place, and to leave the exercise unperformed; yet supposing
this to be an honest and lawful kind of Vorsura, to borrow of my hand, to pay
my tongues debt, I have presumed to present it to your grave judgments in
writing, and under your Worsh: names to publish it to the world. What the will
and purpose of God is, in this manner to put me to silence, I do not busy my
self to inquire, neither would I have other rashly and curiously to judge;
Exodus: 29:29: 2. Tim: 4:5:
Secret things belong to God. In that I continued thus unserviceable for the
work of an Evangelist, in speech and utterance, I resolved with a Reverend man
among us, Evangelizare manu and scriptione to preach (according to my poor
ability) by my hand and by writing. D. Rainolds Epist. ad Com Essex.
Let no man think that I pretend infirmity as a covert for Idleness, for I
have heretofore offered and presented my labors, of a willing and ready mind,
when I might have withdrawn my self. And I fear to truant in this business
under any such coulourable excuse, least that should befall me, which happened
unto Caelius, who to avoid the Ave potentiorum, to give his attendance early
and late upon the great ones of his times, feigned himself sick of the gowt,
so cunningly, that his hypocrisy came home to him, and he fell sick of the
gowt indeed, Tantum cura potest and ars doloris, Martial. l. 7 Epig. 38.

Desit fingere Caelius podagram.


What my infirmity is I cannot well tell you, because Galen says it has no
name; yet I find that it effects that which there he says, loquelam, De
Sympt, Causis lib. 2 cap. 2.
quae voluntatis no^ leve est opus, prorsus adimit, it clean depriveth and
bereaveth a man of speech, which is the principal work and the most noble
Action of his will. Iam. 3:2. Enarrat. in Psalm. 37. qui in lingua non peccavit,
etc.
Saint James faith, according to St. Augustines reading, that he that
offends not in his tongue is a perfect man, it is meant that sense according
to which the Paroemiast speaks in multiloquio stultiloquium; Prove. 10.19
where Austen says Non frustra lingua in vdo est, Aug. ibid.
quia facile labitur. The tongue may as well offend in too much silence, as in
lavishnes of words. For to be wilfully sile^t in Gods messadge, in which the
neglect is attended on with a vae, ^. Cor. 9.16 Ier: 48:10.
and negligence with a curse, is to fail of a Ministers active perfection, the
chief complements whereof, are the right use of his hand and tongue. If I have
wilfully neglected, or negligently handled the work of the Lord, Psa. 137.5.6
then let my tongue ever cleave to the roof of my mouth, and let my right hand
also forget her cunning; Mark. 7:35. Luke 1:64: Motus linguae vitiatur per
septimam nervorum coniugatione^. Gal. de locis affectis lib. c: 2.
But seeing it has pleased God not to loose the strings of my tongue for
vttera^ce, as to Zacharias, but rather by solution of the co^iugation of nerves
to disable my speech; J must learn with Saint Paul even in this also to be
content. Philip. 4.11. Especially seeing that Gods worthiest servantes have
complained of like infirmities. Ser: 44. in Cant.
Saint Bernarde says, that weakness of body oftentimes enjoined him silence,
and enforced him to pause in the midst of his sermons, and abruptly to break
off his Disputations and Lectures. Concerning this present discourse; as I
conceived it upon occasion of the danger of these times, and since have
inlardged it with a Summary collection of that, which at other times I had
delivered elsewhere touching the same matter; I thought it good to shoot it
abroad like one of Ionathans Arrows, 1. Sam. 20.22.
to give men warning of Gods displeasure, beseeching him to guide it to the
mark whereunto it was levelled, namely to work in us all, a trembling fear
of his wrathful indignation, and our true and hearty conversion, which I pray
God to grant unto us. And I humbly beseech your Worcester: to accept this my silly
labor with that wo^ted favor, wherewith I have always found my endeavors
to have been accepted and entertained of you. God of his mercy double his
Spiritual graces upon you, giving you a large heart, 1. King. 4.29.
to understand and to comprehend the riches of his goodness and the wonderful
things of his law, and replenish you with godly zeal seasoned with
discretion, truly to seekc the advancement of his glory and sincere worship,
and the good of his Church. From Magdalen College this 13. of March, 1603.

Your worships in all Christian duty. JOHN SANFORD.

Gods Arrow of the Pestilence.
Psalm. 38.2. For thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon
me etc.


THAT which Tullie sometimes said of Crantors book de luctu: Est non magnus,
In lucullo sive lib: 2: Acad: Quest.
verum aureolus libellus. The same may more cruely be spoken of this book of
the Psalms, that it is but a small volume, but in deed a golden book, both for
the stuff and the matter thereof, as containing in it the true and undoubted
word of God which as the Psalmist says is pure and to be desired super aurum
obrizum even before fine gold: Psalm. 19:10:
as also for the multiplicity of Argument, fitted to yield comfort and
instruction to all estates of men in their several occurrences and distresses,
and therein also is more cordial and medicinable then the Paracelsians aurum
potabile so much commended by Johannes Franciscus Picus Mirandula. Lib. 1: de
au^o ca. 4:
Saint Basil in his preface to the first Psalm says, that the whole body of
ye Scriptures inspired by God, was therefore purposely indighted by the holy
Ghost, that every man might there find a medicine and confection for his
particular disease, (...), Basil: in Psalm 1.
as it were in a common Apothecaries shop. The Prophets teach one thing the
Historical books another, the Law a third thing. (...), but the book of the
Psalms, contains whatsoever is comprised in them all; for it prophesies of
things to come, it records matter of story, it gives laws and precepts for
the well ordering of a man's life, in a word, says he, it is (...) a common
storehouse and treasury of all good learning. Out of this storehouse ye Saints
of God have at al times furnished their spiritual wants, and out of this
Chirurgions or Apothecaries shop, have taken medicine for the comfort of their
souls. Camerarius in Catalogo Episcoporum:
Babylas the good Bishop of Antioch when he was drawn to his execution by the
commandment of Numerianus, or as others say, of Decius the tyrant, repeated
that saying out of the 116. Psalm Return unto thy rest o my soul for the
Lord has bin beneficial unto thee. In like manner the good Emperor
Mauricius, Niceph. lib. 18: cap. 40:
when he had been enforced to behold the slaughter and butcherie of his wife
and children, by the commandment of Phocas usurper of the Empire, and himself
lastly being drawn to the scaffold and to the block, quieted his soul with
that godly confession out of the 119. Psalm. I know o Lord that thy judgments
are right and that thou do afflict me justly. Finally the last words which
our Savior spoke when he gave up the ghost upon the cross, were those out of
the 31. Psalm. Luke 23:46.
Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. So that as Saint Basil truly
says, (...). Pacis caduceus, vt reddidit volater:
A Psalm of David fitly and aptly applied, is as a fair calm and as an
herald or Ambassador of peace to a troubled soul.

The consideration hereof moved and enduced me to make choice of this passadge
of holy writ, as of a Scripture well befitting these times, in which the hand
of God has for a long time layen heavy upon us, in this his grievous
visitation of our land by plague and pestilence, which has much wasted and
dispeopled many of our cities and villadges abroad. The Division:
The parts of the whole Psalm (as I conceive of it without any curious
Analysis) I propose generally to be two, first a prayer consisting of two the
Prophet beseeches Almighty God not to exasperate his anger against him in
fury and displeasure. Secondly an imploring of Gods help and assistance, that
he be not overborne with the extremity of his sickness to murmur against God
or to despair of his providence 20. amplified by many circumstances, and
interlaced with great variety of passion and affection; for first he bewraieth
his humane infirmity, when being under Gods ferular and under the lash, he
does that which is unseemly and uncomely for a man to do, he cries and
roareth out verse. 8. and all along aggravateth the greatness of his pain and
punishment, though not through impaciencie, yet through an impotencie of mind,
which has likewise bin found in the rest of Gods Saints Job, Jeremy, and the
like. Job: 3:3: Ier: 20:14:
Secondly he shows his affiance and confident trust in God, notwithstanding
the sharpnes of Gods correction laid upon him; on thee o Lord do I wait verse.
15. as Job likewise says that although God should slay him yet he would trust
in him. Job: 13:15:
In the third place he ingenuously confesses that ye primitive and
fu^dame^tal cause of this his affection was his sin v. 3. there is no rest in
my bones by reason of my sin. Lastly the pain of his disease outwardlye in his
body, was increased by the inward grief of his heart, of with he sets down
2. accessory causes; 1. the defectio^ of his frinds who now stood aside from
his plague and his kinsme^ stood afar off v. 11. Secondly ye barbarous
inhumanity of his enemies v. 12. who were so far from co^doling with him in
this his adversity, as that they did rather rejoice at it and insult over him,
most injuriously rendering him evil for good, and hating him, as the manner of
such miscreants is, for no other cause, but because he desired to live a godly
life, and follovved goodness as it is verse. 20.

The matter and subject which at this time I purpose to insist on, omitting the
rest, is the Nature and kind of our Prophets disease, together with those two
metaphorical Attributes by which it is described and deciphered verse. 2. where
it is called the stroke of Gods hand and his arrow; Thine arrows, o God, have
light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me.

What kind of disease it was, that our Prophet was sick of, it is not here
mentioned nor expressed, The Hebrews suppose that it was an ulcer so vile and
loathsome that ye Prophet was abashed and in a manner ashamed to name it in
this his holy Ditty and Spiritual song; this they gather, because he uses
the Adjective (...) foul and abominable, but suppresseth the substantive; some
render it foeditate or re abominabili, my loins are filled with filthy and
abominable corruption. The circumstances and particularities laid down in the
text, show it to have been some foul pestilent and contagious botch or soar:
the Interpretours do somewhat differ about the place where this disease made
his issue. The word (...) is by some rendered Ilia, Bucerus in hunc locu^:
by others Lumbi or renes which our English translations following say, my
reins or loins are filled with a sore disease. If this interpretation be
admitted and allowed of, then it seems to import, that his malady was either
the ach of the reins by a fit of the stone, or one of those pa^gues which
Tully calls (...) difficulty of urine, Lib: 7: Epist Fam: 26:
and griping and wringing in the bowels and entrails; For these are the
passions which usually fall into these parts. Which maladies though they bring
with them a very sharp and sensible pain, yet they proceeede not to that
loathsomenesse, which here is mentioned, namely to putrify corrupt and
stincke, for so Austen reads computruerunt and putuerunt livores mei.

Others who guess more properly and nearer to the disease, Calvinus and
Bucerus.
say that the word designeth a place beneath the reins, between the thigh and
the belly or bowels, which is the flancke or groine, into which place the
confluence of vicious corrupt and malignant humors do most commonly betake
themselves, as being one of Natures Emunctories, as Physicians speak, and a
part fitly qualified and prepared for evacuation of impostumation and the
course and flux of humors, by reason of the tenderness and raritie of the skin
and other passagdes as Galen has observed and delivered unto us. Raritas and
teneritas axillaru^ and inguinum. De Oculis particula 6. ca. 1. (...) Esaias 1.6.
Exodus 28.27
So that finding there residence, they do impostumate and push out into some
blaine and ulcer, such a one was this disease, for the word which here is
used, signifies a collection of humors impostumated, which Esaias calls a
swelling soreful of corruption, and in Exodus is termed the botch of Egypt.
Nicolaus Selneccerus discoursing of those passions and maladies which grow and
arise in membris explantatis that is, In Physiolog fol. 597
in the out branches and limbs of the body, the arms, thighs, and legs;
among the rest he reckons the Carbuncle, which may not improbably be
coniectured to have been our Prophets disease, and that for these reasons
Carbu^culus in Latin, and (...) in Greek, signifying a burning coal, describe
an inflammation so sensibly grievous and painful, as that it does vex a man
as if his flesh were seared and cauterized with a burning coal: agreeing
altogether with the word here used, (...) torrere comburere.
which coming from a Radix which signifies to burn, is rendered ardore or
combustione, which the Geneva translation following says, my reins are full
of burning, according as in English we call such soars boiles because they
boil with the extreme heat of the blood Vlcus cum ^iusta.
Certain it is that it is an ulcer very odious and loathsome, and in this
respect also agrees with the nature of our Prophets disease, which some call
plagam contemptibilem, a botch or plague abhorred of all men, for his very
friends and kinsmen fled from him and stood a loofe off for fear of infection
as it is not unlikely. Say we then that it was this Carbuncle; or be it rather
that it was that boil and blaine of which king Ezechias was sick unto the
death, 2. Kings 26 Esaias 38.
which Divines think to have bin the very plague immediately sent from God,
neither arising from natural causes, nor to be cured by natural and ordinary
means. For so Iunius says, morbi natura indomita erat a medijs naturalibus,
Annot. in 2. Reg. 20.
and therefore God challendgeth the cure thereof to himself, saying, I have
healed thee. The applying of the lump of dry figs to his boil, Masculus
thinks to have bin used for a sign to confirm Ezechias his faith rather
the^ any ordinary cure. Calvin in Esaias 38. Hug. Card. in 2. Reg. 20
Howbeit Calvin and Hugo Cardinalis say that Physicians now a days do apply
the same to ripen the sore, and that it has a natural force to draw the
corruption outward. Concerning our Prophets disease Bucer, Musculus and others
think it to have been the plague. And thereupon Masculus upon this 2. verse,
moves this question, whether it be lawful to fly from them that are infected
with the plague. Add hereunto this reason, that seeing that the prophet
confesses this his sickness to have bin laid upon him for his sins, In Argum in
Psalm. 38.
which Iansenius collecteth to have bin his crying sins of Adultery and
murder, it is not improbable, but that God for exemplary justice, did afflict
him with that disease which he threatens against them that transgress against
his law, namely that he would smite them in the knees and in the thighs with a
sore botch that should not be healed, Deuteronomy: 28:35 and 59
and with a plague of long continuance. All which very consonantly agrees, to
our Prophets disease, for the place which this malady affected was the thigh.
Faemora mea occupat ardens vlcus says Musculus, and it was a disease also of
long continuance upon him, for in the next Psalm he co^plaineth, Psalm. 39.10.
that he was almost consumed by means of Gods heavy hand and of his plague.
This may further appear, by those sharp acce^ts of grief which he utters in
his complaint. First he says, there was no sound part in all his flesh nor
any rest in his bones, verse 3.
as if the whole frame of his limbs inwardly had been lurate and disiointed,
and as if outwardly by reason of the anguish of his ulcer, which now had made a
rupture in his flesh, all his skin had bin blistred over. For when he says,
nihil est integri in carne mea, he alludeth to the name and nature of an
ulcer, which coming from the Greek word (...), and signifying in the
primitive to draw a sunder, it imports that an ulcer is a disioyning of the
continued flesh or skin, as Frischlin upon that verse of Triphiodore, Nicodem:
Fris. Annot in Triphiod
(...), that Ajax by stabbing of himself, brake open the chest and coffin of
his body with a deep gash and gaping wound, he says that a wound or ulcer is
solutio continui, a breach of the whole skin: now both these his pains seem to
be employed together in the 8. verse, where he says, I am weakened and sore
broken. Secondly he goes crooked and bended together, incurvatus sum verse 6.
his face is heavy, swarty, and discolored; not with repining sullennes, but
through his languishment, fainting, and wasting away through sickness. Add
heereunto that which follows in the 10. verse, that his heart was overthrown
in his body, beating and panting through the anguish of his malady, as if it
had labored and gasped for breath and life. His eyes were sunk into his head
and waxen dim, and his sight failed him, and his strength was clean decayed
through feebleness, or as elsewhere he speaks, Psalm. 22.15. and 32:4:
his strength was dried up like a potsheard, and his moisture was as the
drought in Summer; Al which are the very Symptomata and Accidents which
usually follow after any extremity of sickness.

Thus have I bin induced to conjecture, that the disease here meant though not
mentioned, was either the Carbuncle, or the very botch and boil of the plague,
not so much because it is expressly called the plague, verse 17. in our vulgar
English, I truly am set in the plague; and yet more plainly, Psalm. 39.10.
Take thy plague a way from me, etc. for the word which is there rendered a
plague, (...) plaga, verber
signifies a stripe, or scourge; as elsewhere in Scripture, diseases are
called scourges, as in the story of the woman that had her issue of blood dried
up and healed by Christ, it is said, that she felt in her body, that she was
healed (...), of that scourge or of that plague, Mark. 5.29. Luke. 7.21.
as our English has it. And in S. Luke it is said, that Christ cured many
(...), of their sicknesses and plagues. But I rather suppose it to have bin the
plague for the reasons before alleged.

The use of this point, is to teach and to lessen us, The use of the 1. part.
to understand the right use and end of this and all other afflictions
wherewith God does exercise his children; to wit, that howsoever they be
inflicted upon all, as punishments for sin, and to the wicked and ungodly
which remain incorrigible, are testimonies of Gods vengeance to consume them;
yet to the godly, they are his fatherly chastisements and corrections, for
their amendment. And when we shall see the hand of God, to lie heavy upon his
dearest children, ^. Sam: 23:1
as here it does upon David, that sweet finger of Israel, Act: 13:22:
and the man after Gods own heart, as that it brake and bruised his body, with
a co^tusion of his limbs; yea and upon his only son too, our Savior Christ,
who^ he cast into an agony and fit of sorrow so extreme and vehement, as that
he sweat drops of blood thereat; Luke 22:44
Let this be our comfort in the day of our affliction, and in the depth of our
sorrows, that how soever Gods hand seem to press us sore, yet he will not
cast us away in displeasure, as he does the vessels of wrath, but even then
when he punishes, he will remember mercy. Psalm: 32:11:
Great plagues indeed are ordained and reserved in store for the ungodly, but
whosoever puts his trust in the Lord, mercy embraces him on every side. And
therefore though God do differ our deliverance, yet we must not suffer our
selves to be cast down with too great consternation, as to be swallowed up of
impatiency or despair, but patiently to tarry the Lords leisure, as here our
David does, who being likely in this his extreme sickness to rot away
peece-meale, is not discouraged or discomforted, nor moved for his recovery
either to put confidence, or rely his hope upon Physicians, 2. Chro. 16.12.
as did Asa in his sickness; or to repair to Idols and Witches, as did king
Ahaziah; but as himself speaks verse 15. He waits on God; 2. King. 1.16
knowing that to be true which Hosea has, that it is God that wounds, and
heals again; Hosea 6:1:
and this is his rest, vna eademque manus vulnus opemque feret. Popilius Laenas
being sent ambassador to Antiochus, Veleius Paterculus l: 1:
from young Ptolemie whom he had besiedged, and having delivered his messadge,
expected the kings answer, which he deferring to do, circu^scripsit virgula,
he drew a circle in the ground round about the king with his wand, adiuring
him, to give him answer before he went out of the circle; we must not so
capitulate with God; nor article with him upon conditions, as did the men of
Bethulia, to yield up their city to the Assyrians if God did not deliver them
with in five days; but let us wait for deliverance from him, Judith: 8:
as Judith there advises her people, and not bind the counsels of the Lord,
for he has power to save us when he well, And this pacient attenda^ce on Gods
will and pleasure, is an excellent fruit and effect of faith, according to that
of Esaias, Quo credit non praefestinabit, Cap: 28:16:
he that believes with a true faith, will not be ouerhasty with God, but
will patiently wait his Lords leisure.

Having thus laid down our Prophets disease, and proved by all likelihood,
that it was the botch of the plague, or some other pestilentiall disease. I
come now to the handling of this 2. verse; wherein he calls his Ulcers Gods
arrows, and the stroke of his hand. And because it is the hand of God that
shoots and scatters these arrows abroad, I will (somewhat inverting the
order entreat first of the hand of God:

Here then it is to be considered, that the Phrase here used of the hand of
God, cannot be understood literally and in a true propriety of speech. For that
were with the Anthropomorphites to conceive God to be as man, and to have the
bodily parts of a man, and who so shall think these things truly to be in
God, proculdubio in cord suo idola fabricat, doubtless, Tom. 4: lib. de me^bris
Dei:
says Jerome, he makes an Idol of God in his heart. But the Scripture, when it
does attribute unto God, Anger and Displeasure, as in the 1. verse of this
Psalm. though not as passions, seeing that he is impassible as Saint, Ambrose
speaks upon this psalm, according to that of Lucretius, nec Deus affectu
capitur, nec tangitur ira. And when it does give eyes, and hands, and fingers,
and feet unto God, it does it by a metaphore and Anthropopathie (...), Basil:
in Ps: 38.
speaking unto us says Basil, after the manner of men, and stooping and
descending to the quality and capacity of the hearers. God, says Bernard,
Sermon: 4, in Cantic.
has a mouth, by which he teaches man Wisdom, he has an hand, Sermon. 4. in
Cantic.
by which he gives food unto all flesh, and he has feet, by which he
treads upon this earth as upon his footestoole; And how has he all these per
effectum, says Bernard, non per naturam: he has them not by nature
Organically, as men have; but he is said to have them, for that variety of
effects, which he brings forth in the course of nature, and in the policy
and governance of mankind upon earth.

But because this metaphore is taken from man, to whom the use of the hand is
chiefly given in token of his perfection; let us somewhat examine the reason
hereof, and see by what Analogy and proportion, the Scripture does attribute
an hand unto God.

Lib. de Frater amore.
Anaxagoras, as Plutarch tells us, said that the hand in man is the cause of
wisdom and knowledge, because that by the use of the hand, a man can draw
letters and characters; he can describe Geometrical figures and Diagrammes,
by means whereof we attain the knowledge of Sciences. And not so only, but
by expressing of signs, a man is able to speak with his hand if need be, Act.
21.40. Pers. Saty. 4.
as Paul by beckening with his hand procured silence and audience among the
people, maiestate manus, as the Poet says. Add hereunto the wonderful skill
of cunning artisans and handicrafts men in their curious workmanshippe, in such
sort, that a man would think (as the Italians say of the Duch-men) that their
wits dwell in their fingars ends. j Tedesch hanno L'ingegno nelli n^ani
So that it is not without good cause that Anaxagoras said, that man for having
the use of his hands, was (...), ye wisest of al creatures. For howsoever some
brute beasts, may seem to participate with man in the use of reason, yet they
want speech, which is reasons broker and interpreter, as Democritus said,
(...) Epist. ad Hipp^cratem de natura Hum^.
and the hand also with is reasons factour and agent. For although apes, and
marmosites, and Babons, have hands, by which as in other parts and lineaments
they have some resembla^ce to a man; yet they have them after a more rude and
unfashionable feature, as being rather made for feet, then for hands; in
regard whereof the Poet says, Ovid. lib: 12 M^ta: De Divin. lib. 2:
Dissimiles possunt homine similesque videri. Tullie out of Ennius Simia quam
similis turpissima bestia nobis; How like are these Anticks and base creatures
to us men in body; and yet how unlike in the comely and exact use of the parts
of their bodies. Wherefore Aristotle, correcting as it were the saying of
Anaxagoras, affirms that a man is not therefore to be accounted the wisest
because he has hands, but therefore he has hands, because he is the wisest;
in as much as the wiser a man is, the more instruments does he require for his
use, and the better can he use them. Hence then appears the reason of this
Metophore, Romans 16.27
that seeing that God is only wise, as the Apostle speaks, he is imagined to
use these parts, (though not materially, but by way of proportion) which man
uses to show forth his wisdom, to wit the hands, and hence it is, that the
Psalmist says, that the firmament shows Gods handy work; Psalm. 19.1.
not only for the curious workmanshippe, in regard whereof Gods hands may be
called, as Homer called Jupiters hands, (...).
(...); hands whose praise cannot sufficiently be spoken; but also for the
orderly and powerful governing of the same, Spo^danus fol. 24.
in which respect they may be called, as some read that place, (...), hands
inaccessible and irresistable for strength; (...), all the Gods in heaven
cannot ward a blow of that hand. The hand of God the^ ordinarily in Scripture,
signifies his power, Lib. de. memb. Dei.
and so says Jerome in the place before mentioned; But Saint Bernard more
pertinently to our purpose says, ye God has two hands; the one is called
Latitudo, qua tribuit affluenter; Ser. 8. in Cantic.
this is the hand of his bou^ty by which he bestows his larges, and gives
guiftes unto men. The other is his hand Fortitudo, qua defendit potenter, this
is the hand of his power, stretched out over all his creatures to protect them
and defend them; and not so only, but to punish them also when they shall
offend him; and so says Saint Jerome, Ibid.
manus Deo flagellum, the hand of God sometime signifies a whip or scourge;
with the one hand, Deuteronomy. 11.29
God seems (as standing upon mount Ger^z^m) to deal abroad his blessings;
Iliad. 24.
and like Homers Jupiter, out of one of those tons, and great vessels which
stand in the entrance of his palace, he sets abroach his favors unto men;
with the other, as standing upon mount Ebal, he scatters his cursings; and as
out of the other tun he drentcheth me^ with afliction, and gives them plenty
of tears to drink, Psalm. 80.5.
as the Psalmist says.

Now David had very comfortable experience of both these hands of God, For
with his hand Latitudo, the hand of his Bounty; he had give^ him a kingdom,
and set a Diadem and a crown of pure gold upon his head, he had given him
pro pedo sceptrum a scepter for a sheepe-hooke, Psalm. 78.71.
taking him from following the ewes great with young, to make him a ruler over
his people: with his hand Fortitudo, God had as mightily defended him; Saul
had pursued him and hunted him as a man would hunt a Partridge in the
mountains, 1. Sam. 26.20.
as himself complains; and had brought him into those wonderful straites,
that he tells Jonathan in the bitterness of his Soul, that verily there was
but a step between him and death; 1. Sam. 20.3.
yet God had always broken the snare of the fowler, and had wrought his
deliverance miraculously. But now this hand of God for his sins was turned
against him; Sickness by a loathsome and contagious disease; Discomforte for the
loss of his friends, and grief of heart because of the malicious hatred of
his enemies; these were now become his portion, this was the handsell that GOD
had given him.

By the hand of God then in this place, I understand, In Psalm. 38.
with Saint Ambrose, virtutem punie^di, his irresistable power, in punishing,
by which he keeps corrections, as it were among kings themselves, who are as
Gods among men, Haec manus Dei regem Aegyptiarum flageslauit, this is that hand
of God, says Ambrose, Genesis 20.
which scourged Abimelech king of Egypt, or of Gerar, and al his people with
a sore disease, because of Sarah Abraha^s wife: This is the hand, that punished
king pharaoh, with those manifold plagues mentioned in the book of Exodus and
this is that hand, which here punished David, with this disease in his body
and in his person. I know that Saint Basil, expounds it otherwise,
understanding it thus, that the hand of GOD was heavy upon David, not as
upon his person, but upon his house and upon his family, (...), it had
shaken his house from the very foundation, by the manifold disorders of his
children, first by Ammons incest with his sister Thamar, 2. Sam. 13.14. verse.
28.
then by Absoloms killing of him for the same; Afterward by Absoloms defiling
of his fathers concubines, and his ambitious aspiring to the Crown; And after
that again, by Adoniiahs usurping of the kingdom. But it appears al along,
2. Sam. 16:21. 1. King. 1.5:
both by this exposition, and by that other also, where he calls GODS
arrows, nothing else but Gods commination and threatenings, with the terror
whereof, David's Soul and conscience was wounded, that Basil had a moral and
Allegorical conceit of the whole Psalm; The best of our late and modern
writers, understand it of a disease inflicted upon David in his person, with the
Prophet calls Gods hand, Bucer. Musc:
as deriving it from the principal efficient cause of all our misery and
affliction as for example; Overthrow in battle, is Gods ha^dy work; when
Israel forsook God and served Baal and Astaroth, Judge. 2:5.
it is said that whither soever they went, the hand of the Lord was sore
against them, and still delivered them into the hands of their enemies. Psalm.
127.3.
Children and the fruit as the Psalmist speaks; so on the contrary, orbitas
liberorum, loss of children and barrennes of the womb, are the stroke of Gods
hand. Naomi bewailing the death of her two sons the husbands of Ruth and
Orpah, and considering that God had shut up her womb and that it ceased to be
with her after the manner of women, Ruth. 1.13.
so that she was without further hope of having any more children, she said,
it grieveth me my daughters for your sakes, that the hand Blindness is
likewise the stroke of Gods hand; when Elymas the sorcerer was stricken blind,
Paul tells him, Act. 13.11.
yt it was the hand of God, behold the hand are the hand of God. For when the
Philistines were smitten with Emeroides, it is there said as here David
speaks, that the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them. 1. Sam. 5.6.


The use of the 2. part.
The Doctrines which hence arise for our instructions are these. First in that
he says, thine hand lies heavy upon me, Victori: Strigel. in hunc locu^.
it is very emphatical, it is as if he had said, I do not fear the hand of the
Assyrians or the Philistines, or any of the inhabitants of Palestina. for
against them I could oppose mine own hand, by which I have gotten many notable
victories over them, I could fortify my self with strong munition, of war,
I could muster and prease forth many thousands of those strong men of
Israel, that draw swords; I have many worthies, valiant men, who for my sake
will carry their lives in their hands, and will defy mine enemies, and smite
them till their hand cleave to the sword, as did Eleazer the son of Dodo; 2 Samuel 23:^0.
but all this will not now serve the turn, it will nothing avail; for it is thy
hand O God, that presses and pursues me. Again; the chardge and weight of a
man's blow, is but weak, according to the force and pulse of his arm, as the
two princes of the Midianites Zeba and Zalmana said to Gedeon, when he bid his
son Iether to try his arm and the dint of his sword upon them; No said they;
Arise thou and fall upon us, for as the man is so is his strength. Judge 8.21.
But the hand of God it falls not lightly where it lights; but with an
heavy load, and it breaks and bruiseth; whatsoever makes resistaunce
against it, as before I told you out of Homer, that all the gods could not ward
a blow of Jupiters hand. This is the hand that now combatted David, against
which he fenceth himself, not with shield or target, but with his prayers and
tears, teaching us thereby, to be careful that we do not by our prouocatio^s
cause God to lift up his hand against us, Psalm. 39.10.
least we be consumed by the stroke thereof, as our Prophet speaks; and when
at any time he is incensed against us, that with David we seek to pacify him
by our humble conversion. For howsoever David chose to fall into the hands of
God, 2. Sam. 23.14.
because his mercies are great; yet when his wrath is kindled though but a
little, so that he lay aside his golden scepter of mercy, and take his
crushing rod of iron into his hand, then as the Apostle speaks horrendum est,
Heb. 10.31.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the handi of the living God. And if he
thus ware fierce against them of his own family, and begin correction and
judgment at his own house, as here he does with David, ^. Pet 4.17.
What will be the end of the^, which obey not the Gospel: and if this be done
in virente ligno, in the green timber, as S. Luke speaks, Luke 23.31
quid fiet in arido? What will become of the dry wood? But that it should be
meat for the fire, Esaias 9.19.
and fuel for the furnace of his wrath.

Secondly, in that he says, that his sickness was Gods hand lying upon him,
it teaches us, that affliction and calamity come not upon us by chance or
fortune, but by the hand of Gods providence. Which while men ignorant of the
true God considered not, they framed to themselves a new goddess of casual
events, Fortune, te facimus Fortuna Deam. Iuve. Sat. 14. 1. Sam. 6.9.
The Southsayers tell the Eckronites and the men of Ashdod, that if the Arc
which they sent home upon a new cart, drawn with two milch kine, took up the
way to its own coast to Bethshemesh, that then surely it was God that had done
the^ that evil; if not, then shall we know, say they, that it was not his hand
that smote us, but that it was a chance that happened unto us. No no, things
come not to pass by chance; David in the true search and surveigh of his
sickness, finds that it is God hand and his arrowe that had wounded him, as
Job likewise says, manus domini ^^tigit me, Cap. 19.21 Job. 2.7.
and yet it is said in the second Chapter, that it was Satan that had smitten
him with boiles, but the holy man knew that the Devil and wicked men who are
his instruments, are Gods agents; as David likewise replied not against the
reproaches of his reviling enemies, because it was Gods doing. Psalm. 39.9.
But of this more hereafter; The godly then wisely consider, that whatsoever
misery befalls the^ in this life, it is al Gods doing; There is no evil of
affliction in the city, which the Lord has not done, says the Prophet Amos.
I form the light and create darkness, Amos 3.6. Esaias 45.7.
I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things, says God by
his Prophet Esaias. Amos in his fourth chapter, gives instance of the
particulars, where God tells ye house of Israel. I have give^ you cleanness
of teeth in all your cities, and skarcenes of bread in all your places. Amos
4.6.
I have withholde^ the rain from you when there were yet three months to the
harvest. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew. Pestilence have I sent
among you after the manner of Egypt, yet have you not returned unto me says
the Lord: The certainety of this Doctrine, teaches the godly when they are
exercised with any cross of affliction, to look up to the hand that smites
them; and as David asked the woman of Tekoah, 2. Sam. 14.19
whether the hand of Ioab were not with her in her plot and devise; so they
examine, whether the hand of God be not with the wicked, in those things
which they attempt and practice against them, or in any other calamity
whatsoever else comes upon them.

It is apparent by the whole course of the Story, that Joseph's brethren had
sold him to the Ishmeelits, for hatred and of envy, and that the Medianites or
Ishmeelits to make their gain, had sold him again at the second hand to
Potiphar king Pharaohs chief, steward, to be a slave and bondsman as it is in
the Psalm: Psa. 105.17
But Joseph he espied Gods hand working in that action, and he tells his
brethren, Genesis 50.20
that when they thought and intended evil against him, God disposed it to good;
for God says he, sent me into Egypt before hand for your preservation. But
the example of our Savior Christ, Gen, 45.5.
is very excellent to this purpose. See what a rabble of miscreants co^bined
and co^federated themselves together, to work the destruction of that innocent
lamb of God; and every one of them proposed to him self a particular end of
his doing. Satan the chief Agent, he saw that his kingdom could not stand,
if Christ's kingdom were erected, and therefore he begins to play the
pioner; but yet he would not openly show himself in the Action, (which is the
manner of the great Politicians of our age) but he suborneth another to play
the traitor, Judas one of Christ's own followers, and he put into the heart
of Judas to betray Christ, says Saint John. Ioh. 13.8:
Judas then having through the throat of covetousnes, which inlardgeth it
self as wide as hell, swallowed down the Devil and all together with the
sop, as it follows in the chapter, he comes to the Priests to proffer his
service, perfidiously to betray his Lord and Master, saying, Quid dabitis? what
will you give me? Here is his end; for thirty pence he will sell him that was
worth all the world beside, for he was the Ransom of the whole world. The
Priests willingly condescend thereunto, moved through an ambitious desire of
upholding and mainetayning their estates and dignities, against the proceedings
of so base an vpstart, as Christ seemed to be, Ioh: 11.47. and 48:49.
mark their speeches; What perceive you not that we pervaile nothing, behold
all the world goes after him, and if we let him thus alone all men will
believe to him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and the
nation. And thereupon they trudge to Pilate, who makes up the match. And the end
which he proposed to himself, was the retaining of Caesar's favor, least he
shoold have bin stripped out of all his offices and preferme^ts; for ye Priests
had told him that if he did deliver Christ, Ioh. 19:12. Luke 23.23
he was not Casars friend, and therefore their instant and clamarous voices
prevailed against him, as S. Luke testifies; insomuch yt through pusistanimity
of mind not fit to be found in a judge, contrary to his own knowledge, Luke
23.22
for he found no fault in him worthy of death, against his own conscience,
against the admonition sent unto him from his wife, who willed him to have
nothing to do with that Just man, Math. 27.19
for she had suffered many things that day in a dream by reason of him; yet
he, notwithstanding all this, causlesly and without any suspicio^ of crime,
condemned to death the Lord of life. Here is now the Gordian knot of the very
powers of darkness made fast. But what; had God forgotten or forsaken his
beloved son all this while? no, ye scripture does not disse^ble it, but yt the
hand of God was mainly in this whole actio^, and wrought with every particular
age^t, though not in every one; according to that of the Schoolmen, Beza
quaest. fol. 91.
Deus agit quide^ in bonis, and per bonos, per males vero tantum agit, sed no^
in malis, see the^ how the Scripture does determine of it; doubtless say the
Apostles, Peter and John, doubtless both Herod, Act. 4.27.
and Po^tius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered
themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel, O God, had
determined before to be done. The place is very pregna^t to the purpose which
we have in hand, namely to show, yt whatsoever affliction befalls us, it
comes not to pass by chance, but by Gods providence, and as we commonly say,
Gods ba^d has a stroke in it. Therefore in all our miseries we may truly say, as
David here does, that it is the hand of God that presses us. Let us not behave
our selves frowardly in this day of our visitatio^, by murmuring against God
for afflicting us in this measure, or in this kind of punishmente by plague
and Pestilence, like cursed Dogs which bite at the chains wherewith they be
tied. But let us learn with David, to humble our selves under the mighty hand
of God, ^ Pet. 5.6.
as Saint Peter exhorts; the way to avoid the weight of his blow, is to
yield under it, for it breaks and bruiseth whatsoever makes resistance
against it. And seeing that it is undoubtedly Gods hand that smites us, let
us construe it to be for our good, namely that God in seeking to reclaim us
from those bypath of sin, into which we have straied, he shows that he has
a care of us as of his children, as of those who are not yet past hope of
recovery. Magna est ira quando Deus non irascitur. August.
Desperate is the case of those, who never feel any touch of Gods hand, nor of
his displeasure; and it is a sign of his greatest anger, when he does not show
himself to be angry with us at all.

Gods arrows. Thine arrows o God stick fast in me. The Lord, says Moses, is
a man of war. Exodus 15.3.
The Scripture elsewhere describes his furniture and his armor; For his armor
of defense he is said in Esaias, Esaias. 59.17.
to put on Righteousness as an habergeon, and the helmet of Salvation upon his
head; and with these he defends this church: For his weapons of offense, Ibid.
he puts on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and is clad with zeal
as with a cloak. And in the Psalms, he is said to girde his sword upon his
thigh and to whette it, Psalm. 7.12: and 4^.
to bend his bow and to prepare his deadly arrows. Neither is God a common
soldier under pay, gregarius miles, but he is the Lord high Marshall and
great comma^der of all the forces and armies in the world, and therefore is
very truly called ye Lord of hosts he has in heaven a band of ten thousand
thousands of Angels, Esaias. 1.24.
which are his swift archers and his winged posts, Dan. 7.1.10.
and these stand before him to attend his command. Who are properly called the
host of heaven, 1. King. 22.19. Job. 26.3.
and in Job Gods armies; and are by him appointed to incampe and to pitch their
tents about his Saints: as the Psalmist speaks. He has also a Legion of
wicked and unclean Spirits, Psalm. 34.7. 1. Cor. 10.10.
destroying Angels, as the Apostle calls them, and these have a leader and
commander whose conduct they follow, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in
Greek (...), that is, a destroier, Apoc. 9.11. 2: Sam: 23:
these are mightier then the Worthies of David so much famoused and commended,
2. King. 12.
for one of them in one night space slew an hundred fowrescore and five
thousands in Sennacharibs host. God has his host and army in the orbs and
Arches of heaven, Judge. 5:20:
for the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. He has his garrisons
in the lower Elementarie regions; Psalm. 135.7 Psalm. 147.16.
thence he brings his swift winds as out of a treasury, gives snow like
wool; and scatters his ice like morsels; Thence he smites the corn with
blastings, and mildewes; Thence he destroyed the Egyptians vines and mulberie
trees with the frost, Psalm. 78:47.48.
and their flocks with hot thunderboltes; Thence he slew the Amorites with
prodigious hailstones; Joshua. 10.11.
And thence will he shoot his irefull arrows against the wicked; and will
rain upon their snares, Psalm. 11.6.
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be the portion of their
cup. Nay out of the least and the lowest and most contemptible creatures: God
mustereth forth an army to destroy mighty nations: Exodus 8.
Frogs, flies and lice, the Catterpiller, and the palmer worm, are sent out
against Egypt; and God seems to brag of them in the 2. of Ioell, Joel.
2.25.
calling the^ his great best. Against those seven mighty nations the
inhabitants of Canaan, God sent an army of Hornets to destroe them. Joshua.
24.12.
Against the house of David. God says that he will hiss for the fly of
Egypt, and the be of the land of Ashur, as it is in Esaias; Esaias. 1.18.
but by these are properlye understood the armies of the Egyptians, and the
Assyrians. Nay a man finds an host of enemies amongst them of his own house,
Math. 10.36.
as our Savior speaks in another sense; for eve^ in this house of clare
which we carry about with us, Job. 4.19.
and in this body of ours, the very humors yield matter and occasion of
sundry strange and incurable diseases, as punishments for our offenses, for
since the time that man first fell away from God his Creator by sinful
transgression, Maecies and nova febrium terris incubuit cohors; Horat. lib. 1.
odo 2.
as the Poet speaks, he still has bin and yet is assaulted, with a new
army of burning Fevers and pestilent Agues, with botches, blaines, and soars,
and other maladies, which the Prophet verse. 5. calls the stripes of Gods rod,
vibices meae computruerunt, and in this place he calls them the stroke of
Gods sharp and wou^ning arrows, Sagettae tuae in me descenderunt, Thine
arrows, o God, stick fast in me.

The Metaphore of a sword, a bow, and arrows, attributed to God, seems to
be borrowed from the custom of the Eastern and Southern nations, whose
armor in battle were the bow to wound a far off, and ye sword to be used
in close fight. Thus the Black-more and the Lybian, are said to bear shields,
and the Lydians to handle and bend the bow. Ier, 46, 9.
Now God this great and terrible archer, has his quiver fraught with diverse
kinds of arrows. Moses; and such a one was Saint Peter, Moses in quo locutus
est deus dei est sagitta. Origin in. Ps. 36 Hom 3: Act: 2:37. Esaias: 49.
at whose preaching it is said yt the hearers (...) were pricked in heart.
according whereunto ye Prophet Esaias says of himself, that God had made him a
chosen shafte, and had hid him in his quiver; Some read, posuit me sagitta^
mu^da^, a clean, a smooth and a bright arrow, to teach us, that a Minister in
his judgment and Opinions, should endeavor to be free from error and
falsehood, And that his reprehensions also, should not be cankered with the rust
of Affection, of hatred or malice, or the like; but that he should speak says
Oecolampadius, Ioh. OEcolampad: in 49: Esaias:
Eloquia Dei, the true, pure and sincere word of God, which is as silver, that
has bin tried, purified, Job calls the wicked, Job: 16:13: Ier 8 3: Psalm:
11:2:
Gods archers. There is a generation, says Jeremy, who bend their tongues
like bows, and these are they, of whom the Psalmist says, that they shoot
out their arrows, even bitter words, against the^ which are true of heart.
Which Origin thus expounds, Origin: Ibid:
that their Quiver, is the heart, their arrows are the Counsels and intentions
of the heart, their bows, are their tongues and lips; by which they cast
forth their virulencie, to wound the good name of their brethren. Agreeable
hereunto, is that spoken of Joseph, that the Archers grieved him and shot
against him, but his bow abode strong, Gen: 49:23
and the hands of his arms were stre^gthened by the mighty God of Jacob, Hom.
66: in Gen:
which Chrysostom understands of his brethrens conspiracy against him, and
accusing him with joint consent unto their father, but God defeated their
practices. Thirdly the Devil and those whom he retains rod, his sword, and
his arrowe. Thus Ashur or Nebuchadnezzar, Esaias: ^0.5: Ier: 50.23: Vide Petru^
Mesiam var: lect: part 1: cap: 32:
is called the rod of Gods wrath, and his hammer, as Tamberlan and Totilas
called themselves Flagella Dei Gods scourges. In the 17. Psalm verse. 13. ye
wicked are called Gods sword; Deliver my soul from the ungodly which is a
sword of thine. So when God cast upon the Aegyptia^s the furiousnes of his
wrath, by storms and tempest of hailestones, thunder, and lightning, which
Psalm. 18.14. and Psalm. 144.6. are called Gods arrows) and by giving their
lives over to the pestilence, which in this place is called Gods arrowe; it is
expressly said Psalm. 78. that he sent evil Angels amongst the^. And hereunto
agrees Saint Ambrose; Cum Diabolus vulnerat, Psalm. 78.49. Ambros. in hunc lo
cu^:
Domini sunt sagittae, qui vulnerandi potestatem dedit; when the Devil does
wound any man either by himself or by his instruments and ministers, they are
Gods arrows that wound, because it is God, that gives the^ power, and ability
to hurt. Fourthly those great and famous worthies of old, and in former
adges, whom God used as Instruments, to bring his purposes to pass, and to
subdue kingdoms and countries; they were his strong, his swift, and victorious
arrows, Thus God calls Cyrus and Darius, Esaias. 13.3. and 5.
his Sanctified ones, and his mighty giants, and (...), the vessels or the
weapons of his wrath, as our English has it. Of Cyrus, whose right hand God
had holden up to subdue nations before him, Esaias. 45.1.^.
he speaks thus; I will weaken the loins of kings, and open the doors
before him; I will break the brazen gates and burst the iron bars, and give
him the treasures of darkness, and the things hid in secret places, and yet
Cyrus knew not all this while, yt he was Gods sanctified champion nor his
weapon or arrowe, and therefore God says to him, Verse. 5.
I girded thee, though thou have not known me. Alexander the Great, was
another of these arrows, who being shot off with great strength, flewe
without resistance a conqueror of the world; subduing kingdoms, faster then a
man could pace them over; and therefore Daniel co^pareth him to a Leopard,
which had four wings upon his back. Dan. 7.6.
Julius Caesar, was another of Gods arrows, he wondreth himself at his own
success; veni, vidi, Sueton in Iul. number: 37: more sulminis venit percussit,
abscessit. Florus. lib. 4. cap. 2. Lucan: l: 1^ 2. King. 9:20:
vici, and as another says of him Omnia ei prova; all the world lay coutched
before him at his feet. Lucan does fully express and interpret my meaning
when he says of him that he was Ductor Impigor, and torto Balearis verbere
funda ocyor, and missa Parthi post terga sagitta, He was a leader and
commander suddeine in his expedition, he Marched furiously like Iehu, and
swifte as a Parthian arrowe.

These were indeed Gods principal and chosen shaftes. He has yet other
arrows prepared for destruction. Thunder and lightening, are called GODS
arrows; Ps. 18.15.
with these arrows GOD scattered and discomfited the Philistims, at the prayer
and petition of Samuel. 1 Samuel: 7:10
Out of his bow in the clowd, he shot against the old world, rain and waters,
that all flesh perished that moved upon the earth. Zanch. de Operib. Creat. l:
3: c. 3: de Iride, 9 These: 3: Lamen. 4.6
Against Sodom, he shot arrows feathered with fire, and it was destroyed as
in a moment, and none pitched camps against her, as Jeremy speaks; Al these
arrows he shoots, and yet his quiver is not emptyed, nor spent, I have yet
other arrows to speak of Zosimus tells us, that in that battle that was
fought between Constantius and Magnentius near unto the city Mursa, Lib. 2.
in fine
there was one Menelaus Colonel of the band of the Armenian archers, in
Constantius his army, a bow-man so skilful and cunning, that he could, (...),
at one loose, shoot of three arrows at once, not as against one man, but he
would be sure (...), to stick his shaftes, in three men at once. Almighty God,
when being provoked to anger, he comes forth to battle against sinful
men; he draws out of his quiver his three arrows, which are his deadly
weapons; like Philoctetes arrows, in Sophocles; In Philoctete.
(...), the messengers and forerunners of death, Et habent sunt arundine
plumbum; they are stemd and headed with heavy vengeance, and feathered with
swift destruction.

The first of these arrows; is his Arrowe of Famine. This is the arrow which
he threatens against his rebellious people, when he says; I will send upon
them the evil arrows of Famine, which shall be for their destruction, Ezech:
5:16
and I will break their staff of bread. The second, is the Arrow of battle,
for this is also levelled and directed by him. Michaiah told Ahab, 1: King:
22:34:
that if he went to battle against the king of Ara^, he should not return in
peace; the event proved the prediction true, for a certain man drew a bow
ignora^tly, or in his simplicity, or as Jerome reads; in incertu^ sagitta^
dirigens, casu percussit regem, he shot at a venture, and he hit the king by
chance; but it was not vy chance, for God so directed the arrow, that it smote
the K of Israel, between the ioints of his brigandine, and he dyed at eue^.
Iehoram had received wounds in the battle, 2: King: 9:15
which he fought in Ramoth Gilead against Hazael K. of Ara^, but he was in way
of recovery, and to be cured of those wounds; afterward when Iehu was
anointed K. over Israel, and appointed to smite the house of Ahab, God
directed his hand in the battle, and he took a bow, and smote Iehora^
between the shoulders, verse: 24:
that the arrow went through his heart, and he fell down dead in his charet.
Iulia^, as Sozomen reports, Lib: 9: cap: 2:
being wounded to death by a Persia^ arrow, intellexit, says mine Author, he
knew it to be Gods arrow, and therefore receiving the blood that gushed out of
his wound, into the palm of his hand; he threw it up dispitefully into the
air, Zonara. Tom. 3. in Iuliano,
crying out, (...). Satiate thy self with my blood, o Christ of Nazareth. The
third and last Arrowe, is his arrow of Pestilence; this is indeed a fearful
arrowe, Musc, in Psalm. 38,
and it is, as one calls it, grandis terror mort al^um the great terror of
men; as being Deaths chief Pursuivant and Sumner, Job, 18 18,
who in Job, is called Rex terrorum, the king of fear. These three arrows,
God had laid upon his bow, and had fitted them to the string, when he came
against David for nombring the people, 2. Sam. 24,
but he gave David his choice, whether he would endure the arrowe of Famine 7.
years; or the arrowe of battle 3. months, or the arrow of the pestilence 3.
days: he made choice of the last, of with I will deliver a word more
particularly. Cu^ huiusmodi vlcera Domini sagittae vocentur no^ video.


Musculus says, yt he does not well conceive ye reason, why ye Prophet should
call his Ulcers Gods arrows, unless it be because that the body being
suddenly stricken with them, they kill a man down right, as does an arrowe or
darte shot into the body. I suppose it to be an Hebrewe phrase, by which
they call such blaines and soars, Arrows; because that the impostume, the
rupture and abscession (as Physicians call it) which they cause in the body,
makes the flesh and skin to go a sunder, a (...) dimidians Pagn:
as in Hebrew ^n arrow is so called, because it divides a thing into two
parts; or because the pain and ache which they cause, is like unto the
piercing of an arrow. Other languadges in other sores have terms not unlike;
The tumor and swelling inflammation, called Erysipelas, In Phisiol. fol. 195.
lin. 1.
or Saint Anthonies fire, is by Selneccerus (belike out of the propriety of his
country languadge) called Spina a thorn, because ye smart which it causes, is
like ye pricking of a thorn. Boiles are in another languadge called n^iles,
and this is from the Latin; Gallice clout. lib. 3 Ep. 7. erat illi natus
insanabuis clavus, cuius toedio admortem irrevocabili constantia decucrit.
Pliny writing to Caninius Rufus, of the death of Silius Italicus, tells him
that he had a boil or a nail risen in his body, with put him to ye extremity of
pain, that he, to rid himself out of the torment, pined, and starved himself
to death. But to omit the phrase; I come briefly to show you in what respect
the Plague may be called Goat arrowe.

In an Arrow then I observe these properties; First, it flies very swiftly;
whence as one pretely notes, the Italians from their word Frezza, Pierius Hier
lib. 42.
which signifies an arrow have formed the verve Affrezzolare, which signifies
to make have about any matter; Psalm 9.11.5.
So the Pestilence which is GOD arrowe, it is called by the Psalmist, Sagitta
volans, a flying arrow, this arrowe in three days space, flew throughout all
the coasts of the land of Israel, 2. Sam. 24:
from Dan to Beersheba, and slew of the people 70000.

Arrowe flies silently, without making any great noise, Wisd. 5.12:
it gently parts the air, which immediately comes together again, so that
a man cannot know where it went through. In like manner this arrowe of God,
the arrowe of Pestilence, it is called terror nocturnus, Psalm. 91.
ambulans in tenebris, it steals upon men oftentimes suddenly in the night,
in their most private and secret bed-chambers, and assaileth them with
wonderful terror.

Arrowe reaches a mark that is far off, Ovid. lib. 9: Meta: fab. 2
as Hercules told Nessus when he ran away with his Deianira, that although
he could not come to him, yet he would send after him; Vulnere non pedibus
te consequar; and he made it good too, fugientia terga sagitta-traijcit, he
sped an arrowe clean through his loins. In like manner the Arrowe of the
Pestilence it is called a walking arrowe, Sagitta ambulans.
it roveth dp and down to marks far and near, from city to villadge, to
the great terror of men. Qui long abest peste morietur; qui prope, gladie
cadet, Ezech. 6.12.
He that is afar off, he shall be a mark for the arrowe of the pestilence,
and he that is near at hand he shall fall by the sword. Eusebius shows,
Lib 9 c: 8.
how many, who had made shifte to escape the arrovve of Famine, could not
keep themselves out of the reach of this Arrowe, but that they died of the
Plague.

Fourthly, an Arrowe pierces and wounds Psalm: 127:5:
especially from the hand of a giant, as the Psalmist speaks. The Indian
archers shot arrows of two cubitts of length, with such strength, that as one
writes, non clypeus non thorax summae firmitudinis, Caelius Rhodig. lib. 23:9:
In Psalm. 91.
neither target nor corsset of armor of proof, were able to resist the stroke
of them. The Pestilence Gods Arrowe is of like force, as Musculus says,
pernicisseme volat and exitialiter ferit, it flies swiftly, and it wounds
deadly. No age is exempted from the stroke and infection of it; no, not young
men by their lusty and strong bodies: for as Seneca says, De Ira. lib. 3:
cap: 5:
Adversus pestilentiam nihil prodest firmitas corporis etc. it little avails
a man against the plague, to be of a strong constitution of body, or to use
diligent care in preserving his health, for the Plague seiseth upon weak and
strong both alike. Old men are not superannuated nor privileged from it,
howsoever Pliny be bold to avouch the contrary; Lib. 7: c: 50.
Senet minime sent^re pestilentiam, that old men are never tainted with the
plague: It is not the season nor the coldness of the winter, that can stop the
course of it; De rebus Moscoviticis fol. 11.
Possevinus tells us that at what time he was Ambassador for the Pope in
Moscovia, the plague with had scarce ever bin heard of before in that country, ob
inte^sissima frigora, by reason of the extreme cold; yet it then killed many
thousands. And hence is this arrow called Exterminium, Psalm. 91.6.
a rooting out and a destroying arrowe.

arrow being guided by a steady hand, and leveled by a quick cast and just
aim of the eye, it flies straight and misseth not its mark. The dexterity of
some men in these sl^ights has bin wonderfully excellent; there were brought
before Alexander at several times two men, notably famous for their Activity
in diverse kinds: Sine frustratione.
the one could cast millett seed through the eye of a needle, without missing
the king wondering at his vanity, rather then admiring any excellency, rewarded
him, Quintil. l: 2 cap. 21.
eius leguminis modio, with a bushel of the same pulse, to find him play,
and to keep his hand in ure. The other was an archer, so skillful and cunning
through long practice, that he could shoot his arrows through a ring.
Cael. Rho. dig: lib. 23.9.
In the 20. of Judges it is said, that of the children of Benjamin there were
7. hundred chosen men, Iud 20.16. Au^el. victor. and Sueton in domit. nu^. 19.
that could slinge stones at an hairs breadth and not fail. The like is
reported of Domitian, that he could shoot his arrows between the fingers of
a man's hand a far off, without doing him any hurt. But the hand of God is
much more cunning to handle the bow, and his arrows fly more steddelie and
miss not. They are more certain and sure then the Arrowe of Cephalus, Ovid.
met: lib. 7. Fab. 27.
of which the Poet says Consequitur quodcunque petit, it hitte whatsoever it
was aimed at; They are more Fortunate then Hercules his bow and arrows, In
Here ^^taeo verse. 1655.
which as he tells Philoctetes in Seneca; Non fallet vnquam dexteram hic
arcus tuam librare telum didicit and certam dare-fugam sagittis: my bow is a
knocker, it will never fail thy hand, it keeps always one scantling, and
mine arrows; ipsa non fallunt iter-Emissa nervo tela: they never glaunce wide
from the mark. GODS bow is like Ionathans bow, 2. Sam. ^.22.
which never returned empty from the blood of the slain, nor from the fat
of the mighty, and this his arrowe of the Pestilence, though it walk in the
darkness, and be shot off as in the night, yet it is not carried casually by
chance, but is guided and leveled by the hand of Gods Providence.

Now this is the arrowe, or some other of this kind that had wounded David,
The use of the 3, part,
as out of the comperts and evidences of the text, and out of the judgment of
learned Interpreters, I have deduced more at lardge. For our instruction; The
Emphasis which he uses, is worth the observing. First, he says thine arrows
o God, Exodus 14.18. Lento gradu ad vindicta^ divina procedit ira, sed
tarditatem gravitate supplicij co^pensat. Val: Max. l. 1, cap, 2,
have light upon me, or as another Translation reads, stick fast in me. God
is slow to wrath and slow to punish; but when he is provoked, he recompenceth
his slownes, with the greatness of his punishment; as Euripides truly says;
(...). which is the reason why David says, that God threw his darts and his
arrows impetuously against him; Sagittae tua confortae, dimissae, depressae
sunt, ^rruerunt in me, the Interpreters strive to find a word to express the
Emphasis of the Hebrewe; they were whirled at him with violent fury, GOD let
drive at him, as at his enemy, his arrows suncke into his body, and hid
themselves in his flesh; Ps. 103.8.9.10.
Our GOD is a GGD of patience, and long-suffering; yet when he is provoked,
he is a consuming fire. In the book of Job; Job, 20, 29,
Zophar the Naamathite enforces a very firm and true conclusion; that
howsoever the wicked man, does bath himself in pleasure for a time, yet God
will send upon him his fierce wrath, and although he escape the iron weapons,
that is, the sword of man, yet he shall not escape the hand of God, for his
bow of steel, Job: 20, 24,
says he, shall strike him through, his arrowe shall drentch it self in his
very gall. And against the wicked GOD threatens and speaks thus in the 32.
of Deuteronomie; Deuteronomy, 32, 23
I will spend plagues upon them, I will bestow mine arrows upon them; If I
whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will execute
vengance on mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me, I will make mine
arrows drunk with blood. and my sword shall eat flesh.

Secondly, our Prophet calls the Plague Arrowe. thine arrowe, o GOD, sticks
fast in me; it is not then Apollos arrowe, as Homer affirms, Iliad, 1.
when describing the Plague that destroyed in the Grecian army, he says
(...), for 9. days together, (...). the Arrows of God Apollo walked up and
down the army, but this is but a Poetical fiction. It is God alone that
shoots this arrow among us; and it is he alone that ca^ salve and cure the
wound that it makes, and therefore vain is it for us to seek for help from
any other, and consequently foolish and superstitious are those prayers, which
the Papists make to their Saints, whither it be to our Lady, In. Breviar. ad
vsum Saru^, part Aestivali fol. 128.
as in the Mass appointed for the plague.

Virgo matter, maris stella,
Fons ortorum, verbi cel^a,
Ne nos pestis aut procella
Peccatores obruant
D. Rainold. de Idololat. lib. 1. cap 6. Sect. 7.
Or to Saint Rochus most profanely, Tu qui Deo es tam ch^rus,
Et in luce valde clarus.
Sana tuos famulos;
Et a peste nos defend,
Opem nobis ac impende,
Contra morbi stimulos.
These are their shameless and impious blasphemies, which I find also
published for the use of the vulgar and common people, in a little Manual of
Spanish prayers.

Thirdly, in that it is called Gods arrow, it teaches us that it comes not
upon us by chance, or fortune, but by the hand of Gods providence, as before I
have showed; for howsoever it may seem to make havoc of the people, and to
destroy without difference men of all sorts, yet the godly man, has a
comfortable promise of deliverance, Psalm. 91.7.
a thousand shall fall beside him, and ten thousand at his right hand; but it
shall not come nigh him nor nigh his dwelling. God will so ^edge him in on every
side, with his protection, that neither an hair of his head, nor a bristle of
his Swine, shall fall to the ground. And this is it, that Satan stormeth at,
that he could not hurt Job, Job. 1.10.
because God had made an hedge about him, and about all that he possessed on
every side. But here we must carefully observe these two caveats.

First, that in a Christian charity toward the wise man dies as does the
fool, Eccl. 2.16.
not only by the same necessity of death, but oftentimes also by the same
disgraceful and dishonorable means, that other men do, Psalm. 34.21.
that as misfortune slays the ungodly, as the Psalmist speaks, so the godly
sometimes come to their ends by sudden and unexpected deaths. I showed you
before how two wicked kings, Ahab and Iehoram, were slain by an arrow; and you
shall find in the book of Cronicles, 2. Chro. 35.
ye good king Josiah was likewise slain by an arrowe, for going to battle
against Pharao Necho king of Egypt. And in this place you see, how God made
this good king David a But to shoot his arrows against and holy Job likewise
complains, Job 16 12:13 item ca. 6.4
that God had set him as a mark to shoot at, that his arrows were in him,
the venom whereof drunk up his spirits; and Jeremy yet more plainly,
Lament. 3.12.13.
says of God, He has bent his bow and made me a mark for the arrow, he has
caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins. Thus we see that the
godly are plagued like other men but yet God takes a more special notice of
them; for the foundation of God remains sure, 2: Tim: 2:19
and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his. Psa: 116:15
And therefore precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, by
what means, or by what kind of death soever they fall.

Musculus upon this place, from this Metaphore of an arrow here used, seems
thus to argue that the use of an Arrowe, is not to be flurted out at randon,
or to be shot at a venture; but to be aimed and directed to a set mark, And
therefore me^ do amiss, to think that the Plague infecteth any by chance or
fortune, but rather by Gods special messadge, and consequently that it
proceeds from weakness of Faith, for me^ to fly. Infirmitas Fidei, in Psalm:
86:2:
The sword likewise in battle, says he, though it be lifted up and
brandished by the hand of man, yet it kills not but by Gods dispensatio^, as
God himself says, I will number you to the sword; Esaias 65:12:
I know that the General is true, that neither the sword in battle, nor
this Arrowe of the Pestilence, does kill any but those that are appointed
thereunto: But whether a man may thereupon infer, that it is not lawful at
all to fly from the one nor the other, Calvin epist 362. facessant Paradoxa.
Zanchius ad Philip. cap: 2.30: Ovid. 7. meta Fab. 25.
it seems in Divinity an harsh sequel and Argument; but I will not take upon
me to determine this Question. I know great Divines, learned, and judicious, to
be of another mind. And certain it is, and woe-full experience teaches that
to be too true, which the Poet has, Quo propior quisque est, servitque
fidelius aegro,
In partem laethi citius venit.
By how much ye nearer me^ come about infected persons, by so much ye sooner
they come by their own deaths I know that there is a time to be borne, Eccles.
3:2: Job 14:5: Seneca Her: Fur. Act: 1: in choro Luth. in cap: 2: Ecclesiastae.
and a time to die and as Job says, man's days are determined, the number of
his months are with God, who has set him his bounds that he cannot pass.
Nulli iusso cessare licet, nulli scriptum proferre die^. Many men, says
Luther, have bin deeply and deadly wounded, who have recovered and survived,
and yet many on the contrary side, have dyed of very small hurtes; Astrologers
ascribe it to the stars and planets; others impute it to chance and fortune,
the scriptures refer it to Almighty God apud que^ sunt vitae and mortis
nostrae momenta posita, who has skored up the minutes and moments of our life
and death, and he, as he has set the last hour and period of our days, so
has he appointed the means and the manner of death, to bring us to our ends:
yet must we not therefore behave our selves carelessly, wilfully to expose our
selves to apparent dangers. Man is not Lord over his own Spirit or life to
retain it, Eccles: 8:8:
says the wise man; And it is a good note to this purpose, that our Bibles
have upon that place; that a man has no power to save his own life, and
therefore he should not rashly cast himself into danger.

To shut up al in a word: Almighty God after the flood, he hung up his bow in
the clowd, in token of reconciliation unto men; for if you mark it, the bend
and the arch of the bow is turned from us, as Zanchius observes: Lib: 3. de
operib: creat: cap: 3: Lib: de Noe and Arca: cap: 27:
But he hunge up his bow, says Ambrose, not his arrow: Arcus habet vulneris
indicium, non v^lneris effectum; the bow makes a show of hurting but it does
not hurt, it is ye arrow that wou^deth But now God seems for our sins to have
taken down his bow again; And he has shot his arrows against our whole
land, with to use the Prophets words, Joel: 2:3.
lay before him like the Garden of Eden, but he has left it wast and desolate
where he has gone, like a wilderness. The Queen city of our land, and the
glory of the kingdom, which to speak with the Prophet Zephanie, as she dwelt
careless; Cap. 3:15.
and sat attired in fine scarlet, so had she her sins also red as scarlet;
and therefore God has made her an ensample of his wrath, to her sister cities
of the land, and she mourns in her desolations, for the loss of her
inhabitants. And now God has changed his marks, and he shoots his arrows
all abroad, to cities and villadges far and near; he cannot shoot amiss, sin
is a fair mark for the arrow of vengance to hit. Concerning our selves of
this place; almighty God as if at the first, he had missed his aim, he shot
wide first on the one side of the city, and then on the other; of late it began
to be feared, that having found the just length, he had shot his arrows into
the midst of our city, and that his arrows stuck fast in her very flancks.
What remained? but that we should betake our selus to David's preservatives
against the Plague, Prayers and Tears. A^undines vulnera per niciosa ferentes.
Ammian: Marcell. lib 25: Lib: 2: ca: 8:
The Persian bow-men, are by all Historians commended for excellent archers,
and their arrows are said to have wounded deadly; yet in the battle that was
fought between Scipio and Antiochus, they were wonderfully foiled; but mark
how it came to pass; imber superfusus Persicos arcus corruperat, a shower of
rain, says Florus, falling in time of the battle, so slacked their bows,
that they could not shoot an arrow. The way for us to slacke^ Gods bow, is by a
shower of tears falling from the eyes of penitent sinners. Let the Priests,
says Joel, Joel: 2:17:
the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the portch and the Altar, and let
them say, Spare thy people, O Lord; then will the Lord be jealous over his land,
and spare his people. And as Tears must work upon Gods vow, to slacken it;
Plin: l: 26: c: 14 Dictamnum pota sagittas pellit.
so Prayer is the true Dyctamnum, that plucketh out his arrows when they
stick fast in us. These are the Sacrifices with which God is well pleased and
pacified; these were David; and Ezechias his amulets, counterpoisons, and
preservatives against the plague; for so God tells Ezechias. I have heard thy
prayer, 2. Kings: 20.5:
and seen thy tears, behold I have healed thee. Now God of his mercy give us
grace, to make an holy use of this and all other his visitations, and to make a
conscience of using all wholesome means for our preservation, that so his heavy
hand may be removed from us, and his arrows which yet stick fast in the
flancks of many of our distressed brethren, may be plucked out, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and
one ever living God, be all honor and glory, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

