THE Quintesence of Wit, being A corrant comfort of conceits maximies, and
poleticke devises, selected and gathered together by Francisco Sansouino.
Wherein is set forth sundry excellent and wise sentences, worthy to be
regarded and followed.

Translated out of the Italian tung, and put into English for the benefit of
all those that please to read and understand the works and worth of a worthy
writer.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde, dwelling without Cripple-gate at the sign
of the gilded Cup. Octobris. 28. 1590.

To the right Worshipful Master Robert Cicell Esquire, one of the Sons of
the right honorable the Lord high treasurer of England.
IN reading and reuiewing the manifold discourses and famous works of sundry
worthy writers, (right Worshipful) some translated out of French, Italian,
and some reduced into our English tung, by learned Latinestes and Grecians,
(whose studies and labors benefits a multitude) I happened on a book written
to Rodolphus the second, (a mighty, grave and wise Emperor) which book treated
on so many matters, and touched with quick conceits and sentences, such a
number of rare arguments and politic devises, that it seemed not only a
register of wit, but a natural quintesence of knowledge, gathered and
collected out of the highest and divine spirits of Philosophy, the value and
variety of the work is so excellent: that it argues of it self to be a rich
storehouse of precious compoundes, fraught and furnished full of deep insight
and profound reasons. Then to hide or keep secret the same work, were an
unpardonable error, and a wilful offense and fault committed against the
common society of men, that daily and hourly are nourished and fed with the
sweet and sugared taste of Histories, and understanding of true novelties,
penned out with painful study, and printed to exercise wise judgments with
matters of great moment. So under your favor good Sir, the hope of your
towardnes and good bringing up, and the desire I suppose you have to advance
learning and good letters, (the sensible sap of life) commands me by a bond of
causes, to honor you with a work not only worthy the reading, but likewise
worthy the noting and bearing in mind, a burden so pleasant to embrace and
delectable to carry in memory, as shall unload and make light a heavy heart,
and discharge a weighty imagination of disquiet thoughts. For the dissoluing of
doubts, and discovering o^ secret sentences: breeds a lightsomnes in man, and
puts away the wearines of time, and labor of the spirits, such care and
foresight of our commodity had our forefathers and ancient writers, that
always they filled the Printers shops full of great vollumes, and maintained
the worlds knowledge with an innumerable number of books, and never in any
age books were more sought for and better esteemed (if the authors thereof be
of sound judgment) then in these our flourishing days, where flowing wits
abound and reapes the reward of well doing and virtuous disposition. The
praise, preferments, great fame and good fortunes they have found: is such a
gazing glass to look in, that thousands thereby seek after virtue and
learning, to shun the rebuke of vicious idleness and sloth, none more disliked
then ignorant Idiots, nor more admired then the worthy wits of our world. Who
is not abashed to follow a painted shadow? and who takes not great glory to
wait where some substance is looked for? though the wise for their wisdom
are envied of the foolish, yet the fond for their folly are derided and pointed
at by all kind of people, wisdom is honored in his meanest attire, and
fondnes is but scorned in his brauest garments, the bare presentation of the
honorable, brings gladness to the beholders, and the proud pomp of the
vainglorious, are both irckesome and disdained, gold is more made off for his
goodness then his color, and men look more into the perfectnes of things then
to the outward appearance, this book though it be printed in common paper, yet
was it not penned in ordinarye discourses, it spreads it self like a tree
that has many branches, whereon some bow is greater then another, and yet
the fruit of them all are alike in taste, because no sour crabbes were graffed
where sweet Apples should grow, nor no bitter Oranges can be gathered where
sweet Powngarnets are planted, the excellency of this fruit, must be sencibly
felt and tasted with a well seasoned mind and judgment, and the delicatenes
thereof must be chewed and chawed with a chosen and special spirit of
understanding, not greedily mumbled up and eaten as a wanton eats Pears that
never were pared. Philosophy and far fetched knowledge may not be handled
and entertained like a Canterbury tale, nor used like a riding rhyme of sir
Topas, (this spoken to the general judgments of men) for I know to whose
hands this woork is commended, and I doubt not the usage thereof, because I see
some good sparks of a noble Father, shining in the eyes of a happy Son,
wherefore this book needs not fear (as I hope and believe) who barketh
against it, nor the writer thereof (if he were alive) neeeds not to doubt who
looks on his labors, for generally and absolutely (in a most loving phrase
and manner) he bountifully has imparted his secrets te a multitude, and
bestowed a great deal of thankeful pains on the wise, if the world be not
ingrate and forgetful of a good turn offered, he sets forth to sale, no
speeches farssed full of fables, but presents to our view (in an open
manner) heaps of hidden secrets, that none but noble and venerable aucthors
did ever open before, and in a manner leaves neither peace, war, policy,
practice nor any thing untouched, that is fit for a public state or common
weal to know, his golden book beautified with a thousand graces, is
translated out of the Italian tung, though not in such beauty as becomes the
gravity thereof, yet stripped gentlye out of his gaye garments, it is clothed
and plainly apparelled in such comely weeds and clean roabes, as every part
and proportion of the book may easily be seen and well perceived, and albeit
that a fine Italian in an English groce gaberdine is not fashioned in all
forms to please every strangers fancye, yet the personage may be passable when
all comelines is used for the setting forth of the same. Thus presuming that
Francis Sanssouino is no whit disfigured to walk openly in such English habit
as is found fit for him (craving favor that he may speak his own mind) I
hope you of courtesy will let him pass through our Country, that all kind of
people may see and hear what opinion he was of, in matters of state and mighty
affairs of this world, the book is dedicated unto you, for many good
considerations, one is that by your means a second life may be breathed into
Sansouinoes collections through your good liking, and being revived (or
awakened out of a long sleep) when it lay dead from our common knowledge, it
may show some such singular spirit: as shall rejoice both men of greatest
capacity and meanest judgments, so committing the worthiness of the matter to
your censure and protection, (always hoping my good will and good meaning
shall be well accepted) I take my leave, leaving you to the blessing of God,
and to judge favorably of my boldenes, and wishing you increase of woorship
and credit, even such as your self can desire.

Yours at commandment in that he may. Robert Hichcock.

Francisco Sansouino to the Emperor Rodolph the second.
MOst happy and fortunate Emperor, there is nothing more necessary for a
Prince in this world the^ Histories, for so much as being the mirrours and
masters of our life: they show and teach us what the government of a city
and Province ought to be, what laws we ought to institute and cause our
subjects to observe, in what manner to increase and maintain divine worships,
in what sort to exercise moral virtues, and how to reap benefit of counsel
in our affairs of importance: heerof it came to pass, that histories were
called of wise men most noble, for their antiquity, for so much as by them we
receive the creation of this huge world, and the original of man's generation.
For their perpetuity: because they have endured with the world, and shall
continually endure, always writing up human Actions, for the benefit of our
posterity. For their dignity: in respect they befit to be read and known, as
the proper art and science of Emperors, of Kings, of commonweals, and of
great Lords and captains, for their generalities: considering that in
histories we find written, in every tung, in every Province, and in every
age, those things that have fallen out either well or evil. For their justice:
because they do honor and dishonor, whosoever does merit and deserve the
same: giving due praise to the excellency of virtue and valor, and dispraise
to the vile filth of vice and idleness. For their subject: for that they do
entreat of great things, the acts of great men which they have accomplished to
the intent to enlarge, to preserve, and to sway rule. For their end: because
the same is no other, the^ to sacrifice truth to eternity. For their profit:
for the making us to behold things past, we may prudentlye by their means
foresee that which is to come, and therefore it came to pass in former and
ancient time, many excellent Princes and Emperors not content with the glory
they had gotten through their wise and valiant acts: did greatly desire also
to join unto their name this other glory, that is: eloquently to have written
histories, as did Augustus, after him Adrianus, and finally Gordianus the
predecessors of your Majesty. To this therefore having applied my study, not
to observe only what the cuntries, the mountains, and the rivers and floods
of this world are, or to have knowledge, how embassages were sent, of
Parlaments, of the managing and handling of affairs, or to understand the
voyages of armies, their order in ranging battles, their encamping, their
Stratagems, their beseegings, their expugnations and their victories, but
rather to draw and suck out of all these particular things, the sap, the
sweet and marrow, reducing them into precepts, for the commodity of great
persons, that being otherwise busied, neither have they time, neither can they
well, continually apply themselves in reading of histories, which was the only
motive that made me take in hand this book, wherinto if any prince or governor
will look, he may (as though it were in a bright crystal glass)
incontinently behold the substance that fully is contained, in the volumes of
the most commendable ancient and modern writers. And for so much as so
worthy and noble food appertains unto Princes, and for that amongst Princes,
your Imperial Majesty is of highest degree and dignity: therefore coming
toward your Majesty with no less affection of mind, then that wherwithall I
was enflamed, when I applied my self about this profitable enterprise: I
present the same most humbly at the feet of your Majesty, to the intent, that
with your sacred name, due and perfect honor may be given to this work, since
it shall be under the protection of your Imperial majesty, who carrying in his
noble person, the greatness and felicity of so many famous Emperors and Heroes,
of that worthy house of Austridge, which through a long course of worlds, have
governed and shall govern hereafter the sacred Empire, who being no less
benign and affable, then high in blood and honor* I assure my self, that he
will not disdain to look upon the same, for although it be little in quantity,
yet notwithstanding it is very great in quality, since it contains in it self
a Quintesence of those things that have been written for the profit and
commodity of men, governors and Princes. Venice the 24. of February. 1578.

The most humble and dutiful servant of your Imperial Majesty, Francisco
Sansouino.

The Author to the Reader.
I Could imparte unto you many things touching this my present travail,
excusing my self, for that I have not called the same rather experiments,
aduertisements, maximies, axiomies, precepts or sentences, the^ co^ceits: And
therein to have entermixt some moral and private matters, if I had not been
assured that I should not prevail. For I know very well, that it is almost a
general rule (by that I have observed in things past) that every writer what
good intent soever has moved him, or what trauail soever he has endured for
the universal profit of all, yet is he ever taxed of critical persons:
for so much as our tunges being moved and stirred through envy or hate, or
through a certain corruption which is brought in amongst us, not to have any
taste but only in our own proper matters we are much more easy drawn to
speak evil, then the wisdom of him that is moved, is prompt and ready to
do well. Therefore referring all my excuses to your upright judgment (when it
is not driven forward with any passion) I will only say this that I hold for
a certain, that this work howsoever it be, will be of great help and aid to
those that be studious, for that I imagine, it will enriche the private
discourses, and the public actions of those that shall chance at any time to
use and handle these conceits in humain actions, which almost have been ever
the selfsame in all times and amongst all men: and for that in the working
and negotiating of affairs, as well in public as in private, they will minister
unto them many conditions and parts, the which conceits although they be
somewhat general, yet nevertheless they will give no small light partitie:
how to know the parts and conditions of greatest advantage in particular
things, as well of public actions, as of private affairs. And although these
accidents, which do at unawares chance unto men in their affairs, and upon
the deed doing, are so many and so unknown, that they cannot be comprehended
within the compass of precepts: therefore some vulgar persons do reprehend
the study of them: nevertheless, for that I presuppose I shall help and yield
aid to men of accomplishment, as my intent was, when I took this matter first
in hand, drawing the substance (the final end of this study) forth of
histories, thereby to take away from others, the length, tediousnes of reading
and toyling themselves: I persuade my self, that although all accidents cannot
be brought under precepts, yet that man that has any mean assistance of
diligence, and that in working and perfourming of the^, he be not moved nor
altered more then is convenient (either by his nature, or by any other new
accidents) to dispose otherwise then well and aptly these actions which he
means to bring to an end; he by great reason may receive many benefits and
commodities, by having his mind fullye replenished with these aduertisements
and conditions, which he in any part has exercised in other operations, or
rather studiously read in some good and chosen writers, and stirred up in his
memory, only in this matter this has been somewhat noisome unto me: that I
could not find any full or perfect means (by reason of the variety of the
subject) to put them under firm and infallible titles for your commodities:
and although I have oftentimes conferred this difficulty with those excellent
Gentlemen, Master George Gradenigo and Master Alui di Michele, as of great
learning, who did enter into the same, and did discourse upon it with great
prudence, of Histreographie, and in matter of state, and of whom I have
received great counsel in this enterprise, nevertheless they could not resolve
me according to my desire. And although the foresaid gentlemen put me in
memory, that it would do well if I did place them under six titles, under
which are accustomed to light the consultations which are made in the counsels
of commonweals, and are drawn therinto by the lawgiuers, and whereof Aristotle
writ in his Rethorick: although they did not immediatlye come unto the same,
but as it were in consequence: at any time when the understander thereof would
apply themselves to their places, nevertheless I did dispose my self to make
the table heereunto annexed, as a thing more perfect, and perchance more easy
and short: The which although unto some it seems not able to serve the turn,
to find out sufficiently the particulars of those conceits that are fit for
him, or wherein he has need about his affairs: nevertheless, it will show you
a way how to attain to your intent, if not in all things, yet at the least in
some part. Receive therefore with a beneuolent mind this my good will, to the
intent, that perceiving your ametie, I may with a fervent desire, bring end to
the second and third book of conceits, which I still am about to gather.

Farewell.
The names of those Authors and writers, forth of whom the conceits of this
present book be gathered.
IT would no doubt very much have prevailed to those that are studious, that I
should have placed the names of the Authors at the foot of every conceit, but
for that it was not my meaning, when I first begun this work, to publish the
same, I did not remember in that my study to use the foresaid diligence.
Therefore if any one will serve his turn with these conceits, he may say: to
give force to his reason, by alleging some of these or such like words, as
wise men say, as antiquity have written, as prudent men declare, and such
other manner of speeches, nevertheless, I assure ye, that when I return again
to read over the same Authors, perchance in the second impression they shall
be added according to your desires. Notwithstanding, I have thought good to put
in this place, the names of the writers, which I have used in this my first
book, and these be they that follow.

Aristotle. Appian Alexandrine. Ammiano Marcellino. Antonie Gueuarra. Bernard
Justinian. Caesar the Emperor. Cornelius Tacitus. Cosmo Bartol. Dione Casio.
Francisco Guiciardini. Galeazzo Capello. Giouanne dalla Casa. Gabriello Fiamma.
Gian Battista pigna. The history of Florence. The History of Naples. Josephus
the Hebrewe. Iustine. Leonardo Aretino. Marc. Antonio Sabellico. Marcus Tullie
Cicero. Niceta Aconiate. Philippe Argentone. Polibius Historiens. Plutarchus
Cheronensis. Paulus Emilius. Pietro Bembo. Paulus Iouius. Plato. Procepius.
Remigio the Florentine. Salust. Suetonius. Thucidides. Titus Liuius. Zenophon.
Politic conceits and sentences, Gathered by M. Francisco Sansouino, out of
the most famous writers in the Greek, Latin, and Italian tongues, to benefit
those that command in matters of State and Civil government.
IT is the wunted Nature of men cheefelye to doubt those dangers that be
nearest at hand, to esteem more then is convenient, those things that be
present: and to have in less account then they ought, those that be far off:
by reason that in these last we may hope for many remedies, by the means of
Time and other sundry accidents.



which wise men have imagined ought of necessity to fall out. And therefore, he
that does for-goe present benefits, for fear of future perrilles (when in
such cases the danger is not most certain and near at hand) plainly perceiues
that he has lost sundry occasions full of profit and glory, for fear of
those perilles which after fall out to be vain.





A Great power united wholly together, is much more to be feared, then the
powers and forces of many yt are disseuered, the which as they have sundry
mouings and proceedings, so have they several and disagreeing operations.

but by the consent of many, proceed with more moderation and with greater
respects then a Prince can do: neither do so out of reason depart from that
which has some appearance of honesty, as oftentimes they do, yet does it
fall out to be a far better government when the commonwealth makes the body
and the members, and the Prince the head, so that being incorporated together
as one body, the dignity, majesty and state of the commonwealth, falls out
to be of a far greater perfection.

A Wise man ought always to draw commodities out of occasions, therefore a
Prince should not cast away the instruements of increase, neither slack them
when he has the favors of fortune propetious.







headlong those that b^ wicked.

A New Empire not well ordered, nor prudently governed, does rather burden then
make more mighty him that has gained it, besides that, no man has at any time
born himself well in governing a state which has been evil gotten.









WHere many Princes that pretend to be equalles do consort and keep company
together, there does easilye spring up amongst them suspicions and
contentions, by reason whereof, those enterprises which they have begun with
great reputation, do fall into many difficulties, and finally become vain.











A Prince in duetifull causes must hang in suspicion and reserve to himself so
much as is possible, the means and faculty to take these deliberations, that
by the proceeding of general and universal causes, he does discern to be his
best.

A Prince can have no greater felicity, then that his deliberations (whereof
does arise his own greatness and glory) may be accompanied with such
consequences and circumstances, that they may appear that they are done, no
less for an universal safety and benefit, then for the exaltation of the
whole Christian Commonwealth.





A Politic General and Captain, will rather (to the intent he may with
security obtain the victory) have little or no respect to the length of the
time, neither to the taking of too much toil and travail, either to proceed
in the spare of expenses, without much provision, rather the^ by obteining
glory by ouercomming with facilitye and speed, to put in peril and hazard
together with his army, the event of his quarrel and action.



NO solicitations, no benefits, no knot of conjunction is sufficient to
remove from the breast of Princes the small confidence and mistrust they have one
with an other: and although it be fit and proper for them, always to prefer
in their deliberations, profit, and benevolence, before hate and other covetous
humors, yet nevertheless, it is the office and duty of a wise Prince, to the
intent he may shame the greater, to embrace for profitable, for good, and for
the very best, the election of the less evil: neither ought he to free him
self from one peril, and one disorder, to run into an other, of more
importance, and of greater infamy.





A Tirant does enforce himself to perform three things to maintain his
estate, the first is to keep down, and to keep the minds of his citizens weak
and feeble, for he that is of small courage does never rise up against a tirant.
The second is to procure that the most mighty Citizens do live in discord
amongst themselves, to the intent they shall not conspire against him, being
united together. The third, is to keep them disarmed and in idleness, for he
that neither can nor knows how to do any thing: will not be enflamed, neither
once enter into thought to assault him that is of great power.

THat place is not called a City, which has a great number of men to
inhabit it, but rather that which is furnished with such Citizens which are of
sufficiencye to live well and happily, for Lordship and Signorie is maintained
with prudence and with valor, and with him that is a good man, and a good
governor: and good he cannot be unless he be prudent.



A Prince ought to be grave, not in hautines of countenance, but in the order
of his life: governing him self moderately in all his affairs and actions,
and observing those promises he has made: let him be rather affraide not to
do evil, then that evil should be done unto him, and let him remember, that
being a man as others are, he has granted him by God almost divine power, to
the intent he may place in his government things that be just and honest.



Plato, the one, that they defend and maintain the profit of their Citizens in
such sort, that whatsoever they do may tend to that end, setting aside their
own commodities: the other, that they have an eye to the whole body of the
Commonwealth, to the intent, that whilste they have care of one part, they
do not abandon another: for even as in the Tuter of a ward, so the government
of a Commonwealth is to be handled and ordered, to the benefit of those for
whom it is committed and recommended, and not for the^ to whom it is committed.





to live in servitude, since that amongst all worldly things the best is
liberty: whose name is a note of virtue, as servitude and bondage is a note of
infelicitie.







Cicero say, it is necessary in the obtaining of office and government in a
free Commonwealth.



of importance he did use that part and means of proceeding, which does most
assuage, and is contrary to envy.





with deeds nor with words, to the intent not to imitate him.









counsel, if he be not very faithful and much affectioned to him that does
demand ye same: moved not only through notable respects of profitte, but for
every small commodity, or every light satisfaction: does oftentimes direct
his counsel, to that end that does turn most to his purpose, or that
wherein he does take most pleasure, and therefore these ends and terms being
for the most part so much unknown to him that seeks for counsel, he does
not remember nor perceive if he be not prudent, the infidelity of the council.

A Prince that by the means of his ambassador would deceive an other Prince,
must first deceive the Ambassador, to the intent that he may work and speak
with greater efficacy, persuading himself and believing that such is the
mind^ of his prince, the which though he would not nor could not do, if he did
imagine himself to be a dissembler, and this practice every one does use,
that by the means of an other, would persuade that which is false unto an
other.





and have many good considerations.









and beware at the first to give place to unjust and pernicious demaundes: for
so much, as when once any one has obtained their desired things, they do not
deminish at all, but do always increase our determinations and desires with a
greater better will, and with greater conceits then before.









then by flying and leaving the same to consume by little and little, and to
give to the enemy the victory without blood and without perrill, for so much as
in things that fall out contrary, the fear and difficulty of him that is
overcome, does become every day greater.



Dignities disciphers men's qualities, for through experience and measure
thereof, is not only known by their weight, what ability or insufficiency
is in them, but also by reason of the power and liberty they have, are
discovered the affections of their minds and of what nature they are: by how
much the greater a man is, so much less respect has he to suffer and keep
himself from being guided according to his own nature.

Et e conuerso.



and have their spirits and wits in such a readiness, that oftentimes they
overcome the difficulties of the affairs, with greater discretion and prudence
then others can believe: for we must not expect the process of years, when
the virtue of valor and force is to be showed: for so much as the race and
course of force and virtue is much more swift, then that of age.









the principal degree and honor.











of opinions, and of many making one body alone does keep governments and
States uncorrupted.









AMongst mortal men there is nothing more common and therewithal more
perilous, then to give place to that imagination, whereby we believe that the
state of one man, is better then that of an others, and hereby it comes to
pass, that humain malice does so blind men, that they rather seek to have
that with travail, which appertains unto another, then to enjoy with rest
and quietness that which is his own. The state of a Prince assuredlye is good,
if of them it be used to a good end: and the being of the people is likewise
good, if they be content with the same. So in like sort, that of religious men
is best, if they reap that profit thereby which they ought: To be rich is
very good, if therein they use temperaunce: in like manner, the poor man, if
he have patience, his es^ate falls out to be good: for to merrite, does not
consist in suffering many travails and discommodities: but by having in them
great patience.



more worth then all others, does support more then all others, and to
conclude, does ouerpasse and excel the government of all others. So is it most
necessary that the Court, the person, and the life of a Prince, be ordered and
corrected more then that of all others: for even as with the length of an elm
all the whole goods of a Merchant is measured, so with the life of the Prince
all the whole commonwealth is measured.







to have them propitious) more incensed against us: for counsel is rather more
damegeable then commodious, if he that gives the same be not of excellent
judgment, and he that receives it of very great patience.







NO man ought to be more careful of any thing, then to search out those that
may advise and counsel him how to govern the Commonwealth well, and how to
maintain his estate with justice, the which is not to be performed with
words that terrify, neither with deeds that scandalize, but gentleness and
curtisies that may embolden their hearts, and with good woorks that may edify
them, for a woorthye, noble and gentle heart cannot make resistance, if he that
commands be of good life and behavior.



I Have many times seen large experience of one thing in this world worthy
to be noted, that as there is to be found one amongst the good, which is of
mark for his singular goodness: so amongst the wicked there does appear one
extremely wicked, but the wurst is, that the virtuous man does not obtain so
much glory for his virtue, as the wicked through his wickedness, possesses
impudence: for virtue makes a man naturally discreet, and vice makes him
dissolute.





THat man which is oppressed, does ordinarily cry after the change of Fortune:
And there is nothing more abhorred of a man in felicity, then to think how
full Fortune is of mutabilitie: for the oppressed does imagine, that by
changing oftentimes, his state may grow to be better: but the man that is in
felicity, does think y^ one change of Fortune, may throw him down headlong
into ye deapth of disgrace and misery.









to be suspected. For spending his riches in good works (it being a thing by
proof very manifest, that that man which makes account of his fame, esteems
little of money) for routing out tirants, (for that the good hermonye in the
government of a Prince does consist in chastesing of the wicked and rewarding
the good) and for the giving freelye of that which is his own, for nothing
does make more notable the majesty of a Prince, then to show his greatness in
helping of others, and not to be greedy to be ouerpassed, and aduauntaged by
others.



A Prince or Lord that desires to be obeyed, it is necessary that what he
commaundes be first observed to be in his own person: for no Lord or Prince
can well withdraw or exempt himself from virtuous opperations, for so much as
a Prince being an example to others, is bound to use such actions and
opperations, that he may become a woorthye and notable example to those that he
gouernes.

soddainly all those that be wicked murmr.







whosoever: for since they are to stand in centernell and watch to behold and
discover what the doings of all others be, they have less liberty or license
then their subjects have to commit errors, for even as they have liberty to
behold and judge of others, even so are they beheld and judged of others:
without any license or liberty granted them so to do.

Palace which is the Goddess of science, should be portraited and figured
armed.



A Prince does play a very wise part, when he does procure to have prudent
and valiant Captains for the wars, but without comparison it is much better
to keep in his Court wise men, for the victories of battles does finally
consist in the force of many, but the government of the Commonwealth
sometimes is referred and credited, to the advice and judgment of one alone.

grievous alterations in kingdoms, for by reason that one is in disgrace and
out of favor, and another in love and credit: there does spring up harmefull
hates, pernicious thoughts and great envy, the end whereof is wicked words,
and finallye wicked deeds. And therefore that Prince that does make any
difference in conversation with those that be equal, does kindle and set fire
in his Commonwealth.









REason requires, that that Citizen which is in the state of a private person,
is affable and courteous with his friends when he does arise afterward to bear
the title of a Magistrate, that he should maintain himself with them in the
selfsame degree of humanity: for even as to become proud through the
obtaining of perpetual honors newly gotten either by Fortune or by valor: is
a demonstratiue sign of a vile and abject mind. So to become hautie through
the office of a Magistrate, which is shortly to take end: is the sign of a
mind that does possess small modesty and virtue, for although honors do
change manners and humors of men, yet for all that they ought to change them
not into wursse, but into better.



A Man must (so far as is possible) keep himself from emulations which are of
most naughty nature, and endowed with appare^t customs, which have in their
mouth the contrary to that which is their mind: and must double their tung,
not suffering it unadvisedly to break the bonds and the two bulwarks of the
teeth and the lips, amongst which nature has shut up the tung as in ye midst
of a strong and double Fortress.



words, and to keep faith in his promise, moreover he must digest and
discourse upon his affairs with great aduisement, deliberate upon them with
mature judgments: and execute them with great celeritie. In his countenance
he must show himself unto his Soldiers wild, alegre and stern, he ought to
be pleasant, human and benign toward men, nevertheless, observing always
together with that manner of behavior, his degree and ye decorum of his
dignity: that he neither with his overmuch familiarity and homelines make
his army become dissolute and of small obedience, neither with overmuch
severitie bring them to be his enemies: and for so much as the benevolence of
the Soldiers is the most certain hope to obtain victory, he must so frame
his actions, that not only they may carry toward him a due respect and
reverence, but that they may more-ouer love one another greatly, and him
especially, therefore he ought always to reward and honor those that merits
and contrariwise reproach and punish those that are faulty.







HOw much greater, and how much more important things are: so much more they
are spoken of, and so much less we do gather and groape out the truth, in
respect that one sort of men believe and declare for true, those things that
they have heard, whether they be true or false: othersome, although part of
those things be true, yet always they report them otherwise the^ they are,
and so with time they increase, and those that come after to those things that
they have heard of their Ancestors, do always add and join something more.







I Oftentimes doubt in my self, whether it be given to Princes from their
birth (as in other things it is) to become propitious and favorable toward
these, and froward and cruel toward these others: or that is infused and
placed in our industry, by means whereof it is granted us to walk in a mean
path, to the intent that over obstinately we do not oppose our selves against
those that rule: and yet nevertheless, we are not to suffer our selves to fall
headlong into a shameful flattery and servitude, but we ought to proceed in
such sort, that neither through ambition, neither through over great
covetousness of glory, we yield our selves overcome, and therefore with greater
security we do lead our lives, and with less perrill, if we make our selves
subject.









I Was of opinion that I could not persevere and discover with often reuoluing
and thinking upon yt which I could not discearne at the first sight: but I
know by proof that how much the more a man does think upon his affairs: so
much the better they are understood, and so much the better they are
performed.











A General or Captain that does take glory and honor for his full scope
and final end, ought to endeavor himself to obtain fame: not with the toil
and with the perrils of others (as many are used to do) but with the sweat and
danger of his own person, and by the means of his proper virtue: and since it
is a deed worthy of no less praise to extinguishe ye wars with counsel, then
to end it by arms: he must go about sometimes to do ye one, sometimes to do
the other: and let him carrye well in mind that the first success of things,
are those that do make him fearful to the enemy: and contrariwise, to be
despised, and to be had in small consideration: for such as is the beginning,
such oftentimes is the end accustomed to be. Let him likewise be circumspect in
using of artificial deceites, for small sincerity or faithful proceeding is
suspected of him, that men once have conceived in opinion to be wunted to
govern himself with doublenes and artificial means.





A Capable wit that knows how to make choice of time has no occasion to lament
him self that his life should be short, for he that can apply himself to
infinite things, and spend his time profitably does gain time.











IT is almost impossible, but that he which with a great and wonderful
efficacy does affirm a thing: should raise some ambiguitie, to believe the
contrary, yea in the minds of those that are resolutely determined.









most seems an impossible thing that he does not hurt, For knowing that the
good cannot keep company or consorte with him, it is behouefull for him to
bear them hatred, and knowing that they are followed and favored of all the
rest that be good: it behoues him likewise to stand in fear of the^. Now
therefore to escape from him that hates, that fears, and that has power to do
evil: does arise more of adventure then reason.







A Prince ought not to believe, that to make choice of a good master for his
son is of small importance, for if in this point he do not use very great
diligence, he does burden himself with a great fault: my opinion therefore
is, that he ought not to give the office of instructing his Son in such sort
as other offices are given, that is either for requests, either for gifts,
either for importunity, either for ametie, either else in respect to reward
some service, for although some of his subjects have been Ambassadors in
strange and foreign Countries, or the General of his army, or that he has
borne in his royal Court great offices, yet for all that it follows not,
that he should be apt to instruct the Son of his Prince. For to be a good
General, it is requisite for him to be full of valor, and very fortunate: but
to be the master and instructour of a Prince, it is necessary that he be
endowed with great virtue, joined together with a settled and staide mind.







A Good Prince ought never to lay hands upon an^ man, for what injury soever
he has done him, for hi^ hands ought never to be exercised in the revenging
of in^iuries done against him, but in defending and reuengin^ the injuries of
those that obey him.



A Prince ought to make reckoning of his reue^n^es, but if he forget to
redress those offenses and faults that are committed in his Territories, and
makes no account of them: he is worthy of reprehension, for the people pay
their tribute to the Prince, to the intent he may set them free from their
enemies, and defend them from Tirants.





to the contrary.





Aristotle does say in his Rethorick, but he that does wiselye behold this
part, will say with Senecca, that none is more worthy or near unto God, then
he that despises and scoffeth at riches: The which I do not deny says
Senecca, that thou should possess: but I would have thee to possess it not
fearefullye, the which thou shall do by this only means* if thou persuade
thy self to live happilye and in felicity without it, and if thou do hebolde
it with eyes, which are always to fail thee.



diligent: for so much ^s when ire is enflamed and that it has blinded the
understanding of many, he cannot be quieted through any consolation that he can
have: neither through any reason that can be told him.









have had no good end: and those that have been evil counseled have had a
good end. And if we should commend pernicious counselles, for their good end:
we should do nothing else, but give courage to men to err, which does
greatly turn to the damage of Commonwealths, for always evil counsel
falls not out happily, so should we err if we did reprehend a wise
determination, which has not a joyful end: for that it takes away the
courage of Citizens to give counsel to the City, and to speak that which
they understand.



manifestlye empeche principal determinations: and then when any vice of his
is di^couered, and specially of those that do harm virtue, whereof he of
whom evil is spoken does greatly make profession as should fall out: if of a
good profession, he make some naughty and wicked practice, if of liberal, some
sign of covetousness: For all that it is necessary it should be done with so
great modesty, and in things so manifest, that it may appear rather that
occasion does force thee, then that it does arise of thy own will and
pleasure.











the selfsame time we could know, that which would have faulne out if we had
proceeded diversely.













no long time make foundation in ye confederations made with them, for so much as
the affairs in confederations, may be by adverse and sundry chances reduced
into many difficulties.











never is there found any prompt speedines to execute gallantly when the favor
of fortune does show her self benign and favorable, neither of disposition
to resist constantly when she does li^^ to frown.













profits, but about covetous and private affairs, there does arise
particular sects and conspiracies, with the which the deuisions of the City
do join themselves, a most assured plague and death to the Common-wea^^h^s of
empires and governments.









PRinces that bend of their own proper inclination to prefer utility before
fidelity, are easilye persuaded the selfsame that other Princes are.













such sort can^ell and diminish the same from day to day, that if no new
accidents do arise that may make fresh and quicken the terror and fear they
have: They make themselves in the process of small time, almost assured.









THat City that would maintain it self more by sects and factions then by
laws: when one sect does remain at home without opposition: of necessity it
comes to pass, that it divide it self, for from these private means it cannot
defend it self, the which for her safety she had first ordained.







of God: to hazard and adventure, enter in, to supplye the place of reason and
of prudence, in such sort that we ought not to leave off to attempt those
things that seem unto us to be of small foundation, in respect of human
prudence: for so much as our most blessed Savior and God, many times, to the
intent to make the wisdoms of the world appear vain, suffers a some
certain sort of people, to run into great calamities: for that he does give
and send us his mercy, in those causes in the which the grounds of reason
does fail us.







to be hated, and such persons shall obtain more then those that going about to
get other men's portions lose their own: and before they lose the same, live in
continual greef and sorrow.







same, and to put in him the full managing thereof, yet with this prouiso, that
he have about him Counselors of good understanding, with whom he may confer
all the whole course of his enterprises.







IT is no doubt but that other men's continual severity, does exasperate our
minds, but even as the overmuch fatherly pardoning suffers the child to
run astraye to a licentious and a disobedient life: even so the ouer-great
abundance of pleasures in a Prince, does spoil his Citizens and his
Soldiers, and is yet an occasion of greater damage, when it is used with
persons of account and degree: for those that be heads and principalles by
offering things not lawful, take possession and become masters of their
administrations: and besides that by little and little to be their superiors:
And moreover, their insolence may work more pernicious effects then can that
of the multitude, it being very easy to know, whither many persons gathered
together bend themselves, as it is a thing of difficile understanding to
discipher the secrets of one man alone.





not grant the same: he ought to consider of two things. The one is the
necessary circumstances, that is to say, those things whereof does spring
evil satisfaction, the person that is evil content, and the time wherein the
same does occur: the other is to be advertised and have in memory, to
counterpease one benefit with one that has been refused and rejected.



A Good Soldier is like unto bright Steel the which does keep his bright
shining gloss whilste it is in continual exercise, but being not wrought
withal takes rust: rust breeds to an eating cancker, and cancker makes
contagion, in such sort, that right Soldiers which are not good: to any other
end then to manage and handle weapons, in times of peace they suffer great
damage in themselves: and cause others to be pertakers thereof.



person, then to give place unto him that does oppose himself against his
intention.







A Prudent man ought not to suspect that small credit and faith is given unto
him: and if he suspect the same, he must so order the matter, that the wicked
do not know that he has suspicion of the^: to the intent that through fear,
license do not increace in them, and that they take not away their diligence
and promptnes from others.



for that the night couers in them that which the day does discover, which is
either fear or shame.













TO do benefits to him that does persuade himself, to have received many
injuries: are not sufficient to cansell out of his evil disposed mind the
memory of the offenses: cheefely when the benefit is done in such a time,
that it seems it proceeds more of necessity then of any voluntary desire.









does deserve or merit* and therefore he becomes displeased when he perceiues,
that that account is not made of him that seems to appertain unto him.



A Man must always keep and restrain himself from those things that do
hurt or not benefit: therefore he ought not to speak any thing that does
displease, neither in presence nor in absence, without necessity: for it is a
great folly to make people our enemies without purpose.







without doubt, to be more fallible and more perrilous, then those that reason
and experience has approved in all ages, and amongst all men.











much more to those that be courageous. For knowing and considering the
perrilles, they discourse and reuolue in themselves, how often men sometimes
have by chance, sometimes by force, valor and virtue, made free themselves
from many difficulties.



Lodowick S^orce, who in change to show himself grateful to Charles the
eight, for the benefits received of him: not only, did not defend him from
the perrill of loosing the state, but did help to chase him out of Italye, by
violating the faith of amity: breaking in sunder the league, and joining
himself to his enemies, only in respect to keep and preserve his estate, and
for fear of the over great rising, might and power of King Charles.



is to receive counsel be not prudent, he will not receive that which shall be
offered him as for the best: but will follow that which is most agreeable to
his own mind: for if he be not prudent, foolish things will please him: and
not being capable of that which is good and true, he will follow that which is
naught and foolish: and so perverting all order, it will never be possible for
him either to perform woorks, or give end to any action that will fall out
well. And on the other side, if he that gives counsel be not faithful: he
will so cunningly with a thousand colors, cover and shadow the truethes,
drawing him back to his intent, end, and purpose: and winding in the receiver
with counsel, that he believing him, in the end shall find himself to be
disceiued: and so having taken and tas^ed wicked and naughtye counsel, for
that which is good: he will call to memory, but ouer-late, the unfaithfulness
of his Counselor.



A Man ought to take care, not only: not to take counsel of him that hates
him, but also of those persons that carrye hate to others: although they were
the enemies of him that is counseled. To the intent, that he by accepting such
counsel, it chance not unto him to chastise any one of his enemies, or
peradventure more then he that counsels him, that he fall not into some
inconvenience, not able to be remedied.

AFter that any potentate has well consulted upon the affairs and provisions
for wars, he ought not to vary from his purpose, but ought to be resolute in
his enterprises: for so much, as to remain in a doubtful mind and to hang in
suspense, bending himself sometimes to do one thing, sometimes another, does
cause many disorders, but yt which does greatly importe, is: that he gives time
to the enemy, not so much to think upon the ways how to defend himself, as
to make preparations to endamage and offend thee.



A New Prince in making provision of monye, has greater difficulty then has
a Commonwealth: for so much, as it is not possible for him that his ordinary
reuennewes, should suffice to maintain him in his estate, as well for the new
expenses that are necessary for him to make, and for the preparations and
fortifications to defend his State, as in respect that he must entertain many
captains in time of peace to serve him self withal in future wars: and
moreover, to maintain himself toward great princes, of whom a new Prince is
constrained to depend: and to intertaine other Princes, wherein besides the
conuentions that is made with them, there does occur sundry other expenses:
for so much as the officers of great persons, think that they may be able
always reasonably to enrich themselves by means of the gifts of new
princes: whilste it seems unto them, that to draw from those is not so much
profitable to them, as it is unto the Prince they serve: but in a Commonwealth
many do willingly contribute infinite things: carried forward with a desire
to procure themselves greater honors, the which oftentimes falls out, by
receiving due and worthy rewards: and if it chance they impose and appoint
necessary taxes and paiments to be made: It seems that every one does
supporte it easily, whilst it appears unto them, that they disbursse the same
for their own proper profit.



obtain the same, they become displeased, and do nothing that is good, or
else, obtaining the same, they become over proud or damageable to the States
they serve.







poor man it is smally known and less esteemed.







be good, and what those cases be, cannot be comprehended under any rule,
neither can there any book be found that can teach the same: but it is
necessary that this light be first had of nature, and afterward of experience.











and honors, as though supreme and cheifest offices are of themselves clear
and magnificent, and not reputed to be such, as the virtue of those be that
sustain and bear them.



A General or Captain, does attend and take respect with prudence and with
carfulness to his affairs, and to the enemies, and does know that which is
good, or that which is pernicious in the one and the other: he spies out his
proceeding, his counselles, and does prevent his trappes and deceites: neither
suffer any thing negligently about himself, nor assured about them.

A General or Captain ought to provide for every thing, no otherwise the^ if
he had not given in charge any of his affairs, not so much in respect yt he
should mistrust or doubt that his commandment should not be executed: but to
the intent his Soldiers should willinglye seek to match and imitate his, in
travail and pains taking.

A General or captain, although death were present before his face, yet ought
he rather to stay himself resolutely. Then betraying and abandoning those that
he does lead, give pardon to his uncertain life with a shameful flight.





IT is a thing truly very difficile to be full of valor in battle, and good
in counsel, for the one is accustomed for the most part to bring fear through
prudence, and the other small consultation through audacitie.







Francisco Carmignuola was accustomed to say, that ye principal rule that men
ought to observe toward Princes, was not to believe very easilye that which
they speak with their mouth, and that which they make outward appearance of:
but it is necessary to consider and to discipher that which with all reason
they may imagine they think in their minds, that is, that which will turn
most commodious for their profit, and upon this they may make the foundations
of their desires and thoughts more then upon their words: and likewise we
ought not to have regard to the ametie, to the emnitie, to the parentage, or
to any thing else whatsoever amongst them: for when they perceive any future
profit to arise, they forget all amity, they quiet all disdain, and make
small account of any brotherhood or parentage, and do permit every respect, so
yt therein may be found some small colome of honesty sufficient to salve ye
apparent show thereof.











for that the laws, amities, and such other like things, are nourished in him:
moreover, it does help over much when a naughty answer is fearde, and it is
taken for a despising of the Prince, and if it be a just quarrel, arms is
taken, and does fly the fault, in that he has not demanded the thing, to
abtaine it.



Genio, does prick us forward to attempt things contrary to all human
prudence: And they fall out in such sort as we are not able to find out the
reason thereof.







it be very near and very certain, for that, those things not falling out
oftentimes, which thou did doubt of through a vain fear, it comes into
thy memory, that thou have left off those things that did please thee, and
therefore that is a wise Proverb which says: Di cosa nasce cosa et il Tempo le
gouerna, Affairs spring forth of affairs, and Time does govern them.













thing to remove that opinion, for that men naturallye conceive and become
gross with the first impressions, the which waxing old, cannot so easilye be
defined and plucked out.









but it is requisite in wars to know how to discern occasion, and to take
heed of her, for that she does help more then any other thing.





Popolo, would verily have tearmde it un Pazzo, A Fool, for that he is a
monster replenished with confusion and errors: for so much as his opinions are
so far off from the truth, as according to Tolome, the East Indies is from
Spain.

I Can never flatter my self, to make show of those things that are not so in
effect: nevertheless, it should be much more profitable to do the contrary,
for it is an incredible thing to be spoken off, what benefit the reputation and
the opinion that men have that thou art great, will work, then for that only
by the means of this rumor they run after thee, without needing to clime to
the height to make show of thy self.

THe liberty of a Commonwealth, is the administration of justice, for that
the foundation thereof is laid to no other end, but that the one be not
oppressed of the other: Therefore he that might be assured that in the state of
one alnoe, or of many, Justice would be observed: should have no occasion to
desire liberty. This was the occasion wherefore the wise men of old time did
not praise the government of those that live in liberty, more then the rest:
but those in which there was best provision made for the preservation of the
laws and justice.





A Prince when he has about him his familiares, does distribute his favors
amongst them that are most grateful and most conformable to his honor, but
when a time of necessity and occasion of affairs falls out: then the
diversity and difference that is amongst them is apparently known.

A Wise personage, which has the means to entertain ten thousund Footmen, is
more to be feared and esteemed, then ten confederates together, which have
every one of them six thousand: for that very sildome agreeing together, by
reason of their sundry and diversity of ends: the one half of the time is
lost and spent, before they resolve upon any thing.

IF a man would serve a great person, let him rather choose him wise then
ignorant: for about a wise man there be many means to be found, by the which
his favor is obtained, but about one that is ignorant: there can no way be
found that is good, for that he has no understanding.







he may give good judgment, that has knowledge of no other then of
Generalities, and knowing more perticulars, gives woorsse judgment, for so much
as he that has not his brain very perfect, and clean and free from passions,
understanding many particulars, does very easilye vary and confound himself.

A Man ought above all things in this world to desire and to attribute to his
own felicity, to see his enemy stricken prostrate to the ground, and brought
into such s^ate, that he may use him at his discretion: but by how much the
more happy he is unto whom this adventure does befall: by so much the more
ought he to make himself glorious, by using the victory commendable, in
pardoning and in using of clemency: a thing proper and particular to great and
worthy minds.









IT is a manifest thing to every one, that he that does always hold his
Prince in terms of suspicion, and fear, with aduertisements stuffed with
fear and suspicion: either will become to be mortallye hated of him, or in the
end shall fall into some other evil inconvenience.





Sun and Stars, the elements and men, were changed in their moving, order,
and power, from that that they were in ancient time.





it falls out to their commodity to be friends, or else through necessity
and Fortune: which against their own wills, constraines them to remain
united.





but when that good custom does fail, immediately laws are necessary.







quiet: for that in these the greatness of his principality does govern and
hold him up, without much travail and toil: in the other they are environed
with many perrilles, and supposed with infinite difficulties, from the which to
defend and keep themselves, does for the most part proceed of the rare and
hye virtue of a prudent Prince, who can with a good and resolute execution
shun the evil, and cleave to that which is good, but no good execution can
be made, without good providence: neither that without a good resolution,
neither can resolution be made without good counsel, the which is the head,
fountain, and original of all good operations.

A Man ought not to depart from the first purposed plot and form of his life,
without evident and most necessary occasions, as did Cato Vticenses, who did
rather choose to kill himself, then to fall into the hands of Caesar, therefore
a wise Prince ought to do the very same, holding always firm and fast his
first and his good resolution.



a part of his enemy, but injuries are all attributed to him that has been
injurious.





we make it of such quality, as we shall not be able to manage it after one
discretion and manner: and if we maintain it small and disarmed, to the intent
we may guide it the better: if we gain any dominion, we are not able
afterward to keep it: or else we shall become so vile, that we shall fall to
be a spoil and pray to whosoever does assault us. Therefore in all our
opinions and determinations, we ought to consider, where the inconveniences are
least, and to make choice of the best party: for that they be never found to
be altogether clear, altogether secure, and altogether without suspicion.





determinations, and cheefelye when the other are found to be hurtful, in
sum, the old and woonted way is rather to be followed, then the new and
vnaproued way.





and counter pease them in equal balance, and on that side where the least
evil is and the most good, to cleave to that part.









GOod Soldiers have need of a good General Captain, who may be their guide
in all things, of whose actions does depend for the most part, the exaltation
and ruin of an Army: therefore the Greek Proverb did say, That an army of
Hearts that has a Lion to their Captain, is more terrible then an army of
Lions which is guided with a Heart. But it is requisite that in an Army there
be both good soldiers and a good Captain general, to the intent yt like may
not be spoken thereof, that Caesar spoke: who going against Pompei said: he
went against a Captain without Soldiers: and afterward going against
Afranius in Spain, said: that he went against an Army without Captains.

Sparta did call it the sinews of war, for even as the Sinews gives moving
to the body, so monye gives life to an Army.



IN my opinion he has no great reason to lament himself, that at any time has
been contented to make himself equal to others, referring himself to
chance: The which for no other respect, has been induced and brought into a
Commonwealth, but only to take away, all sorts of concurrences and
inequalities: and to content equally every one.





defense, defense does procure partakers. And immediately parties and factions
arise up in a City or state, and such partakings does ruinate the same.









MEn are accustomed to judge largelye of themselves, and of their proper
merits, and beholding the succession of things as we do for the most part,
and seeing some out of all expectation and peradventure without merit, without
reason, or at the least without proportion: and by contrary ways and
proceedings, to be placed in high degrees and estate: their hope does awaken in
such sort, and they proceed so far in their thoughts, that measuring with
their eyes the height whither they determine to ascend, suddenly they fly
thither with their imagination, and do place themselves upon the tipe and
height thereof, but afterward being entered into the troublesome and crooked
path, and the way every day increasing, they become afflicted, fall into
lamentations, and sometimes also despair to be able to attain unto the same.





THe very same does chance unto Commonweals, which is accustomed to fall
out in the body of man, unto whom his evil minded appetite is an occasion of
disorders, whereof after spring infirmities, with the trauail and grief of the
body and of the mind together: so it falls out, that a certain sensualitye
(to term it so) has produced and does produce many defectes in a
Commonweal.



Candie and Sparta, which were instituted and instructed in warrefare The very
same did the Roman Commonweal, who for the remedy of their troublesome
state, were constrained to go abroad continually to make wars: to the
intent that those evil humors might be consumed, that with rest did spring up
amongst the Citizens: at the end when they had no more to overcome,
ouercomming and ruiniting themselves: they reduced themselves under another
form of state, for so much as the end being once changed, it is an impossible
thing to stand firm and fast, in the observation of ye mean and of the
ancient institutions.

us to be called unto the same, then presumptuouslye to intrude our selves
therinto, if a man do not make profession thereof, he is neither known nor
reputed for sufficient, and if he make profession therein, the same is on the
one side odious, and the other side is also hurtful to his own judgment: and
he that makes this profession, does oftentimes discourse so much, that he does
ouer-passe his bounds, and does foreshewe many false propositions: and finally
is reputed of wise men, like unto those soldiers that brave and brag it out
in the time of peace.



they will show their wants and inward lamenesse.





the destroyers of Religion, that have disseuered kingdoms, and are enemies to
learning, virtue, and valor.

Licurgus, so did Solon, and so did that most holy and divine Moses.







does not assure himself of those that do oppose themselves against this new
order and institution: makes a state of small endurance. True it is, that I
judge those Princes unhappy, that to assure their state, are constrained to
hold extraordinary ways, having the multitude for enemy, for so much as he
that has few for his enemies, easilye and with little scandale does assure
himself, but he yt has an universal people for his enemy, shall never be
assured: and by how much the more he uses crueltye, by so much the more his
principality becomes weak.





A Man cannot be of so long a life, as shall be of sufficient time to accustom
to goodness, a City that has a long time been accustomed to evil. And if a
man that is of long life, or two virtuous successions together does not prick
them forward, when one of them begins to fail, it does ruinate, if that with
many perrilles and much blood, he do not cause it to arise again, for that
such corruption and so small aptnes of free life, does spring of an
inequality which is found in that City or State: and desiring to reduce it
to equal terms, it is necessary to use great extraordinaries the which few
other know or will use.





may be observed, have need of good customs.







with their fame even to the highest heavens.







NO well ordered Commonwealth does at any time cansell out the demerites of
her Citizens, with their merits, but having appointed rewards, for a good
deed, and punishments for a wicked: and having rewarded some one for that he
has done well, if that the same man do afterward commit any thing that is
evil: he is to be chastised without any respect of his good d^eds, for that if
unto a citizen that has performed and done any famous thing for his City,
be joined (besides the reputation that such a one has gained) a certain
audacitie, confidence and trust, to be able without fear to do any thing that
is not good: he will in time become so insolent, that he will dissolve all the
order of civil life.





THe nature of men is full of ambition and suspicion, and cannot give any stay
or mean to none of their Fortunes: therefore it is an impossible thing but
that, that suspicion which does arise in a Prince immediately after the
victory of his Captain General: should be caused by the increase of some
manner or fashion of behavior used insolently in the said Captain: so that a
Prince can enter into no other thought, then how to assure himself, either by
putting him to death, or by taking from him his reputation, or to make show
with all industry, that that victory did arise not by his valor and virtue,
but by Fortune, or through the vile baseness of his enemy, or by the prudence
of some other of his Captains, that were in that faction.





Flattery is cheefelye found in Courts, Palaces, and ^ouses, and also in
Commonwealths, and in every place, touching the person of him that does
flatter, and of him that is flattered: the flatterer has need or desire of
something the which may be for his gain, or else to conserve, to obtain, or
not to loose, by the means of him that he does flatter: for so much as the
person that is flattered is always more mighty then he that flatters, or at
the least such a one as in some respects may favor him: And therefore it is
used in Commonweals amongst those that be equalles, and also of the
superiors toward the inferiors: only it rests, that those that be miserable
and base men, which are not thought to be able in any case either to harm or
help, do not flatter and in like sort as well those that are endowed with
magnanimity, and are in happy estate, as those that be presumptuous, and
those that content themselves with their estate, be not flatterers.



may never be reputed unworthy, as also for that he never come to be
suspected that he is not apt to become a Maiestrate.







laws are observed, and although he had, yet such men are so timorous, that
those free favors do not concur in them.









A Prince in the managing of his estate, does not only seek to redress
present scandales, but also those that are future, and to provide for the same
with all industrye, for that providing for the same a far off, he may easilye
remedy them, but expecting until the evil draw near: the physic comes not
in time, for so much as not being known, it both grows old and to be without
cure.





force, or overmuch authority, the which he may easily do, debasing with his
forces the most mighty, to remain altogether the arbitratour of the Province,
and he that does not govern himself well in this part, he shall soon loose
that he has gotten.



A Wise man knows easily the general inclination of any nation, and the
actions thereof being public: it is necessary that the same show perforce her
mind and desires, forth of which afterward are drawn particular
determinations either more or less, according to the capacity of that wise
man: which has charge to perce and desipher the same.



SOliman the Emperor of the Turks said, that Princes ought not to use the
help and aid of a Servant oftener then once: for so much as, in that first fact
his desire to obtain the good grace of his Prince: and the greatness of the
demand, does make him to resolve in himself to obey his request, having no
space to think either of the perrill or of his own advantage: but when after
he comes afreshe to request him, he thinks no more of the favor already
obtained, but does imagine to make free himself, with the perrill of his
Prince, and to advantage himself by some means, to the damage oftentimes of
his Prince, and the falsing of his own faith.



A Wise Officer or servant ought after the manner of an excellent Physician,
foresee that which he may hope for, or that which he may fear, neither hoping
nor fearing more or less, then so much as is convenient, and he may very
easily know in the beginning, if that his hope be in augmentation, in estate,
or in declination: and knowing the same, he may make his prognosticate, to the
intent he need not altogether to expect his sorrow, and he ought to advertise
his Prince or Master, thereby to show himself prudent, keeping alwais his
judgment in hand, not suffering him to be exalted through hope, neither fall
down to the ground through fear, and so affairs are handled with prudence,
and come to pass to his honor, that does negotiate for the profit of his
Master.



PLato would have the duetye of a good Citizen to consist in these four
things, for the benefit of the commonweal: that is, that he be prudent in
discearning those things that be present, and prevent those that are to come:
just in distributing to every one according to his demerites, strong to
overcome fears, which are an impediment to the operation of virtue, and
temporate in our desires.



THe knowledge of matters of state, is sifted out of Princes by sundry means.
For So Much, as some procure to know the same by way of report, some by way of
discourse, some by the means of espialls, some by stipendary intelligencers,
and some by the disposition of this man, and some by yt man. But there is no
way so certain: as by the means of Ambassadors, and especially of those, that
either through the greatness of their Prince, or by his own proper virtue, is
in reputation: for that dealing always with great persons, and pondering
diligently, their customs, their words, their counsel, the valor, the manner
of every one and of the Prince himself: they may with a more surer grounded
foundation, then those that write Cronicles: know by report, things that are
past: neither like exploratoures, rest only upon the consideration of things
present: But with a certain and assured consideracion drawn forth of these
and those things: make judgment of that which is to come.



A Common weal, may have more confidence in a Citizen, that from a high
degree, descendes to govern one that is less: then in him, that from a small
degree ascends to a greater. For that in reason this man cannot be credited, if
he have not good men about him, who are of such reverence and virtue, that
those novelties he raises, may be moderated with their authority and
counsel.







appears, that punishment by infamy is a small punishment to one of base
degree, whereas to a noble personage it is of great detriment. Therefore those
Officers and ministers that proceed in merits and demerites, in favors and
disfavors, in one manner and with one measure, having no consideration to the
diversity, that nature and fortune has put betwixt the one and the other, so
that they cannot be changed unless the nature and custom of the whole world
be changed: do not understand the same as it ought to be: for that the
nobility grow into despair, perceiving themselves to be debased, in like
equal sort to those that be their inferiors, and perceiving that those which
are of base degree to be entreated and ordered like the nobility: it makes
them become insolent.





IT is easilye known by those that consider well, those things that are
present, and those things that are past in ancient time: how that in all
Cities and amongst all people, the same desires and the same honors, that ever
were amongst them do still remain: in such sort that it is a very easy
thing to him that does well and diligently examine things past, to foresee in
a Commonweal those things that are to come: and to use those remedies that
of the antiquity were used, or not finding those that have been used to think
upon new, through the similitude of the accidents: but for these
considerations, are either neglected or not understood of those that read, or
if they be understood, they are not known of them that govern, neither are
they followed, for that the selfsame scandalles are to be found in all ages.



those that be great personages, are more secure, for that their violence is
sustained with a greater force then those be that have the people to their
enemies, and the Nobility to their friends.





A Commonweal in her institutions and orders ought to be watchful that the
Citizens under the shadow of good, do not work evil: and that they carye
and have that reputation, which may help and not harm the liberty thereof.

A Prudent man ought never to refuse the popular judgments, in particular
things about the distribution of degrees and dignities, for that in this only
the people do not deceive themselves: and if they be deceived, it is rarely:
but those that be few in number, which have to make such distributions, do
much more deceive themselves.

ALl those Contries and Provinces that live in liberty* make great increase,
and proceed much more forward then those that live in slavery and bondage. For
that in a free state is found greater store of people, because marriage amongst
them are more free and more desired of men: for so much as every one does
willingly beget those Children, which they think them selves able to nourish:
not douting that their Patrimony shall be taken from them: and that they are
borne free and not slaves, and that they may by means of their virtue and
valor become great.



A Weak and small Common weal cannot invade and occupy neither cities nor
kingdoms that are stronger and greater then it self. And if for all that she
do invade and possess the same: it chances unto her, the same that does
unto that Tree which has her bows greater then the body of the Tree, so that
sustaining and holding up her branches with great toil and travail: every
small wind does bend the same.





TO obtain empire and not force: agree well together, and he that obtaines
Empire and not force both together, it comes of necessity, that he must fall
in ruin. And he cannot obtain force, that is impouerished by wars, although
he be victorius: for that he does disbursse more then he receives in by the
gain thereof.

A Prince or a Commonweal: ought first to take every other resolution, then
to have recourse to conduct and bring into his state for his defense, Foreign
succors, although it is necessary for him to put confidence in them, for that
any part, or any conuention that he makes with the enemy: will be lighter unto
him, the^ any such resolution.









THe estate of a government is no other, then to rule thy subjects in such
sort, that neither they can, or by reason ought to hurt or offend thee. This
is done by this means either by assuring thy self sufficiently in all
things, cutting off all those ways whereby they might harm thee: or else to
benefit them so much, that they cannot by any reason be more to desire to
change Fortune.







never does quiet him self, until such time that in some sort, he does
revenge him self against him, although he perceive his own proper damage
should fall out in the same.





commodities for thee to satisfy thy mind.











A Man may begin with his practices and with his naughty orders to corrupt the
people of any City, but it is an impossible thing that the life of one alone
should be sufficient to corrupt it in such sort, that he himself may be able
to reap fruit thereof: and although he did perform it through the long
progress and drawing out of time, yet it is impossible in respect of the
proceeding of men that are impatient, and cannot long defer their passions.







A Prince that has an army together, and does perceive that through the want
of money or friends, he cannot long hold the same together: is of small
discretion if he do not attempt and make trial of fortune before the army be
dissolved, for if he tarry and exspect: he is sure to lose, but if he attempt
the same: he may overcome, and if he lose, yet he does obtain glory: for more
glory it is to be overcome by force, then by anyother inconvenience, which may
cause thee to loose.



A Wise General that goes about to win and expugne any City, he ought to
measure the facility and difficulty that he shall have to win the same, by
knowing and considering what necessity does constrain the inhabitours
thereof to defend themselves: and when he finds sufficient necessity that
constraines them to defend themselves: let him judge ye expugnation for
difficile, otherwise: let him hold it for most easy.



and every noise does amaze them and makes them to fly.

A Wise General, amongst other things, ought to appoint which those be which
must receive his words and carry them to others: accustom his Soldiers
that they believe none, but only those Cheeftains and officers, that speak or
appoint nothing but that which is commanded by him: for that if this part be
not well observed, it is oftentimes seen, that disorders of great importance
has followed.







other force has not been able to open, one example of humanity or of
piety, of chastity, or of such other virtues, has been able not only to
open, but also to make subject.







be ordinary may use his humanity: for that ordinarye punishments, are not
imputed to the prince, but to the laws and to the other institutions of the
City.





HE that determines to obtain the degree of a Magistrate, let him dispose
himself to supporte the hate and evil will of many, and let him never imagine
to become angrye with any one, for any thing that shall chance unjustly
against him: even of those that he has holden for most freendlye, neither let
him leave of so lightlye, by reason of the first denialls and withstandings
that are made him, his hopes are much less his own defenses: for that he
that does su^^ain certain vehement assaults, and chiefly the first, the which
are accustomed to be made, neither suffers himself to fall into manifest
overthrow, either through wrath or over much haste: may hope to find many
good occasions to favor his election.





many good deeds makes him better known: they ground it better, for in such
case they are never deceived.









A Wise General, when he comes to encounter with a new enemy that is of
reputacion: is constraned before he give battle, to make his soldiers prove
the enemy with light encounters and Skirmishes, to the intent that beginning to
manage and to know them, they may loose that terror which fame and
reputation had given them.

ALthough to use fraud in any action, is detestable: neu^^thelesse in the
managing of wars, it is a laudable and glorious thing: and he is as well
commended that ouercomes the enemy by fraud, as he that does overcome him by
force.







A General ought never to give credit to any error that is euidentlye made by
the enemy: for always under the same there is some fraud, since it cannot
stand with reason that men should be so unwary.

the which medeocritie does spring partly for fear of the adversaries that
have the laws to benefit them: part^ly through the incrudelitie of men, which
do not give place to any new thing, unless they do see firm experience.



A Prince ought to have no other object, nor any other thought, neither take
any other thing for his art, then wars, orders, and laws, and the discipline
of them: for that is the only art that is to be required of him that
commaundes, and is of such great virtue, that it does not only maintain
those that are borne Princes, but oftentimes, makes men of private fortune to
arise unto that degree.





willingly the merits or demerits of their friends, and that which our
adversaries can do, or cannot do: so that we will have patience to give ear,
the which patience is the foundation for us to do every thing well. And he
that has greater desire to speak then to give ear: does instruct much more
then he does learn.





A Prince which has no understanding in Warrefare besides his infelicitie, he
can neither be esteemed of his Soldiers, neither put any confidence in them:
he therefore ought to exercise himself more in the time of peace, then in the
time of war, two ways: The one in action, the other with his mind: in
action, by keeping his people w^ll ordered and well exercised, always to use
himself to the chase, and by the means thereof, to accustom his body to
travails and discommodities, and in part to learn the nature of the
scituations. With his mind to read the histories, and in the^ to consider the
excellent acts of men, to behold how they did govern themselves in war,
examine the occasion of the victory, and of the loss thereof: to the intent
that the one may be shunned and avoided, and the other imitated: and above all
things, to imitate those that before him were glorious and of woorthye praise.









A Prince ought not to take care to be accounted cruel, so that he may
maintain his subjects in fidelity and concord: for that with a few examples
he is more pitiful then those that through overmuch pity, suffer disorder to
ensue: whereby spring up rapines and slaughters: for that these are accustomed
to endamage the universal state, and those executions which proceed from the
Prince, do hurt but one particular person, and it is altogether impossible for
a new Prince to avoid the name of cruel, for new states are full of
perrilles.

A Prince ought to be slow in believing, and slow to be displeased, neither
ought he to make a terror of him self, but to proc^ede in such a temperate
sort with prudence and humanity, that his over great confidence do not make
him unwary, and his over great distrust do not bring him to be intolerable.





is no judgment unto which they may appeal, beware of the end.



A New Prince, cannot observe all those things by the which men are accounted
good: being often times driven to necessities, to maintain his state, to
wincke against his promised faith, against charity, against humanity and
against such like virtues. And therefore it is necessary he have a mind ready
to turn it self, according as the winds and the varying of Fortune does
command: but he ought not to depart from that which is good (if he be able)
but to know how to enter into that which is evil, when he is enforced.

A Prince ought ever to endeavor himself how to live and to maintain his
State, and the mean is ever judged honorable and commendable of all men. For
that the common Uulgar people are taken with that which appeeres, and with the
event of things. And in the World there be none but such as be Uulgar: And
those that be few have place, when those that are many have no where to settle
them selves.

A Prince ought to possess two fears, one at home in respect of his
Subjects: the other abroad, in respect of foreign Potentates. From these he
may defend himself with good weapons and w^^h good Friends, and always if
he have good weapons: he shall have good Friends. And continually the state of
things will remain firm at home: when those rest firm that are abroad.

A Prince ought not to make estimation of conspiracies, when the people is
beneuolent, but when they be his enemies and hate him, he ought to be afraid
of every thing and of every one, how simple soever he be, for there is no man
of such poverty, that he wants a knife.

A Prince that would maintain his state, is constrained oftentimes not to be
good, for that when the people, the Soldiers, or other great Personages, be
corrupted, of whom in his judgment he has need to maintain himself: it is
requisite that he follow their humors and that he satisfy them: and then his
good works, are his enemies.







not wise of him self: he cannot receive good connsell, if he do not remit
whole to the chance of one alone (which may govern all) and such a one as were
a wise and prudent man. But good counsels from whom soever they come, it is
requisite that they arise through the prudence of the Prince, and not the
prudence of the Prince to arise of good counsel.

Di Cosa nasce cosa, et il tempo le gouerna. Of things: things arise, and
time does govern them.





but does inflame them to demand more, and with greater instance then before,
for by giving them often to drink: the thirst is made greater.



I Would imploye my self to seek the mutation of states, if I alone were able
to change them: but when I call to mind that it is requisite I should first
make head with others, and for the most part with fools and with malignant
persons, which neither can keep secret, neither know how to perform any
thing, there is nothing that I flee and shun more then this.





A Good Citizen that loves his Country, ought not only to temporise and
maintain himself in the good grace of a Tirant for his security, for that he
is in perrill when he is holden in suspect: but also for the benefit of the
City, for that governing of himself, after this sort, he shall have occasion
to favor with counsel and with d^eds, many good men, and disfavor many wicked.





I Have desired as other men have: profit and honor, and my draught has
always succeed, nevertheless, when I have obtained what I would: I have not
found in the same any of those satisfactions I imagined before, which thing if
it be well considered, ought to suffice to exstinguish much of that thirsty
humor that men have of honors.

those enterprises which he had begun to his profit, fall out to be damageable.





A Well ordered City ought to desire that the study of warrefare be used in
time of peace, for an exercise: but in the time of war, for necessity and
for glory, suffering the same to be used for art, only of public and
commonweal.



but are always profitable, and maintain the City more immaculate by means
of these weapons then without them.

A Captain of the sea, which is accustomed to fight with the winds, with ye
waters, and with men, will more easily become a captain on land, where we fight
only with men: then a captain of ye land become a captain on the sea.









himself in the hazard and perrilles of warrefare.







and ways, into few bodies and sects, and those into other few, until such
time as they conspire and be incorrupted, whither it be by chance or of
purpose, in one only body and head.





at the least do not serve with such a reverence and respect.





A Wise man ought not to keep secret any good counsel that is profitable for
his Country, for doubt that the same should be put in effect: for that the end
will cause other men's temeritie and folly to be known: and likewise will cause
the bounty and prudence to appear of him that has given thee counsel.

be de termined, contrariwise have had unhappy success. For so much as things
are very sildome executed according to their draught, but every one with a
certain security, do judge of future things, and after in the action fail.









if not at that present at the least, when they see that they are entered into
their Country, beginning to destroy and to ruinate the same.







Physicians do foresee plagues, and Sailors the tempests at the Sea: but
rather unto the good, and those of understanding, they are peradventure of
greater importance, then oftentimes are the demo^strations of greater things:
for that as a certain wise man says, in small things wherein men use not to
feign, and do not use study of appearance, neither are afraid to be punished:
the habit of virtue is easily comprehended together, with the secret
inclination and disposition that a man has toward vices, for so much as having
at that time not any eye and care to please universally, but himself: he
remembers himself (drawn by his particular humor) of that error into the
which he may run, but to satisfy his appetite.







IN perrills where there is no courage: no art does help, for fear makes men
to forget knowledge and Science: and practice without generositie, does bring
with it no profit at all. Let therefore an Army be courageous although it be but
small: for that, that Army which is great, and does trust more in their
number then in their counsel and in their courage: it may be said that the
same Army is full of fools. And let him know that order and silence, whilst
Armies are in fight: are great helps to obtain victories. And that those
which be once overcome in any enterprise, finding them selves again in the
same perrill: are not very assured.





MEn of gross and slow wits, do govern a City better, then those that be
of a quick and crafty brain, for wise men will show, that they know more of
laws, and be superiors in eloquence to others, of things deterned in commune,
as those, that cannot make demonstration of their prudence in greater matters:
whereupon oftentimes they bring great damage to the City, but those that put
no confidence in their prudence: esteem themselves of the least in the law,
and not being sufficient to object against the speech of him that does
discourse, but rather being better judges then many of those that speak like
ceremonies, for the most part do with great felicity govern their City.





does greatly prick us forward: the one going before, and the other following
after: and the one despising deceites, and the other propounding unto us the
prosperity of fortune: do bring great damage.







more speedy and perrilous effects for Princes.









and in them goes forward still pursuing of honor, and following that which
does lead to the true and honest way, with an unspotted and excellent intent
and mind, until such time as he has obtained the effect, or the desired end.







for that all perrilles, toils, travails, discommodities and greefes, which
we bear in the exercise, or in the managing of great causes, is done with
this principal intent, to benefit so many as we can or are able, and to be
hurtful to none.

A Wise man ought too consider, that he is borne not so much for himself, as to
benefit others, and by how much he finds himself in greater degree then
others, or by how much he knows himself to have more knowledge, more virtue,
or more gifts of God then others: by so much he ought to judge that God has
granted him the same, to the intent he may imparte the same to the benefit of
others, and in this we ought infinitely to rejoice, that he has opened unto
him so large, so plain, and so apparent a way, to make him self immortal.



damage, or much rather through the present harms, and for doubt of wursse,
but that fear which is in the mind of a particular person, when he is mighty
does oftentimes divide a fr^e City into parts, and does dis-vnite the same.



A Man that is of a free and of a good mind, ought to consider that justice is
maintained, that the faultye are chastised, and the good rewarded, for no other
occasion but only by so doing it is good and just.

not see them before them, neither more honored or of greter reputation then
they be.









others, for that envy is nothing else but a grief and a sorrow taken to see
the good hap and glory of others.







THose which love and those which hate likewise, are accustomed to honor and
reverence their Prince, but the one through love and natural favor: and the
other through fear and terror. Therefore a wise Prince ought to apply his
endeavors to procure unto himself, not by any of those ways, Titles,
statures, honors and dignities, which the people would attribute unto him
without merit: but apply himself to those actions, that truly are worthy of
true praise and of great honors, which are to be attributed to him, not of the
unskillful and light multitude: but of virtuous men that have consideration of
his quallitie, and that do not change (as for the most part the multitude
does, following after the fouours of Fortune) for that true virtue is that
which does confirm and establish States: by the which Fortune being
overcome, is constrained in the end to go with him in company.







MEn in peace do not supporte injuries, and although many times they forget
them: it seldom falls out, but that when occasion serves, the displeasure of
received injuries: does awaken and quicken again within their minds. And few
are to be found, that although they know they are in the wrong, and that, that
punishment that for some of their offenses is put upon them: they repute it as
though it were just.







that they use the force of arms, and endeavor themselves to show their
error one to the other: either to revenge themselves of their broken faith, or
reduce them that are issued forth by force unto their duty, and right path
of justice: and he that does not perform this, shall become not only an
enemy to the people that are subject to him, but also to himself: for that
besides his not defending the^, from the invasions and damages that they have
received, the Prince will become in short time ignominius, of small account,
and to be despised of other Potentates, and for that he neither knows, neither
was of ability to prevail through those received injuries, by means of the
faith broken toward him, he shall loose al his reputation and credit.



since they perceive themselves deprived of the just reward of their travails.



their own opinion. Those toil and trouble them selves in vain, which believe
either with requests to humble them or with rewards to gain them, or with
threatinges to astonish them.



with factions, for that it is grounded upon a common benefit, and not upon a
private benefit, and although that amongst such Citizens we cannot by any
means so provide, but that there will arise grievous hates, nevertheless,
having partners, that through their own proper profit, do follow him, they
cannot be hurtful to the Common weal: but rather it will fall out, that they
shall benefit: therefore it is necessary to overcome their attemptes, that
they turn themselves to the exaltation of those, and perticularly hold
certain observations one to another, to the intent they do not ouerpasse the
civil terms.





e^stinguished or are kindled up. Therefore that Prince or commonweal, that
has an army, ought to acustome the soldiers, to have their Captain speak,
and the Captain to speak often to the Soldiers.



A City whose ditches without the same, together with counterscarpes and
other strengthes, be higher then the walls of the City: that Town is most
weak, for that those become bulwarks to the enemy that does assalt them:
and does not hinder him to endamage them, for that easilye they may be opened,
and give place to his artillery.

is forced to overcome those that are within the town, with valor, virtue, and
reputation.



A General amongst all his other actions, ought to endeavor himself with all
art, to divide ye forces of his enemies, either by making his Soldiers
suspected of him, in whom he trustes and puts confidence, or to give him
occasion to separate his people, and by this means to become more weak.





WHen either hunger or any other natural necessitye, or human passion, does
bring the enemy to his last desperation: and pricked forward with the same,
does come to fight with the General: he ought to remain within the lodgings of
his camp, and so much as is in his power, to flee and shun the charge and
encounter of battle.







number that suffer discommoditie through the burdens of prodigality, then
those that receive benefits of his liberality: the reason is, that amongst
men hope is of greater force, then fame, and those be of greater number that
hope to obtain something at his hands, then those that fear to be oppressed.



and full of good hopes, but not in such sort as they may bind thee precizely.











THere is nothing more worthy in an excellent Prince, or in a well ordered
Commonweal, neither more profitable for a Province: then to build and edify
a new Town, whether men may reduce them selves through the commodity of
de^ence or benefit of the fertile ground. For that it makes the Country that
is overcome, more secure to the vanquishour: and does fill with inhabitants
void places, and maintains men well distributed and dispearced in a Province,
for so much as the inhabitours multiplying, they be more prompt and ready in
their offenses, and more secure in their defenses.







and when many do suffer: few do go about to revenge them selves, for that
universal injuries are supported with greater patience then those that are
particular.





True it is, that when for all that it chances, that when through the good
fortune of the City, there does arise in the same, a wise, good, and mighty
Citizen, by whom Laws are instituted, by whom these humors of the nobility
and of the populare sort are quieted, or are restrained in such sort, that
they cannot work any evil: then it comes to pass that this City may be
called free, and that ^ate may be called stable and firm, for being grounded
upon good laws and good orders, it has no such necessi^ie of the virtue of
one man, as the others have that do maintain the same, many ancient
Commonweals were endowed with like laws and orders: all those that often in
their government have changed and do change from a tiranicall state to a
licentious state, and from the one to the other, have failed in this: and for
that in them through the mighty enemies that every one has, there neither is
nor can be any stabilitie, for that the one does not please good men, the
other does displease wise men: the one may easily do evil, the other may do
good but with great difficulty, in the one insolent men have ouer-great
authority, in the other those that be foolish. And it is con^enient that both
the one and the other ^e maintained by one man through virtue and fortune,
which either through death may become less, or by travail become
unprofitable.

A Wise man ought ever little to esteem, to live in a City where laws are of
l^sse account then men: for that Country is to be desired, in the which we may
safelye enjoy our substance and our friends, not that where other men may
easily take from us that which is ours, and our ^^^ends, for fear of their
proper state, do abandon us in (...) most necessity.

orders: for that the affairs of this world being not firm by nature, where
they arrive at their last profession, not having wher-vpon to ascend higher: it
falls out of necessity that they descend, and after they be descended, and
being come by disorder to the last step, not being able of necesitie to descend
lower: it is convenient that they climb up again, and so always from the
good we descend to evil, and from the evil we ascend to good: for that wars
bringes quietness, quietness brings idleness, idleness engenders disorder, disorder
does ruinate us, and likewise of ^uine does spring orders, of orders come
virtue, of virtue arises glory, and good fortune: wherefore of prudent
persons it is observed, as letters come after weapons, and that in Provinces
and Cities, Captains are borne before Philosophers, for that the good and well
ordered wepons having brought forth victories, and victories brought quietness:
the fortitude and strength of armed minds cannot be corrupted with a more
honest idleness, then which that of le^ters, neither can idleness enter into a
well ordered City, with a greater or more perrilous deceit then by letters:
Provinces therefore come by these means to ruin, whereinto being arrived, men
by blows being made wise return to orders, if that already through
extraordinarye forces they remain not choked and devoured.

occasion it does rise, it is a great enemy to reputation.







victory cannot be so well gotten with an inconsiderate speed, as with a
prudent stay: and neither so well in going to find the enemy at his own
doors, as to defend himself within his own confines: and to go about rather
to put our selves in perrill, then overcome: is the part of an unwise man, and
of one that is more rash, then courageous.







and well practiced men, who may stand like Senternelles and watchmen,
attentive and vigilant for the benefit of the Commonweal: and wisely
understand every thing, and with great prudence provide for every thing.
Forthly, to conserve and keep the amity of adjoining Princes, yielding favor
to those that have need: Last of all to write to the greatest Princes of the
world, consulting with the^ upon occurent causes.





faith, neither their promises they have made neither their sworn conuentions.
And although every breach of promise be infamous, nevertheless that is most
infamous which against capitulacions of peace, does draw wars after i^. For
if the sacred effects of faith, and the observing of oaths be taken away:
what remains more amongste men that is good and godly, whereby one may put
trust in an other? and by which inconveniences, the common conversation and
company of men is broken.



worthy of praise, then that which is taken in hand for the defense of our
liberty and of our Country, the which does contain in it, our houses, our
Children, our wives, our fathers and mothers, riches, the Temples, and finally
every human and divine thing.



A King is no other then a man brought up in deliacies, and as it is accustomed
to be said in swaddle clothes, and is a man that has need of a great number
of officers and servants. From whom if his wonted services be taken away:
without dout he is of less power then others, for so much as he is not
accustomed neither wonted to exercise neither his feet, neither his hands,
neither any other part of his body, but to live in idleness. And Kings know
better how to command then to perform.



should long maintain them selves, all of them united together, or that they
should use one self consultation or bring soddainly things to effect, because
they are not of one self will and mind, but rather every one is only
careful for his own proper profit. For where men's minds are disagreeing:
there likewise their deeds fall out to be disagreeable, whereof there can
never any thing that is perfect arise.



A Good Citizen ought never to speak neither for favor or grace, neither
through the instigation or benevolence of others: but only in respect of that
he knows to be lawdable and best, as well for the particular as general
commodity of all. And never to persuade any thing but which shall be as
agreeable to God: as in the sight of men reasonable, just, and sacred, loving
rather better the public benefits and the universal quiet, then his own
proper life.



A Captain ought not to comfort his Soldiers, but unto a glorious enterprise,
for that to comfort them to their wonted works and actions is shamful, not
only to them that are comforted, but also to him that does comfort, seeking
for at the hands of the Soldier, that which he is bound unto.







one only enemy, reason will that they be overcome by their adversaries.







then those that without thinking upon the same, be fallen down from the same:
although they proceed with their enemies in time to come more timerously and
doubtfully: for negligence and baseness do corrupt also those things that are
excellently well ordered, but travail accompanied with care and diligence:
has aided greatly unto many, although Fortune has been contrary unto them:
for that those that with slothe and follye take in hand any enterprise, are
accustomed oftentimes to weaken themselves, and to fail in their forces, but
those that proceed in the same with care and with diligence, are accustomed to
encreace marueilously.



that he has done any thing of himself.









that which is gained with the mind of a man, and with the valor of a
Soldier, and to give into the hands of the enemy that which he has as yet
not gained, together with riches not hoped for, and therefore what hope can be
had in them, or how may we believe that they are to behave themselves in
arms, who making the profession of Soldiers, are only made afraid with
thinking upon wars, and with the imagination of battles: therefore is it
better to take a glorious death, then to desire to live to lead a shameful and
vile life, for in a short space of time life does leave us, but shame does
never leave us, even after death: but does rather make our shame so much the
longer and the greater, by how much our death has been shameful and infamous.







deeds: for so much as they feign all things to obtain their intent, but after
they have once obtained it, they do not in any sort abstain from the
fulfilling of their desires, and besides this those that come after do always
force themselves to ouerpasse their ancestors in audacitie, thinking* that
the like is small, for that befoore it has been committed, they choose that
which is unaccustomed, as if it we^e a thing fit and worthy for them, because
it is behind the opinion and exspectation of men.





in things that be administered unluckily, to the intent he may be accounted
one self person in all his actions, correcting errors with right counselles.





L'erario, to constrain unto warfare those yt would not endamage, to take care
of all those things appertaining to peace and wars, and to do them before
the eyes of the envious, of those that are partial, and those that are
adversaries: is a way more difficile, then that which a man would believe.

neither cannot be trusted with any strong place: and therefore unto men that be
strong and of valor, it appertains more to despise death, then to have our
life in hatred: and oftentimes those that be vile and base, are foreced either
through the tedious toil and travail, to provide for themselves and for their
own profit, but virtue does leave nothing behind unprovided and
vnexperimented.





change: he therefore is a most worthy man, that in adversities can manly
sustain the furies of fortune, and does study to amend his wants and faults:
but he that is negligent, does fall oftentimes in his rising, and running
headlong, goes altogiter into ruin: but if this oftentimes fall out where
only virtue is, how much more in wars: where the Squadrons are of sundry
generations, their minds and their wills sundry, the place contrary, the
raggednes thereof difficile, and the space of ground strait to fight in, in
which things fortune is of greater force then virtue.







I Make my account, that that City which departes from the exercise of
business, and gives it self to idleness, will soon run into ruin: and that
those men amongst all the rest live in greatest security, that using the
present laws, although they were less good,, without any contention, do
govern their Commonweal, without strife and discord.









against all counsel this comes to pass, for that Fortune does overcome our
providence, but he that does take naughty counsel, (although it succeed
happily) is worthy of blame, for very sildome to the devices of evil
counsel does succeed prosperous ends.

A Good counselor ought never to hide the truth, although it turn to the
prejudice of his life: for it is better for him to loose his life, then to
keep secret a good counsel: for that the end of things will make manifest of
what mind he was that did wiselye give counsel, and who did speak things to
please the Prince, to flatter him: and it will then follow, that the good
counselor will be better beloved being so dead, then the flatterer shall be
esteemed, that remains living.







THe speech of a light and of an inconstant person, is reputed unprofitable and
vain who does vnconsideratly run here and there without any reputation or
honor. Contrariwise when it is known that any one does carry great respect
to his faith: his speech when he does desire, pray or make request, is much
more worth then the force of any other. And the same chances when he would
cause any one to return to his obedience, he does far more basely obtain
his desire with words, then an other with deeds, and his threatenings have
more force then other means, executions and punishments: and he does bring
forth greater fruit by promising, then any other by giving.





in forces: by so much the more to procure themselves those things, which at
some time may turn to their profit, to the intent that when occasion and need
requires, they may have a defense wherewithal to help themselves.







through the proffite which chances to be performed by the same, neither
does it chance only to private persons, to have such opinion of every of
these things, but also unto all Cities and unto all people. Demand nothing
but that which is according to the divine laws, neither do any thing out of
the common justification of men.







For that suffering them selves to be carried away with passions, they use not
their counselles for the common proffit but according to the evil disposition
of their minds, whereupon it follows, that those which have given good
counsel, be despised, and afterward Princes by means of those evil
counselles: find themselves to be deprived of their States.









NAture has appointed it to be healthful and necessary to man, that some
should be ruled and governed, and it is impossible that without this order,
any thing should persevere and go forward any long time, and it is a
convenient thing that one that is ruler over another, have care over convenient
things, and to comaund, but he that is subject, it appertains unto him to be
obedient without any excuse, and to execute diligently that which is
commanded him.



Cadmus.

if in the beginning he be not altogether destroyed, he remains in continual
desire to revenge himself against him that did him injuries, until such time
as he feel himself satisfied in his mind: and in like sort the rest of the
multitude, although they have not been pertakers of this thing, nevertheless,
through the pity they bear to him that is overcome, and through the envy
they bear to the vanquishour: fearing also to suffer such like, and hope they
may be able to do the same to him: and by this means the one half of the
Citizens are moved to make sedition, and the one and the other succeeds and
follows on to evil, which is like to a Circulare and legitimate course, having
this occasion to revenge those that have been oppressed, and although they are
privately set free, nevertheless every way they destroy the Commonweal.



considerations, the end, and security to arrive with satisfaction, but when
unto these two, speed may be joined: then have we fully all those parts that
appertains to perfect affairs.



reason was not looked for, and many men, besides that they have seen much,
have heard many things and read much, whereby they possess a discourse of
greater effect, and likewise because the affairs that are consulted upon are
many and sundry, therein is to be required diverse and sundry judgments: and
he that rules, has so huge a Machine upon his shoulders, that he is forced to
have many arms, to lay hand upon to help him to sustain that heavy burden.



nevertheless there remains and rests not much, but when any case does fall
out, that has many shapes and colors, so that it may change it self in
sundry sorts, and take many forms, and that it does importe much either in
appearance or in consequence, or in the one and the other sort: the which thing
comes often, for that oftentimes ma^^ers do fall out, which carrye with them
such doubts as are to be had in consideration.



them with the occasion, by finding them evil satisfied, and by having the
means to entertain them, and so they may easilye stir up tumults against the
regal power.







men esteeming by that means to be able to attain to some purpose or
determined invention: therefore it is required in those that seek for honors,
that liberty and affability be in them by nature, not for that it is not good
to obtain the same virtuously and by election, but for that not being able so
well to make judgment of the inward parts of others, sometimes it chances,
that which is done by artificial means, does make such a manner of show,
that it seems, that it is like unto virtue, whereby it may easily deceive, but
nature does never deceive.





their hands that will not be discommodious or grievous unto them.





as whosoever is courag^ous without stay and pillar of some of these qualities,
shall persevere himself rather to be deri^ed and flo^ted, and shall spoil all,
rather then help and amend the matter.



FINIS. Deo Gratias. Et Pace, Et Praelio.
THis is the end of the first Book, translated out of Italian into English.
Anno. 1590.
HITCHCOCKS ARMS.
EN DIEV EST MA DEFFENSE.



A Table wherein is contained the contents of these Conceits, Showing their
number by figure, they being in all ^03.
A.
ABode. 706. Accidents or chances. 74.551. Actions. 68.293.539.633. To
Accomodate our selves. 511.515 Adventure or chance. 108. Advise. 3^0.
Administration. 260 Affection. 170 Affairs or business* 244.245. Affirmations.
2.167. Agents. 373. Old Age. 523. Alterations, 418. Ambition.
123.304.315.316.469.536. Ametie. 218.317.379. Appetite. 153.18.9. Arms.
250.592. Art ofwarre. 251 Artificial devises. 65.456.565.570. Assurednes or
security. 619. Authority. 146.252.374.412.423.474.513.
B.
Baseness or vileness of mind. 718 Base and mean men toward great personages.
193. Day of battle. 369.530. or Battles. 214. Benefits. 225, 276.547.
Benevolence* 799. Beastlyne^. 285. Bond or Obligations. 63. Bondage or
slavery, 246.363.427.781.
C.
Calumines or detractions. 411. Causes or affairs. 58. Captains or Generals.
28.179.139.158.300.321.322.325.521.522.545.593.665 670 672
683.676.677.678.679.680 682.688.723.735.754.773. Care or deep consideration.
165 Chastisement. 108.131. Charity. 270.525. Charge or burden. 39. Cities or
states. 134.668.675.692.699, 700.770.775.778 Citizens.
37.135.248.333.471.485.593.721.740.752.793. Ciuil^tie. 262. Circumspectnes.
283. Clemency. 215. Commonweals. 7.45.628.708.710.757.768. Colonies or new
Inhabitants. 462. Commanding or rule. 186.567. Companyes or bands. 18.41.
Counselles or advise.
9.27.64.97.105.194.287.297.299.386.538.574.607.725.760.764.788.790.
Considerations. 16.154. Conuersations. 125, Conservation or well keeping. 212.
Confederation or League. 227.343.344. Confidence or trust. 2.475.609.
Counselors. 324.536.761.789 Consultation. 298. Contentions. 263. Constancy.
387. Contrary course in managing causes. 555. Corrispondence or similitude.
200. Corruption. 512. Customs. 12.435. Cowards. 731. Couragiousnes. 284.
Covetousness. 340.684.767. Credulity. 143.229.657.661. Cruelty. 560.563.
Curiosity. 3.
D.
Deliberations. 235. Denial. 196. Detraction or evil speaking. 197. Deeds or
actions. 183.331. Degrees. 145.535. Demands. 468. Determinations or
deliberating. 27.25.82.206.224.291.293.294.542.642. Demerites, 734.736. To
desire or request. 638. Dearth. 734. Dignetie. 159. Difficulty. 518.
Difference. 179. Discord. 61.89.784. Discipline. 274. Discourses. 425.
Displeasure, 550. Dsarmed or without weapon. 553. Disturbations. 98.
Distribution. 223.486. Disorders. 247.477. Disimulations. 584. Disswasion. 671.
Coffeehouse. 505. Deceiuours. 141. Displeasure or entering into cholor. 608.
Damage or loss. 224.616. Doubts. 405. To dye. 208.739.763. A Desembler. 483.
E.
Excesses. 454.455. Effects. 195.181. Election or choice. 10.330.536.
Emulations. 137. Ambassadors. 279.473. Emnities. 694. Enterparling and meeting
of Princes. 371. To enlarge or augement. 295.488. To enrich our selves.
442.516.585. Enterprises. 88.178.221.311.355.322.760. Ennye.
328.620.646.648.649.6^1.776. Enemies. 368. Entertainment or delays. 26.
Errors. 163.242.365.396.744. Events, happes or chances. 263 Final end. 386.
Executions or accomplishements. 168.184. Examples. 169. Extremities. 231.610.
Experiences. 78.683. Exercises. 404.621* Expenses in war. 711.
F.
Fame. 734, 736. Favors 49.149.534. Faith. 31.306.684.707.713.763. Faulty.
133. Fear. 550.643.644.319. Flattery. 54.^41.449. Flight. 597. Footmen or
Soldiers. 591. Fortune. 114.140.380. Force. 410.479. Form or proportion.
415. Fortifications. 572.674. Forgetfulness. 43. A Friend. 128. Foreshewing or
fore-happes. 305. Foreseeings or preuentions. 266.756. Fugitives. 315.
G.
Gains or getting of any thing. 492, 753.771. Governors.
91.103.109.215.117.801.746.766. Glory. 92.287. Government. 652. Goodness of
life. 421. Goodness of persons. 90. Goods. 308. Good deeds or works. 307.377.
Grauetie. 36. Grace or favor. 144. Greatness or might. 157. Gross wits.
677.624. Gratefulnes. 795.
H.
Hate. 328. Hope. 235. Histories. 376. Honesty. 31. Honors.
119.318.796.796.800.801.802.
I.
Ignorance. 594. Invasion or usurping. 438. Injuries. 32.659.660.783.
Introductions. 181. Insolence. 226. Impressions in our minds. 347. Imitations.
379. Inconveniences. 392.453. Inconstancy. 399. Intent. 640. Ire or wrath.
190. Irresolution. 558 Irruption or inuation. 182. The Judge. 142. Judgments.
209.467.564, 518. Justice. 175.
K.
Kings. 95.717. Knowledge or perseuerence. 383.
L,
Lamen^^tion or complaining 623, Laws. 378.435.436.791. Leages.
210.216.217.234.362.457.458.719. Letters or learning. 286. Liberty or free
state. 40.50.162.222.238.239.246 392.359.428.700.714.742. Liberality. 171.558.
Lustines or galant courage. 83. Losses. 507.704. Short Life. 161. Love.
130.627.
M.
Magistrate. 80.319.393. Master. 176. Malcontent or evil satisfied. 551. To
Maintain. 391. Measure. 187. Keeping of the mean. 450. Magnanimity. 632.720.
Miserable. 556.559. Mistrust. 30.229.663. Misfortunes. 26. Multitudes or
assemblies. 258.275.429, 636. Mutations or changes. 580. Mighty. 56.59. Money.
302.515.
N.
Nature of Princes. 15. Necessity. 233.382.517.6^3.698.749.762. A Negotiatour.
53.469, 470.575. Newtralitie. 67.207.384.385.388.389.394.395.396.397.400.
News. 268. To be Negligent. 517. Night. 269. Noble. 51. Nobility. 482. Notice
or knowledge. 472 Novelties. 118.360. Needful occasions. 126.127.
O,
Obedience. 527.702. Occasion or oppertunitie. 8.82. Offenses or harms.
409.502.562.625. Obtemperations, temporising or congratulation. 81. Orders.
436.520. The maker of good orders. 381.425.438.546. Opinions or judgments. 337.
Overthrows. 464. Off-icers or Servants. 14.467.469.595.
P.
Peace. 57.278.349.662. Pact or condition. 464. Things past. 480. People.
23.69.199, 229.230.290.356.481.578.690.709.774. Perrill^s. 1.292.689.712. To
pardon. 42.185. Persuasion. 228.67. Pleasure. 550. Persecution. 255. Practices.
582. To premeditate. 149. Prevention. 160. Predictions. 211.327. Preparations.
476. Power. 6. Poverty, 161.627.791. A Prince.
11.17.22.44.52.102.107.113.116.122.155.345.347.434.466.596.602.655.691.747.
Princes. 73.201. Prodigalities. 29. Prosperity. 264. Proceeding forward in
affairs. 487. Promises. 686. Prudence. 650. Presumption or rash boldenes.
698.718.725.729. To praise. 433.663. Praise. 60 Pride. 197. Punishment. 524.
Profitablenes. 35.
Q.
Good qualities. 396.803.
R.
Rash persons. 732. Reign. 20. Reason. 134. Religion. 424.426.785. Respects.
164. Reprehenders. 203. Reputation. 232.451.479.681. Resolution. 243.300.549.
Remembrances. 312.313. Requests. 259.437.532.599.667. Reformation. 432.444.
Revenge. 180. Rewards. 75. Riches. 46.188.697.791. New Rule or Empire. 13.
S.
Sage or wise. 641.148. Sects, factions, banding, or part-taking. 240.669.695.
Seditions. 132. Severity. 2^6. To Serve. 420.422.579.604. Security.
79.120.249. Scandalles. 460. Silence. 335. Slacknes. 561 Sincerity. 622.
Substance. 84. Success of things. 205. Suspicion. 220.207.346.446.447.484.629.
A Successor. 334.516. A Soldier. 261.326.440.687.724.737.738. State.
48.99.497. Stratagems. 522. Way of Sta^^. 419. Solitarines. 647. Strangers.
463. Strong. 529.634.635.636.637.
T.
Taciturnitie or secrecy. 174. Temeritie or rashness. 265. To Temporise. 571.
Tirants. 33.249.685. Treason. 7^4. Tumults. 431. Time. 150.24^.543. Truth or
verity. 758. Threatenings. 100. Terror or fear. 235.
V.
Valor. 325.371. Variety. 72. Varying or changing. 701. Vassalles. 630.
Virtue. 181. Victory. 66.289.597.730.769. Universal. 658. Uniting or knitting
in one. 94.669. Violence. 413.490.528. Vices. 93.181. Unworthiness or indignity.
296.
W.
Watchfulnes. 353. Warrefare. 77.611. Wars.
41.86.^04.213.271.301.352.390.531.548.588.589.590.600.613.605.606.609.666.705.715.716.726.727.728.743.745.751.787. Wicked naughty persons. 172.254. Worldly affairs. 366.402. Wrath or displeasure. 471.236.629.630.
Y.
Youth. 70. Yielding or granting. 257.
FINIS.
Captain Hichcock.
THis said Captain Hichcock serving in the Low Cuntries, Anno. 2586. with
two hundredth Soldiers: brought from thence with this Book, the second book
of Sansouinos politic Conceits, which shall be put to the Printing so soon as
it is translated out of the Italian into English.

