THE COLONIES OF BARTAS.

With the Commentary of S.G.S. in diverse places corrected and enlarged by
the Translatour.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI



Mores hominum multorum narrat and vrbes.

LONDON, Printed by R. F. for Thomas Man. 1598.

AD ILLVSTRISSIMVM HEROA, CAROLVM NOTINGHAMIAE COMItem, Equitem Georgianum,
Regineae Maiestati Regni consultum, magnum Angliae Admirallium, etc.
anchor and lion PAR MER ET PAR TERRE


Multa audire nequis per summa negotia Regni,
Qui Leo per terram es, Ancora qui per aquas.
Viue igitur praelustris (vtes) Terraque Marique,
Et liber hic tibi sit gratus, vt alter erat.
Viue and vince hostem, vicisti vt semper, Iberum:
Semper and in Christo (Carole Magne) vale.
Tui Nominit studiosissimus Guilielmus de Insula.

AGAIN, TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES EARL of Nottingham, Knight of the
Garter, Privy Counselor to her sacred Majesty, Lord high Admiral of
England, etc.
EXcellent and most worthy-aduanced, the hard and troublesome study of the
laws, whereunto I am by place deuowed, affoords me so short only and broken
times to show and satisfy the desire I have of honoring your Lordship, that,
through the continual enaction of your virtue, your honors daily increasing
do far surmount and outstrip these enterspaced labors of my pen. Bound yet
(my L.) by many titles to love and honor your House, ever honorable, and now
in your Lordship repossessed of the great name your ancestors had, for some
token of the great joy my heart conceiues thereat, and especially at this time,
I have to the Babylon of Bartas, which you did so graciously receive at my
hands, further Englished, and do here present unto your excellent Honor, this
book next ensuing the other, which the Auctor entitled The Colonies a work
(my L) worthy also to be countenaunced by your honorable name, and not unmeet
for a noble Knight, Statesman and Admiral (though he were of all the world) to
read, if the great cares of so high place gave leave. For here in less room
then might be thought able to contain so great and sundry matters, are
plainly set down, and even tabled-out unto us, the several parts, peoples
and policies of the whole earth, as they began first, and grew in time further
to be distinguished by the three sons of Noe and the diverse ouer-creases of
their families:

But Englands great negocies will not let
Your Lordship read or hear much prose or song:
For (as in Emblem I before have set,
To paint in short what honors you belong)
BY SEA AND LAND you are the Fense of Sion;
By SEA her Ancor, and By LAND her Lion.
Live then renoumed both BY SEA AND LAND,
And daunt the Spaniard as you have to fore:
That England fast may with your Ancor stand,
And by your Lion enemies be tore.
So shall you rid the world of Tyrants threat;
Therefore be tytled Englands Charles the Great;
And always (for so guarding this her Isle)
Of Prince be graced; loved and song of Lisle,
Who still remains your Lordships ready at command.

THE COLONIES.
Being to speak of so many peoples remoues as came from Noe, a hard matter. ^ee
desires the furtherance of Gods spe^^^ favor.
WHile ore th'vnpeopled world I load the fruitful stock
Of him that first assayed the waters vvrackfull shocke;
While I by sea and land, all in their places, range,
Discou'ries fortunate of many a kingdom strange:
And while of mighty Noe I toil to spread and twine
Fro the one to the other sea the many-branched vine;
O 1 what twy-lightie cloud by day shall guide my sight!
What fiery pillar shall my course direct by night,
To Seats each peopl'ordain'd before the Paire-of-man,
Their twyfold-one estate in paradise began!
2 Thou holie-holie Flame, that ledst the Persian Wises.
Who left the coast parfum'd vvherout fair Tytan rises,
To view the cradl'of him, whose youth in living light
For ever flourishes, drive hence the gloomy night
That seeleth up mine eyes: and so my Muse it shall
Search all the darker nookes of this great earthie Ball.
For though my wandering sprite althrough this journey long
Wave here and there, yet I no way more bend my song,
Nor aught do more desire, then to direct and waine
My readers to the Child that was Diuine-humaine,
1
What twilighty cloud. The Poet being to make in and out so many ways, and
cross so many seas and countries, huge and unknown, good cause he had to
demand (as he does) a greater help then man's wit can afford, such as the
children of Israel had, a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, to
guide them through the wilderness; and surely God gave him a very
extraordinary gift, otherwise he had never been able so well and briefly to
have comprised so many, hard, and worthy matters, as he has done, in less
then six hundred verses. He says here further, that each peoples place of
abode was ordained of God before the pair of man (that is Adam and Eve) had
received in paradise their twifold-one beginning: that is, before Adam was
created of earth, and Eve of one of his ribs: noting thereby, how of one they
were made two in creation, and after of two one by marriage. And so before the
world was made, the Lord had in his eternal decree marked and skored out the
dwelling places of all people: it remained therefore that the same decree
should be accomplished, as appeared afterward.

2
Thou holy-holy Flame. The Pole-starre is the mariners guide: but here the
Poet asks another manner help to show him the right way in his travel: and
glancing at the marvelous new star that appeared to the wisemen that came
out of the East, to see and worship our Savior Jesus Christ then borne in
Bethlem, he calls on the holy Ghost the true light of our understanding,
auerring that although the matter which he has taken in hand, constraines
him to discourse sometime of one thing, and sometime of another, yet is Jesus
Christ the chief mark he aymeth at, unto whom his desire is to lead his
readers, as also whatsoever is set us down in the doctrine of Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles, tends to the self same end. This the Poets holy
desire makes much to the shame of those that having themselves an unclean
heart, by setting their filthy works in print, defile also the eyes and ears
of many, whom (as much as in them lies) they lead unto the devil.

A comparison ^^^ly showing the effect of that astonishment befell the buil^ers
of Babell.
As when the sky orecast with darkesome cloudy rack,
A vvoods heart thorow-strikes with some great thunder-cracke,
The birds even all at once their neast and perch forsake,
And through the troubled air they flote for fear, and quake,
One here, another there; their pinions whizzing sound
Is noysed all about: no gre^sell Turtl'is found
Together with her make; with downie callow feather
Some young ones dare assay to vvrastl'against the vveather.
Right so 3 the men who built the Babyloman tower,
Perceiving Gods great voice in thunder-clashing stower,
Of their confounded speech, each barbarous to either,
Betake them to their heels, all fearful altogether.
Some to the left hand run, and some run to the right,
Why god would not have the poste^tie of Noe stay in the plain of S^enat
All tread sh'vnhaunted earth, as God ordaind their flight.
For 4 that great king of heaven, who long ere creature breathed
In privy counsel had this vnder-world bequeathed
Unto the kind of Man, could not at all abide it,
To be a den of thieves, or that men should divide it
By dreadful dint of sword, and every people border
This thickened Element beast like and out of order:
But, fire of getting barred, as did himself divide,
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet held all this the world so vvide:
The earth divided between the sons of Noe.
5 To Sem was given in fee the day-beginning East,
To Cham befell the South, and Iaphet gained the West,
3
The men who built. That which the Poet says concerning th'affright of these
builders, is implied by the words of Moses Genesis 11.8. they ceased to build: by
the one is the other understood: for upon the sudden chance of so strange a
confusion, they were scarred, as with a thunderclap, and after by necessity
constrained to sunder themselves. Yet I am of their opinion, who think the
diversity of tongues is to be considered, not in every particular builder,
but only in families. As that the goodness of God was such in his judgment,
that the builders departing thence, each led his wife and children with him,
who understood and spoke as he did, otherwise man's life could hardly have bin
sustained. They also that parted furthest at the first from those of Noes
successors that were not leagued in this presumptuous enterprise, soonest
forgot all their former language. And true it is, that at the first they
sundered not all very far one from another: but, as it pleased God more and
more to increase them, they sought further and further for new countries to
dwell in, and all by the secret direction of the wonderful providence of God.

4
That great king of heaven. He reaches even to the first cause of the
Colonies and diuers-way-partings of Noes posterity. Straight after the flood
God blessed Noe and his children and said, Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth: and the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of
the earth, and upon every f^^^e of the heaven, upon all that moves upon the
earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea, into your hands are they delivered.
Genesis 9.1.2. Therefore if the builders had continued and fast settled themselves
in the plain of Sennaar, they had (as much as was in them) made void the
Lords blessing, and bereft themselves and their posterity of those great
privileges which he had granted them. But the decree of God must needs be
fulfilled, and therefore according to his ordinance he chaseth far away these
donataries, to the end that year by year some in one place, and some in
another, they may take possession of that which was given them, the whole
compass of the world. Whereas the Poet says further, that ye Lord divided the
whole earth into three lots, that may be gathered out of the 10 chap. of
Genesis, and 32. chap. of Deuteronom. verse the 8. Noe a wise and learned man,
and one of great experience, was the instrument of Gods blessing in this
behalf: and though the bounds of these habitations be not all and thoroughly
specified, as were the divisions of the land of Canaan among the Tribes of
Israel, yet out of the tenth chapter of Genesis a man may gather that in those
days Noe and his sons and their posterity, knew more a great deal hereof
then men can now perceive: as may appear by so many diverse Colonies, so many
strange languages, so many names changed and rechaunged. A good commentary
upon this chapter would assoile many questions hereabouts arising.

5
To Sem was given. Because the sons of Noe were but three, therefore here are
named but three quarters of the world the East, West, and South: Some of the
successonrs of Iaphet peopled the North also, as shall be showed hereafter.
Concerning the names of these four cardinal points, somewhat has been said
upon discourse of the winds in the 2 day of the first week, verse 571. The
order of the sons of Noe is this. Iaphet is the elder, Sem the second, Cham
the last. Genesis 9.24 and 10.21. But Sem is named first, because of the favor of
God showed to his posterity, by thence raising the Messiah, and there
maintaining his Church. Iaphet the second, for that in the vocation of the
Gentiles he is received into the tents of Sem, that is, united to the family
of the faithful Abraham, according to the prophecy and blessing of Noe Genesis
9.27. Now in the 10 of Genesis v. 25. Moses further affirms, that Heber Sems
vnder-nephew had two sons, the one named Peleg, which signifies Division or
parting asunder (for in his time the earth was divided) and the other Ioktan.
Whereout some gather, that in the time of Peleg, that is (as I take it) before
the confusion of tongues, Noe and his sons remembered the grant that God had
made them of all the earth: and that Noe then made a kind of partition thereof
among his sons. If we reckon the confusion of the builders, together with
the partition of the world, though about the fiftieth year of Peleg, who was
borne but an hundred years after the sloud, and lived 239, this confusion must
happen within 150 years after the flood: which were very soon: yet some take
it sooner, as from the time that Peleg received his name, for remembrance (as
they say) of both things so note-worthie to all posterity, and especially to
the Church of God: which well might be advertised thereof; for Peleg lived 46
years after the birth of Abraham, as appears by the 11. chapter of Genesis.
Two things then are here to be considered: the one, that the partition of the
earth which Noe made, was to his posterity a token of Gods great blessing,
which nevertheless the Babel-builders for their part have turned into a curse:
the other, that this partition (as many divines and Chroniclers think) was
made before Nymrod and his train came out of the East, and sat down in the
plain of Sennaar, what time they were scattered thence again by the
confusion. Whereunto this I will adioyne, that as then the builders language
was confounded: so by continuance of time, the speech of others also was
corrupted, especially when they began to forget the true religion, which even
in Sems family was decayed, as appears plainly out of the 24 chap. of Joshua,
where it is said that Terah father to Abraham and Nachor had served strange
gods. It was no reason that the holy tongue should remain entire and vncorrupt
with such as had corrupted the service of God. But the Lord being merciful
unto Abraham, restored to him again, and kept for his faithful children the
first language, which had not been so much corrupted in the family of Sem, who
parted not so far from his father.

Sem ^ent toward the West.
6 This country reaching forth as rich as it is large,
From Peake of Perosites (where does himself discharge
The stately running Ob, great Ob, fresh waters king,
A river hardly crossed in six days traveling)
To Malaca, to th'isles from whence are brought huge masses
Of Calamus and Cloves: Samotra whereon passes
The night-equalling line, and to the waters far
Of Zeilan breeding-pearle, and goldie Bisnagar:
And from the Pont-Eusine, and from the brother waves
Of those Chaldean streams, unto the sea that raues
With hideo us noise about the Straight of th'Amens,
To Quinzits moorie poole, and Chiorzeke, from whence
Come Elephantick bulls with silken haired hides;
That was the share of Sem: for Gods decree it guides
How and what nations came of Sem.
7 Ashur to Assyriland, that after some few days
Chal, R^zen, Niniue, their towers to heaven may raise.
The Persian hills possessed great Elams princely race,
And those fat lands where-through Araxes runs apace.
Lud held the Lydian fields, Aram the Armenian,
And learned Arphaxad the quarter Chaldean.
6
This country. He sets down the lots of Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, first in
general: after meaning to show the particular Colonies of each. So then to Sem
he allotteth Asia. The proof of these several shares may be gathered out of
the 10. Chapter of Genesis. It is not meant that Sem in his own lifetime took
possession of this huge plot of ground, although he lived 600 years: but the
posterity of his five sons ouer-spred it by succession of time, as the Poet
declares at large hereafter; and a man may perceive some token thereof, in that
Moses reckeneth in the foresaid Chapter the sons of Ioktan the son of Heber
peti-sonne of Arphaxad, son of Sem. Now before I show the bounds here noted
by the Poet in this lot of Sem, I will set down the description and division
of Asia, as now it is. The map-drawers of our time differ in their order: some
consider it by the whole mass; others by the sea-borders and parts best
known, which they reckon to be nine, and those particularly deciphered in the
first chapter of the 20 book of the Portugal history. But this kind of
division, because it is more obscure and farther from my purpose, I leave and
rest on the other, which deuides the mass of Asia into f^ue principal river
Ob or Oby, the lake of Kittay, and the land-straight that is betwixt the
Caspian and Euxine sea. The second is Tartary subject to the great Cham, which
abutteth Southward on the Caspian sea, the hill Imaus and the river Iuxartes;
Northward and Eastward on the Ocean, and Westward upon Moscouie. The third part
is possessed by the Turk, and contains all that lies between the Euxine,
Aegean and Midland seas, and so further betwixt Egypt the Arabian and Persian
Gulfes, the river Tygris, the Caspian sea, and the land-straight there. The
fourth is the kingdom of Persia, abutting Westward on the Turk, Northward on
the great Cham, Eastward on the river Indus, and Southward on the Indian sea.
As for the fifth part, it is the same which we call the East Indies, so named of
the river Indus, and distinguished the higher from the lower by the famous
river Ganges. These Indies are very large countries, as the maps declare, and
front out Southward as f^^re as Malaca, having besides, an infinite sort of
Islands great and small, which the Card-men have well set down both in ^^ps and
writing. Now see we the manner how the Poet considers Asia. He takes it first
by right line from North to South, to (...), from the peake, foreland or cape
of Perosites as far as Malaca, where he takes in the Moluckes and Taprobana,
and from thence rises again to Zeilan and Bisnagar. Then draws another line
from the Mayor or Euxine sea on the West, to the straights of Amen Northeast,
and touches by the way some few countries most note worthy, reserving the rest
until his particular description of the Colonies: which follows from the 297
verse unto the 319.

To make plain some words in the text, the Peake of Perosites is a promontory
about the farthest part of Moscouy, near the Scythian sea, where lives (as
Cellarius reports of Asia in his great book entitled Speculum orbis terrarum,
and Mercator in his world-map) a certain people which have so small a vent for
their mouth, that they are nourished only by the savor and steeme of sodden
flesh. And about this promo^tory the river Ob, rising from the lake of Kythay,
grows to an huge breadth, and so emptieth into the Scythian or frozen sea.
The Baron of Herbestoin notes it in his map of Moscouie, and in his History
says as much as here follows touching this river, fol. 82. They that have
been thereon say they have labored a whole day without cease, their vessel
going very fast, to pass the River, and that it is fourscore Italian miles
broad. Which agrees well with that the Poet here says, and with report of
Mercator and Cellarius: so that by good right it may be called, rather then any
other stream, the king of all fresh waters, because in all the world besides
there is none so large and this also is of a wonderful great length: for as
the foresaid Baron affirms, from the one end to the other, to wit, from the
lake of Kythay to the frozen sea, it asks more then three months sailing.

The realm and city of Malaca are described in the sixth book of the
Portugal history, chap. 18. It is near the Equinoctial above Taprobana: so
therefore Asia reaches from the North pole beyond the Equator.

The isles from whence are brought huge masses of Cloves and Cassia, are the
Moluckes, five in number, Tidor, Terenat, Motir, Ma^hian, and Bachian, beset
with diverse other Isles and Islets under and near the Equator in the East,
which with their properties and manners of their inhabitants are well set down
in the 13 book of the history of Portugal, Chap. 8.

Samotra, whereon passes the night-equalling line, or the Equator, is the Isle
Taprobana Southward over against Malaca: it is above 450 leagues long, and 120
broad, I have described it in the fifth day of the first week: see further the
history of Portugal in the sixth book, the 18 chap.

Zeilan is an Isle right against the Cape of Calecut, above Taprobana toward
the East, it lies North and South, in length about 125 leagues, and in the
broadest place is 75 over. There are taken out of the sea great store of
pearls very fair and bright: for the further description thereof, see the 4
book and 20 chapter of the hystory of Portugal.

Bisnagar is a kingdom lying between Decan and Narsingua, the mountains of
Calecut, and the sea called the great gulf of Bengala. It is rich in gold
which is there found in rivers. Look the situation thereof in the Map of the
East Indies, and in the Asia of Ortelius and Cellarius.

The Pint-Eusine, is now called the Mayor or the black Sea: at the one end
thereof toward the Midland sea is Constantinople, the Card-men call it by
diverse names, which Ortelius has set down in his Synonym.

By the Brother waves of those Chaldean streams, is meant (as I suppose) the
Persian sea, whereinto Euphrates and Tygris both together empty, being before
joined about Babylon, now called Bagadet, and so the Poet takes as much of the
breadth of Asia at the West end as he does at the East: the one from Quinsay to
Chiorze, the other from the sea of Constantinople to the Persian Gulf.

Concerning the straight of Anien, the Cardmen are not all of one opinion:
Mercator, Ortelius, Cellarius, Theuet, and others, set down plainly a good
broad arm of Sea betwixt the Northeast point of Asia and America. But Vopelius
ioines Asia and this fourth part of the world together, greatly enlarging Asia
and curtolling the other, contrary to the opinion of the Authors aforesaid, and
many Spaniards that have written of the newfound world, the reasons that may
be alleged in favor of either side, require a large Commentary. Vopelius his
opinion indeed cutteth off many doubts that arise about the enpeopling of
America: but Mercator and the others, who are most commonly followed, seem to
ground more upon Geography and better to agree with the seas natural sway and
easy compassing the earth. Arias Montanus in his book entitled Phaleg, where
he treats of the habitations of Noes posterity, sets down a Map
according to Vopelius, this book of his bound in the volume called Apparatus,
is joined with the great Bibles of Antwerp. But the Poet follows Mercator,
Ortelius, and the common opinion of the Cardmen of our time: for Ptolome,
Strabo and Mela in their days had not discovered so much.

Quinsay, which the Poet calls Quinzit, is a famous city in the Northeast point
of Asia about ten leagues from the sea, built upon peers and arches in a
marrish ground; it is twenty leagues or 100 miles about, and by reason as well
of the great Lake-waters there, as also of th'ebbe and flow of the sea, it has
(as M. P. Venet. reports in the 64. chapter of his 2. book) 12000 bridges of
stone: the most renoumed bound-marke of all Asia, and the greatest city in the
world, if that be true. But Theuet gainsaith it in the 27 chapter of the 12
book of his Cosmography, where he describes the city and Lake with the river
that causes the lake to swell, he says it is not above four leagues in
compass: yet M. Paul affirms he has been there.

Chiorze is another worthy part of Asia set down here for a bound-marke,
because of the strange Bulls there, as great as Elephants, with hair as smooth
and soft as silk. Howsoever now adays that country is nothing so civil as
others inhabited by the posterity of Cham and Iaphet, yet the fruitfulness of
the ground, and great commodities there growing, for maintenance of man's life,
declare it has been in times past one of the best portions of the children of
Noe.

7
Ashurt Assyriland. Moses says the sons of Sem were Elam, Ashur, Arphaxad,
Lud and Aram: The Poet here in six verses has noted out the first habitations
of these five: reserving afterward, about the 300 verse and so forth, to show
their first, second, third, and fourth out-going over the rest of Asia.
Concerning Ashur it may be gathered out of the 10 of Genesis, verse the 11,
that having sorted himself with the people that now began to fear Nimrod, and
liking not to live under that yoke went on further, and in the country after
his name called Assyria built Niniuy (which a long time remained one of the
greatest cities in the world, as appears by the prophecy of Jonas and other
places of Scripture) and Caleh and Resen not far asunder, which have been
long-agoe destroyed. Elam, that was the eldest, seated himself by the river
Euphrates near the Persian Gulf, which now is called the Sea of Mesendin. The
Poet gives him a Princely title, because the Monarchy began betime and long
continued ther-abouts, where also reigns still the Sophi, a great Emperor and
deadly enemy of the Turks. The River Araxes is described by Ptolome in his
third Map of Asia, where he makes it spring from the foot of Pariard which
some men take for the hill Taurus, and so passing Scapene, Soducene, and
Colthene to empty into the Caspian sea. These countries are very rich, and
therefore the Poet calls them fat lands. Lud having passed the River composed of
Tygris and Euphrates, which straight after void into the Gulf, had Elam on the
North, the two Rivers joined and the Gulf on the East, and on the West the
Marches of Seba, which is the upper part of Arabia. The Poet here alloueth him
the Lydian fields, if by Lydia be understood that part of the lesser Asia
called Me^nia by Ptolome, Herodote and Pliny, Lud should have wandered further
then the other four brothers. Moses reports not any thing of his Colonies, and
his far going may be the cause, for according to the Poet he should have
coasted up as far as Aeolia and the Midland sea. The seat of Aram is
Mesopotamia, to wit, the countries about Babylon, and the mountains of
Armenia, which were after called by the name of Taurus. This also contains
Syria and the great Armenia, betwixt the which runs Euphrates. Arphaxad
passing Euphrates stayed in Chaldea: and for that Astronomy and other excellent
arts there chiefly flourished, the Poet surnameth him the Learned, which
appertains also unto him in regard of the true doctrine maintained by his
posterity, and after some corruption reformed in the house of Abraham, whom
the Lord removed from Vr of the Chaldeans into Syria.

Cham goes to the ^^^^pa^^s.
8 Cham Lord was of the land that Southward is beset
With scorched Guineas waves, and those of Guagamet,
Of Benin, Cefala, Botongas, Concritan
That fruitful is of droogs to poison beast or man.
Northward it fronts the sea from Abile, pent between
The barren Affricke shore and Europe fruitfull-greene:
And on the Western coast, where Phoebus drownes his light,
Thrusts out the Cape of Fesse, the green Cape and the white:
And has on the other side whence comes the sun from sleep
The Arabike seas, and all the blood-resembling Deep.
Nay all the land betwixt the Liban mountain spread
And Aden waves, betwixt the Persicke and the Red,
This mighty Southern Prince commanding far and wide
Unto the regiment and scept'r of Affricke tide.
9 Canan one of his sons began to build and dwell
^ow and what ^^^^ns are de^^^ded of Cham
By lordans gentle stream, whereas great Israel
Was after to be placed. Phut peopled Lybia,
Mizraijm Egypt had, Chus Aethiopia.
8
Cham. The share of Cham was Afric, which the Poet boundeth out as follows.
It has on the Southside the Aethiopicke Ocean, or the sea of Guinea, the land
of Negres, the realms of Cefala (which comes near the South Tropicke, and
(...) right over against Madagascar, or as the Spanish call it the Isle of S.
Laurence.) Botongas (lower and hard by the Cape of good hope) Guagamet, about
the lake of Zembre, from whence the river Nile springs, as Daniell Cellarius
notes in his Map of Affricke; and Benin, that lies above the Equator near
the great bay betwixt Meleget and Manicongo. As for Concritan, that is a great
wilderness between Cefala and Botongas, which by reason of extreme heat
brings forth great store of poisonous things. Now the Northbound of Affricke is
the Midland sea, and on the West it shoots out three capes or promontories
named in the text, all toward the Atlanticke Ocean, but the green cape, which
is more southward and points more toward the Sea, called (in respect of the
Antarticke pole) the North Sea, though it lie very near the Equator: on the
east of Affricke plays the Arabian Gulf, and the great red sea now called the
Indicke Ocean: and beyond these bounds the Poet says Cham also possessed
Arabia, which is distinguished into three parts, the Happy, the Desert, and the
Stony, all enclosed by the Mount Libanus, and the Red and Persian Gulfes.

9
Canan. He sets down breefly and in four verses the several abodes of
Chams four sons, according as they are named of Moses in the tenth chapter
of Genesis. Chus the eldest brother had Aethiopia, which some take for that
under Egypt, others for the land of Chus which is a part of Arabia the Happy,
as may be gathered by many places of the old Testament, well noted of M.
Beroald in the sixth chapter of his fourth book of Chronicles. Mizraim peopled
A^gypt, that of the Hebrews was commonly called Mitzraym, and long after
Egypt of the name of King Aegyptus, who succeeded Belus in that kingdom, and
was brother to Danaue who came into Greece and was Author of that name general
to the Grecians, which, as Saint Augustine thinks De Cus, Dei, the eighteenth
book and the tenth chapter, happened about the time of Joshua. Phut the third
son of Cham, gave name (says Josephus) to the Phutaeans after called
Lybians of one of the sons of Mesren or Mizrain named Lybis. He adds also
that in Mauritania there is a certain river and country called Phute.
Ezechiel, 30.5. numbreth Phut among those that were in league with Chus and
Lud, which the Latin interpreter translateth Ethiopia, Lydia, and the Lydians:
so also did the 70. Interp. This I say to move the Reader, that is so
delighted, unto a further and more diligent search. I think Phut was seated
near Arabia and Egypt: although Arias Montanus and others place him in the
coast of Affricke now called Barbary, about Tunis, ^ugie, Algeri and the
Mountains of Maroco. Now of Canan or Chanaan, the fourth son of Cham, was
called that Land of Promise, which the twelve Tribes of Israel under the
conduct of Joshua in due time entered and possessed. The bounds thereof are
plainly set down in the book of Exodus, chap. 23, verse 31, and elsewhere: I
need not here discourse of them, except I were to write a longer Commentary.

Japhet to the North and West
10 Now Iaphet spread along from the Ellesponticke waters,
The Euxine and Tanais, unto the mount Gibratars
Renoumed double top, and that sune-setting Maine
Which with his ebb and flow plays on the shore of Spain,
And from that other sea, upon whose frozen allies
Glide swiftly-teemed Carres instead of winged Galleys.
Unto the sea Tyrrhene, Ligusticke, Prouencall,
Moreas waters and the learned Atticall:
Against the goodly coast of As^a the less,
The second Paradise, the worlds chief happiness
And that great piece of ground that reaches from Amane
Unto the springs of Rha, and pleasant banks of Taken
A^^ those brave men of war that France have ouerspred,
How and what nati^ns came of Iaphet.
11 Of Gomers fruitful seed themselves profess are bred:
So are the Germaneseke, once called Gomerites:
Of Tuball Spaniards came, of Mosoch Muscouites,
Of Madai sprung the Medes, of Magog Scythians,
Of Iauan rose the Greeks, of Thyras Thracians.
10
Now Iaphet. Moses reciting Genesis, 9.27, how Noe blessed his two children,
sets down two notable points, the one concerning the great and many countries
which Iaphet and his posterity should possess: the other of the favor that
God should show them, by lodging them in the tents of Sem, that is, by
receiving them at length into his church; which has been fulfilled in the
calling of the Gentiles. For the first point, whereas he says, God enlarge
Iaphet (For so the Hebrew word signifies, although some translate it Persuade)
it is as much as if he had said, Let Iaphet and his race possess the
countries round about him far and near. And this has also been
accomplished in that so infinite a multitude of people has issued out of the
stock of Iaphet, and peopled Europe; which, though it appear lesser then the
other parts, has always had more inhabitants and fewer void countries. The
Poet has set down so parfite a description thereof, as it needs no further to
be opened, if the Reader have never so little beheld the Mappes. On the East
it is parted from the greater Asia by the Mayor Sea, the Meotis Lake, called by
Ortelius the Zabach sea, the River Taken or Don, which voids into the Lake, and
the Spring-heads of Rha, Edel, or Volga, running by Tartarie into the Caspian
Sea: and from Asia the less, sometime the honor of the world and exceeding
rich, as still it has sufficient, it is divided by the Straight of Gallipoli,
sometime called Hellespent. On the West it has the Straight of Gibraltar, the
Spanish and British Oceans: on the North the Frozen sea, and on the South the
Midland sea, which is diversely called, to wit, the Sea of Marseil by the coast
of Genes, the Adriaticke about Athens and Morea, and otherwise according to the
places adjoining. This goodly part of the world, beside the Roman Empire,
has many great kingdoms full of people, well set forth by the Card-men.
Daniell Cellarius accounts it in length, from Lisbon to Constantinople, about
six hundred leagues Almaine, and very near as much in breadth from Scrifinie
to Sicily.

11
Gomer. Moses reckeneth seven sons of Iaphet, Genesis, 10.2. So does here the
Poet, notstanding much upon the order of them, to follow the verse; of Gomer
are come the Gomerites, whom the Greeks called Galates and Gauls: of them
came the people that spoiled Delphos, and then sat down about Troas in Asia,
and were called Gaule-Greekes, or Asian Galates, who afterward seized a good
part of Phrygia. The Lord threatening by Exechiel, 38. chapter; Gog chief of
the Princes of Mesech and Tubal, says he, will destroy him with this Gomer and
all his bands, and the house of Togarmah of the North-quarters. They that
expound the prophecy gather out of this place that the Gomerites were people
bordering on the North of Asia, and brought by the Kings of Syria and Asia to
destroy the Jews after their return from Babylon. They preased forth of Asia
and enlarged their dominions greatly (as has been said) for they were a very
warlike Nation. Of them the Poet says are come the Germans, so Melancthon
affirms upon Carrion, so do others also, and chiefly Goropius in his fifth
book. But there is great diversity in these outworne matters, between the
late and ancient writers. A diligent conference of places in the old
Testament, and the ancient Latin, Greek, and Chaldean translations serve best
for the purpose: next a careful examining of the best Greek and Latin
histories: but this requires a whole volume, whereunto the searches of
Goropius, being so well handled, might afford a man great help. Concerning
Tubal the Poet follows the opinion of Josephus, that he was author of the
Spanish: which must be rightly understood, that is, after a long tract of time.
For by the 38 and 39 of Ezechiel, it seems that the people issued from Tubal
and Mosoch, that were neighbors, dwelt near Arabia, and were governed or led
to war by the king of Asia and Syria. And in the 32 chapter* where is mention
made of the mourning that should be among the nations for the king of Egypt,
there are named among others, Ashur, Elam, Mosoch and Tubal: whereby it may be
gathered they were of Asia. As for their Colonies and outcreases into Spain,
they are very dark and hardly proved. Vasaeus indeed in his Chronicle of
Spain, and Taraphe in his history, and others that have written of Spain in
diverse languages, following Joseph and Berose, make Tubal first king of
Spain, but sithence they declare not what time he came thither, I leave the
reader to consider-of and search further into the matter. Look the historical
Library of N. Vignier, the first part, page 15. where he treats of the
people of Europe.

Magog as the Poet says, is father of the Scythians: his first habitation and
Colonie was in Coelesyria, as may be gathered out of the fifth book and 23
chapter of Pliny, and the 37.38 and 39 chapters of Ezechiel. At this time the
right Scythians are the Sclauonians, Mosceuites and Tartarians, who vaunt of
their descent from Iaphet. This might have been by tract of time, but not so
soon, as the Poet in the sequel. Melancthon in his first upon Carrion takes
the prophecies against Gog and Magog to be meant especially of the Turks, whom
he calls by the name of Scythians, and applies also unto them that which is
written in the Revelation. And in the end of his second book he gives the name
to all people that profess Mahomet. I think my self, that, some while after
Noes partition of the lands, Magog and his people dwelt in Coelesyria or
therabouts, and thence by succession of time thrust up into the higher
countries. Now as the ancient people of God were much vexed and outraged by the
kings of Syria and Asia, successors of Seleucus Nicanor, and signified by the
name of Gog, who aiding the people of Magog, Mosoch and Tubal their subjects,
greatly annoyed the Jews then returned from Babylon: so has Satan in these
later days against the holy City, the Church of God, stirred up again Gog
and Magog, many kings and Princes enemies to the faith, who have conspired
together, and made a League to overthrow it utterly: but the Almighty in due
time and season shall confound them. Read the 20 Chapter of the Revelation,
and the 89 Sermon of Bullinger thereupon.

As for Mosoch, Joseph says, of him are come the Cappadocians, and for proof
thereof alleges a certain town of their country called Mazaca. It may be
gathered out of the 120. Psalm, that Mesech or Mosoch was a neighbor people
to Syria and Arabia, which place the Chaldee Paraphrast expoundding, uses
words of this import: O wretch that I am! for I have been a stranger among the
Asians, and dwelt in the Arabiantents. The Poet considers what might have
been in continuance of time, and how far the man's posterity might have
stretched.

Madai sure was author of the name of Medes, whose Empire was very great in
the higher Asia; they destroyed the Chaldean Monarchy, as may be noted out of
Jeremy 51.11. and Dan. 5.18.

The Thracians ( Joseph says, and the Poet) are descended of Thyras.
Melancthon thinks that of him are come the Russians, but the Scripture speaks
not of his posterity. Pliny makes mention of a river Tyra in the Russian or
European Sarmatia: Melancthon, Goropius and others call it Noster. Coropius in
his seventh book puts the Gotes, Daces and Bastarnes among the Thracians, as
all of one stock, and speaking almost the self same tongue, which also (as
he says) comes very near the C^mbricks and Brabantish.

Iauan the fourth son of Iaphet gave names to the Ionians, who after with
their neighbors were called Greeks: and therefore the Latin interpreter,
translating the place of Ezech. 27.19. for the Hebrew Iauan has put Grecia: so
have the 70 put (...), which is the name of Greece, for the same word. As also
in the thirteenth verse of the said Chapter, and in the 19 of the 66 of Esaias
they both have translated the Bebrue Ieuanim (...) and Graci. The country of
Athens has in old time been called Ionie, as Plutarke says in the life of
Theseus, and Strabo in his 9 book recites out of Hecataeus, that the Ionians
came out of Asia into Greece. Now the Greeks as they were great discoursers,
they have devised a thousand tales of their first beginning: but I let them
pass, because my notes are already waxen over long.

He will no^ e^ter into matter far out of knowledge.
12 Here if I were disposd upon the ground to tread
Of that supposd Berose, abusing all that read
As he and others do; well might I let you see
Of all our Auncesters a feigned pedigree;
I boldly might assay of all the worlds provinces,
From father unto son, to name the former Princes;
To sing of all the world each peoples diverse lot,
And of the meanest towns to lay the grunsill-plot.
But what? I mean not I, as every wynd shall blow
To leave my former course, and straight begin to row
(The Load-starre bright unseen) upon the waves vnknown^
Of such an Ocean, so full of rocks bestrowne
And Scylla's glutton gulfes, where tumbleth equal store
Of shipwracks on the sands, and billows to the shore.
Not having other guide then vvriters such as feign
The names of ancient kings, and tell us fables vain:
Who make all for themselves, and gaping after glory,
Upon one Cirons foot can build a perfect story.
12
Now. The like is seen in many books of late times and ancient, that treat
of the kingdoms, countries, and people of the world: for many labor more to
come nere Noah's Ark, and to find there the foundation of their towns, and
names of their first Princes, then about other more certain and sure grounds.
And they had rather forge names, and devise matter of their own head, then
leave to pack huge volumes full of tales, witnessing the strange vanity of
man's brain. The Poet condemns this foolish ambition, and by good right: all
the matter, when it is at the best, being very doubtful and unprofitable: for
man was placed on the earth to think rather on the service of God, then so to
trouble his head with curious out-search of his ancestors names.

13
Of that supposed Berose. Who so desires to know that the Berose late printed
is false, supposed, and plain contrary to the right Chaldean cited often by
Joseph in his Antiquities against Apton, let him read the fourth book of
Goropious his Origines Antuerpiaenae. And so let him think also of Manetho,
Metasthenes, Fabius Pictor, Sempronius, Myrsilus Lesbius and others packt, as
they are, into one volume, by some one that thought to do great matters by
abusing so the readers, and holding them in a muse by falls devises from further
search of the truth. I will not here set down the words of Goropius, who at
large discouers the forgednesse of this new Beros and his followers: let it
suffice to have pointed at the place. The true Berose was one of the Priests,
of Bell, and at the commandment of Antiachus the third, who succeeded Seleucus,
wrote three books of the Chaldean history: so says Tatianus, Joseph, and
Cleme^s Alexandrinus. Some fragments of his we read in Joseph against Apion,
and they make flat against that other Berose published in our time.

13 Why it is a hard matter to search Antiquities.
14 The Allusion of words is not a suer ground
For any man thereon a steady work to found;
Since greatest hills and seas and most-renoumed rivers,
Though they continue still, among long-after livers
Are often diuerse-nan^'d: as eke the generation
Of him that built a wall, or laid a towns foundation,
Inherits not the same; nor any mortal race
Has an eternal state in this same earthly place:
But holds for term of life, in fee-farme, or at will,
Possession of a field, a forest, or an hill.
And like as, when the wind amids the maine sea rustles,
One wave another drives, and billow billow iustles;
So are the people at odds eachone for others rome:
One thrusts another out, scarce is the second come
Unto that houses door whereas he means to keep,
But comes a third and makes him forth at window leep.
A fit Example.
So from great Albion 15 the old Bretton being chased
By Saxon-English force, the Gauls forthwith displaced
That wond in Armoricke and called the land Brettains,
Where Loyre his glyding charge vnloadeth on the maine:
So when 16 the Lombard left (with mind to rome at large)
Unto the skotched Huns the diuerse-furrow'd marge
Of lster double-nam'd, he made the French to fly,
By force of warly rage, out of rich Insubrie:
But vnder-fell again the French revenging heat,
And was to bondage brought by sword of Charles the great.
And so 17 the Alaine, and so the Northen-borne Vandall
Dislodged by the Goth from Cordube and Hispall,
In Carthage harbored; then by the conquering stroke
Of him that framed the laws sustained the Roman yoke.
The Roman aft'r and all the land Barbarian
What causes people often to remove and change their dwelling.
Of frizel-headed Moors obayd the Arabian.
18 This hunger neare-suffiz'd of gold and great Empire
This thirst of sharp revenge, and further this desire
Of honor in-conceit, all builded on rapines,
On slaughters, cruelties, towne-burnings and ruins,
Dishabiteth a land, and diuerse-wayes and far
To wave and wander makes the people sons of war.
Diverse examples of wa^dting people.
19 I do not speake-of here the spoiling Arabes,
The Hordies proper Scythes, or Sheppardes Nomades,
Who grazing on in troops despised every fence,
And pitched where they list their bristel-hairie tents:
Like as with wing are wont black swarms of Swallovves swift
Acrosse the sailed sea their bodies light to lift,
And changing their aboade as'twere on prograce go
For love of sweeter air twince yearly too and fro:
But other peoples feirce, who for Bellones renown
With often loss of blood have romed up and down.
And weeting better how to overcome them vveild;
To conquer, then to keep; to pull down them to build;
And choosing rather war, then i^st and holy rest;
Have boldly diverse lands, one after other pressed.
The natural country of the Lomba^des, their diverse remoones and conquests.
20 Right such that Lombard was, who borne in Schonerland
Seized on Liuonia, thence went to Rugiland;
And having wrought revenge upon the Bulgar-men
Of Agilmond his death, he boldly ventured then
Upon Polonia, so marched on brave and fine
To bath his golden hair in silver flote of Rine:
Thence turning him about he settled in Morauie,
And so to Buda went, and after flew to Pauie:
There rained two hundred years, and honored Tesin so
He princely dares compare streams with his neighbor Po.
Of the Goths.
21 Such was the Goth, who left the freizing-cold Finland
Scanzie, and Scrifiaie, Norway and Gotterland,
To sit on Wixel-banks; and for that air did please,
In temper keeping near that of the Baltik seas,
With his victorious host entering Sclauonia
Surprised Zipserland and all Valachia:
And then set foot in Thrace, but scorning long to toil
Among the beggar Greeks, for hope of richer spoil
Four times the Roman tryde, God Mars his elder Son,
To rob him of the crown that he from all had won;
Once led by Radaguise, once led by Alarick,
Once under Vidimer, once under Theodricke.
And after dwelt in France, then chased from Gascoine
Aboade in Portugal, Castile and Cataloine.
Of the ancient Gauls.
22 Such was the French of old, who roaming out as far
As darted are the beams of Titans fiery carre,
Invaded Italy, and would in rage have spilt
The towers that Roinulus, or Mars himself, had built:
Went thence to Hungary, then with his conquering plough
He fallowes up the ground cold Strimon runs through:
The fair Emathick fields does altospoile and fleece,
And spares not at all the greatest Gods of Greece.
At length with Europe Cloyed he passes Hell^spont,
And wastes as he goes of Dindyma the Front,
Pisidia ruineth, surprizeth Mysia,
And plants another Gaul in midst of Asia
23 Of people most renownd the dark antiquity
Is like a forest wide where Hardy-foolery
Shall stumble at every step, the learned Souenance
It self entangled is, and blind foldignorance
Blundring athwart the thick of her dark-nighty wits
Is ouer-throwne in Caves, in Quagmiers and Pitts.
14
The Allusion. They that in our time have entreated of the Nations pedegrees,
have much stood upon the resemblance that one word or proper name has to
another, and have aptly framed conjectures of good import and likelihood, as a
man may note in Carrion, Melact. Peucer, Althamer, Lazius, Coropius, and others.
But the Poet holds that a simple resemblaunce of words is no good ground for a
story. His reasons are, first, that hills, rivers and seas change their names,
as by Ortelius his treasure of Geography does appear, comparing the books and
tables of Ptolomie, Strabo, Mela, and other ancients, with the maps of Gemma
Frisius, Vopelius, Mercator, Postel, Theuet, Cellarius and other late writers.
Secondly, that cities and countries are not always called by the names of
their founders and first inhabitants. Thirdly, that no stock or nation has
sure hold of any place in the world, because of the many chaunges that befall
this life. Fourthly, that as in the sea one wave thrusts on another, so the
people, and chiefly those of old time, have driven each other out of place, and
in a manner played, In docke out nettle. All stories prove these reasons to be
true, and for the last, the Author shows three notable examples to confirm it.

15
The old Bretton. It is above 1200 years ago since Vortiger king of England,
then called great Brettaine, or Albion, (that is, a white-sand Isle) having
war with his neighbors the Scots, sent for aid to the Saxon-English, a people
of Germany, who, after they had done him good service, played as the Turks did
in Greece: for they seated the selves in a part of the Island, on the East,
where few years after they kept such a coil, that the old Bretton, the
natural Inbred of the country, was constrained to forsake it. So with a great
multitude passed the sea, and landed in Armoricke, now called little Britain:
where they gathered more and more together, and increased much by succession of
tune. See more hereof in the Chronicles of England and Britain. The river
Loyre falls into the trench of Nantes, and so voids into the Ocean.

16
The Lombard. About the year of Christ 568 Alboin king of Lombardes having
heard of the fruitfulness of Italy, left Pannonia or Hungary (where he
dwelt) in guard of certain Huns, upon conditions, and in few weeks after made
a rode into Italy with a mighty army: and got many towns, chiefly in
Insubria, now called Lombardy, of those Lombards, who reigned there above 200
years, till they were overcome and brought to thrall by the Emperor
Charlemaine about the year 774. Look the histories of France, and the second
part of the Library of N. Vignier. I shall speak anon of their beginning more
particularly.

17
The Alaine. About the year 412 when Ataulphe king of Goths had driven away
the Alaines and Vandals from Cordway and Seuill which they possessed, as also
most of the provinces of Spain, the Vandals sat down in Betica, which after
was of their name called first Vandolosie, and then shorter Andalosie: The
Alaines in Lusitania and the province of Carthage, or (as some say) betwixt the
rivers Iberus and Rubricatus, whereabouts in time past dwelt a people called
Iacetani, not unlikely to be the men of Arragon: afterward they joined and went
both together into Affricke, where they reigned a long time. But in the year
534. the Emperor Justinian, who caused the Roman laws to be gathered
together into one body, sent an army against them under the command of
Belissarius: he regained Affricke, took Carthage, and led Gilimer king of
Goths prisoner unto Rome. After all this the Romans and the Mores also were
constrained to give place in Affricke to the Arabians, who preassed in there,
and encamped them selves in sundry places.

18
This hunger n'ere suffiz'd. The Poet says, that desire of rule, revenge, and
vainglorie, ambition and covetousness, have chiefly caused so many people to
remove and change their dwellings. As also many stories of Scripture and
others plainly show. Seneca rekened diverse other causes in his book de
Co^solatione ad Elbiam, where he says, The Carthaginians made a road into
Spain, the Greeks into France, and the Frenchmen into Greece: neither could
the Pyrene mountains hinder the Germans passage; over ways unknown and
vntroad the lightheaded people have carried their wives and children and
ouer-aged parents: some after long wa^dering up and down seated themselves not
according to their free choice, but where they first might, when they waxed
weary of travel: some on other men's possessions seized by force of arms:
some as they sought unknown places were drowned in the sea: some there sat
down, where they first began to want provision. And all forsook not their
countries or sought other for the same causes. Many, after their cities were
destroyed by war, fled from their enemies, and so bereft of their own
possessions, were feign to preasse upon other men's: many left their dwellings
to avoid the disquiet of civil wars: and many to empty Cities of their
ouercreasing multitude: some by pestilence, or the earthes often gulfing, or
like insufferable faults of a bad soil, were cast forth; and some were
entised from home by report of a larger and more fruitful ground: some for one
cause and some for another, etc.

19
I do not speake-of here. The Poet has Scoenites, which I translate Arabes,
because they were a people of Arabia, great robbers and harriers of Egypt and
the coast of Affrike: the shepheardes Nomades are (as I take them) the
Numidians and Moors: or (as some think) a kind of Scythians. The Hordies are
the Tartaria^s, who live in the field in chariots and tents. Now the Poet
leaving the uncertain course of these roguing nations, who have had no more
stay in them then swallows and other wandering birds, intends to speak of a
more warlike people: whereof he alleges some notable examples.

20
Right such that Lombard was. He sets down much matter in few words,
concerning the Lombardes. There are diverse opinions of their pedigree:
Melancthon and Peucer in the third and fourth book of Carions Chron. hold they
dwelt in Saxony by the river Albis, about where now are the Byshoprickes of
Meidburg and Halberstad, and a part of the Marquessie of Brandburg; and from
thence under the conduct of Alboin entered Italy, and in the time of the
Emperor Justin the 2. seated themselves between the Appenine hills and the
Alps: where they began a kingdom. They were called Lombards, either because
of their long Iauelines (for thence it seems are come the names of Halbards
and Iauelines de barde) or because they dwelt in a country slat and fruitful,
as the Dutch word Board may signine. Some other Authors count the^ far-northerne
people, yet show not their ancient abode. Ptolomee in the 4. table of Lurope
deriues them from the country of Swaube, as also he notes in the 2. book and
11. chap of his Geogr. with whom agrees C. T acitu^^ in his Histories. But
Lazius in the 12. book of his ^^grationes of the Northern people, Vignier in
the first part of his Labratie page 905. and our Poet here follows the opinion
of Paulus Diaconus: they differ not much but only about the time of their
stay, and place of their first abode. Melancthon and Peucer set them first in
Sa^on^e, Paulus Diaconus, the Poet and others, in Scandinanie, or Schonland, a
great near-Isle of the Sound or Baltike Sea, from whence they might come in by
the banks of Albis, all or some of them, and some by the coast of Mekelberg,
etc. For Paulus Diaconus in his first book 2. chap says of this people, they
increased so fast in their foresaid country, that they were feign to part
themselves into three companies, and cost lots, which of them should go seek
another seat. This I say, to show the Poets cunning drift, that in so few
lines has set down matter enough, for any man to writeon whole volumes of
books. Thus then to follow the Poet, the first notable and fast abode of the
Lowbardes, who came from the Goths and Vandalles, was Schonland, whence a part
of them, dislodging under the conduct of Ibor and Agio settled in Scoring, which
is about the marches of Liuonia and Prussia: and after they had there dwelt
certain years, were constrained by a dearth to seek further, so as they came
to Mauringia, and at length to Rugiland, and the countries near adjoining,
which Paulus Diaconus sets down by name. There after the death of their
leaders, they chose Agilmond for their king. He had reigned 33. years, when
the Bulgares, a neighbor people, assailing the^ unawares, stue king Agilmond.
After him was chosen Lamisson for king, who to revenge the death of his
predecessor, made war with the Bulgares, got and held a part of Polongne:
then waxing weary of that country he led his people toward the Rhine, to the
coast of the County Palatine, as Tacitus notes in his second book of
Histories, and Velleius Paterc. in the life of Tiberius. About Heidelberg there
is a town called Lamberten, which seems to make somewhat for the Lombardes
abode there: so says Lazius. But many years after, they coasted back
again, and dwelt in Morauie, where they warred against the Herules, Sucues and
Gepides. Then went they up into Hungary under the safe-conduit of the Emperor
Justinian, to whom they paid tribut (as Procopius and Paulus Diaconus declare
at large.) There had they cruel war with the Gepides, but at length agreed and
joined with them; and understanding by the practice of Narses, that Italy was
a country much fitting their nature, their king Alboin made a road thereinto,
and got Lombardie before called Insubria; there they rested and reigned two
hundred years, until Charles the great vanquished them, as is before said.

21
Such was the Goth. Lazius in the tenth book of his Mygrations, has handled
well and largely the History of Goths gathered out of Procopius, lornandes,
Tacitus, Claudianus, Olaus Magnus, Eutropius and many others. I will shut up all
in short, and by way of Paraphrase upon the Poets verse. The Goths, and
Almaine people, had for their first assured seat the Isles of the Sound, or
Baltike Sea, and Gothland yet retains the name of the^. In Syllaes time they
left these Isles, and came to dwell in Almaine beside the river Vistula, now
called Wixel. After they had warred there against the Fre^chme^, they bent
toward Tra^ssiluania, Hungaria and Valachia, where they remained until the
time of Valintinian, maintaining themselves by force of arms against the
Greeks and Romans. Then for many causes alleged by Lazius, they went forward
into Thrace, and there dwelt and became tributaries unto Valentinian and
^alens. Eutropius says, all went not thither, but a good part of them kept
their former place, and the cause of their sundring was a civil disagreement
about religion: the one side retaining Heathenisme under Athalaricke their
king: the other under Fridigerne mingling with Christenisme the abominable
heresy of Arrius, which takes quite away the true religion of Christ. The
Arrians drew toward the West, and were after called Visigothes or Westgothes,
the other to the contrary, and were called Ostrogothes or Eastgothes, who out
of Thrace moved into Hungary and the countries adjoining, where they had much
ado with the Roman Emperors, as Lazius well records: at last they got
Sclauonia, and all forward unto the Adriaticke Sea, there growing to a mighty
number they determined to set on Italy under the command of Radaguise their
king in the time of Theodosius the first, son of Arcadius. Their army was in
number above CC. thousand strong, but by the special grace of God they were
overthrown, captiued and sold most for ducats a piece, their king slain, and
all scattered into diverse countries, but, in the time of Honorius, Alaricke
the king of Westgothes made another volage, and, entering into Italy, asked the
Emperor a place to dwell on: having obtained the coast that marches upon
France, as he was going thitherward with his company upon Easter day, one of
the captains of Stilico set upon him, and taking him so at disadvantage, by
treason slew a great number of the Goths. They, stirred up with anger and
disdain of such unfaithful dealing of Romans, make back to Rome, wast
Italy, and in the month of September. 1164. beleaguer and take the City, and
three days after depart thence laden with the spoil. As Alaricke was
marching toward Rome, there appeared a reverend personage unto him, and advised
him, since he would be counted a Christian, that he should not make such
hauock as he did: whereunto the king answered; it is not my desire to go to
Rome, but every day am I forced by some one (I know not who) that still cries
unto me, Go on, go on, and destroy Rome. As the Goths retired Alaricke dyed,
and Athaulph succeeded him, who led them back to Rome again. So they went
through with their saccage, and led away captive Galla Placidia the sister of
Honorius, whom Athaulph married. He was after slain of his own people at
Barcelona in Spain, for seeking peace for his wives sake with Honorius. The
third road they made into Italy was under the command of Vidimer: but they
were encountered and beaten back by Glycerius, as Iornandes writes: and so
they preassed again upon the French, and Spanish nations. Afterward the Goths
of Sclauonia weary of easy living, got leave of the Emperor Zeno and entered
Italy, and overcame Odoacer the Exarch of Rauenna, and there held estate for
many years. At length about the year of Christ 411. in the time of Honorius,
they seated themselves in Spain under Alaricke and his successors. Now during
the time of their abode near the Meoticke marshes they had nine kings: while
they remained in Gothland (which is now divided into the East and West Gothie,
betwixt Swethland and Norway) they had 28. kings: and 10. about the banks of
Wixel, and in Transsiluania and Sclauonia 26. After that being sundred into
Eastgothes and Westgothes, the Eastgothes had in Italy 11. kings from Alaricke
to Teias, who with the greater part of his people was overthrown by Narses.
The Westgoths in Lio^ Gaul, in Languedoc and Guien, had 6. kings, and the
kings of Westgothes in Spain, from Alaricke in the year 411. to Philip that
now reigns, are eight and twenty in number, according to the account of
Lazius, who reckons also two and thirty kings of Arragon, and two and
twenty of Navarre, unto the kings father that now is. Of these matters it may
suffice to have touched thus much in a word.

22
Such was the French. To enter into the whole history of the Frenchmen, or
Gauls, it was not the Poets meaning, but only to note briefly the chief
Outroads of this brave nation, and that within the compass of 2000 years. I
will go no further, but follow the text. The first beginning of the French is
diversely recorded, and all the opinions thereof are well gathered and examined
by the Author of the French Antiquities: who in the end shows his own
judgment, and avouches it to be very likely, that the land of Gaul (which
in old time, besides the realm of France, did contain also the Low
countries, Germany within Rhine, and Lorraine) was first inhabited by the line
of Gomer, thither coming upon diverse occasions and inereasing more and more
with the time: as also by the Germans a neighbor people: for little could the
Rhine hinder the G^ules and Germans from coming together, but that either, as
they prevailed in strength, might come into others country for their better
liking. And as the men of Marseil are counted an outcrease of Asia, it is like
the rest of the towns and quarters of France were peopled after the same sort.
Am^anus Marcollinus lively painteth out the Gauls in his 15. book. So does
Polybius, Caesar, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and others. All agree they were a
very warlike people; and their multitude gave them to think upon such remedy
as others had used before. Their first outroade, that was of any account, was
in the reign of Tarquinius Prisons, and about the time of the Jews thraldom
in Babylon, some 600 years before the birth of Christ. The Cel^ae (which were
the ancient Gauls) possessed the countries now called Suisse, Sauoy,
Daulphine, Languedoc, Vellay, Viuaretz, Lionnois, Forest, Auuergne, Berri,
Limosin, Quercy, Perigort, Xanctoigne, Angulmois, Poictou, Brettaigne, Anjou,
Tourraine, Maine, Perch, Normandy within Scine, the Chartrain, Hurepois,
Beaul^e, Gastinois, Brie, Champagne, the Duchy and Count of Bourgongne: their
king Ambigat sent forth Sidoveze and Belloveze to seek other dwelling.
Sidoveze taking toward Germany, left people in Bauaria, Bohemia and
Carinthia, and seated him self in the point of Europe toward and beyond the
Riphean mountains. Belloveze a while staying at the foot of the Alps, was
after by the persuasions of a certain Tuscane called Arron drawn into Italy,
and possessed Insubria. Some of his company seating first among the Pyrene
hills, at length entered a part of Arragon, and gave the name to Portugal. But
these were nothing so renowned as the other: who preassing further into Italy,
marched under Bren^us as far as Clusium, and so to Rome. Of his exploits
there, Liuie writes, and Plutarke in the life of Camillus, which was ^86
years before the coming of Christ. A third company that followed Bellevoze,
because they would have room enough, ouer-ran Slauonia, and maugre all stay
entered Hungary, and after many skirmishes departed thence in two bands: the one
coasting into Macedonie, the other into Greece, where they made the whole world
afraid of the^: after they had slain Ptolomeus Keraunus brother to
Philadelphus king of Egypt. Pranses was their king, who^ others call Bre^nus,
but was not he that sacked Rome. This man not content to have obtained a great
victory of the Macedonians and harried their country, presumed so far as to
spoil the Temple at Delphos, whereby himself and all his were brought to a
miserable end. Nevertheless the French that stayed behind, to guard the
frontiers of the country, fainted not at the report of these news, but went
to field with 1500 foot and 3000 horse, overcame the Getes and Triballes, and
wasted all Macedonie: only through negligence, as they retired laden with
spoil, they were brought to their end. Yet they that remained in Gaul sent
forth other companies into Asia: who passed on as far as Bossen and Dardanie,
where, by reason of a quarrel that fell between them* they sundred themselves.
One part of the^ cast into Thrace, and reigned there a long time: the other
settled about where Sanus and Danubius meet, not far from Belgrade. These that
remained in Dardanie, when they heard tell of the fruitful soil of the lesser
Asia, went on so far as Hellespont, and there because they were three
companies, they parted Natolia between them into three parts. The Trocynes
had the coast of H^ll^^p^nt; the Tolystoboges, Eolide and Ionie (which the
Turks call Quiscon.) The Tectosages, the country further into the maine land.
All that part of Asia which lies on this side Taurus they made their
tributarie pla^ting the^ selves all along the river Halys that parts
Paphlagoria from Syria. That province where the Gauls dwelt in Asia, from
their first arriual to the height of the Roman Empire, retained the name of
Gaul-Greece, together with that same language which S. Jerome (six or seven
hundred years after) says was like that he heard spoken in Gaul about the
quarter of Treues. Thus concerning the ancient Gauls: now to clear some few
dark words of the text. The work of Romulus, etc. He means Rome builded by
Romulus, the most warlike City of all the world; and therefore Mars, whom the
Painims counted the God of war, may be thought the founder of it. Cold
Strymon. A river parting Macedome from Thrace, as Pliny says: and because
Thrace is no very warm country, he gives Strymon the adioint of Cold. The
Emathicke fields: to wit, Macedonie, so called of king Emathion. Pliny speaks
thereof in his 4 book and 10 chapter thus, Macedonie a country containing a
hundred and fifty nations, sometime renowned for two kings (he means Philip
and Alexander) and for the Empire of the whole world: it was aforetime called
Emathia: which word the Poets as Virgil and Lucan, do sometimes use for
Thessaly, a country near Macedonie. Lucan in his very first verse, Bella per
Emathios plusquam ciuilia Campos. And Virgil in the end of his 2 Georgic. Nec
fuit indignum superis his sanguine nostro
Emathiam and latos Aemi pinguescere campos.


The Pharsalian fields are in Thessaly, as Pliny records in his 4 book and
8 chapter.

Dindyma. A hill in Phrygia. The Poet calls it Dindyme chastre, guelt Dindym:
because the Priests of Cybele called Curetes, kept and sacrificed there, and
were Eunuchs attired like women. The Poets meaning is, that these Gauls
harried also Phrygia, and called the country where they dwelt in Asia,
Gaul-Greece, after the name of that from whence they first came, and so planted
as it were another Gaul in the midst of Asia. What became of their
successors in the Romans time, because the Poet makes no mention thereof, I
pass it also.

23
Of people most renowned. He shows in few words wherefore he thrusts no
farther into discourse of the out-roades the people made in old time. For
though Carrion, Melancthon, Peucer, Lazius, Rhenanus, Goropius and others of our
time, have that way far ventured, and somewhile with very good success, He
groundeth all his discourse upon holy writ; and shewe^h more particularly how
the 3. sons of Noe peopled all the World.
yet it cannot be denied, but that they leave many doubts, and do not alwhere
clear the matter. See then how fitly the Poet adds that follows.

24 It shall suffice me then to keep me ne are th'encloses,
And careful hanging on the golden mouth of Moses,
Amram his learned son, in verses to record
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet filled this round work of the Lord:
And that of mighty Noe the far out-roming boat,
Did thus the second time all countries over flout.
25 Yet not as if Sems house from Babylon did run
Together all at once unto the rising Sun;
To drink^ of Z^iton the water siluer-fine,
To peopl'all rich Catay, with Cambalu and Chine:
Nor Iaphet unto Spain; nor that ungodly Cham
Unto the droughty soil of Meder and Bigam,
The fields of Cefala, the mount of Zanzibar,
The Cape of hoped good, in Afric most afar.
Very meece co^parisons.
For as the lblean hil^s, or those Hymettick trees,
Were not in one years space all ouer-buzz'd with bees;
But that some little rock that swarmed every prime
Two surcreases or three, made on their tops to clime,
Their sides and all about, those nurslings of the Sun,
At length all ore the Clyffes their hony-combes to run:
Or as two springing Elmes, that grow amids a field
With water compassed, about their stocks do yield
A many younger trees, and they again shoot-out
As many like themselves encroaching all about;
And gaining piece by piece so thrive that aft'r a while
They for a shared mead a forest make that Isle:
Accordingly the Wrights that built proud Babels tower
All scattering abroad (though not all in an hour)
At first enhous'd themselves in Mesopotamie;
By process then of time increasing happily
Past river after river, and seized land after land,
And, had not God forboad the world should ever stand,
No country might be found so savage and unknown,
But by the stock of Man had bin ere this ore-growne.
26 And hence it comes to pass the Tig'r-abutting coast
In all the former Age of all did slonish most:
That first began to war, that only got a name,
The cause, why the first monarchy was in Assiria.
And little knew the rest but learned of the same.
27 For Babylon betimes draw'n vnd'r a kingly throne,
Th'emperiall scepter swayd before the Greeks were known
To have a Policy, before by charming tones
Amphion walled Thebes of selfe-empyling stones.
Or Latins had their towns, or Frenchmen houshold-rents,
Or Almains Cottages, or Englishmen their tents.
The Hebrews and their neighbors were learned and religious before the Greeks
knew any thing.
28 The sons of Heber had with Angels often spoke,
And of all stranger Gods detested th'altar-smoke,
They knew the great unknown, and (o most happy thing)
With faithful eyes beheld their vnbeholden king:
The learned Chaldee knew of stars the numb'r and laws,
Had measured the sky, and understood the cause
That muffleth up the light of Cinthia's silver lips,
And how her thwarting does her brothers beams eclips:
The priest of Memphis knew the nature of the soul,
And straightly marked how the heavenly flames do roll.
(Who, that their faces might more flaming seem and gay,
In Amphitrites poole once wash them every day)
He Physic also wrote, and taught Geometree,
Before that any Greek had learnd his A Be Cee.
The Egiptians and Tyrians had all riches and delights, before the Greeks and
Gauls knew the world.
29 All Egypt ouershone with golden vtensilis
Before the limping Smith by Aetna's burning kill's
Had hammerd Iern bars, before Prometheus found
The fire and use thereof upon the Argolian ground.
Alas we were not then, or, if we were at least,
We led an uncouth life, and like the savage beast
Our garments feathers were that birds in moulting cast:
We feasted under trees, and gaped after mast.
When as the men of Tire already durst assay
To raze the salty Blew twixt them and Africa;
Were set on Merchandise, with purpl'en-g^^^rt their flanks,
And all the pleasures rained about Euphrates banks.
30 As, if a pebblestone thou on the the water fling
Of any sleepy poole, it frames a little ring
About whereas it fell, and far about does raze
The wa^^ng marbl', or even the trembling Crystal face,
With g^^t^l moving of a number circles mo,
That reaching further out together waxing flow
Until the round at length most outward and most large
Strikes of the standing poole both one and other marge:
So from the cent'r of All, which here I mean to pitch
Upon the the waters brinke where discord sprung of speech,
Man dressing day by day his knowledge more and more
Makes Arts and wisdom flow unto the Circle-shore*
As does himself increase, and as in diverse bands
His fruitful seed in time has over grown the lands.
31 The first Colonies of (...) the East.
For from Assyria the Semites began to travel
Unto the land beguilt with Hytans glestring gravel,
And peopling Persiland drooke Oroates l^yse,
And clear Coaspes eke, that lickes the walls of Suse,
So to the fruitful dale and fowerbearing plain
Betwixt high Caucase tops, whereas the Arsaces reign.
And some in Medie dwelt, and some began to make
The second.
The fields abutting on the great Mesendin lake.
32 These men's prosteritie did like a flood surround
And over flow in time the Cheisel-fronting ground:
They came in diverse troops upon Tachalistan,
Carz, Gadel, Chabula, Bedane, and Balestan.
33 The third.
Their of spring afterward broke up with toiling hands
Narzinga, Bisnagar, and all the plenteous lands
That Gauges thorow-flowes, and peopled Toloman,
The Realm of Mein, and Aue, and muskie Carazan,
And saw the fearful sprights in wilderness of Lop,
The fourth.
That mask in hundred shapes wayfaring men to stop.
34 Long after sundry times this Race still coasting East
Tipura seizd that breeds the horny-snowted beast,
Mangit and Gaucinchine that Aloes has store,
The first Colonies of Iaphet in the west.
And stopped at Any Straights and Cassagalie shore.
35 Now from the center-point enclining to the Set
Far spread abroad themselves the Children of Iaphet.
To Armenie the less, and after to Cilice,
So got the hau'ns at length of Tarsis and of Ise,
The sweet Corician Cave, that near Pernassus Hill
Delights the commers-in with Cimbal-sounding skill:
Huge Taure his lofty downs, Ionie, Cappadoce,
Moeanders winding banks, Bithyne and Illios.
The second.
36 Then boldly passing ore the narrow Cut of Sest
They drunk the waters cold of Strimon, Heb'r, and Nest:
The Rhodopean dales they grazed, and laid in swathes
The leas that (running by) Danubies water bathes.
The third parted into many branches.
37 Thrace did athonside fill the Grecian Territory:
Greece peopled Italic law giving, louing-glory:
By Italy was France, by France was filled Spain,
The borderings of Rhyne, and all the great Brettaigne.
Ath'other side again it sent a Colonie
Beth to the Pont-Eusine and toward Moldauie:
So raught Transsiluanie, Morauie, Hungary,
And Seruie farther west, and eastward Podolie:
Thence men to Prussie came, and Wixell borders eard
And that of Almanie, that narre the pole is reard.
The first Colonies of Cham in the South.
38 Now turning to the South, consider how Chaldaea
Spewes out in Arabie, Phoenice and Cannaea,
The cursed line of Cham; yet nerthelesse it grows,
The second.
And right betwixt two seas down into Egypt goes:
So stores the town Corene, and that renowned coast
Whereon the punick Seas are all to froth betost:
Fesse, The third.
Gogden, Terminan, Argin, Gulosa, Dara,
Tombuto, Gualata, Melli, Gago, Mansara,
The sparkling wilderness of Lybie breeding-venim,
Caun, Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubie, Benim,
The fourth.
And of the droughty soil those euer-mouing sands,
Where Jesus yet is known, and Prestre Ian commands;
Who, though in many points he comes near the l^w,
Yet has a kind of Church not allvnl^ke the true.
How the north was peopled.
39 And if thou long to know whence all the land (...) large,
That vnder-lyes the draught of many as^^ding barge,
All over pau'd with Ise, and of the sea of Russe
Environed about with surges mutinous,
Was co^^-vnto by men, think after they forsook
The ^laine where Tegill flood swift-running ouertooke
Once and again the stream of running-far Euphrates,
They lodged at the foot of hoary hill Niphates.
So forth of Armeny the field Hiberian,
The Colchish, the Albanick and the Bosphorian,
Ware furnished with men; thence to the Suns Vprist
The cruel Tartar went, that roameth where he list
All ore those quarters huge: and thence acoast the Set
Was stoar'd the land that Rha does near his rising fret,
The shore of Liuonie, the plains of Moscouie,
Biarmie, Permie, Russe, Whitelake and Scrifinie.
24
It shall suffice. The Poet has heretofore compared Antiquity (chiefly
concerning the Nations Out-roads) unto a great forest, wherein the cunningest
guides have often lost the^ selves. Now therefore he says it is the safer way
to follow and keep near the verge of the forest, rather then venture too far
into it. He shows thereby, that his meaning is to give us a general view of
these matters, not curiously to minse the particulars, as they have done, who
undertake to gather out of Authors, and teach others the course of Noes
posterity every mile as they have run until this present; and pore still
into the Arc, to find there the names of their countrymen and ancestors.
Therefore he voweth to rely wholly upon the golden mouth of Moses, which was
the son of Amram, as the Scripture witnesses, Nomb. 26.59. Now Moses says
Genes. 10. in the end of the Chapter, That of the children of Noe were the
Nations divided on the earth after the flood. And before in 5.20. and 30.
verses, he shows plainly from whence they began to people the world, and (as
it were) to lead again the Arc over the face of the earth: in filling most
countries of the world with their great posterity, increased, as it was, by
virtue of Gods wonderful blessing. Gen 9.1. Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth.

25
Yet not as if Sems house. He says Sem peopled not the East all at once, but
by succession of time; that Iaphet when he came out of the Arc, did not
forthwith run to Spain, nor Cham to hide himself in the furthest part of
Afric: but that by little and little, and in process of time their issues
raunged so far forth either way. He speaks of diverse countries far up in
the East, and far down Southward, the site whereof appears plain in the
Mappes: and to enrich this true story, he uses two pretty comparisons, of
the rocks of bees in Hybla, and Elmes in an Island: and as by their surcrease
both places are by peecemeale at length quite ouergrowen, so (he says) the
world by yearly increase of Noes posterities was part after part over peopled
as it is. First after the confusion of tou^gs they lodged one behind another,
about the coast of Mesopotamia. afterward as they increased in stock, their
new families passed the rivers, hills and straights looking-out other dwelling
places to their liking: the providence of God directing all (as appears) for
the better grace and trimming of the earth, and the commodity of all mankind.

26
And hence it comes to pass. This ensues necessarily of that goes before.
Where the posterity of Noe were most together in the beginning, there we must
confess was the chief sway and greatness of mankind, and that was in Assyria
and Chaldaea, as Moses witnesses Genesis 11. whereout the Poet concludes as
before: see further. Genesis 14. Concerning the kings wars that are there named,
with their countries marching upon Tigris or there abouts; and of Nymrod it is
namely said that the beginning of his reign was Babell, etc. in the country
of Sennaar, marching upon the river Tigris.

27
For Babylon betimes. Having spoken in general of the first people their
greatness, he specifieth now the first Monarchy; whereof it seems Moses has
enough written in the 10. chap. aforesaid. Now the best Authors many, of these
and the former times, declare and prove by the account of years that the first
Monarchy was in Babylon, and Babylon was in Chaldaea: whereupon some dispute
for Niniuie and Assyrians, and some because these two great Cities began about
one time, had several Princes, and reigned both many hundred years, they make
a double Monarchy of the first, until such time as the Chaldean had swallowed
the Assyrian. I take not the word Monarchy too precisely, as if in the time of
the Babylonia^ there were none other in the world. Egypt began in good time to
be of power, and great kings there were in the land of Can^an, and the
countries adjoining. But I understand with our Poet that the first rule
plainly appeared at Babylon, even in the time of Noe. He that would upon this
point compare profane Histories with the Scripture, might find matter for a
long discourse, the sum whereof may be seen in Funecius, Carrion, Vignier
and other Chroniclers. To be short, I say the reign of Nymrod mentioned Gene.
10.10. many years forewent all other we read of, and especially those of the
Greeks, Romans, Gauls, etc. as is proved plainly by the account of time.
Thebes, a town of Boeotia in Greece: it has a spring by it called Dirce,
whereof the town self among the Poets is often surnamed. Amphion, a wise
Politician, who by his eloquence and slight persuaded the people of those
times, rude as they were and uncivil, to join together in building the walls
of Thebes; whereupon the Poets, to show the force of eloquence, feign that
Amphion by the cunning strokes of his Lute made the stones come down from the
rocks and lay themselves together in order of a wall. And thus says Horace in
his Epistle of Poetry ad Pisones: Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor vrbis
Saxa moucre sono testudmis, and prece bla^da. Read more of him in Appollonius
his Argonauticks.

28
The sons of Heber. This proves again that the near successors of Noe
filled not the world all at once, but by succession of time. So the true
religion remained in the family of Sem; The Chaldeans were excellent
Astronomers and Philosophers; the Egyptian Priests knew the secrets of
Nature; before there was any knowledge of letters in Greece: which was not
peopled so soon as the other by many years, as the histories even of the
Greeks themselves declare. See the latter Chronicles.

29
All Egypt ouershone. Another proof. If the world had been peopled all
straight after the flood, riches and dainties would have been found used in all
countries at the same time. But they were in Egypt and Tire long before the
Greeks and Gauls knew the world. So it follows that Greece and Gaul were
not so soon peopled as Egypt and Phoenicia. By the limping Smith, he means
Vulcan, that first found out the use and forging of Iron in Sicilie. Prometheus
was the first that found the use of fire among the Argolians or Greeks. Of him
says Hor. 1. book 2. Ode. Audax Iapeti genus igne^fraude mala gent^bus
intulet. That is, the bold son of Iaphet brought fire by craft among the
nations. Of this matter the Poets have set forth many fables, the true drift
whereof our Author shows in a word. Look what I have noted upon the yoy
verse of the 6. day of the 1 week. The rest of this place is easy to be
understood.

30
As if a pebble stone. A fine similitude concerning the aforesaid matter: to
show how all the Arts began from the plain of Scunnar to spread by little and
little over all the world.

31
For from Assyria. He begins here to treat of the more particular peoplings.
And first he shows how the posterity of Sem began to fill Asia. Their first
out crease leaving the coast of Assyria, bent toward the East. Of this river
Hytan, Pliny faith 6.23. Carmamae flumen Hytanis portuosum and auro fertile.
Look Solinus cha. 67. They having peopled this quarter, hrust on further toward
Oroatis a river of Persia: whereof Pliny says in his 6. book the 23. Flumen
Oroatis ostio difficili nisi peritis; Insulae 2. paruae^nde vadosa nauigatio
palustri similis, per euripos tamen quosdam peragitur, and in the 25 chap.
Persidis initium ad Flumen Oroatin, quo diuiditur ab Elimaide. Read also the
24. chap. of the said book of Pliny, for the better understanding of their
dwelling here. Then they drew further forth into Persia toward the City
Susa, close by the which Coasp^s runs: such is the sweetness of that water,
that (as Pliny, Soline, Plutarch, and others record) the kings of Persia drink
of none other. So they came into the valleys of the famous hill Caucasus, where
dwelt the Parthians, whose kings were commonly called Arsaces. From hence into
Medie and lastly up higher toward the Mesendin, Hyrcaman, or Caspian lake.
Look Ptolo in his 1.2. and 3. table of Asia, Mercator, ^^rtelius, Cellarius
and Thouet. All these remoues are contained within the compass of 5. or 600.
leagues.

32
These men's posterity. He sets down in four verses the chief countries
peopled by the second ouercrease of Sems Issue. The land fronting Che^^el is a
part of Tartarie, not far from the Caspian sea, whereinto that river falls,
and rises near the wilderness of Lop, above Tachalistan; which is a great
country neighbor to the mountain ^maus. Charasse, Charassan, or Chorasan, it
is a country that hes between Istigias, Bedane, and Tacalistan, which I note
more particularly then I find in the French Commentary, because there is so
little difference of letters between that and the name of Carazan, whereof the
Poet speaks in the fourth verse following. This Charasse, Gadel, Cabul,
Bedane and Balistan, are provinces enclosed by the river Indus, the mountain
Imaus, the Mesendin or Caspian Sea, and the realm of Persia, a circuit of land
somewhat more then 600. leagues.

33
Their of spring afterward. He comes to the third ouercrease of the Semites,
who went forth Southward as well as North and Eastward. The inhabitants of
Cabul thrust forward their Issue toward Bisnagar, a rich country of South.
Asia, lying between the Persian sea and the Gulf of Bengala. Narsinga (for so
I have translated the French Nayarde) is a kingdom lying yet lower, and very
rich. That plenteous land that Ganges thorow-flowes, it contains the higher
India, where are many wealthy kingdoms set forth well at large in the Mappes,
as Cambaie, Decan, Bengala, Pedir, etc. Toloman, is further up toward the
North. Aua, is beyond the Gulf of Bengala, toward the East, about Pegu and
Siam, countries of infinite wealth. Mein, on the West has Ganges, on the East
Macin, on the South Bengala, and on the North Carazan, which the Poet surnameth
Muskey, because there is great store of the best Musk. Lop, a Desert thirty
days journey over, lying yet higher Northward. It seems the Poet follows the
opinion of M. P. Venet, who in the first book of his Tartarian History, chap.
35. makes very strange report of the fearful sights that the poor passengers
there meet with, often to the loss of their lives. Not unlike it is that
certain legions of evil Spirits there abiding, have had some special power
given them so to punish the Idolotrous Mahometists, who still inhabit those
quarters. The Poet says all the countries marching this Wilderness were
peopled by this third out crease of the Semits. It is an opinion somewhat
likely, and thereon I rest, until I hear some other (if it be possible) give
more certain intelligence of the matter.

34
Long after sundry times. He speaks of the fourth and last ouercrease of
Sem. Tipura, a country breeding many Rhinocerots, which, according as the
Greek name signifies, I have translated horny-snouted beasts: read the
description of them in the exposition of the 40. verse of the 6. day of the
first week: this Tipura lies East ward above Toloman betwixt Carazan an
Caichin, or Gaucinchine, for so I have translated: it has on the West Tipura
and Toloman, on the South Campaa, on the North China and Mein, and on the East
ye East-Ocean: a land very large and bearing great store of Aloes. Mangit is
far up in the North: so is also Quinsai, Ania, and Tabin, one above another
even unto the Amen Straight and Scythike Ocean. By this description, plain to
be seen in the Maps of Asia, the Poet meant to show us all the several
remoues of Sems posterity; who not passing beyond the Anian Straight, might
long content themselves with so large a portion as Asia, containing above four
thousand leagues of ground. As for the particular description of these
countries, their length, breadth and commodities, I neither dare, nor will ever
charge therewith my notes intended for short. Besides, it was not the Poets
mind to hold the reader long with view and study of such matter and
questions, as may be had and plainly resoiled of the Card-men.

35
Now from the center-point. Out of Assyria and Mesopotamia, Iaphet, or the next
race from him, drew toward the West, into those places that the Poet names, set
down (as they are) in the ancient and later Mappes of Asia and Europe. I need
not mince every word of the text. Armenie is distinguished into the Great and
Less, it lies near the Caspian sea, and coasteth toward Europe. The sweet
Corician cave, it is in Cilicia, and is described of Pliny in the 27. chapter
of his 5. book, and Strabo in his 4. book, and Solinus in his 51. chap.
Concerning the strange matters which the Poet reports of it, read Pomponius
Mela his description of Cilicia, the first book. Besides many notable
properties of the place, he says moreover that when a man has gone there a
troublesome narrow way a mile and more, he shall come through pleasant shades
into certain thick woods, which make a sound (no man can tell how) of certain
country-songs: and after he is passed through to the end thereof, he shall enter
another deeper shadow, which amazeth much all that come there, by reason of a
noise is heard, loud and passing man's power to make, as it were the sound of
many Cimballes. These are his words: Terret ingredientes sonitis Cimbaloru^
diuinitus and magno fragore crepitantium. He sets down also at large al other
the pleasant delights of the place. Concerning this music, some think it a
fable: Others ascribe it to a natural cause: as that the air entering by a
narrow mouth into a vault of stone, wide and very deep, soon grows thereby
exceeding raw, and so turns into water, then dropping still down in many
places and quantities somewhat proportionable upon the sounding stone, makes in
those hollow rockie places a noise as it were musical. Taure his lofty
downs, this great mountain reaches hence well toward Pisidia Westward, and
on the other side a great way into Asia, as Ptolomee shows in his first
table. Meander a river arising out of the mountains of Pelta and Totradium in
Asia the less, it runs through Hierapolis, Pisidia, Licaonia, Caria, and
other countries thereabouts, into the Midland sea. Illios or Troas, Bithynia
and the rest, are higher toward Hellespont and the Mayor sea.

36
Then boldly passing ore. He spoke before of Illios, which lies in low Phrigia
upon the shore of the Midland sea, about the Sigean Peake and the river Simois,
hard by the Straight of Gallipolie, where Abydos on Asia-side stands, and
Sestos on the side of Europe: now he says the second ouercrease of Semites
past the Straight, it being in breadth but the fourth part of a league, as
Bellon avouches in the 2. book and 3. chapter of his Singularities. In times
past there stood two towers, one in Sest, the other in Abide, in the tops
whereof wont to be set great lights to waine the mariners by night. Look
what we have noted upon the word Phare in the first day of the first week,
verse 448. and what upon the word Leander 1. week, fifth day, 912. verse. At
this time Sest and Abide are two Castles, where the Turk has Garrisons, and
are the very keys of Turkey in that quarter: so near is Constantinople unto
them. Strimon, Hebre and Nest, are three great rivers passing through Thrace
(which is now called Remania) and falling into the Aegean sea, called now by
some Archipelago, and by the Turks the White sea. Look the 9. table of Europe
in Ptolomee. The Rhodopea^ dales. Rhodope is a mountain bounding Thrace: in
the dales thereof, beside other towns, are Philippoli and Hadrianopoli.
Danubie or Donaw is the greatest river of all Europe, springing out of Arnobe
hill, which Ptolomee and Mercator puts for a bound between the Sweues and
Grisons: this River running through Almaine, Austria, Hungaria, Sclauonia, and
other countries with them interlaced, receives into it above 50. great Rivers,
and little ones an infinite sort, so emptieth by six great mouths into the
Mayor sea. Moldauia, Valachia, and Bulgaria are the countries near about the
fall of Danubie.

37
Thrace. These countries near the Mayor and Aegean Seas, and the Thracian
Bosphore, thrust on the third ouercrease of people further West and Northward,
as the Poet very likely faith: the Mappes of Europe show plainly the coasts he
names for their chief seats. But to show how and when they changed and
rechanged places and names of places, driving out one the other, and removing
by diverse enterspaces, it were the matter of a large book.

38
Now turning to the South. He comes now to handle the Colonies or ouercreases
of Chams posterity: first into Arabia, Phaenicia, and Chananaea, which was
after called Indaea: the site of these countries we know well: they are easy
to be found in the general Mappes, and those of Europe, beside the
particulars in Ptolomee and other late writers, as namely in the Theater of
Ortelius. When the Chamites had ouerbred Arabia and the country south from
Chaldaea, which lies betwixt The Arabian and Persian Gulfes, they went at the
second remove down into Egypt betwixt the red and Midland seas: thirdly they
entered Afric, and by little and little filled it. The Poet points-out many
countries, for better understanding whereof, we must consider that Afric
(the fourth part of the world known) is divided into four parts, Barbaria,
Numidia, Lybia, and the land of Negroes. Barbaria contains all the North
coast, from Alexandria in Egypt to the Straight of Gibraltar along by the
Midland sea, and is divided into four kingdoms, Maroco, Fessa, Tremisen, and
Tunis, containing under them 21. Provinces. Under the same Southward lies
Numidia, called of the Arabia^s Biledulgerid, and having but few places
habitable. Next below that is Lybia, called Sarra, as much to say as Desert, a
country exceeding hot, and marching athonside upon the land of Negroes: that,
the last and greatest part of Afric, reaches South and Eastward very far.
In the further coast thereof is the country of Zanzibar, certain kingdoms
and deserts near the Cape of good hope, which is the utmost and Southerest
peake of all Afric. Corene is near Egypt. The Punick Sea, the Sea of
Carthage, put for the Midland that parts Europe and Affricke asunder. Fesse,
is the name of the chief City of that Realm in Barbary. Gogden, a Province
of the Negroes, as are also Terminan, Gago and Melli, near the same. Argin,
lies near the White Cape. Gusola, is one of the seven Provinces of Maroco in
Barbary. Dara, a country in the Northwest of Numidia, not far from Gusola.
Tombuto, a great country in the West part of the Negroes, near above the
river Niger. So is Gualata, but somewhat higher and right against the Green
Cape. Mansara (which I have put in for the verse sake, as I left out Aden) it
lies near Melli upon the lowest mouth of Niger. By Aden, that the French has,
I take to be meant Hoden, which is betwixt Argin and Gualata, or somewhat
lower. The Wilderness of Lybie is surnamed Sparkling, because the sands there
ouerchafed with a burning heat of the Sun, fly up and dazzle men's eyes.
Cane, Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubie, Benim: all are easy to be found in
the Map near about the river Niger, saving Benim which is lower by the Gulf
Royal, and Nubie higher toward Nilus. Amasen (which I have added) is a great
country, near the place where Niger diueth under the Earth. From these
quarters South and Eastward lies the great Ethiopia, a country exceeding hot,
sandy, and in many places uninhabitable, because of the sands, which by the wind
are so moved and removed oftentimes, that they ouerheate and choke-vp diverse
great countries, that might otherwise be dwelt in. There the great Negus,
called Prester-Ian, reigns far and near. His Realms, Provinces, customs,
laws, Religion, and the manner of his peoples living, are set forth at large
by Franciscus Aluares, in his history of Ethiopia, that is joined with
Johannes Leo his description of Afric.

39
If thou desire to know. Hitherto the Poet has told us how Asia, Europe, and
Affricke, were peopled by the successors of Noe. But he has not showed how the
Japhethites from Chaldaea got up to the furthest Northern parts: and that he
now goes about, and does in 16. verses: supposing them from Euphrates to coast
up toward the mountains of Armenia, and so to enter Albania and the neighbor
places, from thence to people Tartaria, Moscouia, and all the North countries,
they are plainly set down by Mercator, Ortelius, Theuet and others in their
Maps of Europe: and I thought good, for causes often aforetold, not here to
entreat of them particularly. There is left us yet to consider two notable
questions concerning these out-roades and Colonies of Noes posterity. The one,
how they came unto the West India, which has so lately, within these 100.
years, been discovered. The other, how it came to pass that so few of them,
in the short space of some hundreds of years, were able to increase to such a
number, as might empeople and fill so many huge and diverse countries of the
world. The Poet straight makes answer hereunto. Let us mark his discourse
upon either the demands.

40 But all this other world, How America was peopled.
that Spain has new found out
By floting Delos-like the Western Seas about,
And raised now of late from out the tomb of Leath,
And given it (as it were) the Being by the death;
How was it inhabited? The first objection.
if long agone, how is it
Nor Persians, nor Greeks, nor Romans euerwist,
Or inckling heard thereof, whose euer-conquering hoasts
Have spread abroad so far and troad so many coasts?
Or if it were of late, The second objection.
how could it swarm so thick
In every town, and have such works of stone and brick,
As pass the towers of Rome, th'antike Egyptian Pyramid,
The King Mausolus Tomb, the walls of Queen Semiramis?
41 What then alas? Answers negative, by an Ironic.
belike these men fell from the sky
All readie-shap'd, as do the Frogs rebounding fry,
That aft'r a soultie day about the setting hour
Are powered on the meades by some warm April shower:
And entertouch themselves, and swarm amid the dust
About the gaping clifts that former drought had brust:
Or grew of tender slips and were in earthy lap
(In stead of cradle) nursed, and had for milk the sap:
Or as the Mousherom, the Sowbred, or the Blite
Among the fatter clots they start-vp in a night:
Or, as the Serpents teeth sow'n by the Duke of Thebes,
They bravely sprung all armed out of the broken glebes.
42 Indeed this mighty ground, that called is Americk, The first earnest
answer.

Was not inhabited so soon as Afferick;
Nor as that learned soil tow'r-bearing, louing-right,
That after Jupiter his deer-beloued hight;
Nor as that other part which from cold Bosphors head
Does reach the pearly dew of Tithons saffran bed.
For they much more approach the diaprized ridges
And fair endented banks of Tegil bursting-bridges,
From whence our ancestors discamp'd astonished,
And like to Partridges were all-to-scattered;
Then does that newfound world whereto Columbus bore
First under Ferdinand the Castile arms and lore.
43 But there the building are so huge and bravely dight
So differing the States, the wealth so infinite, Generali.

That long agon it seems some people thither came,
Although not all at once, nor all by ways the same.
Some by the clowdy drift of tempest raging-sore
Perhaps with broken barks were cast upon the shore:
Some other much anoyd with famine, plague and war, Particular.

Their ancient Seats forsook, and sought for new so far;
Some by some Captain led, that bore a searching mind,
With weary ships arrived upon the Western Inde.
44 Nay could not long ere this the Quinsay vessels find
A way by the Anian straight fro the one to the other Inde? The second.

As short a cut it is, as that of Hellspont
From Asia to Greece; or that wher-ore they wont,
Sail from the Spanish hill unto the Realm of Fesse,
Or into Sicilie from out the hau'n of Resse.
Colonies according to the second Answer: noting by the way certain meruailes
of the country.
45 So from the wastes of Tolm and Quiuir (where the kine
Bring calves with weathers fleece, and camels bunchy chine,
and hair of Courserots) they peopled Azasie,
Coss, Toua, Caliquas, Topira, Terlichi,
The flow'r-entitled Soil, Auacal Hochilega,
Saguenai, Baccalos, Canada, Norumbega,
And those white Labour-lands, about whose bleachy shore
The sweeter waterd seas are most-anon befrore.
46 They sowed athother side the land of Xalisco,
Mechuacan, Cusule, and founded Mexico
Like Venise ore the wat'r, and saw astonished
The greenest growing trees become all withered
As soon as ever touched; and eck a mountain found
Vesenus-like enflamed about Nicargua ground.
So passing forth along the straight of Panama,
Upon the better hand they first Oucanama,
Then Quito, then Cusco, then Caxamalca built,
And in Peruvi-land, a country thorow-guilt,
They wondered at the Lake that waters Colochim,
Al vnder-paued salt, and fresh about the brim:
And at the springs of Chinck, whose water strongly good
Makes pebble stones of chalk, and sandy stones of mood.
47 Then Chili they possessed, whose Rivers cold and bright
Run all the day a pace, and slumber all the night:
Quinteat, Patagonie, and all those lower seats,
Whereon the fon^y Brack of Magellanus beats.
Upon the left they spread along by Darien side,
Where Huo them refresht, then in Vraba spide
How Zenu's wealthy waves down unto Neptune rould
As big as Pullets eggs fair massy grains of gould;
And in Grenada saw mount Emeraudy shine:
But on Cumana banks hoodwinked were their eyne
With shadie thickened mist: so quickly from Cumana
They on to Parie went, Omagu, Caribana:
Then by Maragnon dwelt, then entered fierce Bresile,
Then Plata's level fields, where flows another Nile.
The third Answ^re.
48 Moreover one may say that Picne by Gronland,
The Land of Labor was by British Izerland
Replenished with men; as eck by Terminan,
By Tombut and Melli the shore of Corican.
40
But all this other world. This is the first of the foresaid questions: how it
came to pass that the new world, discovered in these latter times, could be so
replenished with people, as the Spaniards (who have thereof written very much)
did find it. He speaks of the West Jndia, which is called another world, or
the new world, for the hugenes thereof; being more then 9300. leagues about, as
Gomara says in his Indian History 1. book. 12. chap. it is longer then all
the other three parts of the world: and two or three ways as broad as Asia and
Europe laid together. This quarter, so great and full of kingdoms and people,
if it have been long agone inhabited, how hap (says our Poet) the Persians,
Greeks, and Romans, who undertook so many far voyages, came never there,
nor once heard thereof? For Ptolomee, Strabo, Mela and other ancient writers
make no mention of it: and if it were peopled but of late years, he asks,
how came so many people there, so many great cities and stately monuments, as
Gomara, Benzo, Cieque, Ouiede, Cortes, and others write of. Benzo and
Barthelemi de las Casas do report, that, in that little the Spaniards have
there gotten within these 30. or 40. years, they have slain above twenty
millions of people, undone and brought to great distress as many or more, and
wasted and unpeopled twice as much ground as is contained in Europe and a part
of Asia to that. Nevertheless in many places, and even in Mexico, New Spain
and Peru, where they have used all the cruelty, wickedness and villainy that
man's heart or the devils rage could imagine, there are yet living many thousand
Indians. Concerning the ancient Monuments of this new world, I will reckon at
this time but one of the^, taken out of the fourth book and 194. chapter of
Gomara: there are (says he) in Peru two great highways reaching, the one
through the hills, the other over the plains, from Quito to Cusco, which is
above 500. leagues out right, a work so great and chargeable, that it is well
worthy noting: that over the plains, is 25. foot broad, and walled on either
side, and has little brooks running along in it, with store of the trees
called Molli planted on the banks. The other is of like breadth, cutting
thorough the rocks, and filling up the lower grounds with stone work: for they
are both of them level without mounting or descending any hill, and straight
without stopping at any lake or poole. In a word, whosoever has seen either
of them, will say it is a work far surpassing all the great buildings and
paued causies of the Romans, or the walls of Babylon built by Queen
Semyramis, or those most wonderful Pyramides of Egypt. Guaynacapa, a certain
king of the Indians (who lived about 100. years ago) caused these ways to be
repaired and enlarged; but he was not the first beginner of them, as some would
make us believe: for he could not have finished them in all his life time, and
the stone-worke seems to be much more ancient. There are built upon them, a
days journey asunder, many goodly palaces, called Tambos, wherein the Court
and armies of the Princes wont to lodge. But, Gomara says, our Spaniards have
by their civil wars utterly destroyed these causies, and cut them asunder in
many places, that they might not come one to the other: yea the Indians
themselves have broke-off and severed their parts in time of war. Now let us
hear the Poets answer.

41
What then alas? belike. His first answer is, that the people of the West
Indies fell not out of the air, as many little frogs do in a warm shower,
framed, by the virtue of the Sun, of the dust or vapors arising out of the
earth: nor that they grew not out of the ground like roots or plants: nor by
any strange and vain enchantment, as of the Serpents teeth sown by Cadmus,
the Poets feign, grew soldiers in complet harness. But these they are men
well-featured, stout, and longliuing, chiefly in the North and South-parts of
the country, where both men and women in stature, strength, and continuance,
far excel the people of Europe, Asia, and Afric. The commodities they have
for health, their meat, drink and dwelling, their ceremonies, civil government
and other properties, duly noted by the Historians, make very good proof of ye
Poets saying.

42
Indeed this mighty ground. This newfound world is called America, of the
name of Americus Vespusius, a certain famous Pilot of Florence, one of the
first discouerers of the country, not much more then a hundred years ago.
His second answer is, that this part of the world could not be so soon
enhabited as the other three: because it is discoasted further from the plain
of Sennaar, for in Asia the plain it self was. And Arabia being peopled,
Afric was very near at hand, and Europe from the lesser Asia is parted but
with a narrow Phare: whereas America is far beyond all these which way soever
we coast. He calls Europe a learned Soil, tow'r-bearing, louing-right, for
the number of learned men and cunning Artisans, of kingdoms and states well
governed, and Fortresses that are there. That after Jupiter his deer-beloued
hight, to weet Europa, that was the daughter of Agenor king of Phaenicia. For
the profane Poets feign their great god, being in love with her, to have taken
the shape of a Bull, and on his back to have carried her over Hellespont, and
therefore the place where he first landed her was called by her name. From this
fable seems to be drawn the name of Bosphore: which is as much to say as
Bull-ferrie. Perhaps this Jupiter was some notable pyrate or tyrant thereabout
reigning, who in a Ship called the Bull, stole away some young Lady and fled for
safety into Europe. These words (which from cold Bosphors head Does reach the
pearly dew of Tithons saffran bed) set down the length of Asia, that is, from
the Bosphore of Thrace unto the East-Ocean. The Castile arms and lore: that
is, the Spanish Religion and forces, which Christopher Columbus brought first
into America, and there planted in the name of the Spanish king.

43
But there the buildings. The third answer is, that the stately buildings,
infinite treasures, and diverse gouernements that are there, will witness that
the country has been long enhabited, although hard it is to learn how. I
have already spoke of the great Causeyes of Peru. Now the sumptuousnes of
Themixtetan, the great city of the kingdom of Mexico, and the kings Palaces
of Peru (such they are described by the Spaniards) make further proof of the
Poets saying. As forth vncountable wealth of the Indies it plainly appears,
that above ten thousand Myllions of gold have been brought thence into Europe,
beside heaps of Rubies, Emeraudes and Pearl, much wracked in the sea, and
much brought for a yearly tribute into Spain. Whereunto I will add what
Franciscus Lopes de Gomara says concerning the invaluable riches of
Guainacapa, (the name signifies young and rich) the father of Antibalippa,
last king of Peru, whom the Spaniards put to death. All the furniture of his
house, table and kitchen (says he in the 120. chapter of his fourth book)
were of gold aend silver, and the meanest of silver somewhat embased with
copper for the more strength. He had in his wardrop giant-like images of gold
lively featured; as also all kind of beasts, fowls, trees, herbs, and
flowers that the land there bears; and all kind of fishes, that either the
Sea there, or any fresh water of his kingdom breeds, in the said metals
well and proportionably resembled, not so much as cords, paniers, troughes,
billets, and other such implements, but were so; to conclude, there was nothing
in his kingdom, whereof he had not the counterfeit in gold or silver. It is
also said that the kings of Peru, called Ingaes, have a garden in a certain
Isle near Puna, where they delight themselves when they list take the Sea,
that has in gold and silver all herbs, flowers and trees, and other things
whatsoever meet for a pleasant garden: such a sumptuous devise, as never was
heard-of or seen elsewhere. Besides all this, that king, last but one, had
gathered into Cusco huge masses of gold and silver vnfined: which the Indians
hid so secretly, as the Spaniards could never come-by it, there was also in and
about Cusco great store of picture-tables and tombs all of fine silver, worth
some thirty, some fifty, some threescore thousand ducats a piece: also
dining-tables, vessels, and images a great number, all of fine gold. The
Spaniards at the taking of Antibalippa found as good as 252000. pounds of
silver, and of gold 1300265. pezoes, every pezo valued at a ducat and a half.
Besides the great golden table of Antibalippa, worth nigh 40000. Crowns. Now
for all this great spoil that the Spaniards got, and hauock that they made, as
well in Peru, as other the Provinces thereabout, yet the Indians (as Benzo
reports, who stayde there with the Spaniards fourteen years, and wrote in
three books worthy-reading that whole story) they stick not to say, they
have yet more remaining then all that the Spaniards ever had. And to make their
meaning plainer, they will take out of a great vessel full of wheat one
grain betwixt their fingers, and say: See you this? the Viracochie (so they
call the Spaniards) have taken as it were this one grain away: but thus much
(say they, poynting to the rest in the vessel) thus much and more have they
left behind them. Now the word Viracochie because it comes thus in my way,
Benzo himself in his third book says, it signifies the frother scumme of the
Sea: and that the Peruvians so call the Spaniards for deep hatred and
abomination of them; saying also sometimes one to another in their language:
The wind bears down houses and trees, and the fire burns them, but these
Viracochie they do worse then wind and fire. They waste all, they eat all,
they turn the earth and all vpsedowne: they turn the course of rivers: they
are never at quiet: they never cease ranging up and down to seek gold and
silver: and all they find is too little for them. When they have it, what do
they? They take their pleasure, they war one with another, rob one another,
kill one another: they are ever given to lying, blaspheming, and denying the
same God whom they profess: and these men have cruelly slain without cause
our fathers, our children and kinsfolks, taken from us, contrary to all
right, our goods, our liberty and country. Having thus commended the
Spaniards, they curse the Sea for vomiting on the Earth so cruel and wicked a
people, and often have vpbrayded the Spaniards themselves with this notorious
reproach: that gold was the Christians God. O how shall this people in the
latter day condemn that euer-greedy covetousness, for which Europe nowadayes
hears so ill, and is by the selfe-people thereof so wasted and unpeopled! But
concerning the diverse gouernements of the West Indies, seeing they are set
down so well at large by Lopes, Ouiede, Benzo and others, it is too great a
matter for me to handle in this discourse, which is (I fear me) grown to
long already: therefore will I draw to an end. The Poet at the 413. verse
begins to show some likely opinions how this new-founde world was peopled: and
first in general, that the people of countries enhabited, exercising their
ordinary traffic one with another, might sometimes be cast by force of
tempest upon the West-Indian shore, and so be constrained (their ships being
broken) to remain still there. Others by plague, war or famine were driven
to leave their countries, and seek some quieter dwelling farther off, and so
have lighted on these new Countries. Or perhaps some great man of authority,
or cunning Pilot, by ventring made a discovery thereof, and led the
ouer-creases of some people thither. As the Poet shows more particularly in
the verses following.

44
Nay could not long ago. He guesseth inspeciall (and most likely) that the
inhabitants of the furthest Northeast shore of Asia, to wit, the men of
Quinsay and other places there, might have emptied their ouer-peopled Cities,
by passing the Anien Straight (a part of sea no broader (as he says) then the
Phare of Gallipoli, Gibraltare, or Messine) and so from the East Indies might
they have stoared first the land of Tolguage (which Theuet, in his map of
the new world, places betwixt the Realms of Anian, Tolm, and Quiuir, within
15. degrees of the North Pole:) then the rest as follows.

45
So from the Wastes of Tolm and Quiuir. In all this huge Northen part of
America, few people there are, especially toward the coast ouer-against Quinsay
and the other East-countries. There are therefore great Waste-landes (as the
later Cardmen have noted) about the kingdoms or countries of Anian. Tolguage,
Quiuir and Tolm, above 12000. leagues compass.

So then the Poet holds opinion that some of Sems posterity, having once
passed from the farthest East-point of Asia over to the West-Indian Coast,
thrust their of spring farther into the land. The Countries here named by the
Poet, are to be found in the Sea-cards and Land-mappes betwixt New-Spaine and
Estotilant: as if he meant that the North-part of America was first inhabited:
concerning the properties and particular descriptions of these places, read
the third volume of the Spanish Nauigations, the second Book of the general
history of Lopez de Gomara Chap. 37. etc. the History of Florida, Benzo, the
Reports of Iohann:s Verazzanus, laques Cartier, and other French Captains,
concerning their discovering of the Land of Labor (where the sea is frozen)
Baccalos, New-France, Canada, Hochilega and other lands thereabouts. Read
Theuet also and the latter Card-men. For the French Calicuza I have translated
Caliquas, according as I find it written both in others and in Ortellius; who
also has for Mechi Terlichi-mechi; and therefore I translate it Terlichi.

46
They sowed at'hother side. Xalisco, now called Noua Gallicia, is described by
Gomara in the 21. Chapter of his 5. book. It is a land very fruitful, and
rich in honny, wax and silver: and the people there are Idolaters and
Men-eaters. Nunnius Gusmannus, who seized the country for the king of Spain in
the year 1530. has written a discourse thereof, and it is to be read in the
third volume of the Spanish Nauigations. The Province of Mechuacan (from whence
not far lies Cusule) is about 40. leagues lower southward then Xalisco: that
also the said Gusmannus conquered, after he had most cruelly and traitorously
put to death the Prince and Peers of the country, as Gomara shows in his
book and chapter above quoted. Mexico, (which some count all one with
Themixtetan) is the mother City of that kingdom, now called Hispania Noua:
wonderful rich it is and strong, and of high renoume: built, far more
curiously then Venice, upon a lake salt on the northside, because it is there
of a Sea-like breadth, and on the southside fresh, because of a River that
empties there into it. Greater is the City thought to be, then Seuille in
Spain, the streets are passing well set, and their channels in such manner
cast, as can not be mended. Diverse places there are to buy and sell-in the
needful and ordinary wares, but one there is greater then the rest, with many
walks and galleries round about it, where every day may be seen above
threescore thousand Chapmen. There is the Judgment hall for common Pleas: and
were also many temples and shrines of Idols before the coming of Ferdinando
Cortez, who made thereof the first conquest for the K. of Spain, exercising
most horrible cruelties upon all both young and old in the City, as Barthelemi
de las Casas, a Monk and Bishop of Spain, reports in his history of the
Indies, where he stayed a long time. Look the description of Mexico in the
third volume of the Spanish Nauigations fol. 300. See also Benzo of Millaine
his history of the new world the 2. book and 13. Chapter. Now from these
parts above named (after report of some wonders of many there seen, and
worthy a larger discourse by themselves) the Poet draws his Colonies down
further toward Peru, by the Land-straight of Panama, which parts the
South Sea from the Ocean, and thereabout is hardly 20. leagues in breadth. The
fiery mountain of Nicaragua is by Gomara described in his 5. book, Chap. 203.
so are the other wonders, which the Poet here notes, in his 4. book, chap. 194.

47
Then Chili they possessed. Gomara, in his fourth book, chap. 131. holds opinion
that the men of Chili are the right Antipodes or Counter-walkers unto Spain,
and that the country there is of the same temper with Andaluzie. This Chili
lies on the shore of el Mar Pacifico, so also does Quintete (which I have put
for Chinca) both near the Patagones or Giants, whose country is full of
people, and has certain rivers that run by day and stand by night, some
think because of the snowes which in the day time are melted by the Sun, and
frozen by the Moon in the night: but I take it rather to be some great secret
and miracle of nature. The cause, why here I made exchange of Chinca, was first
for that the Poet had spoke before of the springs of Chink, which I take for
the same; then because it is so diversely placed of the Card-men: for Ortelius,
in his Map of the new world, sets it above, and Theuet beside Chili, in
either place it stands well to be taken for the Chink aforementioned: but Mercator
places it a great deal lower, and on the contrary coast, near the river of
Plata, where indeed is a country called Chica, that perhaps has bred this
error. Lastly, Quintete stands so right in way, which the Poet follows, from
Chili to the Patagones, that I thought it not amiss to take the same rather
then the doubtful Chinca. By the fomy Brack of Magellanus, he means the sea
and Straight of Magellan close by terra Australis. Gomara describes it well in
the beginning of the third book of his Portugal History. The Poet has
already showed how people came first on the North- America from the kingdom
of Anian over the maine land to the Atlantic sea shore, then on all the
further coasts from Quiuir to the Magellan Straight, along the Archipelago de
San Lazaro, Mar del Zur, and Pacifico: and now he takes the higher side on the
left hand from the Land-Straight of Panama to the river of Plata, which is not
far from the Magellan: noting by the way the most note-worthie places of all
this huge reach of ground, represented, as it is, by our late writers in their
general and particular Mappes of the Newfound world. Huo is a great
sweet-water stream rising at Quillacingas, (that lies under the Equatour) and
running athwart the country now called Carthage into the sea at Garia. Vraba
is the country that lies betwixt that river and Carthagene. Concerning Zenu,
mark what Gomara says thereof in his second book and 69. chapter. It is the
name of a river and city both, and of a Haven very large and sure. The City
is some 8. leagues from the sea. There is a great Mart for Salt and Fish. Gould
the inhabitants gather all about; and when they set themselves to get much,
they lay fine-wrought nets in the river of Zenu and others and oftentimes they
draw-vp grains of pure gold as big as eggs. This country is not far from
the Straight of Darien. In the said second book, chap. 72. he describes also
Noua Grenada, and the Mount of Emeraudes: which is very high, bare, and peeld,
without any herb or tree thereon growing, and lies some five degrees on this
side the Equatour. The Indians, when they goe-about to get the stones, first
use many enchauntments to know where the best vain is. The first time the
Spaniards came there, they drew thence great and little 1800. very fair and of
great price: but for this commodity, the country is so barren that the people
were feign to feed on Pismers: till of late the Spanish covetousness has
made them know the value of their Mountain. Cumana is described in the
foresaid book, chap. 79. in the end whereof Gomara says the vapors of the
River of Cumana engender a certain little mist or slime upon men's eyes, so as
the people there are very pore-blind. Parie is described in the 84 chapter of
the said second book. Maragnon, a River which (as Gomara says, 2. book, 87.
chapter) is threescore miles over. It emptieth at the Cape of A^inde, three
degrees beiond the Equator: but springs a great way further South, by Tarama
in Peru; thence running Eastward, it casts only an Arm into the Amazon
about Picora. Which has caused many the first writers of America to count from
that place both but one river. So also does our Poet here: otherwise he would
have mentioned first how the people passed the Amazon, that other great stream
now known by the name of Orenoque; which rises about Carangui, and emptieth
(as Theuet says) 104. leagues above the mouth of Maragnon. Bresile, which the
Spaniard discovered in the year 1504. is surnamed fierce, because of the
Canibales, Caribes, and other man-eating people there. l^de Leri has written
very fully all the history of his adventure in part of the country, where
dwell the people called Toupinamboes. The river of Plata the Indians call
Paranagacuc, which word imports as much as a great water. Gomara speaking
thereof in the 89. chapter of his second book says, In this river is found
silver, pearls, and other things of great price. It contains in breadth 25.
leagues, makes many Islands, and swells like Nilus, and about the selfsame
time. It springs first out of the mountains of Peru, and is after increased
by the in fall of many rivers: for the country thereabout is level, or flat,
whereof it seems to have received the name of Plate.

Thus the Poet gesseth at the manner of this newfound worlds empeopling by the
coast of Asia. Whereunto I will add what Arias Mont. that learned Spaniard
has written thereof in his book entitled Phaleg. He says Ioktan the double
pety-son of Sem, (that is, whose double grandfather Sem was) had thirteen
sons, which are named by Moses in the 10. of Genesis and some of them peopled
the West Indies from the East. That which Moses says, Genesis 10.30. concerning
Sephar a mountain of the East, Arias applies to the great hills of Peru, which
the Spaniards call Andes: they reach out further in length then any other in
the world, and near them stands an ancient town called Iuktan. Moreover,
there lies higher a Neer-isle, betwixt Cuba and Mexico, called Inkatan: which
may be thought to resemble still the name of him that first brought people into
the country. To Ophir, one of the sons of Ioktan, Arias allots the land of
Peru: for as much as in the 3. chap. and 6. verse of the 2. book of Chron.
there is mention made of the gold of Paruaim. To Iobab the country of Paria,
which is near the Straight of Panama, very rich also in gold and pearl. I
have said elsewhere that Arias Montanus took Asia to be all one main-land with
America, and knew no Anian Straight. If that be true, sure the race of Sem
peopled those quarters. But others considering the horrible ignorance and
brutishnes of the West-Indians so lately discovered, and the rather to excuse
their outrageous cruelty exercised upon the poor people, cannot think but
that they are some relikes of the race of Cham. This opinion has but a weak
ground, as he may well perceive that will duly examine the circumstances. For
strange it is not that the race of Sem, after so many generations, and in so
farre-discoasted countries, should at length be thus corrupted. Besides, the
West-Indians in diverse places live still after the manner of the East. But for
better answering sundry objections, that make to prove them Chamites, read
the Preface to the Newfound world of Benzo, Frenched by M. Vrbain Chauueton.

48
Moreover one may say. This is another guess of the Poet; as that the
West India was peopled from the North by some Iaphethites, who ve^tured over
the Straight of Gro^land. Indeed these Northern countries have ever swarmed
with people: and well it may be, that some thence by others driven, or by
necessity, or of their own heads, have sought that way other places more to
their liking. As also that the coasts of Bresile and Plata (which I think the
Poet means by the Shore of Corican) were peopled by some Chamites from Temian,
Tombut, and Melli, countries lying in the West of Africa, about the fall of
Niger. For unlikely it were, seeing Almighty God gave the whole earth to Noe
and his three sons, ( Genesis 9.) that the race of any one of them should
engrosse all this Newfound world, beside his part in the other. Thus rather
doubtless, as the Poet guesseth, and I am further bold to gather, by little
and little at sundry times and places did all the three families of Noe
possess those quarters as the rest: that the will of God might be fulfilled,
and the light of his glory appear, in so equall-parting and ouer-peopling the
whole earth: howsoever all that huge reach of ground that lies under the
South-pole, and is thought the fifth and greatest part (if it all be habitable)
is as yet unknown, or very little discovered.

How is was pos^^ble that (...) and his three sons should increase as they
did.
49 Well may I grant you then (thou wilt say perhaps) there is naught
In all this vnder-world, but may at length be raught
By man's Ambition: it makes a breach in Hills,
It runs dry by sea among the raging Scylles,
And in despite of Thirst it guides the sailing Holme
Amids the Arabic Sands, the Numid and the Tolme.
But verily methinks it goes against all sense,
One house, beds only four, should break so large a fence,
As t'ouerbreed the lands af Afric, Europe, Ase,
And make the world appeer to narrow for the Race.
1. Answer.
50 If little thou regard the I mortals powerful hest,
That once again the bond of sacred Marriage blessed,
And said, 2. Answer.
Increase and Fill: 51 If thou profane deny
That Jacobs little train so thick did multiply
On Pharces fruitful ground, that in 400. year
The 70. living souls five hundred thousand were:
52 At least consider, 3. Answer.
how (because in elder time
The fruits they ate grew not upon so foggy slime
As ours do now, nor was their meats with sauces dight,
Nor altered as-yet with health-destroying slight
Of gluttonating Cooks; because with murdring sword
Of raging enemies they were not laid aboard;
Because their bodies were not overcome by sloth,
Or void of exercise) they waxt in lively groth,
And lived some hundred years, and even in latter days
With siluer-haired heads were able sons to raise.
So that Polygamie, then taken for a right,
This world an Ant-hill made of creatures bolt-vpright:
And many people rose in short time, if thou mark,
From out the fruitful reins of some one Patriarch.
53 Right so a grain of wheat, Two fit comparisons.
if all the increase it yeildes
Be often times resow'd upon some hearty feildes,
Will stuff the barnes at length and color mighty lawnes
With yellow-stalked ears: likewise two fishes spawnes,
Cast int' a standing poole, so fast breed up and down,
That aft'r a while they stoare the larders of a town.
An example of late years.
54 Has not there been of late a certain Elder known
That with his fruitful seed a village had oregrown
Of five skore houses big, so blessed that he saw
His sons and daughters knit by ord'r of marriage Law!
The tree of Parentage was ouer-short and thin
To braunch-out proper names for their degrees of kin.
Another example.
55 Who knows not that within three hundred years and less,
A few Arabians did Lybie fill and press
With new Inhabitants, and Mahom taught in Fesse,
In Oran, in Argier, in Tunis, Buge and Tesse?
56 Now if they so increase who dwelt in Afferick
And with an humor sharp, fretting, melancholic,
Prouoak'd are day and night and made more amorous
Then in begetting babes fruitful and vigorous
(Because the more they force the Citherean deed
The more enfeebled is their vnpreserued seed:
So are their inward parts the colder and the nummer,
By how much more without they feel a boiling summer)
Imagine how the men, who nearer to the Pole
Behold the flaming wheels of Welkins charrot role,
Do breed and multiply: because they come but seeld
And at well-chosen times to Cithereas field:
And since cold weather stays about the northen Bear,
Ore all that rugged coast triumphing every wheare,
The lively heat retires within their bodies tower;
And closer trussed makes their seed of greater power.
57 And thence the Cimbrians, Gauls, Herules, The North has swarmed with
people, not the South.
and Bulgares,
The Sweues, Burgundians, Circassians and Tartares,
Huns, Lombardes, Tigurines, Alanes and Eastergoths,
Turks, Vandals, Teutonicks, Normans and Westergoths,
Have ouerflow'd the lands, and like to grass hoppers
Destroyed the fairer parts of this great Universe.
Whereas the barren South in all these former days
Has scarce been abl'enough two martial bands to raise
That could the North affright; one under Hanniball,
Who brought the Punick State both unto rule and thrall;
Another powered forth as far as Towers wall,
And there with Abderam was knocked by Charles the Maul.
49
Well may I grant. This is the second objection against that has been said
concerning the Colonies drawn from Noes three sons: to wit, yt it is
impossible so few households should in so short time fill so many countries as
are in the world, so thick as now they swarm.

50
If little thou regard. The Poet answers at large and very exactly to the said
objection. First, out of the words of Moses Genesis 9. And God blessed Noe and his
children, and said unto them: Increase and fill the Earth. This answer is right
to the point, and very sufficient to stop the mouths of all curious
questioners, that at least believe the word and power of God. Such is also the
answer following.

51
If thou profane deny. He that believes the holy Scripture knows well that in
the space of 400 years the family of Jacob no more then 70. persons increased
in Egypt unto the number of five hundred thousand, besides women and children.
This is an argument from the less to the greater: if in one little country a
few so much increased, and that in the short space of 400. years, how much
more might all the people else in the world increase in 4000. years? But the
profane man will not believe the story, he will say it is impossible. I will
make no miracle of it, although the Scripture notes how the people increased
meruailouslie; and therefore uses a word which signifies to multiply or
spawne like fishes. But let him cast account as near as he can, not of
excess, but the ordinary increase that might arise of 70. persons in the
space they were in Egypt, and before he come to 250. of the 400. he shall have
the number, as Mornaeus notes in his book De veritate, Chap. 26.

52
At least consider how. This the third answer is also of great importance,
especially for Atheists: because it relyeth upon natural reason: as namely
that a purer food, and better health, with peace, strength, rest, long life,
and Polygamie (which is the use of many wives) made greatly for the increase of
mankind in those former times. Each point of this answer is of great weight,
and may persuade easily all that is written of the matter.

53
Right so a grain of wheat. For confirmation of the foresaid arguments, he
bringeth-in two fine comparisons and fit for the purpose. The one drawn from a
corn of wheat, the other from the spawne of two fishes. Both so much the
better in this case, because they are of common things, and such as we daily
see before our eyes.

54
Have we not in our days. He confirms his reasons further by a notable
example of a certain man, who lived to see a whole town, of no less then
100. houses, peopled only with persons issued of himself and his: so that
there were no names in law for their degrees of blood: Ludouicus Viues
affirms he saw the man in Spain. There dyed also lately an honorable Lady
in Germany, who saw of her self and hers borne a hundred and threescore
children; notwithstanding many dyed unmarried, and those that were married are
yet like to have more.

55
Who knows not that within. Lo another notable example of a few Arabian
families, set down at large by John Lion in his History of Afric, and cited
also by Philip Morney in his 26. chapter de Veritate. And we see (says he)
how the threescore Familes, that for the Sect of Califa moved out of Arabia, in
less then 3. hundred years have peopled all Afric: so as at this day the
countries there are surnamed after them Beni Megher, Beni Guariten, Beni
Fensecar, etc. that is: The sons of Mogher, the sons of Guariten, the
sons of Fensecar, etc: as each of them grew-vp to a people. In like sort the
East Indies, that were discovered now a hundred years ago, and straight
almost unpeopled, within another hundred will be stored again and repeopled by
the Spaniards.

56
Now if they so increase. A strong conclusion from the Less to the More,
gathered out of the example next aforegoing: thus, If the people of Afric,
that are not very fit to engender, were able in few years to store so huge
countries; how much more might the Northern and Asiaticke people increase? and
if a small number of weaklings; how much rather an infinite sort of Iustie and
fruitful men? This is grounded upon natural reason, regarding the climats and
site of each countries, together with daily experience of the matter.
Hipocrates in his book de Aere, aquis and locis, and his enterpreters
discourse at large thereon. It were long to follow their steps, and I have been
too long in this matter already.

57
And thence the Cimbrians. For a further proof of the last conclusion, he
alleges, and no man can deny, that the North has always brought forth most
and most warlike people: (and diverse he reckons-vp, of whom we have spoken
heretofore) whereas from the South have hardly ever come above two Armies worth
naming. The one under command of Hanibal, whom the Poet notes by the name of
Borgne, (which is as much to say as Blind, or bad-eyed) because he lost an eye
by ouer-watching himself in the passage of certain great marrish-grounds into
Hetruria, Liuie. 22. He it was that enlarged the Empire of Carthage, by means
of the great overthrows he gave the Romans, but was after driven out of
Italy, and in Afric quite vanquished at Zama field, where the Carthagineans
were forced to yield themselves wholly to the Romans mercy, so had their City
rased and their State utterly destroyed. The other Army of the South was of
Sarasens, no less then four hundred thousand strong, led by their king and
Captain Abderame: they set out of Afric into Spain, from thence marched
forward into Aquitaine, and came wasting all the way as far as the City of
Tours; there three hundred thousand of them, with the king himself, were
slain by the French, who had for General the Duke or Prince Charles, that for
this great and happy victory was after surnamed Martel the Maul: because he
broke and battered the force of that Southern people, as a great maul or
hammer does Iron. Look the Histories and Chronicles of France in the life of
Charles Martel.

58 A fine discourse upon the (...) people.
O world of sundry kinds! O nature full of wonders!
For every part thereof, as from the rest it sunders,
It has not only men of diverse hair and hew.
Of stature, humor, force; but of behavior new:
Be It that a custom held at length a nature makes,
Or that the younger sort still after the elder takes,
Or that the proper Laws of diuers-coasted Realms
Do so much disagree, or these enflowing beams
Of th'vmour-altring Lights, that whirling never stint,
Here in our minds below their heavenly force emprint.
59 The Northen man is fair, the Southern fauor'd-hard;
One strong, another weak; one white, another sward;
Ones hair is fine and smooth another gross and twinde:
One loves the bodies pain, another toils the mind:
Some men are hot and moist, some others hot and dry,
Some merry, and other sad: He thunders out on hye,
This other speaks small; he dudgen is and spightfull,
This other gentle and plain; he slow, this other slightfull.
Some are unconstant so they often change their thought;
And others never let go conceits they once have caught.
He typples day and night, and he loves abstinence;
One is a scatter-good, another spares expense:
One is for company, another in his moodes
Is like a Bugger-bo, and strayes amids the woods.
One goes in leathern peltch, another richly dight;
On's a Philosopher, another borne to fight.
60 The middle man takes part of all the qualities
Of people dwelling near the two extremities;
His body stronger is, but not his mind so frank,
As theirs who till the gleabes of Nilus fruitful bank:
Again, he is not so strong, but many ways more fine,
Then they that drink the streams of Donaw and of Rhine.
61 For in the sacred close of th'vniuersall Town
The southern men that often with ouer-musing sown,
And fall int'extasies, and use to dream and poue;
That measure how the heavens by rules appointed move,
And are so curious none other knowledge base
May satisfy their minds; they hold the priest his place.
The Northen, whose conceit in hand and finger lurkes,
That all what ere he li^t in wood and metal works,
And like Salmoneus with thunder-sound compares,
He Is for the man of war, and makes all cunning wares.
The Mean, as knowing well to govern an Estate,
Sits with a grauer grace in throne of Magistrate.
And to be short, the first seeks knowledge wondrously,
The second, handy-crafts; the third, good policy.
Though some skore years agone Themis that mendes abuses,
Apollo, Mercury, Minerua with her Muses,
Have taught their holy schools as near the Northen coast,
As Vulcaneurs forged, or Mars encamped his Oast.
H^^^ the French D^^ch, (...), and ^^an^sh nations d^^^er in many points.
62 But even among our-selues that altogether mell,
And have of all the world no more whereon to dwell
Then as it were a clot, how diverse are the fashions?
How great variety? the Dutch of all our Nations
Is stout, but hired in War: the Spaniard soft and neat;
The Italian merciles; the Frenchman soon on heat.
The Dutch in counsel cold, the Italian althing weeting,
The Spaniard full of guile, the Frenchman ever fleeting.
The Italian finely feeds, the Spaniard does but minse,
The Dutch fares like a clown, the Frenchman like a Prince.
The Frenchman gently speaks, the Spaniard fierce and brave,
The German plain and gross, the Roman wise and grave.
The Dutch attire is strange, the Spanish is their own,
The Italian sumptuous, and owers never known.
We brave an Enemy, the Italian friendly looks him,
The Dutchman strikes him straight, the Spaniard never brooks him.
We sing a cheerful note the Tuscan like a sheep,
The German seems to howl, the Lusitan to weep.
The French pase thick and short, the Dutch like battel-coeks,
The Spaniards Fencer-like, the Romans like an Ox.
The Dutch in Love is proud, the Italian envious,
The Frenchman full of mirth, the Spaniard furious.
Why it pleased God the world should be inhabited of so (...).
63 Yet would the Immortal God appoint so strange a race
Of this great carthie bowl to cover all the face:
To the end he clensing all his children from the foil
Of sin, which had as'twere bestain'd their native soil,
Might his great mercy show, and how the heavenly Sines
A little only move, but not oresway our minds.
That in the furthest parts his servants eu'rychone
A sacrifice of praise might offer to his throne:
And that his holy name from Isie Scythia
Might sound unto the sands of red-hoat Africa.
Nor should his treasures hid in far-asunder land
Created seem in vain, and never come to hand.
But that all cuntry coasts where Thetis enter-lies
Should traffic one with oth'r and change commodities.
The world compared to a great City.
64 For as a City large contains within her wall
Here th'Vniuersitie, and there the Princes hall;
Here men of handy-craftes, there marchant-venterers;
This lane all full of ware and shops of shoomakers,
That other changing coin, that other working gould;
Here silk, there pots and cups; here leather to be sold,
There cloth; here hats and caps, there doublets redy-made;
And each among themselves have use of others trade:
So from the Canar Isles our pleasant Sugar comes,
And from Chaldeaa Spice, and from Arabia gummes
That stand us much instead both for parfume and plaster,
And Peru sends us gold, and Damask alabaster:
Our Saffern comes from Spain, our Iuory from Inde,
And out of Germany our Horse of largest kind:
The skorched land of Chus yields Heben for our Chamber;
The Northen Baltike Sound emparts her bleakish Amber;
The frosty coast of Russe, her Ermins white as milk,
And albion her Tin, and Italy her Silk.
Thus every country pays her diverse tribute-rate
Unto the treasury of th'vniuersall State.
Man Lord of the world.
And as the Persian Queen this province called her Chains,
And that her stomachers; her plate this, that her trains;
Man may the like profess: what Desert so vntrad,
What Hill so wild and waste, what Region so bad;
Or what so wrackefull Sea, or what so barren Shore
From North to South appeers; but pays him evermore
Some kind of yearly rent, and grudging not his glory,
Unto his happy life becomes contributorie?
A particular declaration of the great use of some unlikely, creatures against
the Atheist, who says they are to (...) use, or ^^ade by chance.
65 These moors enameled, where many rooshing brooks
Enchase their winding ways with glassie wauing crookes,
They stand for Garden-plots: their herbage, ere it fades,
Twice yearly sets on work our two-hand mowing blades.
The plain feilde Ceres heales, the stony Bacchus filles.
These ladders of the sky, these rough-aspiring Hills,
The stoarehouses of storms, the forging-shops of thunders,
Which thou untruly cal'st th'earthes faults and shameful wonders,
And think the living God (to say it I am aferd)
Created them of spite, or in creating erred,
They bound the kingdoms out with euer-standing marks,
And for our shipping bear of timber goodly parks:
The same afford thee stuff to build thy roofed hold,
The same in wintertime defend thee from the cold:
They powre-out day and night the deep-enchanel'd Rivers,
That breed, and bear on them, to feed the neighbor livers:
They remanure the lands with fruitful clouds and showers,
They help the Milles to turn, and stand instead of towers
And bulwarks to defend Bellonaes angry wound,
And mortar to the sea the Center of the ground.
The Wasternes of land that men so much amazeth,
Is like a common field where store of cattle grazeth,
And whence by thousand heads they come our tylth to rood,
To furnish us with furre, with leather, wood and food.
The sea it self that seems for nothing else to sarue,
But even to drown the world (although it never swerve)
That rumbling ouer-heales so many a mighty land,
Wherein the waters stead much wauing might corn stand;
A great store-place it is and vnd'r a watery plain
Flocks numberles it feeds to feed mankind again:
And of the cates thereof are thousand cities saru'd,
That could not otherwise but languish hunger starved,
As does a Dolphin whom upon the shore halfe-dead
The tide untrusty left when back-againe it fled:
It shorter makes the ways, increases merchandise,
And causes day and night the reaking mists arise,
That still refresh our air, and down in water flowing
Set, even before our eyes, the grainy pipe a growing.
The Poet, as after a long voyage landeth in France.
66 But shall I still be tossed with Boreas boystrous puffes?
Still subject to the rage of Neptunes counterbuffes?
And shall I never see my country-chimnies reake?
Alas my rowing fails, my boat begins to leake.
I am undone, I am, except some gentle bank
Receive, and that right soon, my wrack-reserued planke.
Ha France, I ken thy shore; thou reachest me thine arm:
Thou opnest wide thy lap to shend thy son from harm:
Nor wilt in stranger lands I roaming step in age;
Nor ore my bones triumph Bresile anthropophage,
Nor Catay ore my fame, nor Peru ere my verse;
As thou my cradle were, so will thou be my hearse.
The praise of France.
O thousand thousand times most happy land of price!
O Europes only pearl! O earthly Paradise!
All-hayle renowned France: from thee sprung many a Knight
That has in former times his triumph-laurels pight
Upon Euphrates banks, and blood with Bilbo shed
Both at the suns vprist, and where he goes to bed:
Thou breedest many men, that bold and happy dare
In works of handy-craft with Nature self compare:
Thou breedest many wits that with a skill divine
Teach Egypt, Greece and Room, and ore the learned shine,
As ore the paler hewes do glister golden yellowes,
The sun above the stars, his flower above the fellows:
Thy streams are little seas, thy Cities Provinces,
In building full of state, and gentle in vsages:
Thy soil yeeldes good increase, thine air is full of ease;
Thou have for strong defense two mountains and two Seas.
The Egyptian Crocodile disquiets not thy banks,
The plaguie Lybian snakes with poyson-spotted flanks
Crawle not in broken pleights upon thy slowry plains,
Nor meats an aker out by length of dragling trains.
No Hyrcan Tigers slight boot-hails thy vaulted hills,
Nor on thy skorched wastes the Arcadian Lion killes
Thy wandering habitants, nor Cairik Water-horses
Drag vnd'r arowling tomb thy childrens tender corses:
And though like Indy streams thy fairest rivers drive not
Among their pebbles gold, although thy mountains riue not
With veins of silver ure, nor yet among thy greet
Carbuncles, Granats, Pearls are scattred at our feet:
Thy Cloth, thy Wool, thy Woade, thy Salt, thy Corn, thy Wines,
More necessary fruits, are well-sufficient mines
T'entitle thee the Queen of all this earthly scope:
Peace, the only want of France, prayed-for inconclusion.
Peace is our only want. O God that hold open
Always thine eyes on us, we humbly thee desire,
Quench with thy mercy-drops this Fraunce-consuming fire.
O make our Aier calm; dear Father us deliver,
And put thine angry shaftes again into thy quiver.
58
O world of sundry kinds! Without this discourse, all that went before
concerning the worlds enpeopling, were to little purpose or none at all, save
only to breed many doubts in the readers understanding. For a man may ask,
How falls it out that the nations of the world, coming all of one father,
Noe, do vary so much one from another, both in body and mind? The Poet
therefore making this objection, most worthy to be considered, gives also
answer thereunto: first in general, by way of exclamation and marvel, then
in particular manner, setting down some special reasons of this wonderful
diversity, that appears in the stature, complexion, strength, color, and
custom of people wheresoever dispersed over the face of the earth. The first
and principal cause is Nature it self, that is, the wise providence of God,
marvelous in all his works. If God had made the earth in all places alike,
all flowers of one color and savor, all beasts, fowls, fishes and creeping
things, of one kind; had he made the heaven without stars, or the stars all
of one bigness, and men all of the same hew, beauty, feature, strength and
disposition, as well of body as mind: the diverse colors of his infinite
wisdom had not so shined in them. But as he is above all (yea only) wise,
good and beautiful, so would he in his works keep a certain resemblance of
his own perfection, provoking us thereby, daily to advance and raise our
thoughts unto the high consideration, parfite love and due reverence of
himself. Now if we consider all his works, the light of his wonderful glory
no where appears more, then in the diligent view of Man, who is very fitly
called of the Greeks (...) the little world. For in this little table has he
lymbed-out in orient colors, for all that will behold, the wonders of his
unsearchable wisdom: and they are here some of them by the Poet well
pointed-out. And a wonderful thing indeed it is, that among so many men as
have been since the beginning, are, or shall be to the worlds end, there
never was, nor is, nor can be any one, but differing much from all the rest,
both in body and mind, and in many things else that ensue thereon. This I am
content to note, but in a world, leaving all the particulars of this miracle
for the reader privately to consider; that he may wonder the more thereat, and
praise there according the almighty Creator, the Sovereign Good: neither will
I now take in hand to dispute against those that in searching the causes of
this diversity, ascribe all to Fortune, or Nature, (as they call it, meaning a
secret property and power of the creatures) or to the stars and other
heavenly bodies; to man's laws, custom or nourishment, in stead of God: who is
indeed the first and only working cause of all things; in whom we live, move
and are. This matter would require a long discourse: and though the Poet here,
beside the chief and only true cause, reckons certain vnder-causes; as
custom growing to Nature, The Example of Elders, provincial Laws, and the
influence of Stars; it is not his meaning to take from the Lord of Nature
this honor due unto him for the diversity of his wonderful works: but only
to lay open unto us a few such instruments as his incomprehensible wisdom
uses, to make us the better conceive the manner of his heavenly working. The
Philosophers, Astronomers, Physicians and Politickes, discourse at large upon
these differences: he that would see them well handled, let him read the 5.
chapter of Bodines method, entitled de recto historiarum iudicio, and the
first chapter of his fifth book de Republica, which is the sum of all that
he writes thereof in his Method. Peucer also in the 13. and 14. books of his
discourse upon the principal sorts of diuinations: and Hippocrates in his
book de Aere, aquis and locis: but especially Bodin, may serve to expound our
Poet; who in very few lines has penned matter of so long discourse.

59
The Northen man. He enters consideration of many points, wherein the North
and Southern people differ. Bodin in the places aforequoted shows the causes
thereof, according to philosophy and physic: because his books are common,
specially his politickes, I will not here set down what he says, nor examine
his opinions, but leave that wholly to the diligent reader. Concerning that the
Poet notes, the best histories auerre the same: and namely for the Southern
people, Johannes Leo, and Franciscus Aluares; for the Northen, Olaus Magnus,
the Baron of Herbestan in his Moscouie, Buchanan in the history of Scotland,
and diverse others.

60
The Middle Man. Bodin in the 5. book of his Politickes, the first chap.
deuideth all people dwelling on this side the Equator into 3. kinds, to
wit, the hot and Southern people from the Equator 30. degrees upward; the
Mean and temperate in the next 30. and The Extreme cold and Northen people,
from the 60. degree to the Pole. And so of the nations and countries beyond the
Equator. The reason hereof he sets down in his Method. chap. 5.

61
For in the sacred close. The poet goes on according to the said division: and
in few words emplies all that discourse of Bodin: who says among other
matters there, that the people dwelling in the middle Regions have more
strength and less wit then the Southern; better parts of mind, and less
bodily force then the Northen: and are moreover the fittest for government of
Commonwealths, and iustest in their actions. And if a man do mark well the
histories of the world, he shall find that the greatest and most valiant Armies
came ever out of the North: the deepest and subtilest knowledge of Philosophy,
Mathematickes, and all other contemplative Arts, from the south: and the best
government, the best laws, lawyers and Orators from the Middle countries; and
that the greatest Empyres were founded and established there, etc. What reason
there is for this, he shows also in his fifth chap. of his Meth. Look more
thereof in L. Regius, de vicissitudine et varietate rerum. For my part, I am
of opinion that Almighty God as he has knit and bound together the Elements,
and Creatures made of them, with a marvelous compass, in number, weight and
measure, best for continuance of the whole work, and mutual agreement of the
parts; so he has also placed the chief subtlety and liuelyhood of spirit
farthest from the greatest bodily force, either in beast or man; for the better
maintenance of human society in a just counterpoys: and gave the middle
kind of people a nature of either tempered, though if a man enter into
particular discourse, he may easily find the northern, southern and middle
Nature in every Nation. What say I, every Nation? nay I dare say in every one
of us, so fitly is Man called a little world. But the southern men, for the
most part having so quick and lively parts of mind in a body less charged
with fieshe, they represent the contemplative and studious kind of life: the
northern that have their wit in their fingers ends, that is, that are so
cunning craftesmen, inuenters of warlike engines, artillery, and all sorts of
needful instruments, they may well be likened unto the active and trading
life: and the middle sort unto the civil government and politic life: which
is a mean betwixt the other two. Yet this the Poet well restrains, saying
that the northern people also in these latter days have bin renoumed for the
Tongues, the Laws, the Mathematickes, Poesy, Oratorie, and all good learning;
as well as in times past they were, and are still, for warlike valor and
cunning hand-works. Not without cause; for in England, Scotland, Polonie,
Denmark, and other such countries, are and have been diverse very learned men
flourishing: and Germany especially, which is (as it were) Vulcans forge, and
the Camp of Mars, has brought forth many men excellent well seen in all
kind of learning: it were needelesse to name them, they are so wellknowne.

62
But even among our selves. The more to magnify the vnsoundable wisdom of
God, appearing in the creation of so diuers-disposed people, he notes out many
points of great difference even among those nations that live near together,
and are severed only by certain hills, rivers and forests: as the French,
Dutch, Italian, and Spanish. He paintes them out all in their kind, for such
properties as are daily seen in them, and may be easily gathered out of their
own histories: for there are not the like-differing neighbour-nations in all
Europe, no not in the world. Let me consider and all my Countrymen with me,
what he says of the French: the other three may do the like by themselves if
they list. The French (he says) is in war impatient, in counsel wavering,
in diet sumptuous, gentle in speech, diverse in apparel, outfacing his enemy,
a sweet singer, a swift paser, a merry lover. If any man can draw a righter
counterfeit of our Nation, let him take the pensill.

63
Yet would the Immortal God. He shows for what cause it pleased God the earth
should be enhabited by men of so diverse natures: as 1. to the end he might show
forth his mercy and loving kindness in raising his chosen out of the sincks of
sin, wherewith each of their birth-soyles were bestayned. 2. That it might
appear, how neither the soyles, nor yet the heavenly Signs (though they have
great power over earthly bodies) can force the minds of men, especially such
as God himself has blessed. 3. That there might be some in all places of the
world to acknowledge his manifold goodness, and glorify his Name: And 4. that
whatsoever needful things the earth any where by his gracious blessing
brings forth proper and severally, they might be enterchanged and carried
from place to place for the use of man.


64
For as a City. The last consideration gives the Author occasion to compare
the world unto a great City, such as Paris Roan, Tolouse, Lions or any other
like, where there are merchants and craftesmen for all kind of wares, each in
their several wards, buying, selling, changing and trading one with other.
And even so one country affoordeth sugar, another spice, another gummes; and
gold, alabaster, Iuorie, hebenwood, horses, amber, furs, tynne and silk,
they are brought from diverse coasts, all the more to furnish with things
necessary this great City of the world. Whereby we may note that no
country (be it never so well appointed) can say that it needs not the
commodities of another. And again, that there is no land so barren, but has
some good thing or other which the rest want. For even in men we see the like;
there is none so poor but has some special gift: none so rich but has need
of the poorest. Our Poet therefore having so fitly resembled the world by a
great City, he brings-in thereupon a fine example of the Persian Queen, who
(as Herodotus, Xenophon and Plutarch report) called one Province her Iuelhouse,
another her Wardrope, etc: for even so may every man say, that has the true
knowledge and fear of God; such a man may say, Peru bringes forth Gold for
me: the Moluckes or Chaldaea, Spice: Damask, Alabaster: and Italy, Silk:
Germany sends me great Horses: Moscouie, rich Furs: Arabia, sweet Parfumes:
Spain, Saffern: Prusse, Amber: England, Cloth and Tin: France, Corn and
Wine. Yea more the child of God may say; the Earth, the Sea, the Air and all
that is therein; the Sun, the Moon, the Heavens, are mine: for he that
needs nothing, made all things of nothing to serve me, and me to worship him.
But of this let the Deuines discourse more at large. He go on with the Poet:
who says further, against the carping Atheist, that nothing was created in
vain, but even the most unlikely places bring forth many good fruits, and
very necessary for the life of Man. And he proves it plainly by some notable
particulars that follow.

65
The Moors enameled. First, The Fennie Valleis, though too moist they are and
ouer-low for men to build and dwell upon, yet are they so beset with diverse
herbs and flowers, so iagg'd, guarded, and enter-trailed with rivers, that they
are, as 'twere, the common gardens of the world: as also the plain fields are
our seed-plots, and the stony grounds our Vineyards. 2. The huge Mountains,
about whose tops are engendered thunders, lightnings and tempests: for which
cause the Atheists count them hurtful, or at least superfluous, or made by
chance and error: they are in truth clean contrary (as Theodoret has long
ago showed in his Sermons of Gods Providence) even the sure-standing Bounds
and Landmarks of every kingdom and country: they bear great store of
timber trees for ships and houses, and fuel to burn: from them spring the
great rivers, that breed much fish, and help the conueyance of provision and
other merchandise unto many people dwelling far-of: by them are stayed and
gathered the clouds and thick musts, that manure and fatten the lower
grounds: the Wind-milles are much helped by them, as if they were the
storehouses of wind: like rampires and bulwarks they keepe-of the sudden
force of warlike neighbors: and to conclude, they are (as 'twere) the very
mortar that ioynes Land and Sea together. 3. The great Deserts and
wast-grounds, that are for men (by reason of some wants) scarce habitable, yet
like huge Commons they feed an infinite sort of beasts great small, whereof we
have good use and commodity. 4. The Sea, it breeds fish, maintains many
Cities, increases Traffic, and makes the ways for travail easier, and
shorter: and lastly, thereout the Sun draws vapors which after, turned
into rain, do refresh the Air, and make the ground fruitful. The like good
uses may be found in all other the Creatures of God, how unlikely soever they
seem to wicked Atheists. Look more in S. Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose and
others, who write of the Creation, and at large have declared what excellent
commodities man may reap of every creature.


66
But shall I still be tossed. Fitly and in very good time the Poet, having
ouerslipt nothing worthy note in this discourse of Colonies, now strikes
sail, and after his long voyage through all Climats of the world, ariues
happily at the haven he most desired, to weet, in France: and well he takes
occasion to reckonvp the great commodities of his country, as commending the
same above all the kingdoms of the world. After he has saluted the land with
diverse honorable terms and titles, he says very truly, that it has
brought-foorth many worthy warriors, cunning workmen, and learned Scholars:
more is the marvel, because it is but a small kingdom in comparison of
Polonia, Persia, Tartaria, China and others. But indeed the commodities
thereof are most wonderful. Besides the seas that bound it, as on the North
and West the Ocean, and the Midland on the South, it has many rivers of great
name and even little seas: as the Rosue, Saone, Dordogne, Loire, Marne, Seine,
Oise: and yet a great number of other lesser streams and brooks. Cities it
has, as Paris, Tolouse, Rouan, Lion, Bourdeaux, and others of more value then
diverse whole Duchies, Earldomes, or Provinces elsewhere. There are Forts and
Castles now stronger and goodlier then ever were. As for the civil behavior
of the people, I report me to the judgment of other nations. The Land for the
most part is very fruitful, and the air there temperate almost every where.
Against the sudden invasion of enemies all is well defended by the two Seas
aforesaid, and the Alps toward Italy, and the Pyrenes toward Spain. More
then all this, the country is no where troubled with Crocodiles as Egypt is,
nor with monstrous long Serpents, or any wild ravening beasts, as the inner
countries of Affricke are. And in stead of Gold and Silver, Pearls and
precious stones, which diverse lands barren of necessary fruits abound with,
it has of Cloth, Woade, Wool, Salt. Corn and Wine, euer-growing Mines, and
even vnwastable: Woade and Salt in Languedoc; and Salt again in Guyenne; Wine
in most places; Wool and Corn in Prouence and Beausse; and in every Province,
but four or five, good store of diverse the said commodities. More there are,
but the Poet notes the chief only, and such as the neighbor countries and
many far-of do most of al trade-for. Hereby we are taught, and should be moved
with hearty thanks to acknowledge the great benefits that God has bestowed on
us: for the Poet rightly concludes that we lack nothing but peace, and peace
he craves of the Lord: with whom, and all my good countrymen, I join humble
suite from the bottom of my heart, that once again this Realm (sometime so
flourishing) may enjoy a sure, that is, a just and right Christian peace.

Amen.

FINIS.

