VIRTUES POST FVNERA VIVIT Or, Honor Tryumphing over Death. Being true EPITOMES
of Honorable, Noble, Learned, And Hospitable Personages

WILLIAM SAMPSON.

Printed by JOHN NORTON. 1636.

A Proeme.
To the right Honorable, and most nobly deserving Lord, WILLIAM Earl of
New Castle, Barron Ogle etc.
Right Honorable.
CAESAR did adventure to write his own acts, and heroicke deeds by commentary
(and very well he might) I, that with Virgils gnat, have nothing to write of my
self (save misery) have assaied to write the lives, Pious, and virtuous deeds
of others (not that by this they are immortalizde) for their own Worthes,
Virtues, Hospitable, and Pious deeds united have eternized themselves. My full
scope, and modest aim is to perpetuate them on Earth, that posterities unborne
may not let such Honorable, Religious, and virtuous acts, as your
nobleprogenito^s have done, and daily do perform, slip into oblivion, but as
in a crystal mirror we may here behold them (as from the beginning we had our
sa cred laws in the first table writ) your Honor is the Sanctuary to whose
high Altar of goodness, I always fly too for redress in all extremes ^one,
whom I know with

Anaxeritis had rather receive a cruse of cold water from your Poor Sinetis,
then a goblet of rich aromaticke, or cretan wine, from a flattering Gnatho, the
God of Heaven, and earth bless you, my honorable. Lady my Honorable Mecenas,
and all your noble, and Honorable families, and posterities, sending you your
hearts wish Temporal, and Eternal.

Your Honors humblest Creature. WILLIAM SAMPSON.

To the right Honorable most Religious, and truly noble Lady CARISTIAN DOVVAGER
Countess of Devon: Mother to the right honorable WILLIAM Earl of Devon: and
to the right Honorable the Lady, A^n: Ri^h, her honors sole Daughter.
Right Honorable.
Fame, and Envy that usd to be sworn enemies of the dead (either in
detracting, or saying too much, (in this place subject themselves) Envy
submits, and fame continues her resolution, which is to div^lge unto the world,
deeds of Honor,, Piety, and Truth worthy of Fames Trumpet! To your families,
your Honor, and your issue these properly belong! you are the needle by whom
these Sun-dialls of Charity hourly, and daily go, it is you that lengthen, and
not lessen these Charitable, and most Religious deeds begun by your
progenitors of blessed memory! I need not say with Horace. Tn recte vivis, si
curas esse quod audis. For the lives, and actions of this family, all tend to
divine honor; Heaven continue it, and with it long days, and happy ones, and
send that noble stem your Honorable Son that lovely branch of Honor, a
H^lcyon gale, that he may safely arrive at your feet for a blessing and
continue an arm of comfort to your Hnnor., and all this most Honorable family.

To whom, and to your Honor I rest an humble servant. WILLIAM SAMPSON.

To the right Honorable CHARLES Lord Vis-count Mansfeild, Son, and heir to the
right Honorable my singular good Lord WILLIAM Earl of Now-castle, Barron Ogle,
etc. Lord Leiftennant of his Majestics too famous Counties Nottingham, and
Derby.
SOle heir of thy great fathers virtues! I
Present these Funeral odes unto thine eye,
Wherein though young, like to Tully's Son
You may perceive, what great deeds have been don
By your progenitors! deigne then to read
These living Trophies of true honor dead.
Though wise Cratippus reach you, yet behold
How virtue robes nobility in gold.
We know there is a Sun, because his light
Ap^'y distinguishes twixt day, and night.
Your Ancestors like to th glorious Sun
Have led the way, (you Honors race m^^st r^n.
Your infant Honors like to a welcome Spring
Are by the Graces marked for virtues King.
Live there, and grow there! never may I see
A fall'oth Leaf, in your progenitrie.
Shine in thy Princes favors, and appear
Like the blessed Sun, when as hetrotes the sphere.
Let no cloud blemish thee! still may your e^e
Aim at the graces of high Majesty.
Out-grow thy honored fathers goodness! then
Th art honors Map, the non-p^reill of men.
Your Mother wears the wreath of goodness! you
From such fair Trees must need a Trophy grow.
Blessed be you ever, may I still deserve
Next my devotions (them, and theirs to s^rve)
Your honors servant till Death.William Sampson.

In laudem Authoris.
LAudabunt alii vel Classica vatis Achaei, Phaliscus.
Vel Dircaei Candida Cigni
Carmina, sive Lyra Flaccum, Sophoclemve Cothurno
Insigneis, aut pectine Bassum.
Sunt quibus unum opus est numeros celebrate Maro nis;
Plurimus in Nasonis honorem
Aptum dicit amoribus alter: singula singli.
Me nec tam lasciva Properti
Cynthia, Teia fides nec tam percussit, avena
Quam nostratis moesta poetae.
Quicquid habet Laurus, Jovis arbor, Populus, Ilex,
Hac Cupressi fronde plicatur.
Hic gravis, et brevis est, operosus, castus, acutus;
Tales lectores facit Author.
Ph. K. Mr in art^.

An Elegy.
ON THE RIGHT HONORAble Elizabeth Countess of Shrewsbury wife to the right
Honorable GEORGE Earl Shrewsbury Mother to the right Honorable William Earl
o^ Devon: Sir Charles Cavendish who married Katherine Barronnesse Ogle, Henry
Cavendish who married the Lady Grace Talbot, and Mary Countess of Shrewsbury
wife to the Lord Gilbert which Mary was Sole builder of the second Court of St.
John's in the famous University of Cambridge, Frances Lady Peirpoint This
Countess Elizabeth was Erectoresse of the two famous fabrics of Chatts-worth,
and Hard-wicke, and sole foundresse of the famous Almeshouse in Derby.
Grandmother To the right Honorable William last Earl of Devon: William Earl
of Newcastle Robert Earl of Kingstone Sir Charles Cavendish. Countess of
Pembrooke The Countess of Arundell Countess of Kent


Great Grandmother to the right Honorable William Earl of Devon-shire The
Lord Matreve^s Charles Lord viscount Mansfield Henry Viscount New warke Charles
Cavendish, and Henry Cavendish. Esquires.


WHile Scottish Angus up to heaven does raise Hector Boctiu^ and, Aenca^
Sylvius in their description of the Rivers of Scotland.

Her River Tay with inexpressable praise,
While Bamfe, and Louthan, Fife, and Devern sing
And old Legea braggs of her Dane King
While Northern Tweede disjoyning them, and us
Says of her self sl^ees most conspicuous,
Shall I our silver Thames, Severn, and Dee,
Trent, Owze, and Avon, of one quality
Forget? nay to your praise I Will bring
My Alpine peakish Dove, whose fertile wing
Yeeldes Milk, and Honey, till her self she trill
Into swift running Darwent on the hill.
And lastly though a little rivolet
T^out yielding Crawley shall in measure jet,
You boast of stately Turrets, births of high rate,
There in an equippage I Will meet your state,
You brag of stately fabrics, gilded Towers,
Whose splendour both the eye, and sense devoures,
My Muse shall meet you there too; but her wing
Must some sad Funeral notes, and dirges sing.
This blessed Eliza this bright Diamond,
Which long-time grew upon our peakish stronde
Graceing the serti^e quarries! wast not strange
That Hills, and Rocks their sterilnesse should change
Yielding a fruitful eedenes; as if she
By natures help had wrought maturitie,
And from rough quarries taught the ploughshare go
(Some deity for her sake formed it so)
She like a Sea Nymph decked the River sides
With Trees like garlands, ornaments for Brides.
The wanton sis^ would leave the bait, and hook,
And dance in aie rye bubles, on her to look
As when the Sun his fiery beams displaies,
And over sweet Rivers castes his golden rays,
Then every beam seems double: so did they
In thousands in their Icy Kingdoms play,
As if conceited that their gazer on
Was Queen of them, and their low region,
Nor were they couzend much in her great worth,
For like a Queen she long lived in the North,
Graced by her noble virtues! she alone
Shone in her own orb (ungrac't by none)
Free from Ambition, or thoughts to aspire
Yet was her temper all celestial fire,
Her glory was in children, happy she
That left behind her such a progeny!
Three noble Earls sons of her great blood,
Whose perfect Honor writes her Honors good,
Six Countesses descended all from her,
Whose names, and fames deserve a Chronicler
Whose births, and worths in future times shall stand
Enrold within the volumes of our Land,
What need I speak of them? their worths are known:
Their birthes were hers (their virtues are their own)
Such up-rightnes of faith, pureness of soul,
The World beneath her feet she did control,
Her O^isons like incense offered up
Ascendant were to drink salvations cup.
The mighty Orb was witness of her power,
With whom she sat in counsel every hour,
The stars to her an everlasting book,
Whose mighty volumes she did over-looke.
Knowing that there she was appointed one
To sit in splendour, adding to the zone.
Now while that Thames boastes of her buildings hie,
Whose Turrets seem themselves to stellifie. Tay said to be the most noble
River in Angus.

Though Angus boast of her strong maiden Tower,
Yet comes it short of Rosamonds fair Bower,
My little River shall compare with them,
Yet never reflect upon the diadem. Johannes Major.

Darwe^t thy Chat-worth I will call upon:
Thy structure merits admiration.
Thy situations fair, hills like to clouds
On every side thy gilded ^urrets shroudes,
Th art like the ^unne when he is going West
Rowzing Aurora from her silver nest.
Amid thy valleys Da^went s^iftly runs,
Who like a tender Mother to her sons
Yields foo^ds, and springs, and waters sweet, and clear,
As the b^essed Sun in his meridian sphere.
There may you see the Salmon, Tench, and Trout,
Like Neptun's Tri^ons nimbly friske about.
Sometimes along the flower enameld vales
She d^es inundate, and tells wanton tales
Unto the Meadows: f^r she takes a pride
Her crystal limbs on pearly sands to glide.
As if she were enamored on the Hills,
Whose steep descents her water courses fills.
As loath she were to leave the continent,
And thrust her head into her sister Trent.
Who sometimes angry does her course forsake,
Thrusting her head into the German lake.
Above her valley the^e you may deserie
As in a Land-skip t^ings beyond the eye.
The Alps themselves you would think were thither come
And Ponto Angelo removed from Rome,
I glance but at the outside, for within
Those be the Judges ^ave that structure seen.
And next to thee, faind Hard-wick, which do stand
Like to a promont peering over the Land:
Or like a quarrie that is unpenetrable
Against pick, or crow rest unvulnerable.
Or like a Diamond's glittering in the night
Which in the darkest room gives greatest light.
Or like a perspicill that does descrie
Things fair remote, and bring's them to the eye,
So stand's this second Colosse built by her,
By this blessed Woman this world's wonderer.
Distant four Miles, there stands her truest lover, Guiccardine: (...) Gildas
in the Expul. of the Danes.

The stately Cabinet of Bouls'over,
Whence the insulting Danes by force, and might
Were last expuls'd, and beaten out in fight.
Those that like Giants against great Jove did war,
And darted rocks against the thunderer,
Here their aspiring purposes were void,
Their Lives, and their intentions all destroid.
Thence came the privilege those Pheeres enjoy
'Cause they those Fin-land Giants did destroy.
Beneath our Hard-wike, in the Valey trills
The Beck of Crawley fed by springs, and rills.
Whose watery course, no river can beget
Till in the Rother she her head does set.
Sometimes she is wanton too, and loves to kiss
The Daizy meadows. when her Verdure is.
You Would take her for an inland fen, or meare,
When Hyems does the frigid Solstice steare;
But when fair Sol has burnished the fields.
Not Zephyres Botles so much calmnesse yields.
Yet in this little rill we Troutes do find,
Harmless Mullets, and Crevise in their kind.
Pike, Tench and Barbell, Pickrels of high price,
Which live within her watery Paradise.
For which, and for those Fabrickes, which you bear,
Within my fancies you shall still appear.
Darwent my Tempe thou shall be, or non.
Soft purling Crawley thou my Helicon,
Enriched with minerals thy valleys are,
Iron, Wood and Coals, Creatures that are rare
In other climes, though not esteemd with us:
For plenty ever was contagious.
Things facilely come by we nothing deem,
But what we cannot get we most esteem.
Her bounty fame, and liberality,
With all those Types of hospitality
Were so inimitably absolute,
A Parliament cannot that state refute, A most pious Princely gift 100. per
Annum, and confirmed by Charter.

With all the household gods that mournd her fall,
To whom she was the full material.
Witness that Almse-house which in Derby stand's,
Where every hour with pure religious hand's
Twelve Almners habited in azure blue
Yield's their oblations tributaries due
To her their foundresse, where they have their pay
By deed confirmd them at a certain day,
With Gardens to delight them, and sweet Bowers,
Where harmless souls there spend their pious hours.
Our swelling Darwent is their neighbor there,
Who often feasts them with her Icy cheer.
Within All-hallowes Church entombed she lies,
As if she here dreamd of that Paradise
Above she was ascertained! her eyes run
Like to the larkes observant of the Sun.
Like fire in some fat mineral of the earth,
Finding the least vent, she would find new birth.
Rest sweet Eliza; again I say go rest,
Sleep with the Phoenix in thy spycie nest,
Embalmed in thine own mirrhe! merit, and fame
As thine own attributes attend thy name.
Though Mankind be but dust, yet by decree
In every earth there is a diversity,
Some soft, some hard, some sanded, some all Clay
For several countries several soiles display,
Thine was a hard one, yet it brought forth lead
Surpassing silver fined, and polished.
Those Margaretas preci^us in the West
Compared with thy worth are unworthiest,
Those Cassiopean jemmes, deerer then gold
Laid to her vertnes were for nothing ^old.
The spirit of Tagus, Opsi^, Ind^a free
Are gross and vile of no validity.
Yet when all is done, Man is but kneaded dust,
Subject to wither, canker, dy^ and rust.
Like to the Helitropium or go^d Flow^r,
That Sun that warmes him needs must him devour.
Her virtues this Imperious ensign bears,
Glory to her, and Honour' to her heirs.
On the Right Honorable the Lady Katherin Baroness Ogle, worker to the right
Honorable William Earl of Newcastle and the most noble Gentleman Sr. Charles
Cavendish.
When the two Tables first were writ in stone
By the All-mighty (which made all of none)
They certainly were left us for to show
How in this life our times we should bestow.
Why may n^t^ then boldly forage on
To write a truth without detraction?
Thy sacred virtues cannot lodged be
Surer in Grave then in the memory
Of thy dear issue^ that emboldens me
To write thy merits in an elegy.
That Tree must needs be good, when as the fruit
Is always ready for the taste, and tooth:
I mean in leason. For Divinity
Allows to each plant full maturity.
Had thou been one of common birth, or gone
Above thy female sex (in but in one
Rare gift) my mournful elegies then might
As offered incense do thee funeral rite,
But when so many rarities conspire
In one self person, fit for all t'admire,
Small wonder then if my amazed eyes
Are dazel'd with diviner rarities.
And I of sense, and wonder quite bereft,
Si ce for to praise thee, there is scarce one way left.
For thou were all divinity, so rare
Few earthly creatures might with thee compare,
So sil'd with knowledge, sanctity, love, zeal,
As if by prophecy thou could un veil
All holy mysteries! thy every word
Had reference to the Almighty Lord:
In Hymns, and Soliloquies thou did pay
Thy Orisons, as incense every day,
Or balm powered on his Altars! therefore we
Count it a blessing to remember thee,
Whose good deeds we may aim at, but not touch,
'Twere a Herculcan labor; and too much
For women to aspire, or match thy worth:
One Phoenix dead, there is yet no more come forth
Out of thy ashes, and yet thine own fair birth
Has brought a second blessing to the Earth
Like spreding Vines they bout his tables grow,
And like the lovely Olives stand in row.
In these thou still do live, thou art the Tree
These stemmes of honor all are grown from thee.
It Is not a few poor lines that can pourtray
Thy ample worth; the Muses lost their way
Seeking to discribe thee! then blame not me
If I come short of thy known memory,
Whose every word was all perfection,
And what I now write mere detraction.
I cannot reach unto thy ample story
That was so fraughted with Zeal, Goodness, Glory,
Humility was thy hand-maide, and she
Has wafted thee to immortality,
Where sacred ravishing^s thou hear'st above,
Whiles we on Earth do memorize thy love,
Bouls over retains thy Corpse, the whole World thy fame
There Is nothing here dead of thee (not thy Name.)
On the right Honorable WILLIAM last Earl of Devon-shire who married the most
noble Lady CHRISTIAN Sister to the Lord BRVSE and lies inter(...)d in DERBY.
I Make no doubt but from the Muses quire
Some more sweet singers nobler, and higher
Have offered to thy shrine! yet let not me,
When others pay, live in obscurity,
Without acknowledgment! 'twere a sin indeed,
At which even Heathens do us far exceed.
Ingratitude is ba^e, my treas'ry poor,
Yet ^*le l^nd some things from my Muses store.
Thy honors gain*d not more unto thy name,
Then did thy virtues in thy Funeral flame.
Nay were thou now alive, there is none that dare
Thy living virtues then for to compare.
For thou would think we flattered! but now,
Thy death shall all suspicion disavow.
It Is sin for to belly the dead! yet we,
Hold goodness speaks all truth (not flattery)
I want that rhetorique, which the men of Rome,
Did jointly bear unto dead Tullies tomb.
Yet i will not danbe thy utne; (since that there
Can be no foul things, where there is no foul ear.)
Thine ancestors of noble birth, and fames
Whose good deeds have eternized their names.
Whose zeal of faith, fealty to Prince,
Detracting envy can no whit convince.
With all those stratagems she works to eat
Into a free breast void of malices seat.
Thou Art not more honored by thine ancestrie,
Than they are triply dignified by thee.
Since all their honors thou did multiply,
And so did leave them to posterity.
For to be great-borne is not the mere cause
Why men receive loud popular applause,
But to be good-borne does transcend the great;
(Goodness makes greatness for to be complete.)
And she was thine inherent, virtue strove
In various ways, all vices to remove.
In France thy honors there did gain renown
From the most Christian wearer of that Crown,
Those courtly favorits that gazde on thee
Said that thy looks promisd maturitie.
Even the greatst Pheeres of France, no more did wish
But the Alliance of a Cavendish.
They thy admirers were, and thou the Man
In whom whole rivolets of virtue ran.
Not by conceived hopes! for in thy face
Were Characters of honor set in grace
With virtues never found out, nor yet thought
With sacred sanctity thy heart was fraught:
With courtesy courage, bounty, wisdom.
What greater trophies can adorn a tomb?
Honor, learning, knowledge, piety,
The holy blessings of some deity,
But that which makes these to perfection grow
He who had all these could be humble too.
But that's a blessing from eternity
Successively given to thy family.
Humility is a robe of high renown
And amongst the card'nall virtues wears the Crown.
These made the Princely Dolphin t'admire thee
And all the French Pheeres in love desire thee.
And with a mourners sorrow wail thy loss
When thou from France the English seas did cross.
Thy parting from them was, as if some groom
Should leave his Bride, and journey far from home.
Yet hoping to enjoy her lord again
In 'midst of anguish gave release to pain.
He that from strangers had these favors shown
What graces then deserved he from his own?
As great Ambassadors of eminence
From foreign Princes do their suites commense,
Are in all pomp, and honorable port
Received, and graced by persons of the Court,
Such is the Princes will! so was this Man of men.
Unto his native home received again.
And married unto the Princely line
Of noble Bruise beyond the River Tine,
Of whom some noble branches still remain The Lord Rich married the Lady Anne
daughter of William Earl of Deton shire

Whose honors part of their great worths retain.
The one engraffd in warlike Rich's Arms
The other ready to sing warr's Alarmes.
Then came each Poet with his sprigge of Bays
With all the Muses to set forth his praise.
Into whose Palms he evermore did power
Such heapesas Jove in Danaes lap did shower.
Thus like a goodly Fabric did he stand
Admirde, and honored by all in our Land.
Especially by sacred majesty
In whose true service he did live, and die.
Loved of his Country, honored of the state,
And his mortality did free from hate;
For which the Muses to his memory
Have now noe other song but Elegy.
On the right Honorable JANB Countess of Shrewsbury Wife to the right
Honorable EDWARD Lord TALBOT of Shrewsbury last of that family dedicated to
the right Honorable the Lady JANE CAVENDISH Daughter to the right Honorable
WILLIAM Earl of New Castle:
YE sonns of Phoebus, were ye drowned in Sack
Or Lethe? did dull security slack
Your feeble spirits? knew ye not she was gone
That was sole governesse of Helicon:
She was the soul of learning, love, and grace,
Row^e up your sack-braines, die not in disgrace,
Let not each misers Hearse adorned ly
With your strong Verses, stead of heraldry
She was sole Queen of the Castalian spring,
Then to her feet your flowing numbers bring.
Come sprightly on, and offer here your Bays
For she deservedly was worth your praise.
Since most ungrateful braine-sicke murderers,
Court Parasites, Virtues smotherers,
False Sons of Phoebus, bastards of the Nine,
Since they their own worthes sing, and conceal thine.
May that rare miracle, never Created be
Nor found amongst'em (wealth in Poetry)
Well, though I cannot sing, yet you shall see
Honor, and truth, kiss in an Elegy.
Thy funeral Ode was not more full of fame
Then mine shall be of truth (let spite spite shame)
For Temper, Goodness, Liberality,
Steadfastness in faith, Hospitality
She was inimitable! beyond compare,
No earthly Saint was so completed rare.
Each day the poor kept market at her gates,
And tasted largly of her wonted Cates,
Had all commodities the mart afforded,
Yet paid for nothing, all went back rewarded.
Rich Charity the whiles, when every buyer
Has all for nothing, and is paid for hyre.
Here goodness floated, Hospitality
Is the first staire leads to Eternity.
These she at Rufford every day did show,
As duly as she paid her morning Vow,
Which sweet Oblations every day did fly
As incense offered to the Trinity.
Her soul set in her body, was a Jem
Inclosd within a Glorious Diadem.
Whose sparkling Inster, reachd unto the Skies,
Where like a star it stands fixed in our eyes.
Her mind was the gold cabinet of Art
Richly completed in every part.
Love, Honor, Knowledge, Learning, far beyond,
The common strain of Ladies in our Land,
Who are not so annexed to the tie
Of sacred knowledge, as to nicetie.
Her youth spoke rare things, her virtues greater,
She was rare 'ith first 'ith last compleater.
Such sacred comforts her sweet soul did give.
As that she feared not death 'twas fear to live,
Was her affliction! honored she
No TALBOT left of that great progeny:
That progeny, I say, even at whose look
All France have stood, as with an earthquake shook. Not of him that was the
Terror of France though all the rest were brothers of his Line,

Like crazy buildings when their pillars gone
So have they trembled, and for refuge flowne.
The name of TALBOT, as a Bugge-beare still
Affrightes their children from attempting ill.
If twatling rumor said but TALBOT's come,
At her report all mutinies were dumb.
That famous TALBOT whose authentic name
Was never touchd, by tainture, blot nor stain.
Not to historifie their high renown.
(A Shrewsbury was keeper of the Crown.)
Such were the unstained TALBOTS honors there
Though now scarce mention of them is made here
But honored urnes, and ashes! what are those
But relics which our rotten tombs enclose?
What can out-last time, rust wears l'ron away
Small wonder then, if our great names decay.
And yet her name, and honored memory
Shall never fade, till all consume, and die.
Her servants are her Chroniclers, they found
Those virtues from her, cannot fall to the ground.
Northumberland thy dear loss does lament
In them thy goodness still is eminent.
What shall I say of her? she was complete
And in two Maxim's rare (borne good, and great)
Great-borne by birth, joynd with that style of blood
But that which nobler was, (she was borne good.)
Nay add to that which may all mankind vex
All virtues lived in one of weaker sex.
Then sweetest Madam, noblest Lady JANE,
You bear her memory, her worth, and fame.
And may you fairest Lady ever be
As near to her in deeds as pedigree.
You cannot miss her worth, you have the shrine
Of goodness in you, (all parts speak Divine.)
On the right Honorable ELIZABETH Countess of Huntington Wife to the right
Honorable FERDINAND Earl of Huntington.
Women lament her loss, for here she lies,
That from your female sex deserved the prize.
The Graces met in this bright paragon
And but for her had perishd long agon.
The Lacedaemonians usde to sacrifize
Unto the Muses in most solemn wise
To the end their deeds might all be registered
And Chronicl'd, for theirs (when they were dead)
If they did thus, Ladies why should not you
Pay to this pious Dame a holy due?
She to her sex did all their virtues give,
Envy cannot deface them! they shall live
Till Time dissolves, and this huge fabric pass,
And all to Chaos turn, as first it was.
What s'ever worth, or merit, could define
In her, as in a mirror, clear did shine.
Those rich endowments sacred virtue claims
To be sole Queen of; those she wore as chains
Making a true loves knot of goodness! she
The Lady was of bles'd Humility.
Charity, Love, Zeal, Religion,
Were the Ideas that she doated on.
She knew Court Ladies faults, and did not tie,
Her faith unto her fashion! her eye
Aimd at the starry Court of Majesty
Absolute in Love, Zeal, Brightness, Glory,
Honor loves not applausive multitudes,
But virtues self, which verity includes.
Her soul was so engraffd in piety
That she despisd all popularity
She needed not those Platonicall Rings
Of whom an old Philosopher thus sings
The virtue made invisible; no no she
Expressed all virtues in her modesty.
She on true honors Maxim did depend
That conscience was the honorablest friend.
From dead Eliza of bles'd memory
She did receive her Christianity.
A happy Mother makes a happy Child
She had her spirit, and her nature mild.
Till pale Consumption made the way for Death,
Then sweet Eliza, yielded up her Breath.
On ELIZABETH WILLOVGH BY First Wife to HENRY WILLOVGH BY of RISLEY Baronet who
lies interred in the Parish of Wilne in Derby-shire.
Why did the birds 'ith hight of Summers prime
Their wonted Chirpings leave; which usd to chime
Like silver sounding bells, from springs or woods
Which Echo iterates from running floodes.
The sil'y robinet did leave to hop
And senseles sat upon the cold house top.
The Lark lay down lothing to get on winge,
The Thrush had quite forgot her sonneting.
Sad Philomela from her pensive breast
In all dull sorrows tunes her notes expressed.
Such mournful dirges were by her begun
As if that sorrow sorrow would strike dumb.
Thy loss best woman, was the cause why thus
Both man, and creatures were incongruous.
The Birds blessed woman ruefully did moan
Thinking their Phoenix was to Ashes stone.
But from thy flames few more such will arise.
In thee the Arabicke perfection dies.
Thou Orphant's Mother, and the Churches praise,
Great pity Time did not protract thy days.
But let a stock of virtues fall in thee,
Which able were to make an History
Of ample goodness! these for to look upon
And dare to write 'em were detraction.
Thou have been long lamented, yet no verse
Nor showers of rhetorique can grace thy Hearse?
Thou have out-gone all eloquence; and we
Need no invention, thy History
Will find us work enough! and that we read
Of thee at Risley, though that thou be dead.
The neighbor Villages, that round are there,
Receive thy bounteous alms, three times a year,
Paid from thy Husbands open treasury,
Whose soul sweet, Saint, has long lamented thee.
That were the true Idea of his soul A famous Chapel, and the Tomb of his
noble ancestors by him erected over her in the Parish Church of Wilne in
Derby-shire

Whose pious actions do all ills control.
He over thy Funeral Hearse a Fabric framed
A Chapel at Wilne! what needs that be named?
All buildings come too short of that great worth,
Which thy most honored birthright did bring forth.
And therefore dead thou can not lodged be
More in thy Grave, then in our memory.
On the Right Honorable the Lady CLIFTON second Wife to Sir GERVASE CTIFTON
Baronet, daughter to the Earl of Cumber-land.
VVOnder, and Beauty did contest,
Which of them too should grace her best.
Wonder then said that she alone
Was fit to write on her own stone.
Pride, and she at difference were,
Vanity must not dare come near.
Divinity, and she were one
And best were pleased when most alone.
Contemplation was the ty
Which bound her thoughts in unity.
For poverty she had a band
Which like a harvest ear did stand
Full, and open! her marble stone
Still invites a parting groan.
Beauty said she would not vie
For out ward parts to please the eye.
The in-ward beauties of the mind
Soul Magazines she there did find.
There were honors, riches, plenty,
Grace, and goodness, glories dainty,
Charity in a robe of Gould
Sat their enthroned, all might behold
They mental virtues did not weep,
Her Leet, or Court, did justice keep:
There were all that might be said
Of goodness in a wife or maid.
Beauty said, there was her store,
And wonder cried, enough, no more.
These are enough to build a tomb
That shall out-last the day of doombe
Natures Darling, Virtues Glory,
Thy best self, is thy best story.
On the never dying memory of old Sir JOHN HARPER of Swarkeston Grandfather
to the noble Gentleman Sir JOHN HARPER dedicated to him, and his most nob^c
Lady.
To number out thy Birth, thy years, and age,
Each leaf would be a Chronicle, and each Page
A volume! where our Patriots might read
Thy living actions though thou long since dead.
I shall want Trophies to adorn thy Hearse,
Rather some pen of silver for thy verse.
Silver, said I? nay sparkling diamond
Or some more rare, if rarer can be found,
For to engrave thy worth! a goulden pen
Well poyn^ed with some glittering diadem,
Will best become thy anthentique story,
If that it fail not thy great history.
Our Antiqua(...)es to thy seat may come,
And offer volumes up unto thy tomb.
And yet fall short of thee! nay sadly mourn
Over those few ashes strewde about thy urne.
Their mystic Caracters thou could make sense,
And never wrest Case, Gender, Mood nor Tense.
All foreign broils, and eke domestique jarrs
Thou could by policy appease from wars.
Such were thy sacred treasures in the law
That even dissension thou could keep in awe,
Setting at peace the uncontrouled splcene
Of those thy neighbors which in suites have been,
As lawiers did their Tully imitate,
Yet could not reach unto his sugared fate:
So now those imitators follow thee,
Yet cannot reach thy sweet serenitie:
Justice in even scales thou long did bear,
At which Astrea joyd, set in her Chair,
For she rejoices when her scale is even,
And registers her up-right Judge in Heaven.
Our ancient Heralds to discourse with thee
Thought it as much as to Historifie.
The Muses lost a father, for thy hand
Did their necessities, and wants withstand,
Yet thy benevolence as freely came
As dew from Heaven upon this Earthly frame.
Each brow was lawrell'd, and each sprigge of Baies
Was tipd with gould, foretelling Halcyon days;
The gods of music since that thou went hence
Have quite unstring'd their sacred instruments.
And took them to the Melancholy vales
And there to one another tell sad Tales.
Yet there is fair hopes their states they will resume
And with their strains strike Melancholy dumb.
Filling the groves with their harmonious sound
Striking a double echo from the ground.
A house as free, and open as a Court
Managed by industry; not by report,
Seeking to gain a populare applause,
But cheifely aiming at Charities Laws,
The poor, and needy every day are fed
Though thou be gone they still eat of thy bread
This president was un-matchable, Ages to-fore
Nay, and to come, cannot the like tell over.
A family so guided, manned, and governed
As that dissension scarsely was discerned,
For twice six years, a house kept, and maintained,
As if the master still on earth had reigned.
If after-ages do not record this
Our Chronicles are faulty, and remiss;
No servant from his Master went away,
Nay there are still maintained unto this day
By thy successors! whose fair hopes do give
Large testimonies that thou still do live.
And may they ever in thy goodness shine,
For thou on Earth were heavenly divine.
Send them, great God, a many happy sons
And all like thee (the y will be holy ones.)
Where Vbrious Trent her swelling veins does spread,
Within a narrow room lies entoombed
This noble president! and while Trent their flows
All ages honor to thy memory owes.
I will not longer trouble thy dead earth.
Sleep on blessed JOHN, sleep till a second birth.
If good men's prayers to Angels have access,
Thou have in heaven perfect happiness.
On the renowned gentleman old Sir JOHN BYRON of Newsteed-Abbey.
LIke to the silly freckled Butterfly
Oblivious winter long has let thee ly.
But now the Sun his beams has darted forth,
And most illustriously guildes thy worth.
It Is not a marble Tomb, nor some few lines
Writ with a golden pensill, that confines
Our good or bad acts: it is memory
That record's them unto posterity.
And that we have from thee, for thou were all
That can be said of goodness natural.
Lives he that will not justify, how fame
Raised early Trophies to the BYRONS name?
How by desert, thy noble virtues shone
In their own orb, rectified by none.
He truly served his Country, nobly the state,
And was for both like Basills magistrate,
Free from Corruption, Avarice, or Pride,
His virtues not his vices, he did hide.
When Royal Anne was pleased for to try
Diana-like her strong Artillery,
In spacious Sherwood! famous'd for the fame
Of Robin-hood, whose bower still bears the name.
Then had you seen our BYRON with what port
He entertaind her Majesty to the Court.
With music sweet, as if in harmony,
The Earth, and Heavens in confort did agree,
To speak a bounteous welcome (...)uch a one
As well might vivifie a heart of stone,
How every office in its own sphere moved,
Admired by all, and of the whole Court loved,
Freedom, and plenty strove which should exceed,
Bounty p oclaim'd full wellcomes to Newsteede,
Yet with a free, and sparing hand! for she
Saucde every juncket with sweet temp'rancie.
But what of these? why nothing, all is gone:
These are but shadows to perfection.
He was religions friend, and with a sword
And shield of faith did ever man Gods Word.
He lived till in the Autumn of his Age
Death signed his Exit off this frail world's stage.
But though he is gone, he that so dies, dies not,
But lives, and never can be here forgot.
On Sir GEORG MANORS of Haldon, father of the noble Gentleman JOHN MANORS
Esquire.
ANd shall thy honors which like Landmarks stand
To guide the Seaman? shall those be writ in sand
Or Carracts of oblivion? then let my pen
Lose her sweet candor, and never dare again
To draw spruise Nectar from the Thespian springs
Where merit freely sip's, and clearly sings.
Were all wits frosty, and to Ice congealed
That thou brave JOHN so long should lie concealed,
And not a memory sent to thy vrne
To blaze thy worth? did there so many mourn,
And can so few remember? barren age
When virtues must be sent on pilgrimage,
Never to return liurely it was our clime
Made with so barren, that nothing in due time
From any Muse was offered to thy shrine,
That were on Earth so heavenly divine.
Frostes dried our Springs, Mountainous heaps of snow,
Upon our peakish Alps did seem to grow,
Which made our wits, as barren, leaden, dry,
As that which on her Alpine brows did lie.
Until Vertumnus with his luke warm veins
From rockie springs bedewed all our plains.
Till then our wits, like spring's chained up in frost,
Or chillish thawes were sterill, drein'd, and lost.
Then let my Muse, though weak'st in all the quire,
Unto thy Hearse offer Phoebean fire,
Yet without Marts of oil, or flattr'ies Ink,
My smooth El^gies never used to drink
Affections liquor, truth play thou thy part,
And Muse brave envy, write thou from thy heart.
Some things often times do simply good befall,
And sometimes goodness happens accidental
In out-ward gifts! use makes them good, or naught.
As if a man his Country save, it is thought
His strength is good! but if by violence
His valor wounds the guiltless innocence
Then is his valor naught! absolute fame
Lov's all, hurts none, and gain's a glorious name.
In this he did transcend, for in the field
He never did to any foe-man yielde.
Valiant, yet seldom angry, valor shows
Most clearly perfited in smooth-fac't brows:
The emblem of an honest hearted mind
Is to be valiant, yet to all men-kinde.
As starr's in magnitude, and splendour show
Each from other; so mortals ever grow
In goodness or in vices. Often we see
Two men in all things never did agree.
If this has height, the other wants his stature
Deformed the one, the other full of feature.
Some Starr's are fixed, so are some men's minds,
Others all motion: so are most by kinds.
Some starr's are bigger, so are some men by birth,
And some show lesser that are highest from Earth.
As the fixde stars never from their centers move
But in their Epicycles roll: such was his love
A Rock unmovable, a Bullworke of defense,
A Fort of Love, Arms, Arts, and Innocence.
Just to his God, Religion, Piety:
For all men's griefs, full of anxiety.
His whole existence, this way was enclind,
T'adorne his soul, more then to please his mind.
Pride as a leprosy he still abhorred
With all their vanities that sin adored.
In spir'd by sacred knowledge from above
That proud men never lived in perfect love.
This Maxim's undenieable by disdain.
(Prides pension, and reward is called pain.)
From that if out-ward signs do blazon forth,
What the interior is addicted too: then worth
Speak for thy self! I need no soothing lays
Daubed with Encomiums to set forth thy praise.
Thy Country knows it, that thy garments were
For warmth, not wantonness; such as might out-beare
Storms, and tempests! some say pride lives in rags
Yet thine were never cut in Flashes, Jaggs,
Not like our gallants, at whose vanities,
Ever sits blushing the poor taffaties,
Whom though they cannot speak their collor rises
To see Apes dressed in several disguises.
Virtue is home spunne, needing no gould lace
To guild her russet coat with, Sacred grace
With all the Card'nall Virtues she is indu'd,
Her cabinet all goodness does include,
Bounty, Greatness, Hospitality,
Unfeigned love, and liberality
And that which under foot, does all else tread
(A hand still ready to give poor men bread.)
But I have lost my self, and my faint Muse
Is so short of thy worth, she does abuse
Thy memory: then let thy Country speak;
And they'ill strike envy dumb, make malice break
Her neck; if she dare to oppose them,
For all these worthes, and more he did enclose them.
Charity was his robe, peace was his crown
Good works the sword, with which he won renown.
He Philips Motto, every morn did scan
(Remember mortal thou art but a man.)
Therefore he knew that man's selected good
Was his last act (which was to lose lives blood.)
Repaying nature that which mortals must,
A forefeiture called life, most true, and just,
Therefore he armed himself with innocence,
Love, zeal, humility, and patience,
Strong Porters for to bear a sinful man
Up to the portalls of Elysium
Where like the Bay Tree, though to us unseene
Though winter allwaies were, (yet he lives Green.)
On Sir GEORGE PERKINS of Bunny.
STay passenger, for there he lies.
Who for his merit, gained the prize.
Beloved ith City, famed ith Court
Virtue makes the tru'st report.
Such his gesture grace, behave'our
From his Prince he had the favor,
Of a servant! but noe Court grace
Can the rough hands of Death displace.
His sandy hours do fleeting run,
As snow dissolving before the Sun.
The greatest Pheeres, and Potentates
Are all but subjects to the fates.
But noble Perkins did not fall
He mounted to the Tribunal,
He served his Country, Prince, and state
And did free from the Commons hate.
An Alms he ever freely gave
And those that wanted there might have.
He was wise, judicious, strong,
And yet he feared for to do wrong.
Rich in sacred wisdoms store
Which makes his Country him deplore,
And adorn her self in black,
For many such she now does lack.
Such fair modells, such brief stories
As do heap on her more glories.
And still add in worth, and fame
More honors to his Funeral flame.
But he is gone, and fates are just,
For as he is, so mankind must.
Yet this I say though he be gone
His virtues shall strike Envy dumb.
On the right Honorable WILLIAM CAVENDISH second son of that name to the
right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of New Castle. 1633.
WILLIAM CAVENDISH

Ana gramma

All my will is Heaven.

IT was heavens will, and sure it was performd,
And thou in heaven art certainly adorned
Amongst those Angels, whose bright Coronets.
Transcend the Sunns, and brighter ray's begets.
Sure Nature was impoverished, and her store
Most certainly enfeebled, and grown poor,
And therefore to enrich her treasury
She sent her messenger pale death for thee,
Making that Axiom from her own sex good,
(All purity was borne in innocents blood)
Thrice happy he that so departed hence
In lambe-like patience, Sacred innocence.
Before he ever tastes earths pompous dross
So to gain heaven (a happy saint like loss)
Conspired you all, did you oh fates conspire
To crop this goodly tender growing spire?
Did you and death Herodian like agree
To work on innocents a Tragedy?
Could no low Brambles but the talest Tree
In all the forest give satietie
To your dire vengeance? is Blood, Honors, State
At no more price then Birthes of meaner rate.
Since Adams mourned fall, was there noe degrees
No difference in blood? no diversities
'Twixt Kings, and Cottagers? no, not with death,
His paile-eyd horse rides mortals out of breath,
And it is small wonder, for it is often seen
Rough Winter blows upon the Summers Queen.
The youthful Spring grown almost to his prime
By Northren blasts does instantly decline.
Both old, and young are equal in degrees,
For death says mortals are but Natures fees.
She keeps her Courts. At her exchequor day
All must receive (or if they owe all pay)
Her rowles are open, every man may read
Her just allowance, how her paths to tread.
And he that derogates from her behests.
Is straight way summond to her court of questes.
Sometimes her terms she warily rejournes,
Making the dead tree live that sadly mourns.
Lives sap being spent! contrarily
The plant new grafted she makes for to die.
As she has done this noble Impe of fame
Just when his lives bright candle 'gan to flame.
Life like a Taper that gives others sight
Consumes, and wastes in lending its own light.
For all estates at Deaths shrill Trumpets call
In her star chamber must be personal.
The bodies goods, as beauties strength, and health
Which always are esteemd the bodies wealth,
And eke the souls as (manners mild, and art)
Which still do govern man's diviner part,
Also the wills, as Justice Wit, and Virtue,
Which unto her as attributes are due,
Are of no prise, nor vigor in the scale.
(For when death comes there is nothing can prevail
His bounds are boundless, his malicious Ire
Is like an Aetna, or consuming fire.
All mortals are his buts, all lives the aim,
At which he shootes, and never loses game.
Death's an engrosser still; say what man list
He scorns his laws, is a monopolist:
What greater malice could a Tyrant show,
That had the whole world set his guess to go.
Where he might find souls pinched with poverty
That s^de, and prayed, each minute for to die.
Sape-gode usurers that never did make
An honest act, for Law, or conscience sake.
These were no diet for thee, mischiefs sons
The aptest are for thy companions.
Those second helps which Nature does bestow
Which in her treasury of Earth still grow
Ordaind for mankind, could not physic make
From her large store, one compound that would take
His dainty palate? no 'twas then in vain,
For he did Physics help, and life disdain,
And like a man enforced for to go
A longer journey, then he first did know
Cries Doctor spare thy physic for to day,
(To morrow I Will take all, and thee obey.)
Sweet divinity, when so sweet a child
Reproves Hippocrates with speeches mild,
Presageing that his Esculapian
Was absolute, his souls Physician;
Yet knew not he to sin his tender years
(Though all were borne in sin) that ambage cleares.
His mothers griefs, and honored fathers praires,
Vnpenetrable were in thy dull ears,
Thou have no heart, and pity cannot enter
In any bosom where there is no center.
Dull is my Muse, yet my prophetique fire
That slowly flames burns constant in desire
To quench thy malice? monster now I see
Why thou hewdst down this goodly growing Tree
This Princely, lovely, gall-lesse, harmless dove
Mirror of infancy, patience, and love.
I Have found the cause of thy invetraterage
Thou killd'st his brother 'bout the self same age.
And 'cause the Conqueror of Britains I Will
Was named William, famous'd for his style,
Therefore successively thy malice runs
To kill two Williams natures champions
For as the one Phoenix out of flames did rise
The other Phoenix into Ashes flies,
And like Joves Eagle leaves this vale of Earth
Mounting Elysium for a second birth.
Where death, nor time, nor envy candeface,
Nor ought diminish of his heavenly grace.
Farewell blessed babe, laurel decks thy brows,
Deaths live'ry ours, the saddest cipres boughs.
Epitaph on the same.
REader behold a wonder here
A child here lies, that did not f^are
Pale death (...) he valiantly
Spurnd fate, death, and destiny,
Warriour-like he met his so,
The aged wretch dares not do so.
See what a guarde has innocence!
Over all it bears preeminence.
It loves not life, cares not for breath
It conquers sin, Hell, Pain, and Death.
It is the Sword, and Shield of Faith
The just man there his ground-forme laith.
Then happy thou blessed honored jem
Sweet morning Star, bright Diadem
Thou Have gainde a Conquest by thy fall
For Earth, the Heavens high tribunal.
Death surely was in love with thee
Cybele on Atys doated (so did he.)
Her love transformed him to a Pine.
So death did thee amongst pow'res divine.
Marble will moulder, thy name will live
And harbor unto virtue give.
Then Reader, underneath does lie
As much Innocence as could die.
On the well learned, and truly noble Gentleman Sir PETER FRETCHVILLE of
Stalie.
COttons great fame, learning birth, and worth
The Genti of our Nation has set forth.
And worthily compared him to a book
Writ by the thrice three maids? On which to look
Is full perfection? why may not we
Renown^d Peter read thy History?
Each word containd a subject, every line
Was worth a Kingdom that was all Divine:
His body, natures noblest frame, was strong,
His silver hairs proclaimd him ever young.
The Graces thronged together him to court
Nay you would swear this man was virtues foart.
Where learning, bounty, courage met in one
Striveing to place themselves in virtues Throne.
There all the lies of goodness jointly grew
Dressing themselves to render merit due.
Each limb of him, each arter, nerve, and vein
Did in themselves a Microcosme contain.
There charity in her rich robe was dressed
Here liberality at full expressed
Within his bosom there lay aptitude
And there sat bounty kissing fortitude,
Hospitality almost dead, and gone
He did again bring to perfection.
Adorning her in Heavens Sky colloured hue
(For poverty is characterd in blue)
She at his gates was answered every day
Before she knocked she had her Alms, and pay.
Where others stretch their lands as men wrest cloth
Stretching it on the tenter-hookes! when both
The Farmer, and the keeper cursing cry
Their hands are barrd from public charity.
Yet then this Nestor of experience,
Took pity on his tennants indigence,
The third part he enjoyd, he had no more,
Such Landlords never did make Tennants poor.
Aged he was if reckond by his years
But you would deem him young seeing his hairs,
More white then Snow or Milk! his grateful worth
Got him the name (of white Knight of the North)
His Country still laments him, and does weep
Since he that was her eye is fallen asleep.
Staley retains but his impurer part
Heaven has his soul, his best part we in heart.
On the right Honorable HENRY Lord, STANHOT of the North, Knight of the Bath,
Son to the right Honorable PHILIP Earl of Chesterfield, and KATHERIN his noble
Countess. Anno. 1634.
LIves there an eye of Honor did not weep
'Cause thou so suddenly did fall a sleep?
Oh yes, even Virtues self did sadly moan,
'Cause thou so suddenly to heaven was gone.
And yet this Crown she sets upon thy head,
Thy Virtues are alive (though thou be dead)
Who ever knew thee did not wail thy fall,
Or wept not at thy solemn funeral?
Such hopes thy Country had, such joys the state,
And yet to see, they both unfortunate.
Hopes had thy Country of a Patriot,
The state a Counselor though new begot.
Borne Man even from his Cradle; yet oh see
How sudden vanishes maturitie!
Just like the Lilly fairest of the field
Which does her bravery to th'sickle yield
Or like the flower that opens with the Sun,
And falls, and dies, before his course is run.
Thus did this noble sprigge of honor fall
Even from perfection to a Burial.
And yet to say so were detraction,
Since he is gone hence to perfection.
For so much goodness, wisdom, knowledge, arts,
Such rare endowments, and such sacred parts,
Such gravity, as if experience had
Invested him, and in her robes him clad,
Such Activenes of body, acute wit
As if the Muses in his breast did sit.
And there kept court, instructing him all rules
And abstruse secrets of their holy schools.
Nay what unto him did not they impart?
Urania had enshrind him in her heart.
And all these rarities to be complide
In one, not twenty one before he did.
Great pity that a fabric of this state
Should crazy fall, and subject be to fate.
But vain are tears, there is little to be sed
For each of him is disinherited. Being his ^^der brother

He had a brother who in's prime of youth
Almost arriv'de unto his perfect grouth.
Pale death and time cut off: whose most dear loss
He did embrace with such a heaviness:
That from his day of death, unto his own,
His Brothers dying day was ever known.
Entombd that day oth' weak, ins chamber he
Solemnly kept his brothers Obsequie:
There did his own true worth his worth confine
In meditations siting a Divine:
Rare presidents of Honor, chiesly young,
What would his age have brought, had he lived long?
But he is g^ne, and with him went our tears,
For certainly he now needs not our prayers.
Yet such rare presidents, ought not for to lie
Entombd, and buried in obscurity.
His joys are full, and now we may express
More joy in him then cause of heaviness.
He dies not that so dies, but lives again
Immortally, from anguish, grief, or pain.
On CHARLES STANHOP first brother to the Lord HENERY, and third Son to PHILIP
Earl of Chesterfield. KATHERIN his noble Countess.
NO sooner are my Summer blessings come
But straight comes Autumn, and rough Hyems on.
Whose rugged browe proclaim's sad disasters,
Nights, storms, tempests, day-consuming wasters.
No sooner did our Sun of comfort shine
Nor bright Aurora with her silver shrine,
After tempestuous days, and dim-eide nights,
By their fresh beams, and rarefied lights
But newly perfected! in comes a storm
Almost as great as that but newly borne.
Eclipsing our fresh glories, and in cares
Makes us a fresh for to begin old tears.
No sooner was our honored HENRY gone
And our late mourning weeds past putting on
Our memory or backs I streightway does come
The death of CHARLES that strikes all joys dumb.
Oh thou most sacred Jewel; golden Time
Thou precious Jem of Jems, thou all divine,
Thou fleeting shade, unsubstantiall thing
Thou that art nothing, yet of all the King,
Whoo'd be lavish of thee? this president
Should make us chary how our Time is spent.
We may in thee behold, how vain is man
In all his actions, do the best he can.
This goodly slower, but yesterday new blown
By Times untimely sithe to day cut down.
This goodly Garden in whom searse grew weeds,
This lovely full-eard corn, that never lent seeds
Fitting a seedenesse! is taken from the earth
Before it had maturity or birth.
This lovely Pine Tree when his Aples shone
With rosy cheeks like Phoebus in the Zone.
Is hewd, and fallen just in his Prime, and growth,
Even in the early spring time of his youth.
But Death and Time are Twinns, if one cries on,
Thought is not swifter then the act is done.
Death thou art merciless, and thy rigor such
As makes us rail (though it avail not much)
Me thinks those pair of noblest brothers gone
Those that of Virtue had Dominon;
Might have suffizd thy wrath! or if not those
Their Virtues might, which did all worth enclose.
All worthes, I say, that might be thought or found
In two so young there could not more abound.
Of if not those, their Mothers showers of tears,
Which fell like rain sent from the weeping Spears
Who wept in pity too, or if not these,
The new changed Virgins prayers might appease.
No sooner were they tied in wed-lockes bands
But thy inveteracies untwines their hands,
No sooner were those lovely Turtles pairde,
Scarce of those rites, and ordinations sharde
Which God for man decreed I straight way thy Ire
Sweepes all before thee, like Promethean fire.
Virgins will curse thee ever, and forbear
The sacred Jugall wedding Ring to wear.
And so empoverish nature of her wealth
Because thou rak'st up all her joys by stealth.
But these could not suffize thee; he alone
Was the Idea (...) (...) thou doatedst on.
His brothers like the two great Lamps of light
That guilde the heavenly Orbs by day, and night,
So graced thy Trophes, won thee such renown,
Without this third thou could not win the Crown.
But thou dealtst poorly to insinuate
Enseebleing him I nay with the selfsame fate,
And cause of sickness, which our Barons killd,
Killd him? high providence must be fullfilld,
No struggling against the stream, no stopping tide,
Birthes of this nature mortals cannot hide.
The end of our creation was to die
Death being the fine of all mortality.
Then cease to wail his loss, his soul's a Je^
Fixde in the Sun-rai^s like a Diadem.
Thrice honored Lady, count not that a loss
Which even the Angels cover to engrosse.
With David's sorrow mourn him while alive,
But dead, do not against your knowledge strive.
The loss of friends, more sorrows do not get
If rightly understood, then benefit.
We sorrow for them, when we think of Earth,
But when of Heaven, and that most sacred birth
We do rejoice? and their joys emulate
Till we in happiness possess like state.
You have more sons, and many more may have
Leave mourning these then (Earth is mankinds Grave.)
On ROBERT POVVTRELL of Westhallam Esquire.
IF love to knowledge, or good parts
The Muses friend, and true deserts,
A man enshrind in all men's hearts
Liberal, and Authenticke Arts.
If love to music does deserve
A thankefullnes from every nerve.
Chiefly the Organ of the ear
Whose atribute is all to hear.
If charity deserve to be
A virtue for necessity,
Since he that gives unto the poor
Hourly increases his large store,
He wisely does his Talent lend
And may it doubly so expend,
If love to subject, Prince, and state
Free from envious pride or hate.
One that never used for to oppress
Without thoughts of covetousness.
One that his whole life so d^d sway
As merely careing for to day.
If one in whom these worthes did dwell
Deserved to be the non Pareill
Of goodness: surely such a one
Deserved from us a parting groan.
Nay a Rich Trophe over his hearse
Adorned round with his own Verse,
If such a one was worthy praise
Then he deserved the sprig, and Baies.
For he had these from natures store
And a thousand virtues more.
Which ab^e are to tell his story,
Fraught with honor, fame, and glory.
Which are able for to depaint
His life a man's, his death a Saint.
On William Willoughby of Mascam Esquire, who died at Celson.
SOme say Death does brave things, I think it true
and yet it stands ambiguously too.
Some say thou slew (...) with a sling
(A trick to scare P^ds with) a pretty thing.
And bravely thou knockest Sisera ith'head
(A manly part to Nail a man stark dead.)
Wolves facilely do prey upon the sheep,
When as the careless Shepherd lies asleep.
Amongst multitudes of Pagans Sampson fell,
Brag of that Trophe, there thou quit'st thee well.
Yet boast not much of that poor sacrifize,
He would have killd thee (had he had his eyes)
Great Alexander of an Ague did,
And Tailour-like thou bodkindste Casars side.
And Troyes great Hector fell too, not alone
Thou kill'dst him cowardly (hundreds to one)
But here thou kill'dst perfection, in this man
Rivolets, nay Seas of sacred virtue ran.
For this sweet man of men, this Willoughby
The Graces mourned, and cruel Destiny,
That never yet did good, for him did moan,
'Cause he from earth so suddenly was gone:
Just in the Summer of his growing age
Began thy malice to break forth in rage.
And like a trembling thief thou did steal in
And murder'dst him (that scarce knew how to sin)
Well, thou have done thy worst, the best is ours:
He lives in spite of thee amongst sacred Powers,
Time will not court thee as she used to do
Because thou kill'dst his Son (not twenty two)
Thrice happy he that lives well, and so dies
Growing a Prime-rose in Gods Paradise.
Reader behold that Pho^n^x here he lies,
Until another from his ashes rise.
On HENRY VVORRALL of wysoll Esquire.
Who lies there think von! Read, and see,
It Is not the Map of misery,
Nor he which does this world control
Whose money is his life, and soul.
His feeling, sense, his eyes, and ears,
He Is dumb, he is deaf, he nothing hears
Without it: beyond these it is his god
For that absented he lives odd.
Ten in the hundred, hundreds to one
His god, and he will keep one room.
Thou art deceived, he is not here
Then read not, lest thou shed a tear,
This sacred place affoords not rome
For such a one to rear a tomb.
No Tempe ever had a birth
Of so much goodness, love, and worth.
Who though in honor he is not great,
In goodness he is all complete.
VVoo't have me speak a verity
Here lies the Map of charity,
One that did daily at his Door
With his own hands relieve the poor.
One that did never lend on use
And yet to lend did never refuse.
One that did never once engrosse
Yet sold to all (and lived by loss.)
One of those men, loved not to make
Acts for Law, but conscience sake.
He amongst the wisest was held one
Most fit to write on his own stone.
For which high heavens have enrold
Him in a Throne of purest gould.
From hence he was translated, there
To be a Star fixde in the sphere,
For us to wonder, and admire,
A man composed of heavenly fire.
He never did the poor oppress,
But in their wants did give redress.
His countries grief he left behind
They can no more such fathers find.
Worrall though dead we have thee still
In thought, in word, in deed in will.
Thy memory cannot decay
Till all dissolves, and turns to clay.
Wood'st thou have truths Epitomie
Know Virtue died (and then died he.)
On the Worshipful Mrs GREASLEY Mother of the Lady BVRDEAVT of Formarke.
LEt it suflize that all I speak of thee
Will come far short of thy great memory,
But as small briefes great Volumes do contain:
So those few lines may at thy goodness aim,
In part though not in whole (...) and therefore I
Offer up these to thy posterity.
Thy Birth was noble, thy education such
As had from Virtue Virtues sacred touch.
In truth, and true religion thou did stand
Full many years, as Sea-markes to the land,
Guiding the Mariners that in dangers were
Unto their wished Ports, and havens clear.
And unto those that did the truth approve
Thou were a lamp of faith, burning in love
With Christ, and with his spouse, the Bride and Groom,
What greater Pillars can support thy tomb?
She needs not many beautys t'adorne her
That has the Bridegroom for her chief mourner.
She was in Children happy, in parents blessed
Of her chief happynes she is now possessed.
In patience calm as sleep, her Love, Zeal,
True emblemes of a pious common weal,
To Anger flow, the winds did not contract
More swift motion, then she to a good act.
Then Madam it is your comfort that she is To the Lady Bur(...)ut.

Emparadic'd in perfectnes of bliss,
No soothing after Toombes, and ashes! she
Is absolute in true felicity.
For which in stead of Cipres, Olive, Baies
May best be worn by you that live her praise.
On the Renowned JOHN Lord DARCY of the North.
GReat buildings by their own contexture stand,
So do thy honors propp'd up by no hand.
True glory was thy aim, mark, and renown,
And thou in heaven have a glorious Crown.
Great vessels of their own weights never sink
It Is overpoising, or that which they drink
Which makes them sand; thy well trimmed Boat,
Did on this Worlds Sea a long time floate.
Ballans'd with honor! without wrack or leake,
No storms nor tempests could her strong keele break.
Till heaven emparadic'd her in the haven
Of bless eternal making all joys even.
What was her fraught? Religion, Piety,
Repentance, servent Zeal, Anxiety:
Goodness, Grace, and Honor Pilots were
Guiding the ste^ne unto the Starry Sphere.
Where Angel brightness yields reflection
Ambassadour-like to greet this paragon.
The cardinal Virtues follow Humility
That sacred sister of Nobility:
True love in whom all noble honor staith
Sweet Charity the first borne child of Faith.
Patience, Diligence, Liberality,
That yields a hand to due necessity:
Rich Temperance that does all ills control,
And Chastity the Beauty of man's soul.
A happy guard, but thrice more happy he
That thus is guarded to Eternity.
He had three Wives of blessed memory,
Who certain are in heavens rich treasury.
By two he issue had, by th'ould one none,
They, and their of-sp'ring all to bliss are gone.
In peace they lived, in love, and peace they di'de
Enjoying honse-roome with the lamb, and bride.
Dame Fretchvill, Bows, and Bellis were their names
Whose good deeds do perpetuate their fames.
A fourth survives, whose goodness amongst the rest
From all the four winds styles her self by West.
She ranck'd in honors file does claim due share
From the ennobled house of Dela-ware.
Deaths Image sleep has stolen his soul away
His body till the last Trumpe restes in clay.
On Sir GILBERT KNIVETON Knight, and Baronnet.
When first thy active person made resort
Both to the English, and the Danish Court.
No favorite then lived in more reguard
Then noble Kniveton! Or freer gave reward
Upon desert, and merit! The stately Court
Where men of all degrees, of garb, and port,
Extant to practice! some for complement
Yet run at random from the Element,
Some to make faces, Curtifies, and Congees,
As if they were disjoynted in their knees.
Some merely study fashions, some paynt
At pleasure making of a devil a Saint.
And some more sacred wits, purer, and fine
That studied nothing but what was divine.
For there is of all trades, like a Mart or Faite,
And thither all so^tes of people make repair.
Retired from thence thy ^leasures taken away
Thou practis*d gratitude a nearer way.
Zeal to thy God which evermore shall prove
A living Monument of lasting Love.
A hand like harvest, always free, and open.
Affable in looks, courteously spoken.
In thy Converse the poorest swain might be
Allowed all language, open, firm, and free.
An eye, and brow, that never frownd! but when
Gross appetites predominated men.
A tongue that wisely could with cares dispense
To The people love, allegiance to his Prince.
Not covetous of Honor, Pomp, or State,
As free from enmity, as love from hate.
Wise in thy countries cause, yet now, and then
Subject to errors like to other men.
Yet those that knew how fair a treasury
Of goodness in thy noble breast did ly,
What all refined sweetness? well might swear
Thy rarenes thee proclamd they Muses heir.
Thy noble offspring still does droope, and groan
Like crazy buldings thou there pillar gone.
Bradley laments thy loss, for there thy name
Long time has livd in King and countries fame.
But vain are stately fabrics, narrow rooms
Will serve to bear us, and our rotten toombes.
On the Lady Greffith Wife to Henry Greffith Baronnet, and daughter of Henry
Willoughby Baronnet.
It Is not a sin thus to expostulate,
And ask the causes, why untimely fate
Crops the bladed corn, before 'its eard.
Kills fruit ith blossom, and Lillies new appeard.
But it is great pity that these goodly creatures
The braverys, and raritys of natures
Should be untimely by Times Sithe cut down
Before their perfitenes, and worthes are known
Unto the world, and thereby to deprive
The earth, and Nature of what worthes they give.
If this be sin, and pity, then pale Death,
I Will dare thee to a combat, which whiles breath
Retains this mansion, till thy fatal dart
Those old companions soul, and body part,
Shall never be finished: and I know till then
Thy hatred cannot cease to mortal men.
Yet I defy thee, knowing that here tody
Is but a preface to eternity.
Here has thy malice showd it self, to steal
That sacred lamp of love, and perfect zeal.
Honors perfection, pattern of Piety
Light unto Grace, Goodness, Nobility
Was there one riches, which this world did foulde
That in her little world she did not hold?
Yet rave'nous Tiger thou did her annoy
Before she tasted of an earthly joy.
Just in the early Springtime of her age
Thou sent'st her on her short lived pilgrimage.
Hence questionles she did on Cherubs fly
To the great Palace of eternity.
Where amongst the Hierarchies she sings in parts,
Joys inexpessible by men, or arts.
But that is no thanks to death; for the best will
Thou have in doing well, is doing ill.
And how can that be good; since there is a text.
Divinely contradicts it, and has annexed
Curses unto it! but I waste my breath
The law has limits (none must kill save Death.)
Thy sting oh Death, thy cruel sting I say,
Destroid this goodly parragon of May:
This lovely Juni'an Rose that did display
Those Cretan spices sweeter nor the day,
Those sacred leaves of honor, lamps of love,
Which made pale Envies self her self reprove.
Earth held no ric^es, which she could not find,
For she had cabin'd goodness in her mind,
Yet lent it out still I not on usury
But for th'encrease of goodness treasury!
Vnsated Caniball I Will rail on still
Although I know thou art limited to kill.
Could not the Earth suffize thee, there to roame
But that thy meager paunch must build a tomb
Robbing a consecrated Temple, thereby
To steal true goodness sacrilegiously?
Nay to subvert posterities, that is a bane
That will perpetually on thee remain.
She the fair prop of four fair goodly towers
Is undermind and fallen: but God-like powers
Have left one goodly branch, which spite of thee
May propagate, and make posterity
Vn-numberlesse. so shall Willoughby
In Willoughby beget new heraldraie:
And Knowles shall tell thy malice, and I pray
The G(...)ffin may of thee beget the day.
As questionless th'All-seer has assignde it,
And t^y posterity shall surely find it.
Then shall the Bird of Pallas change her note
And clutch the Hare out of the Greyhoundes throat,
And the gould Griffin which is foe to none
Still shall innovate this noble union.
The Elephant with his vast truncke shall turn
Those eyes to laughter that in sorrows mourn.
All shall consigne in one, and with this Ave
Caution each other (adsum cave)
Thus great destroyer, know that silly I
Less fear thy malice, then did fear to die
This noble Lady! all have from nature breath,
And all are sure, nought's certainer then death.
On WILLIAM FARRINGTON of Salterstord Esquire March the, 14. 1633.
WILLIAM FARRINGTON

Anagramma

Farewell I am gone.

Which Anagramizde by conversion even, (Farewell. I am gone) from Earth to
Heaven.

What Epithete more shall I give
Then for to say thou still do live?
The Reader says how may that be?
Does that man live? noe man can see.
I answer thus, all die to live,
Therefore that Epithete i will give.
I need not praise thee, goodness known
Needs no Laudare's. But her own.
I must lament thee 'cause the Earth
Grows barren, and yields no such birth.
Known griefs are dumb, and such are mine
Thy joys abundantly do shine.
I add but coal to flaming fuel,
Death has stolen away my jewel.
I dare not wrestle against harsh fate,
Yet needs must wail thee (though to late.)
Thou were no wrangling contester
No covetous, poore-molester.
No plodding politician.
But plainly a right honest man.
Say more that list, more will not I,
Truths Epitomy here does lie.
On that worthy woman CASSANDRA POVVTRELL of Westhallam.
THough she be gone, her goodness, fame, and birth
Left not a second paragon on Earth.
It Is said the Phoenix into ashes flies,
And from her flames another Bird does rise,
If our Arabian England can affoard
From all her borroughes such another Bird
We Will banish foreign groves, ours their shall shame
Of thy great worth, Religion, breeding fame.
Where are the Muses? are they all asleep?
Do they their fathers high holiday keep?
Have they forgot their nursing mother's gone
Which kept a house as free as Helicon?
Where every thirsty soul might drink his fill,
And make him apt for the Castalian quill.
True knowledge base ingratitude does shun
When learning grows ingrate, the World is done.
Others their fame, and glories gain by chance,
But she did never her great birth advance
From others names: that worth is profitlesse
That comes by chance, not by vertuousnesse
Hers was inherent, given her from above
Filld with sanctity, piety, and love.
Yet I dare boast, and will not be denide
She could say that, few women can beside,
Great Aunt, and Mother to so many Sons,
Earls, Lords, and Knights, Virtues companions.
Honored Countesses, Ladies of great worth,
Our Herraldries cannot the like bring forth.
Greater her honor, could so closely hide
Her noble birthright, free from thought of pride.
Yet was contented in a pious life
With one sole husband, thou his only wife.
Thy patience as a Land mark still does stand
To be a president to this whole Land.
Blessed with so many children; yet to see
That they should all claim aprecedencie
Of place before thee! but it is natures will
Death both the young, and ^uld alike does kill.
Our persons he respects not, natures pay
Is what she lent us (life) at our just day.
Her coat like virtues was un-alterable.
A die that never staind un-coulourable.
No mortal saw her change, eve'n such her life,
Even such a Maid, a VVidow, and a Wife.
Her garments, and her faith both were one,
Unchangeable in love, life Religion.
Her charity like to the Queen of heaven
To needy beggars every hour was given
They knew their martes, and where thy well might buy
Sustenance for their mere necessity.
'I was not extended barely at the door
Where they that asked receiv'de, but to the poor
Her neighbors, who sick in bed ost lay
Through hunger starved, almost cast away
For lack of succor! thither still went she
While she could go, and ease their misery.
Happy Cassandra, Happy thrice I say,
Thy Almse deeds never can be taken away.
One part thou have, the other still we have
Blessed in thy Birth, thy Cradle, Life, Death, and Grave
She had her servants hearts, her tenants praise,
And never raisd a rent in all her days,
Remarkable sign of goodness, this age wantes such,
Tho'ther way they multiply too much.
My Muse wantes not rare matter, but a pen
To crown her with a Glorious Diadem,
But that she needs not, for her sacred parts
Have stellifide her 'bove the reach of arts,
Nay I dare bouldly to the world proclaim
Her likewill scarce be found on earth again.
Her brain a Chronicle, her mind a volume
Her Virtues a pillar her goodness a column
For great ones for to build on! if goodness rest
In any of thy sex, 'twas in thy breast.
She did not hoorde it there but freely gave
To any one that asked wha^ they would have.
True pattern of the blessed, so did she
(Whose ever thirsty was might there drink free)
Cassandra mournd to see Troyes misery,
Thy Troy, Cassandra, now does mourn for thee.
And yet those honored Branches left behind
Will ever imitate thy nobler mind.
On Mrs. ELIZABETH WOODVVARD Wife of THOMAS WOODVVARD Esquire.
THy Countries loss, and grief of mind,
The ^ame man's hands, eyes of the blind,
The widows joys, and cure for grief,
The Tennants harts-ease, and relief.
Thou Grown of women, and good days,
The fatherless, and orphants praise,
Thou that inspight of death did live
To praise his name, that long did give
Thee being! think st thou that thy name
Though dead is gone? no it is the same
It was, and ne(...) shall wast away
Till all dissolves, and Time decay.
Thou map of women and good name,
Sleep on with Time; rest still with fame,
Thou which most Scriptures had^st by heart
Now have it for thy better part.
Marble empounded converts to dust
Thy memory can never rust.
Who 'ere thou be that vewes this hearse,
And with a sad eye reads this hearse,
Know underneath this clod does ly
Eliza of blessed memory,
Zealous in life, happy in days,
Worth all men's loves, and Angels praise.
On Sir HENRY SHERLEY of STAVNTON Baronnet buried at Breedon in Leicester shire.
Why who would think it, say the passers by,
That underneath this Marbled stone should ly
So rich a treasury? can so small Earth
Contain a spirit of so great a birth?
Can such a slender hill keep in command
Him that could tread over leagues of his own Land?
Can honor, and worship thus be undertrod
And thrown as relics, under a poor clod.
Weak is the greatest Prince, and cannot stand
The angry darts, of deaths, commanding hand.
For he that treades over Kingdoms of his own,
In some few feet of Earth must be trod down.
And therefore Sherley, 'twas in vain for thee
To Oppose the mast^r of a monarchy.
Let it suffize thy goodness shall outlive
All those inveteracies, the world can give,
Thy love thy learning, goodness, merit, fame,
Shall as preservatives, live in the name
Of thy posterity! and may they shine
In Saint-like goodness, far transcending thine.
That to their fathers name they may gain praise
And centuple their honored mothers dares.
Thus passenger when thou reflects thine eyes
Upon this hill, know that here under lies
Thrice noble Harrie, but all tears are vain.
He Is seated higher then we yet can gain.
Wail thou his loss, but still say Death is just
For Sherley is (what all the World once must:)
On that much lamented gentleman Sir HENRY LEIGH of Egginton.
Why droope you Muses; have you solely cause
To blame the destinies, whose fatal laws.
Have wrought privation, from us taken away
Virtues Map! like the Meridian day
In up-right goodness? I must confess
Great are your griefs, mine greater, and not less.
Rivers lose course, when trilling springs grow dry
Life must decay, when all our vitalls die.
Yet though our bodies fall, and spirits pass
Our virtues live transparent in the glass
Of our lives steeradge; though our loss be great
Lend me your aides solemnly to entreat
Of your dear loss, and mine! mine is as much
And has like Marble a true N^obes touch.
Three things there are indivisibly plast
Which still in order stand; first, midst, and last,
These he was all; his parentage goodness bred
A midst he was nobly educated,
Lastly, he was most zealous to his God,
With lambe-like patience, he did bear his rod.
Attributing Time tardy, 'cause that he
No sooner went to heave'ns felicity.
I heard him sighing say, good God that I
Should languish in this veil of misery
Seeing so many able, lusty, and strong,
Some powerful in estates, great yet young.
Some tympani'de with honors, potentates,
Grand Seigneiores, governors of states
That Midas-like with an Elixar touch
Turned all to gould they handled (quoth he that such)
As these can die, and leave this veil of cares,
And I that loath it, languish still in tears
Because I cannot leave it. love to my God
Has made my soul, and body fall at od?
And from my dying breath I this impart,
Wishing those old companions now depart.
Base fortunes goods, which to their hearts men bind
He estimated not! Virtues of the mind
Were his endowments! his purchased store
Gave sustenance, and still releiv'd the poor.
With open hand, and heart just like a ashowre
Sent in dry April, so did he freely power
His bounteons alms! like as the free Sunn
Gives to all earthly things Vegetation
Life, and full growth, shining alike on all
From the lowest brambles to the Cedars tall.
So did his Charitable hand to all express,
Where just necessity was, due cheerefulnes.
His garments were for warmth, not wantonness,
By which he did humility express,
Implying virtue needed no gould lace
To guild his russet coat with; sacred grace
Was his best suite! there did he contemplate,
And in goodness his soul ingratiate,
Loathing all vanities beneath the Moon,
Which are like shadows after Sun set down.
Night, stormy tempests, dangerous heats that fall,
Labor, greise, misery, death the fine of all,
Him he most hated, 'cause he dared not venture
And with his pale dart, nail him to the center.
Bringing him to those Moon eclipsed lights.
Where day light ever shines excluding nights.
Where peace, and joy perpetually remain
Where death nor age, nor any thing is vain,
Virtue's a castle which hardly can be won,
Till Death gives the retrait, and cries be gone.
Or those Erispelas, statuous tumors
By long consumptions bred, purgd ill humors
Subjecting natures strong enforced mean,
Yet then in three things he wishde to be clean,
Clean in th'exterior part, clean in mind
His soul assuredly he clean did find.
See what divinity pale weakness brings.
(Clean souls delight not in corruptible things.)
But faithles World who shin's most in thy grace
Must expiate, ('it is God and natures race.)
Life like an Autumn leaf shakeing flies
Now on the Tree it grows, now falls, now dies.
One minute brings us life that minute pain,
One minute brings us death, that life again.
On the right Honorable H^N^Y P^I^POINT Father to the right Honorable ROBERT
Earl of Kingston.
What siere thou be, that hap's to cast an eye
Upon this monument, Know here does lie
Virtues unparalleld piece! goodness, grace
Were hand maids to attend him! in his face
In never dying carracts thou might read
How meekenes and humility were displaide.
His charity I need not here proclaim,
The needy handed by truth speak the same.
In courage Mars, in patience Zephyrs wind
Botl'd not so much sweetness, calm, and kind.
Judgments sole ground, his tongue did solely speak
And since he is gone, best judgments are grown weak.
Smooth Plato's style, and Cicere's Eloquence
Survivde by him, in him they did commence.
For from his lip's such honnyde style did come
As would make Tully mute, strike Rhetorique dumb,
Not Ae^chilus such wanton lays did sing
As he did heavenly sacred ravishing.
This makes the Muses mourn, 'cause he is fled
And not their tongues alone, but phrase is dead.
Plato held swarms of Bees! so did not he,
Yet he from Plato gaind the maistery
In his familiar speech! now lived those Swans
That of him sung heavenly Io Paeans.
Our latter age for Style, Sound, Case, and Tense
Of former times would gain preeminence.
Bounty, Goodness, Hospitality
The poores friend, Foe to prodigality.
Patience, neighbour-like Love, and all Arts
The Card'nall virtues of the inward parts.
Sweet consolations of all holy minds
Which like to chains man to heaven binds.
All mental Virtues sovereigns of the soul
He had in heart, and did in mind en-roule
What goodness man could boast, merit, or raise,
In him the Epitome was well worthy praise,
And yet he bragd not: ostentation
And his free thoughts were at disunion
Farewell thrice happy Harry, happy he
That leaves behind him, such a memory
Then reader, when thou read'st, and this name hears
On this thou can not look without soome tears.
On the worthy Gentleman Sir HENRY A^ARD of Fauston, 1635
AS the poor Bird when Summers height resignes
Her high Meridian to the ^cy signs
Which scornefully dart through the watery Clouds,
To see Earths braveries in witherd shroudes.
The silly Lark then to salute the day
Gets upon wing! as though she would assay.
Some cheerful notes to sing! then beholding
Fair Summer spent, after the cheerful spring
Down falls her notes, a cherripping she keeps
Yet knows not well whether she sings or weeps.
She sings in thought of Summer, but she cries
To think of Winters ^ragicke miseries.
In this extreme, all mourn for thy depart
That living knew thee (though now dead thou art.)
Muse thou have had much work, but now thy Pen
Has found a subject worth a Diadem.
Two noble Heuries worthes thou late did sing
This third deserves thy best of sonnetting.
Sad fate it proves to us, when as your eyes
From comicke streines sing tragic Elegies.
Yet though we cannot contradict the Fates
In spite of them, we can bewail our states.
Methinkes I hear the neighbor habiting groves
Where with shrill bugles he did chant their loves,
In piteous order say! who now shall guide
Or man our harmless herds from being destroyde?
The brawny Oak, grown Ash, the Elm, and Yewe.
In this sad season quite have lost their hue.
Their mountant arms like hunts-men always seen
Apparelled in Summers livery green,
Look not like July, but Septembers wane,
When every flower from Tellus breasts are taken?
Thus every sign contrariously does go
Prefiguring calamity, and woe.
Whence grows the cause, why nature had assignd
Thy loss dear Agard, by them thus divined,
Yet thou art not lost, thy one part lives on Earth
Thy other in Elysium has new birth
For thy unparalleld goodness needs must stand
As a remarkable mirror to this Land.
Let gentiles view their faces there, they will find
An un-faind purity, an up-right mind,
A conscience never went without a feast,
A happy burden for a troubled breast.
A brow that never frownd upon the poor
But where necessity was, there went his store.
His fleece was apt for clothing, and his purse
Was ever open to the Orphants nurse.
And since we are dissecting, let his ese
Stand for a pattern of humility.
Where he himself annua'ly did read
Those principals that now last, though he is dead.
His hands bore justice scales, his countries cause
Ev'nly he manadged by her just laws.
Not sparing greatness feareing power, or might.
But scorning favor did to all men right.
The scales of justice here he carride even,
And questionles he finds them now in heaven.
For upright justice is the path that bringes
Man to the presence of the King of Kings.
He ^uilyes Motto every morn did scan,
(None feeds on justice, but the upright man)
He served our Sovereign James, our laurel, King
^^ke him that did our Israell^ gloryes sing.
He Knighthood gave him for his Zeal, Love, Truth.
And dignified him in his prime of youth.
Honors do seldom come without desert
For time makes vice, or Virtue most apert.
Truth like a Column does the one support,
Time Lawier-like does the other court.
His Love, Zeal, Goodness, Truth, Piety,
Strong creditors with Soveraignity.
So pleased our glorious King, Charles of same
For to investe on him, a servants name.
In his new fabric! in which mystery
He ended life in great Tranquillity.
Which ^^^bury the house of Lan^aster,
And John of Gauntes! shall evermore ever^
Not coveting honor for the Agardes names,
But it perpetuating to their fames.
Muse thou art in a Lab'riuth' an Maze
His Virtues questionles thy spirits daze.
For thou have lost thy supine major part.
Th'unbounded, boundless goodness of his heart.
There Virtue kept her seat! Apolles line
In his contention was not half so fine.
So true refined, and so full of grace,
The Carde'nall Virtues there strove for a place.
Thrice happy he that liveing loveing dies,
When Virtue strives for due preeminencies.
This Maxim to his age even from his youth
He did prefer, (friendship goes still with truth)
Reguardlesse of a t^^e friends small offense,
True friendship aims at perfect eminence,
Those Centryes where thou liv'dst do blazon forth
Thou liveing had their hearts, now dead thy worth
Lives still with them! that time cannot decay
Till all dissolves, and time sweepes all away.
Thou liv'dst in peace, and so did; and like thee
May all men go to true Eternity.
On the same.
IF Marble monuments tell to future days
Th'^habiters good deeds, glories, honor, praise,
Why should not thine say something since in thee
Goodness rests to perpe(...)e?
Thou had a scholars knowledge, and best parts
And liv'dst sole M^. of the liberal Arts
Thy goodness needs hoe testate, for thy deeds
Like a true Gardener, rooted (...) ill weeds,
Leaving the supple plants; Herbs, and Flowers,
Befiting coronets of virtues bowres.
No tribulations ever shook thy breast
Patience did evermore support thy creste.
Resolvde on that old S^crates did sing
(Meekenes 'is the greatst. Trophe of a King)
Where power wantes, there E^^y son'st is known,
But where thine lay thy mercy was most shown.
Thy love, charity, liberality,
Were all expressed in true humility.
The just man's merits by his deudes are sound
The bad man's are like waters cast on ground.
Thy life unspotted was, thy end as clear
As Jupiters in his ascendant sphere.
The Romans when their famous Consulls did
Petitioned their Oracles to divide
Their goodness amongst their kindred! so may thine,
By that means they will all be made divine.
Were not a sin to wish, we should desire
Aectias Botles, again for to inspire
Fresh life? it is said that they are stuffed with breath.
But there is no conqueror comes after death.
Old Faussons joy farewell, for there thy name
Shall last as long as honor, time, or fame.
To thy dead Hearse thy honored friend this gives,
That love is firmest after death still lives.
On the pattern of modesty ELIZA: TEVERY daughter of GERVASE TEVERY of
Staplefoord Esquire.
Why did the Lilly, Paunce, and Violet weep
The Marigold ere Sunset in did creep
At whose refiexion she used for to rise
And at his way-gate to close up her eyes.
Why were the beaten ways with flowers strovvne
And set with needy Lazars, hanging down
Their mournful heads? why did the Pulpit mourn
At if prepared for some Funeral urne,
And yet the Temple was with garlands hung
Of swee^ smelling Flowers, which might belong
Unto some bridal! not! heaven knows the cause
It Was otherwise decreed in Natures Laws.
Those smelling sweetes with which our sense was fed
Were for the burial of a maidenhead.
Which made an Antumne just in the mid-spring,
And all things contrary their birthes to bring,
Herbs, Plants, and Flowers, contrariously grew
Because they now received not natures dew,
The needy beggars hung their heads for thee
Thou matchless Map of maiden modesty.
From whose fair hands they had an almners pay
As often as they met thee every day.
The sacred Temple, where thy holy fires
Of incense was powered on, in chaste desires,
Was thus prepared, and deek'd, on every side
To welcome thee, as her sole sovereign Bride.
Whose goodness was inimitable, whose virtues shone,
Like to the Sun in his bright Horizon.
The maiden vestalls, that with watery eyes
Bore thee to the Church for Vesta's sacrifize.
Were all in white! carracts of innocence,
Prefiguring thy greater eminence.
So great their loss that with watery eiene
They offer tears still to thy Virgin shrine,
And if that tears; sighs, or prai^es could save thee
What would not they express now to have thee?
Sacred divinity allows of no such wish.
Therefore emparadie'd soul rest thou in bliss.
Thy neighbours-^^d a share in thy great fall,
But most thy parents in thy funeral.
Unparalleled piece farewell! there is no Grace
But was transparent in thy maiden face.
And when thy Virgin blushes did appear
They showed like Phoebus in our hem^^phere.
Or like the ^ofie blushes of the morn
When he the enameld Zodiac does adorn.
Her tender years were free from hateful pride.
Nor were her looks with red-look'd anger died.
She had with Martha a most zealous heart
But did with Mary choose the better part.
Her loss was piteous, yet less to be wailde
Since she on Cherubins high heaven scalde.
Where amongst the Hierarohies she sits, and sings
Sweet Hymenealls with the King of Kings.
On old JOHN CVRS'EN of KEDLESTON Esquire.
JOHN CVRSON.

Anagramma.

So I run on.

JOHN CVRSONE.

Anagramma.

Honor is sure.

Which Anagrammi^de thus, it is clear, and pure,
So he ran on. His honor now is sure.
On the same.
THy childrens loss, and countries praise
Thou Crown of age, life, and long days,
In thee a happiness still appears
That could tell over so many years,
Achilles in thy prime of youth
U^sses in thy sager grouth.
Lib rall, yet fiugall, foe to none
Virtues choice companion,
Enriched with all her sacred parts
The Muses friend, and nurse of Arts.
Earth use him gently for his fate
Never livde at under-rate
The Worm, scarce so much goodness joy'd
Since the great deluge earth annoyed.
Gone is the hospitable cloak
And where fire was there is now no smoke.
Then that in ^ll things did excel
I wish me with thee, so farewell.
On that renowned, and Hospitable Gentleman JOHN PALMER of Kegworth Esquire.
SMall briefes contain large matters; and
By some parts the, whole we understand.
Rich Diamonds, though set In lead
Are not for worth less valued.
Their sparkleing beauties most are seen
When night would hide them with a Skreene.
Though earth has hid thee in her womb^
Yet thy great worth lives in thy tomb.
Thy goodness was unparalleld
Thy charity by no^e excelld.
Thy bounty learning, love, and name
Are Trophes of thy countries same.
They have more records of thee two
For thou did that none else did do.
The poor man welcome had from thee
Before the rich man's bravery.
He on thy bounteous Table fed
And was with all things cherished.
Nay Palmer-like thou did assay
To fetch them in from the high way.
And with thine own sleece made, and spun
Cover the lame, the blind, and dumb.
The Lazar might not starveingly
Thou coverdst his necessity.
The rich might not the poor oppress
The just man's cause thou did redress.
Thy house was made an hospital
And plenty cride, 'yare welcome all.
The stranger might not thirsty pass
For there was Tempors full brim'd glass,
Prefiguring his thirsty soul
Might be refreshed, but not made foul.
As Zephyrs bottles, such was his mind
Sweet, calm, and free, loveing, and kind.
Great, pity Death did in a rage
Send Palmer on a pilgrimage,
Nere to return for in his loss
He Kegworthes sorrow did engrosse.
And yet he left a merry one
Whose worth's inferior to none
A Patriot of true deserts.
A nursing father to all arts.
All men are Palmers, Pilgrim meek
He compassed earth high Heaven to seek,
The Saints received him into bliss;
The earth her Palmer still does miss
FINIS.
Imprimatur Exaedib. Londin. Sa. Baker.

Apr. 22. 1636.


