THE HISTORY OF IVDITH IN FORM OF A POEM.

Penned in French, by the Noble Poet, G. Salust. Lord of Bartas.

Englished by Tho. Hudson.

Ye learned: bind your brows with Laurer band,
I prease not for to touch it with my hand.
Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Thomas Vautroullier. 1584.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND mighty Prince, James the Sixth, King of Scotland his
Majesty's most humble Servant, Tho. Hudson wishes long life with everlasting
felicity.
AS your Majesty Sir, after your accustomed and verteous manner was sometime
discoursing at Table with such your Domestiques, as chanced to be attendant.

It pleased your Highness (not only to esteem the percles style of the Greek
HOMER, and the Latin VIRGIL to be inimitable to us, whose tongue is barbarous
and corrupted:) But also to allege partly throw delight your May. took in
the Hautie style of those most famous Writers, and partly to sound the opinion
of others, that also the lofty Phrase, the grave indictment, the facou^d
^ermes of the French Salust (for the like resemblaunce) could not be followed,
nor sufficiently expressed in our rude and impollished english language.
Wherein, I more boldly the^ advisedly [with your May lycence] declared my
simple opinion. Not calling to mind that I was to give my verdit in presens of
so sharp and clear-eied a censure as your highness is: But rashly I alleged
that it was nothing impossible even to follow the footsteppes of the same
great Poet SALVST, and to translate his vearse (which nevertheless is of it
self exquisite) succintlie, and sensibly in our own vulgar specch. Whereupon,
it pleased your Majesty (amongste the rest of his works) to assign me, The
History of Judith, as an agreeable Subject to your highness, to be turned by
me into English verse: Not for any special gift or Science that was in me,
who am inferior in knowledge and crudition to the least of your Majesty's
Court: But by reason (peradventure) of my bold assertion your Majesty, who
will not have the meanest of your house unoccupied, would have me to bear the
yoke, and drive forth the penance, that I had rashly procured. Indeed, the
burden appeared heavy, and the charge almost insupportable to me, nevertheless
the fervent desire which I had to obtemper unto your May. commandment, the
earnest entention to verify my rash speaking, and the assured confidence which
I ankred on your highness help and correction, encouraged me so, and lightened
on such wise my heavy burden, that I have with less pain, brought my half
dispaired work to final end. In the which I have so behaved my self, that
through your May. concurrence, I have not exceeded the number of the lines
written by my author: In every one of the which, he also has two sillabes mo
then my English bears. And this notwithstanding, I suppose your May. shall
find little of my Authors meaning pretermitted. Wherefore if thus much be done
by me, who am of an other profession, and of so simple littrature, I leave it
to be co^sired by your May. what such as ar co^summat in letters and knows
the weighty words, the pithie sentences, the pollished terms, and full
efficacy of the English tongue would have done. Receive the^ Sir, of your own
Servant, this little work at your own commandment enterprised, corrected by
your May. own hand, and dedicated to your own highness. If I have done
well, let the praise redound to your May. whose censure I have vnderlyen. If
otherwise, let my default of skill, be imputed to my self, or at the least my
good entention allowed, whereby others may have occasion to do better. To your
highness consideration, referring Sir, both my deligence done in this small
translation, and the inueterate affection which I have, and ought always to
bear unto your May. I commit with all humility, your highness, your Realm
and estate, to the government of God, who governs all the World.

SONNET.
SInce ye immortal sisters nine hes left
All other countries lying far or nere:
To follovv him who from them all you reft,
And now hes causde your residence be here
Who though a stranger yet he lovde so dear
This Realm and me, so as he spoilde his avvne,
And all the brooks and banks, and fountains clear
That be therein of you as he has shavvne
in this his work: the^ let your breath be blavvne,
In recompense of this his vvilling mind
On me: that sine may with my pen be drawn
His praise: for though himself be not inclynde
Nor preaseth but to touch the Laurer tree:
Yet well he merits crovvnd therewith to be.
FINIS.
SONNET,
The Muses nine have not reueald to me
What sacred seeds are in their gardens sown
Nor how their Salust gains the Laurer tree
Which throw thy toil in Britain ground is grown
But since they se thy travel treuly shown
In verteus skoole th'expyring time to spend
So have they to his hienes made it known
Whose Princely power may dewly the defend
Then you that on the Holy mount depend
In crystal air and drinks the cleared spring
Of Poetry I do you recommend
To the protection of this godly King
Who for his verteus and his gifts deuyne
Is only Monark of the Muses nine.
FINIS.
M. V. F.

THE AVTHORS ADMONITION TO THE READER.
Beloved Reader, it is about fourtene years past since I was commanded by the
late Illustrate and most virtuous Princess Iean, Queen of Navarre, to reduce
the History of Judith, in form of a Poem Epique, wherein I have not so much
aimed to follow the phrase or text of the bible, as I have preased (without
wandering from the verity of the History) to imitate Homer in his Iliades, and
Virgill in his Aeneidos, and others who has left to us works of such like
matter: thereby to render my work so much the more delectable. And if the
effect has not answered to my desire, I beseech thee to lay the fault upon
her who proposed to me so mean a Thean e or subject, and not on me who could
not honestly disobeye. Yet in so much as I am the first in France, who in a
just Poem has treated in our tongue of sacred things, I hope of thy favor to
receive some excuse, seeing that things of so great weight cannot be both
perfectly begun and ended together. If thou neither allow my style nor
workmanship, at least thou shall be driuou to allow the honest pretense and holy
desire which I have to see the youth of France so holyly by mine example
exercysed.

I may not forget that they do greatly wrong me, Who thinks that in
discriuing the Catastrophe of this History (truly tragical) thinks that I
am becomme a voluntairy Advocate to these trouble some and sedicious sprites
(who for to serve their temerarious passions, and private inspirations)
conspires against the lives of placed princes. For so much do I disassent that
this example and the like ought to be drawn in consequence, that I am verily
persuaded that the act of Ahud, of Iaell, and of Judith, who under color of
obeisance and pretext of amity laid their revenging hands upon Aeglon,
Sisara, and Holophernes: had been worthy of a hundredth gallows, a hundredth
fires, and a hundredth wheels, if they had not been peculiarly chosen of God
for to unloose the chains, and break the bands which retainde the Hebrewe
people in more then Aegiptian servitude, and expressly called to kill those
tyrants with a death as shameful as their lives were wicked and abominable.
But seeing this question is so diffuse that it cannot be absolved in few words,
and that my brain is to weak for so high an enterprise, I send you to those
who have spent more oil and time in turning the leaves of the sacred
scriptures, then I have done for the present. It me suffices for the time to
admonish the Reader, to attempt nothing without a clear and indubitable
vocation of God against those whom he has erected above us and above althing,
not to abuse the law of human hospitality, and other holy bands for to give
place to these frenetike oppinions so to abolish a prete^ted tyranny. I have
also to warn thee of two different sorts of men of the which one sort is so
depraved that they can hear nothing, but that which is altogether profane,
and the other is so supersticious that they make conscience not only to write,
but also to read of holy things in vearse, as though that the measure and
iointure of sillabes were so constrained as it were impossible to keep the
sense vnperuerted, or at least excessiuely obscured. Now if I perceine that
this my first assay may be to thee agreeable, I shall continue more gladly my
new commenced race in such sort that thou shall not repent thine indulgence,
nor I my passed pains. But if contrary fall, in time to come I will be ware to
lay out my small pack in this ample Theater of France, where there is almost
as many Judgments as beholders. A Dieu.

GSSDB.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE WHOLE HISTORY OF IVDITH.
AFter that the Children of IZREL were delivered from captivity and returned
to their la^d, the city of JERUSALEM reedified, the Temple builded, and
prepared to the scruice of the Lord, the multitude of the people being
scattred in sundry towns and places of the land, where they lived in peaceable
rest: the Lord knowing man to be negligent of God and his salvation, chiefly
when he lives at ease, and all things frames unto his frail desire, to the end
that his people should no^t fall in such an inconvenient, would exercise them
with a fearful affliction and temptation, sending upon their country an
army so great in number and puislance, that made the whole earth to tremble.
This expeditio^ was under the Persian Monark, named in the history
Nabuchadnezar (which nevertheless is not his right name.) His chief Lieutenant
general and Conductor of the whole Army, was Holophernes, who (whersoeuer he
came) ouerthrewe all religion, permitting none to invoke or acknowledge any
other God, but NABVCHADNEZAR, his Master, whom he enforced to constitute and
establish for the only God. So entered he Judea with intent to distroye it
all, which the people perceiving his power to be so great that no nation could
resist him, and also knowing his cruel hatred, were sore affraide, and almost
driven to extreme desperation seeing none other thing present before them, but
ruin and destruction. And this the Lord suffered, to show (in time) his work to
be more wonderful. For the people being humbled, and having called to the
lord for mercy and succor at his hand, he both hard and succored them at
need. The mean was not through strength or stoutnes of some worthy Captain,
but by the hand of IVDITH, a tender feeble woman, to the shame of this most
proud and cruel tyrant, and all his heathen host. For she cut off his head,
put all his camp to flight, distroyd his men of Arms, in such wise that they
fled here and there, and seeking to save their lives. left all their tents and
baggage. Thus the Lord by the weak, and those that are not regarded, makes his
works admirable. By one self mean he saved his own, and executed his justice
against his enemies. In which we have to consider his singular providence and
goodness, and the care which he has in especial for his faithful, and all his
whole church. This History is entitled by the name of IVDITH, because it
conteines the narration of her great virtues, and for that the Lord used her as
an instrument for the deliverance of his people. It is not certain who was the
first Author hereof, nevertheless the reading of it has been received in the
Church for the doctrine and utility of the same.

THE SOMMARIE OF THE I. BOOK.
Holophernes lieutenant general and chief of the army of Nebuchadn^zer King of
the A^sirians, was in the field for to subd^we duers people and amongst others
the Jews. All the Nation is seized with great fear, for the cruelties
committed by the enemy. Then as it falls out in bruits of war, all the
whole people were troubled, some saving themselves in corners for fear, others
attending in great perplexity, some sad and Tragic^ll end the best sort calls
upon God. This while Ioachim the chief Priest goue^ned the people: he by his
letters and expres command^ment recalles those that were fled and scattred, and
made them return to Jerusalem where, in presence of the Leu^ts, he made
sacr^fice and er^est pray^r unto God to withdraw hi^ y^e and to be merciful
to his people, which done he enters in counsel and requyres his Princes to
consulte upon the cause, and consider what is most expedient, and to prefer the
love of Gods L^we and the coun^rie, before all private things: the first that
gainstands this exhortation an hyp^crite and favorer of the enemy, who gives
counsel to render them to Holophernes calling him a Prince gracious to those
that appl^udes to him, and invincible in battle to those that dar resist him.
But the secound Lord replying zealously again, detecteth his false hypocrisy
and c^^rles security, exp^sing the people to the mercy of a barbarous go^es
enemy before the duity they ought to their God and their country: and to
establish in place of the true God, a wicked Nemrod consummat in all impiety
and wickedness, to abolish all virtue and godlynes, for he proves that if the
nation should be roted out for the right religion, God should be more honored
in the death of the Jews then in their lives: and that it is more worthy to
dye Hebrews then to live infidells. And freemen then sklaves. Short^y that
they ought to prefer honor and d^^tie before fear, and a vain hope to
prolong their doleful days. This reply encouraged all the a^s^stants whereof
Ioachim, give thanks to God, and resolving him self upon a just defense for
the conservation of the service of God, and the fredome of his nation, and the
lives of the innocent against this v^lanous invasion: nysely departed the
regiments of towns to persons convenient, who past to their a^s^gned places,
^^hone preparing according to them power unto the war with courage, pain, and
dilignce.

THE FIRST BOOK OF IVDITH.
I Sing the virtues of a valiant Dame, Proposition and sum of this work.

Who in defense of Jacob overcame:
The Assyrian Prince, and slew that Pagan stout,
Who had beset Bethulia walls about.
O thou, who kept thine Izak from the thrall Inuocario^ of the true God.

Of Infideles, and stelde the courage small,
Of feeble Judith, with a manly strength:
With sacred fury fill my heart at length.
And with thy Holy sprite, my sprite enspire,
For matter so divine, Lord I require
No human style, but that the Reader may,
Great profit reap, I joy, thou praise always.
And since in vulgar verse I prease to sing, Dedicatio^ of the Author altered
by the translatour.

This godly Pooeme to a Christian King,
To him who God in goodness has crect
For princely Pillar, to his own elect:
For lawful Lord, to reign with truth and right:
For love some Laurer, to the verteous wight:
Him (I beseech) this travel to defend,
That to his pleasure I the same may end.
WHen Izrell was in quiet rest and peace,
And fruitfully the ground gave her increase,
Which seauentie year untilled lay beforne
And nothing bare but thistle, weed, and thorn.
It pleased God (upon his just correction)
T'awake his own, that were of his election,
Least that the lo^gsom peace should the^ withhold:
And dull their spirits, as does the warrior bold,
Who spoils his horse with pampring in the stable,
That makes him for the manaige more unable.
He spread their land with bands of enmies stout,
Whose clouds of shot, bedimd their land about.
Their Host, with arrows, pikes, and sta^dards, stood The Army of Helepherne.

As bristel pointed, as a thornie wood.
Their multitude of men, the rivers dride,
Which throw the wealthy Judah sweet did slide:
So that slood Iordane finding dry his bank,
for shame he blushed, and down his head he shra^ke,
For woe that he his credit could not keep,
To send one wave, for tribute to the deep.
Scarce had the Harvest man with hook in hand,
Dispoilde the fruit and let the stuble stand:
Scarce had the hungry Gleaner put in bind,
The scattred grain, the Sherer left behind:
And scarce the slapping flaile began to thresh
When unto Jacob, news was brought a fresh.
That Holophern, his frontiers did invade,
And past all Rivers, straites, and murders made
So vile, that none he left that drew the breath:
But old and young, he put to sudden death:
The sucking babes upon their mothers knee:
His cruel cutthroates made them all to dee.
Then like a slocke of sheep that does behold,
A wolf come from the wood upon their fold,
Shapes no defense, but runs athwart the lands,
And shortly makes of one, a hundredth bands,
So Isacks sons, indreading for to feel The Hobreus.

This tyrant, who pursued them at the heel,
Dissundring fled, and sought their lives to save:
In hills, and dales, and every desert cave.
The sheepherd of his flock had now no care: Fear of the enemy.

But fearing death sled to some mountain bare.
The Craftsman now his lumes away has laid:
The Merchant left his traffike and his trade,
To hide himself more safely in a vault:
Then in a Rampire, to sustain the assault.
The Lords esteemde them selfs in furer hold:
In Dens of beasts, then castles gilt with gold.
Fear lent the wings for aged folk to fly,
And made them mount to places that were hie.
Fear made the woeful women for to bear,
Their cradles sweere to hills that highest wear:
Fear made the woeful child to wail and weep,
For want of speed, on foot and hand to creep:
Alwhere was nothing hard but hideous cries,
And pittious plaints that did the hearts agryes.
O Lord (said they) will thou still day by day, Affiction causes prays

The arrows of thine anger never stay?
Will thou that Calde conquer us again?
Shall Judah yet the Heathen yoke sustain?
will thou again that they make every town,
But stony he apes of houses casten down?
Again shall sacrilegious fire deuore,
thy holy house where we do thee adore?
Then Ioachim the priest of God most hie,
who over Judah then had chief degrie:
Stood like a Pylot stout in tempest great,
who seeing wind and weather for to threat,
Yet to his mates, his fear, no terror draws,
Nor leaves his ship unto the wrackfull wawes.
But with disguising fear, his face up casts,
And stoutly does gainstand the balefull blasts:
Right so this prudent prelate sent in haste,
two hundredth men to pass where men were plaste
In places strong, and thence commanded them,
For to repair unto Jerusalem.
Now since The Eternal did reveal his will,
Upon the sacred top of Syna Hill,
the Ark of God which wisdom more did hold,
In Tables two, then all the Greeks have told.
And more then ever Rome could comprehend,
In huge of learned books that they pend:
Long wandered it throw tribs, throw kin and kin, Sam. 1.4. Sam. 2.6.

and found no certain place of resting in.
Yea sometime it the shameful spoil has been
to sacrilegious hands of Palestene,
until that time, that Iessies holy race,
for ever lodged it in Iebus place. Jerusalem

But for that David's hands with blood were filde
throu infinits of humaines he had kilde.
the king of peace would have a king of rest,
to build his Temple far above the best: Sam 2.7.

His house, whose front vpreard so high and eavne,
that lightlied earth, and seemd to threat the heavne
until that wicked time a tyrant vile,
Of name and deed that bare the semble style, Nabuchadnezer. Chr. 2.036

that did this king, that building brave he wract,
And to the sacred ground al whole it sacked.
Yet when, long after, Abrahms holy race,
Of Tiger banks had left the captive place, Esa. 6.

with combers great they redefied with pain,
that most renowned house of God again.
Which though unto the first it seemde as small,
As to a Princes house, a sheepherds hall,
And though the hugenes were not as it was:
yet sure the height and beutie did surpas,
And ouerseilde the famous work of Pharie:
Ephesus temple, and the tomb of Carry.
The Rhodian Collos, and the Caldean wall,
that Semirame set up with tourrets tall.
Also the wondrous work of this same temple,
Might serve a Cresiphon for his exemple:
Lysippus eke to carue by square and line,
Or guide Appelles pensile most divine.
Hear in this place, all Izrel most devout,
withdrew them selves to Salem round about, Jerusalem

As when the heavne his sluices opens wide,
And makes the floods upon the ground to glide,
the brooks that breaks adoune from diverse hills
with course impetious till one deep distills.
Amongst the Dames, that there deuoutest were
The Holy Judith, fairest did appear:
Like Phoebus that above the stars does shine:
It seemd that she was made on moulde divine.
This Primate then assisted with his kin
Of great Eleazar (priests whose head and chinne,
Was never shave) devoutly on he preast:
A pearled Myter on his balmed creast.
And with a holy Alb, with garnettes spread,
And golden Belles, his sacred body cled.
And slew, and burnt, the bulks (as was the guise)
Of many a kid, and ^alfe for sacrifise.
And with their blood, the Alters horns he dyed,
And praying thus, to God immortal cried.
"O Lord of Hosts, we come not unto thee, Prayer.

"To wey our merits with thy majesty:
"Nor to protest before thy heavenly might,
"That sacklessy, thy scourge does on us light:
"But rather we confess (as true it is)
"Our sins, have justly merit more then this.
"But Lord if thou thy covenant would forget,
"Which thou with Abrahm made, and so wilt set
"For mercy great, thy justice most seueare,
"Thou should a greater plague upon us rear.
"Change then our process from thy justice seat,
"And save us at thy throne of mercy great.
"Forgive us Lord and hold far from us all,
"These plagues, that on our heads are like to fall.
Alas what helps us thy heavy stroke,
To bind our necks to such a servile yoke,
Wherewith the Assyrian tyra^ts long have grieved
Thine Izak, till their bondage thou relieved.
If so this native ground that new is tilde,
If so these Hostries new with folk refilde:
If so (alas) our chaste and modest Dames,
Our infants young, our Virgins good of fames,
Should be a pray to Ammon, and to Perse,
To Calde, and the mutine Parthian fierce,
If that we see this Alter made profane,
And witches it abuse with Idols vain:
Yet, Lord if thou no pity on us take,
At least great God, do for thy glories sake.
Have pity on this holy building now,
Where not a God has sacrifice but thou:
Where not a God but thou have residence,
To feile the savor sweet of frankensence.
Hold back (O Lord) the Caldean cressets bright
From these rich Cedar vaults of stately hight.
Preserve these vessels, ornaments of gold,
From sacrilegious hands of neighbors bold.
And let the blood of beasts before thy face,
Thy Justice stay, and grant thy servants grace.
This prayer done, the people went their way,
Then Ioachim conuende that present day:
the Princes all of Judah, and them praide,
against this mischief for counsel, and thus said.
Companions, if your former zeal remain, Exhortation.

If ardent love to god ye still retain:
If wife, or child, may cause your care or love,
Which should the Centers of your senses move:
If in your breasts a noble heart does bide,
Let deed bear witness at this woeful tide.
For saving God and your foresight, in deed
it is done, it is done with us, and all our seed.
And after this, the Immortal shall not see
this after fume before his maiestee.
When the Air is calm, and still as dead and deaf, Comparison.

And under heavne quakes not an aspin leaf,
When Seas are calm, and thousand vessels fleet
Upon the sleeping seas with passage sweet.
And when the variant wind is still and lowne,
the cunning Pylot never can be known.
But when the cruel storm does threat the bark,
to drown in deepes of pits infernal dark,
while tossing tears both ruther mast and sail,
While mounting seems the Azur sky to skaile:
while drives perforce upon some deadly shore,
there is the Pylot known and not before.
Alas I pray you then what care and strifes,
Have we to keep our honors, goods, and life's:
Forget not then the care of this same place,
your countries weal, gods glory and his grace:
But humbly give your selves into the hand
Of god most high, and with a holy brand,
,repurge your sprits from every hateful sin,
,which causes God his Justice to begin:
And see what may to God be agreeable,
For Jacobs weal, and for you profitable.
This said: an ancient traitor from his youth,
who fostred gall in heart, with honey in mouth,
Enforcing from his eyes some fained tear,
(to cloak his malice) spacke as ye shall hear,
My tongue me fails, my hair for dread vpstarts, The Oration of a subtle
worldling

My heavy spirit, from pensive corpse departs.
When I bethink me of yone tyrant stout,
who has bedround the world with blood about:
Approaching threats our towns with fiery flames,
Our selfs with death, dishonor to our Dames.
Yet when I call to mind the curtsie great,
That this great Lord does use, who does entreat
Not only those that beastiall are become,
And have their hope in brutall Idols dome,
But even to zealous folk who do embrace,
The faith, and law, like us of Abrahms race:
who being well aduisde, did humbly sue
His pardon, and escapte his vengeance due,
then thank I God who sends us such a foe,
As plagues the proud, and lets the humble go:
For we as soon, shall vanquish him with tears,
As will be long, to wrak him with our wears.
Then whilst we may have choice of either state
of peace or wars, his favor, or his hate.
Let us not follow (seeing skath at hand)
the folly of our fathers, to gainstand.
But rather let us bear a lower sail,
And serve his king as best for our awaile.
But think not yet, that I this council give
for craft, or warrant for my self to live:
For I have else my days so nearly spent,
that for to dye I could be well content.
The Assyrian need not in my breast to
strike,
His fethred Dart, nor yet his trembling pike:
Yea if my youth to me should eft return,
And make my youthly blood within me burn,
So honor I my God, and country dear,
that for to dye for them, I would not fear:
As Sampson did, if so my death might yield:
The victory of the Vizroy, and the field.
But most (I fear) least we with curious zeal,
Fight for the law, yet fight against her weal,
Against our selfs, to bring so great a wrack:
that proud, and cruel tyrants shall us sack,
And grow in pride (suppressing Iudaes strength)
For to contemn the glory of God at length.
For Israel being lost, who shall ensue,
to render here to God devotions due?
what people sparsed on this earthly ball
From Indian shore to where the Sun does fall.
Or from the Climate of the northren blast,
Unto that place where summer aye does last:
Has God elect, save Israel for his own
Upon this Hill to have his glory shown?
At this: the valiant Cambris of renown,
with righteous rage grew pale and began to frown,
And brake the silence with a vehement style,
His courage movde the Princes all the while.
Nay rather where I stand let open the ground
(Quod he) to swallowe me, in pit profound Azealous godly answer.

Yea, rather righteous heaven let fiery blast,
Light on my head that thou on Sodom cast,
Ear I my malice cloak or ouersile,
In giving Izac such a council vile.
For if the Leader of this folk profane
Upon our bodies only sought to reign,
Although that we have dearly bought always
Our freedom from our first maternall day
(which dearer is then gold for to be kept)
I would assent, the holy Church except,
But since more pride this tyrants heart enroules
to lay a greater burden on our souls:
Who are the vassalles of that only King,
That thu^der sends and Scepters down does thring:
,Should we forget him who made us of naught,
,More the^ al wo^drous things that he has wroght
who treates and loves us like our father and king,
Still under shadows of his wondrous wing?
Will he that we receive a Prince ambitious?
for God, a gods contemner Nemrode vicious?
whose beastly life is of so vile a fame,
That of a man he merits not the name?
Go to, go to, let men, for men assaye
with sword and shot, to deal it as we may:
The victory lies not in mortal hands,
Nor barded horse, nor force of armed bands.
these are but second instruments of God,
Who, as him list, may send them even or od.
But if our sovereign God wills such anoye,
that folk vncircumsisde, our land distroye,
Because we him offend while we have breath,
Alas, yet honor, honor him in death.
And if we lose, and all be overcome,
Let patience win the glory of martyrdom.
Forsooth, though Assurs soldiers brave and bold
Extinguish quite the race of Izak old,
yet shall they not deface the living lord,
As these Apostats falsely do afforde.
For he, who people first this world so round,
But with one man, from whom the rest abound
And who long after, in an arc of wood
Repaird the waste, made by the genrall floode:
May he not eke transform the hardened stone,
To people who will honor him alone?
And may not he do now, as he has done,
who gave to Abrahms barren wife a son?
Them giving Children more, then in the heaven
Are starrie Circles, light as fiery leaven,
And mo, then Northre^ winds that drives the Rack
Of Cyrene sands in number can compack
Who will observe his law a hundredth fold
More zealously then we, who should it hold.
,Then, fathers chose you wars, for better tells,
,To lose like Jews, then win like infidels:
,Let not the greede of gain your hearts attame,
,to leave the right, prefer not, fear to shame.
Scarce ended was th'Oration of this Lord,
when all the Princes with a sound accord:
By word and deed confirmde his good advise:
The chief Priest gladdest of this enterprise,
Unto the heaven held up his hands and face,
And said, I thank the lord who of his grace
,Conioynes no less our wills, the^ bolds our hearts,
,A sure presage that God is on our parts.
This done, unto his princes he deuides
The tribes and towns and ordaines them for guides
for fear least some of them led with ambition
In Izrell might stir up some new sedition,
So they withdrew, and stoutly did provide
this furious storm of Mars for to abide.
Then as ye see sometime the home bees,
Exerse themselfs on buddes of sweetest trees,
Comparison.

where they sometime assault the buzzing waspe,
That comes to near their flowrs away to claspe,
Or when they honey draw from smelling time,
Or from the palm, or Roses of the prime:
And how they draw their wax with wo^drous art,
Observing iointure just in every part,
Both up and down they build te^ thousand shops,
with equal space fulfilde up to the tops:
Or where the master Be, of thousand bands,
Conducts the rest in legions throw the lands:
who daily keeps within their Cities wall:
Their house, their work, their laws and manners all.
So thus the sons of Jacob plyde their pain:
with hot desire their quarrel to sustain.
Some built the breaches of their broken town, Preparations of defense.

that Heaven, and Panim ire, had casten down.
Some other found a cautell against the Ram,
to save the wall unbroken where it camme.
Thus Jacobs towns on alsides had their flanks,
with Gabions strong with bulwarks and with banks.
Some others busy went and came in routs
To terrace towers, some under baskets louts:
Some others also wanting time and might,
to strength their towns, yet used all kind of slight,
To dig up ditches deep for cisterns good,
To draw to them the best and nearest flood.
While th'Armorers with ha^mers hard and great
On studies strong the sturdie steel does beat,
And makes thereof a corpslet or a jack,
Sometime a belme, sometime a mace does make,
whiles sheepherds they enarme vnusde to danger
whiles simple hirds, and whiles the wa^dring stranger.
The tilling Culter then a spear was made,
the crooked Since became an euened blade:
the people food forgetes, no ease they take.
Some on a horse, some on his proper back,
Some on a Cart, some on a Cammell bears,
Corn, wine, and flesh, to serve for many years,
As done these Emets, that in summer tide, Comparison.

Comes out in swarms their houses to provide:
In Harvest time (their toil may best be seen
In paths where they their carriage bring between)
their youth they send to gather in the store,
There sick and old at home do keep the skore,
And over grainels great they take the charge,
Often turning corn within a chamber large
(when it is dight) least it do sproute or seed,
Or come again, or weeules in it breed.
FINIS.
THE SOMMARIE OF THE II. BOOK.
We have hard before, how the people of God used al diligence to maintain the
liberty of Gods true religion and their Country. Now is set forth the
extreme pride of Holophernes, who thought with one word to overthrow them
all: But to make himself some pastime, he assembleth his counsel to
understand of them what people they were, that inhabited the mountains in the
Frontieres of Judea, that durst make him res^staunce Upon this he is informed
by the mouth of one of his chief Captains of that, which he looked not for:
to wit, a discourse of the History of the Jews, from the time of Abraham's
coming out of Caldea, to enter in to the land of promise unto their
deliverance from the captivity of Babylon, following the order of the times
quoted by the holy Scriptures with the praises of the providence of the
almighty God, in defending of his Church, and a sharp threatening to those
that dare presume to disquiet the same The chief Consellers of the Heathen
hearing this, become more cruel, ensencing their General to murder this
Captain. But Holopherne with vain ambition deferreth their bloody request,
and after that he had outraged him in words, he further blasphemeth the living
Lord. And lastly caused him to be bound hand and foot, and so carried near to
the City of Bethulia, where he is by the besieged Soldiers brought into the
City, and there declares his case, exhorting them to continue constant to
God, and their Country, and promises his assistance to his lives end.

THE SECOND BOOK OF IVDITH.
NOw Holophern in Seythique Rampire stood,
with sta^dards pight of youthly heathen blood:
Of nothing thinking less, then war and fight,
But in devising pastime day and night:
till he was war, that Jacob would advance,
Against his Pamm force and arrogance.
A pack of what a pack of countrcy clownes
(Quod Holophern) that them to battle bownes,
with beggars, bolts, and Leuers, to arrest
My warriors strong with whom I have suppressed
Both Tigris swift, and fair Euphrates stream, People of Asia.

with frosty Taurus and rock Niphatheame.
Are they not wrackt? ye cheefs of Moabits,
And valiant Fphrem, ye strong Ammonits:
ye that as neighbors knows this folk of old,
That scattred thus, do all these mountains hold:
Tell me what men are they, of what of spring
what is their force, their customs and their king?
'For wise is he that wots with whom he plays,
'And half is victor as the Proverb says.
The Lord of Ammon then, with reurence due,
Right wisely spack the Duke, and yet, for true,
He was a Panim both of faith, and kind:
But so (with fained tongue) he spoke his mind:
And all the Hebreus acts discourst so well,
That Esdr' and Moses seemde in him to dwell,
As did that sprite that made the Prophet bless, Nomb. 23

the Isralits whom Balac did address,
To curse them all, and wadge his covetous tongue.
which spoke contrary that he would have soung:
So, please it you my Lord, I shall discire,
The story of Izrell, yet so doing I,
Am like the modest Be, that takes but small
Of every flower, though she have choice of all:
For where she list the sweetest of she crops.
These people that ye see on mountain tops, A brief discourse of th'estat of
the Jews.

Encamped in these craggs, are of the line,
Of Abraham, who (serving God divine,
That mighty God of gods who create all,
And firmly knit and built this mighty ball)
Came to this land that then was tilde and sown, Genesis 12.

And by the name of wealthy Canaan known.
Where only God his wealth did multiply,
In goods, and silver, gold, and family.
And when of age he was an hundredth year,
His wife eke barren, never child did bear.
God gave them Izak, swearing that his seed,
Should many Scepters rule and land bespreede.
But when that holy Abraham was old:
And hoped well the promise made should hold,
(O pitious case) The Immortal voice him spak:
And bad him sacrifice his son Izak. Genesis ^^.

Then like a ship between two winds beset,
Upon the raging sea on both sides bet,
In doubtsome fear, ne wots what way to keep,
Least one of them, confound her in the deep:
Makes close her ports, and slides on Neptuns back:
At pleasure of the boisteous winds to wrack.
So felt this Hebrew in his heart to fight,
Both love, and duty, reason, faith and right.
Nor wist he way to take, his troubled soul,
From this to that, continually did roll,
until the time, his heavenly fear and love:
His natural earthly pity did remove.
Then having built the fire and all, anon
His son he laid upon the sacred stone,
And with a trembling hand the cutlasse drew,
with heauied arm the stroke for to ensewe.
When lo: The Eternal staid the balefull knife,
And down it fell, and spaird the guiltles life.
Then God content to have so great assaye,
Of Abrahms faith: defended him always.
Of Izak. lacob came, and lacob than,
Of valiant son had twelve in Canaan,
who (forced by famine) fled to Aegipt land, Exodus 1.

wherefore a while, there dwelling good they fand
and grew so great in number, that they were,
a fear to those, that had them harbrowde there,
And though the Egyptians daily them oppressed,
And burdens on their sweating backs were dressed:
Yet like the valiant Palm they did sustain,
Their peisant weight redressing up again,
This movde King Pharo to command through all
Great Nilus land, where rain does never fall,
He bad his folk should slay where so they came,
All children males the seed of Abrahame,
As Soon as they from mothers wombs were free,
Their day of birth should be their day to dee.
O cruel Tiger thinks thou that this deed
Of Izak may cut of the immortal seed? Exclamation.

well may it stay the sucklings for to live,
and kill th'accustomde fruit that heavne does give:
But spite of this, men Jacobs seed shall see
In flouring state to rule all Cananee.
The first of every house shall feel the hand
And wrath of God against this law to stand.
It fortunde Pharos daughter with her train
Of Ladies fair to play them on the plain,
Upon the shore where Gossan floode does slide
where after many pastimes they had tried,
She hard an enfant weep amongst the reeds,
Then judging it for one of Izaks seeds:
As so it was, yet, with Paternall fear,
Against his piteous plaint she closde her ear:
But after vewing in that enfants face,
I know not what of favor and of grace,
which did presage his greatness to ensewe:
Love vanquist law, and pity dread withdrewe:
So from the sloode not only she him caught,
But curiously she causde him to be taught:
As her own son, O son elect of God,
That once shall rule the people with thy rod. Admiration.

Thou haste not found a servant for thy mother,
But even a Queen to nurse thee and none other.
"Now see how God always for his elect
"Of wicked things can draw a good effect
"his providence has made a wicked thing
"Unto his own great profit for to bring. Note.

"When Joseph's brether sold him like a slave, Genesis 41.

"He after came a kingly place to have.
"Of Haman proud the dark envious hate,
"brought Mardoche the just to great estate. Est.

"for where his enmie sought his shameful end
"the same unto the worker he did send.
This Hebrew Moses once as he did keep
On Horeb mount his father Iethro his sheep: Father in Law.

He saw a fearful sight, a flaming fire:
Enclose a thornie bush whole and entire
From whence a mighty voice unto him spoke,
which made the ground between the Poles to shake
I am that one, is, was, and ay shall be, Exodus 3.

who creat all of naught, as pleases me,
I can destroy, I am the great, and Just,
the fair, the good, the Hosie one to trust:
whose strong rightha^d this world has set in frame,
I am the Almighty God of Abrahame.
I plague my foes, and grant my servants grace,
All those that knowledge me and all their race.
Then follow thou my will, and quickly go,
From me, to that Profane King Pharao,
who holds the towrs of Memphis and the field.
Of Nilus shore that rich increase does yield.
And bid him let my people freely go:
But if with hardened heart, he will not so.
Stretch out thy staff for to confirm thy charge,
And it shall turn into a Serpent large.
And this he shortly did, the thing to prove.
It quickened so, and on the ground began move.
(O Miracle) he saw without all fail,
It grew a Serpent fell with head and tail:
which crangling crept, and ran from trod to trod
In many a knot, till time The Almighty God
Commanded him the same for to retain,
which to the former shape returnde again.
Thus siling humain sight, it changed form,
One while a Rod, one while a creeping worm.
Then armed with this staff the lord him sent,
The proud Idolatrous princes to torment.
He in the name of God full often did pray,
the King, to let the Hebrews go their way,
Unto the desert, where he did devise,
To offer God a pleasant sacrifise.
But Pharo closde his ear against the Lord,
And to his holy word would not accord.
Then God The Eternal wrought by Moses hand
to approve his word great wonders in that land. Exodus 4

For he not only Rivers turned to blood, Exodus 7.

But also all th heads of Nilus floode,
(which wattreth wealthy Egypt with his sources)
was turned to blood amid their silver courses:
So that the king him self his life to feed
was feign to use such water for his need.
This Moses made the froggs in millions creep, Exodus 8

From floods and ponds, and scrall from ditches deep,
who cled all Misraim with their filthy fry,
Even on the king, an all his family.
To young and old of either Sex that while, Exodus 9.

He sent a plague of scalding botches vile:
So that the Memphits laid on beds to rest,
with uncouth venim daily were oppressed,
to Medciners, the medcine veiled not,
So sore the poisond plague did vndercot.
He also smote the forests, herbs and gras,
The flocks of sheep and every beast that was:
throw poison of the infected ground so fell,
The Morrain made them all to dye or swell:
So that the shepherd by the river side,
His flock has rather dead then sick espide.
He, earthly dust, to lothly lice did change,
And dimd the Air, with such a cloud so strange
Of flies, grasshoppers, hornets, clegs, and clocks,
That day and night throw houses flew in flocks, Exodus 10.

that with incisions sharp did sheare the skins,
of Aegipt Panims throw their proudest ynnes.
And when the heavne most quiet seemd and fair,
The Eternal sent a tempest through the air,
and at (this Hebrews prayer) such a rear
Of thunder fell, that brought them all in fear.
Here lay a Bull that woodran while he brast,
There lay the Keeper, brunt with thunder blast,
And now the forest high that hid the air,
with many a spreeding arm, is spoild and bair.
So that the sap that grafters keeps with pain,
which should restore the stock, and leaf again:
Is lost (alas) in less then half a day,
the husbands hoped fiuite gone to decay.
What more? The Eternal darkened so the sky,
For three days space none could another spy,
that cloud so thick, the Memphis rebels fand,
that they might firmly feel it with their hand,
If seemd that Phoebus left his ancient round,
And dwelt three days with men of underground.
"And as the snne at one self time is felt,
"with heat to harden clay, and wax does melt:
"so Amrams sacred son in these proiects
"made one self cause, have two contrary effects.
"For Izak, humbly knew their Lord divine,
"But Pharo, more and more did still repine,
"Like to the corpslet cold the more it is bet
"with hammers hard, more hardness it does get.
Yet when his son was slain by the Angels hand, Exodus 1^

Amongst the eldest heirs of Aegipt land:
He was afraid, and let them go that night, Heyrs.

where pleased them to serve their God of might:
Who sent a cloud before them all the day,
By night a Pillar of fire, to guide their way.
But suddenly this tyrant did gainstand
His former grant, and armd all Aegipt land
With hot pursuit against all lacobs host,
that were encamped on the Red Sea cost.
Such noise was never since the foraigne tide,
Brak throw Gibraltar, when it did divide
the Calp, from Abill, or when Sicill strand
Deuorsed was from her italia land:
As was in these two camps that one with boste,
that other with their waillings filde the cost:
It seemd the sounds of furious horse and men,
With horns and pypes to heavne resounded then.
O Iugler, said the Jews, what hateful strife Exodus 14. They ^^^mure.

Has moved thee to change our happy life.
What are we fishes for to swim the seas?
Or are we fowls to fly where as we pleas?
Beyond the Sea, or over hills to soar?
Was there not graves for us on Gossen shore:
But in this desert hear to dye or have
the bloodred Occean Sea, to be our grave.
Then Moses with his quickened rod that tide
He smote the sea, which (fearful) did divide
Discovering land that sun had never seen,
And staid the sea, as there two walls had beeues
which made a passage dry of ample space,
For all to pass who were of I saks race.
But contrary the Red Sea did deuower,
The barbrous tyrant with his mighty power,
who proudly durst himself to that present,
which opened but to save the innocent.
O happy race, since god does arm for thee,
Both fire and air, the winds, the clouds and see,
which all unto thy pay have whole enclinde,
Let not co^suming time we are out of mind:
So rare a grace, but let thine elders show
this to their noble seed that shall ense we:
And let their sons, unto their sons record
Throw all the world rhese wonders of the lord.
God, with Celestial bread (in time of need)
His loved Jacob forty year did feed: Exodus 16

And gave them water from the solid stone,
which of it self, had never moisture none.
Their caps, their cotes, and shoes, that they did weas
God kept all fresh and new, full forty year.
And larder, least their souls for want of food,
should faint fail: he of his mercies good Exodus 20.

Gave them his law, pronounced by his voice,
His sprite to theirs, in him for to rejoice.
So teaching them, and us in precepts ten,
Our ductie first to god, and next to men,
To the end that man to man should truly stand,
And joy ne with God, and never break that band.
This mighty Prophet dead: Duke Joshua than, Joshua

Their Captain stout this Palmy province wan:
Throw might of God he Scepters did subdewe
Of thirty tyran kings, whom all he slew.
At his commandment like the thunder sound,
The Rampers stroug fell fearfully to ground:
Before the Tortuse, or the horned Ram,
Had bet, or mined, from their wall a dram:
For even of horns, full hoarse, their fimple blast
An engine was, their towers adoune to cast.
He prayed the heavne for to prolong the day,
And made the horses of the sun to stay,
To th'e^d, the night should not with cloud be eled
To save the faithles, that before him fled.
Now when this Panim scourge (with age at last)
Had left this life, and unto heaven past:
Then Izak had of Rulers sundry men,
whose golrious acts deserves eternal pen.
who knows not Samgar, Barac, and Othoniell? Indger.

The valiant Delbor, Ahud, and good Samuel?
What land (O Sampson) rings not thy renown,
who sole, unarmed, bet an Army down?
what laud to Iephthe justly might we low:
Had he not hurt hsi own, through hasty vow?
What hill or dale, what flood or fixed ground.
Does not the famous Gedeons praise resounde?
In later time, their kings some good, some bad
Of all the Hebrew state the ruling had.
Had I the Harp of David (holy King)
None other sound but David would I sing,
But even as all the deeds that David did,
Could not be done by none, but by David:
So none but David, on his yvrie harp,
The glorious praise of God could only carpe.
But here his praise, I prease not to proclaim,
Least I throw want of shkill obscure the same.
Yet leave I not his Son, whom grace divine Solomon

made nolesse rich, then wondrous of engine:
whose doctrine drew to Salem from all wheare,
A hundredth thousand wyzards him to hear:
From Araby, from Ynde, to Affrik shore,
His tongue entysd them with his cunning lore.
Shall I forget the kings who overthrew, Iosiat.

Idolatry and plaste religion dew?
Shall I forget that King, who saw descend Hezekiath. Ierulalem

A win ged Host Solyma to defend?
Shall I forget him, who before his eene, Asa.

Enchast the bands of Chus on Gerar green?
Shall I forget him, who preparing fight Iosapbas.

against Ammon, Seir, and Moabs, Idol might,
Saw each of their three hosts on others fall,
And with them selfs their selfs, disconfit all?
Yet, for their sins God gave them in the hands
Of Calde kings, who conquered all their lands:
And took king Zedekee, and made an end
Of that Impyre, till God did Gyrus send,
Who set them free, and gave them of his grace
Two rulers of their own. And now this place
Is kept, by sacred Ioachim, whose powers
consists not only within Syons towers:
But Edom, Sidon, Moab, and we all
Do know his strength and knows him principal.
Now Sir ye hear the progress first and last
Of Izaks race in order as it past.
Onewhile the Lord enhau^st them to the sky:
Onewhile he drew them down in deeps to lie.
'But were he Judge, or Prince, or king of might,
'sho reuld the Hebre ws polycie aright,
'VVhile they obserude thaliance made before,
'by their forefathers who to God them swore
'In happy state all others they surpast:
'And underfoot their proudest foes were cast.
'And all the world, that their destruction sought
'Against their state, and name, prevailed naught.
'But contrary: as often as they astraide
'From god their guide, he on their shoulders laid:
'The Barbare yock of Moab, and oftymes
'Of Palestine and Ammon, for their crimes,
'The heavy hand of God was seen to be,
'On their ungrateful infidelity.
Now, if so be that any odious sin,
Provoke their Lord his Justice to begin:
Then mine not you their towers nor tourets tall,
Nor bring the wracksom engine to their wall:
Nor place thy battries brave, not yet aduenter,
with thy courageous camp the breacth to enter.
For if Libanus mout or Carmell fair
Or Niphathaei should park them from repair:
If Ynde and Nilus with the Rhene and Rhone
to close them round about, should run in one.
For their defense: yet shall they not withstand.
(With all their force) thy furious fighting hand.
But if they have not broke the bnad in deed
That God with Abrahm made and with his seedc:
Beware my Lord, beware to touch or move
These people that the Lord so much does love.
For though south Autan, would dispeople his lands,
And bring the blackest Mores to swarm in ba^ds:
If Northren Boreas, under his anners cold,
would bring to field his hideous Soldiers bold:
If Zyphirus from sweet Hesperia cost,
would send his chosen armed men to Host:
If Eurus, for to aid thine enterprise,
would bring his men from whence the sun does rise:
Yet all their numbres hudge, and forces strong,
Can never do to Isrel any wrong,
Nor hurt one hair if their great God say nay.
That god will them defend because he may:
with one small blast confound all kings that darre,
(As thou do now) provoke him unto war.
Then like as ye behold the quiet see,
Not raging when the winds engen dring be:
But blauncheth first, then grows in little space,
In wallowing wa was to flow with fomy face:
And lastly beats the banks, and ships vnshrouds,
with wrackfull waves vphoist to highest clouds:
So, almost all the princes of that host,
With in ward anger began to be emboste,
As often as they the praise of God did hear,
So to his speech encreast their spiteful cheer:
which in the end, to blasphemy them brought,
The immortal God of gods to set at naught.
Kill and cut off (quoth they) this traitor fine,
Whose subtle talk, with all his whole engine,
Pretends to save these Hebrcwsews from our hands,
And threts us with vain gods of foreign lands:
For if it plaease you (noble prince) to send,
But twenty men of value that are kend,
Within your camp, these recklesse rebels then
shall be a pray to all your warlike men.
(O wicked wight) but then the Vizroy stout,
with power, apeasde the murmur of the route:
And to him said: O shameless Prophet thou,
what Sybill or what charmer tell me now?
What Devil or Damon so does thee enspire,
that Izrell shall: of us have his desire,
Such men, as with no God can be content:
But such as pleased Moses to invent
Of his own head, a God that has no power Blasphemy.

for to deliver them, nor thee this hour?
Have we an other God, or king of kings,
then our great Persian Monark now that rigns?
Whose barded horse orerunns the Nations all,
whose armed men, out of these mountains tall
shall rake these Rebels that from Egypt came
To this, where they unjustly keep the same?
Dye, dye, thou shall, o wretch, thy tongue untrue,
And double heart, shall have their wages due.
But, fool, what spcake I thus? no haste a while
Thy blood (O villain) shall not me defile.
so just a pain, so soon thou shall not have,
for thy deceit, so soon to go to grave.
'For in a wretches sudden death, at ones
'Their longsome ill is buried with their bones.
But to that end I may prolong thy strife,
In Bethull town I will prolong thy life:
where every hour, thou shall have such affraye
to dye vndead a thousand times a day,
till time, with the^ who thou so strong has thought
to shameful end with them thou shall be brought.
what? wherefore tremblest thou and art so paile,
What sorrow makes thy heart so soon to fail.
If God be god as thou right now have said,
then of thy faith, give witness vndismaid.
A marshall of the camp then being pressed
who was not yet so cruel as the rest.
There took this demi Pagan ( Ammons lord)
and sent him bound to Bethull (with a cord)
Then even as in his claws the kite does bear,
the chirping chicken throu the weather clear:
while that the cakling hen below on ground,
Bewailes her bird with vain lamenting sound.
So in like woe his worthy men were left,
For that so worthy a chief was them bereft
The townsmen the^ beholding near their wall
These Miscreants, to armor straight they fall
yclad in plate and maill and runs in bands,
And fearsly fronts their foes with steel in hands
as fast as done the rivers down the hills,
that with their murmur hudge the deepes vpfils.
The Heathen seeing this retirde away,
And left the Lord of Ammon for a pray
to the Hebrew soldiers who did him constrain,
Though he was willing, with them to remain.
When all the folk with prease about him past
His eyes and hands up to the pole he cast,
'And thus he spak: O God that great abyds
'vpon The Immortal seat and justly guyds
'the ruled course of heavne, whose living spreete,
'reuiuing spreds, and through all things does fleet:
'I render thee, O God immortal praise,
'for that before I end my woeful days
'Now from th'unfrutefull stock thou do me race
'to graft me in thy fruitful tree of grace,
'where in dispite of all contrary strife,
'I shall bring forth the fruits of lasting life.
And ye, O Jacobs sons, think not at all
That I of purpose captive am and thrall:
So that I mean hereby your wrack to bring
For God he knows I think not such a thing.
But I am captive thus because I told,
What wo^drous works the lord has done of old,
to you and your forefathers ever still,
Delivring them that would obey his will.
Then doubt not you a thousand flaffing flags,
Nor horrible cries of hideous heathen hags:
Cool not your hearts, for if the world about,
would compass you withal their warriors stout
(Prouyding first ye seek your help at need
At power divine, and not at mortal seed)
You surely shall see Mocmurs renning flood,
Made red, with Assurs host and Ethnique blood:
ye surely shall, see men not used to fight,
Subdue their foes, that seems of greater might.
The hand of God assailes you not with hate,
but for your weal your pride he will abate,
To let you wit, it is within his power,
To leave or to relieve you every hour.
As on th'vnsavrie stock the lilly is borne:
And as the rose grows on the pricking thorn:
So modest life with sobs of grievous smart,
And cries devout, comes from an humbled heart:
For even the faithful flock are like the ground,
That for good fruit, with weeds will still abound.
If that the share and culter idle lie,
That ryues the soil and roots the brambles bye:
But in the end, God will his ire relent,
As Soon as sinners truly will repent:
And save you from these plagues that present be
In shorter time then ye do think to see.
take courage friends, and vanquish God with tears
And after, we shall vanquish with our wears
these enmies all. Now if there rest in me
the former force that once was wont to be:
If elde have not decaid my courage bold,
That I have had with great experience old,
I render me to serve you to my end:
for Jacobs weal, Gods law for to defend.
FINIS.
THE SOMMARIE OF THE III. BOOK.
In this third book the Poet sets forth the seege of Bethulia, and the
extremity that God permitted them to f^ele, thereby to give an entry to his
miraculous deliverance: who is accustomed to lead his people to the gates of
death, and from thence to retire them above all human expectation, to the end
they should confess that the arm of flesh, nor worldly wisdom mainteines
not the Church: but the only favor of the Almighty to whom the whole
glory of duty should be rendered. Farther: three principal things ar to be
noted: First, the preparations of the beseegers, and the defenses of the
beseeged, and how after throw the council given to Holopherne for the
restraint of the water from the town ensewes a furious assault, which the
Jews repelled with great pain: Secondly, the extreme desolation through want
of water, whereof proceeds sundry sorts of death, with lamentations
murmurations, and danger of mutine within the City, and how the Governor
endeuoures himself with wise and godly admonitio^s to appease the same: But the
commons in this hard estate regarding no reason, required to render the City,
rahter the^ to perish in such apparent misery. The Governor being carried with
a human prudence promises to render the town within five days, ^f God send
them no succor. Yet such is the estate of gods church in this world, that when
all things fails, God manifests his power: And therefore in the third part
is Judith introduced, who (being especially moved by the reading of Holy
Scriptures) is encouraged to deliver her country: but when she understood the
resolution of the Maiestrats, She (being in estimation honorable) modestly
reproues them. After their excuse, she promises to attempt something for the
public weal: not showing her devise, but only desired to have passage by
night unto the enemies camp, and this is granted.

THE THIRD BOOK OF IVDITH.
THhe Snoring snoute of restles Phlegon blewe,
Hot on the Ynds, and did the day renew
With skarlet sky, when Heathen men awooke
At sound of drum, then pike and dart they took:
In order marching, and to combat calls,
th'vndaunted sons, within their Cities walls.
The meeds in May with flowers are not so dect,
of sundry savors, hewes, and seere effect,
As in this camp were people different far
In toungs and manners, habits, tents, and war.
Yea Chaos old, where of the world was founded,
Of members more confuse, was tot compounded:
yet soundely they in union did accord,
To wage the war against the Almighty Lord,
who shaks the Poles, whose only breath does beat
Libanus mount, and makes Caucasus sweat.
There came the Kettrinks wild of cold Hircania:
Joined with the men of great, and less Armania.
With coppintanks: and there the Parthian tall,
Assaid to shoot his shafts and flee withal.
The Persians proud (the Empire was in their hands)
with plates of gold, surbraued all their bands.
The Medes de clarde through fortunes overthwart
they lost their Scepter, not for lack of heart:
And that no costly cloth nor rich array,
Nor painting fine, that on their face they lay
nor boprrowde hair, of fair and comely length,
might oght empair, their ancient power and strength:
There were the happy Arabs those that buields
In thatched wagons, wandering throu the fields.
The subtle Tyrians, they who first were clards,
that staid the wandering words in leaves and barks.
The men of Moab, Edom, Ammon, and
the People sparst on large Elimia land.
The learned Memphians, and the men that dwell
Near-to the AEthiopians black and fell.
In short the most of Asia (as it wair)
Encamped was within that army fair.
So that this Duke mo foreign soldiers lad,
then all the Hebrews native people had.
But they who did the Hebrews greatest wrong
were Apostats of Ephrem fearce and strong:
who fought with hateful hearts them to deface,
Least they should be esteemde of Izaks race.
Then, as in time of spring the water is warm,
and crowding frogs like fishes there does swarm:
But with the smallest stone that you can cast
to stir the stream, their crouping stays as fast:
So while Judea was in joyful days,
The constancy of them was worthy prays:
for that in every purpose ye should hear
the praise of God, resounding every wheare.
So, that like burning candles they did shine
Among their faithful flock, like men divine.
But look how soon they hard of Holopherne,
their courage quailde and they began to derne.
Their ardent zeal with closed mouth they choke
their zeal to hot returned to fuming smoke:
the fear of loss of life and worldly good:
brought Infidels to shed their brothers blood:
Alas how many Ephramits have we?
In our unhappy time all which we see
within the Church like hypocrites to dwell,
so long as by the same they prosper well:
who feines a zeal, the Euangill to maintain
So long as serves their honor, or their gain.
But turn the chance with some contrary wind^,
So that their brows but half a blast do find,
Then faints their hearts, and they seek other way,
Like bankers out their God they disobaye
Discyphring then their malice to be more
to gods contempt, then was their zeal before,
And fights against the lord with greater hate,
Then Celsus did, or Julian Apostate.
The Hebrews, now from hights of houses fair
Who saw so many banners beat the air:
And men to march against their forces small,
who now might well decerne their feeble wall:
They swoune with fear, and fand none other aid:
but of that God, to whom their fathers parid.
O father (quod they) father holy king,
who shields us always underneath thy wing:
Since now the world against us does conspire,
Defend us mighty Lord we thee require.
Thus having humbley praid the Lord of might,
the Governor renforst his watches witht:
And fires at midnight built in every way,
which amde the night appear as clear as day:
and wakerife through the corpsgard often he past:
And thought that Phoebe hyed her course to fast
with horses paile to steal away the night,
to leave the Hebrews to their enmies sight.
Again, the Pagan thought she did but creep,
Or that with Latmies son she was on sleep.
'But human wishes never has the power,
'to haste or hold the course of heavne one hour.
Then as Aurora rose with sanguine hew,
And our Horyzon did the day renew:
The Vizroy made a thousand trumpets sound,
to draw his seatred Cornets to a round,
who from all parts with speed assembled wear
About the Genrals tent his will to hear:
As do the hounds about their hunt at morn
come gladishing at hearing of his horn.
Now when the town, his somo^ds did disdain
to conquer it perforce he plyde his pain:
And their, the Inginers have the Trepan dressed, Engines of Wars

and reared up the Ram for battery best:
Here bends the Briccoll, while the cable cracks,
their Crosbowes were vprent with iron Racks.
Here crooked Coruies, fleing bridges tall,
Their scathfull Scorpions, that ruynes the wall.
On every side they raise with iointure meet,
the timber towers for to command each street.
The painful Pioners, wrought against their will,
with fleakes and fagots, ditches up to fill.
Or underground they delue in dust with pain,
to raise a mount, or make a mount a plain.
Or Cauerns cut, where they might soldiers hide,
t'assaile the town at sudden vnespide.
Some ladders dressed to skale the wall, or else
to steal upon the sleeping Sentinels.
Some vndermynes, some other undertook,
to fire the gates, or smore the town with smoke.
The greatest part did yet in trenches lurk
to see what harm their engines first would wurke,
that if the wall were bet, they would not fail
with brave assault the City to assail.
There Mars to wremyner, there Bellona wood,
Enforced feeble Cowards to suck blood.
their hidious horses, braying loud and clear,
their Pagans fell with clamor hugh to hear,
made such a dinne as made the heavne resound,
retented hell, and tore the fixed ground.
Yet God who keeps his wahch above the skies
For his elect, who never idle lies:
took pity on his people in that tide,
Repressing (part) this cruel princes pride
In causing all the chiefes of Moabits,
of Edom strong, and awful Ammonits
to speak him thus, and thus him terrors dressed.
O Prince, that Scepter bears above the rest,
and gives them law, and holds the world in thrall,
set not thy soldiers, to assault this wall:
For neither bow, nor sling, nor weapons long,
nor sword, nor buckler, will be found so strong:
As is this threatening rock, whose mighty corse
sustaines their wall, of such eternal forse,
that thou can make no skallade on no cost:
But on the corpses dead, of half thine hosts.
'The victor can no honor justly clame
'to lose the men who should advance the same.
'O valiant Prince, that fisher is nor fine,
'who for a frog will lose a golden line
'the holy headband seems not to attire,
'the head of him, who in his furious ire
'preferrs the pain of those that have him teend
'before the health and saftie of one friend.
You may (my Lord) you may in little fight,
subdue these Roags, and not to lose a knight.
Surprise me first their chiefest water spring
from whence these rebels do their conduits bring:
The^ drought shall drive the^ from their whole defense,
In cords to yield them to thine exellence.
'The noble Lion never sleas the least,
'but always prays upon some worthy beast.
'The thunderthro was his sulphred shafts adowne
'on Atlaas high or cold Righes crown.
'The tempest fell more fervently does fall,
'on houses high, then on the homly hall.
So you my Lord need not to prease your power,
Against such foes as will themselfs deuowre.
Sir, this is not for favor or for need,
Nor that this Cities sack may cause us dread.
Nor that we mean thy high attempts to stay,
For ere we from thy standarts stir away,
For thee, the immortal gods we shall defy,
For thee, we shall break down their alters hie:
For thee, we frankly shall pursue and thole,
the eternal heat and cold of either Pole:
For thee, our hardy hands shall help to tear
From Jove and Neptune, both their Eagle and spear:
For thee, the son for father shall not care:
Nor father son, nor brother, brother spare.
Now, Holopherne to conquest whole enclynde
And weing well this counsel in his mind:
Dismissed from his camp a galliard rout
Of men to guard the Rivers round about.
This stratageme, the Hebrews well might know
to see their fountains run with passage slow.
Then manfully their soldiers out they send,
against their foes, the watter to defend.
There fought the Pagan for to win him fame,
the Hebrew meant, he would not dye with shame.
Together soon, they shock with hateful ire,
And first, they forced the heathen to retire:
who (turning face) again do them pursewe,
and wins the victory from the victors new.
So doubtful was the fight, none could define
(Save God) to whom the victrie would incline:
till Izrell was on all sides ouercled
with clouds of shot, then to their town they fled,
As does the Pilgrim passing through the plain,
who is beset with tempest, hail, or rain,
who leaves his way, and seeks himself to hide,
within some cave, or hollow mountain side.
The Panims them pursued without all pity,
and Peslmell entered almost in the City
At open gate. Then rose the cry unsweet
Offearefull folk who fled in every street,
And rent their hair and their affrighted face
as Panims else had won that holy place.
How flee you cowards now and leaves your Port?
(the Captain says) have ye another fort?
Think ye to find for saftie of your crown
In this Bethulia another Bethull town?
(Alas) if ye make no defense at all,
while time this tyrant is without your wall.
How dare you him resist when he has wunne
this forte of yours from which ye feebly run?
The co^mo^s with this chek, brought to their powers,
where Cambris and Sir Carmis like two towers,
Stood at th assaulted gate and did withstand
the Heathen host with each of them in hand
An iron mace (in stead of lances long)
and brazen bucklers beating back the throng:
Their habergions like stiddies stithe they baire
with helmets high and pennons pight in air:
Of equal age they were, and equal length,
Of equal courage, and of equal strength:
Like Poplers twain that recheth up their tops
and holds their heads so high that none the^ crops:
But on the Rivers side do sweetly sway
Like german brether hailsing often a day.
The Heathen seeing thus the Jews descend
with edge of sword their City to defend:
They left th assault, and thence retyring went
(as they commanded were) unto their tent.
But when I think how xxx. days that town,
tormented was with mischief up and down.
Toosad a song I cannot hear invent
So great a sadness right to represent.
My hand for horror shakes, and now no more
Can lead my sacred pen as erst before:
For now mine eyes, that watered are with tears
Declares my matter all of mischief bears.
Oh Sprite from whence all sprit and life does come,
thou losde the tongue of Zachary that was do^me.
and sent thy Heralds through the world to preach
thy name: And in a hundredth toungs to teach:
Guide thou my pen and courage to mnelend,
that to thy honor I this work may end.
Although that Izak saw on every hand
A world of folk against his town to stand:
yet (tracting time) he thought he would provide
no less to keep, then cool the Assiegers pride.
But when they fand the conduits cut and rent,
By which, there water to their town was sent:
Their courage bold, and all their craks (alas)
As lickour faild, so did their stoutnesse pas.
Their Lords preferring death to bondage vile,
Made them believe the thing did them beguile:
To wit, they gave men hope htat they might keep
sufficient watr' in wels, and ceasterns deep:
Through all the town, the people to relieve,
That thirst should not the soldiers greatly grieve.
The maiestrats in deed had great regard
To see this water wisely spent and spard,
that Bottell sweet, which served at the first
to keep the life, but not to slocken thirst.
When wels grew dry, the commons ran inrage A viue description of thirst.

and sought out every sink their thrist to assuage:
And dra^k with lo^gsom draught the pools in haste,
to quench their thirst with ilcontented taste:
which poysond air, enfect their purest breath:
whereby the drinker drank his present death.
O wretched folk, who felt so hard a strife,
Drink, or not drink, both ways must lose their life.
For he that drank, and he that did refrain,
Had of their enmies both an equal pain.
For why? the water vile slew them throughout,
No less, then did their enmies them about.
That wretched town had never a street nor rewe,
But Parcas their, had found some facion new.
to murder men, or martyr them with fears,
As movde the most in durate heart to tears:
If so much water in their brains had been,
as might forbear a drop to wete their eene.
There plaind the oldman that the soldier strong,
Had reft his Bottell from his head with wrong:
But while he spak his heart (for thirst) did faint,
And life him left which frustrate his complaint.
The soldier brave, Oh hartbrek, for to tell
his proper vryne drank thrist to expel.
the woeful mother with her spitle fed
Her little child half dead in cradle bed.
The Lady with her Lord at point of death,
Embracing falls and yelds their latest breath:
'For cruel thirst came out of Cyren land
'Where she was fostred on that burning sand,
'with hot intracted tongue, and soncken eene,
'with stomach worn, and wrinkled visage keen,
'with light and meigre corse and pailed veins,
'in stead of blood that brimstone hot retains:
'Her poysond mouth blew throw that holy town,
'such hellish air, that stifled up and down.
The Arters of the Jews in such a way,
That noght was seen but burials night and day.
So that the heavne, to see their dollours deep,
Could scarsly keep his course, but preasd to weep:
And would have ioind his tears to their complaint,
if God of hosts had made them no restraint.
Yea I my self must weep, who cannot speak
the woes, that makes my heavy heart to break.
And so will silent rest and not rehearse,
But conterfait the painter (in my verse)
who thought his colors paile could not declare,
the special woe, king Agamemnon bare, Look the table

when sacrificed was his only race:
with bend of black, he bound the fathers face.
Now while the people were in this estate
and with their princes wrangling in debate,
They thus besought the lord for to decide
between their simplesse and their princes pride.
The lord be judge of that which ye have wrought
and what your wicked counsels has us brought.
If you had offered peace to this great Lord
At first, we might have won him to accord.
Then happy happy days we might have seen,
and not so many soldiers murdered been.
Alas what hope have we within this hold
Our enmies are more meek a thousand fold.
Then are our own: they, haps, would us preserve,
our wilful own, pretends to see us sterue.
Our children do our childrens weal denay,
and headlong hastes unto their own decay.
We know, o Lord, the breaking of thy law,
has caused thee this sword on us to draw
and justly thou thine yrefull bow do bend
on our vnloyall heads the shot to send.
But thou, who does not long retain thine ire,
Against thine own, thy mercy we require.
Change thou the purpose of our foolish guides,
and of these Heathen, armed at our sides.
Or else let us upon their weapons fall,
and of their hands to be distroyed all:
Or we this drougth and deadly venim have,
with languishing to send us to the grave.
My brethen dear (the ruler then began say)
our whole desire has been both night and day.
Not for to see the seed of Abrham lost,
for which we strive against this furious host.
What? have ye pain? so likewise pain have we:
For in one bote we both embarked be.
Upon one tide, one tempest does us toss,
Your common ill, it is our common loss.
Th Assyrian plague shall not us Hebrews grieve,
when pleases God our mischief to relieve,
which he will do if ye can be content
and not with grudge his clemency prevent.
Then strive not you against that puissant king
who creat all, and gouerns every thing
For confort of his church and children dear,
and succors them though time do long appear.
Sometime an Archer leaves his bow unbent
and hong upon an nail to that intent:
It may the stronger be to bend again,
And shoot the shot with greater might and maine:
Right so the eternal does witholde his ill
A longer time (perchance) for that he will
More egerly revenge him of their crime,
who do abuse his long forbearing time.
When men applauds to sin, they count it light,
And but a matter small in sinners sight.
But in the end the weight does so increase,
that Justice leaves the sinner no release,
Like the Vserer who lends upon the skore,
and maks the reckles debtors debt the more.
What if the thundering Lord his justice stay,
And (for such sin) do not this tyrant slay?
The waters of the ground and in the aere,
Are in the hand of God, then who is there,
that dare sediciously his yoke refuse,
Although he have not water now to use?
No, no, though heavne do seem serene and clear,
On every part, and wete does not appear.
He may with moisture mildly wete the land,
As fell when Saull the Scepter had in hand: Sam 1.12.

For all the stars that do the heavne fulfill,
Are all but executors of his will.
All this could not the peoples thrist assuage,
But thus with murmurs they their Lords outrage:
what? shall we dye, o sacred soldiers bold,
for pleasure of our lords these traitors old?
what? shall we dye on credit, for to please
These wyzard fools who winks at our unease,
who with our blood, would win the^ selfs renown,
So louable, as never shall go down?
Nay, nay, let us cut off this servile chain,
to free our selfs, let us in hands retain
the ruling of this town, the forte and all:
Least we into these deadly dangers fall.
Then like a wise Physician who persaues
His patient that in fervent fever raues:
Yet hights him more then Art can well perform
So Prince Osias in this rural storm,
He promised to the people their intent
If God within five days no succor sent.
Then Izak left their sorrows all and some,
and present woe and fear of chance to come
for that, if they through this, gat not their will:
At least they would avoid, the greatest ill.
But Iudtih the^ whose eyes (like fountains two)
were never dry which witnest well her woe:
Right sad in sound the Almighty she besought,
And on the sacred scriptures fed her thought?
Her prayers much auailde to raise her spreete
Above the sky and so, the scriptures sweet:
A holy garden was where she might find,
the medcyne meet for her molested mind.
Then Judith reading there as was her grace:
She (not by hazard) happened on that place, Iudicium. 3.

where the lamehanded Ahud (for disdain
to see the Jews the Heathen yock sustain)
Smote Eglon with a dagger to the heft,
And from his flank the blood and life bereft.
The more she red, the more she wonder had
of Ahuds act, and hot desire her lad
t ensue his virtue: yet her feeble kind
Empeached often the purpose of her mind
Proposing often the horror of the deed,
The fear of death, the danger to succeed,
with haszard of her name, and more then that,
Though she likewise the peoples freedom gat:
yet for a man, this act more seemly wear,
than for a wife to handle sword or spear:
While Judith thus with Judith did debate,
a puffed of wind blew down that leaf by fate:
Discovring up the story of Iacll how
she drove a nail into Sisaras brow,
And slew that Pagan sleeping on her bed
Who from the Hebrews furious host was fled.
In teaching us albeit a tyrant flee,
yet can he not avoid the lords decree.
This last example now such courage lent,
to feeble Judith that she now was bent:
with wreakful blade to sley and to deuorse
the Heathen soul from such a sinful corse.
But while she did her careful mind employ
to find some means to murder this Vizroy:
She hard report (that made her heart to swoune)
Of the determination of the town:
Then all the present periols to prevent,
Unto the rulers of the town she went:
Reproving then with words of bitter sweet,
what do ye mean? O princes indiscreete.
Will ye the helping hand of God restrain,
And captive it within your councels vain?
Will ye include him under course of times,
who made days, years, all seasons and their prymes:
Do not abuse your selfs, his power profound
Is not to men's Imaginations bound:
God may all that he wills, his will is just,
God wills all good to them that in him trust.
Now fathers: that which does my hope revive
Is only this: there is no wight on live:
within this town that has contracted hands,
to serve du^me gods like folk of foreign lands.
All sins are sin, but sure this sin exceeds
our former faults, by which our blind misdeeds
offends the heavne, by which the lord of might,
Is frauded of his honors due and right.
In wresting of the titles of his name:
To stocks, and stones, and mettels, men do frame,
Since Izak then from such a fault is free,
Let us to gods protection cast our ee.
Consider that all Judah rests in fear,
Aspecting only our proceedings hear.
Consider that all Jacob in this tresse
will follow either-our force or feebleness.
Consider that this house and alter stands
(next under God) vpholden with your hands.
Think that of Izrell whole ye keep the kaye
which if ye quite and give this tyrant way.
Who more then death hates all of Izaks kin,
we shall the name of kinbetrayers win.
Then said the Captain I cannot deny,
that we offended have the Lord most hye.
Unwise are we, our promises are vain,
But what? we may not call our word again.
But if thou feel thy heart so sore oppressed,
that moves thee to tears for our unrest,
Alas, weep night and day and never tire,
So that thy weepings may appease the ire
Of that hie Judge, who hears in every part
the perfect prayer of the humble heart.
I will (quoth she) and if god give me grace
Repel the siege of this afflicted place
By famous stroke. But stay me in no wise,
But bide the end of my bold enterprise:
And let me go when night his mantle spreeds
to th'enmies Camp (quod he) if thou will needs.
The great repressour of oppressors pride
Preserve thy heart and hand, and be thy guide.
FINIS.
THE SOMMARIE OF THE IIII. BOOK.
According to the promis that Judith made to the besieged Captains in
Bethulia, the prepares her self with armor meet for the execution of her
enterprise: to wit, The invocation of the name of God, with a holy
determination to deliver her country from the hand of the Tyrant: whom she
deliberate to overcome with the sweet and fair appearance of her amiable
beutie and behavior. At her departing to the enemies camp, our Poet
introduces one of the chief Captains of the town discriuing to another, her
stock and vpbringing, with the progress of her three estates, Virginity,
Marriage, and Widowhood: Thereby setting forth a singular example of all womanly
behavior and virtue. After her entrance to the Camp, she is brought to
Holophernes, who was curious to know the cause of her coming there. And after
audience given, he is so surprised with her beutie and eloquent language, that
she obtains license to withdraw herself by night to the next valley, there
to pray to God and continuing this exercise, she requires strength of the
Highest that in taking away the chieftaine, she might as one instant destroy all
the Heathen Army. Herein giving example that the beginning and end of all high
attempts, ought to be grounded upon the favor and earnest calling upon him,
without whom all wisdom, and human force is nothing but wind: and who
contrariewise, may by the most feeble instruments of the world, execute things
most incredible and incomprehensible to human capacity.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF IVDITH.
THen woeful Judith with her weeping ees
Beholding heaven and prostrate on her knees:
Held up her guiltles hands and God besought,
Discovring him the secrets of her thought.
O God (quod she) who armed with a spear
Dan Symeon, who reuengde his sister dear:
Lend me the blade in hand, that I may kill
this Tyrant that exceedes all Sichems ill.
Who not contents to soil the sacred bed
of wedlock chaste, but more with mischief leds
Entends thy holy name for to confound,
And race Solyma temple to the ground.
Ambitious Satrap he, whose hope does stand
In mortal men, led with unrighteous hand.
who rules a hundredth thousand stalworth steeds
that combat craves and in our pastures feeds.
Not dreading thee, who dau^ts both man and beast,
And kills and captives them when they ween least.
who stre^gths the pore and prydful me^ down thrings
and wracks at once the powers of puissant kings.
Grant gracious God that his be witched wit
May with my crisped hair be captive knit.
Grant that my sweet regards may gall his heart
with darts of love to cause his endless smart.
Grant that these gifts of thine my beutie small
may bind his furious rage, and make him thrall:
grant that my artificial tongue may move
His subtle craft and snare his heart in love:
But chiefly lord grant that this hand of mine
may be the Pagans scourge and whole ruin:
to the end that all the world may know our race,
Are shrouded so in rampires of thy grace.
that never none against us durst conspire,
that have not felt at last thy furious ire:
Even so good Lord let none of these profane
Return to drink of Euphrate nor Hytane.
Thus Judith prayed with many-a trickling tear,
And with her sighs her words retrenched wear.
At night, she left her chamber sole and cold,
Attyrde with Ceres gifts and Ophir gold.
O silver Diane, regent of the night,
Dare thou appear before this lucent light?
This holy star whose contr'a spect most clear,
Does steine thy brothers brightness in his Spears
While thus she meant (unseen) away to slide,
Her pearls and Jewels causd her to be spide.
the musk and ciuet Amber as she past
Long after her a sweet perfume did cast.
A Carboncle on her Crystal brow she pight,
whose fiery gleames expeld the shadie night.
Upon her head a silver crisp she pind,
Lose wauing on her shoulders with the wind.
Gold, band her golden hair: her yvrie neck,
the Rubies rich, and Saphirs blew did deck.
And at her ear, a Pearl of greater vallewe
there hong, the^ that th'Egiptia^ Queen did swallew.
And through her collet shewde her snowie breast,
Her utmost robe was color blew Coelest,
Benetted all with twist of perfect gold,
Beseeming well her comely corpse tenfolde.
What else she wear, might well been seen upon,
that Queen who built the tours of Babylon.
And though that she most modest was indeed
yet borrowd she some garments at this need.
From Dames of great estate, to that intent
this Pagan Prince she rather might prevent.
Achior then who watched at the gate,
And saw this Lady passing out so late,
To Carmis spak, who warded eke that night
what is she this? where goes this gallant wight
so trim in such a time: has she no pity
of this most wretched persecuted City?
Quod Carmis then, their flourisht hear of late
Merari one, that was of great estate.
Who had no child but one and this is she,
The honor of that house and family.
The fathers now do venture body and soul,
that treasures upon treasures they may roll:
But for the wit or learning never cairs,
that they should leave to their succeeding hairs,
Like those that charely keeps their rich array
In coffers close and lets it their decay:
while that the naked bodies dies for cold,
for whom the clothes are dearly bought and sold.
But as the painful plowman plyes his toil, Comparison.

with share and culter shearing throug the soil
that cost him dear, and ditches it about,
Or crops his hedge to make it under sprout,
And never stays to ward it from the weed:
But most respects to so we therein good seed:
to thend, when summer decks the meadows plain,
He may have recompense of costs and pain:
Or like the maid who careful is to keep,
the budding flower that first begins to peep
Out of the knop, and waters it full often
to make it see nly show the head aloft,
that it may (when she draws it from the stocks)
Adorn her gorget white, and golden locks:
So wise Merari all his study stilde,
to facion well the manners of this child,
that in his age he might of her retire,
Both honor and confort to his hearts desire:
For look how soon her childish cou^g could chat
as children do, of this thing or of that.
He taught her not to read inventions vain,
As fathers daily do that are prophaine:
But in the holy scriptures made her read,
that with her milk she might eue^ suck the dread
of the most high. And this was not for naught
Insomuch as in short time she out brought
Apparent fruits of that so worthy seed,
which chaungde her earthly nature far indeed:
As done the pots that long retains the taste
Of licour such, as first was in them plaste:
Or like the tree that bends his eldren branch,
that way, where first the stroke has made him lau^ch.
So see we wolfs, and bears, and hearts full old,
Some tamenes from their dau^ted youth to hold.
Thus ere the Moon twelf dosen chau^ges past, Virginity

the maidens manners fair in form were cast.
For as the perfect pylot fears to run
Upon the rocks, with singling sheet does shun
Cyanes straites or Syrtes sinking sands,
Or cruel Capharois with stormy strands:
So wisely she dishaunted the resort
Of such as were suspect of light report.
Well knowing that th'acquaintance with the ill
Corrupts the good. And though they ever still
Remain upright: yet some will quarrel pike
and common brute will deem them all alike.
For look how your Companions you clect
for good, or ill, so shall you be suspect.
This prudent Dame delyted not in dance,
Nor sitting up nor did her self advance:
In public place, where plays and banquets been
In every house to see, and to be seen.
But rather understanding such a trade,
Had been the wrak of many-a modest maid:
who following wandering Dina wanton dame,
Have ofty me put their noble house to shame:
she kept at home her fathers habitation,
Both day and night in godly conversation.
She pittious Nurse applyde her painful thought,
to serve and nourish them that her vpbrought:
Like to the grateful stork that gathers meat,
and brings it to her elders for to eat,
And on a firtree high, with Boreas blown,
Gives life to those, of whom she had her own.
But if she might some hour from travel quite
At vacant time it was her chief delight
to read the scriptures, where her faithful mind
Might confort of the heavenly Manna find.
Sometime she broyded on the anuas gall,
Some bird or beast, or Aegle or Eliphant tall.
While subtely with silver nedle fine
she works on cloth some history divine.
Hear Lot escaping the devouring fire
From sinful Zodom shortly does retire
To Segor, where his wife that was vnwittie
Cast back her eye to see the sinful City.
And for her misbeliefe God plagued the falt,
transforming her into a Pillar of salt:
Here she Susannes story viuely wrought,
How near she was to execution brought,
And yet how God the secret did disclose,
And made the mischief fall upon her foes
Here Joseph's story stands with wondrous art,
And how he left his cloak and not his heart
to his lascivious Dame and rather chose
the Prison, then her arms him to enclose.
Here cruel Iephte with his murdring knife.
to keep his vow, bereaues his daughters life.
(Her travel done) her lute she then assayes,
and unto God she sings immortal prays.
not following those that plyes their thriftles pain
In wanton vearse and wastefull ditties vain,
Thereby t'entrapt great men with luring looks
But as the greedy fisher lays his hooks
Along the cost to catch some mighty fish
More for his gain, then wholesome for the dish.
Of him that byes, even so these sisters brave,
Have lovers mo, then honest maidens have.
But none are brunt with their impudent flame,
Save fools and light lunatickes void of shame.
Of virtue only, perfect love does grow,
whose first be ginning thought it be more slow,
then that of lust and quicknes not so fast:
Yet sure it is, and longer time does last.
The straw enkendles soon, and slakes again:
But iron is slow, and long will hot remain.
Thus was the holy Iudiths chaste renown
so happly spread, through Izrell up and down,
that many-a man disdaind the damesels fine,
with Jewels rich and hair in golden twine,
to serve her beutie: yet loves fiery dart,
Could never vnfriese the frost of her chaste heart.
But as the Diamant byds the hammer strong,
so she resisted all her suitors long
Vnminded ever for to wed, but rather
to spend her days with her beloved father
till at the last her parents with great care,
ithstood her will, and for her did prepare.
Manasses, one who was of noble race
Both rich and fair as well of sprite as face:
Her marriage then was not a slight contract
Of secret bills, but by willing act Marriage.

'before her friends: The chance that once befell
'to wandering Dina may be witness well,
'that secret marriage that to few is kend,
'doth never lead the lovers to good end.
For of our bodies we no power may clame
'except our parents do confirm the same,
Then see how love so holily begun,
Between these two, so holy a race they run,
this chaste young man and his most chastest wife,
as if their bodies twain had but one life.
what the one did will, the other wild no less,
As by one mouth, their wills they do express:
And as a stroke given on the righter eye
Offends the left, even so by Simpathie:
Her hus bands dolours made her heart vnglad,
And Iudiths sorrows made her husband sad.
Manasses then, is wife would not control
tyraniously, but look how much the soul
Exceeds the corse, and not the corse does grieve,
But rather to preserve it and relieve,
So Judith with Manasses did accord,
In tender love and honourde him as Lord.
Their house at home so holy was too tell
it seemd a church, and not a private Cell:
No servant there, with villain iestes uncouth,
was suffered to corrupt the shamefast youth.
No idle drunkard, nor no swearing wight
Vnpunist durst blaspheme the lord of might.
No pleasant skoffer, nor no lying knave:
No daily Dyce, nor no Ruffian brave,
Had there abode: but all the servants wear
taught of their Rulers Gods eternal fear.
Manasses, he who saw that in his time
All justice was corrupt with many-a crime,
And that the most peruers and ignorant,
For money, or favor, would none office want
of high estate, refusde all public charge:
Contenting him with ease to live at large.
from court, and palace, free from worldly pelf,
but since he thought him borne not for himself:
But also that some charge he ought to bear
for confort of his friends and country dear:
Yet did he more, not being magistrate,
for public weal, then men of more estate.
So that his house, was even the dwelling due
Of Justice, and his mouth a sentence true.
The Afflicted poor he daily did defend,
and was the widows aid and tutor kend,
to Orphelines, and was the whole support
And chiese conforter of the godly sort.
The vain desire of Indian treasurs great,
Made never his ship to sail nor oar to beat.
The greedy hope of gain with ventruous danger,
Made never his sword be drawn to serve the stranger.
He never sold within the wrangling Bar,
Deceitful clatters, causing clients Jar.
But quietly manurde his little feilde,
And took th'encrease thereof that time did yeilde.
He sowde, and planted, in his proper grange
(upon some savage stock) some frutrie strange.
The ground our common Dame, he undermines
On stake and ryce, he knits the crooked vines,
and snoddes their bows, so neither hot nor cold
might him (from labor) in his chamber hold.
But once as he beheld his harvest train,
with crooked Cickle cutting do wne the grain
the sun a distillation on him sent,
whereof he dyed, his soul to heaven it went.
He that the number of the leaves could cast,
that in November falls by winter blast,
He that could tell the drops of rain or slete,
that Hyad Orion or Pleiades wete
sheds on the ground, that man might only tell, W^ head^.

what tears from Iudiths eyes incessant fell.
What treasur-and gold and what he left her tho,
In place of pleasure, caused all her woe.
The sight of them made her in heart record,
their old possessor, and her loving Lord.
Though she had had as much of gold and good,
As Lydia land, or Tagus golden flood:
(yet losing him) of treasure she was bare:
For whom, all other treasures cause de her care.
Yet in this state she stoutly did sustain,
Like patient Job (contempning) all her pain.
Three times the sun returned had his prime,
'Si^ce this befell, and yet the slyding time
'That wonted is to wear all woes away,
Could never for his death her dolor stay:
But always in some black attire she went
Right modestly and lived on little rent.
Devout she was and most times sole and sad
with dole in heart and mourning vesture clad,
Outshedding tears as does the turtle dove
on withred stalk that waills her absent love:
And widow like all pleasure does forsake
And never intends to take a secound make.
Thus Judith chaste within her house abode,
And seldom was she seen to come abroad,
Unless it wear to see some woeful wife,
whose child or husband was bereft of life,
Or for to visit some in sickness rage,
their longsome pain and dollours to assuage:
Or for to go to Church as God allows
to pray and offer, and to perform her vows.
Thus have I shortly told you brother dear,
the state of her, on whom our city hear
have fixed all their eyes: but I can naught
tell where she goes, much les what is in her thought.
But if we may of passed things collect
the things to come: then may we well aspect
Great good of her, for that even in her face
Is sign of joy, and great presage of grace.
Or some good hap. With this and other talk
they cut the night as they together walk.
This while the worthy widow with her maid
Past toward th'enmies camp not vnafrayde:
For ere she had two hundredth paces past,
The Syrian Soldiers in her way were cast:
Who spack her thus. O fair excellent wight
whence? what art thou? what do thou here this night
In Syrian camp? I am (quod she) a gain
An Izralite whom dollours does constrain,
To flee this town, and for my life's relief,
submits me to the mercy of your chief.
They took her to the Duke, but who has seen
the throngs of folk where proclamations been
In so^e great woen, or where some monstrous beast
Is brought and wondered at by most and least,
that man might Judge what flocks of soldiers came
From every part to see that Hebrew Dame,
To see that fair, so chaste, so amiable:
the more they gasde, she seemd more admirable.
Her wavring hair disparpling flew apart
In seemly shed, the rest with reckles art
with many-a curling ring decord her face,
and gave her lashie brows a greater grace.
Tow bending bows of Heben coupled right,
two lucent stars that were of heavenly light.
two geaty sparks where Cupid chastely hydes.
His subtle shafts that from his quiver glydes.
Tweene these two suns and front of equal sise,
A comely figure formally did rise
With draught vnleuell to her lip descend
where Momus self could nothing discomend.
Her pitted cheeks aperde to be depaint,
with mixed rose and lillies sweet and saint:
Her dulcet mouth with precious breath repleate
Excelde the Saben Queen in savor sweet.
Her Coral lips discovred as it were
two ranks of Orient pearl with smyling chere.
Her yvrie neck and breast of Alabastre,
Made Heathen men of her, more Idolastre.
Upon her hand no wrinkled knot was seen,
But as each nail of mother of pearl had been.
In short this Judith was so passing fair,
that if the learned zeuxis had been thaire
And seen this Dame, when he with pensile drew,
the Croton Dames, to form the picture true
Of her, for whom both Greece and Asia fought:
this only patron chief be would have sought. Hesen.

No sooner Judith entered his Pauillion,
But in her face arose the red vermillion
with shamefast fear: but then with language sweet
The courteous Genrall mildly began her greet.
My love, I am, I am not yet so fell,
As falls report does to you Hebrews tell.
They are my sons and I will be their father
that honors me: and them I love the rather,
that worships for their God the Assyrian King:
They shall be well assurde to want nothing.
And this shall Izak know if they will render
Unto that bonte ous king as their defender.
For thy (my love) tell me withouten fear,
the happy motyf of thy coming hear.
O Prince (quoth she with an assured face)
Most strong and wise and most in heavens grace,
that draws the sword, with steel upon his breast
with helm on head, and Iaunce in iron rest:
Since that my feeble Sex and tender youth,
Cannot longtime endure, the cruel drouth,
the wakrife travels, frayes, and haszards great,
That day and night, our Burgesses does threat:
Yet nevertheless this is not whole the cause
that from my Cities body me withdrawes
to this your Camp: but that most grudging grief,
Which burns my zealous heart without relief:
Is this (my Lord) I have a holy fear
to eat those meats that God bids us forbeares
But Sir, I see that our besieged town,
Is so beset with mischief up and down.
The people will be forced to eat in the end
the meats that God expressly does defend:
Then will the lord with just revenge him wreak
Upon all those, that do his statutes break.
Withouten fight their Cities he will sack,
And make one man of thine ten thousand wrack,
that flies his fury, and thy furious face,
Now I of Bethull am, and in this place
Beseech thy noble grace if so thee please,
with courteous aid, to give my dolours ease,
'Of common sense he is deprived cleene,
'that falls with closed eye on danger seen.
'And he that may both pain and hurt eschew,
'Is vain if he his proper death pursewe,
Then in this quiet dale if I may bide
(in secret) for to pray each evning tide
to God: I shall as he does me enspyre,
Assure you when enkendled is his ire,
Against our folk. Then shall I take on hand,
to lead thine Army through all Jury land,
And streaming standarts set on Syon hill,
where none with weapons dare resist thy will.
No, not a very dog in evening dark,
At noise of harnes shall against thee bark.
Thy only name shall fray the Armies bold,
Before thy face the mountain tops shall fold. R

The floods shall dry and from their running stay,
To make thine Host, a new and uncouth way.
O Jewel of the world (quoth he) o Dame,
For gracious spech and beutie worthy fame,
Now welco^e here, would God it might you please
Longtime with us to dwell in rest and case,
For if your faith and troth concurrant be,
to this your talk, which greatly pleases me:
I will from this time forth with you accord,
to serve your only Hebrews God and Lord,
And will my service whole to you enrowle:
Not of my Scepter only, but my soul.
I will your name and honor ay defend
From Hebrew bounds unto the world his end.
This said: with silence as the moon arose,
The widow her withdrew, and forth she goes
Unto a valley close on every part,
where as she washed her corse and clenst her heart:
And with her weeping eyes the place beraid,
And to the God of Izak thus she praide.
O Lord withdraw not now thy helping hand
from those, that at thy mercy only stand.
O Lord defend them that desires to spend
their goods and blood, thy cause for to defend.
O Lord grant that the cries of Children may
with plaints of oldmen weeping night and day.
And virgins voices sad in shroude of shame
And lauds of Leuits sounding forth thy fame.
Mount to thy throne, and with dissundring break
thy heavy sleep. Wherefore do thou awreake
thy self on Hermon with thy burning blast?
or why? do thou on careful Carmell cast
Thy dreadful darts? forgetting all this space,
these Giants that thy Scepter would displace?
Ah wretch what say I? lord apardon me,
thy burning zeal (and none hypocrisy)
that frets my heavy heart at every hour
Compels my tongue this language out to power.
O thou, the everliving God, and Guide
of all our race, I know thou will provide
For our relief against this furious boste,
And justly kill the Captain of this host.
I know, that thou will help my only hand,
to be the wrak, of all this heathen band.
FINIS.
THE SOMMARIE OF THE V. BOOK.
Holophernes being surprised with the sweet language, and excellent beutie of
the chaste Judith becomes altogether negligent of his charge and government.
Wherein is represented the vnhabilitie of the reprobate, who can not withstand
such temptations as the lord sends upon them But as they become slaves to
their own affections, so by the same they are enforced to fall into perdition.
In place of some faithful servant to warn him of his vices, Holophernes
conferreth with Bagos an Eunuch, who feeds him in his humor, and brings
Judith to his Tent. And here the Poet reprooues all flatterers and bawdes with
the vices of all Courts in General. Judith seeing her chastity in peril, and
the time unmeet to execute her enterprise: Subtily draws the Tyrant to talk
of other affairs. He thinking to insinuate himself the more into her favor,
takes pleasure to crack of his conquests and of his special worthiness:
discoursing so long till suppertyme aproached and she avoided the
inconvenience: And here is to be noted that whilst the tyrants boste of their
cruelly against the Church. God provides for his own and preserves them for
that work, that he has ordained by them to be done.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF IVDITH.
IN stead of mary-in bone, and blood in veins,
Great Holopherne does feed his cruel pains:
He bootlesse flees, and feels, but he ne knows
the quenched fire that of his ashes grows.
For so the charming Image of this Dame,
the only mark whereat his soul did ame,
Tran sported him in passions of dispare,
that of his mighty camp he quits the care,
And goes no more his matters to dispatch,
Nor vewes his corpsgard, nor relieues his watch,
Nor counsel calls, nor sent to spy the cost,
Nor vewes the quarters of his spacious host.
But as the sheep that have no hirde nor guide,
But wandering strayes along the rivers side:
Throu burbling brooks, or throu the forests grene
Throw medows, closures, or throu shadows shene:
Right so the Heathen host, without all bridle,
Runns insolent, to vicious actions idle,
where none obeyes each one commanding speaks,
Each one at pleasure from his ba^ner breaks:
What do you Hebrews now within your wall?
Now time to fight, or never time at all,
To pay these Pagans, whose confused corse,
Combats against themselfs with deadly forse,
Nay, stay a while, of such a great victory,
Your only God will have the only glory.
Before this tyrant was with love yblent
To win the town, he plyde his whole intent:
But now both night and day his mind does frame
to conquer, this most chaste vnconquest Dame.
So lust him led: th'vndaunted Theban knight,
with weighty mace had never him affright:
But now a woman's look his heart enfeares,
And in his breast the curelesse wound he bears.
Ambition erst, so had him ouercumme,
that made him daily rise by sound of drum.
Now Cupid him awaks with whote allarmes,
That his witholds to do the Hebrews harms.
Before he ruled above both prince and king,
now can he not himself in order bring.
Alas (quod he) what life is this I have
Becoming captive to my captive slave? Complaint.

(unhappy chance) what life is this I say?
My virtue gone, my forces falls away.
Nay sure no life, it is more pain I feel,
The Ixion torn upon the Eternal wheel: Pronit. there.

My life is like the theefes that stoale the fire
On whose mortal heart does always tire.
A ravenous foul that gnaues him to the bone,
Reviving still bound to the Scythian stone,
what serves it me to have won where I have hau^ted?
what serves my victor arm for to have daunted?
The people situate tweene Hydaspe large,
And port where Cydnus does in sea discharge?
Since I am vanquished by the feeble sight,
Of captive Judith what auaills my might?
My targe of steel, my Burguinet of Brass,
My guard of warriors stout where so I pass,
Since her sweet eye has sent the pointed dart
Through men and weapons pearcing throu my heart.
Whatserues my coursers, who with swiftnes light
Exceeds the swallow swiftest bird of flight:
since I on him cannot avoid one ynch,
the care that night and day my heart does pinch.
Then change (o Hebrews) change your tears in song,
And triumph ore-my host and army strong.
I am no more that Duke whose name allone,
has made great wariours quake both lim and bone
But I am he, whose heart was sometime brave:
Now less then naught, the slave but of a slave.
I come not here your Izak to annoy,
with fire and sword, your houses to distroy:
But to require your Judith her to render
More mild to me. What is my wit so slender
(berapt with love) have I not here my joy.
that only may relieve me from annoye?
yet nevertheless I clieue the air in vain,
with plaints and makes mine eyes but fountains twain
I wretch am like the wretched man indeed: Tantalus

the more he has the greater is his need.
Although he deeply plonge in water clear,
To quench his thrist: yet is he not the near,
for so do I respect the heavenly grace,
that largely is bestowde upon her face,
that with mine eyes I dare not her behold,
My tongue does stay and in the pallet fold.
Why have not I a heart of Crystal clear,
Transparant through to let my pain appear?
that there she might of all my torments reed,
Which love withholds within my heart in dreed?
Now since, that Judith to this camp aryvde,
the light of heaven had thrice his course revyvde,
And darkened thrice, and began with saffron hew
to light the Ynds, the fourth day to renew:
when thus the Duke who left repast and rest
Unto his Eunuch this like porpos dressed.
O Bagos son adoptife not by chance,
whom I have chose of naught thee to advance
By special grace, and made thee (though I boste)
first of my heart, and second of mine Host:
Irage, I burn, I dye in desprate thought,
Through love by this same strangers beutie brought.
Go seek her then, and shortly to her say,
what secret flame torments me day by day:
show that I shall her to such honors bring,
As he that bears the Scepter of a King:
But chiefly see thy talk be framed thus,
that she do come this night and suppe with us.
Now should it not to me be folly and shame,
to have within my hold the fairest dame,
That ground does bear, if I dare not aspire,
to quench the burning flame of my desire?
I should but serve my soldiers for a Jest,
And Judith fair would count me but a beast.
Then Bagos well acquaint with such a cast
He fed the lamp that brunt but ouerfast.
If private men (quoth he) and people poor,
that goes not over the threshold of their door,
But spends their days in travel and debate,
And never seeks to win a better state:
Lives not content, if that the Cyprian Dame
Do not sometime their frozen hearts inflame?
what slaves are those then on whose baks ar dressed
The burdens of this world? who takes no rest,
for Public weal: but wakes with Argus eyes
For others ease that to no care applies:
If they among so many great vexations,
May not receive in love some recreations?
Pursue your love my Lord, and make no let,
to take the fish that else is in your net.
And as ere this you have me faithful found,
In like Ambassades when ye them propound
So shall you find me in this love of new,
To be as faithful secret trest and true.
Alas how many such are in our times
In princes Courts that high to honor clymes,
More for their handling such an enterprise,
Then for their being valiant learnde or wise?
So^times the Courts of kings were verteous skooles
now find we naught in Court but curious fools.
O you whose noble hearts cannot accord,
to be the sclaues to an infamous lord:
And knows not how to mix with perlous art,
the deadly poison with the Amorus dart:
whose natures being free wills no constraint,
Nor will your face with flattring pensile paint,
for well nor woe, for pity, nor for hyre,
Of good my Lords their favors to acquyre:
Go not to court if ye will me believe:
For in that place where ye think to retreue,
the honor due for virtue, ye shall find
naught but co^te^pt, which leaves good me^ behind.
Ye worthy Dames, that in your breasts do bear
Of your Al-seing God no servile fear:
ye that of honor have a greater care,
then sights of Courts I pray you come not their.
Let men that in their purse has not a myte,
Cloth them like kings, and play the hypocryte,
And with a lying tale and feined cheer,
Courtcozen them whom they would see on bear:
Let their, the Pandar sell his wife for gain,
with service vile, his noblesse to attain.
Let him that serves the time, change his intent,
With says unconstant sail at every vent.
Ye sons of craft, bear ye as many faces,
As Proteus taks among the Marine places,
And force your nature all the best ye can
to counterfeit the grace of some great man:
Camelion like, who take to him each hew
Of black or white, or yellowe green or blew,
that comes him next. So you that finds the facion
to hurt the poor, with many-a great taxacion:
you that do prease to have the princes ear,
to make your names in Provinces appear,
ye subtle Thurims, sell your fumish wind,
to wicked wights whose senses ye do blind.
Ye fearful Rocks, ye ymps of Achelois,
who wracks the wisest youth with charming vois:
ye Circes, who by your enchantment strange,
In stones and swine, your lovers true do change:
ye Stimphalids, who with your youth vptaks,
ye ravens that from us our riches raks:
Ye who with riches art, and painted face,
For Priams wife, puts Castors sister-in place:
ye Myrrhas, Canaces, and Semirames,
And if there rest yet mo defamed dames.
Come all to Court, and there ye shall resaue
A thousand gains unmeet for you to have.
There shall you sell the gifts of great provinces,
there shall you sell the grace of graceles princes.
Stay hear my muse, it thee behoues to have
Great constancy and many-a Hercles brave
to purge this age, of vices more notable,
then was the stals of foul Aegeans stable.
Return to Judith, who to bring to pass,
Her high atempt, before her sets her glass
And ginnes to deck her hair like burnisht gold,
whose beutie had no pere for to behold.
Then went she to his tent where she espide,
the gorgious tappestries on every side,
Of Persian Kings, of Meds, and Syrian stories,
How Ninus first (prict forth with great vainglories)
Subdewde the East Then next in order came
(disguisde in kind) his wife Queen Semirame:
who took the Scepter and with tourrets hye
great Babylon erected to the sky.
Lo, how a Prince with fingers white and fine
In woman's weed the tender twist does twine,
who bare a Rock in sted of Royal mace, Sardanapalus.

And for a man with woman changes grace
In gesturs all, he frisles and he fards,
He oynts, he bathes, his visage he regards
In Crystal glass, which for his sword he wore,
And lost his crown without all combat more.
Amongst his vertugals for aid he drew
from his Leutenant who did him pursew,
And wan his Scepter. Yet with feeble ire,
He brunt himself, and ended is empire.
Behold a Bitch then feeds a sucking child,
Amongst the prickiong thorns and brambles wild
who grew so great and was of such a fame, Cyrue.

that bond, and free, his waged men became,
And afterward subverted to his law,
the Median scepter under Persians awe.
But what is he that so deformed goze
Before the camp and want his ears and noze?
that was that servant true, who by that slight, Zopyrut.

Brought Babylon again in Darius might.
While Judith fed her eyes with figurs vain,
Her heart replete with passions and with pain:
the Genrall came, and with a visage gent,
Saluted her, and by the hand her hent,
And caused her sit down upon a chare,
the more at ease to view her beuties rare.
Then when he saw himself so near his pleasure,
He brunt in heart and scarce could bide the leisure,
Till Venus with her garland shewde in sight
On his Horizon to renew the night.
This widow finding then the time unmeet,
Gods just determination to complete
Made much delay, and fand full many-a skuse,
with sundry talk this tyrant to abuse:
And said my Lord, I pray you show to me,
what fury just has movde your majesty,
what have our people done (please it your grace)
By whom or when that Izaks holy race,
Might so provoke a Prince to wrackfull war
In toungs, and laws, so seprate from us far?
Then said the Duke, discourteous should I be
If I deny (o fair) to answer thee.
Now as the heavne two Suns cannot contain,
So in this earth two kings cannot remain
Of equal state. So does ambition crave,
One king will not another equal have.
My Prince is witness who at wars did fall,
with king Arphaxat cause he raisde his wall
Of Ecbatane so high that it did shame
to Niniue, and Babell feared the same:
For which, he undertook to spoil his throne,
And race his Scepter to the lowest stone:
with spite, his buildings brave, he cast adowne.
Arphaxat then, a man of great renown,
And worthy of his Scepter and his state,
thought better in the field to make debate,
Then bear a scorn, his Meds to battle drew.
Thus tweene them two did cruel war ensewe.
Arphaxat armed all the yles of Greece,
where Jason was, but sought no golden fleece,
But golden lingots with abundant gain,
where Phasis stream bedewes the pleasant plain.
The Harmastans, and Albans, strong, and wise,
that sowes but once, and have their harvest thrice.
The men that near to Oxus banks a bydes,
And those that Antitaurus horns deuydes.
And those that man's the mount upon whose breast
the shipped that escaped the genrall flood did rest:
And those that are (not hyd) within the Reame,
where proud Iaxartes flows with furious stream.
In short: the Meds brought men to aid their plea
From Pontus far beyond the Caspian sea:
And of this Host Arphaxat was commander
with hope and heart more high then Alexander.
My prince desirons then to win or dye,
Left naught undone that furthred to supplye:
His troubled state. he armed Syttacene,
And waged Archers out of Osrohene:
ye lords of lands that yelds the hundredth corn,
Leave Euphrates and bounds where ye were borne:
ye Carmans bold that all on fish do feed,
And of their pelts do make your warlike weed:
Leave Hytan bounds, go seek the golden sands,
ye Parths, ye Cosses, Arabs, and ye lands,
That of your Magi Prophets thinks ye know,
their spells divine, your self for pikmen show,
O Calde, change thine Astrolab and square
To spear and shield: for, we no wight will spare
Of able age, of high or low degrie,
that trails the pik or lance lays on his thie.
Let women, Children, and the burghers old
At home alone, let them their houses hold.
We somond eke the Persians and Phoenicians,
the soft Egyptians, Hebrews, and Cilicians:
(...) come in have. and join their force to ours:
But they disdainfully deteind their powrs:
And with their wicked hands and words vnsage,
They did our sacred messengers outrage.
My master for a time, put up this wrong,
Attending time, to quite these enmies strong,
with purpose more at leisure to provide,
t'abate this sacrilegious peoples pride.
Two greater kings were never seen beforne,
then camped was in Ragau field at morn, Battle.

with hautie hearts enarmed all in ire:
Each soldier set an other so on fire,
that scarsly they could keep them in their bound
till pype or Cymball or the trumpets sound,
Denounce the choke: but with there furious faces,
they thret their foes afar with fell menaces,
And strokes at hand, two thousand Lads forlorn,
(to blunt the sword) were down in battle borne.
Upon their flanks flew fervently the stones,
that bet their bucklers to their bruised bones,
The squadrons then, steps sternly to the strokes,
with hearts in humain all the battle yokes,
And are supplyde with many mighty bands,
Some counters them, and sternly them withstands,
with foot to foot each other over plyes,
Both Meds and Caldes clasp with ghastly cries,
Like Nilus stream that from the rocks does ro^ble,
Or Encelade when he in tomb does tomble.
Here some lies headles: some that cannot stand,
trails on his womb and wants both foot and hand,
cut off with stroks, some perst throu plate and mail^,
Some shoulder slasht, some panched in th'entrails.
Some brains outbet, some in the guts were gorde,
Some dying vomit blood, and some were smorde.
Some neither quick nor dead do yet attend,
what place it pleases god their souls to send:
So loath the little life that does abide,
Is from the dying body to deuyde.
The ground that erst was yellow, grene, and blew
Is ouercled with blood in purpure hew.
While this man gives some one his deadly baine,
He of another gets the like again.
The rage increasing grows with yrefull flame,
the field is spread with bodies dead and lame.
Like as ye see the wallowing sea to strive,
Flood after floode, and wave with wave to drive, Comparison.

Then waves with waves the floods with floods do chase
And eft returns unto their former place:
Or like the crops of corn in mids of May,
(blown with the westren wind) aside does sway:
Both to and fro, as force does them constrain,
And yet their tops redresseth up again:
So whiles the Syrians, are by Meds displaced,
And whiles the Meds, by Syrians are rechaced.
Then like two raging floods that down do fall
From two contrary mutine mountains tall:
Down bearing bridge and bank, and all destroys,
And strives which one may do the most annoyes:
So these two kings in force and courage stout,
Excelled the rest with slaughter them about,
VVherso they preast, they left on either side,
Behind them two long opned ways and wide:
for all their bucklers Morions and Quiraces,
were of no proof against their peisant maces.
Yet (for the time) the Meds so fearcely fought,
that they the Assyrian bands in terror brought,
And pauld their soldiers hearts and brak their might:
Who (overcome) took them to shameful flight.
The Meds pursewde and wounded in that chase,
ten thousand men, but none upon the face.
In short, this day our Scepter had deprived,
Had I not like the thunder dint arrived
In battles brunt. Their male and their vantbras,
Their helm and shield, before my Coutelas,
Were frail as glass: and never a stroke Hent,
But deadly was, and them more terror sent,
then all our camp. The soldier then in fear
with tre^bling hand could scarsly weild his spear.
the palhewd knight with heart in breast that quakes
His thyes in sadle, and feet in stirrops shakes
for dread of me. There some with trenchant glaiue
From hight of head, to middle down I claiue.
And some so far I foyned through the Jack:
the blade aperde a foot behind his back:
So that the Meds afraid at such a thing,
In heat of fight they fled and left their king,
who seeing himself betrayed: his clothes he rent,
And bloody toward Ragau town he went,
where we him met, yet (Brave) did him defend,
And sought amongst his foes a famous end.
As does the Tiger wild who sees her den
Beset about with hunters dogs and men,
that turns her fear to furious raging rife
and will not vnre uenged lose her life:
So he them thunderbet wherso he went,
that neuer-a stroke in vain his righthand spent:
But er with murdring blade they could him quell,
Full many-a bold precursor-he sent to hell.
At last Arphaxat began of slaughter tire
And (wounded sore) left both his life and ire:
And fell, as does some huge high planted oak,
that long has bide the winds, and many-a stroke
Of many an axe: yet stoutly does sustain
their travels long and frustrats all their pain,
The root does sigh, the dale does roaring sound,
And to the heavne the noise does high rebound,
his head now here, now there, seems to incline,
and threats them here and there with great ruin:
Yet stands upright above the highest oaks,
till, vanquished with a thousand thousand strokes,
He falls at last and brings with him to ground
Both trees and cattle to the plain profound.
So with Arphaxat fell the Meds empire:
My king, the king of kings then in his ire
Rasd Ecbatan, and now grows weed and herb,
where sometime stood his palaces superbe.
So that where erst the lute and loud Haubois,
were wont to sound with sweet concordant nois,
Now shriking owls and other monsters more
In funeral sound fulfils the place with woe.
My potent Prince when all this war was ceast
Consumed months four in Royal feast,
In Niniue the great, which banquet done,
He me commanded to assemble sone,
His Royal host, to punish all and some,
that to his former aid disdaind to come:
And that I shortly should with sword and flame
Revenge his honor, but alas Madame
Full far am I from that I would pursewe,
for coming here thy nation to subde we:
I va^quisht am by thee, so that deaths might,
shall shortly close mine eyes with endless night:
If you not (with a loving kiss) to me
Restore my life. O worthy Prince, quoth she,
Continue your discourse, and to me tell,
what great adventures to your Host befell.
Then he retooke his tale he left ^ late,
And made a long discourse of all his state:
Part true, part falls, as do some warriors brave,
who speaking of their Acts will lie and rave.
My camp assembled, then began I t'enflame
My soldiers hearts thus for to win them fame. Oration.

Companions now, if ever ye pretend
To win renoume that never shall hane end.
Go forwards now, plague these inhumain lands,
that on our sacred legates laid their hands.
Revenge, revenge, ye men your most hie prince,
that ever Scepter bare in rich province,
that ever came adowne with mighty arm.
From circled stars. Alarm' soldats alarm:
Take blades in hand, and brands of burning ire,
to wast the westren world with sword and fire,
with bloody seas bedewe each mount and wood,
And make your horses fearce to swim in blood.
Receive the Scepter great and crown of might,
of all this world which is to you behight.
Receive this laud that for your conquest brave,
shall draw your fames from the forgetful grave:
Receive ye valiant men the noble spoil
of many-a land that ye shall put to foil.
Let men behold that sees you day by day,
How ye are cloyde with honor spoil and pray,
thus ended I. And as my words were spent
They bet their bucklers, showing them content
with courage bold, to fight with me and bide.
Then sixscore thousand men I had to guide,
Or more: and so from Niniue we past
And marched unto (Bectile) at last,
I through Edessi, Amidi, and Carran came,
where sometime dwelt you father Abrahame:
I wan the mount whose thwarting horns deuyds
All Asie, and serves for bounds on sundry syds,
to many great Empyrs: I slew, I brent
All in my way. My fellon soldiers went
Like maowers with their sithes in sowple hands,
who leaves not after them a straw that stands:
But ample swathes of grass on ground does cast,
and shows what way their sharped siths have past.
All Lydia knows, that naught now grows in it
but weeds. And Phuli-and Tharsis feels it yet.
I was welneare the straits that closes all,
Phoenice and the Ishique Rouers, like a wall,
when Rosea, Solea, Mops, Anchiali and Iscia,
And sweet Egei: and (short) the whole Cilicia,
This passage took before and lay in wait,
to stay my Army for to pass this strait.
If I the harms and hassards all should tell
of all th'affairs and bloody frayes that fell
and succors sent: the day would slide away
Before my tale. For that Cilicia I say,
through great auantage of their ground so narrow
Defended them from both the spear and arrow:
So that my Host that gave before the chase,
to puissant kings: now fled with great disgrace.
Then foming in dispite, despair, and ire, Craking.

I cast my self where shot flew like the fire,
and though they hurt me in a hundredth parts,
And though my Buckler bare a wood of darts:
yet left not I, but with audacious face:
I bravely fought, and made them all give place.
My Army followde where my arm made way
with trenching blade, on bodies dead that lay.
The greatest coward that my captains led,
Pursewd and slew, the most of them that fled.
The Cidnus stream (who for his silver flood
Esteemd a king ran now with human blood.
The Pyram fearce, in seas discharged than
Full many-a helm, and sword and worthy man.
In short as your own river seems to rest
with swelling tyds and frothy floods represt
within his bank: yet furiously him wreaks
with weighty force and banks and bridges breaks,
and stroyes the plains, and maks for many-a day
More wrak, then if his channels open lay:
In semble sort their bands I did enchace,
that kept the entrance of that craggie place.
I brunt, I slew, cast down, all that I fand,
And Asia spoild, I entered th'easter land.
I wan Celei, and raged pity les
Upon the fruitful shore of Euphrates.
I betthe desert Rapse, and Eagria land,
who knows the virtue of my conquering hand.
From thence to seaward sewing mine intent
I wasted Madian. North ward then I went
to Liban ward, Damascus ouerrinning,
with other towns, Abilia and Hippas winning.
From thence, with curious mind my standerds styes,
the hill, where sun is seen to set and ryes.
And so from thence I forward led mine host,
To the Occident on the Phoenician cost.
Then Sidon, Bible, Beryte, Tire, and Gaze,
with Ascalon, and Assot, in a maze,
For fear, sent humbly to my sacred seat,
wise messengers, my favor to entreat.
We come not here, my lord said they, with arms
for to resist the chok of thy Gensd'armes:
But Prince, we come, of thee for to resaue,
Both life and death, and what law we shall have.
Our towns ar thine, our cities and our hills,
Our fields, our flocks, our wealth is at your wills.
Our service, and our treasures, great and small,
Our selfs, our wives, and our fair children all:
Now only rests to thee, if so thee please
to take us thus. O God what greater ease:
O god what greater good may us befall,
Then unto such a chief for to be thrall?
who weilds the valiant lance and balance right,
with virtue like the Gods of greatest might
So wear to me, as gracious to behold
Their towns and Cities both, for young and old
with crowns, and presents of the Flora sweet,
and costly odours, humbly did me greet.
At sounds of horns and pypes they dancing went
with goods and bodies me for to present.
Then I abusing not the law of arms
Entreated them, and did to them no harms,
nor to their lands. But first their forts I mand,
with men of mine, and theirs took in my band.
For where that I, my people farthest drew,
My camp in bands, from bands, to armies grew,
As does the Danow which begins to flow
By Raurak fields with snakish crangling slow,
then swells his floods with sixty rivers large,
that in the Golfe Euxinus does discharge:
I wend Malame that Izrell like the rest,
would yeald to me, that I should not be strest
Against their breast to move my murdring spear,
But as I came the Soythique rampire near
(the Tomb of her whose milk had such a hap
To feed the twice borne Denis in her lap)
I hard their wilful rage first in that place,
which doubtless will distroye all Abrahms race.
FINIS.
THE SOMMARIE OF THE VI. BOOK.
Judith having escaped the peril of her chastity is brought to a sumpteous
banquet prepared by Holophernes for the intertainement of her, and farther
provocation of his filthy lust: In which the abominable vice of gluttony as
by the Poet viuely descriued, and sharply reprehended And whereas the Tyrant
thought by such excess to overcome the chaste widow: himself is so overcome
with wine, that upon a very simple delay he lets her go till he was in his
bed. And here is noted that the snares that the wicked lays for others, they
fall in them their selfs. W^^les the Tyrant contemplated his lust, Judith in
trouble called upon her God, who made way for her work through the Tyrants
own wickedness: who heaping sin upon sin, approached at last to the end of
his tragaedie, and mounting upon the skaffold of the ire of God* falls a
sleep in his sinful bed, and is by Judith beheaded in his beastly dronkennes.
True it is that in this execution she felt her great infirmity, but likewise
she found that God was able to strengthen the most feeble for the execution of
his lustice. And as before she was preserved in the midst of her enemies: so
the Lord to make a miraculous end of his work, brings her safe home to her
people. The Bethulians gives thanks to God. The Ammonit ravished with this
miracle, embraced the true religion. The head of Holophernes (that Iudiths
servant brought) being set up for a terrible spectakle to the Heathen,
encouraged the Cittezens to give assault upon the camp. Bagos, who had bent an
instrument of the tyrants wickedness, is the first that finds his masters
headles Carkas, and putts the camp in such affray, that they fled all before
Israel, in such sort that scarce one was left to bring news to Niniue, of the
fortune of the battle. And that was Gods Justice, that those that had followed
this tyrant in his wickedness, should be companions of his death. Judith last
of all celebrates the deliverance of God with a song, to the honor and glory
of his almighty name.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF IVDITH.
BEfore the Pagan had his purpose ended,
the night obscure from mo^tains high descended
And sewers set the board with costly meat,
Of passing price, so delicate to eat,
that Holopherne unto his joyous feast
Aperd to have called the kings of west and East.
O glutton throtes, o greedy guts profound,
the chosen meats within the world his bound
By the Abderois invented may not stau^che, Exclamation.

Nor satisfy your foul devouring pau^che:
But must in Moluke seek the spices fine.
Canarie sugar and the Candy wine.
Your appetits (O gluttons) to content,
the sacred breast of Thetis blew is rent:
the Air must be dispeopled for your mawes
the Phoenix sole can skarse escape your jaws. Gluttony

'O plague, O poison to the warrior state,
'thou maks the noble hearts effeminate,
'while Rome was ruled by Curioes and Fabrices,
'who fed on roots and sought not for delices,
'and when the only Cresson was the food
'most delicate to Persia, then they stood
'in happy state, renowinde in peace and war,
'and throu the world, their triumphs spread afarres
'But when they after in th Assyrian hall,
'Had learnd the lessons of Sardanapall.
'and when the other, given to belly cheer,
'By Galbaes, Veroes, Vitells gouernd wear,
'who gloried more to fill a costly plate,
'then kill a Pyrrhus or a Mythridate:
'then both of them were seen for to be sacked
'by nations poor, who^ they before had wracked.
'Of little nature lives superfluous meat,
'But duls the sprite, and does the stomach freate,
When they were set, then throw that Royal rout,
the Maluesie was quaffed often about.
One drinks out of an Alabaster Cup,
one out of Crystal does the Nectar suppe:
Some out of curious shells of Unicorn:
Some spills the wine, and some to beds were borne:
But namely there the Vizroy would not tire,
But more he drank, the more he had desire:
Like to the Ocean Sea, though it resaues
All Nilus floods, yet all fresh water craves
From East to West, yet grows he not a grain,
But still is ready forasmuch again.
One glass draws on another glass, and when
the butler meant to cease he but began,
to skinck good Bacchus: thus this dronken wight,
Among his dronkards tippled till midnight,
then each of them with stackring steps out went,
And groping hands retyring to his tent.
This tyrant wished them often away before,
to whom each moment seemd to be a skore.
As Soon as they were gone, then began he prease,
the trembling Judith. Cease great prince o cease
the widow said: what have need you to make
to reap the flower that none other ca^ from you take?
My Lord go to your bed and take your ease,
where I your sweet embracings will complease,
As Soon as I my garments may remove,
that binds my body brunt with ardent love.
Now if that sober wits and wily brains
Cannot avoid the female tricks and trains.
Abash not reader though this reckles Roy
(Bewitched by Semels son, and Venus boy)
was thus beguilde: considring both these twain,
Confounds the force of those that them retain.
So letting Judith slide out of his arm,
He gins to lose his garments soft and warm:
But throw his have, his hand came lesser speed,
And though he was deceivd, yet took no heed,
But wening well t'vntrus his peuish points,
He knits them twyfold with his trembling ioints:
so long till he with anger discontent,
cuts me them all, and off his clothes he rent,
And naked went to bed. Then as ye see
the bloody bowman stand behind a tree,
who warely watches for the wandering dear:
to every part, where he does think to hear
Some trembling bush, some beast or Lezard small,
that mocion maks, so turns he withal
His face, and hand to shoot, but all in vain
for to relieve his long aspecting pain:
Even so, this foolish tyrant when he hard
some rat or mouse, then thought he to himward:
His Mistress came: and when he hard no more,
yet thought (she came) whom most he did adore.
While up he lifts his head, while lets it fall:
while looks about, while counts the paces all,
that she should pass, to come unto his bed.
Thus turning often, as ardent lust him led:
he thought his bed was sown with pricking thorne^
but now the drink that he had dro^k beforne,
Brewd in his brain, and from his mind it took,
the sweet remembrance of her loving look.
So fell on sleep: and then to him appears
Ten thousand flames, ten thousand dinns he hears,
and dreams of Devils, and Demons dark and dim
Medusas, Minotaurs, and Gorgons grim.
This while the heart of Judith began to beat
Incessantly beset with battle great:
Onewhile her fear refeld her first intent:
onewhile her action Just her courage lent.
Then said she Judith, now is time, go to it,
And save thy people: Nay, I will not do it.
I will, I will not, Go, fear not again:
will thou the sacred gestning then prophaine?
Not it profane, but holyer it shall stand,
when holy folk are helped by my hand.
But shameful lives the traitor evermore,
No traitor she who does her town restore:
But murdrers all, are of the heavne forsaken?
All murder-is not for murder always taken.
Alas are they not murdrers sleys their Prince?
This tyrant is no prince of my province:
But what if God will have us under his-awe?
He Is not of God that fights against his law.
For then should Ahud, Iahell, and Iehewe,
Be homicids, because thy tyrants slew.
But what? they were commanded of the lord,
to such an act, my heart should soon accord.
Alas my heart is weak for such a deed,
they are strong enough whom God does strength at need
But when it is dune who shall my warrant be?
God brought me here, God will deliver me.
What if the Lord leave thee in Heathen hands?
were this Duke dead, I fear no death nor bands.
but what if they polute thee like a slave?
my body with my heart they shall not have.
Thus she resolved in her mind at last,
Her hands and eyes unto the heavne she cast,
And with an humble voice to God she prayde,
O gracious God that always art the aid
to thy beloved Izak, I thee pray,
to strength my hand, even my right hand this day,
that I may make this bloody tyrant dye,
that to discepter thee would skale the sky.
But since thy goodness has preserved me,
and brought my bote so near the shore to be:
Grant that some sleepie drink I may provide,
To dull this tyrants heart and daunt his pride,
to thend that I may free thy congregation
Unto thy honor, and our consolation.
This prayer done, she looked round about,
And hard this dronken prince in sleeping rout,
then stepped she to his sword that by him stood,
whichoft had bathd the world with humain blood
But as she preast this tyrant for to quell.
Fear, reft the sword from her, and down she fell,
and lost at once the strength of heart and corse.
O God (quoth she) now by thy mighty forse,
Restore my strength. This said (with pale annoy)
she rudly rose, and stroke this sleeping Roy
so fell, that from his shoulders flew his powle,
and from his body fled his Ethnique soul
hye way to hell. His bulk all blood bestaind
Lay still, his head in Iudiths hand remaind.
The which her maid put up into a sack,
thus throw the camp they close away do pack
Empecht of none. For those that had her seen,
Suposde she went (as she had wonted been
the nights before) unto the valley wheare,
they thought she went to serve Diana clear.
When Judith chaste came near the Hebrew wall:
Let in (quoth she) for our great god of all
has broke this night the whole Assyrian power,
and raisd the horn of Izak at this hour.
Then men amazde of her unhoped state,
About her ran assembling at the gate,
where holy Judith on a hill was mounted,
And all her chance from point to point recounted,
And there, discovring drew out of the sack,
The bloody head of thenmie of Izak,
The Citezins that saw how she did stand
with th'ead of Assurs head in her right hand:
they praised God who by her hand had slain,
and punished that traitor inhumaine.
'But most of all Duke Ammon did admyre
'the work of God. Then he t'escape the ire
'of Jacobs God who aids the weakest part:
'he shortly Circuncisde his flesh and heart.
'O God that rightly by foresight divine,
'repels the purpose of all men's engine,
'who for to lead the elect to destnyed health,
'Eue^ when it seems them fardest from their wealth.
'of ill, thou draws the good, and some in ill
'thou letst them run thy Justice to fulfill.
'(O lord) the vile desire of blood and sak,
'made Holopherne to war upon Izak.
'But where that he would Izaks blood have shed,
'he lost his own for Izak on his bed.
'Thus thy good grace has made his vain inuencio^,
'to take effect contrary his intencion.
'So Paull became a Saint, who was a Pherisee,
'and of a tyrant, teacher of thy veritee:
'So was the thief that hong with our Messiah,
'(for all his sin) preserved with Elias:
'his vicious corpse could have no life here down,
'his soul by grace yet got a heavenly crown.
'Change the^ (o God) the hearts of christian princes
'who sheds the faithfuls blood in their provinces.
'Let thou that sword that thou gives the^ to guide
'vpon thy enmies only be applyde.
'Vpon those tyrants whose unrighteous horn
'deteins the land where thy dear son was borne.
'not on the backs of those who with humility,
'Adores the Triple one great God in unity.
Then at commandment of this widow chaste,
A soldier took the tyrants head in haste,
And for to give the Hebrews heart withal,
He fixed it upon the foremost wall.
There, fathers came, and sonns, and wives, and mayds,
who erst had lost amongst the Heathen blayds,
There sons, their parents, maks, and lovers dear,
with heavy hearts and furious raging cheer.
They pilde and paird his beard of paled hew,
Spit in his space and out his tongue they drew,
which used to speak of God great blasphemies,
And with their fingers poched out his eyes.
The rife remembrance of so late an ill,
Made vulgar folk such vengeance to fulfill.
This while Aurora ceased to embrace,
Her ancient love and rose with ruddy face,
Upon the Indian heavne, the warriors strong,
take kept the town: now sorted forth in throng.
Enarmed all, with such a hideous sound:
as seemde the elements four for to confound.
And break the ba^ds that keeps the^ in their border,
Retyring them unto their old disorder.
The Pagan watches next the Cities side
(Awaked with this din) start up and cryde:
Alarm, Alarm, like fearful men aghast,
then through the Camp, the whote Alarm past.
Some takes his neighbors armor first he finds, Confusion.

And wrong on arms the bracels both he binds.
Some takes a staf for have, and leaves his lance:
Some madling runs, some trembles in a trau^ce:
Some on his horse ill sadled ginnes to ride,
And wants his spurs, some boldly do abide:
Some neither wakes nor sleeps, but mazing sta^ds:
Some brave in words, are beastly of their hands.
This brute from hand to hand, from man to man,
Unto the Pagans court at last it ran.
Then Bagos Eunuch sadly forth he went
t'awake the sleeping Ethnique in his tent,
and knocked once twice, or thrice with trembling hand
But such eternal sleep his temples band,
that he had past already (miserable)
Of Styx so black the flood irrepassable.
Yet Bagos hearing Izaks cry increase,
He with his foot, the door began to prease:
And entered where the bed he did behold
All bled with Holophernes carcass cold:
He tore his hair and all his garments rent,
and to the heavne his houling cries he sent.
But when he mist the Hebrew-Dame away
then raginghe began a ghastly fray.
And from the bloody tent as he rant out,
Among the Heathen thus he began to shout.
Woe, woe to us, a slave (they Judith call)
In sleaing Holopherne has slain us all:
That daunted all the world. These nouels last,
loynde the former fear that lately past,
Affrighted so the soldiers one and all,
that pike and dart, and target they let fall,
And fled through mo^tains, valeis, and throw heaths
where evrie chance, procurde the^ worser deaths.
Then all th assieged folk in flocks descended,
and on their enmies backs their bows they be^ded.
Both parties ran, but th one that other chased,
The weary flyers flight, themselfs defaced.
The Hebrews there, in fight not one they lost,
But they bet down and slew the Heathen host,
As does a Lion of Getulia wood
Bespred the land with woried beasts and blood
So long as he may find a beast abide,
that dare oppone him to his cruel pride.
Some headlong throws themselfs from craggie Rocks,
and breaks their bones and al their brains out knocks
Some has forgot that Parcas every wheare,
waits on their end that drown in water clear:
But if that any skapt by some great hap,
He skapte the first, but not the after clap:
fore all the straits and passages were set,
that none should escape alive where they were met:
Yea scarsly one was left to tell the king,
At Niniue of all this wondrous thing.
This battle done, all those whose Sex and age
withheld at home (their dolours to assuage)
Came forth out of their fort to see and hear,
what God had done for them his people dear.
They found some men disme^bred having breath,
that cride in vain a hundredth times for death.
Another gnashes with his teeth in pains
some dead, in face their former rage retains.
And some is shot directly throw the heart
Each soul departs to his appointed part,
According to the value, or the chance,
that fortunde them to dye on sword or lance.
In short to see this sight so dreadful was,
That even the Hebrews would have said alas:
If they had vanquished any enmie else,
This while amongst the corses infidels,
Among a hundredth thousand there was found,
the cheftains carcas rent with many-a wound,
Of spear and sword, by th Hebrews in their ire.
There was no sinew, Arter, vain, nor lyre,
that was not mangled with their vulgar rage,
No time nor moment might their ire assuage.
If Holophern had been like Atlas long:
Or like in limbs unto Briarius strong,
Yet should his body been to small a pray,
to satisfy their fury evrie way.
For in that camp was not so small a knave,
but of his flesh some collup he would have.
O tyrant now (quod they) give thy right hand,
to the Cilicians, and to Media land,
leave thou thy left. And to Celea sweet,
to Ismaell and Egypt leave thy feet,
to thend that all the world by thee offenced
with such a present may be recompensed.
But here I fail thy corpse thus to devise
In Attomy for it will not suffice.
This thankful widow then, who never thought
to smore this wo^drous work that god had wrought,
Entunde her vearse and song to sweet confort
Of instruments and past with gracious port
Before the chosen Dames and virgins their,
that were esteemde for honest chaste and fair.
Sing sing with heart and voice and sou^ding strings,
And praise the Lord of lords, and king of kings,
who does disthrone the great, and in their place
Erects the poor that leanes upon his grace.
Who would have thought that in a day one town
Could overcome a camp of such renown?
who daunted all the world whose pride was felt
From Indian shore to where the Calpees dwelt?
Great God who will believe that Holopherne,
who did a hundredth famous princes derne,
should be discreptred, slain, left in a midow,
by no great Giant, but a feeble widow?
great God who will believe that he who raind,
From north to south, and in his hands retaind
Both East and West: now gets not grace to have
An ynch of Gazon ground to be his grave?
This Conqurour that came with no army small,
now lies on ground abandond of them all.
Not sole: for those companions him in death,
that followde him while he had life and breath.
Not now the ground, but Reauens hunger sterude,
Are now his tomb as he has well deserude.
No vaults of Marble, rich nor Porphyr pure,
that he had built could be his sepulture.
Even so good Lord from henceforth let us find,
thee, not our Judge, but for our father kind.
But let all Tyrants that against thee gather,
find thee their Judge, but not their loving father.
Here Judith ends. And also hear I stay
With thanks to God. So for his state I pray, The tra^^slatour.

At whose command I undertook this deed,
To please his Grace, and those that will it reed.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF SIGNIFICATION OF SOME WORDS AS THEY ARE USED BEFORE.
Words. Significations. ABderois. Profane and delicate Epicurs. Abile. A hill
in Africa, one of the Pillars of Hercules. Abraham. Father of the Jews or the
faithful. Achelois Ympes. Sirenes or Mermaids. Amram. The father of Moses.
Assure. Assurs head. the country of Assyria or their king. Assyrian Prince.
Holophernes. Vizroy or ge^rall. Agamemnon. The general of the Greeks, being
present at the sacrificing of his only Daughter was painted with a bend about
his eyes, either forth unskillfulness of the painter, who could not sufficiently
expres the fathers special tears; or else for that he thought it not decent to
paint so mighty a Prince weeping, or unnatural not to weep. Aconite. A
poisonable herb. Autan. the South or south wind. Aurora. the morning.
Arphaxat. supposed to be Arbactus, King of Medes. Atlas. A great Giant. Argus.
Had a hundredth eyes. Alexander. The great. Apelles. An excellent painter.
Bethull or Bethulia. the City where Judith dwelt. Babell. Babylon, or the
whole country. Bellona. Goddess of Battle. Briccoll. an engine of war.
Briarius. a Giant with a hundredth hands. Bacchus. Wine or drunkenness. Boreas.
the north or north wind. Camelion. a beast that changes his colors.
Ctesiphon. a cunning Architectu^^ or builder. Chaos. a confusion before the
worlds creation. Capharois. TWO perilous Rocks. Cyanes straits Calpe. A hill in
Spain one of the pillours of Hercules. Cyprian Dame Venus, love, or lust.
Cupido. Love or lust. Cornies. crooked yrons to draw down buildings. Castors
sister. Helen the dishonest wife of Menelaus. Canaces. Incestuous women.
Circes. witches, abusers of lovers. Cyrene. a dry sandy country, or drouth.
Carmell. a montain in Judea, or the whole country. Danow. Danubius, a river in
Germany. Denis twice borne. Bachus. Diana or Cynthia, The Moon. Dina. The
daughter of Jacob. Aegiptian Queen. Cleopatra the Concubine of M. Antonius,
who swallowed a rich pearl. Elimia Land. The Elamits. Eurus. The East, or East
wind. Aegeans stable. where horses devoured men. Encelade. a Giant burried
under mount Etna. Genrall. Holophernes. Gibaltar. A City in Spain, near to
Calpe-hill, one of the Pillars of Hercules. Holopherne. Vizroy, chief of the
Army. Hermon. a Hill in Judea, or the country of Judea. Hesperian cost. The
west. Hyade. a water nymph or watrie star. Heraults. Apostles, or preachers.
Jacobs sons. the people of Izrell. Izrell or Jacob. the land of Judea. Izaak.
the people of the Jews. Ismaell. Idumeans or Edom. Ixion. One tormented in
Hell Iebus place. Jerusalem or Syon. Judith. of Bethulia of the trybe of Ruben.
Iessies race. David and his seed. Iethro. Father in law to Moses. Latmies
son. Endymion, the long sleper supposed to lie with the Moon. Lysippus. a
cunning caruer. Monark. One sole governor. Memphits. Men of that City in
Egypt. Misraim. The land of Egypt. Mocmur. the river near Bethulia. Momus. a
scornful detractour of all thing. Mars. God of strife or battle. Myrrhaes and
Syllaes. women betrayers of their country. Minotaurs. Unnatural monsters.
Medusaes. furies of hell. Neptunes back. the Sea. Niphathaei. A mighty strong
Roch or mountain in Syria. Palestene. the land of the Philistines. Pharia. a
famous tower in Egypt. Phlegon. One of the four horses that was supposed to
draw the sun. Phoebus. the sun. Phoebe. His sister the moon. Proteus. A
man changing him self in sundry forms, there is a fish of like nature. Priams
wife. Hecuba the honorable. Peslmell. all mixed confusedly together. Ram. an
ingine of war for battrie. Sina-hill. Sinai-hill. Salem. Jerusalem. Solyma
Jerusalem. Sichem. the rauisher of Dina. Sabean Queen. Savors of Saba land.
Simeon. Dinaes brother. Scythique Rampire. The tomb of Semele, mother of
Bacchus. Styx. a River in hell. Sympathy. Concordance of natures and things.
Sentinelles. watchmen. Semirames. women Viragoes. Syrtes. Dangerous sands.
Satrap. Prince. stymphalids. Ravenous fowls with female faces Harpyes. Syrian
camp. the Host of Holophernes. Semels son. Bacchus or wine. Transparant.
that which may seen through and whole like glass. Tortuse. An engine of
war. Trepan. An engine of war. The foreign tide. Suppofed to have been the
flood of Noah, or the deluge of Deucalion that ^iuided Africa from Europe, and
Sicilia from Italia. Thetis. The sea. Thurims. Deceitful Aduocats. Theban
knight. Captain of the Greeks army. Thief that stole the fire. Prometheus, who
stole fire from Jupiter. Zedechias. Last king of the Jews. Zephyrus. West or
west wind. Zeuxis. A painter of Italy, who being required to paint the picture
of Helen, desired to have all the fairest women of Croton to be present for his
pattern.

FINIS.

