TWO SERMONS PREACHED at PAVLES-Crosse LONDON.

The one November 21. the other April 15. 1627. BY ROBERT SAVNDERSON,
Bachelour in Divinity, and sometimes Fellow of LINCOLNE-Colledge in Oxford.

LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T.F. for ROBERT DAVVLMAN, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL my very kind Neighbor and Patron, THOMAS HARINGTON of
Boothby-Paynell, in the County of LINCOLN Esquire.
SIR; although I neither have, nor ought to have any other prime intention in
the Publishing of these two Sermons, then I had in the Preaching of them, and
then every Minister that fore-casteth to make his last account with comfort
ought to have in the whole course and exercise of his Ministry, viz. the
building up of the people of God in Faith and Godliness: yet I cannot but
desire withal, that as they passes abroad in the world, they may stand up
every where as a public testimony of my private obligations to you. Whereof
(omitting those daily kind offices of Friendship and Neighborhood, which you
are ever ready to do me and mine upon all occasions; as also your zeal unto
Justice and the Common-good, abundantly manifested in managing the affairs of
your Country with singular skill, Industry, and Faithfulness:) I need produce
no other argument then this; that living so long under my Charge, as I do also
under your Patronage, you never yet gave me the least cause to think my self,
either despised in the Work, or defrauded in the Wages, of my Ministry.
Which, as it is a gracious evidence of a pious and sincere heart in you; so it
is a Circumstance, wherein I am happy beyond the condition of most of my
Brethren in the same Calling. God make me truly Thankful to him for his good
Providence over me therein, and for all other his Mercies toward me: and both
continue and increase your Comforts amid all the Afflictions of this present
evil World; and in the end make you partaker of the Joys of the world to come:

Yours in the Lord, Robert Saunderson.
Boothby-Paynell, Linc: 1. July. 1628.
Errata.
IN Page 5. and in Note line 6. for Psalm. read Verse. In page 14. from line 6.
for Psalm. read Verse five times in that page.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's- Cross London, November, 21. 1624.
1. TIM. 4.4. For every Creature of God is good: and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with Thanksgiving.


OF that great and Universal Apostacy,. 1. The Coherence.
which should be in the Church through the tyranny and fraud of Antichrist;
there are elsewhere in the Scriptures more full, scarce any where more plain
predictions, then in this passage of Saint PAVL, whereof my Text is a part. The
Quality of the Doctrines foretold Verse. 1. Contrary to the Faith, Erroneous,
Devilish; [ Verse. 1.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils.] The
Quality of the Doctors foretold, Verse. 2. Liars, Hypocritical,
unconscionable; [ Verse. 2.
Speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with a hot jron.]
But least these generalities should seem not sufficiently distinctiue; each
side charging other, (as commonly it happens where differences are about
Religion) with Apostasy, and Error, and Falsehood, and Hypocrisy: the Apostle
thought it needful to point out those Antichristian Doctors more distinctly,
by specifying some particulars of their devilish Doctrines. For which purpose
he gives instance in Verse. 3.
two of their Doctrines: whereof he makes choice, not as being simply the
worst of all the rest, (though bad enough) but as being more easily discernable
then most of the rest, viz. a Prohibition of Marriage, and an Injunction of
abstinence from certain Meats. Which particulars, being so agreeable to the
present Tenets of the Romish Synagogue, do give even of themselves alone, a
strong suspicion, that there is the seat of Antichrist. But joined unto the
other Prophecies of 2. These. 2.3. etc.
St. Paul, and Apoc. 13.11. etc.
St. John, in other places, make it so unquestionable: that they who will
needs be so unreasonably charitable, as to think the Pope is not Antichrist,
may at the least wonder, (as Moulins accomplishment in the Preface.
one says well) by what strange chance it fell out, that these Apostles should
draw the picture of Antichrist in every point and limb, so just like the Pope,
and yet never think of him.

. 2. Scope.
The words of the Text, are the ground of a Confutation; indeed properly and
directly of the latter of these two Errors only, concerning Abstinence from
certain meats: but yet so, as it strongly overthrows the other too,
concerning Marriage; and in truth generally, all other superstitious Precepts,
or Prohibitions, of like Nature. Marriage being the holy Ordinance of God, as
Meats are the good Creatures of God: and neither Marriage, nor Meats, nor any
other Creature or Ordinance, being to be refused as upon tie of Conscience;
provided ever, they be received with such thankfulness, and such other
requisite conditions, as become Christian men. For every Creature of God is
good; and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.

Which words give us occasion to consider of Three points,. 3. And division of
the Text.
which according to the number and order of the several clauses in this verse,
are these. First, the Quality of Gods Creatures, as they come from him, and
are given to us: [ Every Creature of God is the use of Gods Creatures,
consisting lawfulness unto us, and our liberty unto them, [ And nothing to
be refused.] Thirdly, a condition necessary on our parts, least the Creatures,
otherwise good and lawful, should become unto us evil and hurtful; and that
is Thankefulnes: [If it be received with Thanksgiving.] The two first set out
the bounty of God toward us; who has made a world of Creatures, and all
good, and has not enuyed us the use of any of them: and the third, contains
our duty unto God in regard thereof; viz. to return unto him, for the free
use of all his good Creatures, the tribute of our Thanks. Of these three
Points it is my purpose, by Gods grace, and with your patience, to speak in
such manner, as shall be most for our edification; in such measure, as the
usual hours will allow; and in such Order, as the Text gives them: and first
of the First, from the first clause thereof; Every Creature of God is good.

By Creature understand,. 4. Obseru. 1. The Goodness of the Creature declared.
not only such as are appointed for nourishment: but even all kind of created
Beings; the Genesis 1.1.
Heaven and the Earth, and Exodus 10.11.
all things therein contained Col. 1.16.
visible and invisible, with all their several Properties and Accidents. Of
all and each of these the Apostles assertion is true; Every Creature of God is
good. He concludes all kinds of meats to be good; because, they are the
Creatures of God: which argument were not good, if every Creature were not
good. And by Goodness understand, not only that goodness ad intra, whereby
every thing is simply and metaphysically good, in regard of the Nature,
perfection, and being thereof: but that goodness ad extra too, whereby every
thing is in the kind and in some measure endowed with an ability to do some
good without and beyond it self. You may call them an V. Scalig exer. 107.
sect. 27.
Absolute, and a Relative Goodness. And every Creature has both of these. There
being in the meanest and basest of Gods Creatures, not only an Absolute
Goodness, whereby it is perfect in its proper kind, Qua Ens, as it has a being
and existence: but also a Relative Goodness too; and that twofold. One,
respecting God the Creator: whose glory more or less it serves to show forth,
Qua Creatura, as it is the Work of his hands. Another, respecting its (...).
Plat. in Protag. and in Menone.
Fellow Creatures: to some of whom it is some way or other serviceable, Qua
Pars Mundi, as it is a Part of the Whole; but especially serviceable unto Man,
for whose service (next under the Glory of God) the whole was Created. The
sum is. Every Creature which God has made is good. Good, absolutely and in
it self; as a Thing: Good, in that it sets forth the Glory of him that made
it, as a Creature: Good, as a part of the World, for the service it does to
Man, and other Creatures.

Hereof we need neither further,. 5. With the proof.
nor other testimony, then Gods own approbation registered in the story of the
Creation Genesis 1. Where we may see Gods allowance stamped, both upon the
several Creatures of each several day, that they were Genesis 1.4.12.18.21.25.
good: and also upon the whole frame of the Creatures, when the work was
finished; that behold they were Ibid. Psalm. 31
exceeding good. Et nusquam in toto corpore menda fuit. In this goodly systeme
and fabric of Nature, that which is beyond all, is, the harmony and
conjuncture of the Parts, exceeding in goodness, beauty, and perfection: yet
so, as no one part is superfluous or unprofitable; or, if considered singly and
by it self, destitute of its proper goodness and usefulness. As in the
Natural Body of a Man; not the least member, or string, or sinew, but has his
proper office and comlin^^^^ in the Body: and as in the artificial Body of a
Clock or other Engine of motion, not the least wheel, or pin, or notch, but
has his proper work and use in the Engine. God has given to every thing he
has made, that Wisd. 11.20.
number, weight, and measure of perfection and goodness, which he saw fittest
for it unto those ends for which he made it. Every Creature of God is good..
6. And ground thereof.


A truth so evident; that even those among the Heathen Philosophers, who either
denied or doubted of the Worlds Creation, did yet, by making (...). Arist. 1.
Ethic. 6.
Ens and Bonum terms convertible, acknowledge the goodness of every Creature.
It were a shame then for us, who Heb. 11.3.
through Faith understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, if
our assent unto this truth should not be by so much firmer then theirs, by how
much our evidence for it is stronger then theirs. They perceived the thing;
we, the ground also: they saw, it was so; we, why it is so. Even because it is
the work of God. A God full of goodness; a God who is nothing but goodness; a
God Pars naturae little est esse b^nos. (De Diis) Seneca.
essentially and infinitely good, yea very Goodness it self. And as is the
Workman, such is his workmanship. Not for degree, (that is here impossible;)
but for the truth of the Quality: not alike good with him, but like to him in
being good. In every Creature there are certain trackes and footsteps, as of
Gods Essence, whereby it has its Being; so of his Goodness too, whereby it also
is good. The Sea August. passim in Script. ^ou^r. M^nichae^s.
Manichees saw the strength of this Inference: Who, though they were so
injurious unto the Creatures, as to repute some of them Evil; yet durst not be
so absurd, as to charge the true God to be the cause of those, they so reputed.
Common reason taught them: that from the good God could not proceed any evil
thing; no more then Darkness could from the light of the Sun, or Cold from
the heat of the Fire. And therefore so to defend their Error, as to avoid
this absurdity; they were forced to maintain another absurdity (indeed a
greater, though it seemed to them the less of the two,) viz. to say, there
were two Gods, a Good God, the Author of all good things; and an Evil God, the
Author of all evil things. If then we acknowledge, that there is but 1. Cor.
8.6.
one God, and that one God good; (and we do all so acknowledge;) unless we
will be more absurd then those most absurd Heretics, we must withal
acknowledge all the Creatures of that one and good God to be also good. He is
so the causer of all that is good; (for Iam. 1.17.
every good gift and every perfect giving descends from about from the
Father of lights:) as that he is the causer only of what is good (for with
him is no variablenes neither shadow of turning, says Saint James.) As the
Sun who is Pater Luminum, the fountain and father of Lights, (whereunto
Saint James in that passage does apparently allude) gives light to the Moon,
and Stars, and all the lights of heaven, and causes light wheresoever he
shines, but no where causes darkness: so God the Father and fountain of
all goodness, so communicates goodness to every thing he produces, as that
he Errat, si quis putet illos (Deos) nocere velle q non pissunt. Senec. Epist.
95. Nec dant malu^, nec habent Ibid.
cannot produce any thing at all, but that which is good. Every Creature of God
then is good.

Which being so; certainly then, first (to raise some Inferences from the
premises for our farther instruction and use) certainly I say; Sin,. 7.
Inferences thence: the First.
and Death, and such things as are evil and not good, are not of Gods making,
they are none of his Creatures: for all his Creatures are good. Iam. 1.13.
Let no man therefore say when he is tempted and overcome of sin, I am
tempted of God: neither let any man say when he has done evil, it was Gods
doing. God indeed preserves the Man, actuateth the Power, and orders the
Action to the glory of his Mercy or Justice: but he has no hand at all in the
sinful defect and obliquity of a wicked action. There is a natural (or rather
transcendentall) Goodness, Bonitas Entis as they call it, in every Action, even
in that whereto the greatest sin adhereth: and that Mali author non est, qui
omnium qua sunt author est: quia in quantu^ sunt, in tantum bona sunt. August.
83. Quest. 21.
Goodness is from God, as that Action is his Creature. But the Evil that
cleaves unto it, is wholly from the default of the Person that commits it;
and not at all from God. And as for the Evils of Pain also; neither are they
of Gods making. Wisd. 13.16.
Deus mortem non fecit, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, God made not
death, neither does he take pleasure in the destruction of the living: but
wicked men by their words and works have brought it upon themselves: Osc. 13.9.
Perditio tua ex te Israel, Os. 13. O Israel, thy destruction is from thy
self: that is; both thy sin, whereby thou destroyest thy self, and thy
Misery whereby thou art destroyed, is only and wholly from thy self.
Certainly God is not the cause of any Evil, either of sin or Punishment.
Conceit it thus: not the Cause of it (formally, and) so far forth as it is
Evil. For otherwise, we must know, that (materially considered) all Evils of
Punishment are from God: for, Amos 3.6.
shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. In
Evils of sin, there is no other, but only that Natural or Transcendentall
goodness (whereof we spoke) in the Action: which goodness though it be from
God, yet because the Action is Morally bad, God is not said to do it: But in
Evils of Punishment, there is, over and besides that Natural Goodness whereby
they exist, a kind of Moral Goodness, (as we may call it, after a sort,
improperly, and by way of reduction,) as they are Instruments of the Justice of
God: and whatsoever may be referred to Justice, may so far forth be called
good: and for that very goodness, God may be said in some sort to be the Author
of these evils of Punishment, though not also of those other evils of sin. In
both, we must distinguish the Good from the Evil: and ascribe all the Good
whatsoever it be, ( Transcendentall, Natural, Moral, or if there any other,)
to God alone; but by no means any of the Evil. We are unthankful if we
impute any Good, but to him: and we are unjust, if we impute to him any thing
but good.

Secondly,. 8. The second.
from the goodness of the least Creature, guess we at the Sea Wisd. 13.1. etc.
excellent goodness of the great Creator. A Gell. 1. Noct Attis. 1.
Ex pede Herculem. God has Imprinted as before I said, some steps and footings
of his goodness in the Creatures: from which we must take the best scantling, we
are capable of, of those admirable and inexpressible and inconceivable
perfections that are in him. There is no beholding of the body of this Sun,
who dwells in such a 1. Tim. 6.16.
glorious light as none can attain unto; that glory would dazzle with
blindness the sharpest and most Eagly eye that should dare to fix it self
upon it, with any stedfastnes: enough it is for us, from those Tantae hae
forma^um varieta, in rebus conditis, quid nisi quidam sunt radij Deitatis,
demonstrantes quidem quid vere sit a quo sunt; non tamen quid fit, prorsus
dest^ien^es. Bern. Ser. 31. in Cant.
rays and glimmering beams which he has scartered upon the Creatures, to
gather how infinitely he exceeds them in brightness and glory. Bern. ibid.
De ipso vides, sed non ipsum: We see his, but not him. His Creatures, they are
our best, indeed our only instructers. For though his revealed word teach us,
what we should never have learned from the Creatures without it: yet, fitted to
our capacity, it teaches no otherwise then by resemblances taken from the
Creatures. Romans 1.19, 20.
(...), as St. Paul calls it Romans 1. the whole Latitude of that, which may be
known of God, is manifest in the Creatures: and the invisible things of God
not to be understood but by the things that are made. S. Baesill therefore
calls the world Basil.
(...), the very school where the knowledge of God is to be learned: and there
is a double way of teaching, a twofold method of trayning us up into that
knowledge in that school; that is to say, ^quin. 1. qu^ 11.12.
Per. Vi^^ negationis, and per viam Eminentiae. First, (...). Damasc. 1. de
fid. Orthod. 4.
Via negationis: look whatsoever thou find in the Creature, which favors
of defect or imperfection; and know God is not such. Are they limited; subject
to change, composition, decay, etc? Remove these from God: and learn that he
is infini^e, simple, unchangeable, eternal. Then Via Eminentiae: look
whatsoever perfection there is in the Creature in any degree; and know that the
same, but (infinitely and incomparably) more eminently, is in God. Is there
Wisdom, or Knowledge, or Power, or Beauty, or Greatness, or Goodness, in
any kind or in any measure, in any of the Creatures? Affirm the same, but
without measure of God: and learn that he is infinitely wiser, and skilfuller,
and stronger, and fairer, and greater, and better. In every good thing so
differently excellent above and beyond the Creatures; as that, though yet they
be good, yet compared with him they deserve not the name of good Mark. 10.18
There is none good but one, that is God. Mark. 10. None good, as he: simply,
and absolutely, and essentially, and of himself such. The Creatures that they
are good, they have it from him; and their goodness depends upon him: and they
are good but in part, and in some measure, and in their own kinds. Whenever
therefore we find any good from, or observe any goodness in any of the
Creatures: let us not bury our meditations there, but raise them up by those
stayres (as it were) of the Creatures, to contemplate the great goodness of him
their Creator. We are unhappy truants; if in this so richly furnished school
of Gods good Creatures; we have not learned from them at the least so much
knowledge of him and his goodness, as to admire, and love, and depend upon it
and him. Look upon the Workmanship, and accordingly judge of the Workman:
Every Creature of God is good: surely then the Creator must needs excel in
goodness.

. 9. The third.
Thirdly; there is in men, amongst other cursed fruits of self-love, an aptnes
to measure things, Non ex sui naturae, sed ex suo commodo, vel incommodo.
August. 12. de Ciuit. 4.
not by the level of exact Truth, but by the model of their own
apprehensions. Who is there, that cannot fault another work? The Plin. 35
Not. hist. 10.
Cobbler could espy something amiss in Apelles his masterpiece; because the
picture was not drawn just according to his fancy. If a thousand of us hear a
Sermon, scarce one of that thousand, but he must show some of that little wit he
has in disliking something or other: There the Preacher was too elaborate, here
too loose; that point he might have enlarged, contracted this; he might have
been plainer there, showed more learning here; that observation was obuious,
that exposition enforced, that proof impertinent, that illustration common,
that exhortation needless, that reproof unseasonable: one misliketh his Text,
another his Method, a third his style, a fourth his voice, a fifth his mem^ry;
every one something. A fault more pardonable if our Censures stayed at the
works of men, like our selves; and Lucian in Hermotimo.
Momus-like we did not quarrel the works of God also, and charge many of his
good Creatures, either with manifest ill, or at least wise with
unprofitableness. See Sirac. 39.16, 17. etc.
Why was this made? or why thus? what good does this, or what use of that? It
had perhaps been better, if this or that had never bin; or if they had been
otherwise. Thus we sometimes say or think. To Ne tanti artificis opus in
aliquo reprehendere vanitate humanae temeritatis audeamus. August. 12 de Civil.
4.
rectify this corruption, remember this first clause of my Text, Every
Creature of God is good. Perhaps thou see not, what good there is in some of
the Creatures: like enough so: but yet consider, there may be much good, which
thou see not. Say, it gives thee no nourishment: Possibly it may do thee
(...). Damasc. 2 de fid Orthod. 12.
service in some other kind. Say, it never yet did that: yet it may do
hereafter. Later times Quam multae animalia hoc primun. cognovimus seculo? and
quidem multa venientis aeui populus, ignota nobis, Sci. Senec. 7. Not. qu. 31.
have found out much good use of many Creatures, whereof former ages were
ignorant: and why may not after times find good in those things, which do us
none? Say, it never did, nor ever shall do service to man, (although who can
tell that?) yet who knows but it has done, or may do service to some other
Creature, that does service to man? Say, nor that neither: yet this good thou
may reap even from such Creatures, as seem to afford none; to take ^Vtitur
quibusdam assumendis and respuendis, ad val^tudinem; quibusdam tole^a^dis, ad
patiEnt^am; quibusdam ordina^^is, ad tusticiam; quibusdam consideranilis, ad
al^quod vecitatis documentum. August. 83 quest. 25.
knowledge of thine own ignorance, and to humble thy self thereby, who art so
far from comprehending the essence, that thou can not comprehend the very
works of God. The most unprofitable Creatures profit us, at least this way:
Bern. Sermon. 5. in Cant.
Visu, sinon vsu, as Bernard speaks; if not to use them, yet to see in them,
as in a glass Gods wisdom, and our own ignorance. And so they do us good;
if not Ibid.
cedendo in cibum, if not exhibendo ministerium, in feeding and serving us; yet
exercendo ingenium, as the same Bernard speaks; in exercising our wits and
giving us a sight of our ignorance.

. 10. A Doubt removed.
But yet those Creatures, which are apparently hurtful to us; as Serpents, and
Wild-beasts, and sundry poisonous plants; but above all, the Devils, and
cursed. Angels: May we not say, they are ill, and justly both blame and hate
them? Even these also are good, as they are the Creatures of God, and the
workmanship of his hands. It is only through sin, that they are Evil:
either to us, as the rest, or in themselves, as the Devils. These (now wicked)
Angels were glorious Creatures at the first: by their own voluntary
transgression it is, that they are now the worst, and the basest. And as for
all the other Creatures of God, made to do us service; they were at the first,
and still are good in themselves: if there cleaves to them any evil, whereby
they become hurtful to us, that is by accedent; and we have to thank none
but our selves for that. For who, or what could have harmed us, if we had been
followers of that which was good? It was Romans 8.10.
not of their own accord, but through our sinfulness, that the Creatures
became subject unto vanity, and capable either to do or to suffer ill. They
had been still harmless, if we had bin still faultlesse: it was our (...).
Chrysostom. in Genesis Hem. 25.
sin, that at once forfeited both our innocence, and theirs. If then we see,
any ill in them, or find any ill by them; let us not lay the blame, our wreake
our hatred upon them: let us rather bestow our blame and hatred where it is
most due, the blame upon our selves, the hatred upon our sins. If Balaam had
done justly, he should have spared the Numb. 22.27, etc.
Ass, and have corrected himself: but the false Prophet does the fault, and
the poor beast must bear both blame and strokes. When we suffer, we curse, or
at the easiest blame the Creatures: this weather, that flood, such a storm,
has blasted our fruits, sanded our grounds, shipwrackt our wares, and undone
us: when alas these have neither heart nor strength against us, but what our
selves put into them by our sins. Every sense of evil thereof in or from the
Creatures, should work in us a sense of our disobedience unto God, should
increase in us a detestation of the sins we have committed against God,
should teach us by condemning our selves, to acquit the good Creatures of God:
which as they are good in themselves, so should they have been ever and only
good unto us, if we had been true to our selves, and continued good and
faithful servants unto God. They are all good: do not thou accuse any of
them, and say they are evil; do not thou abuse any of them, and make them
evil.

Hitherto of the first Point, the Goodness of the Creatures;. 11. Obseru. 11.
Our Liberty to the Creatures.
Every Creature of God is good. Follows the second, which is their use:
consisting in their lawfulness unto us, and our liberty unto them; every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused. [Nothing.] That is, most
agreeable to the argument of the former verse, nothing fit for food: but more
generally, (and so I rather think the Apostle intends it) no Creature of
God, whereof we may have use or service in any kind whatsoever. Nothing, which
may yield us any comfortable content for the support of this life, in point of
health, ease, profit, delight, or otherwise (with due sobriety, and other
requisite conditions;) nothing is to be refused. By which Refusal the Apostle
means not a bare forbearance of the things; (for that we both may, and in
many cases ought so to re^use some of the Creatures shall anon appear:) but
the thing he forbids is, the forbearance of the Creature, as upon immediate
tie of Conscience; viz. either out of a superstitious opinion of the
unlawfulness of any creature, for some supposed natural or legal
uncleanness in it, or out of a like superstitious opinion of some
extraordinary perfection, or operative and effectual holiness in such
refusal. The Point is this. All the Creatures of God are lawful for us to
use: so as it is against Christian liberty, either to charge the use of them
with sin, or to place holiness in the abstaining from them.

. 12. Without either sin in the use.
Our Apostle often teaches this Point. In Romans 14. at Psalm. 20. Romans 14.20
[ All things are pure:] and at Psa. 14, there he delivers it as a certain
truth, and upon knowledge, Ibid. 14.
[ I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
it self:] and therefore he imputes it as an error and weakness in judgment
to them that refused some kind of meats out of a superstitious opinion, or but
timorous fear of their unlawfulness, at Psalm. 2. Ibid 2.
[ One believes he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eats
herbs:] And in 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 10.25
[ Whatsoever is sold in the shambles that eat, asking no question for
Conscience sake:] and anon Psalm. 27, Ibid 27.
[ if an vnbelieuer bid you to a feast and you be disposed to go; Whatsoever
is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.] And to the
end we might know the liberty he there gives to extend to all other Creatures
as well as meats, he pronounces of them all universally at Psalm. 23, Ibid. 23.
[(...). All things are lawful for me]. And so he does in Tit. 1.15.
universally too; Tit. 1.15.
[ Omnia munda mundis, To the pure all things are pure.] From all which
Testimonies we may conclude, there is no unlawfulness or impurity in any of
the Creatures, but that we may with security of conscience, freely use them
without sin. If we use them doubtingly against Conscience, or indiscreetly
against Charity, or otherwise inordinately against Sobriety; they become
indeed in such cases sinful unto us: But that is through our default, not
theirs; who sinfully abuse that, which we might lawfully use. And that abuse
of ours, neither Romans 14.14.
defiles the things themselves; nor ought to 1. Cor. 10.29, 30.
prejudice the liberty of another, that may use them well.

And as there is no sin in the use:. 13. Or merit, in the forbearance.
so neither is there any religion or perfection to be placed in the refusal of
any of Gods Creatures. Rather on the contrary, to abstain from any of them,
out of a conceit of any such perfection or holiness, is it self a sinful
superstition. Our Apostle ranketh it with Idolatrous Col. 2.16, etc.
Angel-worship, and condemns it as a Will Worship, Colos. 2. from ^s. 16. to
the end of the Chapter. The subiecting of our selves to those and such like
ordinances, Touch not, taste not, handle not; though it may have a show of
wisdom in will worship, and in a voluntary humility and neglecting of the
body, yet it is derogatory to that liberty wherein Christ has set us free, and
a reviving of those rudiments of the world, from which we are dead with Christ.
Every Creature of God is good; and nothing to be refused, out of a
superstitious either fear of unlawfulness or opinion of holiness.

Now the Ground of this our Right or Liberty unto the Creatures is double: the
one,. 14. Our right by Creation.
Gods ordinance at the first Creation; the other Christ's purchase in the work
of Redemption. At the Creation, God made all things for man's use, as he did
man for his own service; and as he reserved to himself his absolute
Sovereignty over Man; so he gave unto man a kind of limited Genesis 1.26.
Sovereignty over the Creatures, in Genesis 1. Psalm. 8.6. -- quod nos in hoc
pulcher rimo domicitio vuluerunt (Dij) secundas fortiri, quod terenis
prafecerunt. Sen. 2. de benef. 29.
He has put all things in subjection under our feet, says David, Psalm. 8.
Which dominion over the Creatures was one special branch of that glorious Genesis
1 27.
Image of God in us, after which we were created: and therefore was not, nor
could be absolutely Bonis naturae ma^a aduentitia dam non succedunt, se.
laccedunt: tu^pant* vtique ea, non exterminant* ^o^turbant, non deturbant Bern.
in Cant. Ser. 82.
lost by sin; but only decayed and defaced, and empaired, as the other
branches of that Image were. So that, albeit man by sin lost a great part of
his Sovereignty, ( Chrys^st in Gen* hom. 9.
(...), as speaks St. Chrysostom,) especially so far as concerns the
execution of it; many of the Creatures being now rebellious and noisome unto
Man and vnanswering his commands and expectations: yet the Right still
remains even in corrupt nature; and there are still to be found some tracings
and Characters, as in Man of superiority, so in them of subjection. But those
(...). Damasc. 4. de fid. Orthod. 4.
dim, and confused, and scarce legible: as in old Marbles, and Coins, and
out-worne Inscriptions, we have much a do to find out what some of the letters
were.

. 15. And Redemption.
But if by sin we had lost all that first title we had to the Creature, wholly
and utterly: yet God has been pleased graciously to deal with us, we are
fully as well as before. God the Father has granted us, and God the Son
has acquired us, and God the Holy Ghost has sealed us a new Patent. By it,
whatsoever Defect is, or can be supposed to be, in our old Evidence, is
supplied, and by virtue of it, we may make fresh challenge and renew our claim
unto the Creatures. The blessed Son of God Col. 1.20.
having made peace through the blood of his Cross, has reconciled us to his
Father; and therein also reconciled the Creatures both to us and him:
reconciling by him (says our Apostle Col. 1.20.) (...), all things (not men
only) unto himself. For God having given us his Son Heb. 1.2.
the heir of all things; has he not Romans 8.32.
with him given us all things else? has he not permitted us the free use of
his Creatures in as ample Right as ever? Ioh. 8.36.
If the Son have made us free we are free indeed. And as verily as Christ is
Gods, so verily (if we be Christ's) all things are ours. This Apostle sets
down the whole series and form of this spiritual Hierarchy, (if I may so
speak,) this subjection and subordination of the Creatures to Man, of Man to
Christ, of Christ to God, 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 3.21, 23.
All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

. 16. This liberty impeached by Iudaisme
Strengthened with this double title, what should hinder us from possession? Why
may we not freely use that liberty, which was once given us by God, and again
restored us by Jesus Christ? Why should we not Gal. 5 1.
stand fast in, and contend earnestly for the maintenance of that liberty,
wherewith Christ has set us free: by rejecting all fancies, opinions, and
Doctrines, that any way trench upon this our Christian prerogative; or seek
either to shorten, or to corrupt, our freedom unto, and power over the
Creatures? First, If any shall oppose the legal Prohibitions of the Old
Testament; whereby some Creatures were Leuit 11,
forbidden the Jews, pronounced by God himself unclean, and decreed
unlawful: it should not trouble us. For, what ever the principal reasons
were, for which those prohibitions were then made unto them (as there be
diverse reasons given thereof by Divines both ancient and modern;) certain it
is, they now concern not us. The Church, during her nonage and pupillage,
(though she were Gal. 4.1, 2.
heir of all, and had right to all; yet) was to be held under Tutors and
Governors, and to be trained up under the law of Ceremonies as Gal. 3.24, 25.
under a Schoolmaster, during the appointed time. But Gal. 4.4.
when the fullness of the time appointed was come, her war^ship expired, and
livery sued out (as it were;) by the coming and suffering of Christ in the
flesh: the Church was then to enter upon her full royalties, and no more to be
burdened with those (...). Gal. 4.9.
beggarly rudiments of legal obseruances. The Col. 2.14.
handwriting of Ordinances was then blotted out; and the muddy Epes. 2.14.
partition wall broken down; and the legal impuritie of the Creatures scowred
off; by the (...). Damasc. 4 de fid. Orthod. 4
blood of Christ. They have little to do then, but withal much to answer;
who, by seeking to bring in Iudaisme again into the Christian Church, either
in whole or in part, do thereby as much as lies in them, (though perhaps
unawares to themselves, yet in deed and in truth) Gal. 5.2.4.11.
euacuate the Cross of Christ. In that Act. 10 1^ 15.
large sheet of the Creatures, which reaches from heaven to the earth,
whatsoever we find, we may freely kill, and eat, and use every other way to
our comforts without scruple. God having cleansed all; we are not to call or
esteem any thing common or unclean: God having good, we are to refuse
nothing. If any shall oppose secondly, the seeming morality of some of these
prohibitions; as being given Genesis 9.4.
before the Law of Ceremonies, pressed from Leuit. 17.11.14.
Moral reasons, and confirmed by Act. 15.20.29.
Apostolical Constitution since; upon which ground some would impose upon the
Christian Church abstain from blood: Or thirdly, the profanation which some
Creatures have contracted by being used in the exercise of Idolatrous worship,
whereby they become Anathema, and are to be held as execrable things; as Josh.
7.1.
Achans wedge was, and the 4 Kin. 18.4.
Brazen Serpent which Hezechiah stamped to powder; upon which ground also some
others have inferred an utter unlawfulness to use any thing in the Church,
which was abused in Popery, by calling them rags and relics of Idolatry:
neither this, nor that ought to trouble us. For although neither my aim,
(which lies another way,) nor the time, will permit me now to give a just and
full and satisfying answer to the several instances, and their grounds: yet
the very words and weight of my Text, do give us a clear resolution in the
general, and sufficient to rest our Consciences, and our judgments and
practice upon; that, notwithstanding all pretensions of reason to the contrary,
yet these things, for so much as they are still good, ought not to be refused.
For the Apostle has here laid a sure foundation, and impregnable: in that he
groundeth the use upon the Power; and from the Goodness of the Creature
infers the lawfulness of it. [ Every Creature of God is good: and nothing
to be refused.] He concludes; it is therefore not to be refused, because it
is good. So that look whatsoever Goodness there is in any Creature; that is,
whatsoever natural Power it has, which either immediately and of it self is,
or may by the improuement of human art and industry be taught to be, of any
use unto man, for necessity, nourishment, service, lawful delight or
otherwise: the Creature, wherein such goodness or power is to be found, may not
be refused as upon tie of Conscience; but that power and goodness it has, may
lawfully be employed to those uses, for which it is meet in regard thereof:
Ever provided, we be careful to observe all those requisite conditions, which
must guide our consciences, and regulate our practice, in the use of all
lawful and indifferent things. They that teach otherwise, lay burdens upon
their own consciences which they need not, and upon the consciences of their
brethren which they should not; and are injurious to that liberty which the
blessed Son of God has purchas^d for his Church, and which the blessed
spirit of God has asserted in my Text.

Injurious in the second place,. 17. and Popery; in the points
to this branch of our Christian liberty, is the Church of Rome: whom Saint
Paul in this passage has branded with an indeleble note of infamy; in as much
as those very doctrines, wherein he gives in^tance as in doctrines of Devils,
are the received Tenets and Conclusions of that Church. Not to insist on other
preiudices done to Christian liberty, by the intolerable usurpations of 2.
These. 2.3.
the man of sin, who exercises a spiritual Tyranny over men's Consciences, as
opposite to Evangelical liberty, as Antichrist is to Christ: let us but a
little see, how she has fulfilled Saint Paul's prediction in teaching lying and
Devilish doctrines and that with scared consiences and in Hypocrisy, in the
two specialities mentioned in the next former verse, viz. forbidding to Marry,
and commanding to abstain from Meats.

Marriage,. 18. of Marriage,
the holy Ordinance of God, instituted in the Genesis 2.18.
place and estate of innocence, honored by Ioh. 2.2.
Christ's p^esence at Canae in Galilee; the se^^ie^ples of the Church, and the
1. C^r. 7.2.
sole allowed remedy against incontinencie and burning lusts; by the Apostle
commended as Heb. 13.4.
honorable in all men, and commanded in case of 1. Cor. 7 9*
vstion to all men: is yet by this Reu 17.1.3.
purple strumpet forbidden, and that sub mortal^, to Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Monks, Friars, Nuns: in a word, to the whole Clergy (as they
extend that title) both Secular and Regular. Wherein besides the Diuelishnes of
the Doctrine, in contrarying the Ordinance of God, and in denying men subject
to sinful lusts the lawful remedy, and so casting them upon a necessity of
sinning, see if they do not teach this lie with scared consciences. For with
what Conscience can they make the same thing a Sacrament in the Lay; and
Bellarm. de Monach Cap. 34
Sacrilege in the Clergy? With what Conscience permit stews; and forbid
Marriage? With what conscience allege Scriptures for the single life of
Priests; and yet confess it to be an Aquin. 2.2. qu. 88.2. Bellar. de Cler.
c. 18. Decan. 1. man Controu. 13. ^. 11.
ordinance only of Ecclesiastical and not of Divine right? With what
conscience confess fornication to be against the Law of God, and Priests
marriage only against the Law of holy Church; and yet make marriage in a
Priest a Coster. Enchirid. cap. 20 prop. 9.
far fouler sin then ^ornication, or incest? with what conscience exact a
vow of continency from Clearks, by those Canons, which Ca. Is. qu. did. 34 c.
12. qu. 1. ca. Dilectissimis
defend their open incontinency? With what conscience forbid lawful marriages
to some; and yet by dispensation allow unlawful marriages to others.

And is not the like also done in the other particular, concerning Meats?. 16.
and Meats.
The laws of that Church forbidding some Benedictines and Carthusians
orders of men, some kind^ of meats perpetually, and all men some meats upon
certain days: and that not for Civil respects; but with opinion of
satisfaction, yea merit, yea and supererogation too. In which also, besides the
Diuelishnes of the Doctrine, in corrupting the profitable and religious
exercis^ of fasting, and turning it into a superstitious observation of Days
and Meats: judge if they do not teach this lie also, as the former, with
seared Consciences. For with what conscience can they allow an ordinary
Confessor to absolve for Murder, Adultery, Perjury, and such petty crimes; but
reserve the great sin of Eating flesh upon a Friday or Ember day to the
censure of a Penitentiary, as being a matter beyond the power of an ordinary
Priest to grant absolution for? With what Conscience make the tafting of the
coursest flesh a breach of the Lent fast; and surfeiting upon the delicatest
fishes and confections, none? With what conscience pretend they forbid such and
such meats, for the taming of the flesh; when they allow those that are far
more nutritive of the flesh, and incentiue of fleshly lusts? With what
conscience inio^ne such abstinence for a penance, and then presently release it
again for a penny? Indeed the Gloss upon the Did. 82. ca. Presbyter.
Canon, that does so, has a right worthy and a right wholesome note: Note,
says the Gloss. ibid.
Gloss, that he who gives a penny to redeem his fast, though he give money
for a spiritual thing, yet he does not commit Symonie, because the contract is
made with God. If these men had not seared up their consciences: would they not
think you feel some check at the broaching of such ridiculous and
inconsistent stuff, as flows from these two heads of Devilish Doctrines; of
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats?

I deny not, but the bands of that strumpet,. 20. The extent of this Liberty,
in eight Positions.
the Doctor* (...) that Church, have their colorable pretenses whe^^ with to
blanch over these errors: else the lies would be palpable; and they should not
otherwise fill up the measure of their Apostasy, according to my Apostles
prophecy, in teaching these lies in Hypocrisy. But the colors, though never
so artificially tempered, and never so handsomely laid on; are yet so thin:
that a steady eye, not bl^ered with prejudice, may discern the Lie through
them, for all the Hypocrisy. As might easily be shown; if my intended course
led me that way, and did not rather direct me to matter of more profitable and
universal. Having therefore done with them it were good for us in the third
place, (that we might know our own freehold with better certainty, and keep
our selves within our due bounds;) to inquire a little what is the just extent
of our Christian liberty unto the Creatures, and what restraints it may admit.
A point very needful to be known for the resolution of many doubts in
conscience, and for the asking of many questions and dispu^es in the Church:
which are of very noisome consequence, for want of right information herein, I
have other matter also to entreat of: and therefore since I may not allow this
enquiry so large a discourse, as it well deserves: I shall desire you to take
into your Christian consideration, these Positions following.

The First. Our Christian liberty extends to all the Creatures of God.. 21.
I. It extends to all the Creatures.
This arises clearly from what has been already delivered: and the
testimonies of Scripture for it are express. Romans 14.20
All things are Pure; 1. Cor. 10.23
All things are lawful; 1. Cor. 3.22.
All are yours; elsewhere: and here, Nothing to be refused.

The second Position. Our Christian liberty equally respects the using* and
the not using of any o^ Gods Creatures.. 22. II. It equally respects the use
and the forbearance.
There is no Creature; but a Christian man by virtue of his liberty, as he
may use it upon just occasion, so he may also upon just cause refuse it. 1.
Cor. 6.1^*
All things are lawful for me, says St. Paul, but I will not be brought
under the power of any thing. Where he establishes this liberty in both the
parts of it: liberty to use the Creatures, or else they had not all been
lawful for him; and yet liberty not to use them, or else he had bin under the
power of some of them. Whence it follows, that all the Creatures of God stand
in the nature of things Indifferent: that is, such as may indifferently be
either used or not used, according as the rules of godly discretion,
circumstances duly considered, shall direct.

The Third Position. Our Christian liberty for the using or not using of the
creature, may without prejudice admit of some restraint in the outward practice
of it.. 23. III. It may admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it:
Ab illicitis semper, quandoque and a licitis; I think it is St. Gregory's: A
Christian must never do unlawful; nor yet always, lawful things. St. Paul
had liberty to eat flesh, and he used that liberty, and ate flesh: yet he
knew there might be some cases, wherein to abridge himself of the use of that
liberty so far, as 1. Cor. 8.13.
not to eat flesh whilst the world stands. But what those Restraints are,
and how far they may be admitted without prejudice done to that liberty,
that we may the better understand: let us go on to

The Fourth Position. Sobriety may and ought to restrain us in the outward
practice of our Christian liberty.. 24. IIII. as first, Sobriety;
For our Diet, all Fish, and flesh, and folwe, and fruits, and spices, are
lawful for us, as well as Bread and herbs: but may we therefore with
chri^tlesse prodigality and exquisite royal fare delisiously and sumptuously
every day, under pretense of Christian liberty? Likewise for our Apparel; all
stuffes and colors, the richest silks, and furs, and dies are as lawful
for us, as cloth, and leather, and sheepes-russet: Christan liberty extends
as well to one as another. But do we think that liberty will excuse our
pride, and vanity, and excess, if we ruffle it out in silks and scarlets, or
otherwise in stuff, color, or fashion vnsuteably to our years, sex,
calling, estate or condition? In all other things of like nature; in our
buildings, in our furniture, in our retinues, in our dispores, in our
recreations, in our society, in our Marriages, in other things: we ought as
well to consider, what in Christian sobriety is meet for us to do; as what in
Christian liberty may be done. Scarce is there any one thing, wherein the
Devil puts s^urres upon us more frequently, yea and more dangerously too,
(because unsuspected:) then in this very thing, in making us take the uttermost
of our freedom in the use of indifferent things. It therefore concerns us so
much the more, to keep a sober watch over our selves and souls, in the use of
Gods good Creatures: lest otherwise, under the fair title and habit of
Christian liberty, we yield our selves over to a carnal licenciousnesse.

The Fifth Position. A^ Sobriety: so Charity also may,. 25. V. Secondly,
Charity: in our selves,
and ought to restrain us in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty.
Charity, I say, both to our selves, and others. First, to our selves: for
regular charity begins there. If we are to Math. 5.29.30.
cut off our right hand, and to pluck out our right eye, and to cast them both
from us, when they offend us: much more then ought we to deny our selves the
use of such outward lawful things, as by experience we have found, or have
otherwise cause to suspect to be hurtful either for our bodies, or souls. So
a man may, and should refrain from meats, which may endanger his bodily
health: But how much more then from every thing, that may endanger the health
of his soul? If thou find thy self enflamed with lust, by dancing; if
enraged with choler, by game: if tempted to covetousness, pride, uncleanness,
superstition, cruelty, any sin, by occasion of any of the Creatures: it is
better for thee, to make a covenant with thine eyes, and ears, and hands, and
senses, (so far as thy condition and Calling will warrant thee,) not to have
any thing to do with such things: then by satisfying them therewith, cast both
thy self and them into Hell. Better, by our voluntary abstinence, to depart
with some of our liberty unto the Creatures: then by our voluntary transgession
forfeit all and become the Devils captives.

But Charity, though it begin at home,. 26. and others.
yet it will abroad: and not resting at our selves, reaches to our brethren
also: of whom we are to have a due regard in our use of the creatures. An
argument, wherein St. Paul often enlarges himself: as in Romans 14. and 1. Cor.
8. the whole Chapters throughout, and in a great part of 1. Cor. 10. The
resolution every where is, that 1. Cor. 14.26.
all things be done to edification: that things lawful become 1. Cor. 10.23.
inexpedient, when they offend rather, then edify: that though Romans 14.20.
all things indeed are pure, yet it is evil for that man which uses them with
offense: that albeit flesh and wine and other things be lawful, yet Ibid.
verse. 21.
it is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any thing,
whereby a man's brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Hitherto
appertains that great and difficult commonplace of scandal, so much debated
and disputed of by Divines. The Questions and Cases are manifold; not now to
be rehearsed, much less resolved, in particular: But the Position is plain
in the general, that in case of Scandal, for our weak brothers sake, we may,
and sometimes ought, to abridge our selves of some part of our lawful Liberty.

Besides these two, Sobriety and Charity; there is yet one restraint more,
which arises from the duty we owe to our Superiors, and from the bond of
Civil obedience:. 27. VI. Thirdly, Duty, in Obedience to Governors;
Oeconomicall,
which if it had been by all men as freely admitted, as there is just cause it
should, how happy had it been for the peace of this Church? Concerning it, let
this be our Sixth Position. The determination of Superiors may and ought to
restrain us in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty. We must 1. Pet.
2.13.15.16.
submit our selves to every ordinance of man, says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2.13.
and it is necessary we should do so: for so is the will of God, verse. 15.
Neither is it against Christian liberty if we do so; for we are still as free
as before: rather if we do not so, we abuse our liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, as it follows there, verse. 16. And St. Paul tells us we
Romans 13.5.
must need^ be subject not only for fear, because the Magistrate Ibid. verse.
4.
carries not the Sword in vain, but also for conscience sake, because Ibid.
verse. 1.
the powers that are ordained of God. This duty, so fully pressed and so
uniformly by these two grand Apostles, is most apparent in private societies.
In a family, the master or Pater familias, who is a kind of petty Monarch
there, has authority to prescribe to his children and servants in the use of
those indifferent things; whereto yet they, as Christians, have as much
liberty as he. The servant, though he be 1. Cor. 7.22.
the Lords freeman, yet is limited in his diet, lodging, livery, and many
other things by his master: and he is to submit himself to his masters
appointment in these things, though perhaps in his private affection he had
rather his master had appointed otherwise, and perhaps withal in his private
judgment does verily think it fitter his Master should appoint otherwise. If
any man under color of Christian liberty shall 1. Tim. 6.3.5
teach otherwise, and exempt servants from the obedience of their Masters in
such things: St. Paul in a holy indignation inueigheth against such a man, not
without some bitterness, in the last Chapter of this Epistle, as one that is
proud, and knows nothing as he should do, but doateth about questions and
strife of words, etc. verse. 3.5.

. 28. Civil,
Now look what power the Master has over his servants for the ordering of his
family; no doubt the same at the least, if not much more, has the supreme
Magistrate over his subjects, for the peaceable ordering of the Commonwealth:
the Magistrate being Pater Patria, as the Master is Pater familias. Whosoever
then shall interpret the determinations of Magistrates in the use of the
Creatures to be contrary to the liberty of a Christian: or under that color
shall exempt inferiors from their obedience to such determinations, he must
blame St. Paul; nay, he must blame the Holy Ghost, and not us, if he hear from
us that he is proud, and knows nothing, and d^ateth about unprofitable
questions. Surely, but that experience shows us it has been so, and the
Scriptures have foretold us that 1. Cor. 11.19.
it should be so: that there should be differences, and sidings, and
part-takings in the Church: a man would wonder how it should ever sink into
the hearts and heads of sober understanding men, to deny either the power in
Superiors to ordain, or the necessity in Inferiors to obey Laws and
constitutions, so restraining us in the use of the Creatures.

Neither let any man cherish his ignorance herein: by conceipting, as if there
were some difference to be made between Civil and Ecclesiastical things,.
29. and Ecclesiastical.
and Laws and Persons in this behalf. The truth is, our liberty is equal in
both: the power of Superiors for restraint equal in both, and the necessity
of obedience in Inferiors equal in both. No man has yet been able to show,
nor I think ever shall be, a real and substantial difference indeed between
them, to make an inequality. But that still, as civil Magistrates have
sometimes, for just politic respects, prohibited some trades, and
manufactures, and commodities, and enjoined othersome, and done well in both:
so Church-gouernours may upon good considerations, say it be but for order and
vniformities sake, prescribe the times, places, vestments, gestures, and other
Ceremonial circumstances to be used in Ecclesisticall Offices and assemblies.
As the Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem in Act. 15. laid upon
the Churches of the Gentiles for a time, a Act. 15.28, 29.
restraint from the eating of Blood, and things sacrificed to Idols, and
strangled.

Thus we see our Christian liberty unto the Creatures may without prejudice
admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it:. 30. VII. With the
comparison of these 3. restraints.
and namely from the three respects, of Christian Sobriety, of Christian
Charity, and of Christian Duty and Obedience. But now in the comparing of these
together; when there seems to be a repugnancy between one and another of
them, there may be some difficulty: and the greatest difficulty, and which
has bred most trouble, is in comparing the cases of Scandal and Disobedience
together, when their seems to be a repugnancy between Charity and Duty. As
for example. Suppose in a thing which simply and in it self we may lawfully
according to the Liberty we have in Christ, either use or forbear; Charity
seems to lay restraint upon us one way, our weak brother expecting we should
forbear, and Duty a quite contrary way. Authority requiring the use: in such
a case what are we to do? It is against Charity to offend a brother; and it is
against Duty, to disobey a superior. And yet something must be done: either we
must use, or not use; forbear, or not forbear. For the untying of this knot,
(which, if we will but lay things rightly together, has not in it so much
hardness as it seems to have;) let this be our seventh Position. In the use
of the Creatures, and all indifferent things, we ought to bear a greater
regard to our public Governors, then to our Private Brethren; and be more
careful to obey them, then to satisfy these, if the same course will not in
some mediocritie satisfy both. Alas, that our Brethren who are contrary
minded, would but with the spirit of Sobriety admit common Reason to be vmpire
in this case: Alas, that they would but consider, what a world of
Contradictions would follow upon the contrary Opinion, and what a world of
Confusions upon the contrary practice. Say what can be said, in the behalf of
a Brother: all the same, and more may be faid for a Governor. For a Governor
is a Brother too, and something more: and Duty is Charity too, and something
more. If then I may not offend my Brother, then certainly not my Governor:
because he is my Brother too, being a man, and a Christian, as well as the
other is. And the same Charity, that binds me to satisfy another Brother,
equally binds me to satisfy this. So that, if we go no farther, but even
to the common bond of Charity, and relation of Brotherhood: that makes them
equal at the least: and therefore no reason, why I should satisfy one that is
but a Private Brother: rather then the public Magistrate, who (that public
respect set aside) is my Brother also. When the scales hang thus even: shall
not the accession of Si tantopera cauenda sunt scandala parvulorum, quanto
amplius praelatorum? Bernard. de Praecept. and dispens.
Magistracy to common Brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common Charity in
me, be enough to cast it clear for the Magistrate? Shall a servant in a
family, rather then offend his fellow-seruant, disobey his Master? And is not a
double scandal against Charity and Duty both, (for Duty implies Charity,)
greater then a single scandal against Charity alone? If private men will be
offended at our Obedience to public Governors: we can but be sorry for it:
We Prudenter aduertat qui hoc cogitat, scandalum scandalo non been emendari.
Qualis, emendatio erit, si vt alijs scandalum tollao, alios scandalizas?
Bernard. de praec. and disp.
may not redeem their offense by our disobedience. He that takes offense,
where none is given, sustaineth a double person; and must answer for it, both
as the giver and the taker. If offense be taken at us, there is no woe to us
for it, if it do not come by us: Math. 8.7.
Woe to the man by whom the offense comes: and it does not come by us, if we
do but what is our duty to do. The Rule is certain and equitable; The
respect of private scandal cease, where lawful authority determines our
liberty: and that restraint which proceeds from special Duty, is of
superior reason to that which proceeds but from Common Charity.

. 31. VIII. The inward freedom of the Conscience
Three Moderatours then of our Christian liberty to the Creatures we are to
allow off; Sobriety, Charity, and Duty* unto every of which a just regard
ought to be had. Neither need we fear, if we suffer Sobriety on one side,
and Charity on another, and Duty on a third, thus to abridge us in the use of
our Christian liberty; that by little and little it may be at length so pared
away among them, that there may be little or nothing left of it. To remove
this suspicion; let this be our Eighth and last Position. No respect whatsoever
can, or ought to diminish the inward freedom of the conscience to any of the
Creatures. And this inward freedom is it, wherein especially consists our
Christian liberty to the Creature. This freedom we are all bound to maintain
to the utmost of our powers; and not to suffer our selves to be made 1. Cor.
7.23.
the servants of men, (otherwife then in Gal. 5.13.
serving one anoth^r by love:) but to Gal. 5.1.
stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set us free. Now this Liberty
consists in a certain resolution of judgment, and a certain persuasion of
^onscience arising thence, that all the creatures of God are in themselves
lawful, and free for us either to use, or refuse, as we shall see it
expedient for us: and that neither the use not the ^orbearance of them, does of
it self either com^tend or discommend us unto God; or any way either please
him as a part of his worship, or offend him as transgression of his Law. Romans
14.17.
The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, says Saint Paul: 1. C^r. 8.8.
neither of we (...), are wo^^he better; neither the worse if we do not
eat; nor on the contrary. Now here is the wickedness, and the usurpation of
the High Priest of four; that he challenges to himself a spiritual power
over the consciences of men, which is the greatest tyranny that ever was, or
can be exercised in the world: laying impuri^y upon the things he forbids;
and anno^ing operative holiness, and power both satisfactory, and meritorious,
to the things he inioyneth. Which usurpation, whosoever hates not in him with
a perfect hatred: is justly unworthy of, and shamefully unthankful for, that
liberty and freedom, which the blessed Son of God, has purchased for his
Church.

But this inward freedom once established in our hearts, and our consciences,
fully persuaded thereof: let us thenceforth make no scruple to admit of such
just restraints in the outward exercise of it,. 32. may stand with some
restraints in the outward exercise.
as Christian Sobriety, Charity, and Duty shall require. For we must know,
that the Liberty of a Christian is not in eating, and wearing, and doing, what
and when and where and how he list; but in being assured that it is all one
before God, (in the things themselves barely considered,) whether he eat or
not eat, wear or not wear, do or not do, this or that, and that therefore,
as he may upon just cause eat, and wear, and do; so he may upon just cause
also refuse to eat, or wear, or do, this thing or that. Indeed otherwise, if
we well consider it, it were but the empty name of liberty, without the thing:
for how is it liberty, if a man be determinately bound the one way, and tied ad
alteram partem contradictionis precisely: and not left indifferent and equal
to either? If then the regards of Sobriety, Charity, or Duty, do not require
a forbearance, thou know every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused: thou have thy Liberty therefore, and may according to that liberty
freely use that Creature. But if any of those former respects require thou
should forbear; thou know that the Creature still is good, and as not to
be refused, so not to be imposed: thou have thy liberty therefore here, as
before, and ought according to that liberty, freely to abstain from that
Creature.. 33. Obseru. III. The Creature to be received with Thanksgiving;
Both in using, and refusing, the Conscience is still free: and as well the use
as the refusal, and as well the refusal as the use, do equally and alike
belong to the true liberty of a Christian.

We have seen now, what liberty God has allowed us: and therein we may see
also his great goodness and bounty toward us, in making such a world of
Creatures, and all of them good, [Euery Creature of God is good;] and not
envying us the free use of any of those good Creatures, [ Nothing to be
refused,]. But where is our Duty, answerable to this Bounty? Where is our
thankefulnes, proportionable to such receipts? Let us not rejoice too much in
the Creatures goodness, nor glory too much in our freedom thereunto: unless
there be in us, withal, a due care and conscience to perform the Condition,
which God requires in lieu thereof; neither can their goodness do us good; nor
our freedom exempt us from evil. And that condition is, the Duty of
thanksgiving: expressed in the last clause of the verse, [ If it be received
with thanksgiving.] Forget this prouis^: and we undo all again, that we have
hitherto done, and destroy all that we have already established concerning both
the goodness of the Creature, and our liberty in the use thereof: for without
thanksgiving, neither can we partake their Goodness, nor use our own liberty,
with comfort. Of this therefore in the next place: wherein the weight of the
Duty considered, together with our backwardnes thereunto, if I shall spend the
remainder of my time, and meditations: I hope my labor by the blessing of God
and your prayers shall not be unprofitable, and my purpose therein shall find,
if not allowance in your judgments, at least in your Charity Excuse. To speak
of which Duty of thanksgiving in the full extent, and by way of common place;
were to enter into a spacious field, indeed a very sea of matter without
bottom. For mine own case therefore and yours, I shall confine my self to
that branch of it, which is most immediately pertinent to my text; viz. that
tribute of Thanks, which we owe unto God for the free use of his good
Creatures: forbearing to meddle with the other branches thereof, otherwise then
as they fall within the reach of this, by way either of Proportion or Inference.

. 34. and what is meant thereby.
And first we are to know, that by Thanksgiving in my Text is not meant only
that subsequent act, whereby we render unto God praise and thanks for the
Creature, after we have received it, and enjoyed the benefit of it: which yet
is most properly Thanksgiving: but we are to extend the word farther, even to
those precedent acts of Prayer and Benediction, whereby we beseech God to give
his blessing to the Creature, and to sanctify the use of it to us. For what in
this verse is called Thanksgiving, is in the next verse comprehended under the
name of Verse 5. hic.
Prayer. And we shall accordingly find in the Scriptures elsewhere, the words
(...), and (...), the one whereof signifies properly Blessing, the other
Thanksgiving, used oftentimes promiscuously the one for the other. The
blessing which our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, used at the consecration of
the Sacramental bread, Luke 22.17.19.
St. Luke and 1. Cor. 11.24
St. Paul express by the word (...): Math. 26.27.
St. Matthew and Mark. 14.22.23.
St. Mark, by (...). And the Prayer of blessing, used before the eating of
common Bread, is by Math. 15.36. Mark, 8.6. Ioh. 6.11. Act. 27.35.
every one of the four Evangelists in some places described by the word (...):
and by Math. 14.19. Mark. 6.41. Luke 9.16.
three of them in other some places, by (...). And the name See Casaub.
exercit. 16. in Baron. sect. 33.
(...) is sometimes found in the writings of the Ancients, for the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; the more usual name whereof is (...), or the holy Eucharist.
And we in our ordinary manner of speech, call as well the Blessing before
meat, as the Thanksgiving after, by the common name of Grace, or saying of
Grace. Both these then together, Grace before meat, and Grace after meat; a
sacrifice of Prayer before we use any of the good Creatures of God, and a
sacrifice of Praise after we have used them; the Blessing wherewith we bless
the Creature in the name of God, and the Blessing wherewith we bless the Name
of God for the Creature: both these I say together, is the just extent of that
Thanksgiving, whereof my Text speaks, and we are now to entreat.

Concerning Meats and Drinks,. 35. For meats and drinks,
unto which our Apostle has special reference in this whole passage: this
duty of Thanksgiving, has bin ever held so congruous to the partaking
thereof, that long and ancient custom has established it in the common
practice of Christians; not only with inward thankfulness of heart to recount
and acknowledge Gods goodness to them therein, but also outwardly to express
the same in a vocal solemn form of Blessing or Thanksgiving, that which we
call Grace, or saying of Grace. Which very phrases, whether or no they have
ground, (as to me it seems they have,) from those words of our Apostle, 1.
Cor. 10. ( 1. Cor. 10.30
For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of, for that, for
which I give thanks:) I say, howsoever it be with the phrase; sure we are the
thing it self has sufficient ground from the examples of Christ, and of his
holy Apostles. From whom, the custom of giving Thanks at meals, seems to
have bin derived, throughout all succeeding ages, even to us. Of Christ
himself we read often, and in every of the Evangelists, that he blessed and
gave thanks in the name of himself and the people, before meat; in 14. and
15. of Math. 14.19. and 15 36.
Matthew, in 6. and 8. of Mark. 6 41. and 8.6.
Mark, in 9. of Luke 9.16.
Luke, and in 6. of Ioh. 6.8.
John. And in Math. 26. that after meat also, when Supper was ended, he and
his Disciples (...). Math. 26.30.
sang an hymn, before they departed the room. And St. Luke relates of St.
Paul, Act. 27. when he and his company in the Ship, who were well toward 300.
persons, were to refresh themselves with food after a long fast, that he took
Bread, and first Act. 27.35.
gave thanks to God in the presence of them all, and then after brake it, and
began to eat: yea St. Paul himself so speaks of it, Romans 14. as of the
known practice of the Church among Christians of all sorts, Weak, and Strong.
He that was strong in the faith, and knew the liberty he had in Christ to eat
indifferently of all kinds of meats, flesh as well as herbs; did eat of all
indifferently, and gave God thanks for all. The weak Christian too, who made
scruple of some kinds of flesh or other meats, and contented himself with
herbs and such like things, yet gave God thanks for his herbs, and for
whatsoever else he durst eat. Romans 14.6.
He that eats, eats to the Lord (says he there, at verse 6.) for he
gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and
gives God thanks too. Notwithstanding they differed in their judgments and
opinions, and consequently in their practice, concerning the lawful or
unlawful use of some meats: yet they consented most sweetly, and agreed both
in their judgment and practice, in the performance of this religious service
of Thanksgiving.

So then giving of Thanks for our meats and drinks before and after meals,
in an outward and audible form,. 36. and other Creatures, the Thanksgiving of
the mouth expedient;
is an ancient, a commendable, an Apostolical, a Christian practice:
ordinarily requisite as an outward testimony of the inward thankfulness of the
heart; and therefore not to be omitted ordinarily, neither but in some few
cases. There being the like necessity of this duty, in regard of inward
thankefulnes, as there is of vocal Prayer, in regard of inward Devotion; and
of outward Confession, in regard of inward Belief: and look what exceptions
those other outward duties may admit; the very same, mutandis mutatis, and in
their proportion, are to be admitted here. But not ^nely Meats and Drinks;
but every other good Creature also of God, whereof we may have use, ought to be
received with a due measure of thankfulness. And if in these things also, so
often as in good discretion it may seem expedient for the advancing of Gods
glory, the benefiting of his Church, or the quickening of our own Devotion; we
shall make some outward and sensible expression of the thankfulness of our
hearts for them: we shall therein do an acceptable service unto God, and
comfortable to our own souls. For, for this cause God instituted of old among
his own people, diverse solemn feasts and sacrifices, together with the
Sanctifying of the first fruits, and of the firstborn, and diverse other
ordinances of that nature: as on the other side to be fit remembrancers unto
them of their duty of thankfulness; so to be as well good testimonies and fit
expressions of their performance of that duty.

But if not always, the outward manifestation thereof:. 37. but of the Heart
necessary.
yet God ever expects at least the true and inward thankfulness of the
heart, for the use of his good Creatures. Col. 3.17.
Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks unto God and the Father by him, Col. 3. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God, Phil. 4. Psalm 103.1.2
Bless the Lord, O my soul, (says David in Psalm. 103.) and all that is
within me, praise his holy name; Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not
all his benefits. Forget not all his benefits: as much as to say, by an
ordinary Hebraisme, forget not any of all his benefits. He summoneth all that
is in him, to bless God for all he has from him: he thought it was necessary
for him, not to receive any of the good Creatures of God, without
Thanksgiving. Which necessity of Thanksgiving will yet more appear; if we
consider it, either as an act of Justice, or as an act of Religion: as it is
indeed and truly both.

It is first, an Act of Justice.. 38. as an Act, 1. of Justice;
The very law of Nature, which contains the first seeds and principles of
Justice, binds every man that receives a benefit, to a thankful
acknowledgement of it first, and then withal. (ability and opportunity
supposed,) to some kind of retribution. The best Philosophers therefore make
Gratitude a Cic. 2. de invent 13 and 36.
branch of the Law of Nature; and so account of it, as of a thing, then which
there is Quid tam co^tr^ ^ffictu^, qua^ no^ reddere quod acceperis? Ambros. 1.
offic. 21

Nullum o^ficium referenda gratia magi^ necessarium est. Cic. 1. de Offic.


not any office of virtue more necessary: as nor any thing on the contrary more
detestable, then Ingratitude. You cannot lay a Erunt homicida, tyranny, fures,
adulters, raptores, sacrilegi, proditores: infra ista omnia ingratus est.
Senec. 1. de benef. 10.
fouler imputation upon a man, nor by any accusations in the world render him
more odious to the opinions of all men; then by charging him with
unthankfulness. Ingratum dicas, omnia dixeris: do but say, he is an
unthankful wretch; you need say no more, you can say no worse, by any mortal
Creature. Verily, every benefit carries with it the force of an obligation;
and we all confess it: if we receive but some small kindness from another we
can readily and complementally protest our selves much bound to him for it.
Indeed when we say so, we often speak it but of coarse, and think it not:
but yet when we do so, we speak more truth then we are aware of* for, if it be
in truth a kindness in him, we are in truth and equity bound to him thereby. The
common saying is not without ground, Qui benificium accepit, libertatem
vendidit. Some men therefore refuse kindnesses and courtesies at other men's
hands; because forsooth they will not be beholden to them. Which though it be a
perverse and unjust course, and indeed a high degree of unthankfulness, (for
there is unthankfulness, as well in Non solum is gratus debet esse, qui
accepit beneficium; verum etiam is, cui potestas accip^endi fuit. Cic. de
Prouinc. Consular. Tam teneor dono, quam si demittar onustus. Horat. 1. Epist.
7.
not accepting a kind offer, as in not requiting a good turn;) and therefore
also a high degree of folly, (for it is not a foolish thing for a man, out of
the bare fear of unthankfulness one way, to become wilfully unthankful
another?) though I say, it be a fond and perverse course in them: yet it
argues withal in them a strong apprehension of the equity of that principle
of Nature and Justice, which binds men that receive benefits ad (...), to a
necessity of requital and retribution. Truth it is; to God our heavenly Father
first, and then to our earthly Sirac. 7.28.
Parents, none of us can reddere paria: none is able to make a full requital
to either of them; especially not to God. But that freeth us not from the the
debt of thankfulness, as not to our Parents, so neither to God: it rather
binds us the faster thereunto. The same Law of Nature, which teaches us to
requite a good turn to the uttermost, where there is wherewithal to do it,
and withal a fare opportunity offered; teaches us also where there wants
either ability or opportunity, to endeavor by the best convenient means we
can to testify at least the th^nkefulnesse of our hearts, and our unfeigned
desires of requital. Which In beneficio redendo, plus animus, quam census
operatur: mag^sque praepouderat benevolentia, quam possibilitas, referendi
muneris, Ambros. 1. offic. 32
desire and endeavor, if every ingenuous man, and our earthly Parents, do
accept off, where they find it, as of the deed it self: can we doubt of Vt
decent vires tamen est laendanda volun as: hac ego contentos auguror esse Deo^.
Ovid. de Ponto.
Gods acceptance of our unfeigned desires herein, though infinitely and without
all proportion short of a just requital and retribution? David knew right
well, that when a man has done all he can, he is but Luke 17.10.
an unprofitable servant, and Job. 22.2.
cannot be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself and his neighbors; and that Psalm. 16.2.3. Nulla ex nobis vtilitas
Deosperanda est, Seen. 4. de ben. c. 3. Nec ille collato eget, nec nos ti
quicquam confer poffumus* Ibid. cap. 9.
his goodness, though it might be pleasurable to the Saints that are on the
earth, yet it could not extend unto the Lord; all this he knew; and yet knowing
withal that God accepts the will for the deed, and the desire for the
performance; he doubted not to raise up his language to that key, in Psalm. 116.
Psalm. 116.12, 13.
Quid retribuam? What requital shall I make? What shall I render unto the
Lord, for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and
call upon the name of the Lord. This thankful heart he knew God valued as a
sacrifice: nay, (...).

Xenoph. 1. (...).


preferred before Sacrifices. For having rejected them at Psalm. 8. Psalm. 50.8.14
[ I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, etc.] he exacteth this at Psalm.
14. of Psalm. 50. [ Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc.] God respects not so
much the calves out of our stalls, or the fruits from of our grounds: as these
Osec. 14.2.
Vitulos labiorum, these Calves of our lips, as the Prophet; and these Heb.
13.15.
Fructus labiorum, these fruits of our lips, as the Apostle calls them. [ Let
us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our
lips giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13.] More then this, in his Mercy he
will not desire: less then this, in all reason we cannot give. Thankfulness is
an Act of Justice: we are unjust, if we receive his good Creatures, and not
return him thanks for them.

It is not only an Act of Justice: it is an act of Religion too; 39.2. Of
Religion: a double sanctification of the Creature;
and a branch of that service whereby we do God worship and honor. Psalm. 50.23.
Who so offers praise, he honors me, Psalm. 50. verse last. Now look what
honor we give unto God; it all redoundeth to our selves at the last with
plentiful advantage; 1. Sam. 2.30.
[ Them that honor me I will honor. 1. Sam. 2.] Here then is the fruit of
this religious Act of Thanksgiving; that it sanctifies unto us the use of the
good Creatures of God which is the very reason Saint Paul gives of this
present speech in the next verse. Every Creature of God is good, says he here,
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving: for, says he
there, Verse. 5. hic.
it is sanctified by the word of God, and Prayer. Understand not by the Word of
God there, his written word, or the Scriptures; as some yet give the sense, not
without violence to the words, though the thing they say be true: but, more
both naturally to the construction of the words, and pertinently to the drift
and scope of our Apostle therein, vnderderstand rather the word of his eternal
council and decree, and of his power and providence, whereby he orders and
commands his Creatures in their several kinds, to afford us such service and
comforts, as he has thought Good. Which sanctifying of the Creatures by the
word of Gods decree and providence, implies two things, the one, respecting
the Creatures, that they do their kindly office to us; the other respecting
us, that we reap holy comfort from them. For the plainer understanding of both
which; instance shall be given in the Creatures appointed for our nourishment:
and what shall be said of them, we may conceit of, and apply unto, every other
Creature in the proper kind thereof.

First then,. 40. The first way.
the Creatures appointed for food are sanctified by the word of God; when
together with the Creature, he gives his blessing, to go along with it: by
his powerful word, commanding it, and by that command enabling it, to feed
us. Which is the true meaning of that speech in Deutr. 8. alleged by our
Savior against the Tempter, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Math. 4.4.
Man lives not by bread only but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Alas, what is Bread to nourish us without his word? unless he say
the word, and command the bread to do it, there is no more sap or strength in
Bread, then in stones. That power and nutritive virtue which the Bread has, it
has from his deeree; because the word is already gone out of his mouth, that
Psalm. 104.15.
bread should strengthen man's heart. As in the first Creation, when the
Creatures were produced in acta primo, had their beings given them, and
natural powers and faculties bestowed on them; all that was done by the word
of Gods powerful decree, [ Psalm. 33.9.
He spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded and they were Created;] So
in all their operations in actu secundo, when they do at any time exercise
those natural faculties, and do those offices for which they were created;
all this is still done, by the same powerful word and decree of God, [ Heb.
1.3.
He vpholdeth all things by the word of his power,] As we read of Bread; so
we often read in the Scriptures of Leuit. 26.26. Psalm 105 16. E^ek. ^16*
the staff of Bread: God sometimes threatens he will break the staff of
Bread. What is that? Bread indeed is the staff of our strength; it is the
very stay and prop of our lives: if God break this staff, and deny us Bread,
we are gone. But that is not all Bread is our staff: but what is the staff of
Bread? Verily, the Word of God, blessing our Bread, and commanding it to feed
us, is the staff of this staff: sustaining that virtue in the Bread, whereby
it sustaineth us. If God break this staff of Bread, if he withdraw his
blessing from the Bread, if by his countermaund he inhibit or restrain the
virtue of the bread; we are as far to seek with Bread, as without it. If
sanctified with Gods word of blessing; a little pulse Dan. 1.12.15.
and water, hard and homely fare shall feed Daniel as fresh and fat and fair,
as the Kings dainties shall his companions: a 3. King. 19.6.8.
^ake and a cruse of water, shall suffice Eliah nourishment enough to walk in
the strength thereof 40. days and nights: a few Ioh. 6.9.12.
barley loaves and small fishes shall multiply to the satisfying of many
thousands, eat while they will. But if Gods word and blessing be wanting; Genesis
41.20.21.
the lean Kine may eat up the fat, and be as thin, and hollow, and ill liking
as before: and we may, as the Prophet Haggay speaks, Agg. 1.6.
eat too much and not have enough, drink our fills and not be filled.

. 41. The second way.
This first degree of the Creatures sanctification by the word of God, is a
common and ordinary blessing upon the Creatures; whereof, as of the Math 5.45.
light and dew of heaven, the wicked partake as well as the Godly, and the
thanklesse as the thankful. But there is a second degree also* beyond this;
which is proper and peculiar to the Godly. And that is, when God not only by
the word of his Power bestows a blessing upon the Creature: but also causes
the Echo of that word to sound in our hearts by the voice of his Holy spirit)
and gives us a sensible taste of his goodness to us therein: filling our hearts
not only Acts 14.17.
with that joy and gladness, which arises from the experience of the effect,
viz. the refreshing of our natural strength, but also joy and gladness with
more spiritual and sublime then that, arising from the contemplation of the
prime cause, viz. the favor of God toward us in the face of his Son; that
which Daeuid calls the Psalm. 4.6.
light of his countenance. For as it is the kind welcome at a friends table,
that makes the cheer good, rather then the quaintnes of variety of the
dishes, Ovid Metamorph. 8.
( Super omnia vultus Accessere boni;) so as that Prou. 15.17.
a dinner of green herbs with love and kindness, is better entertainment then
a stalled Ox with bad looks: so the light of Gods favorable countenance,
shining upon us through these things, is it, which Psalm. 4.6.7.
puts more true gladness into our hearts; then does the corn, and the wine,
and the oil themselves, or any other outward thing that we do or can partake.
Now this sanctified and holy and comfortable use of the Creatures, arises also
from the word of Gods decree; even as the former decree did: but not from the
same decree. That former issued from the decree of Common providence; and so
belonged unto all, as that providence is common to all. But this later degree
proceeds from that special word of Gods decree, whereby for the merits of
Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 15.45
the second Adam, he remoueth from the Creature that Genesis 3.17.
curse, wherein it was wrapped through the sin of the first Adam, And in this
the wicked have no portion; as being out of Christ: so as they cannot partake
of Gods Creatures; with any solid or sound comfort; and so the Creatures
remain, (in this degree) unsanctified unto them. For this reason, the
Scriptures style the Heb. 12.23.
Faithful Primogenitos, the first borne; as to whom belongs Deuteronomy. 21.17.
a double portion: and Romans 4.13.
Haeredes mundi, heirs of the world; as if none but they had any good right
thereunto. And St. Paul deriueth our Title to the Creatures from God, but by
Christ; 1. Cor. 3.22.23.
[ All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods:] as if these
things were none of theirs, who are none of Christ's. And in the verse before my
Text, he says of meats, that Verse. 3. hic.
God has created them to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe,
and know the truth: as if those that wanted faith and saving knowledge, did but
usurp the bread they eat. And indeed it is certain, the wicked, have not
right to the Creatures of God, in such ample sort, as the Godly have. A kind
of Right they have, and we may not deny it them; given them by Gods
unchangeable ordinance at the Creation: which being a branch of that part of
Gods image in man, which was of natural and not of supernatural grace, might
be, and was foully defaced with sin; but was not, neither could be wholly
lost, as has bin See before. 14.
already in part declared. A Right then they have: but such a right, as
reaching barely to the use, cannot afford unto the vser true comfort, or sound
peace of conscience, in such use, of the Creatures. For, though nothing be in,
and of it self unclean: for Every Creature of God is good: yet to them that
are unclean, ex accidenti every Creature is unclean and polluted, because it
is thus sanctified unto them by the word of God. And the very true cause of all
this, is the impurity of their hearts, by reason of unbelief. The holy Ghost
expressly assigns this cause, Tit 1.15.
To the pure all things are pure: but to them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled. As a Sinterum
est nisi vas, quodtunque infundis accessit. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
nasty vessel sowreth all that is put into it: so a conscience not Fide
purifitans corda. Acts 15.9.
purified by faith, casts pollution upon the best of Gods Creatures.

. 42. and how this belongs to the present point.
But what is all this to the Text, may some say: or what to the point? What is
all this to the Duty of Thanksgiving? Much every manner of way: or else blame
St. Paul of impertinency: whose discourse should be incohaerent and vnjointed,
if what I have now last said were beside the Text. For since the sanctification
of the Creature to our use, depends upon the powerful and good word of God,
blessing it unto us: that Duty must needs be necessary to a sanctified use of
the Creature, without which we can have no fair assurance unto our
Consciences; that that word of blessing is proceeded out of the mouth of God.
And such is this duty of Thanksgiving: appointed by God, as the ordinary
means, and proper instrument, to procure that word of blessing from him. When
we have performed this sincerely and faithfully; our hearts may then, with a
most cheerful, but yet humble confidence, say Amen, So be it: in full
assurance that God will join his Fiat to ours: crown our Amen with his: and
to our So be it of Faith and Hope, add his of Power and Command: blessing his
Creatures unto us, when we bless him for them; and sanctifying their use to
our comfort, when we magnify his goodness for the receipt. You see therefore
how, as inseparable and undivided companions, the Apostle joyneth these two
together: the one, as the cause: the other, as the means of the Creatures
sanctification: [ It is sanctified by the word of God, and Prayer.] By the Word
of Gods powerful decree: as the sole efficient, and sufficient cause: and by
the Prayer of Thanksgiving (for such Prayer he means, as either has
Thanksgiving joined with it, or else is a part of Thanksgiving, or
Thankesgiving a part of it?) by Prayer I say and Thanksgiving, as the proper
means to obtain it. This is the blessed effect of Thanksgiving, as it is an
Act of Religion. And thus you have heard two grand Reasons, concluding the
necessity of Thanksgiving unto God, in the receiving and using of his good
Creatures. The one, considering it as an Act of Justice: because it is the
only acceptable discharge of that obligagation of debt, wherein we stand bound
unto God for the free use of so many good Creatures. The Other, considering it
is an Act of Religion: because it is the most proper and convenient means to
procure from the mouth of God a word of Blessing, to sanctify the Creatures to
the uses of our lives, and to the comfort of our Cons^iences. This
Thanksgiving being an Act both of Justice and Religion: whenever we either
receive or use any good Creature of God; without this we are unjust in the
Receipt, and in the Use profane. It is now high time, we should from the
premises infer something for our farther use and Edification.

And the first Inference may be, shall I say for Trial; or may I not rather
say, for Conviction?. 43. The first Inference; for Conviction of our
unthankfulness to God
since we shall learn thereby, not so much to examine our Thankefulnes, how
true it is; as to discover our Unthankfulness, how foul it is. And how should
that discovery cast us down to a deep condemnation of our selves for so much
both Injustice and Profaneness; when we shall find our selves guilty of, so
many failings in the performance of such a necessary Duty both of Justice, and
Religion? But we cannot abide to hear on this care: We unthankful to God?
far be that from us: we scarce ever speak of any thing we have, or have
done, or suffered; but we send this clause after it. I thank God for it. And how
are we unthankful, seeing we do thus? It is a true saying, which one says;
Thanking of God, is a thing all men do, and yet none do, as they should. It
is often in vdo, but seldom in imo: it swimmeth often upon the tip of our
tongues, but seldom sinketh into the bottom of our hearts. I thank God for
it, is, as many use it, rather a Vsu quodem, magis qua^ sensu vel affectu,
personare in ore multorum gratiarum actionem aduertere est. Bern. in Cant.
sermon. 13.
Byword then a Thanksgiving: so far from being an acceptable service to God,
and a magnifying of his name; that is rather it self a grievous sin, and a
taking of his holy name in vain. But if we will consider duly and aright, not
so much how near we draw unto God with our lips, as how far our hearts are
from him when we say so: we shall see what small reason we have, upon such a
slender lip-labor to think our selves discharged either of the bond of
thankfulness, or from the sin of unthankfulness. Quid verba audiam, facta
cum vidiam! Though we say, I thank God, a thousand and a thousand times over,
yet if in our deeds we bewray foul unthankfulness unto him: it is but
Protestatio contraria facto: and we do thereby but make our selves the greater
and the deeper liars.

. 44. in sundry degrees: for want of due
Every sin is spacious, and diffused, and spreads into a number of branches:
this of Ingratitude not least. Yet we will do our best to reduce all that
multitude to some few principal branches. There are required unto true
Thankfulness three things; Recognition, Estimation, Retribution. He that has
received a benefit from another, he ought first, faithfully to acknowledge it,
secondly, to value it worthily; thirdly, to endeavor really to requite it. And
who so fails in any of these, is (so far as he fails) unthankful more
or less. And do not some of us fail in all, and do not all of us fail in
some of these? For our more assured, whether Examination, or Conviction; let us
a little consider how we have and do behave our selves in each of the three
respects; In every of which, we will instance but in two kinds; and so we
shall have six degrees of Ingratitude: still holding our selves as close as we
can to the present point, concerning our Thankfulness or unthankfulness, as
it respects the use we have of, and the benefit we have from, the good
Creatures of God.

And first, we fail in our Recognition, 45. I. Recognition: the first;
and in the due acknowledgement of Gods blessings. And therein first, and let
that be the first degree of our unthankfulness, in letting so many blessings
of his (...) by us, without any regard, or so much as notice taken of them:
Whereas knowledge must ever go before acknowledgement, and Apprehension before
Confession. There is a twofold Confession to be made unto God: the Confessio
gemina est: aut Peccati, aut Laudis. August exp. 2. in Psa. 29 (...). Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 9.
one, of our sins; the other, of his goodness. That belongs to Repentan^^;
this to Thankefulnes. Both of them consist in an Acknowledgement: and in both,
the acknowledgement is most faithful, when it is most punctual: and in both,
we come to make default, for want of taking such particular information, as we
ought, and might. In our Repentance, we content our selves commonly with a
general Confession of our sins; or at the most, possibly sometimes make
acknowledgement of some one or a few grosser falls, which gall our consciences
or which the world cries shame of: and if we do^ that, we think we have made
an excellent Confession. So in our Thanksgiving, ordinarily we content our
selves with a general acknowledgement of Gods goodness and mercies to us; or
sometimes possibly recount some one or a few notable and Beneficia quadam
magnitudo non patitur excidere: sed numero pluria, and temporibus diversa
effluunt. Senec. 3. de benef. 5.
Eminent favors, such as most affect us, or whereof the world takes notice:
and this is all we do. But we do indeed in both these, deal unfaithfully
with God, and with our own souls. If we desire to show our selves truly
penitent we should take knowledge (so far as possibly we could) of all our
sins, small and great (at least the several species and kinds of them, for
the indiuiduals are infinite:) and bring them all before God in the Confession
of Repentance. And if we desired to show our selves truly thankful; we
should take notice (so far as possibly we could, and in the species at
least,) of all Gods blessings, small and great; and bring them all before him
in the Confession of Praise. We should even Ioh. 6.12.
Colligere fragmenta gather up the very broken meats, and let nothing be left,
those Colligere fragmenta, ut pecca^t, i. e nec m^n^ma beneficia oblinisci.
Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 51.
small petty blessings, as we account them: and as we think scarce worth the
observation. Did we so: how many baskets full might be taken up, which we daily
suffer to fall to the ground, and be lost? Like Swine under the Oaks, we
grouze up the ake-cornes, and snouke about for more, and eat them too, and
when we have done lie wrouting and thrusting our noses in the earth for more:
but never lift up so much as half an eye, to the tree that shed them. Every
crumme we put in our mouths, every drop wherewith we cool our tongues, the
very air we continually breath in and out through our throats and nosthrils, a
thousand other such things whereof the very commonnes takes away the
observation, we receive from his fullness: and many of these are renewed every
morning, and some of these are renewed every minute: and yet how seldom do we
so much as take notice of many of these things? How justly might that complaint
which God makes against the unthankful Israelites, be taken up against us?
Esaias 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider.

The second degree of our Unthankfulness to God,. 46. and second Degree.
and that also for want of faithful Acknowledgement, is: in ascribing the good
things he has given us to our own deserts, or endeavors, or to any other
thing or Creature, either in part or in whole, but only to him. Such things
indeed we have, and we know it too (perhaps but too well) but we be stirred our
selves for them, we beat our brains for them, we got them out of the fire,
and swet for them; we may thank our good friends, or we may thank our good
selves for them. Thus do we H^b. 1.16.
sacrifice unto our own nets, and burn incense to our drag, as if by them our
portion were fat, and our meat plentious. And as Luke 13.1.
Pilate mingled the blood of the Galileans with their own sacrifices: so into
these spiritual Psalm. 50.14.
sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which we offer unto God, we infuse a quantity of
our own swinke and sweat, of our own wit and forecast, of our own power
and friends, still some one thing or other of our own; and so rob God, if not
of all, yet of so much of his honor. This kind of unthankfulness God both
foresaw and forbad in his own people, Deuteronomy. 8. warning them to take heed,
verse 17. lest when they abounded in all plenty and prosperity, Deuteronomy. 8.14.17.
they should forget the Lord, and say in their hearts, my power and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth. The very saying or thinking of this was
a forgetting of God. Ibid. 18.
But (says Moses there) thou shall remember the Lord thy God; for it is he
that gives thee power to get wealth, etc. The whole Chapter is none other but
a warne-word against unthankfulness. All Est superbia, and delictu^ maximum,
vti datis tanquam innatis; and in acceptit beneficiis gloriam vsurpare
benificii, Bernard. de dilig. Deo.
glorying in our selves, all vain boasting of the gifts of God, or bearing our
selves high upon any of his blessings, is a kind of smothering of the receipt;
and argues in us a kind of loathnesse to make a free acknowledgement of the
giuers bounty; and so is tainted with a spice of unthankfulness in this
degree, 1. Cor. 4.7.
If thou did receive it; why do thou glory, as if thou had not received
it? says my Apostle elsewhere. He that glories in that, for which he even
gives thanks; does by that glorying, as much as he dares, reuerse his
thanks. The Pharisee, who Luke 18.11.
thanked God he was not like other men; did even then, and by those very
thanks, but bewray his own wretched vnthanke^ulnesse.

Besides a faithful Recognition, in free acknowledging the benefit received;
there is required unto thankfulness a just Estimation of the benefit,. 47. II.
Estimation: the Third;
in valuing it, as it deserves: Wherein we make default, if either we value it
not at all, or undervalue it. The third Degree then o^ our Ingratitude unto
God, is the Forgetfulness of his benefits. When we so easily Apperet illu^ non
sape de reddendo cogis ass, cui obrepsit obliuio, Senec. 3. de ben 1-
peruensunt c^, quo, vt ego existime, pessimus quisque and ingratissimus
peruenit; vt obliuiscantur. Ibi. 5.
forget them, it is a sign we set naught by them. Every man readily remembers
those things, he makes any reckoning of: insomuch that, although old age be
naturally forgetful, yet Nec vero que^quam se^u^ audiui ebutum, quo loco the
saurum obruisses: Omnia, quae current miminerunt: vadinc^nia cen^tituta, qui
sibi, quibus ipsi debea^t. Cic de senect.
Tully says, he never knew any man so old as to forget where he had hid his
gould, or to whom he had lent his monyes. In Deuteronomy. 8. Moses warns the people,
(as you heard) to Deuteronomy. 8, 14.
beware, lest being full they should forget the Lord that had fed them: and
David stirs up his soul in Psalm. 103. to Psalm. 103.2.
bless the Lord, and not to forget any of his benefits. We all condemn
Pharaohs Butler of unthankfulness to Joseph, (and so we may well do; for he
afterward Gen, 41.9.
condemned himself for it:) in that having received comfort from Joseph, when
they were fellow prisoners, he yet Genesis 40.23.
forgot him when he was in place where, and had power and opportunity to
requite him. How inexcusable are we, that so condemn him? seeing wherein we
judge him, we condemn our selves as much, and much more: for we do the same
things, and much worse. He forgot Joseph, who was but a man like himself: we
forget God. He had received but one good turn: we many. It is like he had none
about him to put him in mind of Joseph; for as for Joseph himself we know he
lay by it, and could have no access: we have God himself daily rubbing up our
memories, both by his word and Ministers, and also by new and fresh benefits.
He, as soon as a fair occasion presented it self, confessed his fault, and
remembered Joseph; thereby showing his former forgetfulness to have proceeded
rather from negligence then Wilfulnes: we after so many fresh remembrances and
blessed opportunities, still continue in a kind of wilful and confirmed
resolution, still to forget. Well may we forget these private and smaller
blessings; when we begin to grow but too forgetful of those great and public
Deliverances God has wrought for us. Two great deliverances in the memory of
many of us, has God in his singular mercy wrought for us of this Land; such as
I think, take both together, no Christian age or Land can parallel: One
formerly, from a foreign Invasion abroad; another since that, from an hellish
Conspiracy at home: both such, as we would all have thought, when they were
done, should never have bin forgotten. And yet, as if this were Terra
Oblinionis, the land where all things are forgotten; how does the memory of
them fade away, and they by little and little grow into forgetfulness! We had
almost loved, to see Eighty-eight almost quite forgotten, and buried in a
perpetual Amnestie; (God be blessed who has graciously prevented, what we
feared herein:) God grant that we, nor ours, ever live to see Nouembers fifth
forgotten, or the solemnity of that day silenced.

A fourth Degree of unthankfulness is,. 48. and Fourth degree.
in vnderualuing Gods blessings, and lessening the worth of them. A fault
whereof the murmuring Israelites were often guilty: who although they were
brought into a Exodus 3.8.
good Land, flowing with milk and honey, and abounding in all good things both
for necessity and delight; yet as it is in Psalm. 106.24.
Psalm. 106. They thought scorn of that pleasant Land: and were ever and anon
and upon every light occasion repining against God and against Moses; always
receiving good things from God, and yet always discontent at something or
other. And where is there a man among us that can was his hands in innocence,
and discharge himself altogether from the guilt of unthankfulness in this
kind? Where is there a man so constantly and equally content with his portion;
that he has not sometimes or other either grudged at the leanness of his
own, or enuyed at the fatness of another Lot? We deal with our God herein,
as Hiram did with Solomon. Solomon gave him twenty Cities in the land of
Galilee: but because the Country was low and deep (and so in all likelihood
the more fertile for that,) 3. King. 29.11.13.
they pleased him not; and ^e said to Solomon, What Cities are these thou have
given me? and he called them Cabul; that is to say, dirty. So are we witty to
cavil and to quarrel at Gods gifts; if they be not in every respect such, as
we in our vain hopes, or fancies, have ideated unto our selves. This is
dirty; that barren: this too solitary; that too populous: this ill-woodded;
that ill-watered: a third ill-ayred, a fourth ill-neighboured. This (...). Jude
16.
grudging and repining at our portions, and faulting of Gods gifts, so
frequent among us, argues but too much the unthankfulness of our hearts.

. 49. III. Retribution: the Fifth;
The last thing required unto Thankfulness, (after a faithful Acknowledgement
of the receipt, and a just Valuation of the thing received:) is Retribution and
Requital. And that must be real, if it be possible: but at the least, it must
be votall, in the Desire and Endeavor. And herein also (as in both the
former,) there may be a double fail: if, having received a benefit, we requite
it either not at all, or ill. Not to have any care at all of Requital, is the
fifth degree of Unthankfulness. To a Requital (as you See before,. 38.
heard) Justice binds us: either to the party himself that did us the good
turn, if it may be, and be either expedient or needful; or at the least, to
his David retained such a grateful memory of Ionathans true friendship and
constant affection to him; that after he was dead and gone, he hearkened after
some of his good friends, that he might requite Ionathans love by some
kindness to them, 2. Sam. 9.1.
[ Is there yet any left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness
for Ionathans sake?] And surely he were a very unthankful wretch, that having
bin beholden to the Father, as much as his life and liuely-hood is worth, would
suffer the Son of so well deserving a father to perish, for want of his help;
and would not strain himself a little even beyond his power (if need were) to
succor him. Indeed to God, as we heard, we can render nothing that is worthy
the name of Requital: we must not so much as think of that. But yet somewhat
we must do, to express the true and unfeigned thankfulness of our hearts:
which, though it be nothing less, yet it pleases him for Christ's sake to
interpret as a Requital. And that to Him; and His: To Him, by seeking his
glory, to His, by the fruits of our Christian Charity. We adventure our states
and lives, to maintain the honor and safety of our Kings in their just
wars; from whom perhaps we never received particular favor or benefit, other
then the common benefit and protection of subjects. And are we not then foulely
ungrateful to God, to whose goodness we owe all that we have or are; if for
the advancement of his glory and the maintenance of his truth, we make dainty
to spend the best and most precious things we have, yea though it be the
dearest hart-bloud in our bodies? But how much more ungrateful, if we think
much, for his sake to forgo liberty, lands, livings, houses, goods, offices,
honors, or any of these smaller and inferior things? Can there be greater
unthankfulness, then to grudge him a small, who has given us all? In these
yet peaceable times of our Church and state (God be thanked) we are not much
put to it: but who knows how soon a heavy day of trial may come, (we all
know it cannot come sooner, or heavier, then our sins have deserved;) wherein
woe, woe to our unthankfulness, if we do not freely and cheerfully render
unto God of those things he has given us, whatsoever he shall require of us.
But yet even in those peaceable times there want not opportunities, whereon to
exercise our thankfulness; and to manifest our desires of requital: though
not to him, yet to his. To his servants and children in their afflictions; to
his poor distressed members in their manifold necessities. These opportunities
we never did, we never shall want, according to our Saviors prediction, or
rather promise, Math. ^.6.11.
Pauperes semper hab^bitis, The poor you shall always have with you, as my
deputy-receiuers; but me (in person) ye shall not have always. And what we
do, or not do, to Math. 25.40 45.
these, whom he thus constituted his deputies, he takes it as done, or not
done unto himself. If when God has given us prosperity, we suffer these to be
distressed, and comfort them not, or victuals, to perish, and feed them not;
or clothing, to sterue, and cover them not; or power, to be oppressed, and
rescue them not; or ability in any kind, to want it, and releive them not: Let
us make what shows we will, let us make what profession we will of our
thankfulness to God, what we deny to these, we deny to him; and as we deal
with these, if his case were theirs (as he is pleased to make their case his)
we would so deal with him. And what is to be unthankful, if this be not?

And yet behold unthankfulness, more and greater then this: unthankfulness in
the sixth, and last, and highest, and worst degree.. 50. and Sixth degree.
We requite him evil for good. In that other we were unjust; not to requite
him all: but injurious also in this, to requite him with ill. It sticks upon
King Io^sh as a brand of infamy for ever, that he slew 2. Chron. 24.22, 23.
Zachary the son of Iehoiada the high Priest, who had bin true and faithful
to him both in the getting of the Kingdom, and in the administration of it:
recorded to all posterity, 2. Chron. 24. Thus Ioash the King remembered not the
kindness which Iehoiada the father had done him, but slew his son: and when
he dyed, he said: The Lord look upon it, and require it. And it was not long,
before the Lord did indeed look upon it, and require it: the very next verse
begins to lay down the vengeance that God brought upon him for it. And yet
compared with ours, Ioash his ingratitude was nothing. Iehoiada was bound as a
subject to assist the right heir: God is not bound to us; he is a debtor to
none. Ioash had right to the Crown before Iehoiada set it on his head: we have
no right at all to the Creature, but by Gods gift. Ioash though he dealt not
well with the son, yet he ever more esteemed the father so long as he lived,
and was advised by him in the affairs of his kingdom: we rebel even against
God himself, and cast all his counsels behind our backs. Ioash slew the son;
but he was a mortal man and his subject, and he had given him (at least as he
apprehended it) some affront and provocation: we by our sins and disobedience
crucify the son of God, Symb. Nicen.
the Lord and giver of life, by whom and in whom and from whom we enjoy all
good blessings, and of whom we are not able to say that ever he dealt unkindly
with us, or gave us the least provocation. But as Israel (whom God calls
Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Ieshurun compares to an heyfer fed in large and fruitful pastures,) going
always at full bit, grew fat and wanton, and kicked with the heel: so we, the
more plentifully God has heaped his blessings upon us, the more wantonly have
we followed the swinge of our own hearts, and the more contemptuously spurned
at his holy Commandments. It was a grievous bill of complaint, which the
Prophet in the name of God preferred against Israel in Osee, 2. that his Osee.
2.8.
corn and wine, and oil, and the silver and gold which he had given them they
employed in the service of Baal an abominable Idol. If when God gives us wit,
wealth, power, authority, health, strength, liberty, every other good thing;
in stead of using these things to his glory, and the comfortable relief of his
servants, we abuse them, some or all, to the service of those Idols which we
have erected to our selves in our hearts; to the maintenance of our pride and
pomp, making Lucifer our God; of our pelf and profits, making Mammon our God;
of our swinish pleasures and sensuaality, making our Phil. 3.9.
belly our God; are we not as deep in the bill as those Israelites were? as
unjust, as they? as profane, as they? as unthankful every way, as they?
Flat^er we not our selves: Obedience to Gods commandments, and a sober and
charitable use of his Creatures, is the best and surest evidence of our
thankfulness to God, and the fairest requital we can make for them. I^ we
withdraw our obedience, and fall into open rebellion against God; if we abuse
them, in making them either the occasions or instruments of sin to the
d^shonour of God, and damage of his servants: we repay him ill and unworthily
for the good we have received, and are guilty of unthankfulness in this
foulest and highest degree.

Now we have seen what we are: let us say the worst we can by unthankful
ones; call them wretches, cayt^ffes, chur^es, any thing; load them with
infamies, disgraces, contumelies; charge them with injustice, profaneness,
Atheism; condemn them, and with them the vice it self, Unthankfulness to
the pit of Hell; do all this, and more, and spare not; and as David did at
Nathans parable, when we hear any case or example of ingratitude in any of the
former degrees, whether really done, or but in a parable pronounce sentence
upon the guilty, 1. Sam. 12.5.
The man that has done this thing shall surely die. But withal let us
remember, when we have so done, that our hearts instantly prompt us what Nathan
told David, Ibid. 7.
Thou art the man. We, we are the men, We are these unthankful ones:
Unthankful to God, first in passing by so many of his blessings without
taking any consideration of them; Unthankful secondly, in ascribing his
blessings wholly or partly to our selves, or any other but him; Unthankful
thirdly, in valuing his blessings so lightly as to forget them; Unthankful
fourthly, in diminishing the worth of his blessings, and repining at our
portion therein; Unthankful fifthly, in not rendering to him and his according
to the good he has done for us; but sixthly and most of all unthankful in
requiting him evil for good, and hatred for his good will. Dealing thus with
him, let us not now marvel, if he begin to deal something strangely, and
otherwise then he was wont with us. If he deny us his Creatures, when we want
them, if he take them from us when we have them; if he withhold his blessing
from them that it shall not attend them; if we find small comfort in them,
when we use them; if they be vnanswering our expectations, when we have bin at
some pains and cost with them: if as the Prophet speaks, Agg. 1.6.
we sow much and bring in little, we eat and have not enough, we drink and
are not filled, we cloth us and are not warm, and the wages we earne we put
into a bag with holes: if any of these things befall us; let us cease to wonder
thereat: our selves are the causers of all our woe. It is our great
Unthankfulness that blasteth all our endeauours; that leaueneth with
sowrenesse whatsoever is sweet, and turns into poison whatsoever is
wholesome in the good Creatures of God. It is the Verse. 5. hic.
word of God, and Prayer that sanctifies them to our use; and they are then
good, when they are received with Thanksgiving: so long as we continue
Unthankful; we are vain if we look for any sanctification in them, if we
expect any good from them.

I have now done with my first Inference, for Trial, or rather Conviction: I
add a second of Exhortation.. 42. The second Inference, of Exhortation; with
sundry Motives to Thankfulness.
The Duty it self being so necessary as we have heard; Necessary, as an Act
of Justice for the receipt of the Creature: and necessary, as an act of
Religion for the sanctifying of the Creature: how should our hearts be enflamed
with a holy desire, and all our powers quickened up to a faithful endeavor,
conscionably to perform this so necessary a duty? One would think that very
necessity, together with the consciousnesse of our former unthankfulness,
should in all reason be enough to work in us that both desire and endeavor.
In all reason, it should so: but we are unreasonable; and much a do there is
to persuade us to any thing that is good, even when we are persuaded. Wherefore
to enforce the exhortation more effectually, I must have leave to press the
performance of this duty upon your Consciences, with some farther Inducements,
and important Considerations.

Consider first, the Excellency of the Duty.. 53. viz. 1. The excellency of the
Duty.
There are but three heads, whereto we refer all that is called good:
Iucundum, Vtile, Honestum, Pleasure, Profit, and Honesty. There is nothing
desirable or lovely, but in one or other of these three respects. Each of
these singly we account good but that excellently good, wherein they all
concur. We love things that will give us delight; sometimes when their is
neither profit, nor credit in them: we love things that will bring us profit;
though possibly neither delightful greatly, nor seemly: and we love things
that we think will do us honesty, often times without regard either of
pleasure or profit. How should we then be affected to this duty of giving
thanks, and singing praises unto our God; wherein all these do jointly
concur, and that also in an excellent measure. David has wrapped them all
together in one verse, in the beginning of Psalm. 147. Psalm. 147.1.
Praise ye the Lord, for it is good; yea it is a pleasant thing, and praise is
comely. It is good, it will bring you profit; it is pleasant, it will afford
you delight; and it is comely, it will do you honesty: and what can heart wish
more? Again, many good virtues and graces of God in us, shall expire together
with us: which though they be eternal in their fruit and reward, yet are not
so as to their proper acts; which after this life shall cease, because their
shall be neither need nor use of them then. 1. Cor. 13.8.
Whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail; or whether there be tongues,
they shall cease: or whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. There
shall be no use of taming the flesh by Fasting, or of supplying the want
either of others by Alms, or of our selves by Prayer, Nay even Faith and Hope
themselves shall have an end: for we shall not then need to believe, when we
shall see: nor to expect, when we shall enjoy. But giving of thanks, and
praise, and honor, and glory unto God, shall remain in the kingdom of heaven
and of glory. It is now the continual blessed Revel. 4.8.11 and 7.11, 12.
exercise of the glorious Angels and Saints in heaven: and it shall be ours,
when we shall be translated thither. O that we would learn often to practice
here, what we hope shall be our eternal exercise there! O that we would
accustom our selves, being Epes. 5.18.20
filled in the spirit to speak to our selves in Psalms and himnes and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord: giving
thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ: as speaks our Apostle, Ephesians. 5.

Consider secondly, the multitude and variety and continuance of Gods
blessings:. 54.2. The continuance of Gods blessings.
and let that provoke thy thankfulness. If thou had received but one or a few
benefits: yet thanks were due even for those few, or for that one, more then
thou art able to return. But what can thou allege, or how excuse thy
unthankfulness: when his mercies are renewed every morning, nay every Omni
momento me tibi obligas, dum omni momento mihi tua magna beneficia praestas.
August, Solil. cap. 18. Tot numera, quae sine intermission^ diebus de noctibus
(Dij) fundunt. Senec. 4. de benef. 3.
moment, when he is ever Psalm. 145.16.
opening his hand, and pouring out his blessings, and Psalm. 68.29.
loading and even ouerwhelming thee with his benefits: as if he did vye with
thee, and would have thee see, how easily he can overcome thy evil with his
goodness, and infinitely outstrip thine infinite ingratitude with his more
infinite munificence! His Angels are about thee, though thou know it not:
from a thousand unknown dangers he delivers thee, which thou suspectedst
not: he still continues his goodness unto thee, and repriueth thy
destruction, though thou deseruedst it not. What should I say more, thy very
life and being thou owe to him Act. 17.28.
in whom we all live and move, and have our being: thence resolve with holy
David, to sing unto the Lord, Psalm: 104.33
as long as thou live; and to sing praise unto thy God, whilst thou have thy
being. Many and continual receipts, should provoke many and continual
thanks.

Consider thirdly, thy future necessities.. 55.3. Our future Necessities.
If thou were sure of that thou have, that thou and it should continue together
for ever, and never part; and that thou could make pretty shift to live upon
the old stock hereafter, and never stand need to him for more: there might
be so much less need to take care for giving thanks for what is past. But
it is not so with any of us: of what we have, we are but tenants at courtesy,
and we stand continually upon our good behavior, whether we shall hold of him
any longer, or no: and much of our future happiness stands upon our present
thankfulness. And with what face can we crave to have more, (and yet more
we must have, or we cannot subsist,) if we be not thankful for what we
have? Bern. Sermon. 77
Peremptoria res est ingratitudo, says Saint Barnard, it cutteth it of all
kindness. August. Soliloq. e. 18.
Ventus vreus and exiccans: like that Exodus 14.21.
strong East-winde which in a night dried up the Red sea; it holds of the
streams of Gods bounty from flowing, Gratiarum cessat decursus, vbi recursus
non futri^ Bern. sermon. ^0.
and dries up those channels whereby his mercies were wont to be conveyed unto
us. Certainly this is one especial cause, why God so often says us Nay, and
sends us away empty when we ask; even because we are so little thankful to
him for former receipts. The Ecel 1.7. sua reddentur origin fluentae gvatiae,
vt vberius ^luant. Bern. sermon. 89.
Rivers return all their waters to the Sea, from whence they had them: and
they gain this by the return, that the sea feeds them again, and so by a
continual fresh supply preserves them in perpetual being and motion. If they
should Alloquin, nisi ad fontem redeant, exictantur. Bern. ibid.
withhold that tribute, the Sea would not long suffice them nourishment. So we
by giving, receive; and by true paying the old debt, get credit to run upon a
new score, and provoke future blessings, by our thankfulness for former: as
the Earth by sending up vapors back to Heaven from the dew she has received
thence, fills the bottles of heaven with new moisture, to be powered down
upon her again in due season in kindly and plentiful showers. By our Prayers
and Thankesgiuings we erect a Ladder, like that which Genesis 28.12:
Jacob saw, whereon the Angels ascended and descended; we preserve a mutual
intercourse betwixt heaven and earth; and we maintain a kind of continual
trading as it were betwixt God and us. The Commodities are brought us in, they
are Gods blessings: for these we traffic by our Prayers and Thankesgiuings.
Let us therefore deal squarely, as wise and honest merchants should do. Let
us keep touch, and pay: it is as much as our credit is worth. Let us not
think to have Commodities still brought us in, and we send none out, Horat.
1. Epist. 1.
Omnia te adversum spectantia this dealing cannot hold long. Rather let us
think, that the quicker and speedier and more returns we make, our gains
will be the greater: and that (...), Chrysostom. in Gen* Hom. 26 (...). Ibid. Hom.
25.
the oftener we pray and praise God for his blessings, the more we secure unto
our selves both the continuance and the increase of them.

Consider fourthly thy misery,. 56.4. Our misery in wanting.
if thou should want those things, which God has given thee. (...). Tum
denique homines nostra intelligimus bona, Quu^, quae in potestate habuimus,
ca^misimus. Plau. in Captiu. 1.2.
Carendo magis quam fruendo. Fools will not know that true worth of things but
by wanting, which wisermen had rather learn by having them. Yet this is the
common folly of us all: We will not prise Gods blessings as we should, till he
for our unthankfulness take them from us, and teach us to value them better
before we have them again. We repine at Gods great blessings; we grudge at his
gentle corrections; judging these to heavy, those too light: We think our very
peace a burden, and complain of plenty as some would do of scarcity; and
undervalue the blessed liberty we have of treading in his Courts, and partaking
his holy Ordinances; and all this, because by his great goodness we have so
long enjoyed them: and this is our guise in every other thing proportionably.
Did we but feel a while the miseries of our neighbor Countries, who want the
blessings which we thus slight; or could we but fore-thinke what our misery
should be, if we (as they) had our throats ever before the sword, or were
wasted with extreme famines and pestilences, or lived either in thick
darkness, without the Gospel, or under cruel persecution for it. Did we
thus; though our hearts were as hard and cold as stones, it could not be but
those thoughts would soften them, and inflame them to magnify and bless the
holy name of God for our long and present peace, for that measure of plenty
what ever it be which we yet have, and for the still continued liberty of his
glorious Gospel and sincere worship among us. God grant, that from our
wretched unthankfulness, he take not just occation, by taking these great
blessings from us to teach us at once both how to use them better and how to
value them better.

Consider fifthly, the Importunity with God,. 57.5. Our importunity in asking.
when thou want anything; and according to that, proportion thy thanks,
when thou have it. I remember what Bernard writes of the Popes servants and
Courtiers in his time: Be^n lib 4 le Consid. ad Euge^.
Importuni vt accipiant, inquieti donec acceprint, vbi acceceperint ingrati,
When Suitors come to the Popes Court with their businesses, the Courtiers and
Officers lie in the wind for them, greedily offering their service, and never
quiet with them till they have got something: but by that they have got the
money, they have forgot the man, and having first served their own turn, they
then leave the business to go which way it will. Not much unlike is our
dealing with God. When we Multos videmus vsque bedie satis importune petentes,
quod sibi de esse cognoue^int; sed pausos admodum nousmus qui dig^as super
acceptis beneficijs gratias agere videantur. Bernard. sermon. de diuersis. 27.
would have something, some outward blessing conferred, or some outward
calamity removed, (for these thanklesse devotions seldom look farther, then
after these outward things;) we are as S. Chrysostom speaks Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 137.
(...), very eager and earnest with God, we must have no Nay, we wrestle with
him and that stoutly, as if we would out wrestle Genesis 32.25, 26.
Jacob for a Blessing, and we will not let him go till we have obtained it.
But (...), says Chrysostom there, when our turn is served, and we have what
we would have; by and by, all our devotion is at an end, we never think of
thanks. All the ten Lepers begged hard of Christ for a cleansing: the Text
says, Luke 17.13.17.
They lift up their voices; they were all loud enough, whilst they were
suitors. Sed vbi nouem? there returned not to give God thanks for their
cleansing, of the whole ten any more then barely one single man. It is our
case just. When we want any of the good Creatures of God for our necessities,
we Psalm. 81.10.
open our mouths wide, till he Psalm. 145.16.
open his hand, and fill them with plentiousnesse: but after, as if the filling
of our mouths were the stopping of our throats, so are we speechless and
heartlesse. Shame we to be so clamorous, when we crave from him; and so dumb,
when we should give him thanks.

. 58.6. The freedom of the gift.
Consider lastly, how freely God has given thee, what he has given thee.
Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. Sermon. 14.
Dupliciter gratis, says Bernard: Sine merito; sine labor. Freely both ways:
freely, without thy desert, and freely, without so much as thy pains. Freely
first, without thy desert. Jacob, a man as well deserving as thou, yet confessed
himsel^e Genesis 32.10.
not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. And St. Paul cutteth off all
challenge of desert, by that interrogatory, Romans 11.35.
Who has first given him, and it shall be recompensed him? as who should say,
No man can challenge God; as if he owed him ought. If he have made himself a
debtor to us by his Promise, (and indeed he has so made himself a debtor to
us;) yet that is still gratis, and for nothing: because the promise it self
was free, without either Nulla Deo dandi beneficij causa est. Sen. 4 de benef.
3. Ego robur Spontaneas esse numinu^ benignitates, vltroque ab his fluere
inexpectata beneuolentiae munera. Arnob contr. Gent. lib. Deus nulli debet
aliquid: quia omnia gratuito prastat. Et si quisquam dicet, ab illo aliquid
debere meritia suis; certe vt esset, non ei debebatur: non enim erat, cui
deberetur. August. 3. de lib. arb. 16.
debt in him, or desert in us. Nay more, God has bin good to us, not only
when we had not deserved it; but (which still more magnifieth his bounty, and
binds us the stronger to be thankful) when we had deserved the quite
contrary. And how is it possible we should forget such his unspeakable
kindness, in giving us much good when we had done none, nay in giving us much
good, when we had done much ill? And as he gave it sine merito; so sine labor
too: the Creature being freely bestowed on us, as on the one side not by way of
reward for any desert of ours; so neither on the other side by way of wages for
any labor of ours. To show that God gives not his Blessings for our labor
merely: he sometimes gives them not, where they are labored for; and again
he gives them sometimes, where they are not labored for. If in the ordinary
dispensation of his Providence, he bestow them upon them that labor, as
Solomon says, Prou. 12.24; and 13.4.
The diligent hand makes rich; and seldom otherwise, for 2 These. 3.10
he that will not labor, it is fit he should not eat: yet that labor is to be
accounted but as the means, not as a sufficient cause thereof. And if we
dig to the root, we shall still find it was gratis: for even that power to
labor was the gift of God; Deuteronomy. 8.18.
It is God that gives thee power to get wealth. Yea in this sense, See before,
Sermon 3. ad Cler.. 18.
Nature it self is Grace; because given gratis and freely, without any labor,
preparation, disposition, desert, or any thing at all in us.

All these considerations; the Excellency of the Duty,. 59. The third
Inference; for Direction: by removing the impediments of Thankfulness.
the continuance of Gods bles^ings, our future Necessity, our Misery in
wanting, our Importunity in Craving, his free liberality in bestowing, should
quicken us to a more conscionable performance of this so necessary, so just,
so religious a Duty. And thus having seen our unthankfulness discovered in
six points, and heard many Considerations to provoke us to thankfulness: it
may be we have seen enough in that to make us hate the fault, and we would
feign amend it; and it may be we have heard enough in this, to make us affect
the duty, and we would feign practice it, may some say, but we are yet to
learn how. The duty being hard, and our backwardnes great; what good course
might be taken, effectually to reform this our so great backwardnes, and to
perform that so hard a duty? And so you see, my second Inference, for
exhortation; breeds a third, and that is for direction: which for
satisfaction of those men that pretend willingness, but plead ignorance, I
should also prosecute, if I had so much time to spare. Wherein should be
discovered, what the principal Causes of our so great Unthankfulness; which
taken away, the effect will instantly and of it self cease. Now those Causes
are especially, as I conceive, these five. viz. 1. Pride, and Self-love; 2.
Envy, and Coffeehouse; 3. Riotousnesse, and Epicurisme; 4. Worldly
Carfulness, and immoderate desires; Carnal Security, and foreslowing the
time. Now then, besides the application of that which has already been
spoken in the former Discoueries and Motives; (for every Discovery of a fault,
does virtually contain some means for the correcting of it, and every true
Motive to a duty, does virtually contain some helps unto the practice of it:)
besides these I say, I know not how to prescribe any better remedies against
unthankfulness, or helps unto thankefulnes; then fait^^^lly to strive for the
casting out of those sins, and the subduing of those Corruptions in us, which
cause the one, and hinder the other. But because the time, and my strength are
near spent: I am content to ease both my self and you by cutting of so much
of my provision, as concerns this Inference for Direction; and desire you
that it may suffice for the present, but thus to have pointed at these
Impediments, and once more to name them. They are Pride, Envy, Epicurisme,
Carfulness, Security.

I place Pride,. 60. viz. 1. Pride.
where it would be; the foremost, because it is of all other Maxim facit
ingratos nimtus sui suspectus. and insitum mortalitati vitium se suaque
mirandi. Senec. 2. de benef. 26.
the principal impediment of Thankefulnes. Certainly there is no one thing in
the world, so much as Pride, that makes men unthankful. He that would be
truly thankful, must have his eyes upon both; the one eye upon the Gift, and
the other upon the Giver: and this the proud man never has. Either through
Cacus amor sui. Horat. 1. Carm. od. 18.
self-love he is starkeblind, and sees neither: or else through Partiality,
he winketh on the one eye, and will not look at both. Sometimes he sees the
Gift but too much, and boasts of it: but then he forgets the Giver; he 1.
Cor. 4.7.
boasts, as if he had not received it. Sometimes again he ouerlooketh the
Gift, as not good enough for him; and so repineth at the Giver, as if he had
not given him according to his worth. Either he vnderualueth the Gift, or else
he overualueth himself; as if he were himself the giver, or at least the
deseruer: and is in both unthankful. To remove this Impediment, who ever
desires to be thankful, let him humble himself, nay empty himself, nay
deny himself, and all his own deserts; confess himself with Jacob Genesis
32.10.
less then the least of Gods mercies; and condemn his own heart of much
sinful Sacrilegus invasor gloria tua Bern. in Cant. sermon. 13.
sacrilege, if it dare but think the least thought tending to rob God of the
least part of his honor.

Envy follows Pride;. 61.2. Envy;
the Superbia prima soboles inani^ gloria-mox in ridia^ gi^net. Greg. 31. Mor.
31.
Daughter the Mother: a second Non potest quisqua^ and invidere, and gratias
agere. Sen. 3. de benef. 3.
great Impediment of thankfulness. The fault is; that men not content only to
look upon their own things and the present; but Vehemens, and importunu^
malum Invidia; quae nos inqui^tat, dum comparat. Hoc mihi prastitit: sed illi
plus; sed illi maturius. Senec. 2. de benef. 28.
comparing these with the things of other men, or times: instead of giving
thanks for what they have, Illis non tam iucundum est, multos post se videre;
quamgraue, aliquem ante se. Senec. Epist. 73.
repine that others have more or better; or for what they now have, complain
that it is not with them as it has been. These thoughts are Enemies to the
tranquillity of the mind; breeding many discontents, and much unthankfulness:
whilst our Math. 20.15.
eyes are evil, because God is good to others, or has been so to us. To
remove this Impediment; who ever desires to be truly thankful, let him look
upon (...). Plutarch. de tranquil. anim. Nulli ad aliena respicienti, sua
placents. Senec. 3. de Ira. 30.
his own things, and not on the things of other men: and therein consider, not
so much what he wants, and feign would have, as what he has, and could not
well want. Let him think, that what God has given him, came from his free
bounty, he owed it not; and what he has denied him, he withholdeth it either
in his Justice for his former sins, or in his Mercy for his farther good:
that God gives to no man, all the desire of his heart in these outward things,
to teach him not to look for absolute co^tentment in this life, least of all,
in these things. If he will needs look upon other men's things; let him compare
himself rather Quodque aliena capella gerat distantius vber, Tabescat, neque
se maiori pauperiorum Turbae compares? Horat. 1. Sermon. Satyr. 1. (...).
Plutarch. vbi Supra.
with them that have less, then those that have more: and therein withal
consider, not so much what Nec ^a intuimur, quae nos alys praposuere, sed ea
Sola quae fortuna praesedentu^^ ostentat. Sen. 3. de be^. 3.
himself wants which some others have, as what he has which many others
want. If a few, that enjoy Gods blessings in these outward things in a greater
measure then he, be an eye-soare to him: let those many others, that have a
scanter portion, make him acknowledge that God has dealt liberally and
bountifully with him. We should do well to understand that saying of Christ,
not barely as a Prediction, but as a kind of Promise too, (as I have partly
intimated See. 49.
before,) The poor you shall always have with you: and to think that every
Beggar that seeks to us, is sent of God, to be as well a Glass wherein to
represent Gods bounty to us, as an Object whereon for us to exercise ours. And
as for former times: Let us not so much think how much better we have bin, as
how well we are; that we are not so well now, impute it to our former
unthankfulness; and fear, unless we be more thankful for what we have, it
will be yet and every day worse and worse with us. Council is very needful
for us in these declining times: which are not (God knows, and we all know,)
as the times we have seen: the leprous humor of Popery secretly stealing in
upon us, Math. 26, 11.
and as a leprosy spreading a pace under the skin; and penury and poverty,
as an vlcerous sore, openly breaking out in the very face of the Land. Should
we murmr at this; or repiningly complain that it is not with us, as it has
bin? God forbid: that is the way, to have it yet, and yet worse. Rather let us
humble our selves for our former unthankfulness, whereby we have provoked
God to withdraw himself in some measure from us: and bless him for his great
mercy, who yet continues his goodness in a comfortable and gracious measure
unto us, notwithstanding our so great unworthiness and unthankfulness.
Thousands of our brethren in the world, as good as our selves: how glad would
they be, how thankful to God, how would they rejoice and sing, if they
enjoyed but a small part of that peace and prosperity in outward things, and
of that liberty of treading in Gods Courts, and partaking of his ordinances;
which we make so little account of, because it is not every way as we have
known it heretofore.

The third Impediment of Thankfulness, is Riot,. 62.3. Riot;
and Epicurisme: that which the Prophet reckons in the Catalogue of Sodoms
sins, Ezec. 16.49.
Fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness. This is both a Cause and a
Sign of much unthankfulness. (...), and (...), Fullness and Forgetfulness;
they are not more near in the sound of the words, then they are in the sequel
of the things: Deuteronomy. 8.10.11.
When thou have eaten, and art full, Then beware least thou forget the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 8. It much argues, that we make small account of the good
Creatures of God, if we will not so much as take a little pains to get them:
but much more, if lauishly and like prodigal fools we make wast and hauock
of them. He that has received some token from a dear friend, though perhaps
of little value in it self, and of less use to him; yet if he retain any
grateful memory of his friend, he will Quod non me movet astimatione: Verum
est (...) mei sola^is. Catul.
value it the more, and set greater store by it, and be the more careful to
preserve it, for his friends sake: but if he should make it away causelessly,
and the rather because it came so easily, as the Ding-thrifts proverb is,
Lightly come, lightly go;) every man would interpret it as an evidence of his
unfriendly and unthankful heart. But Riot is not only a Sign; it is also a
Cause, of unthankfulness: in as much as it makes us undervalue the good things
of God, at too low a rate. For we usually value the worth of things,
proportionably to their use; judging them more or less good, according to the
good they do us, be it more or less. And how then can the Prodigal or
Riotous Epicure, that consumes the good Creatures of God in so short a space
and to so little purpose; set a just price upon them, seeing he reapeth so
little good from them? A pound, that would do a Poor man that takes pains
for his living a great deal of good, maintain him and his family for some
weeks together, perhaps put him into fresh trading; set him up on his legs,
and make him a man for ever; what good does it to a prodigal Gallant, that
will set scores and hundreds of them flying at one afternoones sitting in a
Gaming-house? Shall any man make me believe, he valueth these good gifts of
God as he should do, and as every truly thankful Christian man would desire
to do; that in the po^dering and perfuming of an excrement that never grew
from his own scalpe, in the furnishing of a Table for the pomp and luxury of
a few hours, in making up a rich Suite to case a rotten carcass in, in the
pursuit of any other lustful vanity or delight, expendeth beyond the
proportion of his revenue or condition, and the exigence of just occasions? To
remedy this: who ever would be truly thankful, let him live in some honest
Voca^ion, and therein bestow himself faithfully and painfully; bind himself
to a Sober, discreet, and moderate use of Gods Creatures; remember that Christ
would not have the very broken-meates lost; think that, if for every word idly
spoken, then by the same proportion for every penny idly-spent, we shall be
accomptable to God at the day of Judgment.

Immoderate Care,. 63.4. Worldly Carefulnes;
and Solicitude for outward things is another Non patitur aviditas quenquam
esse gratu^. Senec. 2. de benef. 27. Nullum habet malum cupiditas maius, quam
quod est ingrata. ld. Epist. 73.
impediment of Thankfulness. Under which title I comprehend Covetousness
especially, but not only: Ambition also, and Voluptuousness, and every other
vice, that consists in a desire and expectation of something Nivis semper
cupiditatibus occupati, non quid habeamus, sed quid petamus, i^ spaimus.
Quicquid domi est, vile est. Sequitur autem, vt vbi quid acceperis leve nouorum
cupiditas fecerit, author quoque eorum non sit in pret^o. -- ideoque ciduca
memoria est, fuituro immine^tium. ld. 3. de benef. 3.
for the future: which desire and expectation if inordinate, must needs in the
end determine in unthankfulness. For the very true reason, why we desire
things inordinately, is; because we promise to our selves more comfort and
content from them, then they are able to give us: this being ever our Error,
when we have any thing in chase, to sever the good which we hope from it from
the inconueniencies that go therewith, and looking only upon that never so
much as to think of these. But having obtained the thing we desired, we find
the one as well as the other; and then the inconueniencies we never thought of
before, Nihil aeque adeptis, and concup scentibus gratum. Plin.
abateth much of the weight and the price we formerly set thereupon, and
takes of so much from the estimation we had of the good: whereby it comes
to pass, that by how much we ouer-valued it in the pursuit, by so much we
undervalue it in the possession. And so in stead of giving Thanks to God for
the good we have received; we complain of the inconveniences that adhere
thereunto, and so much vnderprise it, as it falls short of our expectation:
and look how far we do vnderprise it, so far are we unthankful for it.
To remove this Impediment: who ever would be thankful, let him moderate his
desires after these outward things; forecast as well the inconueniencies that
follow them, as the commodities they bring with them; lay the one against the
other, and prepare as well to digest the one, as to enjoy the other.

The last Impediment of Thankfulness is Carnal security, joined ever with
Delays and Procrastinations.. 64.5. Delay.
When we receive any thing from God; we know we should give him thanks for
it, and it may be we think of doing such a thing: but we think withal
another day will serve the turn, and so we put it of for the present, and so
forwards from time to time, till in the end we have quite forgotten both his
Benefit, and our own Duty, and never perform any thing at all. My Text does
after a sort meet with this corruption: for here the Apostle says, the
Creature should be received with Thanke^giuing; as if the thanks should go
with the receipt, the Qui gratus futurus est, statum dum accepit, de reddendo
cogitat. Senec. 2. de benef. 25.
receipt and the thanks both together. To remove this Impediment: consider,
how in every thing delays are hurtful and dangerous; how our affections are
best and hottest at the first, and do in process of time insensibly deaden,
and at last dye, if we do not take the opportunity, and strike (as we say)
whilst the jron is hot; how that, if pretensions of other businesses or
occasions may serve the turn to put off the tendering of our devotions, and
rendering of our thanks to God, the Devil will be sure to suggest ^now of
these pretensions into our heads, and to prompt us continually with such
allegations, that we shall never be at leisure to serve God, and to give him
thanks.

. 65. The fourth Inference; and the Conclusion of all.
Let us remember these five Impediments and beware of them; Pride, Envy,
Epicurisme, Worldly Carfulness. and Delay. All which are best remedyed by
their contraries. Good helps therefore unto thankfulness are, 1. Humility,
and Self-denial; 2. Contentedness, and Selfe-suffi^ency; 3. Painfulnesse, and
Sobriety; 4. The Moderation of our desires after earthly things; 5. Speed and
Maturitie. And so much for this third Inference of Direction. I should also
have desired, if the time would have permitted, although my Text speaks of
our Thanksgiving unto God precisely as it respects the Creature; yet to have
improued it a little farther by a fourth Inference: that if we be thus bound
to give God thanks for these outward blessings, how much more ought we then
to abound in all thankfulness unto him for his manifold Ephesians. 1.3.
Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ; for Grace and Election, for
Mercy and Redemption, for Faith and Justification, for Obedience and
Sanctification, for Hope and Glorification. If we ought to pray for, and to
give thanks for our Math. 6.11.
daily bread, which nourishes but our bodies, and then is Math. 15.17
cast into the draught, and both it and our bodies perish: how much more for
that Ioh. 6.51.
Bread of life which came down from Heaven, and feeds our Souls unto
eternal life, and neither they nor it can perish? If we must say for that,
Give us this day our daily bread: shall we not much more say for this, Ioh.
6.34.
Lord evermore give us this bread. But I have done. Beseech we now Almighty
God, to guide us all with such holy discretion and wisdom, in the free use of
his good Creatures; that keeping our selves within the due bounds of Sobriety,
Charity, and civil Duty, we may in all things glorify God: and above all
things, and Ephesians. 5.20.
for all things give thanks always unto God and the Father, in the name of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST. To which our Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed Son of
God, together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons and one only
wise, gracious, and everliving God, be ascribed (as is most due) by us and his
whole Church, all the Kingdom, the Power, and the glory, both now and for
evermore. Amen, Amen.

Here ends the first Sermon.
A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PAVLES Cross, April, 15.
GENESIS 20.6. And God said unto him in a dream; Yea, I know that thou did
this in the integrity of thine heart: For I also withheld thee from sinning
against me; therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.


FOr our more profitable understanding of which words,. 1. The Occasion,
it is needful we should have in remembrance the whole story of this present
Chapter; of which story these words are a part. And thus it was. Abraham
comes with Sarah his wife and their family, as a Stranger, to sojourne among
the Philistims in Gerar: couenanteth with her beforehand, thinking thereby to
provide for his own safety, because she was beautiful, that they should not
be to know that they were any more then Brother and Sister. Abimilech King of
the place hears of their coming, and of her beauty; sends for them both;
enquireth whence and who they were; hears no more from them, but that she
was his Sister; dismisseth him; takes her into his house. Hereupon God
plagueth him and his house with a strange Visitation; threatens him also with
Death; gives him to understand, that all this was for taking another man's
wife. He answers for himself: God replyeth. The Answer is in the two next
former Verses: the Reply in this, and the next following verse.

. 2. Scope,
His answer is by way of Apology: he pleads first his Ignorance; and then,
and thence, his Innocence. Verse. 4, 5.
[ And he said; Lord, will thou slay also a righteous Nation? Said not he
unto me, she is my Sister! and she, even she her self said, He is my
Brother: in the integrity of my ^eart, and innocence of my hands, have I done
this.] That is his Plea. Now God replyeth: of which reply, letting pafse the
remainder in the next verse, which concerns the time to come, so much of it
as is contained in this verse, has reference to what was already done and
past, and it meets right with Abimelechs answer. Something he had done; and
something he had not done: he had indeed Verse. 2.
taken Sarah into his house, but he had Verse. 4.
not yet come near her. For that which he had done, in taking her; he thought
he had a just excuse, and he pleads it: he did not know her to be another
man's wife; and therefore, as to any intent of doing wrong to the husband, he
was altogether innocent. But for that which he had not done, in not touching
her; because he took her into his house with an unchaste purpose: he passes
that over in silence, and not so much as mentions it. So that his Answer, so
far as it reached, was just: but, because it reached not home, it was not
full. And now Almighty God fitteth it with a Reply, most convenient for such
an Answer: admitting his Plea, so far as he alleged it, for what he had
done, in taking Abraham's wife, having done it simply out of ignorance, Yea I
know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart:] and withal
supplying that which Abimilech had omitted, for what he had not done, in not
touching her; by assigning the true cause thereof, viz. his powerful
restraint, [ For I also withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore
suffered I thee not to touch her.]

In the whole verse we may observe,. 3. and Division of the Text.
First the manner of the Revelation; namely, by what means it pleased God to
conueigh to Abimelech the knowledge of so much of his will, as he thought good
to acquaint him withal: it was even the same, whereby he had given him the
first information at verse. 3. it was by dream [ And God said unto him in a
dreame] and then after the substance of the Reply; whereof again the general
parts are two. The former, an Admission of Abimelechs Plea, or an
Acknowledgement of the integrity of his heart, so far as he alleged it, in
that which he had done, [ yea I know that thou did it in the integrity of
thine heart.] The later; an Instruction or Advertisement to Abimelech, to take
knowledge of Gods goodness unto, and providence over him, in that which he had
not done: it was God that withheld him from doing it, [ For I also withheld
thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

By occasion of those first words of the Text, [ And God said unto him in a
dream;. 4. The Nature and use of Dreams, etc.
] if we should enter into some enquiries, concerning the nature and use of
divine Revelations in general, and in particular of Dreams: the discourse as
it would not be wholly impertinent, so neither altogether unprofitable.
Concerning all which these several Conclusions might be easily made good.
First; that God revealed himself and his will frequently in old times,
especially before the sealing of the Scripture Canon (...). Heb. 1.1.
in sundry manners: as by Visions, Prophesies, Ecstasies, Oracles, and other
supernatural means; and namely, and among the rest, by Numb. 12.6. Joel 2.28.
Job. 33.14.16. (...). Homer. Iliad. ^,
Dreams; Secondly, that God imparted his will by such kind of supernatural
Revelations, not only to the Godly and Faithful, (though to them most
frequently, and especially:) but sometimes also to Hypocrites 1. Sam. 10.10
Saul and others; yea and sometimes even to infidels too out of the Church, as
to Genesis 41.25.28.28 45.
Pharao^, Numb. 24 2.4. etc.
Balaam, Dan. 2.28.4^
Nebuchadnezzar, etc. and here to Abimelech. Thirdly; that since the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles were made up, the Scripture-Canon sealed, and the
Christian Church by the Preaching of the Gospel become Oecumenicall; Dreams,
and other supernatural Revelations, as also other things of like nature, as
Miracles, and whatsoever more immediate and extraordinary manifestations of the
will and power of God, have ceased to be of ordinary and familiar use: so as
now, we ought rather to suspect delusion in them, then to expect Fourthly; that
although God have now Esa. 8.20.
tied us to his holy written word, as unto a perpetual infallible Rule, beyond
which we may not expect, and against which we may not admit, any other
direction, as from God: yet he has no where abridged himself of the power and
liberty, even still to intimate unto the sons of men the knowledge of his
will, and the glory of his might, by Dreams, Miracles, or other like
supernatural manifestations; if at any time, either in the want of the
ordinary means of the word, Sacraments, and Ministry, or for the present
necessities of his Church, or of some part thereof, or for some other just
cause perhaps unknown to us, he shall see it expedient so to do. He has
prescribed limited himself. Fifthly; that because the Devil and wicked
spirits may suggest dreams, probably foretell future events foreseens in their
causes, and work many strange effects in nature applicando actiua passiuis;
which because they are without the sphere of our comprehension, may to our
seeming have fair appearances of Divine Revelations or Miracles, when they are
nothing less: for the avoiding of strong delusions in this kind, it is not
safe for us to give easy credit to Dreams, Pro^hesies, or Miracles, as
divine; until upon due trial there shall appear, both in the end whereto
they point us, a direct tendance to the advancement of Gods glory; and in the
Means also they propose us, a See Deuteronomy. 13.2. etc.
conformity unto the reueyled will of God in his written word. Sixthly; that so
to observe our ordinary dreams, as thereby to Contra Onire triticos, See
Aquin. 2.2. qu. 956. Ioh. Satisb. 2. Polyer. 17. Petr. Bles. Epist. 65.
divine or foretell of future contingents, or to forecast therefrom good or
ill-lucke (as we call it) in the success of our affairs: is a silly and
groundless, but withal an unwarranted, and therefore an unlawful, and
therefore also a damnable, superstition. Seventhly; that there is lawful, yea
and a very profitable use, even of our ordinary dreams, and of the observing
thereof: and that both in Physic and Divinity. Not at all by foretelling
particulers of things to come: but by taking from them, among other things,
some reasonable conjectures in the general, of the present estate both of our
Bodies and Souls. Of our Bodies first. For since the predominancy of Secundum
morum and humorum varietates, variantur and semnia. Alij namque vident
sanguinei, alia cholorici, alia flegmatici, alia melancholici. Auctor de spic.
and anim. cap. 25. apud Augustine. Tom. 3.
Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy; as also the differences of strength,
and health, and Iuntae etiam infirmitaetum diversitates, diversa accidunt
somnia Ibid.
dis^ases, and distempers, either by diet or passion or otherwise, do cause
impressions of different forms in the fancy: our (...). Arist. cap. 1. de
divinat. ex insom^.
ordinary Dreams may be a good help, to lead us into those discoueries, both
in time of health, what our natural constitution, complexion, and temperature
is; and in times of sickness, from the rankenesse and tyranny of which of the
humors the malady springs. And as of our Bodies; so of our Souls too. For
since our Dreams for the most part A dream comes through the multitude of
business. Eccles. 5.2. Res, que in vita vsurpant homines, cogitant, curant,
vident, Quaeque agunt vigilantes, agitant que, ea fi cui in somnis accidant;
M^nus mirum est. Attius Quaecunque meutis agitat infestus vigor, Ea per quietem
sacer and a^^^nus refert Veloxque sensus. Senec. in Octau. Act. 4. See Delr.
ibid.
look the same way, which our freest thoughts incline; as the Voluptuous Beast
dreameth most of pleasures, the Covetous wretch most of profits, and the proud
or ambitious most of praises, preferments, or revenge: the observing of our
ordinary Dreams may be of good use for us unto that discovery, which of these
three is our Master sin (for unto one of the three every other sin is
reduced,) 1. Ioh. 2.16.
The Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the eyes, or the Pride of Life.

But concerning Revelations and Dreams*. 5. The first Part of Gods Reply.
it shall suffice to have only proposed these few Conclusions without farther
enlargement: the manner of Gods reueiling his will here to Abimelech by Dream,
being but an incidentall circumstance upon the bye, and not belonging to the
maine of the present story. We will therefore without more a do proceed to the
substance of Gods reply, in the rest of the verse: and therein begin with the
former general part which is Gods admission of Abimelechs Plea and Apology for
himself. The ground of whose Plea was Ignorance, and the thing he pleaded his
own Innocence, and the integrity of his heart: and God who is the searcher
of all hearts, allows the allegation, and acknowledges that integrity, [
Yea I know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart.

. 6. The Explication of the words.
The (...).
Original word here translated Integrity, is rendered by some Targ. Chald.
Truth, by others (...). Septuag.
Purity, and by others Simplici cord. Vulgar.
Simplicity: and it will bear them all, as signifying properly In the
perfection of thy heart. H. A.
Perfection or Innocence. You would think by that word, that Abimelech had in
this whole business walked in the sight of God with a pure, and upright, and
true, and single, and perfect heart. But alas, he was far from that. God
Verse. 17.18.
plagued him and his, for that he had done: and God does not use to punish the
carcass for that, wherein the heart is single. Again, God withheld him, or
else he would have done more and worse: and it is a poor perfection of heart,
where the active power only is restrained, and not the inward corruption
subdued. Besides, Sarah was taken into the house, and there kept for lend
purposes: and how can truth and purity of heart consist with a continued
resolution of sinful uncleanness? Abimelech then cannot be defended, as truly
and absolutely innocent: though he plead Innocence, and God himself bear
witness to the Integrity of his heart: For had his heart bin upright in him
and sincere, in this very matter of Sarah, he would never have taken her into
his house at all, as he did. But that he pleads for himself is; that in
this particular, wherewith it seemed to him God by so threatening him did charge
him, in wronging Abraham by taking his wife from him, his Conscience could
witness the Innocence of his heart, how free he was from any the least
injurious purpose, or so much as thought, that way. It was told him by them
both, that she was his Sister; and he knew no other by her then so, when he
took her into his house, supposing her to be a single woman: if he had
known she had been any man's wife, he would not for any good have done the
man so foul an injury, nor have sinned against his own soul, by defiling
another bed: In the integrity of his heart, and innocence of his hands he
did, what he had done. This is the substance of his allegation: and God
approves the integrity of his heart so far; viz. as free in this particular
from any intent, either to iniure Abraham, or to sin against the light of his
own Conscience, by committing adultery with anthers wife.

The meaning of the words thus cleared: we may observe in them three things.
First,. 7. Obseruat. I. The grieuousnes of the sin of Adultery.
the fact for which Abimilech pleads; and that was, the taking of Sarah, who
was another wife, into his house. Secondly, the ground of his plea; and that
was his Ignorance: he knew not when he took her, that she was another wife.
Thirdly, the thing he pleads upon that ground; and that was his Innocence
integrity of his heart. Each of these three instruction for our use. first
thing we will insist upon from these words shall be, The grieuousnesse of the
sin of Adultery; hateful even in the judgment of those men, who made small
or no conscience at all of Fornication. See how this is raised from the Text,
Abimelechs heart never smote him for taking Sarah into his house, so long as he
supposed her to be but a single woman: led with the common blindness and
custom of the Gentiles, he either knew not, or considered not, that such
fornication (though in a King) was a Sin. But the very frame of his Apology
shows, that if he had known her to be another man's wife* and yet had taken
her, he could not then have pretended the integrity of his heart, and the
innocence of his hands, as now he does, and God allows it: but he should
have been (...), his own heart would have condemned him for it, and he should
therein have sinned grossly against the light of his own Conscience.

. 8. Fornication a deadly sin;
It cannot be doubtful to us, who by the good blessing of God upon us, have his
holy word to be Psalm. 119.105
a light unto our feet, and a laut horn unto our paths, from the evidence
whereof we may receive more perfect and certain information, then they could
have from the glimmering light of depraved Nature; I say, it cannot be
doubtful to us, but that all fornication, how simple soever, is a sin foul
deadly to the committer. As first being opposite directly to that 1. These. 4.3.4
holiness and honor and sanctification, which God prescribes in his will.
Secondly, causing usually consumption of Prou. 5.10.6.26. Job. 31.12.
estate, rottenness of Prou 5.11.
bones, and loss of Prou. 6.33. Prou. 7.22.23.
good-name. Thirdly, Hos. 4.11.
stealing away the heart of those that are once ensnared bewitching them even
unto perdition, in such powerful sort, that it is seldom seen, a man once
brought under by this sin, to recover himself again and to get the victory
over it. Fourthly, putting over the guilty Heb. 13.14.
immediate judgment of God himself; who for this sin ^lew of the Israelites
in one day 1. Cor. 10.8.
23. Numb. 25.9.
24. thousand. And having Fifthly, one singular deformity above all other
sins in all other kinds, that it is a direct sin 1. Cor. 6.18.
against a man's own body; in depriving it (by making it the instrument of
filthiness, and the 1. Cor. 6.15.
member of an harlot,) of that honor whereunto God had ordained it, to be a 1.
Cor. 6.15.
member of Christ, and 1. Cor. 6.19.
the Temple of the holy Ghost.

. 9. yet excused by some:
But yet of this foul sin the Gentiles made no reckoning: So long as they
abstained from Viri licitose errare credunt, si solo abstineant adulterio:
meretricios autem vsus tanquam leginaturae suppetere putant. Ambros. 2 de
Abrah. 11. Solo stupro atque adulteri^ condemnate, passim per lupanaria and
ancillul as libido permittitur. Hieronym. Epist. 30. Vsum scortorum serrena
civitas licitam turpitudium fecit. Augustine. 14. de Civit. 18.
married persons it never troubled their consciences to defile themselves with
those that were single by fornication, because they esteemed it either as no
sin, or as one of the least. It was not only the fond speech of an indulgent
and doting old Father in the excuse of his licentious son in the Comedy,
Mitio apud Terent. in Adelph. 1.2.
Non est flagitium mihi creed adolescentulum scortari; (and yet he spoke, but
as the generality of them then thought:) but it was the setious plea also of
the grave Roman Orator, in the behalf of his client, Cic pro Coelie.
in open court, before the severity of the sage and Reverend bench of Judges,
Quando hoc non factum est? quando reprehensum? quando non permissum? and Datur
omniu^ concessu, etc. 1. These. 4.5.
Not in the lust of concupiscence, (says S. Paul) as the Gentiles, which know
not God. An Error, so universally spread, and so deeply rooted, in the minds
and in the lives of the Gentiles; who Ephesians. 418.19
having their understanding darkened through the ignorance that was in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts, wrought such uncleanness not only
without remorse, but even with greediness: that the Apostles had much a do
with those men, whom by the Preaching of the Gospel they had converted from
Gentilisme to Christianity, before they could reclaim them from an Error so
inueterate both in the judgment and practice: St. Paul therefore as it both
became and concerned him being Romans 11.13. Gal. 2.7. 1. Tim. 2.7. and 2. Tim.
1.11.
the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles, often touches upon this string in
his As Romans 1.29. and 13.13. 2. Cor. 12.31. Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.19. and 5.3.
etc. Col. 3.5. 1. These. 4.3. etc.
Epistles written unto the Churches of the Gentiles. But no where does he set
himself more fully and directly, with much evidence of reason and strength of
argument, against this Sin and error, then in the 1. Cor. 5.1.9-11
6.9-18.7.1. etc. 10.8.
first Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians: because among them this sin, was
both it self most rife in the practice, the Hinc (...) pro scortari. Hadr.
lun. in Adag and (...) habet Aristoph. in Pluto Act. 1. Sc. 2. Quas ^upra mill
prostare ad fanum Veneris quod est in Corintho seribit Strab. 8. Geograph.
Atque hint natam paraemiam. (...). Bourdin. in Comment. ad Aristopo. Thesmophor.
Corinthians being notedly infamous for lust and wantonness; and it was also as
much - Libid^nis, qua nusquam gentium regnabat impunitius, quam Corinthi.
Erasm. paraphr. in 1. Cor. in Argum.
slighted there as any where, many of them thinking that the l body was made
^or fornication, as the belly for meats, and that fornication was as fit and
convenient for the body, as meats for the belly. Out of which consideration,
the Apostles in that first General Council holden at Jerusalem Act. 15.
thought it needful by Ecclesiastical Canon, among some other indifferent
things for the Churches peace, to lay this restraint upon the converted
Gentiles, that they should Act, 15.28.29.
abstain from Fornication. Not, as if Fornication were in it self an
indifferent thing, as those other things were; nor, as if those other things
were in themselves and simply unlawful as Fornication was: but the Apostles
did therefore join Fornication, and those other indifferent things together in
the same Canon; because the Gentiles accounted fornication a thing as
indifferent, as what was most indifferent. Some remainders of the common error
there were it seems among some Christians in St. Augustines days: who both
Quod aliquando qui committunt, nescio qua peruersitati contemnunt; and nescio
vude sibi testimonia nulla and vana conquirunt dice^tes, Peccata carnis Deus
non curat. Augustine sermon. 16. de verb. Dom. cap. 1. Ista pumind^ and nimium
grauia mala, ideo a multis viris si^e vilo timore Domini committuntur, quia ita
a pluribas. In consuitudinem missa sunt, and ita viliae vel leuia du^untur vt
nec iam inter grauia crimina putentur. Sermon. de Temp. 143.
relates the opinion and confuteth it. And some in the Popish Church have not
come far behind herein: so many of them I mean as hold that Durand. 4.
distinct. 33. qu. ^. and alij.
simple fornication is not intrinsecally, and in the proper nature of it, a
sin against the law of Nature, but only made such, by divine positive Law.
A strange thing it is, and to my seeming not less then a Mysterium
iniquitatis. 2. These. 2 7.
mystery, that those men that speak so harshly of Marriage which God has
ordained, should withal speak so favorably of fornication which God has
forbidden; preposterously preferring the disease which springs from our
corruption, before the 1. Cor. 7.2.
remedy which God himself has prescribed in his word. But howsoever, if some
Christians have spoken, and written, and thought so favorably of fornication,
as (to their shame) it appears they have done: the less may we marvel, to
see Abimelech, a King and an Infidel, allow himself the liberty to continue
in the sin of Understand, that in this passage concerning Abimelech, I use
the word Fornication, as it does include Concubinatum also.
Fornication; and yet notwithstanding such allowance, stand so much upon his
own innocence, and integrity as he does.

. 10. but not Adultery by any.
God forbid any man that hears me this day, should be so either ignorant or
uncharitable, as to conceive all, or any of that I have yet said, spoken to
give the least shadow of liberty or excuse, to Fornication or any
uncleanness, which Saint Paul would not have so much as Ephesians. 5.3.
named among the Saints; not named with allowance, not named with any
extenuation, not named but with some detestation. But the very thing for which
I have spoken all this, is to show, how inexcusable the Adulterer is: when even
those of the Gentiles, who (by reason of the Ephesians. 4.18.
darkness of their understandings, and the want of Scripture Light.) could
espy no obliquity in Fornication; could yet through all that darkness see
something in Adultery, deservedly punishable (even in their judgments) with
death. They could not so far quench that (...) Basil.
spark of the light of nature which was in them, nor Romans 1.18.
hold back the truth of God in unrighteousness: as not by the glimpse
thereof, to discern a kind of reverend Majesty in Gods holy ordinance, of
Wedlock; which they knew might not be Heb 13.4.
dishonored, nor the bed defiled by Adultery, without guilt. They saw Adultery
was a mixed crime, and such as carried with it the face of Injustice, as well as
uncleanness; nor could be committed by the two offending parties, without
wrong done to a third. And therefore if anything might be said colourably to
excuse Fornication, (as there can be nothing said justly;) yet if any such
thing could be said for Fornication, it would not reach to excuse Adultery:
because of the injury that cleaves thereunto. Against Fornication God has
ordained 1. Cor. 7.2.
Marriage as a Remedy: what a beast then is the Adulterer, and what a Monster,
whom that remedy does no good upon? In the marriage knot, there is some
expression and representation of the Loue-couenant betwixt Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ, and his Church: but what good assurance can the Adulterer have that he
is within that Covenant, when he breaks this knot? Every married person has
ipso facto surrendered up the right and interest he had in and over 1. Cor. 7.4.
his own body, and put it out of his own into the power of another: what an
arrant thief then is the Adulterer, that takes upon him to dispose at his
pleasure that which is none of his: But I say too well by him, when I compare
him but to a thief. Solomon makes him worse then a thief. [ Pro. 6.30. etc
Men do not despise ^ thief if he steal to satisfy his soul, when he is
hungry, etc. But who so commits adultery with a woman, lacks
understanding: he that does it destroys his own soul, etc.] Where he makes
both the injury greater, and the reconcilement harder, in and for the
Adulterer, then for the Thief. Nay God himself makes him worse than a Thief
in his law: in his Moral Law, next after murder placing Exodus 20.13.15.
Adultery before Theft, as the greater sin; and in his Judicial Law,
punishing (...) ^2.1. etc.
Theft with ^ mulct, but Leuit 20.10. Deuteronomy. 21.22.
Adultery with Death, the greater Punishment. To conclude this first point:
Abimelech, an Heathen man, who had not the knowledge of the true God of heaven
to direct him in the right way; and withal a King, who had therefore none upon
earth above him, to control him if he should transgress: would yet have
abhorred to have defiled himself knowingly by Adultery with another man's wife,
although the man were but a stranger, and the woman exceeding beautiful.
Certainly Abimelech shall one day rise up in judgment, and condemn thy
filthiness and injustice, whosoever thou art, that committest, or causest
another to commit adultery: Romans 1.32.
Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which do such things are worthy
of death, either do the same things thy self, or have pleasure in them that
do them; or being in place and office to punish incontinent persons, by easy
commutations of public penance, for a private pecuniary mulct, do at once
both be guilty thine own conscience with fordide Briberie, and embolden the
Adulterer to commit that sin again without fear, from which he has once
escaped without shame, or so much as valuable loss.

. 11. Obseru. II. How far Ignorance does or does not excuse from Sin.
And thus much for that first Observation. The next thing, we shall observe from
Gods approving of Abimelechs answer, and acknowledgement of the integrity of
his heart, is, That some Ignorance has the weight of a just excuse. For we
noted before, that Ignorance was the ground of his Plea. He had indeed taken
Sarah into his house, who was another man's wife: but he hops that shall not
be imputed to him as a fault, because he knew not she was a married woman; the
parties themselves upon inquiry having informed him otherwise. And therefore he
appealeth to God himself, the tryer and judger of men's hearts, whether he were
not innocent in this matter: and God gives sentence with him, [ Yea I know
that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart.] Where you see his
Ignorance is allowed for a sufficient excuse.

For our clearer understanding of which point,. 12. Sins of Ignorance the
least sins.
(that I may not wade farther into that great Question so much moved among
Divines, then is pertinent to this story of Abimelech, and may be useful for
us thence, viz. whether or no, or how far, Ignorance and Error may excuse,
or lessen sinful Actions proceeding therefrom, in point of Conscience,) let
us first lay down one general, certain, and fundamental ground, whereupon
indeed depends especially the resolution of almost all those difficulties,
that may occur in this, and many other like Questions. And that is this. It
is a condition so essential to every sin to be Voluntary; that all other
circumstances and respects laid aside, every sin is simply and absolutely by
so much greater or lesser, by how much it is more or less voluntary. For
whereas there are in the reasonable soul three prime faculties, from whence
all humane Actions flow; the Understanding, the Will, and the sensual appetite
or Affections: all of these concur indeed to every Action properly Humane;
yet so, as the Will carries the greatest sway, and is therefore the justest
measure of the Moral Goodness, or Badnesse thereof. In any of the three there
may be a fault, all of them being depraved in the state of corrupt Nature; and
the very truth is there is in every sin (every complete sin) a fault in every
of the three. And therefore all sins, by reason of the blindness of the
Understanding, may be called Ignorances; and by reason of the impotency of the
Affections, Infirmities; and by reason of the perverseness of the will,
Rebellions. But for the most part it falls out so, that although all the
three be faulty, yet the obliquity of the sinful Action springs most
immediately and chiefly from the special default of some one or other of the
three. If the maine defect be in the Understanding, not apprehending that good
it should, or not aright: the sin arising from such defect we call more
properly a sin of Ignorance. If the maine defect be in the Affections, some
passion blinding or corrupting the Judgment: the sin arising from such
defect we call a sin of Infirmity. If the maine defect be in the will, with
perverse resolution bent upon any evil: the sin arising from such
wilfulness we call a Rebellion, or a sin of Presumption. And certainly
these sins of Presumption are the Granius quidem infirmitate, quant
ignorantia; sed m^lio grauius studio, quam infirmitate peccatur. De paenit d.
2. ex Gregor.
greatest of the three; because the wilfullest: and those of Ignorance the
least; because there is in them the least disorder of the will, which does its
office in some measure, in following the guidance of the understanding; the
greater fault being rather in the understanding, for misguiding it. And of
sins of Ignorance, compared one with another, that is ever the least, wherein
the defect is greater in the understanding, and in the will less.

. 13. a Distinction of Ignorance
From this Principle do issue sundry material conclusions: and namely, amongst
many other, most pertinently to our purpose these two. The one; that all Error
and Ignorance does not always and wholly excuse from sin. The other; that
yet some kind of Ignorance and Error does excuse from sin, sometimes wholly,
but very often at least in part. The whole truth of both these conclusions, we
may see in this one action of Abimelech, in taking Sarah into his house. In him
there was a twofold Error; and thence also a twofold Ignorance. The one was an
Error in vniversals, (Ignorantia Iuris, as they call it;) concerning the
nature of Fornication: which being an heinous sin, he took to be either
none at all, or a very small one. The other was an Error in Particulari,
(Ignorantia facti,) concerning the personal condition and relation of Sarah to
Abraham: whose sister he thought her to be, and not wife, though she were both.

That former Ignorance (Ignorantia juris) in Abimelech,. 14. The former
ignorance did not excuse Abimelech wholly.
was in some degree voluntary. For Abimelech had in him the common Principles
of the Law of Nature; by the light whereof, if he had been careful to have
improued it, but even so far as right reason might have led a prudent and
dispassionate natural man, he might have discerned in the most simple
Fornication such incongruity with those Principles, as might have sufficiently
convinced him of the unlawfulness thereof. It is presumed, that all ignorance
of that, which a man is bound to know, and may know if he be not wanting to
himself, is so far forth wilful. Now Abimelech was bound to know, that all
carnal knowledge of man and woman out of the state of Wedlock was simply
unlawful; and so much, if he had not been wanting to himself in the use of
his Naturals, he might have known: and therefore it was a kind of wilful
ignorance in him in some degree, that he did not know it. And therefore
further, he cannot be wholly excused from sin, in taking Sarah,
notwithstanding both that, and his other ignorance: for although he did not
know her to be, Abraham's wife, yet he knew well enough she was not his own
wife; and being not so to him, whatsoever she was to Abraham it skilled not,
he should certainly not have taken her. To plead Ignorance, that he knew not
Fornication to be a sin, would little help him in this case. For men must
know, they stand answerable unto God for their Actions; not merely according
to the present knowledge they actually have: but according to the knowledge
which they ought and might to have had, those means considered, which he had
affoorded them of knowledge. Those means, even where they are scantest, being
ever sufficient at the least thus far, Romans 1.20.
(...), as the Apostle speaks Romans 1. to leave the transgressour without
excuse, and to make void all pretensions of Ignorance.

That Error then did not wholly excuse Abimelech from sin: because his
Ignorance was partly wilful.. 15. but only in part:
yet we may not deny, but even that error did lessen and extenuate the
sinfulness of the Action something, and so excuse him in part; a tant^, though
not a tot^. Because it appears by many evidences, that his ignorance therein
was not grossly affected and wilful: and look how much measure you abate in
the wilfulness, so much weight you take of from the sin. The light of
Nature, thou^h to a man that could have made the best of it, it had been
sufficient to have discovered the vicious deformity, and consequently the
moral unlawfulness of Fornication; yet was it nothing so clear in this
particular, as in many other things that concerned common equity, and
commutatiue Justice. Besides, common opinion, and the Custom of the times, and
consent (though corrupt consent) of most nations, in making out a light matter
of it; might easily carry him with the stream, and make him adventure to do
as most did, without any scruple, or so much as suspicion of such foul
wickedness, in a course so universally allowed and practiced. These respects
make his wilfulness less, his ignorance more pardonable, and his sin more
excusable. And I make no question, the premises considered, but that Abraham's
sin in denying Sarah to be his wife, (notwithstanding Verse. 12.
the equiuocating trick he had to help it) was by many degrees greater, then
was Abimelechs in taking her: as being done more against knowledge, and
therefore more wilfully. Abim^lechs sin in taking her, though with some
degrees of wilfulness, being yet a sin rather of Ignorance: whereas Abraham's
sin in denying her, was a sin of Infirmity at the least, if not much rather
a sin of Presumption.

. 16. yet the later did.
Now although this former Error (Ignorantia juris,) could not wholly excuse
Abimelech from sin in what he had done, but in part only; for he sinned
therein, by giving way to vnchast^ desires and purposes, against the seventh
Commandment: yet that other Error of his ( Ignorantia facti, in mistaking a
married woman for a single) does wholly excuse his fact from the sins of
injustice, in coveting and taking another man's wife, against the eighth the
tenth Commandments. He had not the least injurious intent against Abraham, in
that kind and degree: and therefore, though he took his wife from him indeed,
yet not knowing any such matter by her, especially having withal made ordinary
and requisite enquiry thereafter, it must be granted he did it unwittingly; and
therefore vnwilfully; and therefore also vnsinfully, as to that species of
sin. St. Augustine says truly, Peccatum it a est voluntarium, vt si non sit
voluntarium, non est peccatum: without some consent of the will, no complete
actual sin is committed. Such ignorance therefore, as preuenteth a tote, and
cutteth off all consent of the will, must needs also excuse, and that a tote,
the Actions that proceed therefrom from being sins. It is clear from the
words of my Text, that Abimelechs heart was sincere in this action of taking
Sarah, from any injury intended to Abraham therein; although de facto he took
his wife from him: because he did it ignorantly.

By what has been spoken we may see in part,. 17. The first Inference;
concerning the Salvation of our forefathers.
what kind of Ignorance it is, that will excuse us fom sin, either in whole,
or in part; and what will not. Let us now raise some profitable Inferences from
this observation. First; our Romish Catholics often twitt us with our
fore-elders: [ What, say they, were they not all down right Papists? believed,
as we believe? worshipped, as we worship? You will not say, they all lived
and dyed in Idolatry, and so are damned. And if they were saved in their faith,
why may not the same faith save us? and why will not you also be of that
religion that brought them to Heaven?] A motive more plausible, then strong:
the Vanity whereof our present Observation duly considered and rightly applied
fully discovers. We have much reason to conceive good hope of the salvation
of many of our Forefathers: who led away with the common superstitions of those
blind times, might yet by those general truths, which by the mercy of God
were preserved amid the foulest ouerspreadings of Popery, agreeable to the
word of God, (though clogged with an addition of many superstitions and
Antichristian inventions withal.) be brought to true Faith in the Son of
God; unfeigned Repentance from dead works, and a sincere desire and endeavor
of new and holy Obedience. This was the Religion, that brought them to heaven;
even Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience: this is the true and the Old and
Catholic Religion, and this is our Religion, in which we (hope to find
salvation; and if ever any of you that miscall your selves Catholics come to
heaven, it is this Religion must carry you thither. If together with this true
Religion, of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, they embraced also your
additions, as their blind guides then led them; prayed to our Lady. kneeled
to an Image, crept to a Cross, flocked to a Mass, as you now do: these were
their spots and their blemishes, these were their 1. Cor. 3.11.
hay and their stubble, these were their Errors and their Ignorances; and I
doubt not but as St. Paul for his blasphemies and persecutions, so they
obtained mercy for these sins* because they did them ignorantly in
misbeleife. And upon the same ground, we have cause also to hope charitably of
many thousand poor souls in Italy, Spain, and other parts of the Christian
world at this day: that by the same blessed means they may obtain mercy and
salvation in the end, although in the mean time through ignorance they defile
themselves with much foul Idolatry, and many gross Superstitions.

. 18. a Doubt removed.
But the Ignorance that excuses from Sin, is Ignorantia facti, according to
that has been already declared: whereas theirs was Ignorantia juris, which
excuses not. And besides, as they lived in the practice of that worship which
we call Idolatry, so they dyed in the same without Repentance: and so their
case is not the same with Saint Paul's, who saw those his sins, and sorrowed
for them, and forsook them: but how can Idolaters, living and dying so without
repentance, be saved? It is answered, that ignorance in point of fact, so
conditioned as has been showed, does so excuse a tot^; that an Action
proceeding thence, though it have a material in conformity unto the Law of
God, is yet not formally a sin. But I do not so excuse the Idolatry of our
forefathers, as if it were not in it self a Sin, and that (without
repentance) damnable. But yet their Ignorance being such as it was; nourished
by Education, Custom, Tradition, the Tyranny of their leaders, the Fashion of
the times, not without some show also of Piety and Devotion; and themselves
withal, having such slender means of better knowledge: though it cannot
wholly excuse them from sin without repentance damnable, yet it much
lesseneth and qualifieth the sinfulness of their Idolatry; arguing that their
continuance therein was more from other preiudices, then from a wilful
contempt of Gods holy word and will. And as for their Repentance; it is as
certain, that as many of them as are saved, did repent of their Idolatries, as
it is certain no Idolater, nor other sinner can be saved without Repentance.
But then, there is a double difference to be observed, between Repentance for
Ignorances, and for known Sins. The one is, that known sins must be
confessed, and repented of, and pardon asked for them in particular, every one
singly by it self, (I mean for the kinds, though not ever for the
indiuiduals,) every kind by it self; at least where God allows time and
leisure to the Penitent, to call himself to a punctual examination of his
life past, and does not by sudden death or by some disease that takes away the
use of reason deprive him of opportunity to do that: Whereas for Ignorances,
it is enough to wrap them up altogether in a general and implicit confession,
and to crave pardon for them by the lump, as David does in the 19. Psalm,
Psalm. 19.12.
[ Who can understand all his Errors? Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret
sins.] The other difference is, that known sins are not truly repented
of, but where they are Prou. 28.13.
forsaken; and it is but an hypocritical semblance of Penance without the
truth of the thing, where is no care, either endeavor of reformation. But
ignorances may be faithfully repented of, and yet still continued in. The
reason; because they may be repented of in the general and in the lump,
without special knowledge that they are sins, but without such special
knowledge they cannot be reformed. Some of our forefathers then, might not
only live in Popish Idolatry, but even dye in an Idolatrous act, breathing out
their last with their lips at a Crucifixe, and an Aue. Mary in their thoughts:
and yet have truly repented, (though but in the general, and in the croude of
their unknown sins,) even of those very sins; and have at the same instant
true Faith in Jesus Christ, and other Graces accompanying salvation.

. 19. Another Doubt removed.
But why then may not I, will some Popeling say, continue as I am, and yet come
to heaven, as well as they continued what they were, and yet went to heaven? If
I be an Idolater, it is out of my Error and Ignorance: and if that general
prayer unto God at the last, to forgive me all my Ignorances, will serve the
turn; I may run the same course I do without danger or fear: God will be
merciful to me for what I do Ignorantly.] Not to preclude all possibility of
mercy from thee, or from any sinner. Consider yet, there is a great difference
between their state and thine, between thine ignorance and theirs. They had
but a very small enioyance of the light of Gods word, Math. 5.15.
hid from them under two bushels for surenesse: under the bushel of a
tyrannous Clergy, that if any man should be able to understand the books, he
might not have them; and under the bushel of an unknown Tongue, that if any
man should chance to get the books, he might not understand them. Whereas to
thee, the light is holden forth, and set on a candlestick; the books open;
the language plain, legible, and familiar. They had eyes, but saw not: because
the light was kept from them, and the land was dark about them, as the Exodus
10.21.23.
darkness of Egypt. But thou live as in a Goshen, where the light
encompasseth thee in on all sides; where there are Ioh. 5.35.
burning and shining lamps in every corner of the land. Yet is thy blindness
greater, (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) and more inexcusable:
because thou Math. 13.15.
shuttest thine eyes against the light, least thou should see and be
converted, and God should heal thee. Breefly, they wanted the light, thou
shunnest it: they lived in darkness; thou delightest in it: their ignorance
was simple; thine affected and wilful. And therefore although we doubt not,
but that the times of their ignorance God Act. 17.30.
winked at: yet thou have no warrant to presume, that God will also in these
times wink at thee, who Luke 7.30.
rejectest the counsel of God against thine own soul, and for want of 2.
These. 2.10.11.
love and affection to the truth art justly given over to strong delusions, to
believe fables, and to put thy confidence in things that are lies. So much for
that matter.

Secondly, here is a needful admonition for us all, not to flatter our selves
for our ignorance of those things,. 20. The second Inference; Not to flatter
our selves in our ignorance.
that concern us in our general or particular Callings; as if for that
ignorance our reckoning should be easier at the day gf Judgment. Ignorance
indeed excuses sometimes, sometimes lesseneth a fault: but yet not all
ignorance all faults; not wilful and affected ignorance any fault. Nay it is
so far from doing that, that on the contrary it makes the offense Ignorantia
direct and per so voluntaria, auget voluntar^u^ and per consequen^ peccatum.
Aquin. 1.2. qu. 76, 4.
much more grievous, and the offender much more inexcusable. A heedlesse
servant, that Luke 12.48.
neither knows, nor does his Masters will, deserves some stripes. A
stubborn servant, that knows it, and yet tra^gresseth it, deserves more
stripes. But worse then them both is that ungracious servant, who fearing his
Master will appoint him something he had rather let alone, keeps himself
out of the way before hand, and ^ieheth in a co^ner out of sight, of purpose
that he may not know his Masters will; that so he may after stand upon it when
he is chidden, and say He knew it not: such an untoward servant deserves yet
more stripes. Would the spirit of God, think you, in the Scripture so often
call upon us to Prou. 2.3.4.7; 23.23.
get the knowledge of Gods will, and to increase therein; or would he commence
his Hos. 4.1.
suite against a land, and enter his action against the people thereof, for
want of such knowledge: if ignorance were better or safer? Oh it is a fearful
thing for a man to See Prou. 1.24 etc.
shun instruction, and to say he desires net the knowledge of God. Psalm.
36.3.
Noluerunt i^telligere, vt been agerent. When men are once come to that pass,
that they will not understand, nor seek after God; when they Ioh. 3.20.
hate the light, because they take pleasure in the Ephesians. 5 11.
works of darkness; when they are Impia men's odit et am ipsum intellectum: and
homo aliq^a^. so nimium mente peruersa timet intelligere, ne cogetur quod
intellexerit facere. Augustine. de verb. Apost. sermon 13.
afraid to know too much, least their hearts should condemn them for not
doing thereafter; when like the Psalm. 58.4.5.
deaf adder they stop their ears against the voice of the charmer, for
fear they should be charmed by the power of that voice out of their crooked
and serp^ntine courses; when they are so Ex intention voluntatis ad peccantu^
prouenit, quod aliquis vult subire agno vantia d^mnum, propter libertatem
peccandi. Aquin. 1.2.76.4.
resolved to take freedom to sin, that they choose to be still ignorant,
rather then hazard the forgoing of any part of that freedom: what do they,
but even run on blindfold into Hell? and through inner, poast along unto
(...), Math. 25.30.
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? Bernard. de
12. grad. numil.
Frustra sibi de ignorantia blandiuntur, says Saint Bernard, Qui vt liberius
peccent, libenter ignorant. Saint Paul so speaks of such men, as if their
case were desperate; 2. Cor. 14.38.
[ If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant] as who say; if he will needs
be wilful, at his peril be it. But as many as desire to walk in the fear of
God with upright and sincere hearts, let them thirst after the knowledge of God
and his will, as the Psalm. ^1.2.
Heart after the rivers of waters; let them Prou. 2.3.4.
cry after knowledge and lift up their voices for understanding; let them seek
it as silver, and dig for it as for hid treasures; let their feet tread often
in Gods courts, and even wear the thresholds of his house; let them delight in
his holy ordinances, and rejoice in the light of his word, depending upon the
ministry thereof with unsatisfied ears, and unwearied attention, and feeding
thereon with vncloyed appetites: that so they may see, and hear, and learn,
and understand, and believe, and obey, and increase in wisdom and in grace
and in favor with God and all good men.

But then in the third place consider,. 21. Inference 3. against sins done with
knowledge.
that if all ignorance will not excuse an offender, (though some do:) how
can thou hope to find any color of excuse or extenuation, that sinnest
wilfully with knowledge, and against the light of thine own Conscience? The
least sin thus committed is in some degree a Presumptuous sin, and carries
with it a contempt of God: and in that regard is Quo quisque melius sapit, eo
deterius delinquit. Gregor. in pastorali.
greater, then any sin of Ignorance. Iam 4.17.
To him that knows to do good; and does it not, to him it is a sin, says
St. James: Sin beyond all plea of excuse. Saint Paul, though he were a 1.
Tim. 1.13.
Persecutor of the Truth, a Blasphemer of the Lord, and injurious to the
Brethren; yet he obtained Mercy, because he did all that ignorantly. His bare
ignorance was not enough to justify him: but he stood need of Gods mercy, or
else he had perished in those sins for all his ignorance. But yet who can
tell, whether ever he should have found that mercy, if he had don the same
things and not in ignorance? Ignorance then, though it do not deserve pardon,
yet it often finds it: because it is not joined with open contempt of him,
that is able to pardon. But he that sins against knowledge, does Ponere
obicem, (if you will allow the phrase, and it may be allowed in this sense:)
he does not only provoke the Justice of God by his sin (as every other
sinner does,) but he does also dambe up the Mercy of God by his contempt, and
does his part to shut himself out for ever from all possibility of pardon;
unless the boundless ouer-flowing mercy of God come in upon him with a strong
tide, and with an unresisted current break it self a passage through. Do
this then, my beloved Brethren. Labor to get knowledge, labor to increase
your knowledge, labor to abound in knowledge: but beware you rest not in your
knowledge. Rather 2. Pet. 1, 5.7.
give all diligence, to add to your knowledge Temperance, and Patience, and
Godliness, and brotherly kindness, and Charity, and other good graces.
Without these, your knowledge is unprofitable; nay, damnable. Eccles. 1.18.
Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem, is true in this sense also. He that
increases knowledge, unless his care of Obedience rise in some good
proportion with it, does but lay more rods in steep for his own back, and
increase the number of his stripes, and add to the weight and measure of his
own most just condemnation. Know this, that although Integrity of heart may
stand with some ignorances, as Abimelech here pleads it, and God allows it:
yet that man's heart is deuoyd of all singleness and sincerity, who allows
himself in any course he knows to be sinful, or takes this liberty to
himself, to continue and persist in any known ungodliness. And thus much for
our second Observation.

. 22. Obseru. III. Moral Integrity may be in the heart of an unbeliever.
I add but a Third: and that taken from the very thing which Abimelech here
pleads, viz. the integrity of his heart; considered together with his
present personal state and condition. I dare not say, he was a Castaway: for
what knows any man, how God might after this time, and even from these
beginnings, deal with him in the riches of his mercy? But at the time, when
the things storyed in this chapter were done, Abimelech doubtless was an
vnbelieuer, a stranger to the covenant of God made with Abraham, and so in the
state of a carnal and mere natural man, And yet both he pleads, and God
approves, the innocence and integrity of his heart in this business, [ Yea I
know that thou did this in the integrity of thine heart.] Note hence, That
in an vnbelieuer and Natural man, and therefore also in a wicked person and a
Castaway, (for as to the present state, the Unregenerate and the Reprobate,
are equally capable and equally incapable of good things;) there may be truth
and singleness, and integrity of heart in some particular Actions.

. 23. With the Explication,
We use to te^ch, and that truly, according to the plain evidence of
Scripture, and the judgment of the ancient Fathers, against the contrary tenet
of the later Church of Rome; that all the works of vnbeleiuers and natural
men, are not only stained with sin, (for so are the best works of the
Faithful too;) bu^ also are really and truly ^innes: both in their own
Nature, because they spring from a corrupt fountain, for Ioh 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and it is impossible that a Math.
7.18.
corrupt tree should bring forth good fruit; and also in Gods estimation,
because he beholds them as out of Christ Math. 3.17.
in and through whom alone he is well pleased. St. Augustines judgment
concerning such men's works is well known, who pronounces of the best of
them, that they are but splendida peccata, glorious sins: and the best of
them are indeed no better. We may not say therefore, that there was in
Abimelechs heart, as nor in the heart any of man, a Legal integrity, as if his
person, or any of his actions were innocent, and free from sin, in that
perfection which the Law requires. Neither yet can we say, there was in his
heart, as nor in the heart of any vnbelieuer, an Evangelical integrity; as if
his person were accepted, and for the persons sake all or any of his actions
approved with God, accepting them as perfect, through the supply of the
abundant perfections of Christ then to come. That first and Legal integrity,
supposes the righteousness of works, which no man has; this latter and
Evangelical integrity, the righteousness of Faith, which no vnbelieuer has: no
man's heart being, either Legally perfect, that is in Adam; or Euangelically
perfect, that is out of Christ. But there is a third kind of integrity of
heart, inferior to both these, which God here acknowledges in Abimelech; and
of which only we affirm, that it may be found in an vnbeleiuer, and a
Reprobate: and that is, a Natural or Moral integrity; when the heart of a
mere natural man is careful to follow the direction and guidance of right
reason, according to that light (of Nature, or Revelation,) which is in him,
without hollownes, halting, and hypocrisy. Rectus vsus Naturalium we might
well call it: the term were fit enough to express it; had not the Papists and
some other Sectaries, by sowring it with the leaven of their Pelagianisme,
rendered it suspicious. The Philosophers and learned among the Heathen, by that
which they call a good Conscience, understand no other thing, then this very
Integrity whereof we now speak. Not that an Vnbeleiuer can have a good
Conscience, taken in strict propriety of Truth, and in a spiritual sense. For
the whole man being corrupted through the fall of Adam, the Consc^ence also is
wrapped in the common pollution: so that Tit. 1.15.
to them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their mind
and Conscience is defiled, as speaks St. Paul, Tit. 1. and being so defiled,
can never be made good, till Heb. 10.22.
their hearts be sprinkled from that pollution, Heb. 9.14.
by the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself
without spot to God, and till the Conscience be purged by the same blood from
dead works to serve the living God, as speaks the same Apostle, Heb. 9. and
10.

. 24. Proof,
But yet a Good Conscience in that sense as they meant it, a Conscience morally
good, many of them had; who never had Faith in CHRIST, nor so much as the least
inckling of the Doctrine of Salvation. By which Rom 2.14.
Not having the Law, they were a law unto themselves; doing by nature many of
the things contained in the Law; and choosing rather to undergo the greatest
miseries, as shame, torment, exile, yea death it self, or any thing that could
befall them, then wilfully to transgress those rules, and notions, and
dictates of piety and equity, which the God of nature had imprinted in their
consciences. Could Heathen men and unbelievers have taken so much comfort in
the testimony of an excusing Conscience, as it appears many of them did; if
such a Conscience were not in the kind, (that is Morally) Good? Or how else
could Saint Paul have made that protestation he did in the Council Act. 23.1.
[ Men and Brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this
day.] At least, if he meant to include, as some of the learned conceive he did,
the whole time of his life, as well before his Conversion, as after? Balaam was
but a c^rsed Hypocrite, and therefore it was but a copy of his countenance, and
no better, (for his heart even then hankered after 2. Pet. 2.15.
the wages of unrighteousness,) when he looked asquint upon Balaks liberal
offer, with this answer, Numb. 22.1^
If Balak would give me his house full of Gold and silver, I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. But I assure my self, many
thousands of unbelievers in the world, free from his hypocrisy would not for
ten times as much as he there spoke of, have gone beyond the Rules of the Law
of Nature written in their hearts, to have done either less or more. Abimelech
seems to be so affected; at least, in this particular action and passage with
Abraham: wherein God thus approves his integrity, [ Yea I know that thou
did this in the integrity of thy heart.

The Reason of which moral integrity in men unregenerate and merely Natural,
is that Imperium Rationis,. 25. and Reason thereof.
that power of natural conscience and Reason, which it has and exercises
over the whole man: doing the office of a Lawgiver, and having the strength of
a law; Romans 2.14.
[ They are a law unto themselves,] says the Apostle Romans 2. As a Law, it
prescribes, what is to be done, as a Law, it commands, that what is
prescribed be done: as a Law, it proposes rewards and punishments, accordingly
as what it prescribes and commands is done or not done. Abimeleches own
Reason, by the light of Nature informed him, that to take another man's wife
from him was injurious, and enioyneth him therefore, as he will avoid the
horrors and vpbraidings of a condemning heart, by no means to do it. Resolved
accordingly to do, and to obey the Law of Reason written in his heart, before
he durst take Sarah into his house, he makes inquiry first, whether she were a
single-woman or a wife: and therefore, although (upon misinformation) he took
another man's wife, unwitting that she was so, he pleads here, and that
justly, the integrity of his heart. And from obedience to the same Law
especially, seeing those many rare examples of Justice, Temperance* Gratitude,
Beneficence, and other moral virtues, which we read of in Heathen men, not
without admiration: which were so many strong evidences also of this moral
integrity of their hearts.

A point that would bear much enlargement, if we intended to amplify it by
Instances; and did not rather desire to draw it briefly into use, by
Inferences. A just condemnation, it may be first,. 26. Inferences thence: The
first.
to many of us, who call our selves Christians, and Belieuers, and have many
blessed means of direction and instruction for the due ordering of our hearts
and lives, which those Heathens wanted: yet come so many paces, nay leagues,
short of them, both in the detestation of vicious and gross enormities, and in
the conscionable practice of many offices of virtue. Among them what
strictness of Justice? which we either slack, or pervert. What zeal of the
Common good? which we put of each man to other, as an vnconcerning thing. What
remission of private injuries? which we pursue with implacable revenge. What
contempt of honors, and riches? Which we so pant after, so adore. What
temperance and frugality in their provisions? Wherein no excess satisfies us.
What free beneficence to the poor, and to pious uses? whereto we contribute
penuriously and with grudging. What conscience of oaths and promises? which we
so slight. What reverence of their Priests? whom we count as the scumme of the
people. What loathing of swinish drunkenness? wherein some of us glory. What
de^estation of usury, as a monster in nature? whereof some of ours make a
trade. Particularities are infinite: but what should I say more! Certainly,
unless our righteousnesses exceed theirs, we shall never come to heaven: but
how shall we escape the nether most hell, if our vnrighteousnessee exceed
theirs. Romans 2.27.
Shall not Uncircumcision which is by nature, if it keep the law, judge thee,
who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? said St. Paul to
the Jew: make application to thy self, thou that art Christian.

Secondly;. 27. The second.
if even in unbelievers and Hypocrites and Castawayes there may be, in
particular Actions, integrity and singleness of heart: then it can be but an
uncertain Rule for us to judge of the true state of our own or other men's
hearts, by what they are in some few particular Actions. Men are indeed that,
not which they show themselves in some passages, but what they are in the more
general and constant tenor of their lives. If we should compare Abimelech and
David together, by their different behavior in the same kind of temptation, in
two particulars of the sacred History, and look no farther: We could not but
give sentence upon them quite contrary to right and truth. We should see
Abimelech on the one side, though alured with Sarahs beauty; yet free from the
leaft injurious thought to her husband, or adulterous intent in himself. We
should behold 2. Sam. 11.2. etc.
David on the other side, enflamed with lust after Bathsheba, whom he knew to
be another man's wife: plotting first, how to compass his filthy desires with
the wife, and then after how to conceal it from the husband, by many wicked
and politic fetches; and, when none of those would take, at last to have him
murdered, being one of his principal 2. Sam. 23.3^
worthies, in a most base and unworthy fashion, with the loss of the lives of
a number of innocent persons more, besides the betraying of Gods cause, the
disheartening of his people, and the encouragement of his and their Enemies.
When we should see, and consider all this on both sides, and lay the one
against the other: what could we think but that Abimelech were the Saint, and
David the Infidel; Abimelech the man after Gods own heart, and David a
stranger from the Covenant of God. Yet was David all this while, within that
Covenant: and, for any thing we know, or is likely, Abimelech not. Particular
actions then, are not good evidences either way: as wherein both an vnbelieuer,
awed sometimes by the law of natural Conscience, may manifest much simplicity
and integrity of heart; and the true Child of God, swayed sometimes with Romans
7.23.
the law of sinful concupiscence, may bewray much foul Hypocrisy, and
Infidelity. But look into the more constant course of both their lives; and
then may you find the Hypocrite and the vnbelieuer wholly distingushed from the
Godly, by the want of those right marks of sincerity that are in the Godly: no
zeal of Gods glory; no sense of original corruption; no bemoaning of his
privy hypocrisy and secret Atheism; no suspicion of the deceiptfulnesse of
his own heart; no tenderness of Conscience in smaller duties; no faithful
dependaence upon the providence or promises of God for outward things; no
selfe-denyall, or poverty of spirit; no thirst after the salvation of his
brethren, and the like: none of these, I say, to be found in any constant
manner in the general course of his life; although there may be some sudden
light flashes of some of them now and then in some particular Actions. Measure
no man's heart then, especially not thine own, by those rarer discoueries of
moral integrity in particular Actions: but by the powerful manifestations of
habitual grace, in the more constant tenor of life and practice.

We may learn hence thirdly,. 28. The third.
not to flatter our selves too much upon every integrity of heart; or to think
our selves discharged from sin in the sight of God, upon every acquitall of
our Consciences: when as all this may befall an Hipocrite, an Vnbelieuer, a
Reprobate. When men accuse us of hypocrisy or unfaithfulness, or Psalm. 35.11.
lay to our charge things we never did: it is, I confess, a very comfortable
and a blessed thing, if we can find protection against their accusations in our
own hearts, and be able to plead the integrity thereof in bar against
their calumniations. Our integrity, (though it be but Moral, and though but
only in those actions wherein they charge us wrongfully,) and the testimony of
our own consciences, may be of very serviceable use to us thus far, to make
us regardl^sse of the accusations of unjust men: that one testimony within
shall relieve us mo^^, then a thousand false witnesses without can iniure us.
1. Cor. 4.3.
With me it is a very small thing, says St. Paul that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment: as if he should have said, I know my self better
then you do; and therefore so long as I know nothing by my self of those
things, wherein you censure me, I little reckon what either you, or any others
shall think or say by me. We may by his example make use of this; the inward
testimony of our hearts being sufficient to justi^ie us against the accusations
of men: but we may not rest upon this; as if the acquitall of our hearts were
sufficient to justify us in the sight of God. St. Paul knew it, who durst not
rest thereupon; but therefore adds in the very next following words, 1. Cor.
4.3.4.
Yea, I judge not mi^e own self; for I know nothing by my self, yet am not
hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord. Our hearts are close,
false, and nothing so Ier. 17 9.10.
deceitful as they: and who can know them perfectly, but he that made them,
and can search into them? Other men can know very little of them: our selves
some thing more: but God alone all. If therefore when other men condemn us, we
find our selves agrieued: we may remove our cause into an Higher Court; appeal
from them to our own Consciences, and be relieved there. But that is not the
Highest Court of all; there lies yet an appeal farther and higher then it,
even to the Iudgement-seat, or rather to the Mercy-seat of God: who both can
find just matter in us, to condemn us, even in those things, wherein our own
hearts have acquitted us; and yet can withal find a gracious means to
justify us, even from those things, wherein our own hearts condemn us.
Whether therefore our hearts condemn us, or condemn us not. 1. Ioh. 3.20.
God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. To conclude all this
point, and there withal the first general part of my Text; Let no Excusations
of our own Consciences on the one side or confidence of any integrity in our
selves, make us presume we shall be able to stand just in the sight of God, if
he should enter into judgment with us: but let us rather make suite unto him,
that since we cannot Psalm. 19.12.
understand all our own errors, he would be pleased to cleanse us from our
secret sins. And on the other side, let no accusations of our own
Consciences, or guiltines of our manifold frailties and secret hypocrisies,
make us despair of obtaining his favor and righteousness: if denying our
selves, and renouncing all integrity in our selves as of our selves we cast
our selves wholly at the footestoole of his mercy and seek his favor in the
face of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ the righteous.

Of the former branch of Gods reply to Abimelech, in those former words of the
Text,. 29. The second Part of the Text opened.
[ Yea I know that thou did this in the integri^ie of thy heart) hitherto.
I now proceed to the latter branch thereof, in those remaining words [ For I
also with held thee from sinning against me; therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her.] (...). The word signifies properly to hold in, or to keep back;
Vatablus in Schol. hic.
Retinui or ^u^ius hic.
Cohibui, or as the Latin has it Vulgat. h^c.
Custodiuite: implying Abimilechs forwardnes to that sin; certainly he had
bin gone, if God had not kept him in, and held him back. The Greek renders
it, Septuag. hic.
(...), I spared thee: and so the Latin Parcere, is sometimes used for
impedire or prohibere, to hinder, or not to suffer; as in that of Virgil Eclog.
3.
Virgil, Parcite ^ves nimit in procedere. Or taking Parcere in the most usual
signification, for sparing, it may very well ^tand with the purpose of the
place: for indeed God spares us no less, indeed he spares us much more, when
he makes us forbear to sin, then when having sinned he forbeareth to
punish; and as much cause have we to acknowledge his mercy, and to rejoice in
it, when he holds our hands that we sin not, as when he holds his own
hands that he strike not. For I also withheld thee from sinning against me.
How? Did not Abimelech sin in taking Sarah, or was not that as Psalm. 51.4.
every other sin is, a sin against God? Certainly, if Abimilech had not
sinned in so doing, and that against God; God would not have so plagued him as
he did, for that deed. The meaning then is: not, that God withhel^ ^im wholly
from sinning at all therein; but that God withheld him from sinning against him
in that soul kind and in that high degree, as to defile himself by actual
filthiness with Sarah, which but for Gods restraint he had done: Therefore
suffered I thee not] Segtuag. hic.
(...), Vulg. hic.
Non dimis^ts, that is, I did not let thee go: I did not leave thee to thy
self: or most agreeably to the letter of the Text in the (...).
Hebrew, Non dedi, or non tradidi; I did not deliver, or give. That may be, non
dedi potestatem, I did not give thee H. A. hic.
leave or power, and so giving, is sometimes used for suffering, as Psalm. 16.
Psalm. 16.10.
Non dabis sanctum tuum. Thou will not suffer, etc. and Genesis 31.7; Exodus 3.19.
and 12.23; Nu^. 22.13. Iud. 1.^4. and 15.1. Ester. 9.14.
elsewhere. Or non dedi te, tibi, I gave thee not to thy self. A man cannot be
put more desperately into the hands of any enemy, then to be left in manu
consilij sui, delivered into his own hands, and given over to the lust of his
own heart. Or as it is here translated, I suffered thee not. We should not
draw in God as a party, when we commit any sin, as if he joined with us in
it, or lent us his helping hand for it: we do it so alone, without his help,
that we never do it, but when he lets us alone, and leaves us destitute of
his help. For the kind, and manner, and measure, and circumstances, and
events, and other the appurtenances of sin; God orders them by his Almighty
power and providence so, as to become serviceable to his most wise, most just,
most holy purposes: but as for the very formality it self of the sin, God is
(to make the most of it,) but a sufferer; Therefore suffered I thee not, To
touch her.] Signifying that God had so far restrained Abimilech from the
accomplishment of his wicked and unclean purposes, that Sarah was preserved
free by his good providence, not only from actual adultery, but from all
unchaste and wanton dalliance also with Abimelech.

It was Gods great mercy to all the three parties,. 30. Obser. IIII. Gods
Restraint of man's sin.
that he did not suffer this evil to be done: for by this means he graciously
preserved. Abimelech from the sin, Abraham from the wrong, and Sarah from
both. And it is to be acknowledged the great mercy of God, when at any time he
does, (and he does ever and anon more or less,) by his gracious and powerful
restraint withhold any man, from running into those extremities of sin and
mischief, whereinto his own corruption would carry him headlong, especially
when it is set a gogge by the cunning persuasions of Satan, and the manifold
temptations that are in the world through lust. The Points then that arise from
this part of my Text, are these. 1. Men do not always commit those evils,
their own desires, or outward temptations prompt them unto. 2. That they do
it not, it is from Gods restraint. 3. That God restrains them, it is of his
own gracious goodness and mercy. The common subject matter of the whole three
points, being one, viz. Gods restraint of man's sin; we will therefore wrap
them up all three together, and so handle them, in this one entire Observation,
as the total of all three. God in his mercy oftentimes, restrains men from
committing those evils, which, if that restraint were not, they would otherwise
have committed.

This Restraint, whether we consider the measure or the means which God uses
therein;. 31. With the measure and means thereof.
is of great variety. For the measure; God sometimes restrains men a Toto,
from the whole sin, whereunto they are tempted; as he withheld Joseph from
consenting to the persuasions of his mistres: sometimes only a Tanto, and that
more or less, as in his infinite wisdom he sees expedient; suffering them
perhaps but only to desire the evil, perhaps to resolve upon it, perhaps to
prepare for it, perhaps to begin to act it, perhaps to proceed far in it, and
yet keeping them back from falling into the extremity of the sin, or
accomplishing their whole desire in the full and final comsummation thereof;
as here he dealt with Abimelech, Abimelech, sinned against the eighth
commandment, in taking Sarah injuriously from Abraham, say he had been but
her brother; and he sinned against the seventh commandment in a foul degree,
in harboring such wanton and unchaste thoughts concerning Sarah, and making
such way as he did, (by ta^ing her into his house,) for the satisfying of his
lust therein: but yet God withheld from from plunging himself into the
extremity of those sins, not suffering him to fall into the act of
Uncleanness. And as for the means, whereby God withholdeth men from sinning;
they are also of wonderful variety. Sometimes he takes the^ off, by diverting
the course of the corruption and turning the affections another way. Sometimes
he awaketh natural Conscience; which is a very tender and tickle thing, when
it is once stirred, and will boggle now and then at a very small matter in
comparison, over it will do at some other times. Sometimes he affrighteth them
with apprensions of outward Evils; as shame, infamy, charge, envy, loss of a
friend, danger of humane Laws, and sundry other such like discouragements.
Sometimes he cools their resolutions, by presenting unto their thoughts the
terrors of the Law, the strictnes of the last Account, and the endless
insufferable torments of Hellfire. Sometimes, when all things are ripe for
execution, he denies them opportunity, or casts in some unexpected
impediment in the way, that quasheth all. Sometimes he Quosdam praescions Deus
multa peccare posse, flagellat eos infirmitate corporis, ne peccent: vt eis
vtilius sit fraugi languo ribus ad salutem, quam remanere incollumes ad
damntionem. Hug. 2. de Animae.
disableth them, and weakeneth the arm of flesh wherein they trusted, so as
they want power to their will; as here he dealt with Abimelech. And sundry
other ways he has, more then we are able to search into, whereby he lays a
restraint upon men, and keeps them back from many sins and mischiefs, at
least from the extremity of many sins and mischiefs, whereunto otherwise
Nature and Temptation would ca^ry them with a strong current. Not to speak yet
of that sweet, and of all other the most blessed and powerful restraint, which
is wrought in us by the Spirit of sanctification, renewing the soul, and
subduing the corruption that is in the Flesh unto the Obedience of the Spirit:
at which I shall have fitter occasion to touch anon.

In the mean time, that there is something or other, that restrains men from
doing some evils,. 32. That there is such a restraint proved:
unto which they have not only a natural p^onenesse, but perhaps withal an
actual desire and purpose; might be shown by a world of instances: but
because every man's daily experience can abundantly furnish him with some, we
will therefore content our selves with the fewer. Se^ Genesis 31.23. etc.
Laban meant no good to Jacob, when taking his Brethren with him, he pursued
after him seven days journey in an hostile manner; and he had power to his
will, to have done Jacob a mischief, Jacob being but imbellis turba, no more
but himself, his wines and his little ones, with his flocks and herds, and a
few Servants to attend them, unable to defend themselves, much more unmeet to
resist a prepared enemy: yet for all his power, and purpose, and preparation,
Laban when he had overtaken Jacob, durst have nothing at a^^ to do with him,
and he had but very little to say to him neither: The worst was but this, [
Thus and thus have you dealt with me. And Genesis 31.29.
It is in the power of mine hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father
spoke unto me yesternight, saying; Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob
either good or bad:] See the story in Genesis 31. The same Jacob had a Brother, as
unkind as that Uncle, nay much more despitefully bent against him then he; for
he had vowed his destruction, ( Genesis 27.41.
The days of mourning for my father are at hand, and then will I slay my
brother Jacob:) and although the Ibid. ver. 44.45.
Mother well hoped, that some few days time and absence would appease the fury
of Esau, and all should be forgotten; yet Genesis 31.38.
twenty years after the old grudge remained, and upon Jacobs approach Genesis
32.6.
Esau goes forth to meet him with 400. men, armed (as it should seem) for
his destruction: which cast Ibid. us. 7.8.
Jacob into a terrible fear, and much destressed he was good man, and glad to
use the best wit he had, by dividing his Companies, to provide for the safety
at least of some part of his charge. And yet behold at the encounter, no use at
all of the 400. men, unless to be spectatours and witnesses of the joyful
Genesis 33.4. etc.
embraces, and kind loving complements that passed between the two brothers, in
the liberal offers and modest refusals each of other courtesies; in the 32.
and 33. of Genesis A good Probatum of that Observation of Solomon, Prou. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. Balaam the Coniurer, when King Balac had cast the hook before him,
baited with ample Numb. 22.7.17
rewards in hand, and great promotions in reuersion, if he would come over to
him and curse Israel; had both Covetousness and ambition enough in him to make
him bite: so that he was not only 2. Pet. 2.15.
willing, but even desirous, to satisfy the King; for he loved the wages of
vnrightousnesse with his heart, and therefore made Numb. 23.13, 14.27, 28.
trial (till he saw it was all in vain,) if by any means he could wring, a
permission from God to do it. But when his Numb. 24.3 etc.
eyes, were opened to behold Israel, and his mouth open that he must now
pronounce something upon Israel; though his eyes were full of Envy, and his
heart of Cursing, yet God put a parable of Bles^ing into his mouth, and he was
not able to utter a syllable of any thing other then good concerning Israel,
in 22.24. of Numbers.

In all which and sundry other instances,. 33. and that it is from God.
wherein when there was intended before hand so much evil to be done, and
there was withal in the parties such a forward desire, and such solemn
preparation to have it done; and yet when all came to all, so little or nothing
was done, of what was intended, but rather the contrary: it cannot first be
imagined, that such a stop should be made, but by the powerful restraint of
some superior, and ouer-ruling hand; neither may we doubt in the second place,
that every such restraint, by what second and subordinate means soever it be
furthered, is yet the proper work of God, as proceeding from and guided by his
Almighty and irresistible providence. As for that which happened to Balaam,
that it was Gods doing, the evidence is clear; we have it from the mouth of
two or three witnesses. The Wisard himself confesses it, Numb. 22.13
The Lord will not suffer me to go with you, Number. 22. The King, that set him on
work, vpbraideth him with it; Numb. 24.11
I thought indeed to promote thee to great honor: but lo the Lord has kept
thee back from honor: Numb. 24. And Moses would have Israel take knowledge of
it; Deuteronomy. 23.5.
The Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned
the curse into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loved thee. Deuteronomy. 23. It
was God then, that turned Balaams curse into a blessing, and it was the same
God, that turned Labans reuengefull thoughts into a friendly Expostulation; and
it was the same God, that turned Es^us inueterate malice, into a kind brotherly
cong^^^^lation. He that has set Job. 38 8.11.
bounds to the sea, which, though the waves thereof rage horribly they cannot
pass, (Hitherto shall thou go, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves;) and
did command the waters of the Exodus 15.8.
Red sea to stay their course, and stand up as on heaps; and by his power could
enforce the waters of the Psalm. 114.3.
River Iordane, to run quite against the current up the Channel; he has
Prou. 21.1.
in his hands, and at his command the hearts of all the sons of men, yea
though they be the greatest Kings and Monarchs in the world, as the rivers of
waters; and can wind and turn them at his pleasure, inclining them which way
soever he will. Psalm. 76.10.
The fiercenes of man shall turn to thy praise, (says David in Psalm. 76.10.)
and the fiercenes of them shall thou retain: the latter clause of the verse is
very significant in the Original, and comes home to our purpose; as if we
should translate it, (...) Residuum irarum Cinges. Vatablus.
Thou shall gird the remainder of their wrath, or of their fiercenes. The
meaning is this. Suppose a man's heart be never so full fraught with envy,
hatred, malice, wrath, and revenge, let him be as fierce and furious as is
possible; God may indeed suffer him, and he will suffer him to exercise so much
of his corruption, and proceed so far in his fierceness, as he sees
expedient and useful for the forwarding of other his secret and just and holy
appointments, and so order the sinful fiercenes of man by his wonderful
providence, as to make it serviceable to his ends, and to turn it to his
glory: but look whatsoever wrath and fiercenes there is in the heart of a man,
over and above so much as will serve for those his eternal purposes, all that
surplusage, that overplus and remainder whatsoever it be he will gird; he will
so bind, and hamper, and restrain him that he shall not be able to go an inch
beyond his tedder, though he would fret his heart out. The fiercenes of man
shall turn to thy praise, so much of it as he does execute: and the remainder
of their fiercenes thou shall refrain, that they execute it not. Be he never
so great a Prince; or have he never so great a spirit; all is one; he must
come under. No difference with God in this, betwixt him that sits on the
throne, and her that grindeth at the mill: Psalm. 76.12.
He shall refrain the spirit of Prin^^ and is wonderful among the Kings of
the earth: in the last verse of that Psalm.

. 34. with the reason of both,
Now of the truth of all that has been hitherto spoken in both these branches
of the Observation, (viz. that first there is a restraint of evil; and then
secondly, that this restraint is from God;) I know not any thing can give us
better assurance, taking them both together, then to consider the generality
and strength of our Natural corruption. General it is first, in regard of the
Persons; ouerspreading whole lump of our nature: there is not a child of Adam
free from the common infection; Psalm. 14.2.
They are all corrupt, they are altogether become abominable, there is none
that does good no not one. General secondly, in regard of subject, ouerrunning
the whole man, soul and body, with all the parts and powers of either, so as
Esaias. 1.6.
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is no whole part.
Ioh. 3.6:
Whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh; and Tit. 1.15.
to them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their mind
and conscience is defiled; and Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are only evil
continually. General thirdly, in regard, of the Object: averse from all Romans
7.18
(In me that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing;) and prone to all kind of
evil, Psalm. 36.4.
( He has set himself in no good way, neither does he abhor any thing that
is evil.) Add to this generality, the strength also of our corruption; how
vigorus, and stirring, and active it is, and how it carries us headlongly with
full speed into all manner of evil, Ierem. 8.6.
As the horse rusheth into the battle, so as we have no hold of our selves,
neither power to stay our selves, till we have run as far as we can, and
without the mercy of God plunged our selves into the bottom of the
bottomless pit. Lay all this together and there can be no other sufficient
reason given, then this restraint whereof we now speak, why any one man should
at any one time refrain from any one sin being tempted thereunto, whereinto
any other man at any other time has fallen being alike tempted. Every man
would kill his brother, as Genesis 4.8.
Cain did Abel; and every man defile his sister as 2. Sam. 13.11
Amnon did Thamar; and every man oppress his inferior, as 1. King. 21 16.
Ahab did Naboth; and every man supplant his betters, as 2. Sam. 16.3.
Zibah did Mephibosheth; and every man betray his Master, as Math. 26.15.
Judas did Christ: every man being as deep in the loins of Adam, as either
Cain, or Judas, or any of the rest. Their nature was not more corrupt then
ours, neither ours less corrupt then theirs: and therefore every one of us
should have done those things, as well as any one of them, if there had not
been something without and above nature to withhold us, and keep us back
therefrom, when we were tempted, which was not in that measure afforded them,
when they were tempted. And from whom can we think that restraint to come, but
from that God, who is the Auth^r and the Lord of nature, and has the power and
command and rule of Nature; by whose grace and goodness we are whatsoever we
are: and to whose powerful assistance we owe it, if we do any good, (for it
is he that sets us on;) and to his powerful restraint, if we eschew any
evil, (for it is he that keeps us of:) Therefore I also withheld thee from
sinning against me.

And as to the third point in the Observation, it is not much less evident
then the two former; namely, that this Restraint, as it is from God, so it is
from the Mercy of God.. 35. That this Restraint is from the Mercy of God.
Hence it is that Divines usually bestow upon it the name of Grace:
distinguishing between a twofold Grace; a special renewing Grace, and a Common
restraining Grace. The special and renewing Grace is indeed so incomparably
more excellent, that in comparison thereof the other is not worthy to be called
by the name of Grace, if we would speak properly and exactly: but yet the word
[ Grace] may not unfitly be so extended, as to reach to every act of Gods
providence whereby at any time he restrains men from doing those evils which
otherwise they would do; and that in a threefold God, of Themselves, of
Others. First, in respect of God, every restraint from sin may be called
Grace; in as much as it proceeds ex mero motu, from the mere good will and
pleasure of God, without any cause, motive, or inducement in the man that is so
restrained. For take a man in the state of corrupt nature* and leave him to
himself; and think, how it is possible for him to forbear any sin,
whereunto he is tempted, There is no power in Nature, to work a Restraint: nay
there is not so much as any pronenesse in nature, to desire a restraint: much
less then is there any worth in Nature, to deserve a restraint. Issuing
therefore, not at all from the powers of Nature, but from the free pleasure of
God, as a beam of his merciful providence, this Restraint may well be called
Grace. And so it may be secondly, in respect of the Persons themselves: favor
to them, more then they have deseru^d, that by this means their sins (what
in number, what in weight) are so much lesser, then otherwise they would have
been; whereby also their account shall be so much the easier, and their stripes
so many the fewer: Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. and alibisape.
St. Chrysostom often observes it, as an effect of the mercy of God upon
them, when he cutteth off great offenders betimes with some speedy destruction:
and he does it out of this very consideration, that they are thereby prevented
from committing many sins, which if God should have lent them a longer time,
they would have committed. If his observation be sound; it may then well pass
for a double Mercy of God to a sinner, if he both respite his destruction, and
withal restrain him from sin: for by the one, he gives him so much longer
time for repentance, which is one mercy; and by the other, he preuenteth so
much of the increase of his sin, which is another mercy. Thirdly, it may be
other men. For in restraining men from doing evil, God intends as principally
his own glory, so withal the good of mankind, especially of his Church, in
the preservation of humane society: which could not subsist an hour, if every
man should be left to the wildness of his own nature, to do what mischeife,
the Devil and his own heart would put him upon, without restraint. So that
the restraining of men's corrupt purposes and affections, p^oceedeth from that
Tit. 3.4.
(...) (as the Apostle somewhere calls it,) that love of God to mankind,
whereby he wills their preservation: and might therefore in that respect
bear the name of Grace, though there should be no good at all intended thereby
to the person so restrained. Just as those (...), those spiritual gifts,
which God has distributed in a wonderful variety for the edifying of his
Church, though they oftentimes bring no good to the receiver, are yet styled
Graces in the Scriptures; because the distribution of them proceeds from the
gracious love and favor of God to his Church, whose benefit he intends
therein. God here restrained Abimelech; as elsewhere he did Laban, and Esau,
and Balaam, and others; not so much for their own sakes, though perhaps
sometimes that also, as for their sakes, whom they should have injured by their
sins, if they had acted them; as here Abin^rlech for his chosen Abraham's
sake, and Laban and Esau for his servant Jacobs sake, and Balaam for his people
Isreal's sake. As it is said in Psalm. 103. and that with special reference (as
I conceive it) to this very story of Abraham, Psalm. 105.14.
He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their sake;
saying Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: He reproved even
Kings, by restraining their power, as here Abimeleches; but it was for their
sakes still, that so Sarah his anointed might not be touched, nor his Prophet
Abraham sustain any harm.

. 36. The Inferences; of two sorts.
We see now the Observation proved in all the points of it. 1. Men do not
always commit those evils, they would, and might do. 2. That they do not, it
is from Gods restraint, who with holds them. 3. That restraint is an Act of
his merciful Providence, and may therefore bear the name of Grace: in respect
of God, who freely gives it; of them, whose sins and stripes are the fewer
for it,; of others, who are preserved from harms the better by it. The
Inferences we are to raise from the premises of our Christian practice and
comfort, are of 2. sorts: for so much as they may arise from the consideration
of Gods Restraining Grace, either as it may lie upon other men, or as it may
lie upon our selves.

First, from the consideration of Gods restraint upon others, the Church and
children and servants of God may learn, to whom they owe their preservation:.
37. Of the former sort: 1. to bless^ God for our Preservation.
even to the power and goodness of their God, in restraining the fury of his
and their enemies. We live among Ezekiel 2.6.
scorpions, and Math. 10.16.
as sheep in the midst of wolves; and they that P^al. 69.4.
hate us without a cause and are mad against us, are more in number then the
hayres of our heads: And yet as many and as malicious as they are, by the Mercy
of God still we are, and we live, and we prosper in some measure, in despite of
them all. Is it any thanks to them? None at all. The Genesis 3.15.
seed of the Serpent bears a natural and an immortal hatred against God,
and all good men: and if they had horns to their curstness, and power
answerable to their wills, we should not breath a minute. If it is any thanks
to our selves? Nor that neither: we have neither number to match them, nor
policy to defeat them, nor strength to resist them; weak, silly, Luke 12.3^.
little flock, as we are. But to whom then is it thanks? As if a little flock
of sheep escape, when a multitude of ravening wolves watch to devour them, it
cannot be ascribed either in whole or in part, either to the sheep in whom
there is no help, or to the wolf in whom there is no mercy; but it must be
imputed all and wholly to the good care of the Shepherd, in safe guarding his
sheep, and keeping off the wolf: so for our safety and preservation in the
midst, and in the spite of so many Enemies, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, whose greatest strength is but weakness; much
less unto them, whose tenderest Prou. 12.10.
mercies are cruel; but unto thy name be the glory, O thou Psalm. 80.1.
Shepherd of Israel, who out of thine abundant love to us, who are the Psalm.
95.7.
flock of thy pasture, and the sheep of thy hands, have made thy power
glorious* in curbing and restraining their malice against us. Psalm. 107.8.15.
etc.
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men. Wonders we may well call them;
indeed they are miracles: if things strange, and above, and against the
ordinary course of Nature may be called Miracles. When we read the stories in
the Scriptures, of Dan. 6.23.
Daniel cast into the den among the Lions, and not touched; of the Dan. 3.27.
three children walking in the midst of the fiery furnace, and not scorched;
of a Act. 28.5.
viper fastening upon Paul's hand, and no harm following: we are stricken with
some amazement, at the consideration of these strange and supernatural
accidents; and these we all confess to be miraculous escapes, yet such
miracles as these, and such escapes, God wo^keth daily in our preservation:
notwithstanding we live encompassed with so many firebrands of hell, such
herds of ravening wolves and lions and tigers, and such numerous Math. 3.7.
generations of vipers; I mean wicked and ungodly men, the spawne of the old
Serpent, who have it by kind from their father, to thirst after the destruction
of the Saints and servants of God, and to whom it is as natural so to do, as
for the fire to burn, or a viper to bite, or a lion to devour. Oh that men
would therefore praise the Lord for this his goodness, and daily declare these
his great wonders, which he daily does for the children of men.

Secondly, how this restraint of wicked men is so only from God,. 38.2. Not to
trust wicked men.
as that nothing either they, or we, or any Creature in the world can do, can
withhold them from doing us mischief, unless God lay his restraint upon them:
it should teach us so much wisdom, as to take heed how we trust them. It is
best and safest for us, as in all other things, so in this, to keep the golden
mean, that we be neither too timorous, nor too credulous. If wicked men then
threaten and plot against thee, yet fear them not: God can restrain them if
he think good, and then assure thy self they shall harm thee. If on the
other side they colloague, and make show of much kindness to thee, yet trust
them not: God may suffer them to take their own way, and not restrain them,
and then assure thy self they will not spare thee. Thou may think perhaps
of some one or other of these, that sure his own good nature will hold him in;
or thou have had trial of him heretofore, and found him faithful as heart
could wish; or thou have some such tie upon him by kindred neighborhood,
acquaintance, covenant, oath, benefits, or other natural or civil obligation,
as will keep him off, at least from falling foul upon thee all at once.
Deceive not thy self; these are but sl^nder assurances for thee to bide upon.
Good nature? alas where is it? since Adam fell, there was never any such thing
in rerum natura: if there be any good thing in any man, it is all from Grace;
nature is all naught, even that which seems to have the pre-eminence in
nature, Romans 8.7.
(...), is stark naught. We may talk of this and that, of good natured men
and I know not what? But the very truth is, set grace aside, (I mean all
grace, both renew^ng and restraining Grace,) there is no more good nature in
any man then there was in Caine and in Judas. That thing, which we use to call
good nature, is indeed but a subordinate means of instrument, whereby God
restrains some men more then others from their birth and special
constitution from sundry outrageous exorbitancies, and so is a branch of this
restraining Grace whereof we now speak. And as for thy past Experience, that
can give thee little security: thou know not what fetters God laid upon him
then, nor how he was pleased with those fetters. God might full sore against
his will, not only restrain him from doing thee hurt, but also constrain him
3. King. 17.4.
to do thee good: as sometimes he commanded the Ravens to feed Eliah; a bird
so (...) Arist. 6. Hist. Anim. 6. - Pellu^t nidis pullos, sicut and corut.
Plin. 10. N^c. hist. 12.
unnatural to her young ones, that they might famish for her, if God did not
otherwise provide for them; and therefore it is noted in the Scripture as a
special argument of Gods providence, that he feeds the Psalm. 147*9. Job.
38.41. Luke 12.14.
young ravens that call upon him. But as nothing that is constrained is durable,
but every thing when it is constrained against its natural inclination, if it
be let alone, will at length Vsque recurrit Horat. 1. Epist. 10.
return to his own ^ind, and primitive disposition; as these Ravens, which now
fed Eliah, would have bin as ready another time to have pecked out his eyes: so
a Natural man is a natural man still, howsoever ouerruled for the present:
and if God, as he has hitherto by his restraint withheld him, shall but
another while withhold his restraint from him, he will soon discover the
imbred hatred of his heart against good things and men, and make thee at the
last beshrew thy folly in trusting him, when he has done thee a mis^hiefe
unawares. And therefore if he have done thee seven courtesies, and promise fair
for the eighth; yet trust him not: for there are Prou. 26.25.
seven abominations in his heart. And as for whatsoever other hancke thou may
think thou have over him, be it never so strong: unless God manacle him with
his powerful restraint, he can as easily vnfetter himself from them all, as
Judge 16.9.12*
Sampson from the green withes and coards wherewith the Philistines bound him.
All those forementioned relations came in but upon the bye and since; whereas
the Genesis 3 15.
hatred of the wicked against goodness is of an ancienter date, and has his
root in (corrupt) nature: and is therefore of such force, that it makes void
all obligations, whether civil, domestical, or other, that have grown by
virtue of any succeeding contract. It is a ruled case, Math. 10.36.
Inimici domestici, A man's enemies may be they of his own house. Let not any
man then, that has either Religion or Honesty, have any thing to do with that
man, at least let him not trust him more then needs he must, that is an Enemy
either to Religion or Honesty. So far as common Humanity, and the
necessities of our lawful Occasions and Callings do require, we may have to
do with them, and rest upon the good providence of God for the success of our
affairs even in their hands; not doubting but that God will both restrain
them from doing us harm, and dispose them to do us good, so far as he shall
see expedient for us: but then, this is not to trust them, but to trust God
with them. But for us to put our selves needlessely into their hands, and to
hazard our safety upon their faithfulness by way of trust; there is neither
wisdom in it nor warrant for it. Although God may do it, yet we have no
reason to presume that he will, restrain them for our sakes, when we might
have prevented it our selves and would not: and this we are sure of, that
nothing in the world can preserve us from receiving mischief from them, unless
God do restrain them. Therefore trust them not.

. 39.3. Nor to fear them.
Thirdly, if at any time we see wickedness set aloft, bad men grow to be
great, or great men show themselves bad, sinning with an high hand, and an arm
stretched out, and God seems to strenghen their hand by adding to their
greatness, and increasing their power; if we see the Hab. 1.13.
wicked devouring the man that is more righteous then he, and God hold his
tongue the whilst; if we see the ungodly course it up and down at pleasure
which way soever the lusts of their corrupt heart carries them without
control, like a wild untamed Coult in a spacious field, God (as it were)
laying the raines in their neck, and letting them run; in a word* when we
see the whole world out of frame and order: we may yet frame our selves to a
godly patience, and sustain our hearts amid all these evils with this comfort
and consideration; that still God keeps the raines in his own hands, and
when he sees his time, and, so far as he sees it good, he both can and
will, check and control and restrain them at his pleasure: as the cunning
rider sometimes gives a fiery horse head, and lets him fling and run as if
he were mad, he knows he can give him the stop, when he list. The great
Psalm. 104.26.
Leuiathans, that take their pastime in the Sea, and with a little stirring of
themselves can make Job. 41.31.32
the deep to boil like a pot, and cause a path to shine after them as they
go; he can Ibid. verse. 5.
play with them as children do with a bird: he suffers them to swallow his
hook, and to play upon the line, and to roll and tumble them in the waters;
but anon he strikes the hook through their noses, and fetches them up, and
lays them upon the shore, there to beat themselves without help or remedy,
exposed to nothing but shame and contempt. What then if God suffer those that
hate him to prosper for the time, and in their prosperity to Lord it over his
heritage! What if Princes should Psalm 119 23.
sit and speak against us Ibid. verse. 161.
without a cause, as it was sometimes David's case! Let us not fret at the
injuries, nor envy at the greatness of any: let us rather betake us to David's
refuge, to be Ibid. verse. 23.
occupied in the statutes, and to meditate in the holy word of God. In that
holy word we are taught, that the hearts even of Kings, how much more then of
inferior persons, are in his rule and governance, and that he does dispose
and turn them, as seems best to his godly wisdom, that he can Psalm 76, 12.
refrain the spirit of Princes, Psalm 149.8.
bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in linkes of iron; and though they Psalm.
21.6.
rage furiously at it, and lay their heads together in consultation how to
break his bands, and cast away his coards from them, yet they imagine but a
vain thing; whilst they strive against him on earth, he laugheth them to
scorn in heaven, and maugre all opposition will establish the kingdom of his
Christ, and protect his people. Say then the great ones of the world exercise
their power over us, and lay what restraints they can upon us: our comfort is,
they have not greater power over us, then Regum tim^n dorum in proprios greges,
Reges i^ ipsos imperiu^ esi I^uis Horat. 3. Carn. Od. 1.
God has over them; nor can they so much restrain the meanest of us, but God
can restrain the greatest of them much more. Say our enemies curse us with
Bell Book and Candle: our comfort is, God is able to return the curse upon
their own heads, and in dispite of the too Deuteronomy. 23.5.
turn it into a Blessing upon us. Say they make ware like preparations against
us to invade us: our comfort is, God can Psalm. 48.7.
break the ships of Tarshish, and scatter the most Psalm. 69.4.
inuinceable Armadoes. Say they that hate us be more in number then the heirs
of our head, our comfort is, the very Math. 10.30.
hairs of our head are numbered with him, and without his sufferance not the
least Luke 21.18.
hair of our heads shall perish. Say (to imagine the worst) that our Enemies
should prevail against us, and Psalm. 106.41.
they that hate us should be Lords over us for the time: our comfort is, he
that loves us, is Lord over them, and he can bring them under us again, when
he sees time. In all our fears, in all our dangers, in all our distresses;
our comfort is, that God can do all this for us: our care should be by our
holy obedience to strengthen our interest in his protection, and not to make
him a stranger from us, yea an enemy unto us, by our sins and impenitency;
that so we may have yet more comfort, in a cheerful confidence, that God
will do all this for us. The Assyrian, whose Esaias. 10.7.
ambition it was to be the Catholic King and universal Monarch of the world,
stiling himself the Great King, ( Esaias. 36.4.
thus says the great King, the King of Assyria;) when he had sent Esa. 27.28.29
messengers to revile Israel, and an army to besiege and destroy Jerusalem: yet
for all his rage he could do them no harm; the Lord Esa. 10.11.
brought down the stout heart of the King of Assyria, Esa. 37.33.
put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and made him return
back by the way by which he came, without taking the City, or so much as
casting a bank, or shooting an arrow against it. Nay he that is indeed Job.
41.34.
the great King over all the children of pride, and has better title to the
style of most Catholic King then any that ever yet bare it, whose territories
are large as the Earth, and spacious as the Air, I mean the Devil, the Ephesians.
2.2.
Prince of this world; he is so f^ttered with the chain of Gods power and
providence, that he is not able with all his might and malice, no not though he
raise his whole forces, and muster up all the powers of darkness and Hell into
one band, to do us any harm in our souls, in our bodies, in our Children, in
our friends, in our goods, no not so much as our very Math. 8.31, 32.
Pigges, or any small thing that we have, without the special leave and
sufferance of our good God. He must have his Dedimus potestatem from him, or he
can do nothing.

Fourthly, since this restraint is an act of Gods mercy,. 40.4. To labor to
restrain others from sinning.
whom we should strive to resemble in nothing more Luke 6.36.
then in showing mercy: let every one of us in imitation of our heavenly
father, and in compassion to the souls of our brethren, and for our own good
and the good of humane society, endeavor our selves faithfully the best we can
to restrain, and withhold, and keep back others from sinning. The Magistrate,
the Minister, the Houshoulder, every other man in his place and calling, should
do his best by rewards, punishments, rebukes, encouragements, admonitions,
persuasions, good example, and other like means to suppress vice, and
restrain disorders, in those that may any way come within their charge. Our
first desire should be, and for that we should bend our utmost endeauours, that
if it be possible, their hearts might be seasoned with grace and the true
fear of God: but as in other things, where we cannot attain to the full of
our first aims, Cicero.
Pulchrum est (as he says) in secundis terti^sve consistere; so here, we may
take some contentment in it* as some fruit of our labors, in our Callings, if
we can but weane them from gross disorders, and reduce them from extremely
debausht courses to some good measure of Civility. It ought not to be, it is
not our desire, to make men Hypocrites; and a mere Civil man is no better:
yet ^o us, that cannot judge but by the outward behavior, it is less grief,
when men are Hypocrites, then when they are Profane. Our first aim is to make
you good: yet some rejoicing it is to us, if we can but make you less evil.
Our aim is, to make you of Natural, holy and Spiritual men; but we are glad,
if of dissolute, we can but make you good Moral men: if in stead of planting
Grace, we can but root out Vice: if in stead of the power of godliness in the
reformation of the inner-man, we can but bring you to some tolerable
stayednes in the conformity of the outward-man. If we can do but this, though
we are to strive for that, our labor is not altogether in vain in the first,
men's sins are both less and fewer: secondly, abateth somewhat both of the
number and weight of their stripes, and makes their punishment the thirdly,
there is less scandal done to Religion; which receives not so much soil and
disreputation by close hypocrisy, as by lewd and open profaneness: Fourthly,
the kingdom of Satan is diminished, though not directly in the strength, for
he loses never a Subject by it; yet somewhat in the glory thereof, because he
has not so full and absolute command of some of his subjects, as before he
had, or Fifthly, much of the hurt that might come evil example, is hereby
prevented: Sixthly, the people of God are preserved from many injuries and
contumelies which they would receive from evil men, if their barbarous manners
were not thus ciuilised; as a fierce Mastiffe does Seventhly and lastly, and
which should be the strongest motive of all the rest to make us industrious to
repress vicious affections in others; it may please God these sorry beginnings
may be the In ipsis improbis dum formida to supplicio frenatu^ facultas,
muccato Deo sanitur volu^tas. August. Tom. 2
forerunners of more blessed and more solid graces. My meaning is not, that
these Moral restraints of our wild corruption, can either actually, or but
virtually prepare, dispose, or qualify any man for the grace of Conversion and
Renouation; or have in them Virtutem semana em, any natural power which by
ordinary help may be cherished and improued so far, as an egg may be
hatched into a bird, and a kirnell sprowt and grow into a tree; (far be it
from us to harbor any such Pelagian conceits:) but this I say, that God,
being a God of order, does not ordinarily work but in order and by degrees,
bringing men from the one extreme to the other by middle courses; and
therefore seldom brings a man from the wretchedness of forlorn nature to
the blessed estate of saving grace, but where first by his restraining grace in
some good measure he does correct nature, and moralize it. Do you then that
are Magistrates, do we that are Ministers, let all Fathers, Masters, and
others whatsoever, by wholesome severity (if fayrer courses will not reclaim
the^) deter audacious persons from offending, break those that are under our
charge of their wills and wilfulness, restrain them from lewd and licencious
practices and company, Leuit. 19.17.
not suffer sin upon them for want of reproving them in due and seasonable
sort, Jude, verse. 23
snatch them out of the fire, and bring them as far as we can out of the
snare of the Devil to Godwards; and leave the rest to him. Possibly, when we
have faithfully done our part, to the utmost of our power; he will set in
graciously, and begin to do his part, in their perfect conversion. If by our
good care, they may be made to forbear swearing, and cursing, and blaspheming;
they may in time by his good grace be brought to Eccles. 19.1.
fear an Oath: if we restrain them from gross prophanations upon his
holi-day in the mean time, they may come at lenght to think his Sabath Esa.
28.13.
a delight: if we keep them from swilling, and gaming, and reuelling, and
ryoting, and roaring, the while; God may frame them ere long to a sober and
sanctified use of the Creatures: and so it may be said of other sins and
duties. I could willingly enlarge all these points of inferences but that there
are yet behind sundry other good uses, to be made of this restraining Grace of
God, considered as it may lie upon Ourselves; and therefore I now pass on to
them.

First, there is a root of Pride in us all,. 41. Inferences of the later sort:
1. Not to be ^roud of it, when God restrained us.
whereby we are apt to think better of our selves, then there is cause: and
every infirmity in our brother, (which should rather be an item to us of our
frailty) serves as fuel to nourish this vanity, and to swell us up with a
Pharisaicall conceit, that forsooth we are Luke 18.1^.
not like other men. Now, if at any time, when we see any or our brethern fall
into some sin, from which by the good hand of God upon us we have bin
hitherto preserved, we then feel this swelling begin to rise in us, as
sometimes it will do: the point already delivered may stand us in good stead,
to pick the bladder of our pride, and to let out some of that windy vanity; by
considering that, this our forbearance of evil, wherein we seem to excel our
brother, is not from nature, but from Grace; not from our selves, but from God.
And here a little let me close with thee, whosoever thou art, that please thy
self with odious comparisons, and stand so much upon terms of betternesse;
thou art neither Extortioner, nor adulterer, drunkard, nor swearer, theife,
slanderer, nor murderer; as such and such are. It may be thou art none of
these: but I can tell thee what thou art, and that is as odious in the sight of
God as any of these: thou art a proud Pharisee, which perhaps they are not. To
let thee see thou art a Pharisee, do but give me a direct answer without
shifting or mincing to that Question of St. Paul, 1. Cor. 4.7.
Quis te discrevit? Who has made thee to differ from another. Was it God, or
thy self, or both together? If thou say it was God; thou art a dissembler,
and thy boasting has already confuted thee: for what have thou to do to glory
in that which is not thine? Ibid.
If thou have received it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not
received it? If thou say it was from thy self: what Pharisee could have
assumed more? All the shift thou have, is, to say it was God indeed that made
the difference, but he saw something in thee for which he made thee to differ:
thou acknowledgest his restraint in part, but thine own good nature did
something. If this be all, thou art a very Pharisee still, without all escape.
That Pharisee never denied God a part, no nor the chiefest part neither, he
began his vanting prayer with an acknowledgment of Gods work, ( Luke 18.11.
I thank thee, O God, that I am not like other men.) It was not the denial of
all unto God, but the assuming of any thing unto himself, that made him a
right Pharisee. Go thy way then, and if thou will do God and thy self right;
deny thy self altogether, and give God the whole glory of it, if thou have bin
preserved from any evil. And from thy brothers fall, besides compassioning
forlorn Nature in him, make a quite contrary use unto thy self; even to
humble thee thereby, with such like thoughts as these, Gal. 6.1.
considering thy self least thou also be tempted. [Am I any better then he?
or better mould then he? or better tempered then he? Am not I a child of the
same Adam, a vessel of the same clay, a chip of the same block, with him? why
then should I be Romans 11.20
high-minded, when I see him fallen before me? why should I not rather fear,
least my foot slip, as well as his has done? I have much cause, with all
thankfulness to bless God, for his good providence over me, in not suffering
me to fall into this sin hitherto; and with all humility to implore the
continuance of his gracious assistance for the future, without which I am not
able to avoid this, or any other evil.]

Secondly, since all restraints from sin,. 43.2. How to entertain the means
God affoordeth us of restraint.
by what second means so ever they are conveyed unto us, or forwarded, are
from the merciful Providence of God: whenever we observe that God has
vouchsafed us, or does offer us, any means of such his gracious restraint; it
is our duty joyfully to embrace those means, and carefully to cherish them,
and with all due thankfulness to bless the name of God for them. Oh how often
have we plotted, and proiected, and contrived a course, for the expediting of
our perhaps ambitious, perhaps covetous, perhaps malicious, perhaps voluptuous
designs: and by the providence of God some unexpected interuening accident
has marred the curious frame of all our proiects, that they have come to
nothing; as a Spiders web spunne with much art and industry is suddenly
disfigured, and swept away with the light touch of a besome. How often have we
bin resolved to sin, and prepared to sin, and even at the pits brinke ready
to cast our selves into hell: when he has plucked us away, as he plucked Genesis
19 16.
Lot out of Sodom, by affrightments of natural Conscience, by apprehensions
of dangers, by taking away the opportunities, by ministering impediments, by
shortening our power, by sundry other means! Have we now blessed the name of
God for affording us these gracious means of prevention and restraint? Nay,
have we not rather bin enraged thereat, and taken it with much impatience that
we should be so crossed in the pursuit of our vain and sinful desires and
purposes? As wayward Children cry and take pet, when the Nurse snatcheth a
knife from them, wherewith they might perhaps cut their fingers, perhaps haggle
their throats, or puts them back from the wells mouth when they are ready,
with catching at babies in the water, to type over: and as that merry madman in
the Poet, was in good earnest angry with his friends for procuring him to be
cured of his madness, wherein he so much pleased himself, as if they could not
have done him a greater displeasure Herat. 2. satir.
-- Pol me occidistis, amici,- Non seruastis-: such is our folly. We are
offended with those that reprove us; testie at those that hinder us; impatient
under those crosses that disable us: yea we fret and turn again at the
powerful application of the holy word of God, when it endeavors to reform
us, or restrain us from those evils wherein we delight. Let us henceforth mend
this fault, cheerfully submit our selves to the discipline of the Almighty, and
learn of holy David with what affections to entertain the gracious means he
vouchsafes us of restraint or prevention: as appears by his speeches unto
Abigail, when she by her wisdom had pacified his wrath against Nabal, whose
destruction he had a little before vowed in his heat, 1. Sam. 25.32 etc.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and from auenging my self with mine own hand. He
blessed God, as the cause; and her, as the instrument; and her discreet
behavior and advice, as the means; of staying his hand from doing that evil,
he had vowed with his mouth, and was in his heart purposed to have done.

Thirdly,; since we owe our standing to the hand of God, who holds us up,
without whose restrain we should fall at every turn,. 43.3. To pray unto God
to restrain our corruptions.
and into every temptation: we cannot but see what need we have to seek to him
daily and hourly to withhold us from falling into those sins, whereunto either
our corrupt nature would lead us, or outward occasions draw us. We may see it
by the fearful falls of David and Peter, men nothing inferior to the best of
us, how weak a thing man is to resist temptation, if God withdraw his support,
and leave him but a little to himself. Which made David pray to God that he
would Psalm. 19 13.
keep back his servant from presumptious sins. He well knew, though he were
the faithful servant of God, that yet he had no stay of himself; but unless God
kept him back, he must on, and he must in, and he must in deep, even as far
as to Presumptious sins. No man, though he be never so good, has any
assurance, as upon his own strength, though it be never so great, that he
shall be able to avoid any sin, though it be never so foul. When a heathen man
prayed unto Jupiter, to save him from his Enemies; one that ouerheard him would
needs mend it with a more needful prayer, that Jupiter would save him from
his Friends: he thought they might do him more hurt, because he trusted them;
but as for his Enemies, he could look to himself well enough, for receiving
harm from them. We that are Christians, had need pray unto the God of heaven,
that he would not give us up into the hands of our professed Enemies; and to
pray unto God, that he would not deliver us over into the hands of our
false-hearted Friends: but there is another prayer yet more needful, and to be
pressed with greater importunity then either of both, that God would save us
from our selves, and not give us up into our own hands; for then we are
utterly cast away. There is a wayward old man that lurketh in every of our
bosoms, and we make but too much of him: then whom, we have not a more
spightfull Enemy, nor a more false friend. Alas we do not think, what a man is
given over to, that is given over to himself: he is given over to Romans 1.26.
vile affections, he is given over to a Ibid. verse. 28.
reprobate sense, he is given over to Ephesians. 4.19.
commit all manner of wickedness with greediness. It is the last and
fearfullest of all other judgments, and is not usually brought upon men, but
where they have obstinately refused to hear the voice of God, in whatsoever
other tone he had spoken unto them; then to leave them to themselves, and to
their own counsels: Psalm. 81.11.12.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me: so I gave
them up unto their own hearts lust, and let them follow their own
imaginations. As we conceive the state of the Patient to be desperate, when
the Phisician gives him over, and lets him eat, and drink, and, have, and
do, what, and when, and as much as he will without prescribing him any diet,
or keeping back any thing from him he has a mind unto. Let us therefore pray
faithfully and fervently unto God, as Christ himself has taught us, that he
would not by leaving us unto our selves Math. 6.13.
lead us into temptation, but by his gracious and powerful support deliver us
from all those evils, from which we have no power at all to deliver our selves.

. 44.4. To labor for the grace of Sanctification.
Lastly, since this Restraint whereof we have spoken, may be but a common Grace,
and can give us no found nor solid comfort if it be but a bare restraint, and
no more: though we ought to be thankful for it, though we have not deserved
it; yet we should not rest nor think our selves safe enough, till we have a
well grounded assurance, that we are possessed of an higher and a better grace,
even the Grace of sanctification. For that will hold out against temptations,
where this may fail. We may deceive our selves then, and thousands in the
world do so deceive themselves; if upon our abstaining from sins, from which
God withholdeth us, we presently conclude our selves to be in the state of
Grace, and to have the power of godliness, and the spirit of Sanctification.
For, between this restraining Grace, whereof we have now spoken, and that
renewing Grace whereof we now speak; there are sundry wide differences. They
first, in their fountain. Renewing grace springs from the special love of
God toward those that are his in Christ: restraining grace is a fruit of that
general mercy of God, whereof it is said in the Psalm, that Psalm. 145.2.
his mercy is over all his works. secondly, in their extent: both of Person,
Subject, Object, and Time. For the Person; Restraining Grace is common to good
and bad: Renewing Grace proper and peculiar to the Elect. For the Subject;
Restraining Grace may bind one part or faculty of a man, as the hand or
tongue, and leave another f^ee, as the heart or ear: Re^ewing Grace works
upon all in some measure, sanctifies the whole man, 1. These. 6.23
Body, and soul, and spirit, with the parts and faculties of each. For the
Object; Restraining Grace may withhold a man from one sin and give him scope
to another: Renewing Grace carries an equal and just respect to all Gods
commandments. For the Time; Restraining Grace may tie us now, and by and by
unloose us: Renewing Grace holds out unto the end, more or less, wholly
destitute. Thirdly, they did differ in their ends. Restraining Grace is so
intended chiefly for the good of humane society, (especially of the Church of
God, and of the members thereof;) as that indifferently it may, or may not do
good to the Receiver: but Renewing Grace is especially intended for the
Salvation of the Receiver, though Ex consequenti it do good also unto others.
They differ fourthly, mortifieth the corruption, and subdueth it, and
diminishes it; as water quenches fire, by abating the heat: but Restraining
Grace only inhibiteth the exercise of the corruption for the time, without any
real admonition of it either in substance or quality; as the Dan. 3.25.
fire wherein the three Children walked, had as much heat in it at that very
instant, as it had before and after, although by the greater power of God, the
natural power of it was then suspended from working upon them. The Lions that
spared Daniel were Lions still, and had their ravenous disposition still,
albeit God Dan. 6.22.
stopped their mouths for that time, that they should not hurt him: but that
there was no change made in their natural disposition appears by their
entertainment of their next guests, whom they devoured with all greediness,
Ibid. verse. 24.
breaking their bones before they came to the ground. By these two instances
and examples, we may in some measure conceive of the nature and power of the
restraining Grace of God in wicked men. It bridleth the corruption that is in
them for the time, that it cannot break out, and manacleth them in such sort,
that they do not show forth the ungodly disposition of their heart: but there
is no real change wrought in them all the while; their heart still remaining
unsanctified, and their natural corruption undiminished. Whereas the renewing
and sanctifying Grace of God, by a real change of a Lion makes a Lamb;
alters the natural disposition of the soul, by draining out some of the
corruption; begets a new heart, a new spirit, new habits, new qualities, new
dispositions, new thoughts, new desires; makes a Ephesians 4 ^4.
new man in every part and faculty completely New. Content not thy self then
with a bare forbearance of sin, so long as thy heart is not changed, nor thy
will changed, nor thy affections changed: but strive to become a new man, to
be Romans 12.2.
transformed by the renewing of thy mind, to hate sin, to love God, to
wrestle against thy secret corruptions, to take delight in holy duties, to
subdue thine understanding and will and affections to the obedience of Faith
and Godliness. So shall thou not only be restrained from sinning against God,
as Abimelech here was; but also be enabled, as faithful Abraham was, to please
God: and consequently assured with all the faithful children of Abraham to be
1. Pet. 1.5.
preserved by the almighty power of God through faith unto salvation. Which
Grace, and Faith, and salvation, the same Almighty God, the God of power and of
Peace, bestow upon us all here assembled, 1. Cor. 1.2.
With all that in every place call upon the name of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, both
theirs and ours; even for the same our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, his most dear
Son, and our most blessed Savior and Redeemer, to which blessed Father, and
blessed Son, with the blessed Spirit, most holy blessed and glorious
Trinity, be ascribed by us and the whole Church, all the kingdom the power
and the glory, from this time forth and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

