A PARAPHRASE UPON THE DIVINE POEMS.

BY GEORGE SANDYS.

LONDON, At the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XXXVIII.

TO THE BEST OF MEN, AND MOST EXCELLENT OF PRINCES, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF
GOD KING OF GREAT-BRITAINE, FRANCE, AND IRELAND: LORD OF THE FOUR SEAS; OF
VIRGINIA, THE VAST TERRITORIES ADJOINING, AND DISPERSED ISLANDS OF THE
WESTERN OCEAN; THE ZEALOVS DEFENDOR OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH: GEORGE SANDYS.

THE HVMBLEST OF HIS SERVANTS, PRESENTS AND CONSECRATES THESE HIS PARAPHRASES
UPON THE DIVINE POEMS, TO RECEIVE THEIR LIFE AND ESTIMATION FROM HIS FAVOR.

THe Muse, who from your Influence took her Birth,
First wandered through the many-peopled Earth;
Next sung the Change of Things; disclosed the Unknown:
Then to a nobler Shape transformed her Own;
Fetched from Engaddi, Spice; from Jury, Balm;
And bound her brows with Idumaean Palm:
Now Old, has her last Voyage made; and brought
To Royal Harbor this her Sacred Fraught:
Who to her King bequeathes the Wealth of Kings;
And dying, her own Epicedium sings.
To the Queen.
A Night-peece most affects the Eye;
Sad Words and Notes charm powerfully:
The pleasing Sorrow they impart,
Slides sweetly to the melting Heart.
Since no sincere Delight we taste,
Our best of Days with clouds ore-cast;
Wise Nature giddy Mirth disdaines,
And tunes our Souls to Mournful Strains:
As Aethiop's, who fair colors lack,
Place Beauty in the deepest Black.
And we are counseled to be Guests,
Rather at Death's, then Hymen's Feasts.
This was that well-limn'd Face of VVoe,
Where of we but a Copy show:
To you addressed, whose cheerful Ray
Can turn the saddest Night to Day:
Not to infect, or make it less;
But to set-off your Happiness.
Nor are we all of Black composed,
Our setting Sun serenely closed.
And, as in Job, all Storms dispelled,
His Evening far his Morn excelled;
So Judah, in her wandering Race,
At length shall rise to greater Grace.
Our Vows ascend, that you may taste,
Of these, the only First, and Last.
And wheresoever the Subject's Best, the Sense
Is bettered by the Speakers Eloquence.
But Sir, to you I will no Trophie raise
From other Men's detraction or dispraise.
That Jewel never had inherent worth,
Which ask't such Foyles as these to set it forth.
If any quarrel your Attempt or Style
Forgive them: their own Folly they revile.
Since against Themselves their factious Envy shall
Confess this Work of Yours Canonical.
Nor may you fear the Poets common Lot,
Read, and Commended, and then quite forgot.
The Brazen Mines and Marble Rocks shall waste,
When your Foundation will unshaken last.
It Is Fames best pay, that You your Labors see
By their Immortal Subject crowned be.
For nere was Author in Oblivion hid,
Who Firm'd his Name on such a Pyramid.
Henry King.

To my very much honored Friend Mr. George Sandys, upon his Paraphrase on the
Poetical Parts of the Bible.
THese pure immortal Streams, these holy Streynes,
To flow in which, The Eternal Wisdom deignes,
Had first their sacred Spring, in Iuda's Plains.
Borne in the East, their Soul of heavenly Race,
They still preserve a more then Mortal Grace,
Though through the Mortal Pens of Men they pass.
For purest Organs ever were designed
To this high Work, the most Etheriall Mind
Was touched, and did these holy Raptures find.
You Sir, who all these several Springs have known,
And have so large a Fountain of your own;
Seem Borne and Bred for what you now have done.
Placed by just Thoughts, above all worldly Care,
Such as for Heaven it self a Room prepare,
Such as already more then Earthly are.
Next you have known (besides all Arts) their Spring,
The happy East; and ftom Judea bring
Part of that Power, with which her Airs you Sing,
Lastly, what is above all Reach of Praise,
Above Reward, of any fading Bays,
No Muse like Yours did ever Language raise.
Devotion, Knowledge, Numbers, from your Pen
Mixtly and sweetly flow; whilst listening Men
Suspend their Cares, enamored of your Theme.
They calm their Thoughts, and in their Bosoms own
Better Desires, to them perhaps unknown;
Till by your Music to themselves brought Home.
Music, (the universal Language) sweyes
In every Mind; the World this Power obeyes,
And Natures Self is charmed by well-tuned Lays.
All disproportioned, harsh, disordered Cares,
Unequal Thoughts, vain Hopes, and low Despaires;
Fly the soft Breath of these harmonious Airs.
Here is that Harp, whose Charms uncharm'd the breast
Of troubled Saul, and that unquiet Guest,
With which his Passions traveled, disposses'd.
Job. Psalms. Ecclesiastes.
Job, moves Amazement, David moves our Tears;
His Royal Son, a sad Apparel wears
Of Language, and persuades to Pious Fears.
The Passions of the First rise great and high,
But Solomon a less concerned Eye
Casting on all the world, flows equally.
Canticles not Printed.
Not in that ardent course, as where He woes
The Sacred Spouse, and her chaste Love pursues,
With brighter flames, and with a higher Muse.
This Work had been proportioned to our Sight,
Had you but known with some allay to Write,
And not preserved your Authors Strength and Light.
But you so crush those Odors, so dispense
Those rich perfumes, you make them too intense
And such (alas) as too much please our Sense.
We fitter are for sorrows, then such Love;
Lamentations
Josiah falls, and by his fall does move
Tears from the people, Mourning from above.
Judah, in her Iosiah's Death, does dye
All Springs of grief are opened to supply,
Streams to the torrent of this Elegy.
Others break forth in everlasting Praise
The several Hymns.
Having their wish, and wishing they might raise,
Some monument of Thanks to after-Dayes.
These are the Pictures, which your happy Art
Gives us, and which so well you do impart,
As if these passions sprung in your own Heart.
Others translate, but you the Beams collect
Of your inspired Authors, and reflect
Those heavenly Rai's with new and strong effect.
Yet humane Language only can restore,
What humane Language had impaired before,
And when that once is done, can give no more.
Sir, I forbear to add to what is said,
Least to your burnisht Gold I bring my Lead,
And with what is Immortal, mix the Dead.
Sidney Godolphin.

To my worthy friend Mr. George Sandys.
I press not to the Quire, nor dare I greet
The holy Place with my unhallowed feet:
My unwasht Muse pollutes not things Divine,
Nor mingles her prophaner notes with thine;
Here, humbly at the Porch, she listening stays,
And with glad ears sucks in thy Sacred Lays.
So, devout Penitents of old were wont,
Some without door, and some beneath the Font,
To stand and hear the Churches Liturgies,
Yet not assist the solemn Exercise*
Suffices her, that she a Lay-place gain,
To trim thy Vestments, or but bear thy train:
Though nor in Tune, nor Wing, She reach thy Lark,
Her Lyricke feet may dance before the Arc.
Who knows, but that Her wandering eyes, that run
Now hunting Glow-wormes, may adore the Sun.
A pure Flame may, shot by Almighty Power
Into my breast, the earthy flame devour:
My Eyes, in Penitential dew may steep
That bryne, which they for sensual love did weep:
So (though against Natures course) fire may be quenched
With fire, and water be with water drencht.
Perhaps, my restless Soul, tired with pursuit
Of mortal beauty, seeking without fruit
Contentment there; which has not, when enjoyed,
Quenched all her thirst, nor satisfied, though cloyed;
Weary of her vain search below, above
In the first Fair may find the immortal Love.
Prompted by thy Example then, no more
In moulds of Clay will I my God adore;
But tear those Idols from my Heart, and Write
What his blessed Sp'rit, not fond Love, shall endite.
Then, I no more shall court the Verdant Bay,
But the dry leavelesse Trunk on Golgotha:
And rather strive to gain from thence one Thorn,
Then all the flourishing Wreathes by Laureats worn.
Tho: Carew.

To my worthy Kinsman Mr. George Sandys, on his excellent Paraphrase upon Job.
YOu teach us a new Pleasure, and have so
Penned the sad Story, we delight in Woe.
Tears have their Music too; this mournful Dress
Does so become Job's sorrows, and express
Affliction in so sweet a grace, that we
Find something to be loved in Misery.
Here Grief is witty, that the Reader might
Not suffer, in the patience you write.
Let others wanton it, while I admire
Thy warmth, which does proceed from holy Fire.
It Is Guilt, not Poetry, to be like those
Whose wit in Verse, is downright Sin in Prose:
Whose Studies are Prophannesse, as if then
They were good Poets only, when bad Men.
But these are purer Flames, nor shall thy Heat
Because it is good, be therefore thought not Great.
How vainly do they err, who think it fit
A sacred Subject should be void of Wit?
I boldly dare affirm, He never meant
We should be Dull, who bids, be Innocent.
It Is no excuse, when you your charm rehearse
So sweetly, not to hear, because it is Verse.
Religion is a Matron, whose grave Face
From Decent Vestures does receive more Grace.
In holy duties fondly we affect
A mis-becomming Rudeness, and suspect
Clean Offerings; we think God likes the Heart
Where least appears of th'Vnderstanding part.
As if Gods Messengers did but delude,
Unless what they deliver us, be rude.
Choice Language is the clothing of your Mind;
Your matter (like those Saints which are inshrin'd
In Gold, or like to Beauty, when the Lawne
With rosy cheeks bepurpled ore, is drawn
To boast the loveliness, it seems to hide,
And show more cunningly the blushing Bride.)
Has hence a greater luster; they not love
The Body less, who do the Clothes approve.
So we upon this Jewel do not set
Less price, because we praise the Cabinet.
Dudley Digges.

To my honored Kinsman Mr. George Sandys, on his admirable Paraphrases.
Why come thou thus attended to the Press?
Thou wants no Suffrages, the Subject, less:
At first, in confidence of thy full Worth,
Single, unknown, Thou did adventure forth:
Thy living Works since often have past the Test,
And every last (to wonder) proved the best.
Thy Prose and Verse each other Aemulate,
From Rivals free, at home their Right debate:
Divide the Judgment, whether most t'admire
Roabes loosely flowing, or fine shaped Attire.
Nor art thou to be blamed, for having past
Pernassus hill, and come to Sion last.
The Schools from Comments on the Stagyrite,
To heavenly Speculations raised their Flight:
The Progress fit, though of Philosophy,
It Is justly feared, they took too deep a Dye.
God chiefly warmed their Breasts with sacred Heat,
Who were in other Knowledges complete:
Though all alike to him, but that he meant
To give some honor to the Instrument.
He who in other Structures merits praise,
May without diffidence a Temple raise.
And sure, Bezaleel-like, Heaven did instill,
For this intended Frame, that Matchless Skill:
Till then thy restless Mind moved Circular,
Like the touched Needle, till it find the Star.
Well did thou from the East thy entrance make,
From whence the light of Poetry first brake.
The Hand unknown, that God this Piece might own,
(Like the two Tables) for his Work alone.
The Mark of his immediate Work it bears,
Even at the Spring a boundless Sea appears.
For what his Hands, without a Second, make,
At once their Being and Perfection take.
His first Day Adam a full Man beheld;
And Cana's Water choicest Wine excelled.
This first of Authors, first of Poets, flew
So high a Pitch, as almost out of View.
And this was not of Jobs rewards the lest,
That his rare Story such a Pen expressed.
What high expressions in such depth of Woe!
How sweet his sighs and groans in Numbers flow!
When God himself was pleased Job to cite,
Who could such Language worthy Him endite!
His just Reproves so great a Terror bear,
As if each Word a clap of Thunder were.
From hence in smaller Drilles her course she keeps;
And scarce discerned, along the Valleys creeps
Through Moses and the Judges; yet we may
In these discover her continued Way.
But when the State into a Kingdom grew,
When all did with their blessed King renew;
In the sweet Singer then again it flows,
Her bounds extends, and to a River grows.
His large soul'd Son from Heaven full Light receives,
For every Path and Step direction gives.
Discovers to our long-seduced Eyes,
Her Fucus off, the Worlds deformities.
And by a Purer quenches sensual Fire,
The Object changed, preserves the Heat entire.
These two, who might with Job dispute their Right,
Raised Numbers to their Apogaeon height.
Thence through the Prophets We her Current trace,
Whose graver Works Poeticke Iems enchace:
To show how aptly both assume one Name,
Both Heaven-inspir'd, composed of Zeal and Flame:
Above the Rest, that funeral Elegy,
Presents sad Judah, to th'admiring Eye
So lovely in her Sable Veil and Tears;
Scarce any Bride in all her Trim appears:
Of such a winning sweetness: O what Heart
But must due Pity to her Woes impart!
All these, for Prose had still mistaken been,
Their Native grace our Language never seen:
Had not thy speaking Picture showed to All
The wondrous beauty of The Original;
Had lien like Stones uncut, and Oar untri'd,
Their Real Worth the same, though scarce espied,
But by the skillful Linguist; To the Most
In the dark Sense, and hard Expressions lost.
Thy Art has Polish't them to what they were,
Vnvalued Jewels for the Breast, and Ear.
Here fix thy Pillars, what remains there high'r,
But th'unknowne Ditties of the heavenly Quire.
Francis Wiatt.

Summa Approbationis.
PErlegi haec Poemata Sacra in Job, Davidis Psalmos, Ecclesiasten,
Lamentationes Ieremiae Prophetae, and alios Hymnos Sacros, in quibus omnibus
nihil reperio S S. Paginae contrarium; quominus cum utilitate, ut and Summa
Lectorum voluptate Typis mandentur.

Datum Lamethae November. 7. 1637. Rmo. in Christo Patri, and Dom. D. Arch. Cant.
Sacellanus Domesticus. GVIL. BRAY.

To his worthy Friend Mr. George Sandys upon his excellent Paraphrases.
THy Lines I weigh not by The Original;
Nor skan thy Words how evenly they fall:
I most applaud thy Pious Choice, who make
The Sacred Writ thy Subject, and thence take
Those Parts, wherein the most Perverse may see
Divinity and Poesy agree.
Afflicted Job a Veil of Sorrow shrouds;
But heavenly Beams dispell those envious Clouds.
The Royal Psalmist, borne on Angels wings,
Now weeps in Verse, now Halelu-jahs sings.
Converted Solomon to our eyes presents
Deluding Joys, and curelesse Discontents.
That good Iosiah's Name may never dye,
Thy Muse revives his Mournful Elegy.
With the same Zeal, does to our Numbers fit
All the Poeticke Parts of Holy Writ.
And thus Salvation thou may bring to those
Who never would have sought for it in Prose.
Henry Rainsford.

To his Worthy Friend Mr. George Sandys on his Sacred Poems.
HOw bold a Work attempts that Pen
Which would enrich our Vulgar tongue
With the high Raptures of those Men
Who here with the same Spirit sung
Wherewith they now assist the Quire
Of Angels, who their Songs admire?
What ever those inspired Souls
Were urged to express, did shake
The Aged Deep, and both the Poles:
Their numerous Thunder could awake
Dull Earth, which does with Heaven consent
To all They wrought, and all They meant.
Say (Sacred Bard) what could bestow
Courage on thee to soar so high?
Tell me (Brave Friend) what helped thee so
To shake off all Mortality?
To Light this Torch thou have climbed higher
Then he who stole caelestiall Fire.
Edward Waller.

To my worthy Friend Mr. George Sandys.
Inspired by Thee, who art thy self a Muse,
Not crowned with Ivy, or neglected Baies;
But with a sacred Light, which does infuse
Into our Souls her intellectual Rays:
Among these Stars of the first Magnitude,
I, in affection, my dimne Taper bring:
For though my Voice be horce, my Numbers rude,
On such a Theme who could forbear to sing?
Immortal Sands whose Nectar-dropping Pen
Delights, instructs; and with that holy Fire,
Which fell from Heaven, warmes the cold breasts of men;
And in their Minds creats a new Desire.
For Truth in Poesy so sweetly strikes
Upon the Cords, and Fivers of the Heart;
That it all other Harmony dislikes,
And happily is Vanquished by her Art.
These God-like Forms, inspired with Breath divine,
Blessed in themselves, and making others Blessed;
For us are by that curious hand of thine,
In English Habits elegantly dressed.
May our great Master, to whose sacred Name
Thy Studious Hours such usual Gifts direct,
As Caesar to his Maro, prove the Same;
And equal Beams upon thy Muse reflect.
Wintoure Grant.

A PARAPHRASE UPON JOB.

And Northern confines of Sabaea lies,
A great Example of Perfection reigned:
His Name was Job; his Soul with guilt unstaind,
None with more zeal the Deity adored;
Affected Virtue more, Vice more abhorred.
Three beauteous Daughters, and seven hopeful Boys,
Renewed his youth, and crowned his Nuptial Joys.
Lord of much Riches, which the use renownes:
Seven thousand broad-taild Sheep gras'd on his Downs;
Three thousand Camels his rank Pastures fed;
Arabia's wandering Ships, for traffic bred:
His grateful Fields a thousand Oxen tilled;
They with their rich increase the hungry filled:
Five hundred Asses yearly took the Horse;
Producing Mules of greater speed and force;
The Master of a mighty Family;
Well ord'red, and directed by his Eye.
None was more opulent in all the East,
Of greater Power; yet such as still increast.
By daily turns the Brothers entertain
Each other: with the week begin again.
This constant custom held: Not to excite
And pamper the voluptuous Appetite;
But to preserve the Union of their Blood
With sober Banquets, and unpurchas'd Food.
Th'invited Sisters with their graces blessed
Their festivals; and were themselves a Feast.
Their turns accomplished, Jobs religious care
His Sons assembles; whose united prayer
Like sweet perfumes from golden Censors rise:
Then with divine Lustrations sanctifies.
And when the Rosy-finger'd Morn arose;
From bleating Flocks unblemisht fatlings chose;
Proportioned to their number: these he slew,
And bleeding on the flaming Altar threw
Perhaps, said he, my Children in the heat
Of wine and mirth, their Maker may forget;
And give access to Sin. Thus they the Round
Of Concord Keep; by his Devotions crowned.
Iehova from the summit of the sky,
Environed with his winged Hierarchy,
The world survaid. When lo, the Prince of Hell,
Who whilome from that envied Glory fell,
Like an infectious Exhalation
Shot through the Spheres; and stood before his Throne.
False Spirit said, the Almighty, that all shapes
Do counterfeit to perpetrate thy Rapes;
Whence come thou? He replied; I with the Sun
Have circl'd the round World: much People won
From thy strict Rule, to my indulgent Reign:
Taught that no pleasure can result from pain.
Have thou, said God, observed my servant Job?
Is their a Mortal treading on the Globe
Of Earth so perfect? can thy wicked Arts
Corrupt his goodness? all thy fiery Darts
The Armor of his fortitude repels;
In Justice he, as thou in fraud, excels:
Our power adores, with sacrifices feasts;
Loves what thou hat'st; and all thy works detests.
Has Job served God for nothing? Satan said:
Or unrewarded at thy Altar paid
His frequent vows? Have thou not him, and all
Which he calls his, enclosed with a wall
Of strength impregnable? his labors blessed?
And almost with prosperity oppressed?
Left nothing to desire? yet should thou lay
Thy hand upon him; or but take away
What thy Indulgence gave; in foul disgrace
He would blaspheme, and curse thee to thy face.
Iehova said; his Children, all he has,
Are subject to the venom of thy wrath:
Alone his Person spare. The tempter then
Shrunk from his presence to th'aboads of Men.
As at their elder Brother's all the rest
Of that fair offspring celebrate is feast
With liberal joy; and cool th'inflaming blood
Of generous grapes, with crystal of the flood:
A Messenger arrived, half out of breath,
Yet pale with horror of escaped Death,
And cried; Oh Job, as thy strong Oxen tilled
The stubborn fallowes; while thy Asses filled
Themselves with Herbage; all became a prey
To armed Sabaeans, who in ambush lay:
Thy Servants by their cursed fury slain;
And I the only Messenger remain.
Another entered, ere his tale was told,
With singed hair; and said; I must unfold
A dreadful Accident: At Noone, a Night
Of clouds arose, that Day deprived of Light:
Whose roaring conflicts from their breaches threw
Darts of inevitable flames, which slew
Thy Sheep and Shepherds: I, of all alone
Escaped, to make the sad Disaster known.
This hardly said; a third, with blood imbrew'd,
Brake through the Press, and thus his grief pursued:
The fierce Chaldaeans in three Troops assaild
Our Guards; till they their Souls through wounds exhaled:
Then drove away thy Camels, only I
Thus wounded, live to tell thy loss, and Die.
As thronging Billows one another drive
To murmuring shores; so thick and fast arrive
These Messengers of Death: The fourth and last,
With staring hair, wild looks, and breathless haste,
Rusht in and said: Oh Job! prepare to hear
The saddest news that ever pierced an ear.
Lo, as thy Children on soft Couches lay,
And with discourses entertained the Day,
A sudden Tempest from the Desert flew
With horrid wings, and thundered as it blew.
Then whirling round, the Quoines together struck;
And to the ground that lofty fabric shook:
Thy Sons and Daughters buried in the fall;
Who, ah! deserved a nobler Funeral.
And I alone am living to relate
Their Tragedies, that was denied their Fate.
He, who the assaults of Fortune, like a rock
So long withstood; could not sustain this shock;
But rising, forthwith from his shoulders tare
His purple robe, and, and shaved his dangling hair
Then on the Earth his Body prostrate laid;
And thus with humble adoration, said:
Naked I was, at my first hour of Birth;
And naked must return unto the Earth.
God gives; God takes away: Oh be his Name
For ever blessed! thus free from touch of blame
Job firmly stood: and with a patient mind
His Crosses bare; nor at his God repined.

Before his Throne appeared, whose only sight
Beatitude infused: Th'inveterate foe,
In fogs ascending from the depth below,
Profain'd their blessed Assembly: what pretense,
Said God, has brought thee hither? and from whence?
I come, said he, from compassing the Earth:
Their Travels seen who spring from humane birth.
Then God: have thou my Servant Job beheld?
Can his rare piety be paralel'd;
His Justice equaled? can alluring vice,
With all her Sorceries, his Soul entice?
His daily Orisons attract our Ears;
Who punishment, less then the trespass, fears:
And still his old Integrity retains
Through all his woes, inflicted by thy trains.
When he, whose laboring thoughts admit no rest,
This answer threw out of his Stygian breast:
Job to himself is next, who will not give
All that he has, so his own Soul may live?
Stretch out thy hand; with aches pierce his bones,
His flesh with lashes; multiply his groans:
Then if he curse thee not, let thy dire Curse
Increase my torments, if they can be worse.
To whom the Lord: Thou Instrument of strife,
Enjoy thy cruel wish: but spare his Life.
The Soul of Envy, from his presence went;
And through the burning Air, made his descent.
To execution falls: The blood within
His veins inflames, and poisons his smooth skin.
Now all was but one sore: from foot to head
With burning Carbuncles, and Ulcers spread;
He on the Ashes sits, his fate deplores:
And with a pot-sheard, scrapes the swelling Sores.
His frantic wife, whose patience could not bear
Such weight of Miseries, thus wounds his ear:
Is this the purchase of thy Innocence?
O Fool, thy Piety is thy offense.
He whom thou serv'st, has us of all berest:
Our Children slain, and thee to torments left.
Go on; his Justice praise: O rather fly
To thy assured relief; Curse God, and dye.
Thou wretch thy Sexes folly; he replied:
Shall we who have so long his Bounty tried,
And flourished in his favor, now not bear
Our harms with patience; but renounce his Fear?
Thus his great Mind his Miseries transcends:
Nor the least accent of his lips offends.
Now was his ruin by the breath of Fame
Divulged through all the East: when Zophar came
From pleasant Naamath: wise Eliphas
From Theman, rich in Palms, but poor in grass:
And Bildad from Suitah's fruitful Soil;
Praised for the plenty of her Corn and Oil.
These meet from several Quarters to condole
With their old Friend, and comfort his sad Soul.
Yet at the first, unknown: his Miseries
Had so transformed him, known, they joined their cries,
Wept bitterly, their sable Mantles tare,
Raised Clouds of Dust, that fell upon their hair.
Seven Days they sat besides him on the ground;
As many Nights, in silent Sorrow drowned.
For yet they knew the Torrent of his woe
Would by resistance more outrageous grow.
He, when excess of Sorrow, had given way
To the relief of words, thus cursed his Day:
O perish may the Day, which first gave light
To me, most wretched! and the fatal Night
Of my Conception! let that Day be bound
In Clouds of Pitch, nor walk the Etheriall Round.
Let God not write it in his Roll of Days:
Nor let the Sun restore it with his Rays.
Let Deaths dark Shades involve, no light appear
But dreadful Lightnings: its own horrors fear.
Be it the first of Miseries to all,
Or last of Life; defamed with Funeral.
O be that dismal Night, for ever blind!
Lost in it self; nor to the Day rejoined!
Nor numbered in the swift Circumference
Of Months and Years; but vanish in offense.
O let it sad and solitary prove:
No sprightly Music hear, nor Songs of Love.
Let wandering Apparitions then affright
The trembling Bride, and quench the Nuptial light.
O Let those hate it, who the Daylight hate:
Who mourn and groan beneath their sorrows weight.
Let the eclipsed Moon, her Throne resign,
In steed of Stars, let Blazing Meteors shine.
Let it not see the Dawning flecke the skies;
Nor the gray Morning from the Ocean rise:
Because the Door of Life it left unclos'd;
And me, a wretch, to cruel fates exposed.
Oh why was I not strangled in the womb!
Nor in that secret prison found a Tomb!
Or since untimely borne; why did not I
(The next of blessings) in that instant die?
Why kneeled the Midwife at my Mothers throes!
With pain produced! and nurse for future woes!
Else had I an eternal Requiem kept;
And in the arms of Peace for ever slept:
With Kings and Princes ranckt; who lofty frames
In Deserts raised, t'immortalize their Names:
Who made the wealth, of Provinces their prey:
In death as mighty, and as rich, as they.
Then I, as an Abortive, had not been;
Nor with the hated Light, such Sorrows seen:
Slept, where none ere by violence oppressed;
And where the weary from their Labors rest:
No Prisoners there, enforced by torments, cry;
But fearelesse by their old Tormentors Lie:
The Mean, and Great, on equal Bases stand;
No Servants there obey, nor Lords command.
Why should afflicted Souls in anguish live!
And only have immunitie to grieve?
Oh how they wish for Death, to close their eyes!
But oh, in vain? since he the wretched flies.
For whom they dig, as Pioners for Gold;
Which the dark entrales of the Earth unfold:
And having found him, as their Liberty,
With Joy encounter; and contented die.
Why should he live, from whom God has the path
Of safety hid, incompast with his wrath?
In Storms of sigh's I taste my bitter food:
My groans break from me, like a roaring flood.
The Ruin which I feared, and in my thought
So often revolved, one fatal Hour has brought.
Nor durst I on Prosperity presume;
Or time in sleep; and barren Ease consume;
But watched my weary steps: and yet for all
My Providence, these Plagues upon me fall.

O Friend, be it no breach of Love, that I
With silence dare not justify a wrong:
For who in such a Cause can curb his Tongue?
Will thou, that were to piety a guide,
That others have with patience fortifide:
Confirmed the Strong, given sinews to the Weak:
Now in the change of Fortune faint, and break
Into offenses? aggravate thy harms,
Forsake thy strength, and cast away thy arms?
Is this thy Piety, thy Confidence,
Thy hope, and Life untainted with offense?
Consult with former Ages: Have they known
The guiltless perish, or the Just ore 'throwne?
But those who plow with vice, and mischief throw
Into the furrows; reap the Seed they sow.
God shall destroy them with his Nostrils breath:
And send them weeping to the caves of Death.
For he the raging Lioness confounds;
The roaring Lion with his javelin wounds:
Scatters their Whelps; their grinders breaks: so they,
With the old Hunter, starve for want of Prey.
Now when the Night her sable wings had spread;
And sleep his Deaw on pensive Mortals shed:
When Visions in their aerie shapes appear;
A Voice, not humane, whispered in mine ear.
My knees each other struck; the frighted blood
Fled to my heart; my hair like bristles stood.
An Angel then appeared before my sight:
Yet could no shape discern; so great a light
He threw about him: forthwith, silence brake;
And thus to me, intranc'd with wonder, spoke:
Shall mortal Man, that is but borne to die;
Compare in Justice, and Integrity,
With him who made him? he who must descend
Again to Earth, and in Corruption end?
His Angels were imperfect in his sight,
Although indu'd with Intellectual Light;
Whom he accused of folly: much more they,
Who dwell in houses, built of brittle clay;
Which have their weak foundations in the dust:
The food of worms, and Times devouring Rust.
They to the Evening from the Suns uprise,
Are exercised with change of Miseries:
Then, unregarded, set in endless Night;
Nor ever shall review the Morning light.
Thus all their Glories vanish with their breath:
They, and their Wisdoms, vanquished by Death.

What Saint will thou solicit, or what Friend?
The Storm of his own rage the fool confounds:
And Envies rankling sting the imprudent wounds.
Often have I seen him, like a Cedar, spread
His ample Root; and his ambitious Head
With Clouds invest: then, to the amaze of all,
Plow up the Earth with his prodigious fall.
His wandering Orphans find no safe retreat;
But friendlesse suffer at the Iudgement-Seat:
The greedy eat the harvest of their toil,
Snatched from the scratching thorns; to theives a spoil.
Though Sorrow spring not from the womb of Earth;
Nor troubles from the Dust derive their Birth:
Yet man is borne to numerous Miseries,
As dying Sparks from trembling flames arise.
Should I the burden of thy face sustain?
I would not justify myself in vain:
But at his feet my humble Soul deject
With prayers and tears; who wonders can effect:
As infinite, as great; and far above
That Sphere wherein our low Conceptions move.
He waters from celestial Casements powers,
Which fall upon the furrowed Earth in showers:
To comfort those who mourn in want; and give
The famisht food, that they may eat and Live.
The Counsels of the Subtle he prevents;
And by his wisdom frustrates their Intents:
Intangles in the Snares themselves contrive;
Who desperately to their own Ruin drive.
They meet with Darkness in the clearest Light:
And grope at Noone, as if involved with Night.
Licentious Swords, Oppression armed with power,
Nor Envies jaws, the Righteous shall devour.
They ever hope, though exercised with care:
The wicked silen'st by their own despair.
Happy is he whom Gods own hands chastise.
Since so, let none his Chastisements despise.
For he both hurts and heales: binds up again
The wounds he made, and mittigates their pain.
In six afflictions will thy refuge be;
And from the seventh, and last, shall set thee free.
From meager Famines bloodlesse Massacrees;
And from the cruel thirst of horrid Wars:
Preserved from the scourge of poisonous tongues;
The sting of Malice, and insulting Wrongs.
Thou shall in safety smile; when all the Earth
Shall suffer by the rage of War and Death.
The Midian Tiger, The Arabian Bear,
Nor Idumaean Lion shall thou fear.
They all their native fierceness shall decline;
And senseless Stones shall in thy aid combine.
Thy Tents shall flourish in the Joys of Peace;
The wealth and Honor of thy House increase:
Thy Children, and their offspring, shall abound;
Like blades of grass, that cloth the pregnant ground.
Thou, full of Days, like weighty shocks of Corn
In season reapt, shall to thy grave be borne.
This truth, by long experience learnt, apply

Then Job, Oh were my sufferings duly waigh'd;
Were they together in one Balance laid:
The Sands whereon the rolling Billows roar,
Were less in weight, and not in number more.
My words are swallowed in these Deaths of woes;
While Storms of sighs my silent grief disclose.
Gods Arrows on my breast descend in showers:
There stick, and poison all my vital powers.
It Is he, who arms against a Mortal bears;
Subdues my strength, and chils my heart with fears.
Do hungry Asses in fresh pastures bray?
Or Oxen low before full cribs of hay?
Oh can unseas'ned cates the guest invite?
What taste is in an Eggs unsavory white?
My lothing soul abhors your bitter food;
Which sorrow feeds, and turns my tears to blood.
Oh that the Lord would favor my request;
And send my Soul to her eternal rest!
Deliver from this Dungeon, which restraines
Her liberty, and break Afflictions chains!
Then should my Torments find a sure relief:
And I become insensible of grief.
Oh, by not sparing, cure his wounds; who has
Divulged thy truth, and still preserved his faith!
What strength have I to hope? or to what end
Should I on such a wasted Life depend?
Was I by rocks engendered? ribd with steel?
Such tortures to resist, or not to feel?
No hope, no comfort, but in Death is left;
Thus torn with wounds, of all my Joys bereft.
True Friends, who fear their Maker, should impart
Soft pity to a sad and broken Heart:
But Oh, the great in vows, and near in Blood,
Forsake me like the torrent of a Flood:
Which in the winding valleys glides away;
And scarce maintains the Current of a Day:
Or stands in solid Ice, concealed with Snow;
But when the lowdly-storming South winds blow,
And mounted Sun invades it with his beams,
Dissolves; and scatters his exhausted Streams.
Who from the parched fields of Thema came,
From Shaeba scorched with etheriall Flame.
In expectation to assuage their thirst:
Deluded, blushed; and his dry channels cursed.
So you now cease to be what once you were:
And view my downfall with the eyes of Fear,
Have I required your bounty to repair
My ruined fortunes? was it in my prayer
That you for me the Mighty would oppose?
And in a just revenge pursue my foes?
If I have erred instruct me; tell wherein:
My tongue shall never justify a Sin.
Although a due reproof inform the Sense:
Detraction is the Gall of Impudence.
Why add you sorrow to a troubled mind?
Passion must speak: her words are but as wind.
Against an Orphan you your forces bend:
And banquet with the afflictions of a friend.
Accuse not now, but judge: you from my youth
Have known and try'de me, speak I more then truth?
Vnveile your Eyes, and then I shall appear
The same I am; from all aspersions clear.
Have I my heart disguised with my tongue?
Could not my taste distinguish right from wrong?
The life of Man is a perpetual war:

He a poor mercenary serves for bread:
For all his travel, only clothed and fed.
The Hireling longs to see the Shades ascend;
That with the tedious Day his toil might end,
And he his pay receive: but, ah! in vain
I Months consume; yet never rest obtain.
The Night charms not my Cares with sleeplesse eyes
My Tornients cry: When will the Morning rise!
Why runs the Chariot of the Night so slow?
The Day Star finds me tossing to and fro.
Worms gnaw my flesh; with filth my ulcers run:
My skin like clods of Earth, chapt with the Sun.
Like shuttles through the loome, so swiftly glide
My feathered Hours; and all my hopes deride!
Remember, Lord, my life is but a wind;
Which passes by, and leaves no print behind.
Then never shall my Eyes their lids unfold;
Nor mortal sight my vanished face behold,
Not thou, to whom our thoughts apparent be,
Should thou desire, could him, that is not, see.
As clouds resolve to air, so never more.
Shall gloomy Graves their Dead to Light restore:
Nor shall they to their sumptuous Roofes return;
But lie forgotten, as if never borne.
Then, O my Soul, while thou have freedom, break
Into Complaints: give Sorrow leave to speak.
Am I a raging Sea, or furious VVhale?
That thou should thus confine me with a wall?
How often when the rising Stars had spread
Their golden Flames, said I! now shall my Bed
Refresh my weary limbs; and peaceful Sleep.
My care and anguish in his Lethe steep.
But lo! sad Dreams my troubled Brains surprise:
And ghastly Visions wound my staring Eyes.
So that my yiedling Soul, subdude with grief,
And tortured Body, to their last relief
Would gladly fly: and by a violence.
Less painful, take from greater pain the Sense.
For life is but my curse: resume the breath
I must restore, and fold me up in Death.
O what is man, to whom thou should impart
So great an Honor as to search his Heart!
To watch his Steps, observe him with thine eye;
And daily with renewed afflictions try!
Still must I suffer? will thou never leave?
Nor give a little time for grief to breath?
My Soul has sinned: how can I expiate
Her guilt great Guardian, or prevent thy hate?
Why aim'st thou all thy darts at me alone?
Who to my self am know a Burden grown.
VVilt thou not to a broken Heart dispense
Thy Balm of mercy, and expunge the offense,
E're dust return to dust? Then thou no more
Shall see my Face; nor I thy Name adore.

Vain Man, how long will thou thy God up-braid!
And like the roaring of a furious wind
Thus vent the wild distemper of thy mind!
Can he pervert his Judgments? shall he swerve
From his own Justice, and thy Passions serve?
If he thy Sons for their rebellion slew;
Death was the wages to their merit dew.
Oh would thou seek unto the Lord betimes,
With fervent prayer, and abstinence from crimes;
Nor with new follies spot thy Innocence:
Then would he always watch in thy defense;
The House, that harbor'd so much virtue, bless
With fruitful Peace; and crown thee with success.
Then would he centuple thy former store;
And make thee far more happy then before.
Search thou the Records of Antiquity;
And on our Ancestors reflect thine Eye:
For we, alas! are but of Yesterday;
Know nothing, and like shadows fleet away.
Thou in those Mirrors shall the truth behold;
Whose tongues un-erring Oracles unfold.
Can Bulrushes but by the River grow?
Can Flags there flourish where no waters flow?
Yet they, when green, when yet untoucht, of all
That cloth the Spring, first hang their heads, and fall.
So double-hearted Hypocrites, so they
Who God forget, shall in their prime decay.
Their ayery hopes as brittle as the thin
And subtle webs, which toyling Spiders spin.
Their Houses full of wealth, and Riot, shall
Deceive their trust; and crush them in their fall.
Though like a Cedar, by the River fed,
He to the Sun his ample Branches spread,
His Top surrounds with Clouds; deep in the flood
Bathes his firm Roots; even of himself a VVood:
And from his height a night-like shadow throw
Upon the Marble Palaces below:
Yet shall the Axe of Justice hew him down;
And level with the Root, his lofty Crown.
No Eye shall his out-raz'd impression view:
Nor mortal know where such a Glory grew.
Those seeming goods, whereof the wicked vaunt
Thus fade, while others on their ruins plant.
God never will the Innocent forsake:
Nor sinful Souls to his protection take.
Cleanse thou thy Heart: then in thy ample breast
Joy shall triumph, and smiles thy cheeks invest.
He will thy Foes with silent shame confound:
And their proud structures level with the ground.

But Oh what Man is righteous in his Eyes!
Who can not-guilty plead before his Throne?
Or of a thousand Actions answer one?
God is in wisdom, as in power, immense:
Who ever could contend without offense,
Offend unpunish't? you who Glory most
In your own Strength, can you of conquest boast?
Cloud-touching Mountains to new seats are borne
From their Foundations, by his fury torn.
The affrighted Earth in her distemper quakes;
When his Almighty Hand her Pillars shakes.
At whose command the Suns swift Horses stay;
While Mortals wonder at so long a Day.
The Moon into her darkened Orb retires:
Nor sealed up Stars extend their golden fires.
He, only He, Heavens blew Pavillion spreads:
And on the Oceans dancing Billows treads.
Immane Arcturus, weeping Pleiades,
Orion, who with Storms plowes up the Seas,
For several Seasons framed: and all that roll
Their radiant Flame about the Antartick Pole.
What wonders are effected, by his might!
Oh how inscrutable, how Infinite!
Though he observe me, and be ever by;
Yet, ah! Invisible to mortal Eye.
Can hands of Flesh compel him to restore
What he shall take? or who dare ask wherefore?
The great in Pride, and Power, like Meteors shall
(If he relent not) by his Vengeance fall.
And Oh shall I, a worm, my cause defend;
Or in vain Argument with God contend?
I would not were I innocent dispute;
But humbly to my Judge present my Suite.
Yet never could my hopes be confident;
Though God himself should to my wish consent:
Who with incessant storms my peace confounds;
And multiplies my undeserved wounds:
Nor gives me time to breathe; my Stomach fills
With food of bitter taste, and Loathsome pills.
Speak I of strength, his strength the strong obey:
If I of Judgment speak, who shall a Day
Appoint for trial? should I Justify
A Vice, my heart would give my tongue the lie.
If of perfection boast; I should herein
My guilt disclose: thought I, I had no Sin;
My self I should not know. Oh bitter strife!
Whose only Issue is the hate of life!
Yet judge not by events: in general.
The good and bad without distinction fall.
For he th'Appeale of innocence derides;
And with his Sword the controverse decides:
He gives the Earth to those that tyrannize:
And spreads a veil before the Judges Eyes.
Or else what were his power? Oh you who see
My miseries, this truth behold in me!
My days run like a Post, and leave behind
No tract of joy: as ships before the wind,
They through this human Ocean sail away:
And fly like Eagles which pursue their prey.
If I determine to remove my care;
Forget my grief, and comfort my Despair:
The fear that he would never purge me, mocks
M'imbarqued Hopes, and drives them on the Rocks.
For if he hold me guilty; if I soil
My self with Sin, I then but vainly toil.
Though I should wash my self in melting Snow,
Until my hands were whiter; he would throw
Me down to Earth: and, ah! so plunge in mire,
That I should loath to touch my own attire:
For he, is not as I: a man, with whom
I might contend, and to a Trial come.
I, in my cause shall find no Advocate;
Nor Vmpire, to compose our sad debate.
Oh should he from my shoulders take his Rod;
Free from the awe and terror of a God:
Then would I argue in my own defense;
And boldly justify my Innocence.

My Passion, but in bitterness of Soul,
Thus tear the Air: what should thy wrath incense
To punish him who knows not his offense?
Ah! do thou in oppression take delight?
Will thou thy Servant fold in shades of Night,
And smile on wicked Counsels? do thou see
With Eyes of Flesh? is Truth concealed from thee?
What are thy Days as frail as ours? or can
Thy years determine like the age of Man?
That thou should my Delinquencies exquire;
And with Variety of tortures tire?
Cannot my known Integrity remove
Thy cruel Plagues? will thou remorselesse prove?
Ah! will thou thy own workmanship confound?
Shall the same hand that did create, now wound?
Remember I am built of clay; and must
Resolve to my originary Dust.
Thou powr'dst me out like milk into the womb;
Like curds conden'st; and in that secret room
My Limbs proportioned; clothed with flesh and skin;
With bones, and sinews, fortified within:
The Life thou gav'st, thou have with plenty fed;
Long cherisht, and through Dangers safely led.
All this is buried in thy breast: and yet
I know thou can not thy old Love forget.
Thou, if I err observ'st me with stern eyes:
Nor will the plea of Ignorance suffice.
Woe unto me should sin my Soul infect*
Who dare not now, though innocent, erect
My downe-cast looks: which clouds of shame infold.
Great God, my growing Miseries behold!
Thou like a Lion huntest me: wounds on wounds
Thy hands inflict; thy fury knows no bounds.
Against me all thy Plagues embattaild are:
Subdued with changes of internal war.
Why did thou draw me from my Mothers womb?
Would I from thence had slipped into my Tomb,
Before the Eye of man my face had seen;
And mixed with dust, as I had never been!
Oh since I have so short a time to live,
A little ease to these my torments give:
Before I go where all in silence mourn;
From whose dark shores no travelers return:
A Land where Death, confusion, endless Night,
And Horror reign: where Darkness is their Light.

Think thon by talking to be justified?
Or shall these wild distempers of thy mind,
This tempest of thy tongue, thus rave, and find
No opposition? shall we guilty be
Of thy untruths, in not reproving thee?
Nor die thy cheeks in Blushes for the scorn
Thou throw'st on us; till now with patience borne?
Have thou not said to God? my heart's upright,
My Doctrine pure, I blameless in thy sight.
O that he would be pleased to reply:
And take the veil from thy Hypocrisy!
Should he reveal his wisdom to thine eyes:
How would thou thy integrity despise?
Acknowledging these punnishments far less
Then thy offenses? and his grace profess?
Can thou into thy Makers Councels dive?
Or to the knowledge of his thoughts arrive?
Higher then highest Heavens; more deep then Hell;
Longer then Earth; more broad then Seas that swell
Above their shores, can man his footsteps trace?
Would he the course of Nature change? the face
Of things invert? and all dissolve again
To their old Chaos? who could God restrain?
He knows that man is vain: his eyes detect
Their secret crimes? and shall not he correct?
Thus Fools grow wise; subdue their stubborn souls:
Though in their pride more rude then Asses foles.
If thou affect thy cure: reform thy ways:
Let penitence resolve to tears, and raise
Thy hands to heaven; what Rapine got, restore:
Nor let insidious Vice approach thy Door.
Then thou thy looks shall raise from blemish clear:
Walk in full strength, and no disaster fear.
As winter Torrents, tumbling from on high,
Waste with their speed, and leave their channels dry:
So shall the sense of former sorrows run
From thy Remembrance. As the mounted Sun
Breaks through the Clouds, and throws his golden Rays
About the world; shall thy increasing Days
Succeed in Glory. Thou thy self shall rise
Like that bright Star, which last forsakes the skies:
For ever by thy steadfast hopes secured;
Entrenched, and with walls of Brass immured:
Confirmed against all Storms. Soft sleep shall close
Thy guarded eyes with undisturbed repose.
The Great shall honor; the distressed shall
Thy grace implore: beloved, or feared of all.
The sight of thee, shall strike the envious blind:
The wicked, with anxietie of Mind
Shall pine away; in sighs consume their breath:
Prevented in their hopes by sudden Death.

And when you die the fame of wisdom dies.
Though Passion be a fool, though you profess
Your selves such Sages: yet know I no less,
Nor am to you inferior. What blind Soul
Could this not see? It Is easy to control.
My sad example shows, how those whose cries
Even God regards, their scoffing Friends despise.
He that is wretched, though in life a Saint,
Becomes a scorn: This is an old Complaint.
Those who grow old in fluency and ease,
When they from shore behold him tossed on Seas,
And near his ruin; his condition slight:
Pric'd as a Lamp consumed with his own light.
The Tents of Robbers flourish. Earths increase
Foments their riot who disturb her peace.
Who God contemn, in sin securely reign:
And prosperous Crimes the meed of Virtue gain.
Ask thou the Citizens of pathlesse woods;
What cut the air with wings, what swim in floods;
Brute beasts, and fostering Earth: in general
They will confess the power of God in all.
Who knows not that his hands both good and ill
Dispense? that Fate depends upon his will?
All that have Life are subject to his sway:
And at his pleasure prosper, or decay.
Is not the Ear the Judge of Eloquence?
Gives not the Palate to the Taste his sense?
Sure, knowledge is derived from length of years:
And Wisdoms brows are clothed with Silver hairs.
Gods power is as his prudence; equal great:
In Counsel, and Intelligence, complete.
Who can what he shall ruin, build again?
Loose whom he binds? or his strong Arm restrain?
At his rebuke, the Living waters fly
To their old Springs, and leave their Channels dry:
When he commands, in Cataracts they roar:
And the wild Ocean leaves it self no shore.
His Wisdom and his Power our thoughts transcend:
Both the Deceiver and deceived depend
Upon his beck: He those who others rule
Infatuates, and makes the Judge a fool:
Dissolves the Nerves of Empire, Kings deprives
Of Sovereignty; their Crowns exchanged for gyves.
Impoverisht Nobles into exile leads:
And on the Carcases of Princes treads.
Takes from the Orator his eloquence;
From ancient Sages their discerning sense.
Subjects the worthy to contempt and wrong:
The valiant terrifies, disarmes the strong.
Vnvailes the secrets of the silent Night:
Brings, what the shades of death obscures, to light.
A Nation makes more numerous then the Stars:
Again devours with Famine, Plagues, and Wars.
Now, like a Deluge, they the Earth surround:
Forthwith, reduced into a narrow bound.
He Fortitude and Counsel takes away
From their Commanders: who in Deserts stray,
Grope in the Dark, and to no Seat confine
Their wandering feet; but reele as drunk with wine.
This by mine Eyes and ears have I convay'd

Need I in depth of knowledge yield to you?
Is not as much to my discretion due?
Oh that the All-seeing Judge, who cannot err,
Would hear me plead; and with a wretch confer!
You Corrasives into my wounds distill:
And ignorant' Artists, with your physic kill.
Ah! shame you not to vent such forgeries?
Seal up your lips and be in silence wise.
And since you are by far more fit to hear,
Then to instruct; afford my tongue an ear.
Oh will you wickedly for God dispute?
And by deceitful ways strive to confute?
Are you, in favor of his person, bent
Thus to prejudicate the Innocent?
Need's he an Advocate to plead his Cause?
To justify untruth's against his Laws?
Can you on him such falsities obtrude?
And as a Mortal the most wise delude?
Will it avail you, when he shall remove.
Your painted vizors? will not he reprove,
And sharply punish; if in secret you,
For favor, or reward, Injustice do?
Shall not his Excellence your Souls affright?
His Horrors on your heads like Thunder light?
Your memories to ashes must decay:
And your frail bodies are but built of clay.
Forbear to speak, till my Conceptions shall
Discharge their Birth; then let what will befall.
Why should I tear my flesh? cast of the care
Of future life? and languish in despair?
Though God should kill me, I my confidence
On him would fix; nor quit my own defense.
He shall restore me by his saving might:
Nor shall the Hypocrite approach his sight.
Give me your ears, Oh you who were my Friends;
While injured Innocence it self defends,
I am prepared, and wish my Cause were tried:
In full assurance to be justified.
Begin; who will accuse? should I not speak
In such a truth, my heart with grief would break.
Just Judge, two lets remove: that free from dread,
I may before thy high Tribunal plead.
Oh let these torments from my flesh depart;
Nor with thy terrors daunt my trembling heart:
Then charge: so I my life may justify:
And to my just complaint do thou reply.
What Sins are those that so pollute my breast:
Oh show how often I have thy Laws transgrest?
Will thou thy Servant of thy sight deprive,
And as an Enemy to Ruin drive?
Will thou a withered leaf to powder grind?
Tossed in the air by every breath of wind:
Or with thy Lightning into Ashes turn
Such worthless Stubble? only dried to burn.
Thou have indicted me of bitter Crimes:
Now punished, for the faults of former times.
Lo! my restrained feet thy fetters wound;
Watched with a Guard, and rooted in the ground.
Like rotten fruit I fall: worn like a cloth
Gnawne into rags by the devouring Moth.

Of Man from Woman sprung: His Life decays,
Like that frail flower which with the Suns uprise
Her bud unfolds; and with the Evening Dies.
He like an empty Shadow glides away:
And all his Life is but a Winters Day.
Will thou thine Eye upon a vapor bend?
Or with so weak an opposite contend?
Who can a pure and Crystal Current bring,
From such a muddy, and polluted Spring?
Oh, since his Days are numbered; since thou have
Prescribed him bounds that are not to be past:
A little with his punishment dispense:
Till he have served his time, and part from hence.
A tree, though hewne with axes to the ground,
Renew's his growth, and springs from his green wound:
Although his root wax old, his fivers dry;
Although the saplesse bole begin to dye;
Yet will at sent of Water freshly sprout:
And like a plant thrust his young Branches out.
But Man, when once cut down; when his pale ghost
Fleets into air; he is for ever lost.
As Meteors vanish, which the Seas exhale;
As Torrents in the drouth of Summer fail:
So perished Man from Death shall never rise;
But sleep in silent Shades with seal'd-up Eyes:
While the Caelestiall Orbs in order roll,
And turn their flames about the steadfast Pole.
Oh that thou would conceal me in the Grave;
Immure with marble in that secret Cave,
Until the Tempest of thy wrath were past!
A time prefix, and think of me at last!
Can man recover his departed Breath?
I will expect until my change in Death;
And answer at thy call: Thou will renew
What thou have ruined, and my fears subdue.
But now thou tell my Steps, mark'st when I err:
Nor wilt the vengeance due to Sin defer.
Thou in a Bag have my Transgressions sealed:
And only by their Punishments revealed.
As Mountains, tossed by Earthquakes, down are thrown;
Rocks torn up by the roots: as hardest Stone
The softly-falling drops of water wear;
As Inundations all before them bear;
And leave the Earth abandoned: so shall
The aspiring hopes of Man to nothing fall.
Thy wrath prevails against him every Day;
Whom with a changed Face thou send'st away:
Then knows not if his Sons to honor rise;
Or struggle with their strong necessities.
But here his wasting Flesh with anguish burns:
And his perturbed Soul within him mournes.

Can man such follies utter and be wise?
Which bluster from the Tempest of thy mind,
As if thy breast enclosed the Eastern wind.
Will thou thy idle rage by Reason prove?
Or speak those Thoughts which have no power to move?
Thou from thy rebel Heart have God exiled;
Kept back thy Prayers his sacred Truth reviled.
Thy Lips declare thy own impiety;
Accuse of fraud, condemn thee; and not I.
Art thou the first of Mortals? were thou made
Before the Hills their lofty Brows displayed?
Has God to thee his Oracles resigned?
Is wisdom only to thy Breast confined?
What know thou that we know not? as complete
In Natures graces; in acquired, as great.
There are gray heads among us: Counselors,
To whom thy Father was a Boy in Years.
Slight thou the Comforts we from God impart?
What greater Secret lurkes in thy proud heart,
That hurries thee into these ecstasies?
What fury flames in thy disdainful Eyes?
VVilt thou a war against thy Maker wage?
And wound him with thy tongues blasphemous rage?
Was ever humane flesh from blemish clear?
Can they be guiltless whom frail women bear?
He trusts not his Ministers of Light:
The radiant Stars shine dimnly in his Sight.
How perfect then is man? from head to foot
Defiled with filth, and rotten at the root.
Who poys'ning sin with burning thirst devours:
As parched Earth sucks in the falling showers.
What I have heard and seen (would thou intend
Thy cure) I would unto thy care commend;
Which often the wise have in my thoughts revived:
To them from knowing Ancestors derived;
Who God-like over happy Nations reigned,
And Virtue by suppressing Vice sustein'd.
The Unjust his Days in painful travel spends:
The Cruel suddenly to Death descends.
He starts at every sound that strikes his Ear:
And punishment anticipates by fear.
Who from the height of all his Glory shall,
Like newly-kindled Exhalations, fall:
Despaires cold breath his springing hopes confounds:
Who feels the expected sword before it wounds.
He begs his bread from door to door, and knows
The Night draws on that must his Day enclose.
Horror and anguish shall his soul affright;
Daunt like a King that draws his Troops to fight.
Since he against the Almighty stretched his hand,
And like a rebel spurned at his Command;
God shall upon his sevenfold target rush,
And his stiff neck beneath his shoulders crush.
Though Luxury swell in his shining eyes,
And his fat belly load his yiedling thighs:
Though he dismantled Cities fortify,
From their deserted ruins raised on high:
Yet his congested wealth shall melt like snow;
Whose growth shall never to perfection grow.
Destruction shall surround him: nor shall he
His Soul from that dark night of Horror free:
God with his breath shall all his Branches blast:
And scorch with lightning by his vengeance cast.
Will the deluded trust to vanity?
And by the stroke of his own folly die?
For he shall be cut down before his time:
His spreading Branches wither in their prime.
Lo, as a storm which with the Sun ascends,
From creeping vines their unripe clusters rends;
And the fat olive, ever green with Leaves,
Together of her hopes and flowers bereaves:
So shall the great Revenger ruinate
Him and his Issue, by a dreadful fate.
Those fools who fraud with piety disguise,
And by corrupting Bribes to Greatness rise;
Their Glories shall in desolation mourn:
While hungry flames their lofty structures burn.
With Mischief they conceive; their bellies great
With swelling Vanity, bring forth Deceit.

You all are miserable Comforters.
Shall this vain wind of words, ah! never end?
Why Eliphas should thou afflict thy Friend?
Were you so lost in grief, would I thus speak?
Such bruised hearts with harshinvectives break?
Would I accumulate your Miseries
With Scorn? and draw new Rivers from your Eyes?
Oh no, my language should your passions calm:
My words should drop into your wounds like balm.
But oh my frantic Sorrow finds no ease?
Complaints nor silence can their pangs appease!
Thou Lord have my perplexed Soul deprest;
Bereft of all the comforts she possessed:
My Face thus furrowed with untimely age;
My pale and meagre looks profess thy rage.
Whose Ministers, like cunning foes, surprise;
Tear with theirteeth, transfix me with their eyes;
Against my peace combine: at once assail.
With open mouths, and impudently rail.
God has delivered me into their Jaws
Who hunt for spoil, and make their swords their Laws.
Long saild I on smooth Seas, by fore-winds borne:
Now bulg'd on rocks, and by his Tempests torn.
He by the Neck has haled, in pieces cut;
And set me as a mark on every Butt.
His Archers circle me; my reins they wound,
And, ruthlesse, shed my gall upon the ground.
Behold! he ruins upon ruins heaps:
And on me like a furious Giant leaps.
For thus with sackcloth I invest my Woe:
And dust upon my clouded forehead throw.
My cheeks are guttered with my fretting tears:
And on my falling Eyelids Death appears.
Yet is my heart upright, my prayers sincere;
My guiltless Life from your aspersions clear.
Reveal, oh Earth, the Blood that I have spilt:
Nor hear me, Heaven, if I be soiled with guilt.
My conscience knows her own Integrity:
And that all-seeing Power enthroned on high.
Yet you traduce me in my Miseries:
But I to God erect my weeping Eyes.
Would I before him might my cause defend;
And argue as a mortal with his friend:
Since I ere long that precipice must tread,
Whence none return, that leads unto the Dead.

Yawnes to devour me; my last Days are come.
Yet you with bitter scorn my pangs increase:
Nor, ah! will suffer me to die in peace.
What Advocate will take your cause in hand;
And for you at the high Tribunal stand?
Since God your erring souls deprives of sense;
Nor will exalt you in your own defense.
His Children shall their days in sorrow end,
Whose tongue with flattery deludes his Friend.
I to the vulgar am become a Jest:
Esteemed as a Minstrell at a Feast.
My sleeplesse eyes their splendour quench in tears:
My tortured body to a shadow wears.
This, in the Righteous wonder shall excite:
The Innocent shall hate the Hypocrite.
He in the path prescribed shall boldly go:
And his untainted strength shall stronger grow.
Revoke your wandering Censures, nor despise
The wretched: you who seem, but are not wise.
My flying hours arrive at their last date:
My thoughts and fortunes buried in my fate.
How soon my shortened Day is changed to Night!
Abortive Darkness veiles my setting Light.
Oh can your counsel his despair defer,
Who now is housed in his Sepulcher?
I, in the shades of death my Bed have made.
Corruption thou my Father art, I said,
And thou, O Worm, my Mother: by thy Birth
My Sister; borne, and nourished by Earth.
Where now are all my hopes? oh never more
Shall they revive! nor Death her rapes restore!
But to the graves infernal prison must
With me descend, and rot in shrouds of Dust.

To clamor, and afford a patient ear?
Do thou as beasts thy ancient friends despise?
Are we so vile and trivial in thine Eyes?
Oh miserable Man, by thy own rage
In pieces torn: can fury grief assuage?
Will God for thee the governed Earth forsake?
His purpose change, and Rocks asunder shake?
He shall their light extinguish who decline
From Virtues paths: their sparks shall cease to shine.
The Wicked shall be compassed about
With Darkness: and his oylelesse Lamp flye-out.
His wasted strength unthought-of mischiefs shall
Entrap; and he by his own counsels fall.
His desperate feet their Lord to Ruin lead:
And on prepared Engines rashly tread.
The Hunter shall entangle in his Toil;
And ravenous thieves of all his Substance spoil:
Snares, spread with tempting baits, for him shall lay;
And dig concealed Pit-fals in his way.
A thousand horrors shall his Soul affright,
Encounter; and pursue his guilty flight.
Destruction shall upon his Steps attend;
And famines rage into his guts descend:
She shall the Sinews of his strength devour,
And Death's First borne shall crop him in his flower:
Cut of his confidence; and to the King
Of Terrors, his accused Conscience, bring.
Driven from the House, unjustly called his own;
By rapine got: which flaming sulphur, thrown
From Heaven, shall burn: his root within the ground
Shall wither, and the axe his branches wound.
He and his dying memory shall rot;
His name even by the present Age forgot.
From light into perpetual Darkness hurled;
And; as a Mischief, chaste out of the World.
No Son, or Nephew shall supply his place:
Himself the last of his accursed Race.
Posterity, as those then living shall
With wonder tremble at his fearful fall.
So tragical and merited a fate
Shall swallow those, who God and Justice hate.
How long, said Job, will you with bitter words

Ten times have you aspersions on me thrown:
Your selves, as Strangers, without blushing shown.
If I have sinned, my Sins with me remain:
And I alone the punishment sustain.
It is inhumane cruelty in you
Thus to insult; and his reproach pursue
Whom Gods own hand has cast unto the ground:
And in a Labyrinth of Sorrow wound.
Unheard are my Complaints: my cries the wind
Drives through the air: my wrongs no Judgment find.
God, with besieging Troops, prevents my flight:
And folds my paths in shades more dark then night.
Has stripped me of my Glory; my Renown
Eclipsed: and from my Temples torn my Crown.
On every side destroyed; trod under foot:
I, as a plant, am pulled up by the Root.
His indignation like a furnace glowes
Who, as a foe at me his lightning throws.
All his assembled Plagues at once devour:
And round about my tents incampe their Power.
My Mothers Sons desert me: left alone
By my Familiars; by my Friends unknown.
My Kindred fail me: these alone depend
On fortunes smiles; the wretched finds no friend.
Those of my Family their Master slight:
Grown despicable in my handmaids sight.
I of my churlish servants am unheard:
My sufferings, nor Entreaties, they regard.
My Wife neglects me; though desired to take
Some pity on me, for our Childrens sake.
By idle Boys, and Idiots vilifi'd:
Who me, and my Calamities deride.
My Intimates far from my sight remove:
Those, whom I favored most, ungrateful prove.
My skin cleaves to my Bones: of this remains
No part entire, but what my teeth contains.
Oh my hard-hearted friends! take some remorse
Of him, whom God has made a Living Corse.
Will you with God in my afflictions join?
VVil't not suffice that I in Torments pine?
Oh that the words I speak were registered
Writ in a Book, for ever to be read!
Or that the tenor of my just complaint
Were sculpt with steel on Rocks of Adamant!
For my Redeemer lives: I know he shall
Descend to Earth, and man to Judgment call.
Though worms devour me, though I turn to mold;
Yet in my flesh I shall his face behold.
I from my marble Monument shall rise
Again entire, and see him with these Eyes:
Though stern diseases now consume my Reins;
And drink the blood out of my shrivel'd veins.
It Were better said: why should we persecute
Our friend; whose cause is solid at the Root?
Oh fear the sword; for punishments succeed
Our Trespasses; and cruelty must bleed.

I had been silent, but thy words excite
My struggling thoughts to vindicate the wrong
Cast on our zeal by thy reproachful tongue.
This is a truth which with the world began;
Since earth was first inhabited by man:
Sinn's triumph in swift misery concludes;
And flattering joy the Hypocrite deludes.
Although his excellence to Heaven aspire;
Though radiant Beams his shining Brows attire;
He, as his dung, shall perish on the ground:
Nor shall the impression of his Steps be found;
But like a troubled Dream shall take his flight:
And vanish as a Vision of the Night.
No mortal Eye shall see his face again:
Nor sumptuous roofes their builder entertain.
If he have Children, they shall serve the poor:
And goods by rapine got, enforced, restore.
The punishments of Luxury and Lust
Shall eat his Bones; nor leave him in the Dust.
Though vice, like sweet confections, please his taste;
Although between his tongue and palate placed:
Though he preserve, and chew it with delight;
Nor bridle his licentious appetite:
Yet shall it in his boiling Stomach turn
To bitter poison; and like wildfire burn.
He shall cast up the wealth by him devoured,
Like vomit from his yawning Entrails powered:
The gall of Aspes with thirsty lips suck in;
The Vipers deadly teeth shall pierce his skin:
Nor ever shall those happy Rivers know,
Which with pure oil and fragrant honey flow.
The Riches purchased by his Care and sweat,
He shall resign; nor of his Labors eat:
But restitution to the value make;
Nor joy in his extorted treasure take.
Since he the poor forsook; the weak oppressed;
The Mansion, by another built, possessed:
His Belly never shall be satisfied;
Nor he with his adored wealth supplied.
Of all his Sustenance at once bereft:
No Heir shall strive to inherit what is left.
He, in the pride of his full Glory, shall
To Earth descend; and by the wicked fall.
About to feed; Jehova's flaming Ire
Shall blast his hopes, and mix his food with fire.
While from the raging sword he vainly flies,
A Bow of Steel shall fix his trembling thighs.
Darts through his flowing gall shall force their way:
Eternal terrors shall his Soul dismay.
Thick darkness shall infold; a fire unblowne
Devour his Race, by their misfortunes known.
Heaven shall reveal his close impieties:
And Earth, by him defiled, against him rise.
His Substance in that Day of wrath shall waste;
Like sudden Torrents from steep Mountains cast.
This is the Portion of the Hypocrite:
Such Horrors shall on the Blasphemer light.

Afford this only comfort to your friend.
Suffer my tongue to speak my thoughts: and then
Renew your scoffs: do I complain to Men?
Since God such dreadful Arms against me bears:
Oh why should I suppress my sighs and tears!
My sufferings with astonishment survay:
And on your silent lips your fingers lay.
For should my Enemy endure the like;
The Story would my Soul with horror strike.
Why live the wicked? they by vices thrive;
Sail on smooth Seas, and at their port arrive:
Confirm a long succession; and behold
Their numerous offspring: in excess grow old.
Their Houses on secure foundations stand:
Nor are they humbled by the Almighties hand.
Their lusty Bulls serve not their Kine in vain:
Their Calves the Breeders their full time retain.
Abroad like flocks their little ones they send:
Their Children dance, in active Sports contend;
Strike the melodious Harp, shrill Timbrels ring:
And to the warbling Lute soft Ditties sing.
Life is to them a long-continued Feast:
And sleep is not more calm then Deaths arrest.
To God they say; Enjoy thy Heaven alone:
Be thou to us, as we to thee, unknown.
For what is he, that we should him obey?
Or fruitless vows before his Altar pay?
Yet their Felicity from him proceeds:
Nor am I culpable of their misdeeds.
When are their tapers quenched? do they expire,
Struck by the Thunderer, with Darts of fire?
How often are they like chafe by whirl-winds tossed?
Or early Blossoms bitten by the Frost?
When are their Vices punished in their seed?
When for their own offenses do they bleed?
How often tread destructions horrid Path?
And drink the dregs of the Revengers wrath?
Care they for their deserted Families;
When Deaths all-curing hand shall close their eyes?
Shall Man his Maker teach, who sits on high;
And swayes the worlds inferior Monarchy?
Two Men at once behold: the one possessed
Of his desires, with peace and plenty blessed:
From whose swollen breast a stream of milk distills;
Whose bones high feeding with hot marrow fills:
The other, miserable from his birth:
A burden to himself, and to the Earth.
Who never could his Hungers rage suffice.
That in perfection; This in Sorrow dies.
Yet Death, more equal; these extremes conformes;
And covers their corrupting flesh with worms.
I know your Councels; can your thoughts detect:
The forged Crimes you purpose to object.
Where are, say you, those Palaces that blas'd
With burnisht Gold, on carved Columns raised?
Built on the Ruins of the poor; the soil
By extortion purchased; and adorned with spoil?
Be judged by travelers: they will confute
What falsely you suggest, and strike you mute.
For these, and those, who high in Vice command,
Against the Thunders rage securely stand:
And flourish in the Day of wrath, when all
About them by the stroke of Slaughter fall.
Who dare against the great in Mischief plead?
Or turn his Injuries upon his head?
They shall his Corpse with funeral Pomp interre:
And lodge him in a sumptuous Sepulcher.
The Flowers which in the cirkling valley grow,
Shall on his Monument their odors throw.
All that survive shall follow him; and tread
That common path, b'innumerable led.
Why vainly then pretend you my relief?
And with false comforts aggravate my grief?

The THEMANITE) as he by wisdoms guide.
May his own joys advance? can he delight
From him receive, because his heart's upright?
Availes it him that thou from vice art clear?
Makes he thee guilty? or condemns for fear?
No Job, thy Sins these punishments beget:
Thy Sins which are as infinite as great.
Thou of their garments often have stripped the poor;
Thy Brothers pledge refusing to restore:
No water would unto the thirsty give;
Nor with thy bread the Hungry Soul relieve:
While mighty men, and those who more possessed
Then served for Riot, surfeit at thy feast.
Sad widows, by thee rifled, weep in vain:
And ruined Orphants of thy Rapes complain.
For this unthought of snares begirt thee round;
And sudden fears thy troubled Soul confound:
Dark clouds before thine Eyes their Vapors spread;
And thronging Billows roll above thy head.
Perhaps these fumes from thy distemper rise:
Sits not Jehova on the arched Skies?
Behold the Stars, which underneath display
Their sparkling fires; how far removed are they?
What can he at so great a distance know?
Can he from thence behold our deeds below?
Thick interposing Mists his eyesight bound:
Who free from trouble treads th'Etheriall Round.
Have thou observed those crooked paths, wherein
They blindly wander who are slaves to Sin?
Snatched from their hopes by an untimely end:
Cast down like Torrents, never to ascend.
Who said to God; us to our fortunes leave:
From thee what benefit do we receive?
Yet he their Houses with abundance stored.
With Showers of Gold: the God their souls adored.
Oh how my Soul, their wicked Counsel hates!
The Righteous shall behold their tragic fates;
Joy at their early-Ruine: then deride
Their flattered Glory, and now-humbled Pride.
But we, and ours, shall flourish in his Grace;
When searching Flames devour their cursed Race.
Consult with God; thy troubled mind compose:
So he shall give a period to thy woes.
Receive the Laws his sacred Lips impart:
And lodge them in the closet of thy heart.
If thou return; he will thy fall erect:
Nor shall contagious Sin thy Roof infect.
Then shall thou gather shining heaps of Gold,
As pebles which the purling Streams infold:
Trod under foot like dust. Thy God shall be
A Silver shield, a Tower of Gold to thee.
For thou on him shall thy affections place:
And humbly to his Throne exalt thy face.
Thou at his Altar shall devoutly pray:
He shall consent; and thou thy vows shall pay.
He shall thy wishes to fruition raise:
And shed celestial Beams upon thy Ways.
When Men are from their Noone of Glory thrown;
And under Sin and Sorrows burden groan:
Then shall thou say; The Almighty from the grave
Has me redeemed: He will the humble save.
Those guilty Souls who languish in Despair,
God shall restore; and strengthen at thy Prayer.

Yet Oh, how far less bitter then my wounds!
Would his divine Recesse to me were known;
That I at length might plead before his Throne.
I would such weighty arguments enforce,
As should convert his Fury to Remorse.
Then should my longing Soul his answer hear:
Would be object his power? or daunt with fear?
Oh no, his Goodness rather would impart
New vigor, and repair my broken Heart.
He would the Plea of Innocence admit:
And me for ever by his Sentence quit.
But is not to be found: though I should run
To those disclosing Portals of the Sun;
And walk his way, until his Horses steep
Their fiery fetlocks in the Iberian Deep:
Or should I to the opposed Poles repair;
Where equal cold congeales the fixed air:
And yet his searching Eyes my paths behold
When he has tried me I shall shine like gold:
For in his tract my wary feet have stepped;
His undeclined ways precisely kept:
Nor ever, have revolted from his Laws:
To me more sweet then food to hungry Jaws.
But he is still the same: (oh who can shun,
Or change his Fate!) what he decrees is done.
This truth behold in me: His Mysteries
Are Sacred, and concealed from mortal Eyes.
I therefore tremble at his dreadful sight:
Distracted thoughts my troubled Soul affright.
For oh, his terror melts my heart to tears;
Dissolves my brain, and harrowes me with fears.
Who neither would by Death prevent my woes;
Nor ease my Soul in these her bitter Throes.

To wicked men, and their rebellious Seed,
Since times to come are present in his sight,
Concealed from those who in his Laws delight?
Some slily marks remove from bordering Lands;
Feed on the Flocks they purchase, with strange hands:
The Orphants only Ass they drive away;
And make the Widows morgag'd Ox their prey:
Who force the frighted poor to turn aside;
Whom milder Rocks in their dark Cavernes hide.
Like Asses in the Desert, they their Toil
With Day renew; and rise betimes for Spoil.
The barren Wilderness presents them food
To feed themselves, and their adulterate brood.
Their Sicklers reap the Corn another sowes:
They drink the Blood which from stolen clusters flows.
The poor, by them disrobed, naked Lie:
Veild with no other covering but the sky.
Exposed to stiffning frosts, and drenching showers,
Which thickened Air from her black bosom powers:
To Torrents which from cloudy Mountains spring;
And to the hanging Cliffs for shelter cling.
They from their mothers Breasts poor Orphants rend;
Nor without gages to the needy lend.
For want of clothes they force them starve with cold:
From hungry Reapers they their sheaves withhold.
Those faint for thirst who in their vintage toil;
And from the juicie Olive press pure oil.
Oppressed Cities groan; the wounded cry
To Heaven for Vengeance: yet in peace they die.
Others, that truth oppose; despise the way
Of her prescriptions, and in Darkness stray:
Stern Murderers, that rise before the light
To kill the Innocent; and rob at night:
Unclean Adulterers, whose longing Eyes
Wait for the twy-light; enter in disguise,
And say, who sees us? Thieves who daily mark
Those Houses which they plunder in the Dark:
These Strangers are to light; the Morning Rays
By them are hated as their last of Days:
The Agonies of Death are on them, when
They are but known, or spoken of by Men:
And yet they perish by Jehova's Curse;
And fail like roaring floods that have no Sourse.
Unlike the generous Vine, which cut, abounds
With budding Jems; and prospers in her wounds.
As scorching heat the mountain snow devours;
As thirsty Earth drinks up the falling Showers:
Even so the Graves insatiable Jaws
Those Rebels swallow, who infringe his Laws.
The Wombs that bare, their Burdens shall forget:
And greedy worms their flesh with pleasure eat.
No tongue or Pen shall mention their Renown:
But lie like trees by sudden Storms cast down.
The barren they more miserable make:
And from the Widow all her Comfort take.
The Mighty fall in their seditious strife:
When once they rise, who can secure his life?
Though they be resolute and confident:
Yet are Jehova's eyes upon them bent.
But oh, how short their glory! raised to fall:
Lost in the Ashes of their funeral.
For they as others die: like Ears of Corn
By lightning blasted; or with sickles shorn.
Who doubts these contraries? who will dispute
Against me? and my Instances confute?

Dominion, and awefull Majesty,
To him belong, who crowned with sacred Rays,
The Host of Heaven in perfect concord swayes.
Who can his Armies number? infinite,
And full of Fate! on whom shines not his light?
Can Mortals righteous in his Eyes appear?
Can they be spotless whom frail women bear?
To him the radiant Sun is but obscure;
The Moon still in Eclipse; the Stars impure.
What then is Man? polluted in his Birth;
An unclean Worm that crawles upon the Earth?

Thou he that renders vigor to the weak:
Thy strength the feeble Arm with Nerves supplies;
Thou by thy Counsel makes the foolish wise:
No secret from thy Knowledge is concealed;
Caelestiall Oracles by thee revealed.
To whom art thou so prodigal of breath?
Or by what virtue do thou raise from Death?
Gods Works, Oh Bildad, we admire no less:
His prudence in their Government confess.
Dead things within the Deep were formed by him;
And all that in the curled Ocean swim.
The silent vaults of Death, unknown to Light;
And Hell it self, lie naked to his sight.
He fashioned those Harmonious Orbs, that roll
In restless Gyres about the Artick Pole.
The massy Earth, supported by his Care,
On nothing hangs in soft and fluent Air.
He in thick Clouds the pendant water binds;
Not thawed with heat, nor torn with struggling winds:
Before his radiant Throne like Curtains spread;
Yet at his beck in showers their substance shed.
With constant bounds the raging floods confines;
Till Day his Throne to endless Night resignes.
Heavens Columns, when his Storms and Thunder rake
The troubled Air, with sudden Horror shake.
Lo, at his Breath the swelling waves divide:
His awefull Scepter calmes their vanquished pride.
Whose hand the adorned Firmament displayed;
Those Serpentine yet constant Motions, made.
These but in part his power and wisdom show:
For Oh how little do we Mortals know!
Although his Fame resound through all the world;
Like Thunder from aeriall vapors hurled.

As the Lord Lives, who knows my Innocence;
Yet will not judge: but has my Soul deprived
Of all her Joys; to Misery long-lived:
While these my vital Spirits shall receive
The food of Air, and through my Nostrils breath:
No falsehood shall defile my Lips with Lies:
Or with a veil the face of Truth disguise.
Nor will I wound my clear Integrity,
By yiedling to your wrongs, but rather die.
Shall I my self betray, my Strength refuse,
Desert my Justice, and my truth accuse?
First may I sink by Torments yet unknown:
That those which now I suffer may seem none.
Let such as hate me in their Sins rejoice;
And surfeit with the pleasant Baits of Vice:
What hope has the prevailing Hypocrite,
When God shall chase his Soul to endless Night?
Will God relieve him in his Agonies?
Or from the Depth of Sorrow hear his Cries?
Will he in God delight, his aid implore
Incessantly, and his great Name adore?
Oh be instructed by these Characters
Of his impression, which my Body bears!
I his more secret Judgments will disclose:
Which you have seen, yet desperately oppose.
This is the Portion which the wicked has;
He shall inherit the Almighties wrath:
The lawless Sword his Childrens blood shall shed;
Increast for slaughter; borne to beg their bread.
Death shall the Remnant in his Dungeon keep:
No Widow at his funeral shall weep.
Although he gather Gold like heaps of Dust,
The fuel of his Luxury and Lust:
His Cabinets with change of Garments fraught
By silke-wormes spun, and Phrygian Needles wrought:
Yet for the Just reserved; who shall divide
His Treasure, and divest him of his pride.
Though he his House of polisht Marble build;
With Jasper floor'd, and carved Cedar seil'd:
Yet shall it ruin like the Moth's frail cell;
Or sheds of Reeds, which Summers heat repel.
He shall lie down, neglected, as unknown:
And when he wakes, see nothing of his own.
Terrors, like swallowing Deluges, shall fright:
Swept from his Bed by Tempests in the Night:
Like scattered Down by howling Eurus blown;
By rapid Hurl-winds from his Mansion thrown.
God shall transfix him with his winged Dart:
Though he avoid him like the flying Heart:
Men shall pursue with merited disgrace;
Hiss, clap their hands, and from his Country chase.

Whose Ore the fire in crucibles refines.
So dig'd up Ir'on is in the furnace blown:
And Brass extracted from the melting Stone.
Men through the wounded Earth enforce their way;
And show the under Shades an unknown Day:
While from her bowels they her Treasure tear;
And to their avarice subject their fear.
Their they with Subterranean Waters meet;
And Currents, never touched by humane feet:
These, by their bold endeavors, are made dry;
And from the Industry of Mortals fly.
The Earth with yellow ears her brows attires;
Although her Jaws exhale imbosom'd fires.
Torn Rocks the sparkling Diamond unfold;
The blushing Ruby, and pure grains of Gold.
Those gloomy vaults no wandering foul descries:
Nor are they pierced by the Vultures eyes.
Swift Tygres, which in pathlesse Deserts stray,
Nor solitary Lions tread that way.
Their restless Labors cleave the living Stone:
Cloud-touching Mountains by their Roots ore'throwne.
New streams through wondering Rocks their tract pursue;
While they the Magazines of Nature view:
Who swelling Floods with narrow bounds enclose;
And what in Darkness lurkt, to Light expose.
But where above the Earth, or under ground,
Can Wisdom by the search of Man be found?
Her worth his estimation far excels:
Concealed from sense, nor with the living dwells.
The Seas reply; she lies not in our Deeps:
Nor in our floods her radiant tresses steeps.
Nor are her rare endowments to be sold
For silver Hills; or Rivers paved with gold.
Nor for the glittering sand by Ophir shown;
The blew-ey'd Saphir, or rich Onix stone:
For Rocks of Crystal from the Ocean brought:
Nor Jewels by the rarest workman wrought.
Can blazing Carbuncles with her compare?
Or groves of Corrall hardened by the Air?
The Tophas sent from scorched Meroe?
Or Pearls presented by the Indian Sea?
Whence comes she? from what undiscovered Land?
Or where does her concealed palace stand?
Since O, invisible to mortal Eye:
Or winged Travelers that trace the sky.
Death and Destruction say; her fame alone
Has reached our Ears; but to our Eyes unknown.
God only understands her sacred ways:
The Temple knows where she her Light displayes.
For he at once the Orb of Earth beholds;
And all that Heavens blew Canopie infolds:
To measure out the struggling Winds by weight;
That else the world would tear in their debate:
And bridle the wilds Floods; least they their bound
Again should pass, and all the Earth surrown'd.
When he in Clouds the dropping waters hung,
And through their roaring jaws his Lightning flung;
Then he beheld her face, her light displaid,
Prepared her paths, and thus to Mortals said:
The fear of God is wisdom; and to fly
From Evil, is of virtues the most high.

O that those happy Days would now renew;
When God beneath his shield my safety placed!
When his clear lamp a sacred Splendour cast
About my Brows? by whose directing light
I trod securely through the Shades of Night?
That now I had what I in youth possessed,
When he my Mansion with his presence blessed!
When those who from my veins derived their blood,
Like springing Laurels round about me stood!
When Butter washed my Steps, when Streams of oil
Gusht from the Rocks, and Plenty free from toil!
When through the gazing Streets I past in State
To my Tribunal, in the Cities Gate!
The blushing Youth their virtuous awe disclose,
And from their Seats the reverend Elders rose.
Attentive Princes such a silence kept,
As if their Souls had in their Bodies slept.
Th'astonish't Nobles stood like men that were
Deprived of all their Senses but the ear.
All ears that heard, my equal Justice praised:
All eyes that saw, their Lids with wonder raised.
I from Oppressors did the Poor defend;
The Fatherless, and such as had no friend.
Those saved, whom wicked Power sought to destroy:
And made the widows heart to spring with joy.
I put on Truth: she clothed me with renown:
My Justice was to me a precious Crown.
Eyes lent I to the blind; feet to the Lame:
A Father to the Comfortless became.
I searched what from my knowledge was concealed:
And clouded Truth by her own light revealed.
Often with my Scepter brake the Lions jaws
And snatched the prey out of his armed paws.
Then said; my Days shall as the Sand increase:
And I in my own nest shall dye in peace.
My Root was by the living water spread:
And Night her dew upon my Branches shed.
My Glories Crescent to a Circle grew:
And I my Bow with doubled vigor drew.
When I but spoke, they hung upon my look:
And as an Oracle my Counsel took.
None spoke but I; each his own Judgment fears:
My words like honey dropped into their ears;
Which readily with joy they entertain,
As Yawning Earth devoures the latter Rain.
Although I smiled, none would my thoughts suspect:
Nor on my Mirth a frowning look reflect:
But trod the path which I their Chief proposed.
I King-like sat, with armed troops enclosed:
Gave timely Comforts to the Soul that mourned;
Raised from the Dust, and tears to Laughter turned.

The wretched object of their scorn and pride:
Whose Fathers I unworthy held to keep,
With less contemned Dogs, my Flocks of sheep.
How could their youth to my advantage turn?
Or elder age, with weakening vices worn?
Who, pale with famine, to the Desert fled;
On roots of Juniper and Mallows fed:
Whom Men from their Society exclude;
Detested, and like Thieves with cries pursued:
Concealed in hollow Rocks, in gloomy Caves,
And Cliffes deep vaulted by the fretting waves:
Among the Bushes they like Asses braide:
And in the Brakes their Conventicles made.
The Sons of Idiots, of ignoble Birth:
Contaminate, and viler then the Earth.
Yet now am I obnoxious to their wrongs:
A Byword, and the Subject of their song's.
Who exercise their tongues in my disgrace;
Abhor my paths, and spit upon my face.
They, ever since the enraged omnipotent
Dissolved my Sinews, and my Bowunbent;
Like headstrong Horses, twixt their teeth have taken
The masterd Bridle, and contemned the reyne.
Lo, Boys against me rise, and strew my way
With Snares; then watch the cruel traps they lay:
Who now my path's pervert; their hate extend
To multiply his woes, that has no friend.
As Seas against the Shores strong Rampires stretch
Their battering waves, and force a dreadful breach:
With equal fury they upon me roll;
Even to the desolation of my soul.
Besieging Terrors storme-like roar aloud;
Pursue, and chase me like an empty Cloud.
O how my soul is powered upon the ground!
Full grown Affliction has a subject found.
Torments by Night my wasted marrow boil:
My Pulses labor with unequal toil.
My soars pollute my garments: Plagues infest
My poisoned skin, and like a Coat invest.
O I am Dust and Ashes! Lord, thou have
Down in the dirt the brokenhearted cast.
Thy ears the incense of my prayers reject:
No tears nor vows can alter thy neglect.
Ah! have thou lost thy mercy! Will thou fight
Against a worm, and in his groans delight!
Thou setst me on the winds; with every blast
Tossed too and fro, while I to nothing wast.
I see my Death approach: I to the womb
Of earth am called, of all the general Tomb.
Thou never wilt the Dead to Life restore:
Though here in Sorrow they thy grace implore.
How often have I for those that suffered, wept!
Afflicted for the poor, when others slept:
Yet when I looked for joy, for cheerful light;
Then grief fell on, and shades more black than night.
My tortured Bowels found no hour of rest:
By troops of sudden miseries oppressed.
Unknown to Day, I mourned: my clamors tare
The ears soft Labyrinth, and cleft the Air.
The hissing Dragon, and the screeching Owl,
Became Companions to my pensive Soul.
My flesh is covered with a veil of jet:
And all my Bones consume with burning heat.
My Harp her mournful Strains in Sorrow steep's.
My Organ sighs sad aires, as one that weeps.

Should not my Soul, nor she their lights betray
To the deceit of sin: why then should I
Behold a Virgin with a burning eye?
What Judgments are reserved, what Vengeance due
To those, who their intemperate Lusts pursue!
Destruction and eternal Ruin shall
From Heaven, like lightning, on the wicked fall.
Do not his searching Eyes my ways behold?
Are not my steps by him observed and told?
If tempting Sin could ever yet entice
My feet to wander in the Quest of Vice:
Let that great Arbiter of Wrong and Right:
Weigh in his Scales; and cast me if to light.
If I from virtues path have stepped awry;
Or let my heart be governed by mine eye:
If I, oh Justice, have thy Rites profaned;
If bribes or guiltless blood my hands have stained:
Then let another reap what I have sown;
Nor let my Race be to the Living known.
If ever woman could to sin allure;
If I have waited at my Neighbors door:
Let my laicivious wife with others grin'd;
And by her lust repay my guilt in kind.
This were a heinous crime; so foul a fact,
As would due vengeance from the Judge exact:
A wasting fire, which violently burns;
And all to poverty and ruin turns.
If I by Power my Servants should oppress;
Nor would their crying Grievances redress:
What should I do, or say, when God shall come
To judge the world, that might divert his Doom?
Both made he in the womb, of equal worth:
Though to unequal Destiny brought forth.
If from the poor I did their hopes detain;
Or made the widows Eyes expect in vain:
If I alone have at my Table fed;
Or from the fatherless withheld my bread:
Nor fosterd from my youth, their wants supplide;
To him a father, and to her a guide:
If I have seen the naked starve for cold;
While Avarice my Charity controld:
If their clothed Loins have not my bounty blessed;
Warm with the fleeces which my flocks divest:
If I my arms have raised to crush the weak;
The Judge prepared, the witness taught to speak:
Be all their ligaments at once unbound;
And their disjoynted bones to powder grownd.
Divine Revenge my Soul from sin deterred:
For I the anger of The Almighty feared.
I never Idolized Gold embraced:
Nor said; In thee my Confidence is placed.
Nor on decitfull Riches fixed my heart;
Together scraped by no omitted Art.
If when I saw the early Sun ascend,
Or the new Moon her silver horns extend;
I bowing kissed my hand, those Lights adored
As Deities, and their releife implored.
The Sin had been flagitious; and had cried
To him for vengeance whom my Deed's defied.
Have I with joy beheld my ruined foe?
Have I exulted in his overthrow?
Or in the tempest of my passion burst
Into offenses, and his Issue cursed?
Though my Domestics said; oh let us tear
His hated flesh, nor after death forbear.
Who made the Stones their bed, or sighed for food,
If known? my house to strangers open stood.
Suppose I were corrupt, and foul within:
Yet to what end should I disguise my Sin?
Need I so much contempt or censure dread;
As not to speak my thoughts, or hide my head?
Where shall I meet with an indifferent Ear?
Oh that the Sovereign Judge my Cause would hear,
Peruse the Adversaries evidence;
Try, and determine, my supposed offense!
I on my shoulders their complaints would bear:
And as a Diadem their Slanders wear.
More like a Prince then a Delinquent, would
Approach his presence; and my life unfold.
If the usurped Fields against me cry;
Their ravished Furrows weep: if ever I
Have forced from them their unpaid for Grain;
Their Husbandmen, and ancient Owners slain:
For wheat, let thistles from their clods ascend;
For barley, cockle. Jobs complaints here end.

Since he appeared so pure in his own Eyes.
When Elihu Barachels son, who drew
His Birth from Aram, much incensed grew:
Not only against Job, that durst defend
His Innocence, and with God contend:
But with his three austere Companions; since
They would condemn before they could convince.
When he perceived the rest no answer made,
But like dumb Statues sat; the Buzite said:
Till now I durst not venture to unfold
My laboring thoughts, to you that are so old.
For gray Experience is with wisdom fraught;
And sacred knowledge by the aged taught.
Yet oh, how dark is man's presuming sense,
Not lightened with caelestiall Influence!
The great in Honor are not always wise:
Nor Judgment under silver Tresses lies.
Since so; at length vouchsafe to hear a youth,
And his opinion, in the search of Truth.
For I your words have weighed, your reasons heard;
The Instances by each of you inferred:
And yet in all the heat of your dispute,
Not one could answer Job; much less confute.
Know therefore, least too rashly you conclude,
It is not Man, but God that has subdued.
Against me Job did not his speech direct:
No more will I your Arguments object.
You all were at his Confidence amazed;
And silently upon each other gazed:
When I your answers had expected long,
Nor could discern the motion of a tongue;
I said; behold I now will act my part,
And utter the Conceptions of my heart.
My Soul is rapt with fury; and my breast
Contains a flame, that will not be suppressed.
My Bowels boil like wine that has no vent;
Ready to break the swelling Continent.
Words therefore must my toiling thoughts relieve;
And to restrained Truth enlargement give.
No personal Respects my thoughts shall move;
Nor will I Man with flattering titles smooth.
Should I so prostitute my servile Breath;
My Maker soon would cut me of by Death.

As I my lips, so open thou thine ear.
I sacred knowledge clearly will impart;
Drawn from the fountain of a single heart.
God made us both, with breath of Life inspired;
In shrouds of frail Mortality attyr'd:
Then since we shall with equal Arms contend;
Arise, and if thou can, thy cause defend.
Behold, according to thy wish I stand
In steed of God; though made of slime and Sand.
I will not with stern Menaces affright:
Nor shall my hand on thee like Thunder-light.
For I with grief, O Job, have heard thee vaunt;
And break into this passionate Complaint:
My Heart is incorrupt, my Innocence
Without a Stain, my life free from offense:
Yet he occasion seeks to overthrow,
And trample on me as his mortal foe:
Who, least I should escape, in fetters binds;
Observes my steps, and makes the faults he finds.
How rash is thy bold charge? God is complete
In his own Essence; much than man more great:
And yet dare thou contend? his patience grieve?
Will He a reason for his Actions give?
Often he to Mortals speaks: yet will not they
The Counsel of his Oracles obey.
Sometimes by Dreams in silence of the Night;
Sometimes by Visions he informs their sight:
When sleep his Poppy on their Temples sheds;
Or they lie musing on their restless beds.
The cause of their afflictions then reveals;
And on their Hearts his reprehension seals:
That he may man prevent, his pride repel;
Save from the sword, and greedy jaws of Hell.
For this, diseased on his bed he groans;
While unrelenting Torments gnaw his bones:
The sight of Food his empty stomach fills;
And Dainties to his taste are loathsome Pills:
By wasting Hecticks of his flesh bereft;
Bones late unseene, alone apparent left:
His Soul sits mourning at the gates of Death;
While anguish strives to suffocate his breath.
But if a Prophet, or Interpreter,
One of a thousand, with the sick confer:
Before his eyes, his ugly sins detect;
And to a better life his Steps direct:
Then Mercy thus will cry; Release the bound
From Sin and Hell: I have a Ransom found.
Then shall his bones the flesh of Babes indue:
His youth and beauty like the spring renew.
He shall his God implore; his glorious Face
With joy behold, and flourish in his grace.
For God will his Integrity regard:
His virtue with a Bounteous hand reward.
His Eyes the secrets of all hearts survay.
When the contrite and bleeding Soul shall say;
How have I Justice forced! the poor undone!
Sin heapt on Sin! to my own Ruin run!
Then God shall raise him from the shades of Night:
And he shall live to see th'etheriall Light.
Thus often to man that Power which wounds and heales,
The way to Joy by Misery Reveals:
That he may longer with the living dwell;
Snatched from th'extended jaws of Death and Hell.
O thou of men most wretched! hear me speak:
Nor in thy frantic passion silence break.
If thou thy self can clear, at large reply:
For I thy life would gladly justify.
If not; my words with wisdom shall inform
Thy erring Soul, and mitigate this Storm.

Who in a Ring the Disputants enclose.
You that are wise, said he, my Doctrine hear:
You who have knowing Souls, afford an Ear.
For sense is by that Organ understood;
Even as the taste distinguishes of Food.
By Equity let us our Judgments guide:
And this long controverted Cause decide.
Job cries; I guiltless fall, to God appeal:
Yet will not he the clouded truth reveal.
Shall I with lies betray my Innocence?
My wound is mortal: o, for what offense!
Who of himself but he so vainly thinks?
Who contumacy like cold water drinks.
He is in shackles by the wicked led;
And walks the way which his Associates tread.
What boots it man (says he) to take delight
In God! and live as always in his sight!
O hear me, you who high in knowledge sit:
Is it with God that he should Sin commit?
No, each according to his Merit shall
Receive his hire: to Justice stand, or fall.
O can Compassion in Destruction joy?
Or will the righteous Judge the just destroy?
Shall he the world by man's direction sway;
Whom Heaven and Powers Angelical obey?
In his disposure is the Orb of Earth;
The Throne of Kings, and all of humane Birth.
O, if he should the heart of man survay;
Reduce, and take the breath he gave, away:
All Living in a moment would expire;
And swiftly to there former dust retire.
Then Job, if thou have reason; if a mind
Not partial; let my words acceptance find.
Shall he who Justice hates, rule by his lust?
Or will it thou him condemn who is most just?
Shall Subjects tax their Kings? their Princes blame?
And with detractions poisonous breath defame?
Much less upbraid his just Dominion,
To whom both Lords and vassals are all one.
Who Rich and Poor alike regards; since they
By him were formed from the same lump of clay.
Pale Death shall in an instant quench their light;
Whole Nations ravish, in the dead of Night,
Sweep from the Earth: the mighty in Command
Shall from their Thrones be snatched without a hand.
He all beholds with eyes that never close:
Observes their Steps, and their Intentions knows,
No mufling Clouds, nor Shades infernal, can
From his inquiry hide offending Man.
Nor shall the Punishment, which guilt pursues,
Exceed the Crime; lest he should God accuse.
He shall for sins unknown the mighty break;
And to their empty thrones advance the weak:
The Mysteries of Night reveal to Day;
And in their falls their secret faults display.
Nor his exemplary revenge defer;
Presented on the Worlds great Theater:
Since they revolt from God, with open jaws
Blaspheme his Justice, and despise his Laws.
So that the cries of their oppressions rend
The suffering Air, and to his ears ascend.
Who can disturb the peace which he bestows?
What tumult waken their secure repose?
What Nation, or what one of Mortal Race,
Shall God behold, if he withdraw his Face?
That Hypocrites no more may tyrannize:
Nor in their snares the credulous surprise.
Say thou; I will not with my God contend;
But bear his Chastisements, nor more offend.
My Ignorance inform, if I have lent
An Ear to vice, lest I my sins augment.
Will he with thy Arbitrament comply?
VVhither thou should consent, or should deny,
His censure is the same. Shall I transgress
In not reproving? what thou know, profess.
And you my Auditors, by God indu'd
With sacred wisdom, will I hope conclude,
That Job on Justice has aspersions flung;
And spoken indiscreetly with his tongue.
O Father, give his Miseries no end;
While he shall his impiety defend.
They to their sins rebellion add, who jest
At their Instructors, and with God contest.

Proceeds, and aid: Art thou informed by truth,
That dare prefer thine own integrity;
As if more just then he who sits on high?
And say; o I am innocent in vain:
Have to no end preserved my life from stain.
Now give me leave to answer thee, and those,
Who Gods all-guiding Providence oppose.
O Job from Heaven to Earth erect thine eyes;
Behold the vaste extension of the skies:
The sailing Clouds by Exhalations fed;
How far are these advanced above thy head?
Can thy accumulated vices reach
Yet higher? and his Happiness impeach?
What can thy Righteousness to him bequeath?
Can God a Benefit from Man receive?
Although thy Sin a Mortal may destroy;
Thy Justice succor, and confirm his joy.
Those whom too-powerfull Insolence oppress;
Weepe-out their eyes, and howl in their distress:
None cry; where is my God! who all our wrongs
Will vindicate, and turn our sighs to Songs:
Enobles with an Intellectual Soul;
More rational then beast, more wise then foul,
None shall the others sufferings regard:
The ears of Pity by their vices barred.
For God will not relieve th'unpenitent:
Nor to the prayer's of wicked Souls consent:
Much less to his, who says; I never more
Shall see his face, nor he my Joys restore.
Let no such desperate thoughts thy soul infect;
But calmely suffer, and his grace expect.
In both to blame: Though thou his wrath incense;
Thy punishment is less then thy offense.
Judge you how undiscreetly Job complains:
And by extolling his own Justice stains.

Proceed in this Divine Apology:
And from a far-remov'd Original
His Judgments vindicate, who made us all.
No Fucus, nor vain supplement of Art,
Shall falsify the Language of my Heart.
He who is perfect, and abhors untruth,
With heavenly Influence inspires my youth.
For the Omnipotent is only wise:
Nor will the great in Power the weak despise.
His Hands the poor from violence defend;
While Sin-defiled Souls to Hell descend:
Beholds the just, with Eyes that ever wake:
With Princes ranck't, whose thrones no Tempests shake.
Or if their vices cast them to the ground,
If in the fetters of affliction bound:
He to their trembling Consciences displayes
Their former lives, and errors of their ways.
Then opens wide the porches of their ears;
And their long veiled eyes from darkness cleares:
That they themselves may see, instructions hear,
Return from Sin, and their Creator fear.
They shall their happy Days in pleasure spend:
And full of years in peace their progress end.
But if they disobey; the Sword shall shed
Their guilty blood, and mix them with the Dead.
For the Deluder hastens his own fall:
Nor will in trouble on the Almighty call;
Who on the Beds of sin supinely lie;
They in the Summer of their age shall die.
God will the penitent to Grace restore:
Taught by affliction to offend no more.
So from these fearful straights would thee have led,
Enlarged thy passage, and with marrow fed:
But thou, through wicked Counsels, have rebelled;
And therefore justly by his Judgments held.
O fear his wrath! should thou be swept away;
Not Mines of Treasure could thy Ransom pay.
Cares he for wealth? Though Gold on Earth command;
No Gold, or force, can free thee from his hand.
Let not thy desperate soul desire that Night,
Which from the living takes the last of Light:
Nor by the guide of sorrow blindly err;
And Death before due Chastisements prefer.
Lo! he his truth exalts: who so complete.
As he in Power! whose Knowledge is so great!
Who can to him prescribe a Path? or say,
Thy Judgments from the tract of Justice stray?
O rather praise the works his hands have wrought;
By all beheld: with Admiration fraught.
His Glory but in part to man appears:
Who knows him, or the number of his years?
He the congealed vapors melts again;
Extenuated into drops of Rain:
Which on the thirsty Earth in showers distill;
And all that life possess with plenty fill.
Who can the extension of his Clouds explore?
Or tell how they in their collisions roar?
Guilt with the flashes of their horrid light:
Yet darken all below with their own Night.
Judgment and bounty each from hence proceeds;
With these his Creatures punishes and feeds:
With these the Beauty of the Day immures;
And all the Ornaments of Heaven obscures:
Forthwith aeriall Tumults wound the Ear;
Whose heat and cold the Clouds asunder tear.

Ready to break my fivers, and depart.
Hark, how his thunder from their entrails breaks!
The voice of God when he in fury speaks:
Which roles in globes of pitch below the skies.
To Earths extent his winged lightning flies,
Pursu'de by hideous fragors: though before
The flames descend, they in their breaches roar.
His farre-resounding voice reports his ire:
His Indignation flows in streams of fire.
O who can apprehend his excellence;
Whose wonders pass the reach of humane sense!
He gives the winters Snow her aerie birth:
And bids her virgin fleeces cloth the Earth.
Now he her face renew's with fruitful showers:
Now Cataracts upon her bosom powers;
Whose falling spouts the Hands of Labor tie.
When Swains for shelter to their houses fly;
Yet on their former toil reflect their care:
Then salvage Beasts to their dark dens repair.
Loud Tempests from the Cloudie South break forth;
And cold out of the Cloud-repelling North.
The fields with rigid frost grow stiff and gray:
The rivers solid, and forget their way.
Sad clouds with frequent tears themselves impair;
And those that shone with lightning, fleet to air:
At his obeyed decree return again;
T'afflict the Earth, or comfort it with rain.
Thus Judgment and sweet Mercy, which depend
Upon his beck, to men in Clouds descend.
This hear, o Job; with silence fixed, stand:
Review the wonders of his mighty Hand.
Know thou how God collects the must'red Clouds?
How in their darkness he his lightning shrouds?
How by him balanced in the weightlesse Air?
Can thou the wisdom of his works declare?
Or know thou how thy Garments warmer grow,
When dropping Southern gales begin to blow?
Were thou then present, when his hands displaid
The firmament; of liquid Crystal made?
If so; instruct what we to God should say;
Who in so dark a night have lost our way.
What can we urge that is to him unknown?
Or who contend and not be overthrown?
Who on the Sun can gaze with constant eyes,
When purging winds from vapors clear the skies,
And Northern gales his shining face unfold?
Much less the Majesty of God behold.
O how inscrutable! his equity
Twins with his Power. Will he the Just destroy?
For this to be adored: yet cannot find
Among the Sons of men a prudent mind.

Into a radiant flame, Jehova spoke:
What Mortal thus through ignorance profanes
My darkened counsels? of his God complains?
Come, buckle on thy Armor: let us end
This controverse; since thou will needs contend.
Tell, if thou can; where were thou when I made
The food-full Earth, and her foundation laid?
Who those exact dimensions did design?
Who on her superficies stretched his Line?
Or fixed as Center to the world? upon
What Basis built? who laid the Corner Stone?
Where were thou when the Stars my praises sung?
When Heaven with shouts of joyful Angels rung?
Or who shut up the seas with Doors; when they,
As from the tortured womb, enforced their way?
By me invested with a veil of Clouds:
And swadled, as newborn, in sable shrouds.
For these a receptacle I designed:
And with inviolable Bars confind.
Then said: thus far your Empire shall extend;
Nor shall your prouder waves these bounds transcend.
Have thou appointed where the Moon should rise,
And with her purple light adorn the skies?
Scor'd out the bounded Suns obliquer ways;
That he on all might spread his equal rays?
And by the clear extension of his Light,
Chase from the Earth the impious Sons of Night?
Whose Beams the various forms of things display;
Like multitudes of Figures wrought in Clay:
By which the Beauty of the Earth appears;
The divers-colour'd Mantle which she wears:
Concealed offenders by their luster found;
Attached, and in Deaths dark prison bound.
Say, have thou dived into the Deep's below?
And trod those bottom sands where fountains flow?
Or boldly broken-up the Seals of Hell,
And seen the Shadows which in Darkness dwell?
Tell if thou can, how far the Earth extends?
Have thou discovered her remotest ends?
Beheld the Chambers of the springing Light?
Or traveled through the Regions of the Night?
To their abodes can thou reveal the way?
And their alternate rule to men display?
Were thou then borne? have thou these secrets known
Through length of time? art thou so aged grown?
Have thou survay'd the Magazines of Snow?
Seen where the melting drops to haile-stones grow?
With these I punish: these the weapons are,
By me prepared against the Day of war.
Why breaks the Lightning from the troubled skies,
While Eastern winds in horrid Tempests rise?
Who Deluges from Heaven in Torrents powers?
Or gives a passage to the roaring Showers?
That they on Deserts un-inhabited
By Mortals, may their fruitful moisture shed?
Hence vegetives receive their fragrant birth:
And cloth the naked Bosom of the Earth.
What, has the Rain a Father? tell me who
Begot the shining Drops of Morning Dew?
Whose womb produced the glassie Ice? who bred
The hoary frosts that fall on winters head?
The waters then in Crystal are concealed:
And the smooth visage of the Sea congealed.
Can thou the pleasant influence restrain,
Of Pleiades, which bathes the Spring with rain?
Or boisterous Orions chains unbind,
Who draws along the bitter Eastern wind?
In Summer, scorching Mazaroth display?
Or teach Arcturus, and his Sons, their way?
Can thou the Motions of the Heavens direct?
Or make their virtue on the Earth reflect?
Will the condensed Clouds, at thy command,
Descend in Shoures upon the thirsty Land?
Or in their roaring strife asunder part,
And at thy Foes their fearful Lightning dart?
With wisdom who renownes the Nobler parts?
Who understanding gives to humane Hearts?
Whose wisdom cleares the Saphirs of the skies?
Or who the swelling Clouds in Bladders ties?
To mollify the stubborn clods with rain;
And scattered Dust incorporate again.

His hungry whelps? and for the killer kill?
When couched in dreadful Dens; when closely they
Lurk in the Covert to surprise their prey?
Who feeds the Ravens when their young-ones cry.
To God for food and through the Deserts fly?
Know thou when Salvage goats do teeme among
The craggy rocks? when Hinds produce their young?
Can thou their Recknings keep? the time compute
When their swollen Bellies shall enlarge their fruit?
Without a Midwife these their Throws sustain;
And bowing, bring their Issue forth with pain.
They at full udders suck, grow strong with corn:
Depart, and never to their Dams return.
Who sent forth the wild Ass to live at large?
Whom neither Haltar binds nor Burdens charge:
Inhabiting the barren Wilderness,
And rocky Caves, removed from man's access.
He from the many-peopl'd City flies;
Contemnes their labors, and the Drivers cries:
The Mountains are his walks; who wandering feeds
On slowly-springing herbs, and ranker weeds.
Will the fierce Unicorn thy voice obey,
Stand at the Crib, and feed upon the hay?
Or to the servile yoke his freedom yield;
Plough-up the Glebe, and harrow the rough field?
Will thou upon his ready strength rely?
Will he sustain thee with his Industry?
Bring home thy Harvest? to thy will submit?
Put of his fierceness, and receive the Bit?
The Peacock, not at thy Command, assumes
His glorious train: Nor Estrige her rare plumes.
She drops her Eggs upon the naked Land;
And wraps them in a bed of hatching Sand:
Exposed to the wandering Traveller;
And Feet of Beasts, which those wild Deserts rear.
She as a Stepmother betrays her own;
Left without care, and presently unknown:
By God deprived of that Intelligence
Which Nature gives: of all most void of Sense.
Her feet the nimble Rider leave behind;
And when she spreads her sails, outstrip the wind.
Have thou with Strength indu'd the generous Horse?
His neck with Thunder armed, his breast with Force?
Him can thou as a Grasshopper affright?
Who from his Nostrils throws a dreadful light;
Exults in his own courage; proudly bounds;
With trampling hoofes the sounding Center wounds:
Breaks through the ordered Rancks with eyes that burn;
Nor from the Battle-Axe, or Sword, will turn.
The rattling Quiver, nor the glittering Spear,
Or dazzling Shield, can daunt his heart with fear.
Through rage and fierceness he devoures the ground:
Nor in his fury hears the Trumpet sound.
Far of the Battle smells; like Thunder neighes:
Loud shouts and dying groans his courage raise.
Does the wild Haggard tower into the sky,
And to the South by thy direction fly?
Or Eagle in her gyres the Clouds embrace,
And on the highest cliffe her Aerie place?
She dwells among the Rocks; on every side
With broken Mountains strongly fortified:
From thence what ever can be seen survayes;
And stooping, on the slanghtred Quarry preys:
From wounds her Eglets suck the reaking blood;
And all-devasting War provides her food.
Since such my power, will thou with me contend?
Instruct thy Maker? and thy fault defend?
Now answer thou that dare thy God up-braid.
Then humbled Job, transfixt with sorrow, said:
Can one so vile to such a truth reply?
Too long my grief has raved: no more will I
Pursue a folly, and my Sin extend:
But curb my tongue, so ready to offend.
Once more Jehova from that radiant Throne

If thou have will or courage left, prepare
T'encounter me in this Gigantick war.
Will thou my Judgments disanull? defame
My equal Rule, to clear thy self of blame?
Is thy weak Arm as strong as Gods? can thou
In thunder speak? the Sea with Tempests plow?
Come deck thy self with Beauties Excellence;
With Majesty; and Sun-like Rays dispense:
The fury of thy wrath like lightning fling
On bold offenders: Pride to ruin bring.
Those with the surfeits of excess destroy,
Who in their uncontrouled vices joy:
Hide them together in the Caves of Night;
There bind them, never to behold the Light:
Then will I say that thou thy self can save
From wasting Age, Destruction, and the Grave.
With thee, I made the mighty Elephant;
Who Oxe-like feeds on every herb and plant.
His mighty strength lies in his able Loins:
And where the flexure of his Navell joins.
His stretcht-out tail presents a Mountain Pine;
The Sinews of his Stones like Cords combine.
His Bones the hammered Steel in strength surpass:
His sides are fortified with Ribs of Brass.
Of Gods great works the chief: lo, he who made
This knowing Beast, has armed him with a blade.
He feed's on lofty Hills, nor lives by prey:
About their gentle Prince his Subjects play.
His limbs he coucheth in the cooler shades:
Often, when Heavens burning Eye the fields invades,
To Marshes resorts; obscured with Reeds,
And hoary Willowes, which the moisture feeds.
The chiding Currents at his entry rise;
Who quivering Jordan swallows with his Eyes.
Can the bold Hunter take him in a Toil?
Or by the Trunck produce him as his Spoil?

Catch with a hook, or with a noose inthrall?
Drag by a slender Line unto the Shore?
His huge Jaw with a twig or Bulrush bore?
Will he his pitiful complaints renew?
For freedom with afflicted Language sue?
Become thy willing Vassal? can thou still
Subject him to the Service of thy Will?
And like a Sparrow, fettered in a String,
The plaid-with Monster to the Virgins bring?
Shall thy Companions feast upon his spoil?
Or will thou to the Merchant sell his Oil?
Can thou with Fisgigs pierce him to the quick?
Or in his skull thy barbed Trident stick?
Then hasten to the charge. Yet Soldier fear:
Think of the Battle, and in time forbear.
Vain are their hopes who seek by force or slight
To vanquish him, who conquers with his sight.
What Mortal dare with such a foe contend?
Much less his hand against his Maker bend?
Can gifts my grace engage? when all below
The lofty Sun is mine, what can I owe?
This wonder of the Deep, his mighty force,
And goodly form, shall furnish our discourse.
Who can divest him of his waves? bestride
His monstrous Back? and with a Bridle ride?
His Heads huge Doors unlocke? whose jaws with great
And dreadful teeth in treble ranks are set.
Armed with refulgent Shields, together joined,
And seal'd-up to resist the ruffling wind;
The nether by the upper fortified:
No force their Combination can divide.
His sneezings set on fire the foaming Brine:
His round Eyes like the Mornings Eyelids shine.
Infernal Lightning sallies from his Throat:
Ejected Sparks upon the Billows float.
A cloud of Smoke from his wide Nostrils flies;
As Vapors from a boiling Furnace rise.
He burning Coals exhales, and vomits flames:
His strength the Empire of the Ocean claims.
Loud Tempests, roaring floods, and what affright
The trembling Sailer, turn to his delight.
The flakes of his tough flesh so firmly bound.
As not to be divorced by a wound.
His Heart a solid Rock, to fear unknown:
And harder than the Grinders nether Stone.
The sword his armed sides in vain assailes:
No Dart nor Lance can penetrate his Scales.
Who Brass as rotten wood; and Steel, no more
Regards then Reeds, that bristle on the Shore.
Dreads he the twanging of the Archers String?
Or singing Stones from the Phaenician sling?
Darts he esteems as Straw, asunder torn:
The shaking of the Javelin laughes to scorn.
He ragged Stones beneath his Belly spreads;
To his repose as soft as downye Beds.
The Seas before him like a Caldron boil:
And in the fervor of their Motion foil.
A Light, stroke from the floods, detects his way;
Who covers their aspiring heads with gray.
Of all whom ample Earths round shoulders bear,
None equal this: created without fear.
What ever is exalted, he disdaines:
And as a King among the Mighty reigns.

Thy all effecting Power. O who can hide
His thoughts from thee! who can reverse, or shun
Thy just Decree! what thou would do, is done,
I heard thee say; Dare brutish Man profane
My darkened Counsels? and of God complain?
Great Judge, I in thy Mirror see my shame:
Those Lips that justified, my guilt proclaim.
Our knowledge is but ignorance, and we
The Sons of Folly, if compared with thee.
Thy ways, and sacred Mysteries, transcend
Their Apprehensions, who in Death must end.
O to my Prayers afford a gracious Ear!
Instruct thy Servant, and his Darkness clear!
I, of thy Excellence, have often been told:
But now my ravished eyes thy Face behold.
Who therefore in this weeping Palinod
Abhor my self, that have displeased my God:
In Dust and Ashes mourn. Nor will my fears
Forsake me, till I cleanse my Soul with tears.
When contrite Job had this submission made;
The Lord to Eliphas of Theman said:
Against thee, and thy two Associates,
My Anger burns, and hastens to your fates:
Since you, unlike my Servant Job, have erred;
And Victory before the Truth preferred.
Seven spotless Rams, seven Bulls that never bare
The yoke, select; with these to Job repair:
Their bleeding Limbs upon my Altar lay,
His ready Charity for you shall pray,
And reconcile my wrath: Else merited
Revenge should forthwith send you to the Dead;
Who have my Rule and providence profaned:
Nor, like my Servant Job, the truth maintained.
Then Bildad, Eliphas, and Zophar, came
To their old Friend: The feasted Altars flame.
For whom that injured Saint devoutly prayed:
And with the Incensed their atonement made.
Even in that pious Duty, the most High
Beheld his Patience with a tender Eye:
From envious Satan's tyranny releast;
Dry'd-up his tears, and with abundance blessed.
His Brothers and his Sisters, all the train
That followed his Prosperity, again
Present their visits; at his table feed:
Bemone, and Comfort. Joys his grief succeed.
With Gold and Silver they increase his Store:
And gave the precious Earerings which they wore.
So that Jehova blessed his latter Days
More then the first: His Loss with Interest pays.
His Droves of Asses, Camels, herds of Neat,
And flocks of Sheep, grew shortly twice as great.
Blessed with Seven sons: three Daughters; who for fair
Might with the Beauties of the Earth compare.
One called Jemima, of the rising Light:
A second, for her sweetness, Cassia hight:
The youngest Kerenhappa; of the power
And rays of beauty. Rich in Natures Dowre;
As in their Fathers Love: who gave them shares
Among his Sons, and joined them with his heirs.
Job seven-score years his Miseries survived:
His Childrens Children saw; those who derived
From them their birth, even to the fourth descent:
And in Tranquillity his Old Age spent.
Then full of Days, and deathlesse Honor, gave
His Soul to God: his Body to the Grave.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE PSALMS OF DAVID.

By G. S.

Set to new Tunes for private Devotion: And a through Base, for Voice, or
Instrument. BY HENRY LAWS Gentleman of His Majesty's Chapel Royal.

To the King.
OUR graver Muse from her long Dream awakes,
Peneian Groves, and Cirrha's Caves forsakes:
Inspired with Zeal, she climbes the Aethereall Hills
Of Solyma, where bleeding Balm distills;
Where Trees of Life unfading Youth assure,
And Living Waters all Diseases cure:
Where the Svveet Singer, in celestial Lays,
Sung to his solemn Harp Iehovah's Praise.
From that fallen Temple, on her vvings she bears
Those Heavenly Raptures to your sacred Ears:
Not that her bare and humble Feet aspire
To mount the Threshold of th'harmonious Quire;
But that at once she might Oblations bring
To God; and Tribute to a god-like King.
And since no narrovv Verse such Mysteries,
Deep Sense, and high Expressions could comprise;
Her laboring VVings a larger compass fly,
And Poesy resolves with Poesy:
Lest she, who in the Orient clearly rose,
Should in your Western World obscurely close.
To the Queen.
O You, who like a fruitful Vine,
To this our Royal Cedar join:
Since it were impious to divide,
In such a Present, Hearts so tied;
Urania your chaste ears invites
To these her more sublime Delights.
Then, with your zealous Lover, daigne
To enter David's numerous Fane.
Pure Thoughts his Sacrifices are;
Sabaean Incense, fervent Prayer;
This holy Fire fell from the Skies;
The holy Water from his eyes.
O should You with your Voice infuse
Perfection, and create a Muse!
Though mean our Verse, such Excellence
At once would ravish Soul and Sense:
Delight in Heavenly Dwellers move;
And, since they cannot envy, Love:
When they from this our Earthly Sphere
Their own Celestial Music hear.
To my Noble Friend Mr. George Sandys upon his excellent Paraphrase on the
PSALMS.
HAd I no Blushes left, but were of Those,
Who Praise in Verse, what they Despise in Prose:
Had I this Vice from Vanity or Youth;
Yet such a Subject would have taught me Truth:
Hence it were Banished, where of Flattery
There is nor Use, nor Possibility.
Else thou had cause to fear, lest some might Raise
An Argument against thee from my Praise.
I therefore know, Thou can expect from me
But what I give, Historicke Poetry.
Friendship for more could not a Pardon win;
Nor think I Numbers make a Lie no Sin.
And need I say more then my Thoughts indite,
Nothing were easier, then not to write.
Which now were hard; for wheresoere I Raise
My thoughts, thy several Pains extort my Praise.
His Travels wherein he relates the History of the Pyramides.
First, that which does the Pyramids display:
And in a work much lastinger then they,
And more a wonder, scorns at large to show,
What were Indifferent if True or No:
Or from its lofty Flight, stoop to declare
What All men might have known, had All bin There.
But by thy learned Industry and Art,
To Those, who never from their Studies part,
Does each Lands Laws, Belief, Beginning show;
Which of the Natives but the Curious know:
Teaching the frailty of all Humane things;
How soon great Kingdoms fall, much sooner Kings:
Prepares our Souls, that Chance cannot direct
A Machin at us, more then we expect.
We know, Athens.
That Town is but with Fishers Fraught,
Where Theseus Governed, and where Plato Taught:
That Spring of Knowledge, Greece.
to which Italy
Owes all her Arts, and her Civility,
Another.
SVch is the Verse thou Writist, that who reads Thine
Can never be content to suffer Mine:
Such is the Verse I Write, that reading Mine,
I hardly can believe I have read Thine:
And wonder, that their Excellence once known,
I nor correct, nor yet conceal mine own.
Yet though I Danger fear, then Censure less;
Nor apprehend a Breach, like to a Press:
Thy Merits, now the second time, inflame
To sacrifice the Remnant of my Shame.
Nor yet (as first) Alone, but joined with Those
Who make the loftiest Verse, seem humblest Prose.
Thus did our Master, to his Praise, desire
That Babes should with Philosophers conspire:
And Infants their Hosanna's should unite
With the so Famous Areopagite.
Perhaps my Style too, is for Praise most fit;
Those show their Judgment least, who show their wit:
And are suspected, least their subtiller Aim
Be rather to attain, then to give Fame.
Perhaps whilst I my Earth do interpose
Betwixt thy Sun and Them, I may aid those
Who have but feebler Eyes and weaker Sight,
To bear thy Beams, and to support thy Light.
So thy Eclipse, by neighboring Darkness made,
Were no injurious, but a useful Shade:
How e're I finish here, my Muse her Days
Ends in expressing thy deserved Praise:
Whose fate in this seems fortunately cast,
To have so just an Action for her Last.
And since there are, who have been taught, that Death
Inspireth Prophecy, expelling Breath.
I hope, when these foretell, what happy Gains
Posterity shall reap from these thy Pains:
Nor yet from these alone, but how thy Pen,
Earth-like, shall yearly give new Gifts to Men:
And Thou fresh Praise, and we fresh Good receive
(For he who Thus can write can never Leave)
How Time in them shall never force a Breach;
But they shall always Live and always Teach:
That the sole likelihood which these present,
Will from the more raised Souls command Assent;
And the so taught, will not Belief refuse,
To the last Accents of a Dying Muse.
Falkland.

To my much honored Friend Mr. George Sandys.
IT is, Sir, a Confessed Intrusion here,
That I before your Labors do appear:
Which no loud Herald need, that may proclaim,
Or seek acceptance, but the Authors fame.
Much less that should This Happy Work commend,
Whose Subject is its License, and does send
It to the World to be Received and Read,
Far as the glorious Beams of Truth are spread.
Nor let it be imagined, that I look
Only with Customs Eye upon your Book;
Or in this service that 'twas my intent
T'exclude your Person from your Argument.
I shall profess, much of the Love Iowe
Does from the Root of our Extraction grow.
To which though I can little contribute;
Yet with a Natural joy, I must impute
To our Tribes honor, what by You is done,
Worthy the Title of a Prelates Son.
And scarcely have Two Brothers farther borne
A Fathers Name, or with more Value worn
Their Own, then Two of you: whose Pens, and Feet
Have made the distant Points of Heaven to meet:
He by exact discoveries of the West, Sr. Edwin Sandys view of Religion in the
Western parts.

Your Self by painful Travels in the East.
Some more like you would powerfully Confute
Th'Opposers of Priests Marriage by the Fruit.
And (since it is known, for all their Strait-vow'd life,
They Like the Sex in any style but Wife)
Cause them to change their Cloister for that State,
Which Keeps men Chaste by Vows legitimate.
Nor shame to Father their Relations,
Or under Nephews Names disguise their Sons.
This Child of yours, borne without spurious blot,
And Fairly Midwivd as it was begot,
Does so much of the Parents goodness Wear,
You may be proved to own it for your Heir.
Whose Choice acquires you from the Common Sin
Of such, who finish worse, then they Begin.
You mend upon your self, and your Last Strain
Does of your First the start in judgment gain.
Since, what in Curious Travel was begun,
You here conclude in a Devotion.
Where in delightful Raptures we descry;
As in a Map, Sions Chorography:
Laid out in so direct, and Smooth a Line,
Men need not go about through Palaestine.
Who seek Christ here, will the Straight Rode prefer,
As nearer much then by the Sepulcher.
For not a Limb grows here, but is a Path
Which in Gods City the blessed Center has,
And does so sweetly on each Passion strike,
The most fantastic taste will somewhat Like.
To the Unquiet Soul Job still from hence
Speaks in The Example of his Patience.
The Mortified may hear the Wise King Preach,
When his Repentance made Him fit to Teach:
Here are choice Hymns and Carolls for the Glad;
And melancholy Dirges for the sad.
Last, David (as he could his Art transfer)
Speaks like Himself by an Interpreter.
Your Muse, rekindled has the Prophets Fire,
And Tuned the Strings of his neglected Lyre;
Making the Note and Ditty so agree,
They now become a perfect Harmony.
I must confess, I have long wished to see
The Psalms reduced to this Conformity:
Grieving the Songs of Sion should be sung
In Phrase not differing from a Barbarous Tongue.
As if, by Custom warranted, we may
Sing that to God, we would be loath to Say.
Far be it from my purpose to upbraid
Their honest meaning, who first offer made
That Book in Meter to compile, which you
Have mended in the Form, and Built anew.
And It was well, considering the Time
Which scarcely could distinguish Verse and Rhyme.
But now the Language, like the Church, has won
More Luster since the Reformation;
None can condemn the Wish, or Labor spent
Good Matter in Good Words to represent.
Yet in this jealous Age some such there be
So (without cause) afraid of Noveltie;
They would by no means (had they power to chose)
An Old Ill Custom, for a Better loose.
Men who a Rustic Plainness so affect,
They think God served best by their neglect.
Holding the Cause would be Profaned by it,
Were they at Charge of Learning or of Wit.
And therefore bluntly, what comes next, they bring
Course and ill studied Stuff for Offering;
Which, like the Old Tabernacles Covering, are
Made up of Badgers skins and of Goats hair.
But These are Paradoxes they must use
Their Sloth and bolder Ignorance to excuse.
Who would not laugh at one will Naked go,
'Cause in Old hangings Truth is pictured so?
Though Plainness be reputed Honors note,
They Mantles add to beautify the Coat.
So that a Curious (unaffected) dress
Adds much unto the Bodies comeliness:
In Vice and Barbarism supinely rowles;
Their Fortunes not more slavish then their Souls.
Those Churches, Eastern Churches.
which from the first Heretics wan
All the first Fields, or led (at least) the Van;
In whom those Notes, so much required, be;
Agreement, Of Doctrine. Of Persons. As Antioch.
Miracles, Antiquity:
Which can a Never-broke Succession show
From the Apostles down; (Here bragged of so:)
So best confute Her most immodest claim,
Who scarce a Part, yet to be All does aim;
Lie now distressed, between two Enemy-Powers,
Whom the West damnes, and whom the East devoures.
What State then Theirs can more Unhappy be,
Threatened with Hell, and sure of Poverty.
The small Beginning of the Turkish Kings,
And their large Growth, show us that different Things
May meet in One Third; what most Disagree,
May have some Likeness: For in this we see,
A Mustard Seed may be resembled well
To the Two Kingdoms, both of Heaven and Hell.
Their Strength, and wants this work has both unwound;
To teach how these to increase, Turks.
and that confound:
Relates their Tenets; scorning to dispute
With Errors, which to tell, is to confute:
Shows how even there, where Christ vouchsaft to Teach,
Their Dervices dare an Impostor Preach. Priests.

For whilst with private Quarrels we Decaid,
We way for them, and Their Religion made:
And can but Wishes now to Heaven prefer, Ovids Metamorphosis.

May They gain Christ, or We his Sepulcher.
Next Ovid calls me; which though I admire,
For Equalling the Authors quickening Fire,
And his pure Phrase: yet More; remembering It
Was by a Mind so much distracted Writ:
Bus 'nesse and War, Ill Midvvives to produce
The Happy Offspring of so sweet a Muse:
Whilst every unknown Face did Danger Threat;
For every Native there was twice a Get.
More; om mentar.
when (returned) thy Work reviewed, exposed
What Pith before the hiding Bark enclosed:
And with it that Essay, Virg. Aen. lib. 1.
which lets us see
Well by the Foot, what Hercules would be.
All fitly offered to his Princely Hands;
By whose Protection Learning chiefly stands:
Whose Virtue moves more Pens, then his Power Swords;
And Theme to those, and Edge to these affords.
Who could not be displeased, Panegyric.
that his great Fame,
So Pure a Muse, so loudly should proclaim:
With his Queens praise in the same Model cast;
Which shall not less, then all their Annalls, last.
Yet, though we wonder at thy Charming Voice;
Perfection still was wanting in thy Choice:
And of a Soul, which so much Power possessed,
That Choice is hardly Good, which is not Best.
But though Thy Muse were Ethnically Chaste,
When most Fault could be found; yet now Thou have
Diverted to a Purer Path thy Quill;
And changed Parnassus Mount to Sions Hill:
So that blessed David might almost Desire
To hear his Harp thus Echoed by thy Lyre.
Such Eloquence, that though it were abused,
Could not but be (though not Allowed) excused.
Ioin'd to a Work so choice, that though Ill-done,
So Pious an Attempt Praise could not shun.
How strangely does it darkest Texts disclose,
In Verses of such sweetness; that even Those,
From who^ the unknown Tongue conceales the Sense,
Even in the Sound, must find an Eloquence.
For though the most bewitching Music could
Move men, no more than Rocks; thy Language would.
Those who make wit their Curse, who spend their Brain
Their Time, and Art, in looser Verse, to gain
Damnation, and a Mistres; till they see
How Constant that is, how Inconstant she;
May from this great Example learn, to sway
The Parts they are Blest-with, some more Blessed way.
Fate can against Thee but two Foes advance;
Sharpe-sighted Envy, and Blind Ignorance:
The first (by Nature like a shadow, near
To all great Acts) I rather Hate then Fear:
For them, (since whatsoever most they Raise
In Private, That they most in Throngs Dispraise;
And know the Ill they Act Condemned within) (...).

Who envies Thee, may no man envy Him.
The last I Fear not much, but Pity more
For though they cannot the least Fault explore;
Yet, if they might the high Tribunal Clime,
To Them thy Excellence would be thy Crime:
For Eloquence with things Profane they join;
Nor count it fit to Mix with what is Divine;
Like Art and Paintings laid upon a Face,
Of it self sweet; which more Deforme then Grace.
Yet, as the Church with Ornaments is Fraught,
Why may not That be too, which There is Taught?
And sure that Vessel of Election, Paul,
Who Iudais'd with Jews, was All to All:
So, to Gain some, would be (at least) Content,
Some for the Curious should be Eloquent:
For since the Way to Heaven is Rugged, who
Would have the Way to that Way be so too?
Or thinks it fit, we should not leave obtain,
To learn with Pleasure, what we Act with Pain?
Since then Some stop, unless their Path be Even,
Nor will be led by Soloecismes to Heaven;
And (through a Habit scarce to be controlled)
Refuse a Cordial, when not brought in Gold;
Much like to them to that Disease Inured, Tarantula*

Which can be no way, but by Music cured:
I Joy in Hope, that no small Piety
Will in their Colder Hearts be Warmed by Thee.
For as none could more Harmony dispense;
So neither could thy flowing Eloquence
So well in any Task be used, as this:
To Sound His Praises forth, whose Gift it is.
Virg. Georg. 2.
-- Cui non certaverit ullae
Aut tantum fluere, aut totidem dur are per annos.
FALKLAND.

An Ode to my worthy Kinsman Mr. George Sandys upon his excellent Paraphrase on
the Psalms.
O Breath again! that holy Lay
Did convay,
Unto my soul so sweet a Fire,
I desire,
That all my Senses charmed to Ear,
Should fix there.
O might this sacred Anthem last,
Till Time's past:
Until we warble forth a higher,
In the Quire
Of Angels, till the Spheres keep time,
To your Rhyme.
Amphion did a City raise,
By his Lays:
The Stones did dance into a Wall,
At his call.
But your divinely-tuned Air,
Does repair
Even Man himself, whose stony Heart,
By this Art,
Rebuildeth of its own accord,
To the Lord,
A Temple breathing holy Songs,
In strange Tongues.
You fit both David's Lyre, and Notes,
To our Throats.
See, the green Willow now not wears,
Of their Tears
The sadly silent Trophyes, we
From the Tree,
Take down the Hebrew Harps, and reach,
In our speech,
What ever we do hate, what fear,
What love dear.
Now in faint Accents praising God,
For his Rod:
Since that his punishing a Child,
Must be styled
A Blessing. But our thankful Lays,
Do his Praise
Sound in the loudest Key, when e're
He draws near
In Mercy, not affrighting Power;
In that Hour,
New Life approaches: Then our Joy
Does employ
Each Faculty, and Tune each Air
To a Prayre.
But by and by our Sins do cause
A sad Pause.
Our Hands lift-up, and cast-downe Eyes,
Our faint Cries,
Do in their sadly-pleasing Tones
Speak our Mones.
In stead of Harps we strike our Breasts:
All the Rests
Attend this Music, are a Tear,
Which Sighs bear,
In their soft Language, up on high,
To the Sky;
Whence God, delighted with our Grief,
Sends Relief.
Thus unto You we owe the Joys,
The Sweet Noise
Of our ravished Souls; we borrow
Hence our Sorrow;
Repentant Sorrow, which does glad,
Not make sad.
We weep in your Lines, we rejoice
In your Voice:
Whose pleasing Language fanns the Fire
Of Desire,
Which flames in Zeal, and calmly fashions
All our Passions.
Which you so sweetly have expressed,
Some have guest,
We Hallelu-jahs shall rehearse,
In your Verse.
Then be secure, your well-tuned Breath
Shall now outlive the Date of Death;
And when Fate pleases, you shall have
Still-Musick in the silent Grave:
You from Above shall hear each day
One Dirge dispatched unto your Clay;
These your own Anthemes shall become
Your lasting Epicedium.
Dudly Digges.

To the Reader.
THe Paraphrase upon the Psalms, though here ranck't according to the
Chronology, was first writ and published, and therefore these verses do in
time precede those that are fixed in the Front of the Volume.

A PARAPHRASE UPON THE FIRST BOOK OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM. 1.
BASS. ^

CANT. ^

THat man is truly blessed, who never strayes
By false advice, nor walks in Sinners ways;
Nor sits infected with their scornful pride,
Who God contemn, and Piety deride.
But wholly fixes his sincere delight
On heavenly Laws; those studies day and night.
He shall be like a Tree that spreads his root
By living streams, producing timely fruit:
His leaf shall never fall: the Lord shall bless
All his endeavors with desired success.
Men lost in Sin unlike rewards shall find,
Dispersed like chafe before the furious wind:
Their guilt shall not that horrid Day endure,
Nor they approach the Assemblies of the Pure:
For God approves those ways the Righteous tread;
But sinful Paths to sure destruction lead.
PSALM. II.
BASS. ^

CANT. ^

How are the Gentiles all on fire!
Why rage they with vain menacings;
Earths haughty Potentates and Kings,
Against God against his Christ conspire:
Break we, say they, their servile bands,
And cast their cords from our free hands.
But God from his celestial Throne
Shall laugh, and their attempts deride;
Then high incenst, thus check their pride;
(His Wrath in their confusion shown)
Lo, I my King have crowned, and will
Inthrone on Sions sacred Hill.
That great Decree I shall declare:
For thus I heard Jehovah say;
Thou art my Son begot this day:
Request, and I will grant thy prayer;
Subject all Nations to thy Throne;
And make the Sea-bound Earth thine own.
Thou shall an Iron Scepter sway,
Like earthen vessels break their bones.
Be wise, O you who sit on Thrones;
And Judges grave advice obey:
With joyful Fear O serve the Lord;
With trembling Joy embrace his Word.
In due of Homage kiss the Son,
Lest He his wrathful looks display;
And so you perish in the way,
His anger newly but begun:
Then blessed only are the Just,
Who on the Anointed fix their trust.
PSALM III.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

MY God, how are my foes increast!
What multitudes against me rise!
Who say, Give we his Soul no rest;
Whom God forsakes, and Men despise.
But thou art my Support, my Tower,
My Safety, my choice Ornament.
Before thy Throne my Prayers I power,
Heard from thy Sions high ascent.
No fears affright my soft repose;
Thou my Night-watch, my Guard by day:
Not Myriads of armed Foes,
Nor Treasons secret hands dismay.
Arise; o vindicte my Cause!
My Foes, whom wicked Hate provoke,
Thou, Lord, have smit their cancred jaws,
And all their teeth asunder broke.
Thou Lord, the only Hope of those,
Who thee with holy Zeal adore;
Whose all-protecting Arms enclose
Their Safety, who thy Aid implore.
PSALM IV.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THou Guardian of my truth and me,
That from these straits have set me free,
O hear my prayer!
Be I thy care;
For mercy lives in thee.
You sons of men, how long will you
Eclipse my glory, and pursue
Loved vanities;
Delight in lies,
To Man, to God untrue?
Know, God my innocence has blessed,
And will with soveraigntie invest:
His gentle ear
Prepared to hear
My never vain request.
Sin not, but fear; surcease, and try
Your hearts, as on your beds you lie:
Pure gifts present
With pure intent,
And place your hopes on high.
But earthly Minds false wealth admire,
And toil with uncontrol'd desire.
With clear aspect
Thy beams reflect,
And heavenly thoughts inspire.
O let my joy, exempt from fears,
Their joys transcend, when Autumn bears
His pleasant wines
On clustred vines,
And graine-replenisht ears.
Now shall the peaceful hand of Sleep
In heavenly Deaw my senses steep;
Whom thy large wings,
O King of Kings,
In shades of safety keep.
PSALM V.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

TO hear me, Lord, be thou inclined;
My thoughts O ponder in thy mind:
And let my cries acceptance find.
Thou hear'st my morning Sacrifice:
To thee, before the Day Star rise,
My prayers ascend, with steadfast eyes.
Thou love no vice; none dwells with thee;
Nor glorious Fools thy Beauty see;
All sinne-defil'd detested be.
Liars shall sink beneath thy hate;
Who thirst for blood, and weave deceit,
Thy Rage shall swiftly ruinate.
I to thy Temple will repair,
Since infinite thy Mercies are;
And thee adore with Fear and Prayer.
My God, conduct me by thy Grace;
For many have my Soul in chase.
Set thy strait Paths before my face.
False are their tongues, their hearts are hollow,
Like gaping Sepulchers they swallow;
Fawn, and betray even those they follow.
With vengeance girt these Rebels round;
In their own counsels them confound;
Since their Transgressions thus abound.
Joy they with an exalted voice,
That trust in thee, who guard'st thy Choice:
Let those who love thy Name rejoice.
Thy blessings shall in showers descend;
Thy favor as a shield defend
All those, who Righteousness intend.
PSALM VI.
As the 3.
LOrd, thy deserved Wrath assuage;
Nor punish in thy burniug Ire;
Let Mercy mitigate thy Rage,
Before my fainting life expire.
O heal! my bones with anguish ache;
My pensive heart with sorrow worn.
How long will thou my soul forsake!
O pity, and at length return!
O let thy Mercies comfort me,
And thy afflicted Servant save!
Who will in death remember thee?
Or praise thee in the silent Grave?
Vexed by insulting enemies,
My groans disturb the peaceful Night;
My bed washed with my streaming eyes:
Through grief grown old, and dim of sight.
All you of wicked life depart;
The Lord my God has heard my cry:
He will recure my wounded heart,
And turn my tears to tides of joy.
Who hate me, let dishonor wound,
Let fear their guilty souls affright;
With shame their haughty looks confound,
And let them vanish from my sight.
PSALM VII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

O Thou that art my Confidence,
And strong Defense;
From those who my sad fall intend,
Great God, defend.
Lest Lion-like, if none control,
They tear my persecuted Soul.
If I am guilty; if there be
Deceit in me;
If ill I ever to my friend
Did but intend;
Or rather have not succored those,
Who were my undeserved foes:
Let them my stained Soul pursue,
With hate subdue;
Let their proud feet in Triumph tread
Upon my head:
My life out of her mansion thrust,
And lay my Honor in the dust.
Against my dreadful Enemies,
Great God, arise.
Just Judge, thy sleeping Wrath awake,
And vengeance take:
Then all shall Thee adore alone.
O King of Kings ascend thy Throne!

So judge thou me:
Declare thou my integrity;
For thou do try
The heart and reins: the Just defend;
The malice of the Wicked end.
God is my shield; he help imparts
To sincere hearts;
The good protects; but menaceth
The bad with death;
Nor will, unless they change, relent:
He whets his sword, his bow is bent.
Dire instruments prepared has
Of deadly wrath:
And will at those, who persecute,
swift arrows shoot:
Who wicked thoughts conceived; now great
With Mischief, travel; hatch Deceit.
Who dug a pit, first fell therein,
Caught by his sin;
On his own head his outrage shall
Like ruins fall.
But I, O thou eternal King,
Will of thy Truth and Justice sing.
PSALM. VIII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

LOrd, how illustrious is thy Name!
Whose Power both Heaven and Earth proclaim!
Thy Glory thou have set on high,
Above the Marble-arched Sky.
The wonders of thy Power thou have
In mouths of babes and sucklings placed:
That so thou might thy foes confound,
And who in malice most abound.
When I pure Heaven, thy fabric, see,
The Moon and Stars disposed by thee;
O what is Man, or his frail Race,
That thou should such a Shadow grace!
Next to thy Angels most renowned;
With Majesty and Glory crowned:
The King of all thy Creatures made;
That all beneath his feet have laid:
All that on Dales or Mountains feed,
That shady Woods or Deserts breed;
What in the aierie Region glide,
Or through the rolling Ocean slide.
Lord, how illustrious is thy Name!
Whose Power both Heaven and Earth proclaim.
PSALM IX.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THee will I praise with Heart and Voice,
Thy wondrous Works aloud resound:
In thee, O Lord, will I rejoice;
Thy Name with zealous praises crowned.
My Foes fell by inglorious flight,
Before thy terrible Aspect:
Thy powerful Hands support my Right;
Thou Judgment justly do direct.
The proud are fallen, the Heathen fly;
Oblivion shall their names intombe:
Destruction, O thou Enemy,
Has now received a final doom.
Thou Towns and Cities have destroyed;
Their memory with them decays:
But God for ever shall abide,
And high his Throne of Justice raise.
A righteous Scepter shall extend;
And Judgment distribute to all:
He will oppressed Souls defend,
That in the time of Trouble call.
Who know thy Name in thee will trust;

Praise Sions King, O praise the Just,
And make his noble Actions known.
Blood scapes not his revenging hand;
He vindicates the Poor man's Cause.
Lord, my insulting Foes withstand,
And draw me from Deaths greedy Jaws;
That I may in the Royal Gate
Of Sions Daughter raise my Voice;
Thy ample Praises celebrate,
And in thy saving health rejoice.
They (fallen into the Pit they made)
Are caught in Nets themselves prepared.
The Lord his Judgments has displayed:
The Wicked in their works ensnared:
The Wicked down to Hell shall sink,
And all that do the Lord disdain.
But God will on the Needy think;
Nor shall the Poor expect in vain.
Lord, let not Man prevail; arise;
The Insulting Heathen judge: O then
Let trembling Fear their heart surprise;
That they may know they are but Men.
PSALM X.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

Withdraw not, O my God, my guide:
In time of trouble do thou hide
Thy cheerful face?
Who want thy Grace,
The poor pursue with cruel pride:
O be they by their own
Inventions overthrown.
The wicked boast of their success;
The covetous profanely bless,
By thee, O Lord,
So much abhorred.
Their pride will not thy power confess;
Nor have thy favor sought,
Or had of thee a thought.
They in oppression take delight;
Thy Judgments far above their sight:
Their enemies
Scoff and despise:
Who say in heart, No opposite
Can us remove, nor shall
Our greatness ever fall.
Their mouths detested curses fill;
Fraud, mischief; ever prone to ill:
In secret they
Lurk to betray;
The Innocent in corners kill:
His eyes with fierce intent
Upon the poor are bent.

Awaits to catch oppressed men,
Who unaware
Light in his snare.
His couched limbs contracts, that then
with all his strength he may
Rush on his wretched prey.
His heart has said, God has forgot;
He hides his face, he minds it not.
Arise, O Lord,
Draw thy just sword;
Nor out of thy remembrance blot
The poor and desolate:
O shield them from his hate!
Why should the wicked God despise,
And say he looks with careless eyes?
Their well seen spite
Thou shall requite.
The poor, O Lord, on Thee relies;
Thou help'st the fatherless,
Whom cruel men oppress.
Asunder break the arms of those,
Who ill affect, and good oppose:
Their crimes explore,
Until no more
Lurk in their bosoms to disclose.
Eternal King, thy Hand
Has chased them from thy Land.
Lord, thou have heard thy Servants prayer;
Thou will their humble hearts prepare:
Thy gracious Ear
Inclined to hear.
The Fatherless, and worn with care
Judge thou; that Mortals may
No more with outrage sway.
PSALM XI.
As the 9.
MY God, on Thee my hopes rely:
Why say they to my troubled Soul,
Arise, up to your Mountain fly;
Fly quickly, like a chaced Foul?
For lo, the wicked bend their bows,
Their arrows fit with secret Art;
That closely they may shoot at those,
Who are upright and pure in heart.
If their foundation be destroyed,
What can the Righteous build upon?
God in his Temple does abide;
Heaven is the great Jehovah's Throne.
His Eyes behold, his Eyelids try
The Sons of men; allows the best:
But such as joy in cruelty
The Lord does from his Soul detest.
Snares, horrid Tempest, Brimstone, Fire
(Their portion) on their heads shall light:
Th'intirely Just affects th'Intire;
For ever precious in his sight.
PSALM XII.
^

Help Lord, for Godly men decay;
From Mortals Faith, enforced, flies:
And with their sins Companions they,
Talk of affected Vanities:
Their flattering Tongues abound with Lies;
Their double Hearts bent to betray.
God shall those flattering Lips confound,
And Tongues which swell with proud Disdain:
Whose boastings arrogantly sound;
Our Tongues the conquest shall obtain;
They are our own, who shall restrain?
Or to our Wills prescribe a bound?
But forth' Oppression of the Poor,
And VVretches sighs which pierce the Skies,
Who pity at his Throne implore,
The Lord has said, I will arise,
And from their Foes, who them despise,
Deliver all that me adore.
Gods Word is pure; as pure as Gold
In melting Furnace seven times tried:
His Arms for ever shall infold
All those, who in his truth abide.
The wicked range on every side,
When vicious men the Scepter hold.
PSALM. XIII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

HOw long! Lord, let me not
For ever be forgot!
How long my God, will thou
Contract thy clouded brow!
How long in mind perplexed
Shall I be daily vexed!
How long shall he control,
Who persecutes my soul!
Consider, hear my cries;
Illuminate mine eyes;
Lest with exhausted breath
I ever sleep in Death;
Lest my insulting Foe
Boast in my overthrow;
And those who would destroy,
In my subversion joy.
But I, Thou ever Just,
Will in thy Mercy trust;
And in thy saving Grace
My constant Comfort place:
My Songs shall sing thy Praise,
That have prolonged my Days.
PSALM XIIII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THe fool has said in his false heart;
God cares not what to Man succeeds.
Abominable are their deeds;
All ill affect, from Good depart.
Jehovah Man's rebellious Race
Beheld from his celestial Throne;
To see if there were any one
That understood, or sought his Face.
All from forsaken Truth are flowne;
Corrupt in Body, such in Soul,
Defiled within, without as foul;
None Good endeavors, no, not One.
Are all, that work Iniquity,
By Ignorance so blindly led?
My People they devour like Bread;
Nor call on him who sits on high.
Their Consciences with terror quake;
Since God does with the Just abide:
For Poor men's Counsels they deride,
Who him for their Protection take.
O that unto thy Israel
Salvation might from Sion Spring!
When God shall us from Bondage bring,
No joy shall Jacobs joy excel.
PSALM. XV.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

Who shall in thy Tent abide?
On thy Holy Hill reside?
He that is Just and Innocent;
Tells the truth of his intent;
Slanders none with venomed Tongue;
Fears to do his Neighbor wrong;
Fosters not base Infamies;
Vice beholds with scornful Eyes;
Honors those who fear the Lord;
Keeps; though to his loss, his Word;
Takes no Bribes for wicked ends,
Nor to Use his Money lends:
Who by these directions guide
Their pure steps, shall never slide.
PSALM XVI.
As the 8.
PReserve me, my undoubted Aid:
To whom, thou, O my Soul, have said,
Thou art my God; no good in me,
Nor Merit can extend to Thee;
But to thy blessed Saints that dwell
On Earth, whose Graces most excel:
Those ravish me with pure delight.
Their sorrows shall be infinite,
Who other Gods with gifts adore:
Their bloody Offerings I abhor;
Nor shall their Names my Lips profane.
But God my Lot will still maintain:
He is my Portion, he bestows
The Cup, that with his Bounty flows.
I have a pleasant Seat obtained,
A fair and large Possession gained.
The Lord will I for ever praise,
Whose Counsels have informed my VVayes:
And my inflamed Zeal excite
To serve him in the silent Night.
He is my Object; by his Hand
Confirmed, immovable I stand.
Joy has my Heart and Tongue possessed:
My Flesh in constant Hope shall rest.
Thou will not leave my Soul alone
In Hell; nor let thy Holy One
Corruption see: but that Highway
To Everlasting Life display.
Thy Presence yields entire delight:
At thy Right hand Joys infinite.
PSALM XVII.
As the 31.
LOrd, grant my just Request; O hear my cry,
And Prayers that lips, untoucht with guile, unfold!
My Cause before thy High Tribunal try,
And let thine Eyes my Righteoussnesse behold.
Thou prov'st my Heart even in the Nights recesse,
Like metal try'st me, yet no Dross have found:
I am resolved, my Tongue shall not transgress;
But on thy Word will all my Actions ground.
So shall I from the Paths of Tyrants fly:
O, lest I slip, direct my Steps by Thine!
I Thee invoke; for thou will hear my Cry:
Thine Ear to my afflicted Voice incline.
O show thy wondrous Love! Thou from their Foes
Preservest all that on thy Aid depend.
Lord, as the Apple of the Eye enclose,
And over me thy shadie Wings extend.

My guiltless Soul, have compast me about;
Who swell with Pride, enclosed with their own fat,
And words of contumely thunder out.
Our traced steps entrap as in a Toil;
Low-couched on the Earth with flaming Eyes;
Like famisht Lions eager of their Spoil,
Or Lions Whelps; close lurking to surprise.
Arise! prevent him, from his Glory hurled;
My pensive Soul, from the Devourer save:
From Men which are thy scourge, Men of the World,
Who in this Life alone their Portion have.
Filled with thy secret Treasure, to their Race
They their accumulated Riches leave:
But I with Righteousness shall see thy Face;
And rising, in thy Image, joy receive.
PSALM XXVIII.
As the 72.
MY Heart on Thee is fixed, my Strength, my Power,
My steadfast Rock, my Fortress, my high Tower,
My God, my Safety, and my Confidence,
The Horn of my Salvation, my Defense.
My Songs shall thy deserved Praise resound:
For at my Prayers thou will my Foes confound.
Sorrows of Death on every side assailed,
And dreadful floods of Impious Men prevailed:
Sorrows of Hell my compast Soul dismayed;
And to entrap me, deadly Snares were laid.
In this Distress I cried, and called upon
The Lord, who heard me from his Holy Throne.
He trembling Earth in his fierce Anger struck;
Th'unfixed roots of aierie Mountains shook;
Smoke from his Nostrils flew; devouring Fire
Brake from his Mouth; Coals kindled by his Ire.
In his Descent bowed Heaven with Earth did meet,
And gloomy Darkness rolled beneath his Feet,
A Golden-winged Cherubin bestrid,
And on the swiftly flying Tempest rid.
He Darkness made his secret Cabinet;

The Beams of his bright Presence these expel;
Whence showers of burning Coals and Hailestones fell.
From troubled Skies loud claps of Thunder brake;
In Hail and darting Flames The Almighty spoke:
Whose Arrows my amazed Foes subdue;
And at their scatred Troops his Lightning threw.
The Ocean could not his deep Botome hide;
The Worlds concealed Foundations were descri'd
At thy rebuke, Jehovah; at the blast
Even of the breath which through thy nostrils past.
He with extended arms his Servant saves,
And drew me sinking from the enraged waves:
From my proud foes by his assistance freed,
Who swollen with hate, no less in strength exceed.
Without his aid, I in that stormy Day
Of my affliction, had become their prey:
Who from those straits of danger by his Might
Enlarged my Soul; for I was his delight.

And Justice, did his saving grace dispense.
The narrow Path by him prescribed, I took;
Nor like the wicked, my Great God forsook.
For all his Judgments were before mine eyes;
I with his statutes daily did advise,
And ever walked before him, void of guile:
No act or purpose did my soul defile.
For this he recompensed my righteousness
And crowned my innocence with fair success.
The Merciful shall flourish in thy Grace;
Thy Righteousness the Righteous shall embrace:
Thou to the Pure thy purity wilt show;
And the perverse shall thy averseness know.
For thou will thy afflicted People save;
The proud cast down, down to the greedy grave.
Thou Lord wilt make my taper to shine bright,
And clear my darkness with celestial Light.
Through Thee I have against an Host revail'd,
And by thy aid a lofty Bulwark scaled.

A shield to those that in his promise trust.
What God is there in Heaven or Earth but ours!
What Rock but He against assailing Powers!
He breathed new strength and courage in the day
Of Battle, and securely cleared my way.
He makes my feet outstrip the nimble Hind,
Upto the Mountains, where I safety find.
It Is he that teaches my weak hands to fight:
A Bow of steel is broken by their might.
Thou did thy ample Shield before me set;
Thy Arm upheld, thy Favor made me great.
The passage of my steps on every side,
Thou have enlarged, lest my feet should slide.
I followed, overtooke; nor made retreat,
Until victorious in my Foes defeat;
So charged with wounds, that they no longer stood;
But at my feet lay bathed in their blood.
Thou arm'st me with prevailing Fortitude,
And all that rose against me have subdued:
Their stubborn necks subjected to my Will,
That I their blood, who hate my Soul, might spill.
They cried aloud; but found no succor near:
To thee, Jehovah; but thou would not hear.

Trod under-foot as dirt in beaten ways.
From Popular Fury thou have set me free;
Among the Heathen have exalted me;
Whom unknown Nations serve: as soon obey
As hear of me; and yield unto my sway.
The Stranger-borne, beset with horror, fled;
And in their close Retreats betray their dread.
O praise the living Lord, the Rock whereon
I build; the God of my Salvation!
It Is he who rights my wrongs; the People bends
To my Subjection; from my Foe defends.
Thou raisest me above their proud control;
And from the violent Man have freed my Soul.
The Heathen shall admire my Thankfulness:
My Songs shall thy immortal Praise express.
A great and manifold Deliverance
God gives his King: his mercy does advance
In his Anointed; and will shower his grace
Eternally on David and his Race.
PSALM. XIX.
As the 8.
GOds glory the vast Heavens proclaim;
The Firmament, his mighty Frame.
Day unto Day, and Night to Night
The wonders of his Works recite.
To these nor speech nor words belong,
Yet understood without a Tongue.
The Globe of Earth they compass round;
Through all the world disperse their sound.
There is the Suns Pavillion set;
Who from his Rosy Cabinet
Like a fresh Bridegroom shows his face;
And as a Giant runs his race.
He rises in the dawning East,
And glides obliquely to the West:
The World with his bright Rays repleat;
All Creatures cherisht by his heat.
Gods Laws are perfect, and restore
The Soul to life, even dead before.
His Testimonies, firmly true,
With Wisdom simple men indue.

And Feast the Soul with sweet delight.
His Precepts are all Purity,
Such as illuminate the Eye,
The fear of God, soiled with no stain,
Shall everlastingly remain.
Jehovah's Judgments are Divine;
With Judgment he does Justice join:
Which men should more then Gold desire,
Then heaps of Gold refined by Fire:
More sweet then Honey of the Hive,
Or Cells where Bees their Treasure slive.
Thy Servant is informed from thence:
They, their Observers recompense.
Who knows what his Offenses be?
From secret sins O cleanse thou me!
And from presumptuous Crimes restrain;
Nor let them in thy Servant reign:
So shall I live in Innocence,
Not spotted with that great Offense.
My Fortress, my Deliverer;
O let the Prayers my Lips prefer,
And Thoughts which from my heart arise,
be acceptable in thine Eyes.
PSALM XX.
As the 7.
THe Lord in thy Adversity
Regard thy cry;
Great Jacobs God with Safety arm,
And shield from harm:
Help from his Sanctuary send,
And out of Sion thee defend,
Thy Odors, which pure flames consume,
Be his Perfume.
May he accept thy Sacrifice,
Fired from the Skies.
For ever thy endeavors bless;
And crown thy Counsels with success.
We will of thy Deliverance sing,
Triumphant King:
Our Ensigns in that prayd-for Day
With Joy display;
Even in the Name of God. O still
May he thy just Desires fulfill!
Now know I his Anointed He
Will hear, and free;
With saving Hand and Mighty Power,
From his high Tower.
These trust in Horse; in Chariots those;
Our trust we in our God repose.
Their wounded limbs with anguish bend,
To Death descend:
But we in fervor of the fight
Have stood upright.
O save us, Lord; thy Suppliants hear:
And in our aid, Great King, appear.
PSALM XXI.
As the 15.
LOrd, in thy Salvation,
In the Strength which thou have shown,
Greatly shall the King rejoice.
How will Joy exalt his Voice!
Thou have granted his request;
Of his Hearts desire possessed;
Blessed with Blessings manifold;
Crowned with sparkling Gemmes and Gold.
Praid-for Life thou granted have;
Length of Days which never waste;
By thy Safeguard glorious made;
With high Majesty arrayed:
Of resistlesse Power possessed;
By thy favors ever blessed.
Lo! his Joys are infinite;
Joy reflected from thy sight:
For the King in God did trust.
Through the Mercy of the Just,
He shall ever fixed stand.
For thy Hand, thy own right Hand,
Shall thy Enemies destroy,
Who would in thy ruin joy.
When thy Anger shall awake,
Them a flaming Furnace make.
God shall swallow in his Ire,
And devour them all with fire.
From the Earth destroy their Fruit;
Never let their Seed take root.
Mischievous was their intent;
All their Thoughts against me bent;
Thoughts which nothing could perform.
Let thy Arrows, like a Storm,
Put them to inglorious flight;
On their daunted faces light.
Lord, aloft thy Triumphs raise,
While we sing thy Power and Praise.
PSALM XXII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

MY God! o why have thou forsook!
Why, o so far, with-drawne thine Aid!
Nor when I roared, pity took!
My God, by day to Thee I prayed,
And when Nights Curtains were displaid:
Yet would not Thou vouchsafe a look.
Yet thou art holy; throned on high;
The Israelites thy Praise resound.
Our Fathers did on thee rely;
Their Faith with wreaths of Conquest crowned:
They sought, and thy Deliverance found;
They trusted, and thy Truth did try.
But I, a worm, no man, am made
The scorn of men; despised by all:
Who shake their Heads, make mouths, upbraid.
Let God, say they, redeem from thrall,
On whom thy Hopes so vainly call:
Now let him his Beloved aid.
Thou drew'st me from the womb; by Thee
Confirmed at my Mothers breast:
When borne, Thou took'st the charge of me;
Even from my Birth, my God professed.
O succor me with fear distressed!
Thou can alone thy Servant free.

Strong Bulls of Bashan girt me round:
Who their inflamed mouths prepare,
Like ravenous Lions, to confound.
I Am spilt like water on the ground;
And all my Bones disjointed are.
My Heart like Wax within me thawes;
My vigor as a Pot-sheared dried:
My thirsty Tongue cleaves to my jaws;
In dust of Death thou do me hide:
Dogs compass me on every side;
And multitudes, who hate thy Laws.
My hands and Feet transfixed are;
Bones, to be told, with anguish waste:
This seen with joy, my robes they share;
Lots on my seamlesse garment cast.
My Strength, to my redemption haste!
Nor o be deaf to my sad prayer!
Let not the Sword thy Servant wound;
My Dearling from the Dog protect:
From Lions that in rage abound;
From Unicornes guard thy Elect.
I then my Brethren will direct;
Among the Saints thy Praise resound.

You Sons of Jacob, God adore:
Let Isreal's Seed his praise record;
For from their cries who help implore,
His Face he hides not, nor the Poor
In their Affliction has abhorred.
I in the great Assembly shall
Declare his Works, which words exceed;
And pay my Vows before them all.
The Meek abundantly shall feed;
The Faithful praise their Help at need,
Nor by the stroke of Death shall fall.
All who behold the Suns Vp-rise,
Shall God profess, and serve alone:
And all the Heathen Families
Shall cast themselves before his Throne;
Because the Kingdom is his own:
For over all his Empire lies.
Who in prosperity abound,
Nor undeserved Honors gain;
Who poorly creep upon the ground,
And scarce their needy lives sustain;
Shall eat, and to his easy reign
Submit, with joys eternal crowned.
Their sanctified Posterity
Shall ever celebrate his Name;
Adopted Sons of the most High:
They shall his Righteousness proclaim,
And Works of everlasting fame,
To their believing Progeny.
PSALM XXIII.
As the 8.
THE Lord my Shepherd, me his Sheep
Will from consuming Famine keep.
He fosters me in fragrant Meads,
By softly-sliding waters leads;
My Soul refresht with pleasant juice:
And lest they should his Name traduce,
Then when I wander in the Maze
Of tempting Sin, informs my ways.
No terror can my courage quail,
Though shaded in Deaths gloomy vale;
By thy Protection fortified:
Thy Staff my Stay, thy Rod my Guide.
My Table thou have furnished;
Powered precious Odors on my head:
My Mazer flows with pleasant Wine,
While all my Foes with envy pine.
Thy Mercy and Beneficence
Shall ever join in my Defense;
Who in thy House will sacrifice,
Till aged Time close up mine eyes.
PSALM XXIV.
As the 8.
THE round and many-peopled Earth,
What from her womb extract their birth,
And whom her foodfull breast sustaines,
Are his, who high in glory reigns.
The Land in moving Seas has placed,
By ever-toiling Floods embraced.
Who shall upon his Mountain rest?
Who in his Sanctuary feast?
Even he, whose hands are innocent;
His heart unsoil'd with foul intent;
Whom swollen Ambition, Avarice,
Nor tempting Pleasures can entice:
Who only their infection fears;
And never fraudulently swears:
The Lord his Savior him shall bless,
And cloth him with his Righteousness.
Such are of Jacobs faithful Race,
Who seek him, and shall find his Face.
You lofty Gates, your Leaves display;
You everlasting Doors, give way;
The King of Glory coms. O sing
His Praise! Who is this glorious King?
The Lord in Strength, in Power complete;
The Lord in battle more then great.
You lofty Gates, your Leaves display;
You everlasting Doors give way;
The King of Glory comes. O sing
His praise! Who is this glorious King?
The Lord of Hosts, of Victory,
Is King of glory; throned on high.
PSALM. XXV.
As the 2.
ON Thee with Confidence I call,
To thee my troubled Soul erect:
Lord, let not Same my look deject,
Nor Malice triumph in my fall.
Thy Servants save; but those confound,
Who Innocence with slander wound.
In thy disclosed paths direct;
Thy Truth, that leading Star, display:
O my Redeemer! every day
My dangers thy relief expect.
Think of thy Mercies shown of old;
Thy Mercies more then can be told.
The sins of my unbridled Youth,
Nor frail Transgressions call to mind:
Let those that seek, thy Mercy find,
Even for the honor of thy Truth.
God, ever just and good, the way
Of life will show to such as stray.
The Meek in righteousness shall guide;
To such his heavenly Will express:
Which shall with Truth and Mercy bless
All such as in his Laws abide.
My sins, so numerous and great
O for thy honor, Lord, forget!

To him shall he his Paths disclose:
His Soul refresht with calm repose;
The Land by his fair Race possessed:
To him his Counsels shall impart,
And seal his Covenants in his heart.
On thee with fixed Eyes I wait:
My feet enlarge thou from their snares.
O pity me so worn with cares;
Despised, poor, and desolate!
The troubles of my mind increase;
Lord, from their galling yoke release!
Behold thou my affliction,
The toil and straits, wherein I live:
My sins, so infinite, forgive.
Behold my Foes, how potent grown!
How are they multiplied of late,
Who hate me with a deadly hate!
Deliver, o! from shame ptotect;
Since from my Faith I never swerve:
Let Innocence and Truth preserve,
Who constantly thy aid expect.
Redeem thy chosen Israel,
And sorrow from his breast expel.
PSALM XXVI,
As the 4.
LOrd, judge my cause: thy piercing Eye
Beholds my Souls integrity.
How can I fall;
When I, and all
My hopes on thee rely?
Examine, try my reins and heart;
Thou, Mercies Source, my object art:
Nor from thy Truth
Have I in Youth,
Or will in Age depart.
Men sold to sin offend my sight;
I hate the two-tongu'd Hypocrite:
Those who devise
Malicious lies,
And in their crimes delight.
But will, with hands immaculate,
And offerings, at thy Altar wait:
Thy Praise disperse
In grateful verse;
Thy Noble Acts relate.
Thy House, in my esteem, excels:
The Mansion where thy Glory dwells.
My life o close
Not up with those,
Whose sin thy Grace expels!
Who guiltless blood with pleasure spill:
Subverting bribes their right-hands fill;
Bold in offense.
But Innocence
And Truth shall guard me still.
Redeem; O with thy Grace sustain!
My feet now stand upon the plain.
Thy Justice I
Will magnify,
With those who fear thy Name.
PSALM XXVII.
As the 10.
GOD is my Savior, my clear light:
Who then can my repose affright?
Or what appear
Worth such a fear,
My life protected by his Might?
Vain hatred, vain their power,
That would my life devour.
These fell, when they against me fought:
The Wicked suffered what they sought.
Though troops of foes
At once in close,
Of fear I would not lodge a thought:
Should Armies compass me;
So confident in thee.
One thing I have, and shall request;
That I may in thy Mansion rest,
Till Death surprise
My closing eyes:
That they may on thy beauty feast;
That in thy Temple still
I may enquire thy Will.
When storms arise on every side,
He will in his Pavillion hide:
How ever great,
In that retreat
I shall concealed and safe abide.
He, to resist their shocke,
Has fixed me on a Rock.
Now is my head advanced, renowned
Above my foes, who gird me round;
That in my Tent
I may present
My sacrifice with Trumpets sound:
There I thy praise will sing,
Set to a well-tuned string.

Extend thy pity, and reply.
When thus the Lord
In sweet accord;
Seek thou my Face with searching Eye.
Directed by thy Grace,
Lord, I will seek thy Face.
Thy Face O therefore never hide!
Nor in thine anger turn aside
From him that has
Served thee with faith.
Forsake me not, my ancient Guide;
So often in dangers known:
O leave me not alone.
Although my Parents should forsake;
Yet, Lord, thou would to Harbor take.
O lest I stray
Teach me thy Way,
And in thy Precepts perfect make:
Because my enemies
Watch like so many Spies.
Expose me not to their desire;
For lying witnesses conspire,
Who in their breath
Bear Wrath and Death.
My Soul had sunk beneath their ire,
But that I did rely
On thy benignity.
In hope to see (within the Land
Of those that live) thy saving hand.
He shall impart
Strength to thy heart.
Wait on the Lord, undanted stand;
His heavenly Will attend,
Who timely aid will send.
PSALM XXVIII.
As the 5.
MY God, my Rock, regard my Cry;
Lest I unheard, like those that die,
In shades of dark Oblivion lie.
To my ascending Grief give ear,
When I my hands devoutly rear
Before thy Mercie-seat with fear.
With wicked men mix not my Fate;
Nor drag me with the Reprobate,
Who speak of Peace, but foster hate.
Such as their works, their dire intent,
And practices to circumvent;
Such be their dreadful punishment.
Since they will not thy Choice renown,
But hate whom thou intend'st to crown;
O build not up, but pull them down!
He hears! his Name be magnified!
My Strength, secured on every side,
Since all my hope on him relied.
These Seas of Joy my tears devour.
My Songs shall celebrate thy Power,
O thou that art to thine a Tower.
O thou my strong Deliverance,
Thy People, thine Inheritance,
Bless, feed, preserve, and still advance.
PSALM XXIX.
^

YOu that are of Princely Birth,
Praise the Lord of Heaven and Earth;
Glory give, his Power proclaim;
Magnify and praise his Name.
Worship; in the Beauty bless,
Beauty of his Holiness.
From a dark and showring Cloud,
On the floods that roar aloud,
Hark! his Voice with terror breaks:
God, our God in Thunder speaks.
Powerful in his Voice on high,
Full of Power and Majesty:
Lofty Cedars overthrown,
Cedars of steep Libanon,
Calfe-like skipping on the ground.
Libanon and Sirion bound,
Like a youthful Unicorne,
Laboring Clouds with Lightning torn.
At his Voice the Desert shakes;
Kadish, thy vast Desert quakes.
Trembling Hindes then calve for fear;
Shadie Forests bare appear:
His renown by every tongue
Through his Holy Temple sung.
He the raging Floods restraines:
He a King for ever reigns.
God his People shall increase,
Arm with Strength, and bless with Peace.
PSALM XXX.
As the 14.
MY Verse shall in thy praises flow:
Lord, thou have raised my head on high;
Nor suffered the proud Enemy
To triumph in my overthrow.
I cried aloud; thy Arm did save;
Thou drew'st me from the shades of Death,
Repealing my exiled breath,
When almost swallowed by the Grave.
You Saints of his, oh sing his praise!
Present your Vows unto the Lord;
His perfect Holiness record,
Whose Wrath but for a moment stays.
His quickening Favor life bestows:
Tears may continue for a night;
But Joy springs with the Morning Light;
Long-lasting Joys, soone-ending Woes.

My feet shall ever fixed abide:
I, by thy favor fortified,
Am like a steadfast Mountain made.
But when thou hid'st thy cheerful Face;
How infinite my Troubles grew!
My cries then with my grief renew,
Which thus implored thy saving Grace:
What profit can by blood afford,
When I shall to the Grave descend?
Can senseless Dust thy Praise extend?
Can Death thy living Truth record?
To my Complaints attentive be;
Thy Mercy in my aid advance:
O perfect my Deliverance,
That have no other Hope but Thee!
Thou, Lord, have made The Afflicted glad;
My Sorrow into Dancing turned:
The Sackcloth torn wherein I mourned,
And me in Tyrian Purple clad:
That so my Glory might proclaim
Thy Favors in a joyful Verse;
Uncessantly thy Praise rehearse,
And magnify thy sacred Name,
PSALM XXXI.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

Who trusts in Thee, o let not shame deject!
Thou ever Just, my chased Soul secure:
Lord, lend a willing ear, with speed protect;
Be thou my Rock; with thy strong Arm immure.
My Rock, my Fortress, for thy Honor aid,
And my engaged feet from Danger guide:
Pull from their subtle Snares in secret laid,
O thou my only Strength so often tried.
To thy safe Hands my Spirit I commend,
O my Redeemer, O thou God of Truth.
Who Lies invent, or unto Idols bend,
I have abhorred, but loved Thee from my Youth.
I will rejoice, and in thy Mercy boast,
That in his trouble would thy Servant know:
Deliver, when in expectation lost;
Nor yield him to the Triumph of his Foe.

My Spirits faint, my Flesh consumes with care:
My Life is spent with grief, in sighs my Days;
My Strength through Sin dissolves, my Bones impare.
To all my Foes I am become a scorn;
Nor least to those, who seemed in love most near:
By all my late familiar friends forlorn;
Who when they meet me, turn aside for fear.
Forgot like those, who in the Grave abide,
And, as a broken vessel, past repair:
Traduced by many, (fear on everyside)
Who counsel take, and would my life ensnare.
But, Lord, my Hopes are on thee fixed: I said,
Thou art my God; my Days are in thy Hand:
Against my furious Foes oppose thy Aid;
And those, who persecute my Soul, withstand.
O let thy Face upon thy Servant shine;
Save for thy Mercies sake; from Shame defend.
Shame cover those who keep no Laws of thine;
And undeplored to the Grave descend.

That with despite and pride traduce the Just.
What Joy have thou reserved! what wrought for those,
(In sight of all) who fear, and in Thee trust!
Those shall Thou in thy secret Presence hide
From their Oppressors violence and wrongs;
They in thy close Pavilion shall abide,
Secured from the strife of envious Tongues.
Blessed he! who in a walled City has
To me his wonderful Affection shown.
I rashly said, I am the food of Wrath;
Cut off; for ever from his Presence thrown.
Yet thou, O ever blessed, heardst my Prayer,
When to thy Mercy I addressed my Cry.
O love the living Lord, all you that are
His chosen Saints, and on his Aid rely:
For he the Faithful ever will preserve;
And render to the Proud their full deserts.
Courageous be all you, who hope, and serve
The Lord of life, who will confirm your hearts.
PSALM XXXII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

Blessed, o thrice blessed is he,
Whose Sins remitted be;
And whose Impieties
God covers from his Eyes.
To whom his Sins are not
Imputed, as forgot:
His Soul with guile unstained.
While silent I remained,
My bones consumed away;
I rored all the day:
For on me day and night
Thy Hand did heavy light.
My moisture dried throughout,
Like to a Summers drought.
I then my Sins confessed,
How far I had transgrest:
When all I had revealed,
Thy Hand my Pardon sealed.
For this, who Godly are
Shall seek to Thee by Prayer;
Seek, when thou may be found;
In Deluges undrown'd.
Thou art my safe Retreat,
My Shield, when dangers threat;
Shall my Deliverance
With Songs of Joy advance.
I will instruct, and show
The way which thou should go;
The way to Piety;
And guide thee with mine eye.
Be not like Mule and Horse,
Whose reason is their Force;
Whose mouth the Bit and Reine,
Lest they rebel, restrain.
Innumerable Woes
The Wicked shall enclose:
But those who God affect,
His Mercy shall protect.
O you, who are upright,
In God your God delight:
You Just, his blessed Choice,
In Him with Songs rejoice.
PSALM XXXIII.
As the 8.
TO God, you Just, your Voices raise;
It you beseemes to sing his Praise.
O celebrate the King of kings
On Instruments strung with ten Strings:
To Harp and Lute new Dities sing;
Sing loud with skilful fingering.
His Words are crowned by their event;
And all his Works are permanent.
Justice and Judgment he affects:
His Bounty upon all reflects.
His Word the arched Heavens did frame;
His Breath, the Stars eternal Flame.
He the collected Seas confines,
And folds the Deep in Magazines.
The Lord, O all you Nations, fear;
All whom the Earths round shoulders bear.
He spoke, 'twas done as soon as said;
At his Commandment steadfast made.
The People counsel take in vain;
Their Projects no success obtain.
The Counsels of the Lord are sure;
His Purposes no Change endure.
Blessed they, whose God Jehovah is;
The Nation set apart for his.
The Lord looks from the lofty Skis;
On careful Mortals casts his Eyes;
The Lord looks from his Residence;
The Sons of men beholds from thence.
He fashioned their hearts alone:
To him their Thoughts and deeds are known.
No King is saved by an Host;
No Giant in his strength should boast:
There rests no Safety in a Horse;
None are delivered by his force.
Gods eyes are ever on the Just,
Who fear, and in his Mercy trust;
To free their Souls from swallowing Earth,
And keep alive in time of Dearth.
Our fervent Souls on God attend,
Our help, who only can defend:
In whom our Hearts exult for joy;
Because we on his Name rely.
Great God to us propitious be,
As we have fixed our Hopes on thee.
PSALM. XXXIV.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THe Lord I will for ever bless;
My Tongue his praises shall profess,
In him my Soul shall boast:
The Meek, shall hear the same, and joy:
His Name, with me, o magnify;
Extol the Lord of Host.
My prayers ascending pierced his ear;
Who snatched me from those storms of fear.
The Meek who God expect,
Who flow to him like living Brooks,
Shame never shall distaine their looks,
nor with foul guilt infect.
This Wretch in his adversity
(Then men shall say) to God did cry,
Whose Mercy him secured.
The Angels of Jehovah those,
Who fear him, with their Tents enclose,
By Strength divine immured,
How good our God, O taste and see!
Who trust in him thrice happy be;
You Saints, o fear him still:
Such feel no want; the Lions rore
For hunger; but who God implore,
He shall with Plenty fill.

I will instruct you in his fear.
What man delights in life?
Seeks to live happily and long?
From evil guard thy wary tongue,
Thy lips from fraud and strife.
Do good, and wicked deeds eschew;
Seek sacred Peace, her steps pursue.
Gods Eyes are on the Just;
Their cries his open Ear attends:
But on the Bad his wrath descends,
Their Names reduced to dust.
He hears the Righteous, and their cry;
Preserved in their adversity:
A broken heart affects,
And Souls contrite which in Him trust.
Great are the afflictions of the Just;
But He in all protects:
Keeps every bone of theirs entire.
The Wicked swallows in his Ire,
And who the Righteous hate.
The Lord his Servants shall redeem;
Those ever dear in his esteem,
Who on his promise wait.
PSALM XXXV.
As the 3.
LOrd, plead my cause against my foes;
With such as fight against me, fight:
Arise, thy ample Shield oppose,
And with thy Sword defend my right.
Address thy Spear; those in their way
Encounter, who my Soul invade:
To her, O let thy Spirit say,
I am thy God, and saving Aid.
Let those, who my disgrace contrive,
Hang down their heads, for flight designed:
Who seek my fall, let Angels drive
Like Chafe before the blustering Wind.
Obscure and slippery be their path;
Let winged Troops pursue their foil;
Since they for me with causeless wrath
Have dig'd a pit, and pich't a Toil.
Let sudden ruin them destroy;
Mesht in the Nets themselves had laid:
Then in the Lord my Soul shall joy,
And glory in his timely Aid.
My Bones shall say, O who like thee,
That arm'st the Weak against the Strong!
That do the Poor and Needy free
From outrage, and too powerful wrong!

Who unknown accusations brought:
That Evil rendered for Good,
And closely my confusion sought.
I in their sickness did condole;
Unfeignedly in Sackcloth mourned.
With fasting humbled my sad Soul,
And often to my Prayers returned:
Him visited both Night and Day,
As if an ancient Friend or Brother:
In Black upon the Earth I lay,
And wept as for my dying Mother.
Yet these rejoiced in my woe;
False Comforters, about me crowd:
And least I should their cunning know,
They rent their Clothes, and cried aloud.
Like Hypocrites at Feasts, they jeere;
Whose gnashing teeth their hate profess:
O Lord, how long will thou forbear,
And only look on my distress?
O save from those, who smile, and kill;
My Dearling from the Lions jaws:
I in the great Assembly will
Then praise thy Name with full applause.

Rejoice in my afflicted state:
Nor wink at me with scornful eyes,
Who swell with undeserved hate.
Of Peace they speak not; rather they
The peaceable with fraud pursue:
Who wry their mouths at me, and say,
Ha, Ha! our eyes thy ruin view.
This seen, O stand no longer mute;
Nor, Lord, desert my Innocence.
Awake, arise: O prosecute
My Cause, and plead in my Defense.
With Justice judge: nor let them say
In triumph; We our wish possess:
Nor in their mirthfull hearts, Ha, Ha!
VV'have swallowed him in his distress.
Wrath and confusion sease on those,
Who in my tribulation joy:
Let them who glory in my woes,
Be clothed with shame and infamy.
Let those eternally rejoice,
Who favor and assist my right:
For ever with exalted voice
The goodness of our God recite.
And say, O magnify his Name,
Who glories in his servants peace.
My tongue his Justice shall proclaim,
Nor ever in his praises cease.
PSALM XXXVI.
As the 34.
WHEN I the bold Transgressor see,
My thoughts thus whisper unto me,
He never feared the Lord:
He smooths himself in his own eyes,
Till his secure impieties
Become of all abhorred.
Their words are vain, and full of guile:
They Wisdom from their hearts exile;
Forsaken Virtue hate:
Who mischief on their beds contrive;
Through by-ways to bad ends arrive,
And vices propagate.
Thy Mercy, Lord, is throned on high;
And thy approved Fidelity
The lofty Sky transcends:
Thy Justice like a Mountain steep;
Thy Judgments an unfathomed Deep;
Who man and beast defends.
O Lord, how precious is thy Grace!
The sons of men, their comfort place,
Beneath thy shady wings:
They with thy Household dainties shall
Be fully satisfied, and all
Drink of thy pleasant Springs.
For O! from thee the Fountain flows,
Which endless Life on thine bestows;
Enlightened with thy Light.
On such as known thee shower thy Grace;
O let thy Justice those embrace,
Who are in heart upright.
Let not the feet of Pride defeat;
Nor such as are in mischief great
My guiltless Soul surprise.
The workers of iniquity
Are fallen like Meteors from the sky:
Cast down, no more to rise.
PSALM XXXVII.
As the 1.
VEX not thy self at the impiety
Of wicked men, nor their frail height envy.
For they shall soon be mowed, like Summers Hay;
And as the verdure of the Herb decay.
Trust thou in God; do good, and long in peace
Possess the Land; refresht by her increase.
Be He thy sole delight; He shall inspire
Thy raised thoughts, and grant thy hearts desire
Rely, and to his care thy ways commend,
Who will produce them to a happy end.
He shall thy Justice, like the Light display,
And make thy Judgment as the Height of Day.
Rest on the Lord, and patiently attend
His Heavenly Will: nor let it thee offend,
Because the wicked in their courses thrive;
And prosperously at their desires arrive.
Abstain from anger, heady wrath eschew:
Nor fret thou, lest ill Deeds ill Thoughts pursue.
God will cut off the Bad, the Faithful bless;
Who shall the ever-fruitfull Land possess.

Thou shall his place consider, but not see.
The Meek in heart shall reap the Lands increase,
And solace in the multitude of peace.
Against the Godly wicked Men conspire,
Gnash their malicious teeth, and foam with ire,
But God shall laugh at their impiety;
Because he knows their Day of Doom is nigh.
They draw their bloody Swords, their Bows are bent,
To kill the needy, Poor, and Innocent.
But their proud hearts shall perish by the stroke
Of their own Steel, their Bows asunder broke.
That little which the Righteous has, excels
Th'abundant wealth, wherein the Wicked swells.
For God the arms of violent Men will break:
But shield the Righteous, and support the Weak.
His eyes behold the sufferings of the Poor:
Their firm possessions ever shall endure.
They in the time of danger shall not dread;
But shall in Famin's rage be filled with Bread.
When vicious men shall speedily decay:
And those who slight Jehovah, melt away
As fat of Lambs, which sacred Fires consume;
And forthwith vanish like the rising fume.

The Just are gracious and relieve the Poor.
Whom God shall bless, they shall the Land enjoy:
Whom God shall curse, them vengeance shall destroy.
The steps of Righteous men the Lord directs;
For He, even He their ordered paths affects.
Although they fall; yet fall to rise again:
For his, His Care and powerful Hand sustain.
I have been young, am old; yet never saw
The Just abandoned; nor those, who draw
From him their birth, with beggary oppressed.
He lends in mercy, and his Seed are blessed.
Do good, shun evil, and remain unmoved;
For righteous Souls are of the Lord beloved:
His undeserted Saints protecting still;
Their Plants up-rooting, who transgress his Will.
Just men inherit shall the promised Land;
And dwell therein, while Mountains steadfast stand.

And from his lips a spring of wisdom breaks.
Gods Law is in his Heart; his Light, his Guide;
Nor shall his Feet in slippery places slide.
Men seek his blood; but God defends: nor shall
He by the sentence of the Wicked fall.
Wait on the Lord, nor his straight paths transgress;
And evermore this pregnant Soil possess.
But those who in iniquity delight,
Shall be cut off, and perish in thy sight.
The Wicked I have seen in wealth to flow,
Exceed in power, and like a Laurel grow:
Yet vanish hence, as he had never been;
I sought him, but he was not to be seen.
Observe the perfect, and the pure of heart;
They die in peace, and happily depart.
But the Ungodly are at once cut down,
And perish without pity, or renown.
The Lord is the salvation of the Just;
Their strength in trouble, since in him they trust:
Will those assist, who on his aid depend;
Deliver, and from impious Foes defend.
PSALM XXXVIII.
As the 4.
NOT in thy wrath against me rise;
Nor in thy fury, Lord, chastise:
Thy Arrows wound,
Nail to the Ground,
Thy hand upon me lies.
No Limb from pain and anguish free;
Because I have incensed thee:
Nor rest can take,
My bones so ache;
Such sin abounds in me.
Like Billows they my head transcend;
Beneath their heavy load I bend:
My Ulcers swell,
Corrupt, and smell;
Of Folly the sad end.
Perplexed in mind I pine away,
And mourning wast the tedious day;
My Flesh no more
Then all one Sore;
All parts at once decay.
Much broken; all my strength o'rethrowne;
Through anguish of my Soul I groan.
Lord, thou do see
My thoughts and me;
My Sighs to thee are known.
My sad Heart pants, my nerves relent,
My Sight grows dim; and to augment
My miseries,
All my Allies
And Friends themselves absent.

Their wicked thoughts on Mischief bend:
Calumniate,
And lie in wait
To bring me to my end.
But I as deaf to them appear,
As mute, as if I tonguelesse were:
My passion ruled,
Like one that could
At all not speak nor hear.
Because my hopes on thee rely:
My God, I said, O hear my cry;
Lest they should boast,
Who hate me most,
And in my ruin joy.
For O! I droop, with struggling spent:
My thoughts are on my sorrows bent.
My sins excess
I will confess;
In showers of tears repent.
My foes are full of strength and pride;
Who causeless hate, are multiplied:
Who good with ill
Repay; would kill,
Because I just abide.
Depart not, Lord; O pity take!
Nor me in my extremes forsake!
Salvation
Is thine alone;
Have to my succor make.
PSALM XXXIX.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

I Said, I will my ways observe,
Lest I should swerve:
With Bit and Reins my Tongue keep in,
Too prone to Sin.
Nor to their calumny reply,
Who glory in Impiety.
I, like a Statue, silent stood,
Dumb even to good:
My Sorrows boiling in my breast
Exiled my rest:
But when my Heart incenst with wrong
Grew hot, I gave my Grief a tongue.
Of those few days I have to spend,
And my last End,
Inform me, Lord; that I may so
My Frailty know.
My time is made short, as a Span;
As nothing is the Age of man.
Man nothing is but Vanity,
Though throned on high;
Walks like a Shadow, and in vain
Turmoiles with pain:
He heaps up wealth with wretched care,
Yet knows not who shall prove his Heir.

Of all my Hope:
Him from his loathed Transgressions free,
Who trusts in Thee:
Nor O subject me to the Rule,
And proud derision of a Fool!
With silence, since thy Will was such,
I suffered much:
O now forbear! lest instant Death
Force my faint breath.
When thou do with thy Rod chastise
Offending man, his courage dies:
His Beauty wasted, like a cloth
Gnawne by the Moth:
Himself a short-lif'd vanity,
And borne to die.
Lord, to my Prayers incline thine Ear;
And thy afflicted Servant hear.
Nor these salt rivers of mine Eyes,
My God, despise:
A Stranger, as my Fathers were,
I sojourne here.
O let me gather strength, before
I pass away, and be no more.
PSALM XL.
As the 2.
FOR God I patiently did look;
He to my cries inclined his Ear:
And when environed with fear,
From that Abyss of horror took:
Drew from the Mud, and on a Rock
Established, to endure the shocke.
Then did into my mouth convey
Songs of his Praise, unsung before.
Many shall see, with fear adore;
And trusting in The Almighty, say:
Who on the Lord depend, are blessed;
Who Liers, and the Proud detest.
Many, and full of wonder, are
The Works, O Lord, which Thou have wrought:
What Thou to raise our joys have thought,
O who in order can declare!
'Twere lost endeavor to express
Their number, that are numberless.
Thou Gifts, nor Offerings do desire;
But pierced have thy Servants ear:
To Thee Oblations are not dear,
Nor Sacrifice consumed with fire.
Then said I; Lo, I come: thus it
Is of me in Thy Volume writ.
Thy Laws are written in my Heart:
My Joy Thy Pleasure to fulfill.
I in the great Assembly still
Thy Righteousness to all impart:
My lips are unrestrein'd by me,
Which, Lord, is only known to Thee.
Thy Justice I have not concealed
Within the closure of my breast:
But Thy Fidelity professed;
And saving health at large revealed:
Amidst the Congregation
Thy constant Truth and Mercy shown.

With Truth and Mercy still enclose:
For O! innumerable woes
On every side my Soul invade:
So changed with Iniquities,
That they even blind my fearful eyes.
In number they my hairs exceed;
My fainting heart pants in my breast:
Be pleased to succor the Distressed;
And Lord deliver me with speed.
Let Shame at once confound them all,
That seek my Soul, and plot my fall.
Be they repulst with Infamy,
Who persecute with deadly hate:
Deservedly left desolate,
Who Ha, Ha! in derision cry.
Let all who seek thy Help, rejoice,
And praise Thee with a cheerful Voice.
Let them, who thy Salvation love,
Still say; The Lord be magnified!
Though I be poor, and cast aside;
Yet he regards me from above.
My Safety, my Deliverer,
No longer thy relief defer.
PSALM XLI.
As the 7.
Who duly shall the Poor regard,
Has his Reward:
The Lord in time of Trouble, shall
Prevent his fall:
He shall among the Living rest,
And with the Earths increase be blessed.
Lord, render him not up to those,
Who are his Foes:
When he in sorrow languisheth,
Near unto Death;
Let him by Thee be comforted,
And in his Sickness make his bed.
I said, O Lord, thy Mercy show,
And Health bestow:
For O! my Soul the loathsome stains
Of Sin retains.
My Foes have said, When shall he die,
And yet outlive his Memory?
If any visit, they devise
Deceitful Lies:
Their hollow Hearts with Mischief load,
Divulged abroad:
Who hate me, whisper, and contrive,
How they may swallow me alive.
Behold, say they, this Punishment
From Heaven is sent:
He, from the bed whereon he lies,
Shall never rise.
Yea, even my Friend, my Confident,
My Guest, his heel against me bent.
But, Lord, thy Mercy I implore;
My Health restore:
O raise me! that forthwith I may
Their Hate repay.
In this thy Love thou do express,
That none triumph in my distress.
For thou art of my Innocence
The strong Defense.
I shall, enlightened by thy Grace,
Behold thy Face.
Jehovah, Isreal's God, be blessed;
While Day and Night the World invest.
Amen. Amen.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM XLII.
As the 34.
LORD! as the Heart, imbost with heat,
Braies after the cool Rivulet:
So sighs my Soul for thee.
My Soul thirsts for the living God:
When shall I enter his Abode,
And there his Beauty see!
Tears are my Food both night and day;
While, Where Is thy God; they daily say.
My Soul in plaints I shed;
When I remember, how in throngs
We filled thy House with Praise and Songs;
How I their Dances led.
My Soul, why art thou so deprest!
Why O thus troubled in my breast!
With Grief so overthrown!
With constant Hope on God await:
I yet his Name shall celebrate,
For Mercy timely shown.
My fainting Heart within me pants:
My God, consider my Complaints;
My Songs shall praise thee still:
Even from the Vale where Jordan flows;
Where Hermon his high Forehead shows,
From Mitsars humble Hill.

When thy dark Spouts of waters fall,
And dreadful Tempest raves:
For all thy Floods upon me burst,
And billows after billows thrust
To swallow in their Graves.
But yet by Day the Lord will charge
His ready Mercy to enlarge
My Soul, surprised with cares:
He gives my Songs their Argument;
God of my life, I will present
By night to thee my prayers.
And say; My God, my Rock, O why
Am I forgot, and mourning die,
By Foes reduced to Dust!
Their words like weapons pierce my bones;
While still they Echo to my Groans,
Where is the Lord thy Trust?
My Soul, why art thou so deprest!
O why so troubled in my breast!
Sunk underneath thy Load!
With constant Hope on God await:
For I his Name shall celebrate;
My Savior, and my God.
PSALM XLIII.
As the 34.
MY God, thy Servant vindicate:
O plead my Cause against their hate,
Who seek my utter spoil!
Deliver from the Merciless,
Who with bold Injuries oppress,
And prosper in their guile.
For of my Strength thou art the Lord.
Why like to one by thee abhorred
Do thou my Soul expose!
Why wander I in black araid!
My body worn, my mind dismayed!
Pursued by cruel Foes!
Thy Favor and thy Truth extend;
Let them into my Soul descend,
Conducted by their light;
Conducted to thy holy Hill,
And House blessed with thy Presence still;
There to enjoy thy sight.
Then will I to thy Altar bring
An acceptable Offering,
That do such Joys afford:
There on a tunefull Instrument,
With Songs that join in sweet consent,
Thy sacred praise record.
My Soul, why art thou so deprest!
Why O thus troubled in my breast!
Sunk underneath thy load!
With constant hope on God await;
For I his Name shall celebrate,
My Savior and my God.
PSALM XLIV.
As the 3.
LORD! we have heard our Fathers tell
The Wonders wrought by thee of old,
To them by their great Grandsires told;
How by thy Hand the Heathen fell;
Of fruitful Canaan dispossessed,
And Israel planted in their room;
They perished by a fearful Doom,
While ours in growth and strength increast.
Not their own Swords that pleasant Land
Did conquer, and their Foes eject;
Nor did their arms their lives protect:
It was thy Arm and powerful Hand;
It was the Spendor of thy Face;
And by thy Favor they o'rcame.
My King, my God, O still the same!
Salvation send to Jacobs Race.
For by thy Aid our Enemies
Lay bleeding on the stained ground;
And in thy Name we did confound
Who ever durst against us rise.
Our Sword's unable to defend;
We will not trust in our weak Bows.
Thou, Lord, have saved us from our Foes,
And brought them to ashamefull end.

And ever celebrate thy Name:
But now Thou casts us off to shame,
Nor lead'st our Armies as before.
Our faces from our Foes reverst;
A Spoil to such as hunt for blood:
Thou giv'st us up as Sheep for food,
Among th'uncircumcis'd dispersed.
For naught thou do thy People sell,
Nor art enriched by their price;
Our Neighbors in our fall rejoice;
A Scorn to all that near us dwell.
A Byword to the Heathen grown,
Who shake their heads in our disgrace:
My shame is still before my face;
My eyes to Earth with blushes thrown.
Sprung from the bold blasphemers taunts,
And proud Avengers threatening look:
Yet, Lord, we have not thee forsook,
Nor falsify'd thy Covenants.

Our Steps the Path prescribed keep:
Though Thou have crushed us in the Deep,
And with the shades of Death involved.
For should we from the Lord depart,
Or to strange Gods our hearts upreare;
O would not this to him appear,
Who knows the Secrets of our Heart?
Yet for thy sake are daily slain;
For slaughter marked like butchered Sheep.
Awake, O Lord, why do thou sleep?
Rise, nor for ever Us disdain.
O to thy Own at length return!
Why do Thou hide thy cheerful face?
Withdrawing thy accustomed Grace
From such as in Affliction mourn?
For lo! our Souls, are wrapped in dust;
Our bellies to the Center cleave:
O, for thy Mercies sake receive,
And succor those who in Thee trust!
PSALM XLV.
As the 8.
WITH heat divine inspired, I sing
A Panegyric to the King:
High Raptures in a numerous style
I with a ready Pen compile.
Much fairer then our Humane Race;
Whose lips like Fountains flow with Grace:
For this the Lord thy Soul shall bless
With everlasting Happiness.
Gird, O most Mighty, on thy Thigh
Thy Sword of Awe and Majesty:
In triumph, armed with Truth, ride on;
By Clemency and Justice drawn.
No mortal vigor shall withstand
The fury of thy dreadful Hand.
Thy piercing Arrows in the Kings
Opposers hearts shall dye their wings.
Thy Throne no waste of Time decays;
Thy Scepter sacred Justice swayes.
Thou Virtue love; but have abhorred
Deformed Vice: for this, the Lord
Has thee alone preferred, and shed
The Oil of Joy upon thy head.
Thy Garments, which in Grace excel,
Of Aloes, Myrrh, and Cassia smell;
Brought from the Ivory Palaces:
Which more then other Odors please.
Kings Daughters, to augment thy State,
Among thy noble Damsels wait.
The Queen enthroned on thy Right hand,
Adorned with Ophyr's golden Sand.

Thy Country banish from thy thought,
Thy House and Family forget,
His Joy upon thy Beauty set.
He is thy Lord; O bow before,
And him eternally adore!
The Daughters of Sea-circled Tire
Shall bring their Purple, and desire
Even they whom Wealth and Honor grace)
To see the sweetness of thy Face.
Her Mind all Beauties does infold;
Her fair limbs clad in purfled Gold,
She shall unto the King be brought,
In Robes with Phrygian Needle wrought:
While Virgins on her Train attend,
Whose Faith and Friendship know no end:
Whom they with joy shall lead along;
Eternized in a Nuptial Song:
And with renewed Applauses bring
Unto the Palace of the King.
Thou in thy Royal Fathers place,
Of Sons shall see a numerous Race;
Who over all the Earth shall sway,
While the clear Sun directs the Day.
My Song shall celebrate thy Name,
And to the world divulge thy Fame.
PSALM XLVI.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

GOd is our Refuge, our strong Tower;
Securing by his mighty Power,
When Dangers threaten to devour.
Thus armed, no fears shall chill our blood;
Though Earth no longer steadfast stood,
And shook her Hills into to the flood.
Although the troubled Ocean rise
In foaming billows to the Skies;
And Mountains shake with horrid noise.
Clear streams purle from a Crystal Spring,
Which gladness to Gods City bring,
The Mansion of the eternal King.
He in her Center takes his place:
What Foe can her fair Towers deface,
Protected by his early Grace?
Tumultuary Nations rose,
And armed Troops our walls enclose;
But his feared Voice unnerv'd our Foes.
The Lord of Hosts is on our side;
The God by Jacob magnified;
Our Strength, on whom we have reli'd.
Come, see the wonders he has wrought;
Who has to desolation brought
Those Kingdoms, which our ruin sought.
He makes destructive War surcease;
The Earth, deflowered of her Increase,
Restores with universal Peace.
He breaks their Bows, unarmes their Quivers,
The bloody Spear in pieces shivers,
Their Chariots to the Flame delivers.
Forbear, and know that I the Lord
Will by all Nations be adored;
Praised with unanimous accord.
The Lord of Hosts is on our side;
The God by Jacob magnified;
Our Strength, on whom we have reli'd.
PSALM XLVII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

LEt all in sweet accord
Clap Hands, their Voices raise,
In Honor of the Lord;
And loudly sing his praise:
Who From above,
Dire Lightning flings:
The King of Kings,
Of all that move.
Whole Nations of our Foes
Beneath our Feet has thrown:
A fair Possession chose,
For us that are his Own:
The dignity
Of Israel;
Beloved so well
By the most High.
In Triumph God ascends,
With Trumpet shrill, and Shalmes;
Praise him, who his defends;
O praise our King with Psalms!
For God is King
Of all the Earth;
With sacred Mirth
His Praises sing.
God over the Heathen reigns;
Sits on his holy Throne:
All whom the Earth sustaines,
Shall worship him alone.
His Shield extends
In their Defense;
His Excellence
All height transcends.
PSALM XLVIII.
As the 8.
THe Lord is most Majesticall;
Most highly to be praised by all,
Within the City of our God,
And Mansion blessed by his abode.
Fair Sion has a pleasant Site;
Of Earth the Beauty and Delight:
Upon the North-side bordering,
The City of the Mighty King.
God dwells within her lofty Towers;
Secured from all assailing Powers.
Conspiring Kings her ruin sought;
Who armed Troops before her brought.

Their hearts surpised with sudden Dread.
Such fear, such pangs possessed our foes;
As women suffer in their Throws.
At thy command black Eurus rores,
And spreads his wracks on Tharsian shores.
We, what we heard our Fathers tell,
Have seen, who in this City dwell;
The City of our God, which He
Shall ever from destruction free.
Thy Favors, Lord, with Thankfulness
We in thy Temple still profess.
As is thy Name, thou God of Might,
So are thy Praises infinite;
And stretch to Earths remotest Bound:
Thy Hand for Justice far renowned.
O Sion, Judah's Diadem,
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
Unite your Joys, and glory in
His Judgment, which your eyes have seen.
Go walk the Round of Sion; tell
Her Towers; observe her Bulwarks well:
On her fair Buildings cast thine eye;
Declare it to Posterity.
For God will still our God remain,
And us unto our Last sustain.
PSALM XLIX.
As the 1.
ALL you who dwell upon the foodfull Earth;
Both Rich and Poor; of base and noble birth;
Attend: my Tongue deep wisdom shall impart;
And knowledge from the fountain of my heart.
I unto light dark Parables will bring,
And to my solemn Harp Aenigmaes sing.
In Misery and Age why should I fear,
When Sin pursues my steps, and Death draws near?
O you, who Riches as your God adore,
And glory in your scarce possessed Store:
Who can redeem his Brother for one Day,
Or to the Lord his high-pris'd Ransom pay?
(For O, not all the Gold, which Streams conceal,
Or Hills enclose, can banished Life repeal,)
That he might live unto Eternity,
Nor in the Earths corrupting Entrails lie.
They see the Wise, and Fools, to Death descend,
While others their congested treasures spend:
Yet hoping to perpetuate their fame,
Proud Structures raise, and call them by their Name.

That fleets away; and as a Beast must die.
In this vain course, they circularly move,
And their Posterity their words approve.
Death shall as Sheep devour them in the Dust;
Till that great Day subject them to the Just.
Their Strength and Beauty shall to nothing wast:
All naked, from their sumptuous Houses cast.
But God shall from the greedy Sepulcher
My Soul redeem, and to his Joys prefer.
Despair not, when a man grows Opulent,
And that the Glories of his House augment:
For with his thread of Life his Riches end;
Nor shall his Honors with his Soul descend.
Though here he live in luxury and ease;
And those are praised, who their own Genius please;
Yet as his Fathers, he shall set in Night;
Nor ever rise to see the cheerful Light.
Man high in honor, whose ignoble breast
No knowledge holds, shall perish like a beast.
PSALM L.
As the 1.
THE God of Gods, Jehovah, shall convent
All from the Orient to the Suns descent.
From Sions Towers (of Beauty the Divine
And full Perfection) shall his Glory shine.
Nor silent comes: devouring flames before,
And round about him horrid Tempests rore.
The righteous Judge, to judge his People, shall
High Heaven and conscious Earth to witness call.
Assemble all my Saints, who with one mind
My Testaments with Sacrifice have signed.
Then thundering Skies shall make his Justice known;
When he our God ascends his Judgments Throne.
My People, hear; Thy God, O Israel.
Will thee convince, and thy Transgressions tell.
I blame not thy unfrequent Sacrifice,
Nor fumes, which rarely from my Altars rise:
I from thy Stall will take no well-fed Steer,
Nor from thy Folds a Male-goat of that year:
For all are Mine, that Woods or Deserts breed,
And Herds which on a thousand mountains feed:
I know all Foul, which Hills or Valleys yield,
And number all the Cattle of the Field.

When all is Mine which Sea and Land contain?
Will I eat flesh of Bulls? or can thou think,
That I the blood of shaggy Goats will drink?
A thankful heart upon my Altar lay;
And righteous Vows to high Jehovah pay.
Then call on me in trouble; I will raise
Thy Soul from Death, and thou my Name shall praise.
But O thou Hypocrite! Dare thou explain
My Law? My Covenants with thy lips profane?
That scorn'st instruction; do my Word despise;
Consent'st with Thieves, and have adulterous eyes?
Deceit, and slander tip thy impious tongue:
Thy brother woundst with Infamy and Wrong.
Thus did thou; this did I with silence see;
So as thou thought, that I was like to thee.
But I will thy Hypocrisy uncase;
And lay thy ugly crimes before thy face.
Consider this, O you, who God neglect:
Lest I destroy you, when none can protect.
Who praise for Incense offer, honor Me;
And upright Souls shall my Salvation see.
PSALM LI.
As the 3.
LORD, to a sinner Mercy show:
Which since in Thee so infinite;
Let all thy streams of Mercy flow,
And purify me in thy sight.
O wash thou my polluted Soul!
O cleanse me from my bloody Deed!
That to my Self appear so foul;
And now in true Contrition bleed.
My sins, unmask't, before Thee lie;
Who have deserved thy wrath alone:
Which I confess, to testify
Thy Truth, and make thy Justice known.
In sin conceived, brought forth in sin;
Sin sucked I from my Mothers breast:
Thou love a heart sincere within,
Where Wisdom is a constant guest.
With Hysope purge, from blemish clear;
O wash, then falling Snow more white!
Lord, let me thy remission hear:
The Bones, which thou have broke, unite.
Blot out my crimes; O separate
My trembling Guilt far from thy view!
A clean Heart in my breast create;
A Mind, to Thee confirmed, renew.

Nor O thy holy Spirit withdraw!
But thy life-quickening Grace afford;
Enlarge my Will t'imbrace thy Law.
Then Sinners I with heavenly Food
Will feed, directed in thy Ways:
O my Redeemer, cleanse from blood
The Soul, that will thy Mercy praise.
Give Thou my Verse an argument;
And they thy Goodness shall resound.
No Sacrifice will Thee content;
Nor Altars with Oblations crowned.
Else, I would Hecatombs impart:
True sorrow is Thy Sacrifice.
A broken and a contrite Heart,
My God, Thou never wilt despise.
Thy Sion with accustomed Grace
(Lest my foul crimes her shame procure)
In thy protecting Arms embrace;
And fair Jerusalem immure.
Then we, with due Solemnity,
To Thee our grateful Vows will pay;
And Bulls, which never Yoke did try,
Upon thy flaming Altar lay.
PSALM LII.
As the 32.
O Thou in Mischief great,
Why boasts thou in deceit?
Gods greater Mercy will
Protect his Servants still.
Thy Tongue with sraud abounds,
And like a Rasor wounds;
All evil do affect;
All that is good neglect.
Lies are thy low delight;
To Virtue opposite:
Thy words with treachery
The innocent destroy.
God shall repay thy hate,
Thy Stuctures ruinate;
And make thee curse thy birth:
Then tear thee from the Earth.
The Just thy fall shall see,
Fear Him, and laugh at thee.
Lo he, who God forsook,
Nor for his refuge took;
Selfe-strengthning with excess
Of Wealth, and Wickedness.
But I shall planted be,
Like a green Olive Tree,
In Gods own House; and will
Trust in His Mercies still.
For this, I evermore
Shall thy great Name adore:
Thy Promises expect;
The joy of thy Elect.
PSALM LIII.
As the 12.
Fools, flattering their own vices, say
Within their hearts; God is a Name
Devised to make the Strong obey;
To setter Nature; quench her flame:
When all this Universal Frame
The hands of potent Fortune sway.
Secure and prosperous in ill,
The fear and thought of God exile,
To follow their rebellious will;
Think nothing that delights them vile:
Their Souls with wicked thoughts defile;
And all their foul Desires fulfill.
God from the Tower of Heaven his eyes
On men, and their endeavors, threw:
Not one beheld beneath the Skies,
That sought him, or his Statues knew:
All Vice with winged Feet pursue;
But none forsaken Virtue prise.
O deaf to good! in knowledge blind!
By Sin through clouds of error led!
Dull sensual Forms, without a Mind!
Nor slow, though certain, Vengeance dread!
The Righteous they devour like bread;
All piety at once declined.
These, idle terrors shall affright;
Their sleeps disturbed by guilty fear.
God shall their Bones asunder smite,
Who impious Arms against him bear;
Nor they their infamy out-weare;
Since despiseable in his sight.
O that unto thy Israel
The Day Star might from Sion spring!
And all the shades of Night expel!
When Thou shall us from Bondage bring,
How would we Lord thy Praises sing!
No joy should Jacobs joy excel.
PSALM LIVE.
As the 4.
LORD, for thy Promise sake defend,
And Thy All-saving Shield extend:
O hear my cries,
Which with wet Eyes
And sighs to Thee ascend!
For cruel men my life pursue;
And who thy Statutes never knew.
Suppress my Foes:
O side with those,
Who to my Soul are true!
With vengeance recompense their hate;
And in an instant ruinate.
Then will I bring
My Offering,
And Thy great Acts relate.
Thy Name for ever praised be;
Who from those snares have set me free:
For lo, these eyes
My Enemies
Desired subversion see.
PSALM LV.
As the 39.
LORD, to my Prayers incline thine Ear;
The Afflicted hear:
Nor be thou Deaf to my complaint,
For O I faint!
Regard the sighs, the groans, the cries,
Which from my pensive Soul arise.
Raised by the threatenings of my Foe,
Which storme-like grow;
And by blood-thirsty Violence;
Truth my offense:
Who slander with their wounding tongues,
And press me unto Death with wrongs.
My heart, a stranger unto rest,
Throbs in my breast:
The terrors of approaching Death
Exhaust my breath.
My sinews trembling Fear dissolves,
And Horror all my Powers involves.
O that with Dove-like wings I might
Take my swift flight,
To calm Retreats of rest, where I
Concealed might lie!
Then would I find some Wilderness,
Removed far from man's access.
Then all these Tempests, which arise
With hideous noise;
And with their dreadful Tumults make
My Heart to quake;
I would, far swifter then the VVind,
Or winged Lightnings leave behind.

Their Tongues divide:
For Strife, and Violence, bent to kill,
The City fill:
Both Day and Night they walk the Round,
Rape, Mischief, Tears, within abound.
Wild Outrages her streets profane,
And boldly Reign:
Fraud lurking in her Palaces,
Conspires with these.
For I, had he his hate professed,
Had shunned, or should his wrongs digest.
But thou, my Friend, even of my Heart
The better Part;
To so entire a union grown,
As if but one:
Gods House we daily visited,
Both sweetly by one Counsel led.
Let Death devour them; let them dive
To Hell alive.
With mischief their proud roofes abound
Their hearts unsound:
But God my Soul shall dis-enthrall;
For I upon his Name will call.

Ascend the Skies;

His fervent Rays;
When he behind the Earth descends,
And Day, out-worne with labor, ends.
My Cries shall penetrate the Spheres,
And pierce his Ears.
He shall my captive Soul release,
And crown with Peace.
For in the Fervor of the Fight,
His Angels shall protect my Right.
The Eternal Judge, Jehovah, shall
Confound them all;
Who only change from bad to worse,
Nor fear his Curse.
Sweet Peace he violated has,
And broken his obliged Faith.
His Words then Butter smoother far;
His Thoughts of War:
Words softer then the fluent Oil;
Yet bent to Spoil.
But thou, my Soul, thy cares impose
On God, who will redress thy woes.
The Just he shall confirm with Joy;
The Unjust destroy.
Those who in blood and fraud delight,
Shall set in Night,
Before their Noone of Life be past.
But I on God my hopes have placed.
PSALM LVI.
As the 4.
O Lord, protect me by thy Power
From such as would my Life devour;
Who merciless
Strive to oppress;
Nor grant me Truce one hour.
That would devour me every Day,
And make my chased Life their prey:
Yet, Lord, will I
On thee rely;
When Dangers most dismay.
Thy Promise I will celebrate;
In constant hope thy Pleasure wait;
With patience bear
Thy Stay; nor fear
Frail man, or his vain hate.
My words and deeds they daily wrest,
And in their thoughts my fall digest;
Unite in ill,
And lurk to kill:
My Feet can find no rest.
O shall they with impunity
Escape, and thus their sins enjoy!
Let Death thy rage
Alone assuage;
Them in their guilt destroy.
My Wanderings thou have numbered;
Even every Tear mine Eyes have shed
Thy Vial holds:
All in the Folds
Of thy large Volume read.
Assured, that when on God I call,
My Foes shall by his Fury fall.
His Promise I
Will magnify;
His Truth divulge to All.
To him my ready Vows will pay;
My Vows of Thanks, both night and day:
In whom I trust:
Nor shall The Unjust
My steadfast Hopes dismay.
For he has snatched me from the Night
Of Death, and kept my foot upright:
That I may still
Observe his Will,
And see the cheerful Light.
PSALM LI.
As the 10.
O Thou, From whom all Mercy springs,
Compassionate my Sufferings;
And pity me,
That trust in Thee!
O shelter with thy shady Wings,
Until these storms of Woe
Cleare-up, or over-blow!
Thee I invoke, O thou Most High,
Thou All-performer! from the Sky
Thy Angels send;
Let them defend
My Soul from him that would destroy:
O send thy Mercy down;
With Truth thy Promise crown!
For Salvage Lions girt me round,
And they whose Malice knows no bound;
Their cruel Words
More sharp then Swords;
Their Teeth like Spears and Arrows wound.
To Heaven thy Glory raise;
Let Earth resound thy Praise.
They subtle snares prepared have,
And bowed my Soul even to the Grave:
With wicked wit
Have dug a pit,
From which themselves they could not save:
But justly fell therein,
Intrapt by their own Sin.
My ravished Heart flames with desire;
I to the Music of my Lyre,
Eternal King,
Thy Praise will sing.
Awake my Glory! Zeal inspire!
Awake my Harp and Lute,
Nor in his Praise be mute!
To thee, before the Morning rise,
My Lips their Calves shall sacrifice:
Thy Mercy far
The highest Star,
Thy Truth transcends the lofty Skies.
To Heaven thy Glory raise;
Let Earth resound thy Praise.
PSALM LVIII.
As the 46.
PErnicious Counselors! Give you
Sincere advice? to Justice true?
Or Virtue but in show pursue?
Your Hearts are still on Mischief bent;
Your Hands impure and violent;
Nor favor Truth, nor Wrong prevent.
Even from the womb they blindly stray;
Borne, and perverted in one day;
Lie, slander, flatter, and betray:
Like Serpents, with black poison swell;
And charm th'Inchanter never so well,
More deaf then Asps, his Charms repel.
Lord, slit their Tongues, before they speak;
Strike out their Teeth, which tear the Weak;
And the young Lions grinders break.
As Sun-beat Snow, so let them thaw;
And when their weakened Bows they draw,
Let their cracked Arrows fly like straw.
Let them like Snailes consume away;
And as untimely Births decay,
Which never saw the cheerful Day.
Before their pots can feel the brier,
God in the Whirlwind of his Ire,
Shall blast alive, and burn with fire.
Sin with Revenge at length shall meet;
The Godly shall rejoice to see it;
And in their blood shall wash their feet.
Then erring Mortals shall confess,
There are Rewards for Righteousness,
And Plagues for such as do transgress.
PSALM LIX.
As the 34.
LORD, save me from mine Enemies;
From those, who thus against me rise,
Like an incensed Flood:
From those, who in Impiety
Place their delight, and long to die
Their hands in guiltless blood.
Lo! for my Soul they lie in wait:
The Mighty join their power and hate,
Without my blame or crime.
Without my crime they weapons take;
And persecute my Soul. Awake
My God! assist in time.
Great God of Hosts, of Israel,
These all-oppressing Tyrants quest;
Nor be to Mercy won:
At night their mischief they begin;
Incenst like snarling Dogs they grin,
And through the City run.
Behold! they vomit bitter words;
Between their lips they brandish swords;
Yet say; Can these be known?
But, Lord, thou shall their threats deride;
The empty terror of their pride
And Malice, vainly shown.

In Thee I trust, my Shield! my Tower!
Thy Mercy, Lord, how great!
My Foes subjectest to my will:
Subdue, and scatter; but not kill,
Lest we thy Truth forget.
O be they in their Pride surprised!
Even for the Lies they have devised,
Their curses, and close Arts.
Consume them, from the Land expel:
To show, God reigns in Israel,
To Earths remotest parts.
Hopeless let them return with Night,
Like grinning Dogs bark, but not bite;
About the City rome:
Pale, meager, and half famished;
Like vagabonds howl they for bread;
Without or food, or home.
But I, before the Day Star spring,
Will of thy Power and Mercy sing;
My Safety in distress.
Thou art my Rock, my strong Defense;
My living Verse thy Excellence
And Bounty shall express.
PSALM LX.
As the 2.
CAST off, and scattered in thine Ire:
Lord on our woes with pity look.
The Lands enforced Foundations shook;
Whose yawning ruptures Sighs expire.
O cure the Breaches Thou have rent,
And make Her firmly permanent!
Our Souls thou have with sorrow fed;
And made us drink of deadly Wine:
Yet now thy Ensigns giv'st to Thine,
Even when beset with trembling dread;
That we thy Banner may display,
Whilst Truth to Conquest makes our way.
O hear us, who thy Aid implore;
Lord, with thy own Right hand defend:
To thy Beloved succor send.
God by his Sanctity thus swore;
I Succoths Valley will divide;
In Shechems Spoils be magnified.
Mine Gilead is, Manasseh mine;
Ephraim my strength, in battle bold;
Thou Judah shall my Scepter hold:
I will triumph on Palestine.
Base Servitude shall Moab waste;
Over Edom I my Shoe will cast.
Who will our forward Troops direct,
To Rabbah strongly fortified?
Or into sandy Edom guide?
Lord, wilt not thou, that did reject,
Nor would before our Armies go,
Now lead our Host against the Foe?
O then, when Dangers most affright,
Do thou our troubled Souls sustain!
For lo! the help of Man is vain.
Through Thee we valiantly shall fight:
Our flying Foes thou shall tread down;
And Thine with wreaths of Conquest crown.
PSALM LXI.
As the 13.
MY God, thy Servant hear;
O lend a willing ear!
In exile my sad heart,
From Earths remotest part,
Overwhelmed with Miseries,
To Thee for succor cries.
To that High Rock O lead,
So far above my head!
That were, and art my Tower,
Against oppressing Power.
For to thy sacred Court
I ever shall resort;
Secure beneath thy wings,
From all their menacings:
Even Thou my suit have signed;
A King by Thee designed,
To govern such as will.
Thy holy Law fulfill.
Whom Thou long life wilt give,
He Ages shall outlive;
His Throne shall stand before
Thy Face for evermore*
Thy Mercy, Lord, extend;
Him for thy Truth defend.
Then I in cheerful Lays
Will celebrate thy praise;
And to Thee every day
My Vows devoutly pay.
PSALM LXII.
As the 15.
LORD, thou art the only Scope
Of my never-fainting Hope;
My Salvation, my Defense,
Refuge of my Innocence:
Thou the Rock I build upon,
Not by man to be overthrown.
How long will you machinate!
Persecute with causlesse hate!
You shall like a tottering wall,
Like a battered Bulwark, fall.
All conspire to cast me down;
From my brows to tear my Crown:
Full of fraud, they bless in show,
When their Thoughts with curses flow.
Yet my Soul on God attends;
All my Hope on him depends;
He the Rock I built upon,
Not by man to be overthrown.
He my Glory, he my Tower,
Guards me by his saving Power.
You, who are sincere and just,
In the Lord for ever trust:
Power your Hearts before his Throne;
His, who can protect alone.
All that are of high Descent,
To the Poor and Indigent,
Nothing are but Vanity;
Nothing but deceive and lie:
Balanced, altogether they
Lighter then a Vapor weigh.
In Oppression trust thou not;
Nor in Wealth by Rapine got:
If thy Riches multiply,
See thou prize them not too high.
God said once; twice have I heard;
Power is his, by Him conferred:
His is Mercy; He rewards,
And, as we deserve, regards.
PSALM LXIII.
As the 34.
TO Thee, O God, my God, I pray,
Before the dawning of the Day.
My Soul and wasting flesh,
With thirsty Ardor Thee desire,
In Soiles scorcht with aethereall Fire,
Whose drought no showers refresh:
That in thy Sanctuary I
May see thy Power and Majesty,
Once more with ravished eyes:
My lips shall celebrate thy Praise;
Thy Goodness, more then length of days,
Or life it self, I prise.
Extolled while I have utterance:
To Thee will I my Palms advance;
That wilt with marrow feast.
My Verse thy Wonders shall recite;
Remembered in the silent Night,
As on my Bed I rest.
Secured beneath thy shady Wing,
I will in sacred Raptures sing;
And to thy Promise cleave.
Thy Hand upholds; but who with hate
My Soul seek to precipitate
Hels entrails shall receive.
The raging Sword shall shed their blood;
A prey for Wolves; for Foxes, food.
Yet God his King shall bless;
And such as swear by his great Name:
But those, whose Tongues the Just defame,
Confusion shall suppress.
PSALM LXIV.
As the 10.
THou great Protector, hear my Cry;
Save from my dreadful Enemy:
O vindicate
From their close hate,
Who for my Soul in ambush lie.
From their blind Rage protect,
Who Truth and Thee reject.
Who whet their Tongues, more sharp then Swords,
Their Arrows draw, even bitter words;
To wound th'Vpright,
With fierce delight,
When Time to their desire accords:
Then on a sudden shoot;
Nor fear divine pursuit.
Confirmed in skillful Malice; they
Conspire, their Nets in secret lay:
And say; What eye
Can this descry?
First counsel take; and then betray:
On mischief set their hearts,
Pursued by wicked Arts.
But God shall let his Arrows fly;
Wound in the twinkling of an Eye:
Each deadly stung
By his own Tongue,
Shall with that fatal Poison die.
Who this behold, or hear,
Shall tremble with cold fear.
Men shall their Eyes with wonder raise,
Rehearse his Deeds, and sing his Praise.
Eternity
Shall crown their Joy,
Who walk in his prescribed ways.
He to the Pure of Heart
His Glory shall impart.
PSALM LXV.
As the 8.
DUe Honors, Lord, on Thee attend,
Where Sions sacred Towers ascend:
There thy devoted Israelites
Shall pay their Vows, with solemn Rites.
To Thee shall all Mankind repair:
Since thou vouchsaf'st to hear our Prayer.
Our Sins thy Mercies expiate,
When burdened with their loathed weight.
Thrice happy he, of whom thou make
Thy Choice; and to thy service take;
That may within thy Courts reside;
There with thy Goodness satisfied;
And taste of that sincere Delight,
Which never cloyes the Appetite.
From thee, O God, our Safety springs;
Thy Judgment threatens dreadful things.
Their Hope, whom Soiles remote sustain;
Who flote upon the toiling Maine.
Great is thy Power: propt by thy Hand,
Cloud-touching Mountains steadfast stand.
Thou with thy Scepter do appease
The roaring of the high-wrought Seas:
And the tumultuarie jarres
Of People breathing Blood and VVarres.

They tremble at thy fearful Signs.
Where first the Sun his beam displaies;
And where he sets his golden Rays,
They triumph in the fruits of Peace;
Enriched by the Earth's increase.
He Rain upon her Bosom powers;
His swelling Clouds abound with Showers:
And so prepares the lusty Soil
To recompense the Reapers toil.
Mellowes the Glebe with fatning juice,
Whose furrows hopeful blades produce:
With Plenty crowns the smiling Years,
Shed from the influence of the Spheres:
The Desert with sweet Claver fills;
And richly shades the joyful Hills.
Flocks cover all the higher Plain:
The rancker Valleys clothed with Grain.
These in Abundance solacing,
Without a tongue thy Praises sing.
PSALM LXVI.
As the 29.
HAppy Sons of Israel,
Who in pleasant Canaan dwell,
Fill the Air with shouts of Joy;
Shouts redoubled from the Sky.
Sing the great Jehovah's Praise;
Trophies to his Glory raise:
Say; How wonderful thy Deeds!
Lord, thy Power all power exceeds!
Conquest on thy Sword does sit;
Trembling Foes through fear submit.
Let the many-peopled Earth,
All of high and humble birth,
Worship our eternal King;
Hymns unto his honor sing.
Come, and see what God has wrought;
Terrible to humane thought.
He the Billows did divide;
Walled with waves on either side,
While we passed safe and dry:
Then our Souls were rapt with joy.
Endless his Dominion;
All beholding from his Throne.
Let not those, who hate us most;
Let not the Rebellious boast.
Bless the Lord; his Praise be sung,
While an ear can hear a tongue.
He our feet establishes;

Lord, as Silver purified,
Thou have with Affliction tried:
Thou have driven into the net;
Burdens on our shoulders set:
Trod on by their Horses hooves;
Theirs, whom Pity never moves.
We through fire, with flames embraced;
We through raging floods have passed:
Yet by Thy conducting hand,
Brought into a wealthy Land.
I will to thy House repair;
Worship, and thy Power declare:
Offerings on thy Altar lay;
All my vows devoutly pay,
Vtter'd with my heart and tongue,
When oppressed with powerful Wrong.
Fatlings I will sacrifice;
Incense in perfumes shall rise;
Bullocks, shaggy Goats, and Rams
Offered up in sacred flames.
You, who great Jehovah fear,
Come, O come, you blessed, and hear
What for me the Lord has wrought,
Then, when near to ruin brought.
Fervently to Him I cried;
This Goodness magnified.
If I Vices should affect,
Would not He my Prayers reject:
But the Lord my Prayers has heard,
Which my tongue with tears preferred.
Sourse of Mercy, be Thou blessed,
That have granted my Request.
PSALM LXVII.
As the 47.
LORD, shower on us thy Grace,
Enrich with Gifts divine:
Let thy illustrious Face
Upon thy Servants shine:
That all below
The arched Sky,
May Thee, and thy
Salvation know.
Let all thy Praise rehearse,
With one united Voice:
Sing in melodious Verse;
Eternally rejoice.
Thy Power obey,
Whose Justice shall
Dispose of All;
All Scepters sway.
Let all extol thy Worth:
Then shall the smiling Earth
Her pleasant fruits bring forth;
Nor ever mourn in Dearth.
We who implore,
Thy Blessings find;
And all Mankind
With fear adore.
PSALM LXVIII.
As the 8.
LET God, the God of Battle, rise;
And scatter his proud Enemies.
O let them flee before his face,
Like smoke, which driving tempests chase.
As Wax dissolves with scorching Fire;
So perish in his burning Ire.
But let the Just with joy abound:
In joyful Songs his Praise resound:
Who riding on the rolling Spheres,
The Name of great Jehovah bears.
Before his Face your joys express:
A Father to the fatherless.
He wipes the tears from Widows eyes;
The single plants in Families;
Enlarging those who late were bound:
While Rebels starve on thirsty Ground.
When he our numerous Army led,
And marched through Deserts, full of dread;
Heaven melted, and Earths Center shook,
With his majesticke Presence struck.
When Isreal's God in Clouds came down,

He in the approach of meager Dearth,
With showers refresht the fainting Earth:
Where his own Flock in safety fed;
The Needy unto plenty led.
By Him we conquer: Virgins sing
Our Victories, and Timbrels ring.
He Kings with their vast Armies foiles;
While women share their wealthy spoils.
You who among the Pots have lain
In Soot and Smoke, shall shine again;
Bright, as the silver-feather'd Dove,
Whose wings with golden Splendour move.
When he the Kings had overthrown,
Our Land like snowy Salmon shone.
Gods Mountain Bashans Mount transcends;
Though he his many Heads extends.
Why boast you so, ye meaner Hills?
God with his Glory Sion fills:
This his beloved Residence;
Nor ever will depart from hence.

Which Myriads of Angels bear;
He in the midst, as when he crowned
High Sinai's sanctified ground.
Lord, Thou thy Self have raised on high;
Thou captivat'st Captivity.
Decked with the trophies of his Foes,
The gifts received on his bestows:
Reducing those who did rebel;
That both might in his Sion dwell.
O praised be the God of gods,
Who his with daily blessings loads:
The God of our Salvation,
On whom our hopes depend alone.
The Controverse of Life and Death
Is arbitrated by his Breath.
He on their heads his Foes shall wound;
Their hairy scalps, whose sins abound,
And in their trespasses proceed.
Thus spoke Jehovah; Jacobs Seed
I will from Bashan bring again,
And through the bottom of the Maine:
That Dogs may lap their enemies blood;
And they wade through a crimson Flood.

My God, my King, beheld thy State.
The sacred Singers marched before;
Who instruments of Music bore,
In order followed: every Maid
Upon her pleasant Timbrell played,
His Praise in your Assemblies sing,
You who from Isreal's Fountain spring.
Nor little Benjamin alone,
But Judah from his Mountaine-throne;
The far removed Zebulun;
And Naphtali which borders on
Old Jordan, where his stream dilates;
Joined all their Powers and Potentates.
For us his winged Soldiers fought:
Lord strengthen, what thy hand has wrought.
He that supports a Diadem,
To Thee, divine Jerusalem,
Shall in Devotion treasure bring,
To build the Temple of his King.

Of Bulls, with savage strength indu'd;
Till they with gifts sweet Peace invite:
But scatter those, whom Wars delight.
Far off from Sunburned Meroe,
From falling Nilus; from the Sea
Which beats on the Egyptian shore,
Shall Princes come, and here adore.
You Kingdoms, through the World renowned,
Sing to the Lord; his praise resound:
He who Heavens upper Heaven bestrides,
And on her aged shoulders rides:
Whose voice the Clouds asunder rends;
In Thunder terrible descends.
O praise his Strength; whose Majesty
In Israel shines, his Power on high.
He from his Sanctuary throws
A trembling horror on his Foes:
While us his Power and Strength invest.
O Israel, praise the Ever-blest.
PSALM LXIX.
As the 22.
LORD, snatch me from the raging Flood;
Now in deep Eddies almost drowned:
That struggle in the yielding mud,
There, where no bottom can be found:
The rising waves my head surround,
And with their terrors chill my Blood.
Tired with complaining; hoarse, and sore;
Sight fails my long-expecting Eyes:
My Hairs are not in number more;
Then my uninjur'd Enemies.
The great in wrong against me rise;
I, what I never took, restore.
My God, Thou know my Innocence:
Let not the faithful blush for me,
Traduced by slanderous Impudence:
Nor o! let those that call on Thee,
Their shame in my Confusion see;
Since Thou art our professed Defense.
For Thee I suffer Calumnies;
To Men become a general scorn;
Deserted by my near Allies;
By children of my Mother borne:
Through zeal unto thy Honor worn,
While thy reproach upon me lies.
I fasted, wept, in Sackcloth mourned;
My anguish in my looks expressed:
Yet this to my derision turned;
By Drunkards sung at every Feast:
Even Judges at my sorrow jest;
My Innocence by slander spurned.

Even in an acceptable hour.
Thy Mercy, gracious Lord, extend;
And save by thy Almighty Power.
Let not the swallowing mud devour:
Preserve from such a shameful end.
Deliver from the insulting Foe;
My struggling Feet from sinking keep:
Let not the Billows overflow,
Nor Whirle-pits suck into their Deep.
O pity Thou the Eyes that weep:
And thy Transcendent Mercy show.
Hear, and redeem without delay;
Nor in my trouble hide thy Face:
Lest I become a wretched prey
To such as have my Soul in chase.
My shame, indignities, disgrace
And all their crimes before Thee lay.
Reproach my bleeding heart has pierced:
Was ever Sorrow half so great!
Compassion has her Eyes averst;
My Grief no comfort could entreat:
They gave me bitter Gall to eat;
And Vinegar to quench my Thirst.
O be their board a snare to those!
Prosperity it self a Bait!
Their Eyes in clouds of darkness close;
And let them fall by their own weight:
Power on them thy Eternal hate;
With vengeance multiply their woes.

None in their silent Tents be found;
That would, whom thou have smit, destroy;
And wounded Souls with slander wound.
Let their iniquities abound;
Nor ever in thy Mercy joy.
Their names out of thy Volume blot;
Nor with the Just inthrone their Days.
Though poor; to misery begot;
Yet Thoushalt my dejection raise:
Then will I celebrate thy Praise:
My thankful Heart no time shall spot.
This will Jehovah more delight,
Then Bulls prepared for Sacrifice:
Their gilded Horns with Garlands dight.
This shall the Meek with pleased Eyes
Behold, and centuple their joys:
Their Day shall never set in Night.
For God the Poor regards, and those,
Who for his sake affliction try.
Round Earth, deep Seas, what Seas enclose;
You Orbs, that move so orderly;
Our great Jehovah magnify,
Who crowns his Saints with sweet Repose.
For God his Sion shall immure,
And Judah's Cities build again:
Where they shall ever live secure;
A fair inheritance obtain:
There shall their blessed Seed remain;
And safely that rich Soil manure.
PSALM LXX.
As the 5.
Have, Lord; from such as would devour,
Defend by thy almighty Power:
Delay not in so feared an Hour.
But let confusion seize on those,
Who seek my Soul; to shame expose:
Be sudden in their overthrowes.
Let those with infamy return;
Dejected, and unpittied, mourn;
Who laugh, and blast me with their scorn.
Who love thy Name, with joy invest:
Let them in shades of Safety feast;
And ever say, The Lord be blessed.
But I am poor, and full of need:
Have, Lord; deliver me with speed;
Our Strength, our Help, from Thee proceed.
PSALM LXXI.
As the 34.
I To thy Wing for refuge fly;
Protect me from foul Infamy;
Lord, in thy Justice save.
Deliver from their treacherous Snares:
O favorably hear my Prayers;
Snatch from the yawning Grave.
Be thou my Fortress of Defense;
There let me fix my Residence.
O Thou, my Rock! my Tower!
Who have thy Angels given in charge,
That they thy Servants should enlarge
From circumventing Power.
Deliver from their cruel might,
Whose wicked hands in blood delight:
Lest I their prey become.
Thou art my hope; even from my Youth
Have I reli'd upon thy Truth;
By Thee kept in the womb:
From thence extracted by thy Care.
Though, as a Prodigy they stare
On me with wondering eyes;
Yet thee, my strength, my Song shall praise,
And to the Stars thy glory raise,
While Suns shall set and rise.

Forsake not, when my Strength decays:
Watched by conspiring Foes.
God has abandoned him, say they;
Now let us make his life our prey:
Who shall our power oppose?
My God close to thy servant stand,
And help him with a speedy hand:
Those in their pride confound,
Who persecute my wretched Soul;
Let Death their impious rage control,
And with dishonor wound.
But I will ever hope, and raise
My Voice to multiply thy Praise,
Thy Righteousness display,
Thy manifold Deliveries:
Which o! no number can comprise;
Thus spend the harmless Day.
I in thy Strength, though old and weak,
Will walk, and of thy Justice speak;
Of thine, even thine alone.
Thou have informed me from my Youth:
I, to this hour, with single Truth,
Thy wondrous works have shown.

When Time has snow'd upon my hairs,
Abandon not, o Lord;
Till I unto this Age proclaim
Thy Mighty Power; in Songs the same
Unto the next record.
Thy Counsels depth our search exceeds:
How admirable are thy Deeds!
O who is like to Thee!
Thou have afflictions on me lain;
Yet shall thou quicken me again,
And from Earths entrails free.
Still thou my glory wilt increase,
And comfort with the joys of Peace.
I, in a living verse,
Unto my warbling Harp will sing
Thy praises, O eternal King;
Thy noble Acts rehearse.
Unto my Voice, and Instrument
Shall my exalted Soul consent;
By Thee redeemed from Death:
Thy Justice every Day proclaim;
That now have clothed my Foes with Shame,
Dispersed by thy breath.
PSALM LXXII.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THe King, Jehovah, with thy Justice crown;
And in a God-like reign his Son renown.
He shall with equity thy People sway;
And Judgment in the scales of Justice weigh.
Then little Hills shall riot with increase;
And Mountains flourish in the fruits of Peace.
He shall the Poor from Violence protect;
Exalt the Humble, and the Proud deject.
They, while the restless Sun directs the Year;
While Moons increase and waine, thy Name shall fear.
He shall descend like plenty-dropping Showers,
Which cloth the Earth, and fill her Lap with flowers.
The Just shall flourish in his happy Days,
And Peace abound, while Stars extend their Rays.
He shall from Sea to Sea enlarge his Reign;
From swift Euphrates to the farthest Maine.
The wild Inhabitants, that live by prey
In scortched Deserts, shall his Rule obey.
His Foes shall lick the Dust, rich with their Spoils.
Kings of the Ocean, and Sea-grasped Isles,
Shall orient Pearl, and sparkling Stones present;
Gold from the Sunburned Aethiopians sent.
The swart Sabaeans, and Panchaia's King,
Shall Cassia, Myrrh, and sacred Incense bring.

All Nations shall receive him for their Lord.
He shall the Oppressed hear, the Poor defend;
The Needy save, and such as have no friend:
Redeem their Souls from Fraud, and Violence;
And shall with Blood revenge their Bloods expense,
For this, he long and happily shall live:
To him they shall the Gold of Sheba give.
The People for their King shall hourly pray:
His Praises sing, and bless him Day by Day.
Rank crops of Corn shall on high Mountains grow,
And shake like Cedars when rough Tempests blow.
The Citizens shall prosper and abound;
Like blades of Grass, which cloth the pregnant ground
His Name shall last to all Eternity:
Even while the Sun illuminates the Sky.
All Nations shall in Him be blessed: Him all
The habitable Earth shall blessed call.
O praised be our God! That King of Kings,
Who only can accomplish wondrous things!
For ever celebrate his glorious Name,
And fill the World with his illustrious Fame.
Amen, Amen.
Here end the Prayers of David the Son of Iesse.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE THIRD BOOK OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM LXXIII.
As the 1.
THat Power of powers, who Israel protects,
The Pure of heart eternally affects.
Yet I began to stagger in my Faith;
My Feet almost had swerved from his Path,
When I the Fool beheld with envious eyes;
Saw prosperous Vice to Wealth and Honor rise.
Their Thread of Life is close and firmly spun;
Whom feeble Age, and pale Diseases shun.
They, while we suffer, surfeit in content;
As if alone exempt from punishment.
Pride hangs like precious Chains about their necks;
And Violence in robes of Purple decks.
Their swollen eyes shine with uncontrolled excess;
Who more, then what their hearts can wish, possess.
Even glory in their foul Impiety;
And speak like Thunder from the troubled Sky.
Dire Blasphemies against high Heaven they cast;
The suffering Earth their Pride and Slander blast.
The Good not seldom through their Scandal stray,
And pressed with Miseries, in Passion say;
O how can we the Lord All-seeing call!
Or think he cares what unto men befall!
When lo! the Wicked with success are crowned,
And in the pleasures of this world abound.
I to no end have purged my heart of stain;
In Innocence have cleans'd my hands in vain;
That thus with daily punishments am worn,
And still chastised with the rising Morn.

I should th'assemblies of thy Saints displease:
For then, what were it to be just, or good?
My Soul this secret never understood;
Till I into thy Sanctuary came,
And there beheld their honor end in Shame.
Thou have on slippery hights their greatness placed;
Down Headlong from their Noone of glory cast.
How are they unto Desolation brought!
Consumed in the moment of a thought!
Such as a pleasant dream when Sleep forsakes
Our flattered sense: so, when thy Wrath awakes,
Thou in thy dreadful fury shall destroy
Their empty and Imaginary joy.
These former thoughts did my weak Soul molest;
So ignorant; so vain; so like a beast.
Yet I by thy Divine supportance stand:
Thou heldst me up by thy Almighty hand.
Thou by thy counsel shall direct my ways;
And after to eternal Glory raise.
For whom have I but Thee in Heaven above?
Or what on Earth can my Affections move?
My Thoughts and flesh are frail: yet Lord, thou art
My Portion, and the Vigor of my Heart.
Who thee abandon, shall to Death descend;
And they whose knees to cursed Idols bend.
I as my duty, will to God repair;
On Him rely, and his great Acts declare.
PSALM LXXIV.
As the 14.
LORD; why have Thou abandoned!
O why for ever! shall thine Ire
Consume, like a devouring Fire,
The Sheep which in thy pastures fed!
O think of those, who were thy own;
By Thee of old from bondage brought:
The Inheritance which thou have bought,
And Sion thy affected Throne.
Come, O come quickly, and survey
What spoil the barbarous Foe has made.
Lo! all in heaps of ruins laid;
Thy Temple their accursed prey.
Like Lions, with sharp Famine whet,
They in thy Sanctuary roar;
All purple in thy Peoples gore;
And there their conquering Ensigns set.
It was esteemed a great renown
With Axe to square the Mountain Oaks:
Now they demolish with their strokes,
And hew the carved Fabric down.
Who lo! with all-infolding flame,
The beauty of the Earth devour:
Profanely prostrate on the floor
That Temple sacred to thy Name.
Now (said they) with a sudden hand,
Give we a general End to all.
By Fire the holy structures fall,
Through this depopulated Land.

There are no Prophets to divine,
That might our miseries decline;
None know the period of our woes.
Ah! how long shall our Enemies
Exult, and glory in our shame!
How long shall they Blaspheme thy Name,
Great God, and thy slow Wrath despise!
Thy Hand out of thy Bosom draw;
Nor longer thy Revenge withold:
My God, thou wast our King: The old
Amazed World thy Wonders saw.
Thou struck'st the Erythraean waves,
When Seas from Seas in tumult fled;
Brak'st the Egyptian Dragons head,
And made the joining Floods their Graves.
That great Leviathan of Nile,
To Beasts and Serpents, which possess
The dry and foodlesse Wilderness,
By Thee delivered for a Spoil.
Thou clav'st the Rock, from whose green wound
The thirst expelling Fountain brake:
Thou made the heady Streams forsake
Their Channels, and become dry ground.

The Moon and radiant Sun are Thine:
Thy Bounds the swelling Seas confine;
Summer and VVinter by Thee made.
Great God of gods, forget not those
Who Thee reprochfully despise.
Remember, Lord, the Blasphemies,
Cast on thee by our frantic Foes.
O! to the wicked Multitude
Surrender not thy Turtle-dove:
Nor from thy tender care remove
The Poor, by powerful VVrong pursued.
Thy Covenant, bound by Oath, maintain:
For Darkness over-spreads the Face
Of all the Land; in every place
Destruction, Rape, and Slaughter reign.
Let not the oppressed return with shame;
But crown thee with deserved applause:
O patronize thy proper Cause:
Remember, Fools revile thy Name.
O let their Sorrows never cease,
Who blast Thee with their Calumnies.
The tumuls of their Pride, who rise
Against Thee, every day increase.
PSALM LXXV.
As the 8.
THY Praises, O eternal King,
Our Souls in sacred Verse will sing.
The wonders of thy Works declare;
Thy Presence in thy Power and Care.
When I shall wear the Hebrew Crown,
High Justice shall my Reign renown.
The Land with weakening Discord rent,
The People without Government,
Faint and dissolve. Her Pillars I
Support, her Breaches fortify.
Proud Man, I said, renounce thy Pride;
Thou Fool, thy Folly cast aside.
Do not so high your Horns erect;
Nor bellow, as with yoke uncheckt.
Preferment from the Orient,
Nor from the Evening-Suns Descent,
Nor Desert comes: God guides our Fates,
He raises, and He ruinates.
A cup of red and mingled Wine
He pours out to me and mine:
But every Rebel in the Land
Shall drink the Dregs, squeezed by his Hand.
His noble Acts I will relate;
The God of Jacob celebrate;
Suppress the Wicked, and their ways;
The Just to Wealth and Honor raise.
PSALM LXXVI.
As the 29.
GOD in Judah is renowned;
Salem with his Temple crowned:
He in sacred Sion dwells;
Israel his wonders tells.
He their flying Ensigns tears;
Shivers the Assyrian Spears.
He their Swords, Shields, Arrows, broke;
Killed, subdued, without a stroke.
Thou more excellent then they,
That on Juries Mountains prey:
Who the Great in battle foiled;
Of their lives and honors spoiled.
Not the Mighty could with-stand,
Nor so much as find a hand.
Princes, by thy only breath,
With the Vulgar sleep in Death.
Terrible unto thy Foes:
O, who can thy Wrath oppose!
When as they thy Thunder hear,
Mortals stand amazed, and fear:
When from thy eternal Rest
Thou descend'st, to save The Oppressed.
Malice but it self betraies;
And converts into thy praise.
Future rage thou shall restrain,
Making their endeavors vain.
Jacobs Seed, with one accord,
Pay your Vows unto the Lord.
Holy Levites, Offerings bring;
Of his glorious Conquest sing.
He, who Princes overthrowes,
O, how fearful to his Foes!
PSALM LXXVII.
As the 5.
TO God I cried; He heard my cries:
Again, when plunged in miseries,
Renewed with raised hands and eyes.
My festred wounds ran all the Night;
No comfort could my Soul invite
To relish long out-worn delight.
I called upon the Ever-blest:
And yet my troubles still increast;
Almost to Death by sorrow pressed.
Thou keep'st my galled eyes awake:
Words fail my grief; sighs only spoke,
Which from my panting bosom brake.
Then did my Memory unfold
The wonders, which thou wrought'st of old,
By our admiring Fathers told.
The Songs, which in the Night I sung;
When deeply by affliction stung:
These thoughts thus moved my desperate tongue;
Will thou for ever, Lord, forsake!
Nor pity on the afflicted take!
O shall thy mercy never wake!
Will thou thy promise falsify!
Must I in thy displeasure die!
Shall Grace before thy Fury fly!
This said; I thus my Passions checked:
His changes on their ends reflect,
To punish and restore The Elect.

In my Remembrance; I will tell
What in our Fathers days befell.
His counsels from our reach are set;
Hid in his sacred Cabinet.
What God like ours! so Good! so Great!
Who wonders can effect alone;
His Peoples great Redemption;
To Jacobs Seed, and Joseph's known.
The yielding Floods confess thy Might;
The Deeps were troubled at thy Sight;
And Seas recoiled in their affright.
The Clouds in storms of rain descend;
The Air thy hideous Fragors rend;
Thy arrows dreadful flames extend.
Thy Thunders rorings rake the Skies;
Thy fatal Lightning swiftly flies;
Earth trembles in her agonies.
Thy VVayes even through the Billows lie:
The Floods then left their Channels dry;
No Mortal can thy steps descry.
Like Flocks through Wilderness of Sand,
Thou led'st us to this pleasant Land;
By Moses and by Aarons hand.
PSALM LXXVIII.
As the 42.
MY People, hear my Words; I will unfold
Dark Oracles, and Wonders done of old;
By our great Ancestors both heard and known,
Successively unto their Children shown;
Which we will to Posterity relate;
That People, yet unknown, may celebrate
Gods Power, his Praise, and glorious Acts: since He
Will's this Tradition by divine Decree;
Until one Day shall give the World an end:
That all their hopes might on his Help depend.
Nor ever let his noble Actions sleep
In dark oblivion, but his Statutes keep.
Unlike their rebel Sires, a stubborn Race;
Who fell from God, nor sought his slighted Grace.
The Ephraimites, though expert in their Bows,
Though armed, ignobly fled before their Foes:
Who vainly brake the Covenant of their God;
Nor in the ways of his prescription trod,
Forgot his famous Acts, his Wonders shown
In Zoan, and the Plains by Nile o'reflown.
He brought them through the bowels of the Flood;
The parted Waves like solid Mountains stood.
By day with leading Clouds affords a shade;
By night a flaming Pyramid displaid.
Hard Rocks, He in the thirsty Deserts, clave,
And drink out of their stony Entrails gave:
Even from their barren sides the waters gusht,
And down in rivers through the valleys rusht.

Their Lust demand, provoking the most High.
Blaspheming thus; Can God our wants redress?
A Table furnish in the Wilderness?
Though from the cloven Rocks fresh Currents drill,
Can he give bread? with flesh the hungry fill?
Thus tempted by their hourly murmurings,
He to his long retarded Wrath gives wings:
Their infidelity enraged the Just,
That would not to his sure Protection trust.
Who all the Curtains of the Skies withdrew,
And made the clouds resolve into a dew.
With Manna, Food of Angels, Mortals fed;
And filled with plenty of celestial Bread.
Then caused the early Eastern winds to rise,
And bade the dropping South obscure the Skies:
Whence showers of Quails descend; as thick as sand
On Sea-washt shores, or dust on Sun-dri'd Land;
Which fell among their Tents: They their delights
Enjoy, and feast their deadly appetites.
For lo! while they those fatal Dainties chew,
And their inordinate Desires pursue;
The Wrath of God surpised them, and cut down
The choice of all; even those of most renown.
Nor, by their own mis-haps admonished,
Would they his Works believe, or Judgments dread.
So He their spirits quenched with daily fears;
In Vanity and Toil consumed their years.

Returned, and sought Him in the early Morn:
They then confessed, and said; Thou art our Tower,
Our Strength; alone protectest by thy Power.
Yet their sly Tongues did but their Souls disguise;
Full of deluding flatteries, and lies.
Their faithless hearts revolted from his Will;
Nor ever would his just Commands fulfill.
How often would He, whose Mercy has no bound,
Their pardon sign! nor in their Sins confound!
How often did He his burning wrath assuage!
How often divert the fury of his Rage!
Considered them as flesh, in frailty borne;
A passing Wind, that never can return.
Yet still would they his sacred Laws transgress;
Provoked him in th'unpeopled Wilderness:
Confined the Holy One of Israel;
Against their Savior frantickly rebel:
Forgetful of his Power, nor ever thought
Of that Great Day, when from long Bondage brought.
His dreadful Miracles to Egypt known,
And Wonders in the Field of Zoan snowne.
The River changed into a Sea of blood;
Men faint for thirst, to avoid the infected Flood.
Huge swarms of unknown Flies display their wings,
Which wound to death with their envenomed stings.
Loathed Frogs even in their Palaces abound;

Their early fruits the Caterpillars spoil:
And Grasshoppers devour the Plow-mans toil.
Long Vines with storms their dangling burdens lost:
The broad-leav'd Sycamores destroi'd with frost.
Their Flocks beat down with Hailstones, breathles lie:
Their Cattle by the stroke of Thunder die.
The Vengeance of his Wrath all forms of woes,
More Plagues, then could be feared, upon them throws
Whom evil Angels to their sins betray.
He to the Torrent of his Wrath gave way;
Nor would with man or sinlesse beasts dispense;
Shot by the Arrows of his Pestilence.
Slew all the flower of Youth; their Firstborn Sons;
There where old Nilus in seven Channels runs.
But like a flock of Sheep his People led;
Safe and secure through Deserts, full of dread:
Even through unfathomed Deeps: which part and close
Their tumbling waves to swallow their proud Foes.
Then brought them to his consecrated Land;
Even to his Mountain purchased by his Hand.
Cast out the Giant-like Inhabitants;
And in their rooms the Tribes of Israel plants.
Yet they (o most ungrateful!) falsify
Their vows, and still exasperate the most High:
Who in their faithless Fathers traces go;
And start aside; like a deceitful Bow.
Their Altars on the tops of Mountains blaze,
While they their hands to cursed Idols raise.

Whose Soul revolted Israel abhorred.
The ancient Seat of Shiloh then forsook;
Nor longer would that hated Mansion brook.
His Arc even to Captivity declined;
His Strength and Glory to the Foe resigned:
And yielded up his People to the Rage
Of barbarous swords; nor would his wrath assuage.
Devouring flames their able Youth confound;
Nor are their Maids with Nuptial Garlands crowned.
Their Mitred Priests in heat of Battle fall;
No Widows weeping at their Funeral.
Then as a Giant, folded in the Charms
Of Wine and Sleep, starts up, and cries, To arms:
So roused, his Foes behind, Jehovah wounds;
And with Eternal Infamy confounds:
Yet would in Joseph's Tents no longer dwell;
Nor Ephraim chose, who from his Covenant fell:
But Judahs Mountain for his Seat elects;
And sacred Sion, which he most affects.
There our great God his glorious Temple placed,
Firm as the Center, never to be rased.
And from the bleating Flocks his David chose,
When he attended on the yeaning Ewes;
And raised him to a Throne, that he might feed
His people; Isreal's selected Seed.
Who fed them faithfully; and all the Land
Directed with a just and equal hand.
PSALM LXXIX.
As the 39.
THe Gentiles waste thy Canaan, Lord,
With Fire and Sword.
Thy holy Temple they profane;
With Slaughter stain.
Beneath her ruins Salem groans;
Now nothing but a heap of Stones.
The dead no Funeral pomp attends,
Nor weeping friends:
Their carkases our barbarous Foes
To Beasts expose:
The ravenous Wolves become their tomb
Or else the greedy Vulturs womb.
With blood of Saints, the Streams grow red,
Like Water shed:
Thy People now a general
Reproach to all.
The Syrian, and base Edomite
Deride, and in our woes delight.
How long, Lord, shall thy jealous ire
Devour like Fire!
Thy Anger, in a dreadful shower
Of vengeance, power
On those, who know not thy great Name:
And think thy Worship but a shame.

Our Cities ras't.
Lord, O remember not the crimes
Of former times!
But for thy tender mercy save
Our souls; now humbled to the grave.
Lord, for the glory of thy Name,
Redeem from shame.
O purge us, and propitious be!
From thraldom free.
Why should the Heathen thus blaspheme,
And say, Your God is but a Dream!
Against them let thy Vengeance rise;
Before our eyes:
And for our blood, shed by their guilt,
Let theirs be spilt.
O hear the sighing Prisoners cry!
And save, whom they have doomed to die.
Our spiteful Neighbors, Lord, deride
Thee, in their pride.
With sevenfold vengeance recompense
Their insolence.
So we, thy flock, our God will praise;
And to the Stars thy Glory raise.
PSALM LXXX.
As the 3.
THou Shepherd of thy Israel,
That, Flock-like, leadest Joseph's Race:
Who twixt the Cherubims do dwell,
O hear! show thy inlightning Face.
Exalt thy saving power before
Manasseh, Ephraim, Benjamin:
O from Captivity restore!
And let thy beams upon us shine.
Great God of Battle, will thou still
Be angry, and our prayers despise?
Bread, steept in tears, our stomachs fill;
We drink the rivers of our eyes.
Our scoffing Neighbors fall at strife
Among themselves, to share our right:
Great God, restore the dead to life;
And comfort by the quickening light.

Expeld) was planted by thy hand:
Thou gav'st it room and strength to grow,
Until her branches filled the Land.
The Mountains took a shade from these,
Which like a grove of Cedars stood:
Extending to the Tyrian Seas,
And to Euphrates rolling Flood.
O why have thou her Fences ras't?
Whilst every Stragler pulls her fruit:
The browsing Heard her branches waste;
And salvage Boores plow-up her root.
Great God, return; this trampled Vine
From Heaven behold with mild aspect:
Once planted by that Hand of thine;
The branches of thy own Elect.
Which now cut down, wild Flames devour;
Through thy fierce wrath to ruin brought:
Protect thy People by thy Power;
And perfect what thy self has wrought.
Revived, we will thy Name adore;
Nor ever from thy Pleasure swerve.
O from Captivity restore,
And by thy powerful grace preserve!
PSALM LXXXI.
As the 8.
TO God our Strength your voices raise:
In sacred numbers sing his praise.
The warbling Lute, sweet Violl bring,
And solemn Harp: loud Timbrels ring.
The new Moon seen, shrill Trumpets sound:
Your sacred Feasts with Triumph crowned.
These Rites our God established,
When Israel He from Egypt led:
Their necks with Yokes of bondage wrung;
Inured to an unknown tongue.
Your burdens I have cast away,
Said he, and cleans'd your hands from clay:
Then saved, when in your fears you cried;
And from the thundering Cloud replied.
I tried you; heard your murmurings,
At Meribahs admired Springs.
You Sons of Israel, give ear;
I will instruct you, would you hear.
Beware; no foraigne gods adore;
Nor their adulterate Powers implore.

Of Bondage, with a mighty Hand.
I know, and will supply thy need;
When naked, clothe; when hungry, feed.
Yet would not they my Counsel brook;
But desperately their God forsook:
Whom I unto their lusts resigned,
And errors of their wandering Mind.
O that they had my voice obei'd,
Nor from the paths of Virtue straid!
Then Victory their brows had crowned:
Their slaughtered Foes had spread the ground:
Then had I made their enemy
Submit, and at their mercy lie:
Themselves blessed with eternal Peace;
Enriched with the Earths increase:
With flower of Wheat, and Honey filled,
From breaches of the Rock distilled.
PSALM LXXXII.
As the 4.
GOD sits upon the Throne of Kings,
And Judges unto judgment brings:
Why then so long
Maintain you wrong,
And favor Lawless things?
Defend the Poor, the Fatherless;
Their crying injuries redress:
And vindicate
The Desolate,
Whom wicked men oppress.
For they of knowledge have no Light,
Nor Will to know; but walk in Night.
Earths Bases fail;
No Laws prevail;
Scarce one in heart upright.
Though Gods, and Sons of the most High;
Yet you, like common men, shall die;
Like Princes fall.
Great God, judge all
The Earth, thy Monarchy.
PSALM LXXXIII.
As the 1.
LORD, sit not still, as deaf unto our cries:
For lo! our Enemies in tumults rise.
Even those, who thy Omnipotence deny,
And hate thy Name, advance their Crests on high:
Dark counsels take, and secretly contrive
Their slaughter, whom thy Mercy keeps alive.
Come, say they, let us with incessant stroks
Hew down this Nation, like a grove of Oaks
Till they no longer be; and Israel die
Both in his Race, and ruined Memory.
They all, in one Confederacy, have made
A solemn League; supplied with foraigne aid.
Fierce Idumaeans, who in Nomades stray,
And shaggy Ismaelites, that live by prey;
Th'incestuous Race, that border on the Lake
Of salt Asphalthis: Savage Thieves, who take
Their name from servile Hagar; they, who dwell
In Gebal; Ammonites, who Peace expel;
Stern Palaestines; and wild Amalekites;
False Tyrians; Ashur with Lots Sons unites.

Like Sisera; fall like Jabin, on the bounds
Of Endor, where swift Kison takes his birth;
Who lay like Dung upon the fatned Earth:
Like Zeb, and Orebs Princes; made a prey
For Wolves: like Zeba and proud Zalmuna:
Who said, let us these Israelites destroy,
And all the Cities of their God enjoy.
O let them, like a wheel be hurried round;
Like chafe, which whirl-winds ravish from the ground;
As Woods grown dry with age, embraced with fire.
Whose flames above the singed Hills aspire:
So in the Tempest of thy Wrath pursue;
And with thy Storms thy trembling Foes subdue.
O fill their Hearts with grief; their looks with shame;
Till they invoke thy late blasphemed Name.
Confound them with eternal Infamy;
That they, through anguish of their Souls, may die.
That men Jehovah's Wonders may rehearse;
The great Commander of this Universe.
PSALM LXXXIV.
As the 29.
O How amiable are
Thy Aboads, great God of war!
How I languish through restraint!
How my longing Spirits faint!
Lord, for thee I daily cry;
In thy absence hourly die.
Sparrowes there their young ones rear;
And the Summers Harbinger
By thy Altar builds her nest,
Where they take their envied rest.
O my King! O thou most High!
Arbiter of Victory!
Happy men! who spend their Days
In thy Courts; there sing thy Praise!
Happy! who on Thee depend!
Thine their Way, and thou their End.
Who through Baca traveling,
Make that thirsty Vale a Spring;
Or soft Showers from Clouds distill,
And their empty Cisterns fill:
Fresh in strength, their course pursue,
Till they thee in Sion view.
Lord of Hosts, incline thine Ear.
O thou God of Jacob hear!
Thou our Rock, extend thy Grace;
Look on thy Anointed's Face.
One Day in thy Courts alone.
Far exceeds a Million
Let me be contemned and poor;
In thy Temple keep a Door:
Then with wicked men possess
All that they call Happiness.
O thou Shield of our Defense!
O thou Sun, whose influence
Sweetly glides into our Hearts!
Thou, who all to thine imparts!
Happy! O thrice happy he,
Who alone depends on Thee!
PSALM LXXXV.
As the 2.
AT length thou have thy Mercy shown;
Drawn from the Babylonian yoke;
Our Sins removed, which did provoke
Thy Wrath; even that now overblowne.
Great God, our ruined State restore;
And let thy Anger flame no more.
O shall it like a Comet reign!
Extending to the yet unborne!
Will thou not quicken the forlorn;
That thine in Thee may joy again!
O shower thy Mercy from above;
Preserve, and fix us in thy love!
I will the Voice of God attend,
Who to his People speaks of Peace.
Such as in Sanctity increase;
Nor to their Sins again descend:
These soon with Freedom shall be blessed,
That Glory may our Land invest.
Those Days shall consumate our Bliss:
Sweet Clemency with Truth shall meet;
High Justice gentle Peace shall greet,
Saluting with a holy Kiss:
For Truth shall from the Earth arise,
And Righteousness look from the Skies.
Then shall Jehovah distribute
His Blessings with a liberal Hand:
The rich, and ever grateful Land
Abundantly produce her fruit.
For Justice shall before him go,
And her fair steps to Mortals show.
PSALM LXXXVI.
As the 13.
MY God, thy Suppliant hear;
Afford a gentle Ear:
For I am comfortless,
And labor in distress.
My righteous Soul relieve,
So ready to forgive.
Thy Servant, Lord, defend;
Whose hopes on Thee depend.
Me from the Grave restore,
Who daily Thee implore:
From wasting Sorrow free
The Heart long vowed to Thee.
For thou art God alone,
To tender pity prone,
Propitious unto all,
Who on thy Mercy call.
O hear my fervent prayer,
And take me to thy care:
Then ready to be found,
When troubles most abound.
What God, like Thee, O Lord,
Of all by men adored!
Or underneath the Sun,
Such miracles has done.

To Adore and praise thy Name.
For thou art God alone;
Thy Power in Wonders shown.
Direct me in thy Way;
So shall I never stray.
My thoughts from Tempests clear;
United in thy Fear.
My Soul shall celebrate
Thy Praise; thy Power relate.
That have advanced my head,
And raised me from the Dead.
The Proud against me rise,
And powerful Enemies
(All Rebels to thy Will)
My guiltless blood would spill.
But, O thou King of kings,
From Thee sweet Mercy springs;
Still gracious, slow to wrath;
True to thy Servants Faith.
Lord, for thy Mercies sake,
Into thy bosom take:
Thy Handmaids Son O save
From the devouring Grave!
Some happy Sign expose
To my ashamed Foes;
That they thy Hate may see
To them; thy Love to me.
PSALM LXXXVII.
As the 8.
THE Lord has with his Temple crowned
Moriah, by his Choice renowned.
Not all the Tents of Israel,
Or Mountains which in height excel,
He so affects, or celebrates,
As lofty Sions stately Gates.
Jerusalem, thou Throne of Kings,
Of Thee they utter glorious things.
Not by Judea's narrow bounds
Prescribed; the Land which Nile surrounds,
Great Babylon, proud Palaestine,
Rich Tire, which circling Seas confine;
And black-brow'd Aethiopians,
Shall yield thee Citizens and Sons.
All sorts of People, foraign-bred,
As Natives there indenized;
In Sion, built by immortal Hands:
Firm as the Mountain where it stands.
The Lord in his eternal Scroll,
Shall these, as Citizens, inroll.
Their Music shall The Affections raise,
And Songs sung in Jehovah's praise;
Whose Blessings on this City shall,
Like Streams from Heavenly Fountains, fall.
PSALM LXXXVIII.
As the 39.
MY Savior! both by night and day
To Thee I pray.
O let my Cries transcend the Spears,
And pierce thy Ears!
Lest Sorrow stop my fainting breath;
Now near the Jaws of greedy Death.
My light extinguished, numbered
Among the Dead:
Like men in battle slain; the womb
Of Earth their Tomb:
Forgotten, as if never known;
By thy tempestuous Wrath overthrown.
By Thee lodged in the lower Deeps,
Where Horror keeps;
In Dungeons, where no Sun displaies
His cheerful Rays.
Crushed by thy Wrath; on me thy Waves
Rush, like so many rolling Graves.
My old Familiars, now my Foes,
Deride my Woes.
My House becomes my Jail; where I
In Fetters lie.
Blind with my tears; with crying hoarse;
Hands raised in vain; a walking Coarse.

Who sleep below?
The Dead from their cold Mansions raise,
To sing thy Praise?
Shall Mercy find us in the Grave?
Or will thou in Destruction save?
VVilt thou thy Wonders bring to light,
In Deaths long Night?
Or shall thy Justice there be shown,
Where none are known?
I have, and still to Thee will pray;
Before the Sun restore the Day.
O, why have thou withdrawn thy Grace,
And hid thy Face;
From me, who from my Infancy
But daily die?
Whilst I thy Terrors undergo;
Distracted by these storms of woe.
Thy Anger, like a Gulf, devoures
My trembling Powers:
With troops of Terrors circled round;
In Sorrow drowned;
Deprived of those, that loved me most;
To all in dark oblivion lost.
PSALM LXXXIX.
As the 72.
Our grateful Songs, O thou eternal King,
Shall ever of thy boundless Mercies sing:
And thy unalterable Truth rehearse
To after Ages, in a living verse.
For what is by thy Clemency decreed,
Shall orderly, and faithfully succeed:
Even like those never resting Orbs above,
Which on firm hinges circularly move.
Thus God unto his servant David swore;
This Covenant made: I will for evermore
Thy Seed establish, and thy Throne sustain;
Whilst Seas shall flow, or Moons increase, and waine.
The heavenly Hierarchy thy Truth shall praise;
The Saints below thy glorious Wonders blaze.
For who is like our God above the Clouds!
Or who so great, whom humane frailty shrowds!
He to his Angels terrible appears;
And daunts the Tyrants of the Earth with fears.
Great God! how great, when dreadful Armies join!
What God so strong! what Faith so firm as thine!

Thou calm'st the tumults of the incensed Maine.
Proud Rahab, like a Coarse, with blood imbrued;
Hew'n down: the strong with greater strength subdued.
Thine are the Heavens; those Lamps which guild the Skies;
Round Earth; broad Seas, and all which they comprise.
Thou made the Southern and the Northern Pole,
Whereon the Orbs celestial swiftly roll.
Hermon invested with the Morning Rays,
And Tabor with the Evening's, sing thy praise.
Thy Arm excels in Strength: thy hands sustain
The World they made: And guide it with a reine.
Justice with Judgment joined, thy Throne uphold:
Mercy and Truth thy sacred brows infold.
Thrice happy they, who, when the Trumpet calls,
Throng to thy celebrated Festivals!
They of thy Beauty shall enjoy the sight,
And guide their Feet by that informing light:
Thy Name shall daily in their mouths be found;
And in thy Justice shall their Joys abound.

Thy Favor shall exalt us to the Stars.
Thou, Holy One of Israel, our King;
Thou our defense; secure beneath thy VVing.
Thus spoke Jehovah by his Prophets voice;
Of strenuous David have I made my choice,
(On that Hero powered my Sacred Oil)
To guide my People, and preserve from spoil.
I will support him with my powerful Arm;
No Foe shall Tribute force; nor Treason harm:
His enemies before his Face shall fly,
And those, who hate his Soul, by slaughter die.
Our Truth and Clemency shall crown his Days,
And to the Firmament his Glory raise.
He, from the Billows of the Tyrian Maine,
To swift Euphrates shall extend his Reign.
Who in his often renewed Devotions shall,
Me Father, God, and great Protector call.
My Favorite he shall be, and my First birth;
Raised above all the Princes of the Earth.
My Mercy him for ever shall preserve:
And from my Promise I will never swerve.
His Seed shall always reign; his Throne shall last,
While Days have light, and Nights their shadows cast:

My Rites neglect, and from my Rule withdraw;
Then I with whips will their offenses scourge,
With labor, misery, and sorrows urge:
Yet will not utterly my King forsake,
My Vow infringe, or alter what I spoke.
I by my Sanctity to David swear,
That he, and his should never want an Heir,
To sway the Hebrew Scepter, while the Sun
His usual Race should through the Zodiac run;
While Men, the Moon and radiant Stars should see,
The faithful witnesses of my Decree.
But thou art angry with thy own Elect,
And do thy late affected King reject;
Infringe the Covenant to thy Servant sworn;
Thou from his Brows his Diadem have torn,
Cast down the Rampire, which his strength renowned,
And all his Bulwarks levelled with the ground:
Whom now his Neighbors scorn; a common prey,
And spoil to all that travel by the way.

Who now rejoice and triumph in his woes;
Rebatest his sharp Sword, unnerv'st his might,
And make him shrink in fervor of the fight:
His splendour have Eclipsed; his renown
In ruins buried, and his Throne cast down:
His Youth consumed with untimely Age;
Marked out for shame; the object of thy Rage.
How long shall he in thy displeasure mourn!
Still shall thy Anger like a Furnace burn!
O call to mind the shortness of my days;
That dream of Man, which like a Flower decaies.
Who lives, that can the stroke of Death defend;
Or shall not to the silent Grave descend?
Where is thy ancient Love! thy plighted Troth,
Confirmed to David by a solemn Oath!
Remember the Reproaches I have borne;
Those of the Mighty; and their bitter scorn:
Traduced; by thy enemies abhorred.
Yet, O my pensive Soul, praise thou the Lord.
Amen, Amen.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM XC.
As the 34.
O Thou the Father of us all,
Our refuge from The Original;
That were our God, before
The aerie Mountains had their birth,
Or Fabric of the peopled Earth;
And art for evermore.
But frail man, daily dying, must
At thy Command return to Dust:
Or should he Ages last;
Ten thousand years are in thy sight
But like a quadrant of the Night,
Or as a Day that is past.
He by the Torrent swept from hence;
An empty Dream, which mocks the Sense,
And from the Fancy flies:
Such as the beauty of the Rose,
Which in the dewy Morning blows,
Then hangs the head and dies.
Through daily anguish we expire:
Thy anger a consuming Fire,
To our offenses due.
Our sins (although by Night concealed,
By shame, and fear) are all revealed,
And naked to thy view.
Thus in thy wrath our years we spend;
And like a sad discourse they end,
Nor but to seventy last:
Or if to eighty they arrive,
We then with Age, and Sickness strive;
Cut off with winged haste.

Or to thy dreadful anger has
Proportioned his due fear?
Teach us to number our frail Days,
That we our hearts to Thee may raise,
And wisely sin forbear.
Lord, O how long! at length relent!
And of our miseries repent;
Thy Early Mercy show:
That we may unknown comfort taste:
For those long days in sorrow past,
As long of joy bestow.
The works of thy accustomed Grace
Show to thy Servants: on their Race
Thy cheerful beams reflect,
O let on us thy Beauty shine!
Bless our attempts with aid divine,
And by thy Hand direct.
PSALM XCI.
As the 9.
Who makes The Almighty his retreat,
Shall rest beneath his shady Wings;
Free from th'oppression of the Great,
The rage of War, or wrath of Kings.
Free from the cunning Fowlers train;
The tainted aires infectious breath:
His Truth in perils shall sustain,
And shield thee from the stroke of Death.
No terrors shall thy sleeps affright;
Nor deadly flying Arrows slay:
Nor Pestilence devour by Night,
Or Slaughter massacre by Day.
A thousand and ten thousand shall
Sink on thy Right hand and thy Left:
Yet thou secure shall see their fall;
By vengeance, of their lives bereft.
Since God thou have thy Refuge made,
And do to him thy Vows direct;
No evil shall thy strength invade,
Nor wasting plagues thy roof infect.
Thee shall his Angels safely guide;
Upheld by winged Legions,
Left thou at any time should slide.
And dash thy Foot against the Stones.
Thou on the Basiliske shall tread;
The Mountain Lion boldly meet,
And trample on the Dragons Head;
The Leopard prostrate at thy Feet.
Since he has fixed his love on me,
Says God, and walked in my ways;
I will his Soul from danger free,
And from the reach of Envy raise.
To him I his desires will give;
From danger guard; in honor place:
He long, long happily shall live,
And flourish in my saving Grace.
PSALM XCII.
As the 29.
THou, who art enthroned above;
Thou, by whom we live, and move;
O how sweet, how excellent,
Is It with tongue and hearts consent,
Thankful hearts and joyful tongues,
To renown thy Name in Songs!
When the Morning paints the Skies,
When the sparkling Stars arise;
Thy high favors to rehearse,
Thy firm faith, in grateful Verse,
Take the Lute, and Violin;
Let the solemn Harp begin;
Instruments strung with ten strings;
While the Silver Cimbal rings.
From thy Works my joy proceeds:
How I triumph in thy Deeds!
Who thy Wonders can express!
All thy Thoughts are fathomlesse;
Hid from Men in Knowledge blind;
Hid from Fools to Vice inclined.
Who that Tyrant Sin obey;
Though they spring like Flowers in May
Parch't with Heat, and nipt with Frost,
Soon shall fade, for ever lost.

Such from all Eternity.
Perish shall thy Enemies,
Rebels that against thee rise.
All, who in their Sins delight,
Shall be scattered by thy Might.
But thou shall exalt my Horn,
Like a youthful Unicorn;
Fresh and fragrant Odors shed
On thy crowned Prophets head.
I shall see my Foes defeat,
Shortly hear of their retreat:
But the Just like Palms shall flourish,
Which the Plains of Judah nourish:
Like tall Cedars mounted on
Cloud ascending Lebanon.
Plants set in thy Court, below
Spread their roots, and upwards grow;
Fruit in their Old Age shall bring;
Ever fat and flourishing.
This Gods Justice celebrates;
He, my Rock, Injustice hates.
PSALM XCIII.
As the 47.
NOw great Jehovah reigns,
With Majesty aray'd;
His Power all powers restraines,
By men and gods obeyed.
The round Earth hung
In liquid Air;
Established there
But by his Tongue.
Thy Throne more old then Time,
And after, as before.
The Floods in billows clime,
And foming loudly rore.
With horrid Noise
The Ocean raves,
And breaks his Waves
Against the Skies.
But thou more to be feared,
More terrible then these:
Thy Voice in Thunder heard;
Thy Nod rebukes the Seas.
Thee Truth renowns;
Pure Sanctity
Eternally
Thy Temple crowns.
PSALM XCIV.
As the 10.
GReat God of Hosts revenge our Wrong
On those, who are in Mischief strong.
Upon thy Foes
Inflict our VVoes:
For Vengeance does to Thee belong.
Judge of the World, prevent
The Proud and Insolent.
How long shall they the Just oppress,
And triumphin their Wickedness!
How long supplant!
Ah! how long vaunt,
And glory in their dire success!
Thy Saints asunder break,
Insulting over the Weak!
Who Strangers, and poor Widows kill;
The blood of wretched Orphans spill:
And say, Can he
Or hear, or see?
Does God regard what is good or ill?
Brute Beasts, without a mind!
O Fools in knowledge blind!
Shall not The Almighty see and hear,
Who formed the Eye, and framed the Ear?
Who Nations slew,
Not punish you?
Who taught, not know? to him appear
Dark Counsels, secret Fires,
Vain Hopes, and vast Desires.

Chastises with his gentle Rod;
Informs, and awes
By sacred Laws.
In storms brought to a safe abode:
While the Unrighteous shall
By winged Vengeance fall.
For he will not forsake The Elect;
Nor who adore his Name reject:
But Judgment then
Shall turn again
To Justice, and her Throne Erect:
Who are in Heart upright
Shall follow that clear Light.
What mortal will The Afflicted aid?
Depend when impious Foes invade?
Lord, had not thou,
My Soul ere now
In silent shades of Death had laid:
For he my Outcries heard;
And from the Center reared.
When Grief my laboring Soul confounds;
Thou powrest Balm into her wounds.
Shall Tyranny
With thee complie?
Who Mischief for a Law propounds?
Who swarm to circumvent,
And doom the Innocent.
But thou, O Lord, art my Defense,
My Refuge, and my Recompense.
The Vicious shall
By Vices fall;
By their own Sins be swept from hence.
God shall cut off their breath,
And give them up to Death.
PSALM XCV.
As the 34.
COme Sing the great Jehovah's Praise,
Whose Mercies have prolonged our Days;
Sing with a joyful voice.
With bending Knees, and raised Eyes
Adore your God: o sacrifice;
In sacred Hymns rejoice.
Great is the God of our Defense,
Transcending all in eminence:
His Hand the Earth sustaines;
The Depths, the lofty Mountains made;
The Land and liquid Plains displaid,
And curbs them with his Reins.
O come, before his Footstool fall,
Our only God, who formed us all;
Through Storms of danger led.
He is our Shepherd, we his Sheep;
His Hands from Wolves and Rapine keep,
In pleasant Pastures fed.
The Voice of God thus spoke this Day;
Repine not as at Meribah,
As in the Wilderness:
Where your Forefathers tempted me;
Who did my Works of Wonder see,
And to their shame confess.
When vex't for forty years, I said;
This People in their hearts have strai'd;
Rebellious to command:
To whom I in my Anger swore,
That Death should seize on them, before
They knew this pleasant Land.
PSALM XCVI.
As the 29.
NEw composed Ditties sing
To our Everlasting King:
You, all you of Humane birth,
Fed and nourisht by the Earth,
Celebrate Jehovah's Praise,
Daily his Deliveries blase.
His Glory let the Gentiles know;
To the World his wonders show.
O how gracious! o how great!
Earth his Footstool, Heaven his Seat.
To be feared and honored more
Then those gods, whom Fools adore;
Idols by their Servants made:
But our God the Heavens displayed.
Honor, Beauty, Power Divine,
In his Sanctuary shine.
All, who by his Favor live,
Glory to Jehovah give;
Glory due unto his Name,
And his Mighty Deeds proclaim.
Offerings on his Altar lay;
There your Vows devoutly pay.
In his beauteous Holiness

All, whom Earths round shoulders bear,
Serve the Lord with Joy and Fear.
Tell Mankind, Jehovah reigns:
He shall bind the world in Chains,
So as it shall never slide;
And with sacred Justice guide.
Let the smiling Heavens rejoice;
Joyful Earth exalt her Voice:
Let the dancing Billows rore;
Echoes answer from the Shore:
Fields their flowrie Mantles shake;
All shall in their Joy partake:
While the VVoods Musicians sing
To the ever-youthfull Spring.
Fill his Courts with sacred Mirth;
He, He comes to judge the Earth.
Justly He the World shall sway,
And his Truth to men display.
PSALM XCVII.
As the 8.
O Earth! joy in Jehovah's Reign;
You numerous Isles, claspt by the Maine.
Him rolling Clouds and Shades infold.
Judgment and Truth his Throne uphold.
Who fiery Darts before him throws;
With winged flames consumes his Foes.
His Lightning made a Day of Night;
Earth trembled at so feared a sight.
The Mountains at his Presence sweat,
Like pliant Wax dissolved with Heat;
At his Descension from the Sky,
Who rules the Worlds great Monarchy.
The Heavens declare his Righteousness;
His Glory wondering men confess.
Let those with shame to Hell descend,
Whose Knees to cursed Idols bend;
Whose rocks for Deities implore:
O all you gods, our God adore.
Rejoicing Sion heard her King:
Her Daughters of his Judgments sing.
Thou art exalted above all
Mankind, and Powers Angelical.
Those Saints thy shady Wings protect,
Who Sin abhor, and thee affect.
For thou have sown the Seeds of Light,
And joy, which shall invest th'Vpright.
You Just, your joyful Hearts elate;
His blessed Memorial celebrate.
PSALM XCVIII.
As the 47.
SING to the King of kings,
Sing in unusual Lays;
That has wrought wondrous things,
His Conquest crown with Praise:
Whose Arms alone,
And sacred Hands,
Their impious Bands
Have overthrown.
He Justice brings to light;
His saving Truth extends,
Even in the Gentiles sight,
To Earths remotest Ends.
His Heavenly Grace
At full displayed,
And promise made
To Jacobs Race.
Let all that dwell on Earth
Their high Affections raise,
With universal Mirth,
And loudly sing his Praise:
To Music join
The warbling Voice,
Let all rejoice
With Joy divine.
The sprightly Trumpet sound;
The shrill-voic'd Cornet bring:
Let all with Joy abound
Before the Lord our King.
Rore out you Seas,
You spangled Skies,
All you comprise,
Rejoice with these.
Floods clap your thronging waves;
You Hills exalt your mirth:
He, who his People saves,
Now comes to judge the Earth:
The round World shall
With Justice try;
His Equity
Dispenst to all.
PSALM XCIX.
As the 29.
LEt our Foes with terror quake;
Let the Earths Foundation shake:
Now the Lord his Reign begins,
Throned between the Cherubins.
O how great in Sions Towers!
High above all Mortal Powers.
Great and terrible his Name:
Since so holy, praise the same.
Judgment his great Power affects;
Yet by Equity directs.
These celestial Twins embrace;
These reflect on Jacobs Race.
O how holy! above all
Honor; at his Footstool fall,
Moses: Aaron heretofore
Among those who Mitres wore:
Samuel by Vow desired,
Among those who were inspired.
These to him their Prayers preferred,
These by him as soon were heard.
These his Statutes rarely brake:
Unto these the Almighty spoke,
In the Pillar of a Cloud:
To his Service ever vowed.
He did their Petitions hear,
Merciful, and yet severe.
The Holy, on his holy Hill
Glorify, and worship still.
PSALM C.
As the 47.
All from the Suns uprise,
Unto his Setting Rays,
Resound in Jubilees
The great Jehovah's Praise.
Him serve alone;
In triumph bring
Your Gifts, and sing
Before his Throne.
Man drew from Man his Birth,
But God his noble Frame
Built of the ruddy Earth,
Filled with caelestiall Flame.
His Sons we are;
Sheep by him led,
Preserved, and fed
With tender care.
O, to his Portals press
In your divine resorts:
With Thanks his Power profess,
And praise him in his Courts.
How good! how pure!
His Mercies last:
His promise past
For ever sure.
PSALM CI.
As the 46.
OF Justice I and Mercy sing,
Which, Lord, from thee, their Fountain spring;
The Graces that adorn a King.
Grave Wisdom shall my steps direct,
No Vice my heart nor Roof infect.
When will thou visit thine Elect!
No pleasure shall mine eyes misguide:
Who from the Tract of Virtue slide,
Just Hate shall from my Soul divide.
Who mischief in their Hearts contrive,
Delight in Wrong, in Factions strive,
I from my peaceful Court will drive.
Who has his Friend with Slander struck,
I will cut off; nor ever brook
A proud Heart, and a haughty Look.
Mine Eyes the Faithful shall observe;
Those in my Family shall serve,
Who never from pure Virtue swerve,
But who are exercised in Guile,
Whose Tongues malicious Lies defile,
I from my Presence will exile.
And all the Wicked in the Land
Will cut off with a timely Hand;
Nor shall they in Gods City stand.
PSALM CII.
As the 22.
ACcept my Prayers, nor to the Cry
Of my Affliction stop thine Ear:
Lord, in the time of Misery
And sad restraint serene appear:
The Sighings of my Spirit hear;
And when I call, with speed reply.
As Smoke, so fleets my Soul away;
My marrow dried, as Harths with heat:
My heart struck down, like withered Hay;
Through Sorrow I forsake my meat,
While meagre cares my Liver eat:
The clinging Skin my Bones display.
Like Desert-haunting Pelicans;
In Cities not less desolate:
Like Screech-Owles, who with ominous strains
Disturb the Night, and daylight hate:
A Sparrow which has lost his Mate,
And on a Pinnacle complains.
Reviling Foes my Honor blast,
And frantic men my ruin swear.
For Bread, I roll'd-on ashes taste;
Each drop I drink mixed with a tear.
For, Lord, O who thy Wrath can bear
Thou raisest, and do headlong cast.
My Days short, as the Evening shade;
As Morning Dew consume away:
As Grass cut down with Sithes, I fade,
Or like a flower cropped yesterday
But, Lord thou suffer'st no decay:
Thy Promises shall never vade.
For thou shall from thy Rest arise,
(Since now the appointed time draws near)
And look on Sions miseries,
Her Walls and battered Buildings rear;
Whose ruins to thy Saints are dear;
For they her Dust as sacred prise.

All Kings thy Honor celebrate:
For when the Lord shall Sion raise,
His Glory shall ascend in State:
So prone to hear the Desolate,
And succor them in all assaies.
Unto eternal Memory
Our Histories shall this record;
And all that are created by
His powerful Hand, shall fear the Lord,
Who does such Grace to his afford,
And on the Earth looks from on high;
To hear the pensive Captives groan;
The Sons of Death by him unbound:
His Name again in Sion known,
That Salem may his Praise resound:
When in his Service all the Round
Of Earth shall there be joined in one.
Yet, Lord, amidst these Hopes thou have
Consumed my strength, abridg'd my years:
Before my Noon of Life be past
Let me not die thus drowned in tears.
Time wastes not thee, which all out-weares;
Thy happy Days for ever last.
Thou made the Earth, thou did display
The Heavens in various motion rolled:
These and their Glories shall decay;
But thou shall thy existence hold:
They like a Garment shall grow old,
And in their changes pass away.
But thou art still the same: before
The World, and after shall remain.
You blessed Souls, who God adore,
With Patient Hope your harms sustain:
For you shall prosper in his Reign
And yours, subsist for evermore.
PSALM CIII.
As the 8.
MY Soul, and all my Faculties
Jehovah praise; sing till the Skies
Re-eccho his ascending Fame:
My Soul, O celebrate his Name!
Nor ever let the memory
Of his surpassing Favors die.
He gently pardons our misdeeds,
And cures the VVound which inward bleeds.
Has from the Chains of Death unbound;
With Clemency and Mercy crowned.
With Food our Hunger he subdues:
And Eagle-like our Youth renues.
His Justice he extends to all;
Oppressors by his Vengeance fall.
His sacred Paths to Moses shown;
His Miracles to Israel known:
From Him the Springs of Mercy flow;
Swift to forgive, to anger slow.
For he will not for ever chide;
Nor constant to his Wrath abide:
But mildly from his Rage relents,
And shortens our due Punishments.
For as the Heavens in amplitude
Exceed the Center they include:
So ample is his Clemency
To all who on his Grace rely.

Is distant from the Suns Descent;
So far he sets from his Aspect
Their Cuilt, who him with fear affect.
And as a Father to his Child,
So soft, so quickly reconciled.
He knows the Fabric of us all;
That dust is our Original.
Man flourishes like Grass, a Flower
That blows and withers in an hour:
By scorching heat, by blasting Wind
Deflowered, and leaves no print behind.
But his firm Mercy shall embrace
His Saints for ever, and their Race:
Those who his equal Laws fulfill,
Remember, and perform his Will.
In Heaven the great Jehovah reigns,
And governs all that Earth contains:
You Angels, who in strength exceed,
Who him obey with winged speed;
You ordered Hosts of radiant Stars;
O you his flaming Ministers;
All, whom his VVisdome did create;
Through his large Empire celebrate
His glorious Name with sweet accord:
Join thou, my Soul, to praise the Lord.
PSALM CIV.
As the 72.
MY ravished Soul, great God, thy praises sings;
Whom Glory circles with her radiant VVings,
And Majesty invests: then Day more bright;
Clothed with the beams of new-created Light.
He, like an all-infolding Canopy,
Framed the vast concave of the spangled Sky:
And in the Aire-embraced Waters set
The Basis of his hanging Cabinet.
Who on the Clouds, as on a Chariot, rides;
And with a reine the flying Tempest guides.
Bright Angels his attendant Spirits made;
By flame-dispersing Seraphims obeyed.
The ever-fixed Earth clothed with the Flood;
In whose calm bosom unseene Mountains stood;
At his rebuke it shrunk with sudden dread,
And from his voices Thunder swiftly fled.
Then Hills their late concealed Heads extend,
And sinking Valleies to their Feet descend.
The trembling Waters through their bottomes wind,
Till they the Sea, their Nurse and Mother, find.
He to the swelling Waves prescribes a bound;
Lest Earth again should by their rage be drowned.
Springs through the pleasant Medows power their drils,
Which Snake-like glide between the bordring Hills;
Till they to Rivers grow; where beasts of prey
Their thirst assuage, and such as man obey.

And with their Music entertain the Spring.
He from celestial Casements showers distills,
And with renewed increase his Creatures fills.
He makes the food-full Earth her fruit produce;
For Cattle grass, and Herbs for humane use.
The spreading Vine long purple clusters bears,
Whose juice the hearts of pensive Mortals chears:
Fat Olives smooth our brows with suppling Oil;
And strengthening Corn rewards the Reapers toil.
His Fruit affording trees with sap abound.
The Lord has Lebanon with Cedars crowned:
They to the warbling Birds a shelter yield,
And wandering Storks in lofty Fir-trees build.
Wild Goats to craggy Cliffs for refuge fly;
And Conies in the Rocks dark entrails lie.
He guides the changing Moons alternate face:
The Suns diurnall and his annual Race.
It Was he that made the all-informing Light;
And with dark shadows cloths the aged Night.
Then Beasts of prey break from their Mountain Caves;
The roaring Lion pinch't with hunger craves
Food from his hand. But when Heavens greatest Fire.
Obscures the Stars, they to their dens retire.
Men with the Morning rise, to labor pressed;
Toil all the Day, at Night return to rest.

Are all thy works! with what a clear foresight
Did thou create and multiply their birth!
Thy riches fill the far extended Earth.
The ample Sea; in whose unfathomed Deep
Innumerable sorts of Creatures creep:
Bright-scaled Fishes in her Entrails glide,
And high-built Ships upon her bosom ride:
About whose sides the crooked Dolphin plays,
And monstrous Whales huge spouts of water raise.
All on the Land, or in the Ocean bred,
On Thee depend; in their due season fed.
They gather what thy bounteous Hands bestow,
And in the Summer of thy Favor grow.
When thou contract'st thy clouded Brows, they mourn;
And dying, to their former dust return.
Again created by thy quickening breath,
To resupply the Massacres of Death.
No Tract of Time his Glory shall destroy:
He in The Obedience of his Works shall joy:
But when their wild revolts his Wrath provoke,
Earth trembles, and the aerie Mountains smoke.
I all my life will my Creator praise;
And to his Service dedicate my Days.
May he accept the Music of my Voice,
While I with sacred Harmony rejoice.
Hence you profane, who in your Sins delight;
God shall extirp, and cast you from his Sight.
My Soul, bless thou this all-commanding King:
You Saints and Angels, Hallelu-jah sing.
PSALM CV.
As the 72.
TO God O pay your vows; invoke his Name,
And to the World his noble Acts proclaim!
O sing his praises in immortal Verse,
And his stupendous Miracles rehearse!
You Saints, rejoice, and glory in his Grace;
His power adore; for ever seek his Face.
Old Abraham's Seed, you Sons of the Elect;
You Israelites; O you, who God affect,
Report the Wonders by his finger wrought,
When in your cause the inferior creatures fought.
Jehovah rules the many-peopled Earth;
His judgment known to all of humane birth.
He never will forget his Promise past;
His Covenants inviolable last,
Which he to faithful Abraham made before,
And after to the holy Isaac swore:
To Jacob signed, confirmed to Israel;
That their large Offspring should in Canaan dwell.
When they, but few in number, wandered
In unknown Regions, and their Cattle fed:
He did their lives from violence protect,
And for their sakes even mighty Princes checked.
Touch not, said he, my Anointed: fear to wrong
Those sacred Prophets, who to Me belong.

He broke the Staff of Bread, which life sustained:
But Joseph sent before them; sold to save
His Brethren, by whose envy made a slave.
There for th'Accusers guilt in prison thrown;
With galling fetters bound, for crimes unknown;
Tried with affliction, at the time decreed,
At once by Pharaoh both advanced and freed.
He of his household gave him the command,
And made him Ruler over all his Land:
His Princes to his government Subjects.
The prudent Youth grave Senators directs.
Then aged Jacob into Egypt came,
And sojourned in the fruitful Fields of Ham.
God in that Land his people multiplied;
Their Foes, which now their greater strength envied,
Hate what they fear: he alienates their hearts,
To seek their ruin by deceitful Arts.
Then Moses on a sacred Embassy

There wrought his dreadful Wonders; from the I Will
Of Sea-girt Pharo's to the Falls of Nile.
He bade Cimmerian darkness dim the Day:
Th'assembled Vapors his commands obey.
He their seven chanel'd Waters turned to Blood;
The Fishes strangled intheir native Flood.
Frogs from the slimy, Earth in Millions spring;
And skip about the Chambers of the King.
All parts with swarms of noisome Flies abound:
And Lice, like quickened dust, crawle on the ground.
He storms of killing Hail, for Showers, bestows;
And from the breaking clouds his lightning throws:
Blasts all the Vines, and Fig Trees in the Land;
The VVoods, with Tempests torn, or naked stand.
Innumerable Locusts these succeed;
And Caterpillars on their leavings feed:
They bite the tender Herb, the bud, and flower;
And all the virdure of the Earth devour.
Their Strength (the Firstborn) slew: which filled their ears
With Female screeches, and their hearts with fears.

In able health, with Gold, and Silver fraught.
The Inhabitants, whose tears augment the Nile,
At their departure Joy, and Fear exile.
A Cloud to shade them from the Sun was spread;
And Nightly by a flaming Pillar led.
At their request he sends them showers of Quails;
And Bread from Heaven, like Coriander, hailes.
Cleaves the hard Rocks, from whence a Fountain flows,
And unknown Rivers to those Deserts shows:
For he his sacred Promise called to mind,
To Abraham his Friend and Servant signed.
Thus he his People brought from servitude,
Whose long-felt miseries in joy conclude.
From hence the Heathen by our Weapons chased;
And us his sons in their possessions placed:
That from his Statutes we might never swerve.
O praise the Lord, and him devoutly serve!
PSALM CVI.
As the 72.
WITH grateful hearts Jehovahs praise resound;
In goodness great; whose Mercy has no bound.
What Language can express his mighty deeds,
Or utter his due praise, which words exceeds!
Thrice blessed they, who his commands observe,
Nor ever from the tract of Justice swerve.
Great God, O with benevolent aspect
(Even with the love thou bear to thine Elect)
Behold and succor; That my ravished Eyes
May see a period of their miseries,
Who Thee adore: that I may give a voice
To thy great Acts, and in their joy rejoice.
We as our Fathers, have thy Grace exiled;
Revolted, and our Souls with Sin defiled.
They, of thy Miracles in Egypt wrought,
So full of Fear and Wonder, never thought;
Thy Mercies, then their hairs in number, more:
But murmured on the Erythraean Shore.
Yet for his Honor saved them from the Foe,
That all the World his wondrous Power might know.
There the commanded Sea asunder rent,
While Israel through his dusty Chanel went:
Whom He from Pharaoh and his Army saves;
The swift-returning Floods their fatal Graves.

Yet soon forgot: and wandered from his Ways.
Who long for flesh to pamper their excess;
And tempt him in the barren Wilderness.
He grants their wish, and with a Flight of Fowls
Sent meager Death into their hungry Souls.
They, Moses gentle Government, oppose;
And envy Aaron, whom the Lord had chose.
The yawning Earth then in her silent womb
Did Dathan and Abirams Troops intomb.
A swiftly-spreading Fire among them burns,
And those Conspirators to Ashes turns.
Yet they, the slaves of Sin in Horeb made
A Calfe of Gold, and to an Idol prayed.
The Lord, their Glory, thus exchanged they
For The Image of a Beast that feeds on Hay:
Forgot their Savior, all his Wonders shown
In Zoan, and the Plains by Nile o'reflown;
The Wonders acted by his powerful Hand;
Where the Red Sea obeyed his stern Command.
God had pronounced their ruin: Moses then,
His Servant Moses, and the best of Men,
Stood in the Breach, which their Rebellion made;
And by his Prayer the hand of Vengeance staid.

Nor his so-oft-confirmed Promise prized:
But mutined against their faithful Guide,
And basely wished they had in Egypt died.
For this, the Lord advanced his dreadful Hand,
To overthrow them on The Arabian Sand;
To scatter their rebellious Seed among
Their Foes; exposed to Poverty and Wrong.
Besides; Baal-Peor they adored, and fed
On Sacrifices offered to the Dead.
Thus their Impieties the Lord incense,
Who smote them with devouring Pestilence.
But when with noble anger Phinees slew
The bold Offenders, He his Plagues withdrew.
This was reputed for a righteous Deed,
Which should for ever consecrate his Seed.
So they at Meribah his Anger moved;
The sacred Prophet for their sakes reproved:
Their Cries his Saint-like sufferance provoke;
Who rashly in his Souls distemper spoke,
Nor ever entered the affected Land.
They, still rebellious to divine Command,
Preserved those Nations by his Wrath subdued;
Mixed with the Heathen, and their Sins pursued.
Their cursed Idols serve with Rites profane,
(Snares to their Soul) and from no Crime abstain.
Their Sons and Virgin daughters sacrifice

Defiled the Land with innocent blood, which sprung
From their own loins, on flaming Altars flung.
Unto adulterate Deities they praid,
And worshipped those Gods their hands had made.
These crying Sins exasperate the Lord;
Who now his own inheritance abhorred:
Given up unto the Heathen for a Prey;
Slaves to their Foes; who hate them most, obey.
Delivered often; as often his Wrath provoke,
And with increasing Sins renew their Yoke.
Yet he compassionates their miseries,
And with soft pity hears their mournful Cries:
His former Promise calls to mind, relents;
And in his Mercy of his Wrath repents.
In salvage Hearts unknown Compassion bred,
By whom but lately into thraldom led.
Great God of gods, thy Votaries protect,
And from among the Barbarous recollect:
That we to Thee may dedicate our Days,
And jointly triumph in thy glorious Praise.
Blessed, O for ever blessed, be Isreal's King:
All you his People, Halelu-jah sing.
Amen, Amen.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM CVII.
As the 8.
Extol, and our good God adore,
Whose Sea of Mercy has no Shore.
O you by Tyrants late oppressed,
Now from your servile Yokes releast;
Praise him, who your Redemption wrought,
And home from barbarous Nations brought.
From where the Morn her Wings displaies;
From where the Evening crowns the Days;
Beneath the burning Zone, and near
The Influence of the freezing Bear.
They in unpeopled Deserts straid;
The Heavens their Roof, the Clouds their shade:
Their Souls with thirst and hunger faint;
None by, to pity their Complaint:
When to the Lord their God they cried,
His Mercy their extremes supplied.
He led them through the Wilderness,
And gave them Cities to possess.
O you, his Goodness celebrate!
His Acts to all the World relate!
For he in foodlesse Deserts fed
The Hungry with celestial Bread.
From wondering Rocks new Currents roll,

Those Rebels, who his Counsel slight,
Imprisoned in the shades of Night;
Horrors of Guilt their Souls surprise:
When humbled with their miseries,
They to the Lord addressed their Prayers;
His Mercy comforts their Despaires,
From Darkness draws, dissolves their Gieves;
And from Deaths Jaws preserves their lives.
O you his Goodness celebrate!
His Acts to all the World relate?
He breaks Steel-barres, and Gates of Brass,
To force a way for His to pass.
Those Fools, whom pleasing Sins entice,
Are punished by their darling Vice.
Their Souls all sorts of Food distaste:
Whom Troops of pale Disease waste.
When they to God direct their Prayers,
His Mercy comforts their Despaires.
His Word restores them from their Graves,
And from a dreadful Ruin saves.
O you his Goodness celebrate!
His Acts to all the World relate!
Due Praises to his Altar bring,
And of your great Redemption sing.

And traffic in pursuit of Gain,
To such his Power is not unknown,
Nor wonders in the Ocean shown.
At his Command black Tempests rise;
Then mount they to the troubled Skies,
Thence sinking to the Depths below.
The Ship Hulls as the Billows flow;
And all Aboard at every seele,
Like Drunkards, on the Hatches reele.
When they to God direct their Prayers,
His Mercy comforts their Despaires.
Forthwith the bitter Storms assuage,
And foming Seas suppress their Rage:
Then, singing, with a prosperous gale
To their desired Harbor sail.
O you his Goodness celebrate!
His Acts to all the World relate!
His Fame in your Assemblies raise,
And in the sacred Senate praise.

Springs dried up by the Suns access.
To scourge their Sins, he makes the Soil
Ungrateful to the Owners toil:
Turns sandy Deserts into Pooles,
And parched Earth with Fountains cooles:
There plants his hungry Colonies,
Where strongly-fenced Cities rise:
The Fields their yellow Mantles wear,
And spreading Vines full clusters bear.
They infinitely multiply:
Their Herds of no diseases die.
But when their Sins his Wrath incense,
Then Famine, War, and Pestilence,
Their miserable Lives devour:
Their Princes he deprives of Power,
Who in the Path-lesse Wilderness
Concealed themselves from Man's access.
The Poor he raises from the ground;
Their Families like flocks abound.
The Just shall this with joy behold;
The Unjust with fear and shame controlled.
The Wise these Changes will record,
That they may know and serve the Lord.
PSALM CVIII.
As the 2.
MY Thoughts the Lord their Object make;
Before the ruddy Morning spring,
My Glory of his Praise shall sing:
Awake, my Lute; my Harp, awake;
While I to all the World rehearse
His praises in a living Verse.
Thy Mercy (O how great!) extends
Above the Starry Firmament;
Still unto tender pity bent:
Thy Truth the soaring clouds transcends.
Thy Head above the Heavens erect;
Thy Glory on the Earth reflect.
O hear us, who thy aid implore;
And with thy own Right hand defend:
To thy Beloved Succor send.
God by his Sanctity thus swore;
I Succoths Valley will divide:
In Sichems Spoils be magnified.
Manasseh, Gilead, both are mine:
Ephraim my Strength, in Battle bold.
Thou Judah, shall my Scepter hold.
I will triumph over Palaestine.
Base Servitude shall Moab waste.
Over Edom I my Shoe will cast.
Who will our forward Troops direct
To Rabbah strongly fortified?
Or into sandy Edom guide?
Lord, wilt not thou, that did reject,
Nor would before our Armies go,
Now lead our Host against the Foe?
When Death and Horror most affright,
Do thou our troubled Souls sustain.
For O, the help of Man is vain!
Lead; and we valiantly shall fight.
Thy Feet our Foes shall trample down;
Thy Hands our Brows with Conquest crown.
PSALM CIX.
As the 1.
MY God, my Glory, leave not in Distress;
Nor let prevailing Fraud the Truth oppress.
They who delight in Subtilties and Wrongs,
Afflict me with the Poison of their Tongues.
With Slander and Detraction gird me round,
And would, without a Cause, my life confound.
Good turns with evil proudly recompense,
And Love with Hate; my Merit, my offense.
But I in these Extremes to thee repair,
And pour out my perplexed Soul in Praire.
Subject him to a Tyrants stern command;
Subverting Satan place at his Right hand;
Found guilty, when arraigned: in that feared time
Let his rejected Prairs augment his Crime.
May he by violence untimely die,
And let another his Command supply.
Let his distressed Widow weep in vain;
His wretched Orphans to dease Ears complain.
Let them the wandering Paths of Exile tread,
And in unpeopled Deserts seek their bread.
Let griping Usurers divide his spoil;
And Strangers reap the harvest of his toil.

None to his Race so much as Pity lend.
Let his Posterity be overthrown;
Their Names to the succeeding Age unknown.
Let not the Lord his Fathers Sins forget;
His Mothers Infamy before him set.
O let them be the Object of his Eye,
Till he out-root their hated Memory:
That to the wretched would no Mercy show;
But cruelly pursued his Overthrow.
Laid Trains to kill the Broken and Contrite.
On his own head let his dire Curses light.
He hated Blessing; never be he blessed:
Let cursing like a Robe his Loins invest;
And like a fatal Girdle gird him round;
As he with Execrations did abound.
Let them like Water in his Bowels boil,
And eat into his Bones like burning Oil.
Thus let the Lord reward my Enemies,
Who seek to blast me with malicious lies.

Thy Mercy, for the honor of thy Name.
For I am poor, with misery oppressed;
My wounded heart bleeds in my panting breast.
I like the Evening shadow am declined,
And like the Locust tossed with every Wind.
My feeble knees beneath their burden bend;
My Flesh with fasting falls, my Bones ascend.
Reproach has seized on me; my Foes revile;
And in derision shake their heads, and smile.
My God, O snatch me from the swallowing grave!
Thy servant with accustomed Mercy save:
That they may know it was thy powerful Hand;
And how I by divine Supportance stand.
Still may they vainly curse whom thou do bless;
And pine with envy at my good success.
Let them be clothed with shame: O be their own
Confusion on them like a Mantle thrown.
But I thy praise will duly celebrate;
And to the multitude thy Deeds relate:
That have the afflicted Soul from sorrow freed,
And from their snares who had his death decreed.
PSALM CX.
As the 34.
THE Lord unto my Lord thus spoke,
Sit at my right hand, till I make
A Footstool of thy Foes.
He will thy Rod from Zion send,
Unto whose Power all powers shall bend,
That dare thy Rule oppose.
Thy People willingly shall pay
Their vows in that triumphant Day,
With their united Powers:
Aray'd in Ephods; nor so few
As are those Pearls of morning-dew,
Which hang on Herbs and Flowers.
He swore, who never Oath did break,
Of the order of Melchisedek
That thou a Priest should reign:
Even while the Sun dispersed his Light;
While Moons should rule th'alternate Night,
Or Stars their course maintain.
God, in that Day at thy right hand,
Their Blood, who Tyrant-like command,
Shall in his fury spill.
He, in his Justice shall confound
The Heathen, and the purple ground
With heaps of slaughter fill.
Who over many Nations sway,
And only their own Wills obey,
Shall sink beneath his rage.
Then shall this all-subduing King
With Water of the Crystal spring
His burning thirst assuage.
PSALM CXI.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

MY Soul the honor of our King,
Shall in the great Assembly sing.
Great are the wonders He has shown;
With joy by their admirers known.
His glorious deeds all praise transcend;
His equal Justice knows no end:
Left in eternal Monuments;
Whose Mercy Death and Hell prevents:
Feeds those who fear his Name, and will
His Promise faithfully fulfill.
Who planted with a powerful Hand
His people in this pleasant Land.
Just Judgment executes; directs
By sacred Laws; and Truth affects.
These fretting Time shall never waste;
But squared by Justice ever last.
His Word to us confirmed by deed;
So often from oppression freed.
His Name is terrible to all:
His fear is the Original
Of VVisdome; and they only wise
Who make his Laws their Exercise.
His praise, while men have memory,
And power of speech, shall never die.
PSALM CXII.
As the 111.
Hallelu-jah.
THat man is blessed who fears the Lord,
And cheerfully obeies his Word.
His Seed shall flourish on the Earth;
Their Offspring happy from their birth.
His House with riches shall abound:
His truth with endless honor crowned.
To him in darkness light ascends:
Mild, gracious, just in all his ends.
His bounty for the poor provides:
Discretion all his actions guides.
No violence shall cast him down;
No time deface his just renown;
Nor rumors shake his confidence:
The Lord his Hope, and strong Defense:
Confirmed in fearelesse fortitude,
Till he have all his Foes subdued.
He the necessitated feeds.
The honor of his virtuous Deeds
Shall live in sacred memory;
His Glories shall ascend on high.
The Unjust enraged their teeth shall grin'd,
And languish with the grief of mind:
Pale envy shall their flesh consume,
And all their hopes convert to fume.
PSALM CXIII.
As the cxi.
Hallelu-jah.
O You, who serve the living Lord,
Due praises to his Name afford:
Now and for ever celebrate;
Let all his noble Acts relate.
Even from the purple Morn's uprise,
To where the Evening flecks the Skies.
All power to his Dominion bends:
His Glory the bright Stars transcends.
What God can be compared with ours?
Who Throned in Heavens superior towers
Submits himself to guide and move
All that is done in Heaven above:
And from that height vouchsafes to throw
His eyes on us, who creep below.
The poor he raises from the Dust:
Even from the Dunghill lifts the Just;
Whom he to height of honor brings,
And sets him in the Thrones of Kings.
He fructifies the barren Womb;
The Childlesse, Mothers now become.
Hallelu-jah.
PSALM CXIV.
As the cxi
When Israel left The Egyptian Land,
Freed from a tyrannous command;
God his own People sanctified,
And he himself became their Guide.
The Amazed Seas, this seeing, fled;
And Jordan shrunk into his Head:
The cloudy Mountains skipt like Rams;
The little Hills like frisking Lambs.
Recoyling Seas, what caused your dread?
Why Jordan, shrunk'st thou to thy Head?
Why, Mountains, did you skip like Rams?
And why you little Hills, like Lambs?
Earth, tremble thou before his Face;
Before the God of Jacobs Race;
Who turned hard Rocks into a Lake;
When Springs from flinty intrailes brake.
PSALM CXV.
As the 9.
WE nothing can of merit clame:
Not for our sakes thy aid afford;
But for the honor of thy Name,
Thy Mercy, and unfailing Word.
Why should the insulting Heathen cry;
VVher's now the God they vainly praise?
Our Lord enthroned above the Sky,
All underneath at pleasure swaies.
Their Gods but Gold and silver be,
Made by a frail Artificer:
For they have eyes, that cannot see;
Dumb mouths, and ears that cannot hear,
Fools on their Altars incense throw,
Who nothing smell; their Feet are bound,
Nor have they power to moove or go:
Their throats give passage to no sound.
Their hands can neither give nor take;
Unapt to punish or defend:
As senseless they who Idols make,

Your hopes on God, O Israel, place;
He is your Help, and strong Defense:
Be he, you Priests of Aarons Race,
The object of your confidence.
In him, all you that fear him, trust;
He shall protect you in distress.
The Lord is of his Promise just,
And will his faithful Servants bless:
The House of chosen Israel,
And Aarons holy Family:
The poor, and who in power excel;
That love, and on his aid rely.
They shall a mighty People grow;
Their Children happy from their birth:
He will increase of gifts bestow,
Whose hands created Heaven and Earth.
He in the Heaven of Heavens resides,
And over all his Creatures reigns:
Among the sons of men divides
The Earth, and all that Earth contains.
Who sleep within the vaults of Death,
No Offerings to his Altars bring:
O praise his Name, while we have breath;
And loudly Halelu-jah sing.
PSALM CXVI.
As the 4.
MY Soul entirely shall affect
The Lord, whose ears my groans respect.
In misery
He heard thy cry;
To him thy Prayers direct.
Sorrows of Death my Soul assailed;
The greedy jaws of Hell prevailed:
Deprest with grief,
When all relief,
And humane pity failed;
I cried; My God, O look on me;
Thou ever Just, the afflicted free.
O from the Grave
Thy Servant save;
For mercy lives in thee.
The Innocent, and long distressed;
The humble mind by wrongs oppressed;
Thy Favor still
Preserves from ill:
My Soul then take thy rest.
God staid my feet, and dried my tears;
Redeemed from Death, and deadly fears:
That still I might
Walk in his sight,
And number many years.

Yet in extremes of trouble said;
All on the Earth
Of mortal birth,
Even all of Lies are made.
What shall I unto God restore
For all his Mercies? Fall before
His holy Throne,
And him alone
With sacred Rites adore.
I will perform my Vows this day,
Where they frequent, who God obey.
Right precious is
The Death of His:
He sees, and will repay.
Lord, I am thine, thy Handmaids Seed;
By Thee from raging Tyrants freed.
My Prayers shall rise
In Sacrifice;
My thanks thy Altar feed.
I will perform my Vows this day,
Where thy frequent who God obey:
Even in his Court;
Within thy Fort,
Renowned Solyma.
PSALM CXVII.
As the 47.
YOu Nations of the Earth,
Our great Preserver praise.
All you of humane birth,
To Heaven his Glory raise:
Whose Mercy has
No end, nor bound:
His Promise crowned
With constant Faith.
PSALM CXVIII.
As the cxi.
PRaise our good God, that King of kings,
From whom eternal Mercy springs.
Let Israel, let Aarons Race,
Let all that flourish in his Grace,
Confess, that from the King of kings
Eternity of Mercy springs.
He in my trouble heard my Prayers,
And freed me from their deadly snares:
He fights my Battles; then how can
I fear the Power of feeble Man?
Assists my Friends; my Enemies
Shall with their slaughter feast mine eyes.
Far better to have Confidence
In God, then trust to man's Defense:
On him much safer to rely,
Then on the strength of Monarchy.
The Nations all at once assailed;
But by his Aid my Sword prevailed.
Their Armies had beset me round;
I with their Bodies strewn the ground.
Though they like Bees about me swarm;
His holy Name and powerful Arm
Shall soon consume their numerous powers,
As Fire the crackling Thorn devoures.

Whom great Jehovah's Hands sustain.
He is my Strength; his Praise my Song:
By him preserved from powerful Wrong.
Our Tents with public Joy shall ring:
The Just of their Deliverance sing.
He with his own Right hand has fought;
His own Right hand has Wonders wrought,
I shall not die, but live to praise
The Lord, who has prolonged my Days.
He with his Scourge my Sin corrects;
Yet from the Darts of Death protects.
You to his Service sanctified,
The Temple Doors set open wide;
That I may enter in his Name,
And celebrate his glorious Fame.
Those are the Doors, at which all they
Shall enter, who his Will obey.
His Praise with Hymns immortallize!
My Savior, who has heard my Cries.

Is highest on the corner placed.
God has revealed these Mysteries,
So full of Wonder, to our Eyes.
This is his Day; a Day of Joy;
Of everlasting Memory.
Great God of gods, thy King protect;
Propitious prove to thy Elect.
O blessed be he, whom God shall send!
We, who within his Courts attend,
You from his Sanctuary bless;
And daily pray for your success.
God, even the Lord, has shed his light
Into our Souls, and cleared our sight.
Bind to the Altars horns a Lamb,
New-weaned from the bleating Dam.
Thou art my God; my Songs shall praise,
And to the Stars thy Glory raise.
Praise our good God, The King of kings;
From whom eternal Mercy springs.
PSALM CXIX.
ALEPH.
As the 1.
Blessed are the Undefiled, who God obey;
Seek with their hearts, nor from his Precepts stray.
Not tempting Vice shall those from Virtue draw,
Who with unfainting Zeal observe his Law.
Lord, by thy sacred Rule my steps direct.
Those shall not blush who thy Commands affect.
Thy Justice learnt, my Soul shall sing thy Praise.
Forsake me not, O guide me in thy Ways!
BETH.

From these let not thy zealous Servant slide.
Thy Word, writ in my heart, shall curb my Will.
O teach me how I may thy Laws fulfill!
Those, by thy Tongue pronounced, I will unfold.
Thy Testaments by me more pris'd then Gold.
On these I meditate, admire; there set
My Souls delight: these never will forget.
GIMEL.

Illuminate to view those Mysteries.
Me, a poor Pilgrim, with thy Truth inspire:
For whom my Soul even faints with desire.
The Proud is cursed, who from thy Precepts straies.
Bless, and preserve my Soul, which these obeies.
No hate of Princes from thy Law deters:
My Study, my Delight, my Counselors.
DALETH.

Thou know my Thoughts; direct me in thy Ways.
Inform, and I thy Wonders will profess.
O strengthen me, that labor in Distress!
Show thy clear Paths, false Errors mist removed.
I have thy chosen Truth and Judgment loved.
To these I cleave: O shield me from Disgrace.
Enlarge my heart to run that heavenly race.
HE.

Nor from that sacred Knowledge ever swerve.
My Soul to those delightful Paths confine:
From Avarice purge, and to thy Laws incline.
Divert from vain desires, my darkness clear:
Confirm the Soul devoted to thy Fear.
Free from feared shame: thy Judgments are upright.
O quicken me, who in thy Word delight.
VAV.

And silence my reproachful Enemies.
O thou my Hope, in me thy Truth preserve:
So I thy Laws for ever shall observe;
Will freely walk in thy affected way:
Will boldly before Kings thy Truth display.
For in thy Statutes I my comfort place;
Those study, love, and with my Soul embrace.
ZAIN.

All storms appeased, and raised me from the Dead.
Nor for proud scoffs have I thy Laws declined:
Confirmed, when I thy Judgments call to mind.
They, who thy Laws desert, incense my rage:
Sung in the mansion of my Pilgrimage.
Thy Name, great God, I praised, when others slept;
This comfort had, since I thy Statutes kept.
CHETH.

They Laws observe, and promised Grace implore.
My Actions by thy sacred Rules direct;
And thy Commands with forward Zeal effect.
The Wicked rob; but I thy Statutes prise:
At Midnight to applaud thy Justice rise.
Who fear and keep thy Laws, such are my Friends.
Instruct; thy Mercy through the World extends.
TETH.

Discerning knowledge to his Faith afford.
Thu Sea of Goodness, that my Soul conformes
Unto thy Statutes, by Afflictions storms.
The Proud, fat at the Heart, base Slanders raise:
But I will trust in thy affected Ways.
Me blessed Affliction to thy Courts has brought.
Thy Laws more pris'd then Ships with treasure fraught,
JOD.

That thine may see thy Observer with applause,
Thou ever just, in favor do correct.
With promised Mercy comfort thine Elect.
That I may live, who in thy Precepts joy;
Those keep: the Proud, who causlesse hate, destroy.
Who fear and know thy Laws, to me unite:
O, lest I perish, guide me by their light!
CAPH.

My Soul expects. Thy Promise, Lord, fulfill.
I, though a bladder, on thy Word depend.
Confound my Foes: when shall my Sorrows end!
The Proud have pitched their toils; infringed thy Laws:
O sacred Justice, snatch me from their jaws.
They had almost devoured; but I affect
Thy Precepts: quicken, and by those direct.
LAMED.

Firm as the Poles, or Earth; which never move:
By thy eternal Ordinance disposed.
Thy Laws my Life; else Grief my eyes had closed.
Nor will I these forget; by these renewed.
Thy chosen save, who has thy Truth pursued.
The Wicked chase my Soul, which thee obeies.
Thy Word shall last, when Heaven and Earth decaies.
MEM.

By them made wiser then my Enemies.
More then my Teachers know, more then the Old:
With Virtue these inflame, from Vice withold.
That they may guide me, I have cleans'd my Heart:
And from thy Precepts never will depart:
Then Hermons Honey to my taste more sweet.
By-waies I hate; by thine become discreet.
NVN.

I swear t'observe thy Truth, and will not stray.
My wounded Soul with promised mercy heal:
Accept my offerings, and thy Will reveal.
Although enclosed with Death; though Foes have laid
Snares for my Soul; yet have I thee obei'd.
My comforts, my eternal Heritage.
O may I keep them, till I die for age.
SAMECH.

O thou my hope, my Shield, my safe retreat!
My Will shall thine obey. Hence you profane.
Lord, save my Soul, nor let me hope in vain.
Uphold; and I thy Justice shall applaud.
Thou have intrapt thy Foes in their own fraud;
Cast out like Dross. My heart affects thy path,
Yet trembles with the horror of thy wrath.
AIN.

Nor to their scorn my righteous Soul expose.
Mine Eyes even fail, while I thy aid expect.
Be merciful, and in thy Ways direct.
Enlarge my mind, thy Ways to understand:
It Is time; for they infringe thy just Command,
Which more then Gold; then Gold refined I prise;
In all upright. But hate deceitful lies.
PE.

With Knowledge: this my obsequious Soul admires:
This I with thirsty appetite devour.
Thy streams of Mercy on thy Servant power.
Compose my steps: so shall not sin subject,
Nor man oppress: for I thy Laws affect.
Shine on my Soul; thy Statutes teach: mine Eyes
Shed showers of tears, when men thy Laws despise.
TSADDI.

Faithful to those, who in thy Promise trust.
Zeal has consumed me, for my Foes neglect
Of thy pure Laws, which I in heart affect.
Those to observe, though mean and scorned, intend,
Truth crowns thy Word; thy Justice without end.
These in my grief, and trouble comfort give.
Inform with Knowledge, that my Soul may live.
COPH.

Thy Laws obey, and just Commands fulfill.
My Eyes out-watch the Night; my cries prevent
The early Morn, in due Devotion spent.
Hear, and revive; thy Justice execute
On lawless men: preserve from their pursuit.
Thy oft-tri'd Mercy ever is at hand.
Thy Judgments on eternal Bases stand.
RESCH.

Thy Word perform to him, that keeps thy Laws.
Death shall devour, who thy Commands neglect.
Thou, great in Mercy, my sought life protect.
In all extremes I have thy Will observed:
Grieved, when Transgressors from thy Statutes swerved,
To me, who love thy Laws, thy Grace extend:
Thy Truth began with Time, and knows no end.
SCHIN.

Wherein I joy, like those who Treasure find.
Fraud I abhor; enamored on thy Ways.
Seven times a Day my Lips thy Justice praise.
Who love thy Laws, sweet Peace, and Safety bless.
In Thee I hope, nor thy just Will transgress.
Thy Word observe: thy Statutes I affect;
Which through these humane Seas my course direct.
TAV.

From Death redeem; since to thy Promise true.
Thy Statutes taught, I will thy Praise resound.
Thy Word extol, and Laws with Justice crowned.
These are my choice: uphold with thy right Hand;
Who feed on Hope, and joy in thy Command.
Prolong my life, that I thy Praise may sing.
Lord, thy straid Sheep back to thy Pasture bring.
PSALM CXX.
As the 5.
Distressed, and in my mind dismayed,
When destitute of humane aid,
To Thee successefully I prayed.
Lord, shield me from the Fraudulent;
From those that are on malice bent;
Who envious Calumnies invent.
O thou false tongue, steep't in the gall
Of Serpents! what reward, for all
Thy mischief, shall to thee befall!
Like Arrows shot from Parthian strings,
Fired Juniper, and Scorpions stings;
Such art thou, o thou worst of things!
Wo's me, that I from Israel
Exiled, must in Mesech dwell;
And in the Tents of Ismael!
O how long shall I live with those,
Whose savage minds sweet Peace oppose;
Where Fury by disswasion grows:
PSALM CXXI.
As the 15.
TO the Hills thine Eyes erect,
Help from those alone expect.
He who Heaven and Earth has made,
Shall from Sion send thee aid.
God thy ever-watchfull Guide,
Will not suffer thee to slide.
He, even he, who Israel keeps,
Never slumbers, never sleeps.
He, thy Guard, with Wings displayed,
Shall refresh Thee in their Shade:
Suns shall not with heat infect,
But their temperate beams reflect:
Nor unwholesome Serene shall
From the Moons moist influence fall.
When thou travel'st on the way,
When at home thou spend'st the Day,
When sweet Peace thy life delights,
When imbroil'd in bloody Fights,
God shall all thy steps attend,
Now, and evermore defend.
PSALM CXXII.
As the cxi,
O Happy Summons! to the Court
And Temple of the Lord resort.
Jerusalem, our Feet shall tread
Within thy VValls! O thou the Head
Of all the Earth and Judah's Throne;
Three Cities strongly joined in one!
The Tribes in throngs to Thee ascend;
The Tribes which on the Lord depend:
Fat Offerings to his Altar bring,
And his immortal Praises sing.
There shall he his Tribunal place,
The Judgment Seat of David's Race.
Your joys shall with your days increase,
Who love and pray for Salems Peace,
May Peace within thy VValls abound;
Thy Palaces with joy resound:
Even for my Friends and Kindreds sake,
May never War thy Bulwarks shake:
Even for the hope of Israel,
And House, where God vouchsafes to dwell.
PSALM CXXIII.
As the 34.
THou mover of the rolling Spheres,
I through the Glasses of my Tears,
To Thee my Eyes erect.
As Servants mark their Masters hands:
As Maids their Mistresses commands,
And liberty expect:
So we, deprest by enemies,
And growing troubles, fix our Eyes
On God, who sits on High:
Till he in mercy shall descend
To give our miseries an end,
And turn our tears to joy.
O save us, Lord, by all forlorn;
The subject of contempt, and scorn.
Defend us from their pride,
Who live in fluency and ease;
Who with our woes their malice please,
And miseries deride.
PSALM CXXIV.
As the 72.
BUT that God fought for us, may Israel say;
But that God fought for us, in that sad Day;
When men inflamed with wrath; against us rose:
We had alive been swallowed by our Foes:
Then had we sunk beneath the roaring Waves,
And in their horrid entrails found our graves:
Then had their violence, like torrents powered
From melting Hills, our wretched lives devoured.
O blessed be God! who has not given our blood
To quench their thirst, nor made our flesh their food.
Our Souls, like Birds, have escaped the Fowlers Net;
The snares are broke, which for our lives were set.
Our only confidence is in his Name,
Who made the Earth, and Heavens immortal frame.
PSALM CXXV.
As the 9.
THey, who the Lord their Fortress make,
Shall like the Towers of Sion rise;
Which dreadful Earthquakes never shake,
Nor raging tumults of the skies.
Lo! as the Hills of Solyma
Divine Jerusalem enclose:
So shall his Angels in the Day
Of danger, shield them from their Foes.
The Wicked shall not long subject
Their holy Race; lest through despair
They should the Laws of God neglect,
And be as their Commanders are.
Lord, to the Good be good; the Just
Protect: Their punishments increase,
Who follow their rebellious lust:
But crown thy Israel with Peace.
PSALM CXXVI.
As the cxi
When God had our deliverance wrought,
And Sion out of Bondage brought;
It seemed to us a Dream; who were
Distracted between Hope and Fear.
Then sacred Joy filled every Breast:
In flowing Mirth, and Songs expressed.
The wondering Heathen often would say;
How good! how great a God have they!
Great things for us the Lord has wrought;
Above the reach of humane thought:
We therefore will his praises sing.
The Remnant, Lord, from Bondage bring;
As Rivers through the parched Sand,
Or showers which fall on thirsty land.
Who sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy.
We after long Captivity,
Unto our native Soil retire;
The scope and crown of our desire.
PSALM CXXVII.
As the 7.
Unless the Lord the house sustain,
They build in vain;
In vain they watch, unless the Lord
The City guard.
In vain you rise before the Light,
And break the slumbers of the Night.
In vain the bread of sorrow eat,
Got by your sweat;
Unless the Lord with good success
Your labors bless:
For he all good on his bestows,
And crowns their eyes with sweet repose.
Increasing sons, his Heritage,
Renew their age;
The pledges of their fruitful love,
Given from above:
As formidable to the Foe,
As Arrows from a Giants bow.
He is beloved of God, and blessed
Above the rest;
Whose Quivers with such Shafts abound;
By men renowned:
Nor shall his adversary dread;
When they at the Tribunal plead.
PSALM CXXVIII.
As the 15.
HAppy he, who God obeys,
Nor from his direction straies:
Thou shall of thy labors feed;
All shall to thy wish succeed:
Like a fair and fruitful Vine,
By thy House, thy Wife shall join:
Sons, obedient to command,
Shall about thy Table stand;
Like green plants of Olives, set
By the moistning rivulet.
He who fears the Power above,
Thus shall prosper in his love.
God shall thee from Sion bless;
Thou shall joy in the success
Which the Lord will Salem give,
While thou have a day to live:
Thou shall see our Isreal's peace,
And thy childrens large increase.
PSALM CXXIX.
As the cxi.
Often from my early youth have they
Afflicted me, may Israel say:
Often from my early youth assaild;
As often have their endeavors failed.
My back with long deep furrows wound;
As Plow-shares tear the patient ground.
The ever Just has broke their bands,
And saved me from their cruel hands.
Let Sions Foes with infamy
Be clothed, and untimely die.
Be they like Corn on Houses tops,
Which Reapers sickle never crops,
Nor Binder in his bosom bears:
But withers still before it ears.
No Travailer their labors bless,
Nor say, We wish you good success.
PSALM CXXX.
As the 10.
OVT of the horror of the Deep,
Where fear and sorrow never sleep,
To thee my cries
In sighs arise:
Lord from despair thy servant keep:
O lend a gracious ear,
And my petitions hear.
For if thou should our sins observe:
And punish us, as we deserve:
Not one of all
But then must fall;
Since all from their obedience swerve:
Yet art not thou severe,
That we thy Name might fear.
Thy mercies our mis-deeds transcend:
My hopes upon thy Truth depend:
Disconsolate
On thee I wait;
As weary Sentinels attend
The cheerful Morns uprise
With long-expecting eyes.
O you that are of Jacobs Race,
In him your Hopes, and Comforts place;
His praises sing;
The living Spring
Of Mercy and redundant Grace:
For he will Israel
Redeem from Sin and Hell.
PSALM CXXXI.
As the 32.
THou Lord my witness art;
I am not proud of heart;
Nor look with lofty eyes;
None envy, nor despise;
Nor to vain pomp apply
My thoughts, nor sore too high:
But in behavior mild;
And as a tender child,
Weaned from his Mothers breast,
On thee alone I rest.
O Israel, adore
The Lord for evermore:
Be He the only scope
Of thy unfainting hope.
PSALM CXXXII.
As the 72.
REmember David, Lord; remember Thou
His Troubles; thy Redemptions; and the Vow
He to the mighty God of Jacob made;
Bound by an Oath; and in these words convay'd:
No Roof shall cover me, nor sweet repose
Refresh my Limbs, or sleep my eyelids close,
Till I have found a place for his Abode;
Even for the Temple of the living God.
The Arc, we heard, in Ephrata long stood;
And found it in the valley clothed with Wood.
We will into thy Tabernacle go,
And there our selves before thy Footstool throw.
Ascend to thy eternal Rest at length;
Thou, and the Arc of thy admired strength.
O let thy Priests be clothed with sanctity,
And all thy Saints sing with triumphant joy:
For David's sake receive into thy Grace:
From thy Anointed never turn thy Face.
For thus thou swor'st who never wilt forget;
Thy Son shall long possess thy royal Seat:
And if thy Children my commands observe,
Nor from the rules of my prescription swerve;
Their Offspring shall the Hebrew Scepter sway,
Even while the Sun illuminates the Day.
For Sion I have chosen; Sion great
In my affections, my eternal Seat.
I will abundantly increase her store;
And with the flower of Wheat sustain her poor:
Her Priests shall blessings to her People bring;
Her joyful Saints in sacred measures sing.
There shall the Horn of David freshly sprout;
Their lamp of glory never shall burn out:
His Diadem shall flourish on his head:
But Nets of shame his Foes shall overspread.
PSALM CXXXIII.
As the cxi
O Blessed estate! blessed from above!
When Brethren join in mutual love.
It Is like the precious Odors shed
On consecrated Aarons head:
Which trickled from his Beard and Breast,
Down to the bordes of his Vest.
It Is like the pearls of Dew that drop
On Hermons ever-fragrant top:
Or which the smiling Heavens distill
On happy Sions sacred Hill.
For God has there his favors placed,
And joy, which shall for ever last.
PSALM CXXXIV.
As the 47.
YOu, who the Lord adore,
And at his Altar wait;
Who keep your watch before
The threshold of his Gate;
His praises sing
By silent Night,
Till cheerful light
I'th'Orient spring.
Your hands devoutly raise
To his divine Recesse;
The Worlds Creator praise,
And thus the People bless;
The God of Love,
From Sions Towers,
To you and yours
Propitious prove.
PSALM CXXXV.
As the 72.
O You, who Ephods wear and Incense fling
On sacred flames; Jehovah's praises sing.
You, who his Temple guard, O celebrate
His glorious Name; his noble Acts relate.
How great a joy with such sincere delight
To crown the Day, and entertain the Night!
For Israel is his choice; and Jacobs Race
His treasure, and the object of his Grace.
In power how infinite! how much before
Those mortal gods, whom frantic men adore!
All on his Will depend; all homage owe,
In Heaven, in Earth, and in the Depths below.
At his command exhaled Vapors rise,
And in condensed clouds obscure the Skies.
From thence, in showers He horrid Lightning flings;
And from their Caves the struggling Tempests brings.
He the firstborn of Men and Cattle slew;
Fresh streams of blood the Towns and Plains imbrew.
The Inhabitants that drink of Nilus flood,
At his confounding Wonders trembling stood.

And mighty Nations by his power subdued.
Strong Sihon, whom the Amorites obeyed;
And strenuous Og, who Bashans Scepter swayed;
With all the Kingdoms of the Cananites,
Who to the Conquerours resign their rights:
To whom he their dismantled Cities grants,
And in those fruitful fields his Hebrews plants.
Thy Name shall last unto eternity;
And thy immortal Fame shall never die.
Thou do thy Servant pardon and protect;
Advance the Humble, and the Proud deject.
Those helpless gods, adored in foreign Lands,
Are Gold, and Silver; wrought by humane hands:
Blind Eyes have they, deaf Ears, still silent Tongues:
Nor breath exhale from their unactive lungs.
Who made, resemble them; and such are those,
Who in such senseless stocks their hopes repose.
O praise the Lord, you who from Israel spring;
His Praises, O you Sons of Aaron, sing:
You of the House of Levi praise his Name:
All you who God adore, his Praise proclaim.
From Sion praise the only Good and Great;
Who in Jerusalem has fixed his Seat.
PSALM CXXXVI.
CANT. ^

BASS. ^

THe Bounty of Jehovah praise:
This God of gods all Scepters swaies.
Thanks to the Lord
of lords afford;
And his amazing Wonders blaze:
For from the King of kings
Eternal Mercy springs.
Him praise, who framed the arched Sky;
Those Orbs that move so orderly.
Firm Earth above,
The Floods that move
Displayed, and raised the Hills on high.
For from the King of kings
Eternal Mercy springs.
Who Sun and Moon informed with Light,
To guide the Day, and rule the Night:
The fixed Stars,
And Wanderers
Created by divine foresight.
For from the King of kings
Eternal Mercy springs.
The firstborn of Egyptians slew;
Whose wounds the thirsty Earth imbrew:
And from that Land,
With powerful hand,
The Oppressed sons of Jacob drew.
For from the King of kings
Eternal mercy springs.
The parted Seas before them fled,
Who in their empty channels tread:
The joining waves,
Egyptian graves:
And his through food-lesse Deserts led.
For from the King of Kings
Eternal mercy springs.
Who numerous Armies put to flight,
And mighty Princes slew in fight:
Og prostrate laid,
Who Bashan swai'd;
And Sihon the crowned Amorite.
For from the King of kings
Eternal mercy springs.
By his strong hand those Giants fell;
And gave their Lands to Israel:
Confirmed by deed
Unto their Seed:
Who in their conquered Cities dwell.
For from the King of kings
Eternal mercy springs.
Remembered us in our distress;
And freed from those, who did oppress.
He food does give
To all that live.
The God of Heaven, O Israel, bless.
For from the King of kings
Eternal Mercy springs.
PSALM CXXXVII.
As the 1.
AS on Euphrates shady banks we lay,
And there, O Sion, to thy Ashes pay
Our funeral tears: our silent Harps, unstrung,
And unregarded, on the Willowes hung.
Lo, they who had thy desolation wrought,
And captived Judah unto Babel brought,
Deride the tears which from our Sorrows spring;
And say in scorn, A Song of Sion sing.
Shall we profane our Harps at their command?
Or holy Hymns sing in a foreign Land?
O Solyma! thou that art now become
A heap of stones, and to thy self a Tomb!
When I forget thee, my dear Mother, let
My fingers their melodious skill forget:
When I a joy disjoined from thine, receive;
Then may my tongue unto my palate cleave.
Remember Edom, Lord; their cruel pride,
Who in the Sack of wretched Salem cried;
Down with their Buildings, raze them to the ground,
Nor let one Stone be on another found.
Thou Babylon, whose Towers now touch the Sky,
That shortly shall as low in ruins lie;
O happy! O thrice happy they, who shall
With equal cruelty revenge our fall!
That dash thy Childrens brains against the stones:
And without pity hear their dying groans.
PSALM CXXXVIII.
As the 46.
MY Soul, applaud our glorious King;
Before the Gods his praises sing:
His Mercy an eternal Spring.
For this, on consecrated ground
Will I adore; thy Truth resound;
Thy Word above all Names renowned.
Thou heard'st me, when to thee I cried;
When Danger charged on every side;
By thee confirmed and fortified.
All those, who awful Scepters bear,
When they of thy Performance hear,
Shall worship thee with reverent fear.
They shall his Truth and Mercy praise,
Who all the World with Justice swaies;
Whose Wonders Adoration raise.
Although enthroned above the Skies,
He on the lowly casts his eyes,
But does the Insolent despise.
Though storms of Troubles me enclose;
Yet thou shall save me from my Foes,
And raise me in their overthrowes.
For God his Promise will effect;
The Faithful faithfully protect;
Nor ever his own Choice reject.
PSALM CXXXIX.
As the cxi.
THou know me, O thou only Wise;
See when I sit, and when I rise;
Can my concealed thoughts disclose;
Observ'st my Labors and Repose;
Know all my Counsels, all my Deeds,
Each word which from my Tongue proceeds:
Behind, before, by thee enclosed;
Thy Hand on every part imposed.
Such knowledge my capacity
Transcends; so wonderful, so high!
O which way shall I take my flight?
Or where conceal me from thy sight?
Ascend I Heaven; Heaven is thy Throne:
Dive I to Hell; there art thou known.
Should I the Mornings wings obtain,
And fly beyond th'Hesperian Maine;
Thy powerful Arm would reach me there,
Reduce, and curb me with thy fear.
Were I involved in shades of Night;
That Darkness would convert to Light.
What Clouds can from discovery free!
What Night, wherein thou can not see!
The Night would shine like Days clear flame;
Darkness and Light, to Thee the same.
Thou sift'st my reins, even thoughts to come:
Thou cloth'dst me in my Mothers womb.
Great God, that have so strangely raised
This Fabric; be thou ever praised.
O full of Admiration

My bones were to thy view displaid,
When I in secret shades was made;
When wrought by thee with curious art,
As in the Earths inferior part.
On me, an Embryon, did thou look:
My members written in thy Book
Before they were: which perfect grew
In time, and open to the view.
Thy Counsels admirable are;
And yet as infinite as rare.
O could I number them, far more
Then Sands upon the murmuring shore!
When I awake, thy Works again
My thoughts with wonder entertain.
The Wicked thou will surely kill.
Hence you, who blood with pleasure spill.
Their tongues thy Majesty profane;
They take thy sacred Name in vain.
Lord, hate not I thy Enemies?
And grieve, when they against thee rise?
I hate them with a perfect hate;
And, as my Foes, would ruinate.
Search and explore my heart: O try
My thoughts, and their Integrity.
Behold, if I from Virtue stray:
And lead in thy eternal Way.
PSALM CXL.
As the 14.
LOrd, save me from the Violent;
From him who takes delight in ill:
Whose heart Deceit and Mischief fill;
On bloody War and Outrage bent.
Their wounding Tongues, like Serpents whet;
Poison of Asps their Lips enclose.
O save from fierce and Wicked Foes;
Who toiles, to overthrow me, set!
The Proud have hid their cords and snares;
Spread all their Nets; their Gins have laid.
To God, Thou art my God, I said;
O gently hear thy Suppliant's prayers.
My strong Preserver in the fight,
As with a Helm, my head defends.
Let not the Wicked gain their ends;
Lord, lest their pride rise with their might.
Themselves let their own Slanders wound:
Destroy Him who their fury leads.
Let burning coals fall on their heads;
And quenchlesse flames embrace them round.
Cast them into the Depths below;
From thence, O never let them rise!
Let Death the Slanderer surprise;
And Mischief salvage Wrath overthrow.
God to The Afflicted aid will give;
The Poor defend from Death and Shame.
The Just shall celebrate thy Name;
And ever in thy Presence live.
PSALM CXLI.
As the 22.
TO Thee I cry; Lord, hear my cries;
O come with speed unto my aid:
Let my sad Prayres before Thee rise,
Like Incense on the Altar laid;
Or as when I, with hands displaid,
Present my Evening Sacrifice.
Before my mouth a Guardian set;
My Lips with bars of Silence close.
O let me not thy Laws forget;
And wickedly combine with those,
Who Thee, and all that is good, oppose;
Nor of their deadly Dainties eat.
But let the Just wound and reprove;
Such stripes and checks, an argument
Of their sincere and prudent love;
Like Odours of a fragrant Sent,
Poured on my head, no breaches rent.
My prayres shall for their safety move.
Among Rocks their Chiefes in ambush lie:
Yet have my sufferings understood.
Our severed bones are scattered by
The mouths of graves, like clefts of VVood.
Lord, save from those, that hunt for blood:
On Thee with faith I cast mine eye.
O from their Machinations free,
That would my guiltless Soul betray;
From those who in my wrongs agree,
And for my life their engines lay.
May they by their own craft decay;
But let me thy Salvation see.
PSALM CXLII.
As the 4,
With sighs and cries to God I praid;
To him my supplication made;
Poured out my tears,
My cares and fears;
My wrongs before him laid.
My fainting spirits almost spent:
He knew the path in which I went.
Yet in my way
Their snares they lay,
With merciless intent.
My Eyes I round about me throw;
None see, that will The Oppressed know;
No refuge left;
Of hope bereft;
Vain pity none bestow.
Then unto God I cried, and said,
Thou art my Hope, and only Aid;
The Portion
I build upon,
While with frail flesh araid.
O Sourse of Mercy, hear my cry,
Lest I with wasting sorrow die:
Shield from my foes,
Who now enclose;
Since of more strength then I.
My Soul out of this Prison bring,
That I may praise thee, O my King.
Who trust in thee,
Shall compass me,
And of thy Bounty sing.
PSALM CXLIII.
As the 39.
LOrd, to my cries afford an ear,
The Afflicted hear;
According to thy Equity,
And Truth reply;
Nor prove severe: for in thy sight
None living shall be found upright.
The Foe my Soul besieges round,
Strikes to the ground:
In darkness has inveloped,
Like men long dead:
My mind with sorrow overthrown;
My heart within me stupid grown.
I call to mind those ancient Days
Filled with thy praise:
Thy Works alone possess my thought,
With wonder wrought.
To thee I stretch my zealous Hand;
Desired like rain by thirsty land.

Thy Face unveile:
Least I forthwith grow like to those,
Whom graves enclose.
O let me of thy Mercy hear,
Before the morning Sun appear.
My God, thou art the only scope
Of all my hope:
O show me thy prescribed way,
Lest I should stray.
For to thy Throne I raise mine eyes;
My Soul, and all my faculties.
Save from my Foes: to Thee lo I
For refuge fly:
Inform me, that I may fulfill
Thy sacred Will.
My God, let thy good Spirit lead,
That in thy paths my Feet may tread.
O for thy Honor quicken me,
Who trust in Thee:
Out of these Straights, for Justice sake,
Thy Servant take.
In mercy cut Thou off my Foes,
Whose hate has multiplied my woes.
PSALM CXLIV.
As the cxi
THE Lord, my Strength, be only praised;
The Lord, who has my courage raised:
In doubtful Battle given me might,
And skill how to direct, and fight.
My Fautor, Fortress, high-built Tower;
My Rock, Redeemer, Shield and Power;
My only Confidence; who still
Subjects my People to my will.
Lord, what is Man, or his frail Race,
That thou should such a vapor grace!
Man nothing is but vanity;
A shadow swiftly gliding by.
Great God, stoop from the bending Skies,
The Mountains touch, and Clouds shall rise;
From thence thy winged Lightning throw;
Rout and confound the flying Foe;
Stretch down thy hand, which only saves,
And snatch me from the furious Waves.
Free from rebellious Enemies,
Inured to perjuries, and lies:
Their Hands defiled with fraud and wrong.
Then will I in a new-made Song,
Unto the softly-warbling string,
Of thy Illustrious Praises sing.

Even David, who thy Will observed;
Free from rebellious Enemies,
Inured to perjuries and lies:
Foul deeds their violent hands defile;
Hands prone to treachery and guile:
That in their Youth our Sons may grow
Like Laurel Groves; our Daughters show
Like polish't pillars decked with Gold;
Which high and Royal roofes uphold:
Our Magazines abound with Grain,
Provision of all sorts contain:
Increasing Flocks our Pastures fill,
And wel-fed Steeres the Fallowes till;
That no incursions Peace affright;
No Armies join in dreadful fight;
No daring Foe our Walls invest,
Nor fearful shriekes disturb our rest.
Blessed People! who in this estate
Enjoy your selves without debate:
And happy, o thrice happy they,
Who for their God, the Lord obey!
PSALM CXLV.
As the cxi
I Still will of thy Glory sing;
Thy Name extol, my God, my King.
No day shall pass without thy praise;
Praised while the Sun his Beams displayes.
Great is the Lord, whose praise exceeds:
Inscrutable are all his Deeds.
One Age shall to another tell
Thy Works, which so in power excel.
The Beauty of thy Excellence,
And Oracles intrance my Senfe.
Men shall thy dreadful Acts relate;
My Verse thy Greatness celebrate;
To memory thy Favors bring,
And of thy noble Justice sing.
For in Thee Grace and Pity live;
To anger slow, swift to forgive.
All on thy Goodness, Lord, depend:
Thy Mercies all thy Works transcend;
Even all thy Works shall praise thy Name;
Thy Saints shall celebrate the same:
Of thy farre-spreading Empire speak;
Thy Power, to which all Powers are weak;
To make thy Acts to Mortals known,
And glory of thy awefull Throne.

Thy Rule beyond Times flight extend.
The Lord shall those, who fall, sustain;
And Souls dejected raise again.
All seek from Thee their livelihood;
Thou in due season giv'st them food:
Thy liberal Hand, Men, Birds, and Beasts,
Even all that live, with plenty feasts.
The Lord is Just in all his Ways,
Who Mercy in his Works displaies;
Is present by his power with all,
Who on his Name sincerely call:
For he will their desires effect;
Regard their cries; from Foes protect.
Who love Him, Safety shall enjoy:
The Lord the Wicked will destroy,
My Tongue his Goodness shall proclaim.
Mankind, for ever praise his Name.
PSALM CXLVI.
As the 29.
Halelu-jah.
O My Soul, praise thou the Lord:
Whilst thou liv'st, his praise record.
Whilst I am, eternal King,
I will of thy praises sing.
O, no hope in Princes place;
Trust in none of humane race;
Who can give no help at all,
Nor prevent his proper fall.
When his parting breath expires,
He again to Earth retires.
Even in that uncertain day
All his thoughts with him decay.
Happy he, whom God protects;
He, on whom his Grace reflects.
Happy he, who plants his trust
On the only Good and Just.
He who Heavens blew Arch displayed;
He who Earths Foundation laid;
Spread the Land-imbracing Maine;
Made what ever all contain:
True to what his Word professed;
He revengeth the oppressed;
Hungry Souls with food sustaines,
And unbinds the Prisoners chains:
To the blind restores his sight;
Reares, who fall by wicked might.
Righteousness his Soul affects.
Friendlesse Strangers he protects,
Widows, and the Fatherless;
Those confounds who these oppress.
Zion, God, thy God shall reign,
While the Poles their Orbs sustain.
Halelu-jah.
PSALM CXLVII.
As the CXI
Jehovah praise with one consent.
How comely! sweet! how excellent,
To sing our great Creators praise!
Whose hands late ruined Salem raise,
Collecting scattered Israel,
That they in their own Towns may dwell:
He cures the sorrows of our minds;
Our wounds imbalmes, and softly binds.
He numbers Heavens bright-sparkling Flames,
And calls them by their several Names.
Great is our God, and great in might;
His knowledge O most infinite!
The Humble unto Thrones erects;
The Insolent to Earth dejects.
Present your thanks to our great King;
On solemn Harps his Praises sing;
Who Heaven with gloomy Vapors hides,
And timely Rain for Earth provides.
With grass he cloths the pregnant Hills,
And hungry beasts with Herbage fills.
He feeds the Ravens croaking brood,
(Left by the Old) that cry for food.

Nor man's strong limbs, and matchless force:
But those affects, who in his Path
Their feet direct with constant Faith.
O Solyma, Jehovah praise;
To God thy Voice, O Sion, raise:
Who has thy City fortified;
Thy streets with Citizens supplied:
Firm peace in all thy borders set,
And fed thee with the flower of Wheat.
He sends forth his Commands, which fly
More swift then Lightning through the Sky:
The Snow-like Wool on Mountains spreads;
And hoary Frosts like Ashes sheds;
While solid Floods their course refrain,
What Mortal can his cold sustain?
At this Command, by Wind and Sun
Dissolved, th'unfetter'd Rivers run.
His Laws to Jacob he has shown;
His Judgments are to Israel known.
Not so with other Nations deals,
From whom his Statutes he conceales.
PSALM CXLVIII.
As the 29.
Halelu-jah.
YOu, who dwell above the Skies,
Free from humane miseries;
You whom highest Heaven imbowres,
Praise the Lord with all your powers.
Angels, your clear Voices raise;
Him you Heavenly Armies praise:
Sun, and Moon with borrowed light;
All you sparkling Eyes of Night:
Waters hanging in the air;
Heaven of Heavens his Praise declare.
His deserved Praise record;
His, who made you by his Word;
Made you evermore to last,
Set you bounds not to be past.
Let the Earth his Praise resound:
Monstrous Whales, and Seas profound;
Vapors, Lightning, Hail, and Snow;
Storms, which when he bids them, blow:
Flowery Hills, and Mountains high;
Cedars, neighbors to the Sky;
Trees that fruit in season yield;
All the Cattle of the Field;
Salvage beasts; all creeping things;
All that cut the Air with wings.
You who awful Scepters sway;
You inured to obey;
Princes, Judges of the Earth;
All of high and humble birth;
Youths, and Virgins, flourishing
In the beauty of your spring:
You who bow with Ages weight;
You who were but borne of late:
Praise his Name with one consent:
O how great! how excellent!
Then the Earth profounder far;
Higher then the highest Star.
He will his to honor raise.
You his Saints, resound his Praise;
You who are of Jacobs Race,
And united to his Grace.
Halelu-jah.
PSALM CXLIX.
As the 29.
TO the God, whom we adore,
Sing a Song unsung before:
His immortal Praise rehearse,
Where his Holy Saints converse.
Israel, O thou his Choice,
In thy Makers Praise rejoice:
Zions Sons, rejoice, and sing
To the Honor of your King.
In the Dance his Praise resound;
Strike the Harp, let Timbrels sound.
God in Goodness infinite,
In his People takes delight.
God with safety will adorn
Those, whom men afflict with scorn.
Let his Saints in glory joy;
Sing as in their Beds they lie:
Highly praise the living Lord;
Armed with their two-edged Sword,
All the Heathen to confound;
And the Nations bordering round;
Binding all their Kings with cords;
Fettring their captived Lords:
That they in divine pursuit,
May his judgments execute;
As it is writ, such Honor shall
Unto all his Saints befall.
Halelu-jah.
PSALM CL.
As the 29.
Halelu-jah.
PRaise the Lord enthroned on high;
Praise him in his Sanctity;
Praise him for his mighty Deeds;
Praise him who in Power exceeds;
Praise with Trumpets, pierce the Skies;
Praise with Harps and Psalteries;
Praise with Timbrels, Organs, Flutes;
Praise with Violins, and Lutes;
Praise, with silver Cymbals sing;
Praise on those which loudly ring.
Angels, all of humane birth,
Praise the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
Halelu-jah.
A PARAPHRASE UPON ECCLESIASTES.

King David's Son; who Judah's Scepter swai'd.
O restless vanity of Vanities!
All is but vanity, the Preacher cries.
What profit have we by our Labors won,
Of all beneath the Circuit of the Sun?
The Earth is fixed, we fleeting: as one Age
Departs, another enters on the Stage.
The setting Sun resignes his Throne to Night:
Then hastens to restore the morning Light.
The Wind flies to the South, shifts to the North;
And wheels about to where it first brake forth.
All Rivers run into the insatiate Maine;
From thence, to their old Fountains creep again.
Incessantly all toil. The searching Mind,
The Eye, and Ear, no satisfaction find.
What is, has been; what has been shall ensue:
And nothing underneath the Sun is new.
Of what can it be truly said, Behold
This never was? The same has been of old.
For former Ages we remember not:
And what is now, will be in time forgot.
Lo I, the Preacher, King of Israel;
Who in ability and power excel;
In wisdoms search applied my Industry,
To know what ever was beneath the sky:
(For God this toil, on Man's ambition lays,
To travel in so intricate a Maze.)
I all their works have seen: all are but vain;
Conceived with sorrow, and brought forth with pain*
The crooked never can be rectified;
Nor the defective numbered, or supplied.
Thus in my Heart I said; Thou art arrived
At Honors hight; more wisdom have achev'd
Then all that lived in Solyma before:
Thy Knowledge, Judgment, and Experience more.
As wisdom, so I folly did pursue;
And madness try'de: these were vexations too.
Much wisdom great anxieties infest:
And grief of Mind by Knowledge is increast.

What Mirth can do: taste the delights of Love.
In Pleasures change thy careless Hours employ:
This also was a false and empty Joy.
Avaunt, said I, O Laughter thou art mad!
Vain Mirth, what can thou to contentment add?
Then sought the cares of Study to decline
With liberal feasts, and flowing Bowls of Wine.
With all my wisdom exercised, to try
If she at length with folly could comply:
And to discover that Beatitude,
Which Mortals all their lives so much pursued.
Great works I finished; sumptuous Houses built:
My Cedar roofes with Gold of Ophir guilt.
Choice Vineyards planted: Paradises made;
Stored with all sorts of fruits, with Trees of shade:
And watered with cool Rivolets, tha dril'd
Along the Borders: these my Fish-pooles filled.
For service, and Delight, I purchased
Both Men and Maids: more in my House were bred.
My Flocks and Herds abundantly increa'st:
So great, as never King before possessed.
Silver and Gold, the Treasure of the Seas,
Of Kings, and Provinces, foment mine ease:
Sweet Voices, Music of all sorts, invite
My curious Ears; and feast with their delight.
In greater fluencie no Mortal reigned:
In height of all, my wisdom I retained.
I had the Beauties which my Eyes admired;
Gave to my Heart what ever it desired:
In my own works rejoiced. The recompense
Of all my Labors was derived from thence.
Then I surveyed all that my hands had done:
My troublesome delights. Beneath the Sun
What solid good can man's endeavor find?
All is but vanity, and grief of Mind.
At length I wisdom pond'red in my thought;
And madness weighed: for folly is distraught.
What man can my untraced Steps pursue?
Or do that Act which to the King is new?
Then found, how wisdom folly did excel;
As much as brightest Heaven the Shades of Hell.
The wisemans Eyes are towred in his head:
The fool in Darkness walks, by Error led:
Yet equal Miseries on either wait;
And both we see obnoxious to one fate.
Thus in my heart I said; The fool, and I
Suffer alike, and must together Dye:
Why then vex I my brains to grow more wise?
Even this was not the least of Vanities.
Both must be swallowed by Oblivion;
What is, will not to after times be known:
The wise and foolish to the Earth descend;
And in the grave their various travels end.
For this I hated Life, which only feeds
Increasing Sorrows: fruitless are our Deeds,
And wearisome; Man no content can find:
For all is vanity, and grief of Mind.
I hated all the Glory I had won;
My State, my Structures; all my hands had done:
Foreseeing how that certain hour would come,
When I must leave them; Nor yet know to whom.
Who can divine if prudent or a fool?
Yet he must over all my Labors Rule;
Of all my wisdoms purchaces possessed:
This vanity was equal with the rest.
I therefore sought to make my Heart despair;
To slight the frail success of all my Care.
What by Integrity, and honest toil,
A wise man gathers; must become his spoil
Who only pleased his Sense: this is a great
Vexation, and an undiscerned deceit.
What has a Man for all his Industry,
And grief of Soul, sustained beneath the sky?
All is but sorrow from the Hour of Birth;
Till he with age return unto the Earth:
His Travel, pain; night yields him no repose:
This vanity from our first Parents flows.
To eat, to drink, to enjoy what we possess
With freedom, is the greatest Happiness
That Mortals can attain unto: A good
Derived from God, by Men not understood.
Who feasted more then I? who spent his store
More liberally? or cheered his Genius more?
God wisdom gives, gives Knowledge and Delight,
To those whose hearts are perfect in his sight:
To Sinners trouble; who their time employ
To gather what the Righteous shall enjoy;
By their own A varice in plenty pined:
This is a vanity, and grief of Mind.

In Natures changes; all things which proceed
From Man's Intentions under the vast sky:
A Time when to be borne, a Time to Dye:
A time to plant, to extirpe; to Kill, to Cure:
A time to batter down, a time to immure:
A time of laughter, and a time to turn
Our smiles to tears: a time to dance, to mourn:
To scatter Stones, to gather them again;
A time to embrace, embraces to refrain:
A Time to get, to loose; to save, to spend:
To tear asunder, and the torn to mend:
A time to speak, from speaking to surcease:
A time for Love, for hate; for war, for Peace.
What good can humane Industry obtain,
When all things are so changeable and vain?
For God on Man these various Labors throws;
To afflict him with variety of woes.
He in their times all beautiful has made;
The world into our narrow hearts convay'd:
Yet cannot they the causes apprehend
Of his great works; the Original, nor End.
What other good can Man from these produce,
But to take pleasure in their present use?
To eat, to drink, to enjoy what is our own;
Is such a gift as God bestows alone.
His purpose is Eternal; nor can we
Add or Substract from his Divine Decree:
That Mortals might their bold Attempts forbear;
And curb their wild affections by his fear.
What has been, is; what shall be, was before:
And what is past, the Almighty will restore.
Besides; the seats of Justice I survay'd:
There saw how favor and corruption swayed.
Then said I in my heart; God surely shall
Reward the just; the unjust to Judgment call.
All Purposes and Actions have their Times:
A time for Vengeance to pursue our Crimes.
As much as sense concerns, God manifests
To Men how little they dissent from Beasts:
One end to both befalls; to equal Death
Are liable; and breath the self same Breath.
Then what pre-eminence has Man above
A Beast; since both so Transitory prove?
Both travel to one home: are Earth, and must
Return to their Originary Dust.
Who knows that Souls of men ascend the sky?
That those of Beasts with their frail Bodies dye?
What Mortal then can make so good a choice,
As in his own acquirements to rejoice?
This is his Portion: for of things to come,
None can inform him in the Graves dark womb.

In Presence of the all-survaying Sun:
Beheld the tears that fell from Sorrows Eyes;
No Comforter t'asswage her Miseries:
With all the oppressors powerful Violence;
While weak Integrity found no defense.
For this, before the Living I preferred
Those whom the quiet Caves of Death interred:
Before them both, such as have yet not been;
Nor these diversities of evils seen.
Again observed, how our best Actions bred
Ignoble Envy; by our Virtue fed:
Nor friendship could so great a vice control.
This was a Vanity, and grief of Soul.
The fool sits with his Arms a-crosse; his hours
In sloth consumes, and his own flesh devoures.
Better, says he, a handful is obtained
With happy ease, then two by trouble gained.
While I this chase of Vanity pursue;
A worse presents her folly to my view:
Lo, one who has no Second, Child, nor Heir,
Wears out his Life in restless toil and care,
To gather Riches; nor can satisfy,
With all his store, the Avarice of his Eye:
Nor thinks, for whom do I my Soul deceive?
And injured Nature of her Dues bereave?
This is a sore disease, if truly known:
And such a vanity, as yields to none.
Two better are then one; of more regard:
Their Labor less, and greater their reward.
If either fall, one will the other raise;
When he who walks alone, his Life betrays.
If two together lie, both warmth beget;
But he who lies alone receives no heat.
If one prevail; two may that one resist:
Coards hardly break, which of three lines consist.
More real worth a poor wise child adornes;
Then an old Foolish King, who counsel scorns.
He from a Prison, to a Throne ascends:
This, borne a Prince, his Life obscurely ends.
His Subjects after his successor run;
As from the setting to the rising Sun.
The vulgar are inconstant in their choice;
Nor in the present Government rejoice:
The following, as the first, to change inclined.
This is a vanity, and grief of mind.

When thy bold feet the House of God ascend.
There rather hear his Life-directing Rules;
Then offer up the sacrifice of Fools.
For sinful are their gifts, who neither know
What they to God should give, or what they owe.
The Riot of thy tongue let fear restrain:
Nor with rash Orisons his Ears profane.
God sits in Heaven, with Rays of Beauty crowned;
Thou a poor Mortal creep'st upon the ground:
Since nothing lies concealed from his view,
Nor scapes his knowledge, let thy words be few.
As Dreams proceed from multitude of Cares:
So multitude of words a fool declares.
Perform thy vows to God without delay:
Fools please not him: thy vows sincerely pay.
Since they are offerings of the grateful will;
Vow not at all, or else thy vows fulfill.
Let not thy tongue oblige thy flesh to sin:
Nor say, I erred: by that pretext to win
Thy Angels Pardon. Why should thou incense
Thy God, and draw his wrath on thy offense?
In multitudes of words and Dreams appear
Like vanities: my Son, Jehova fear.
Nor let it quench thy Piety, when thou
Shall see the poor beneath the mighty bow;
All Laws perverted, Justice cast aside;
As if the Universe had lost her guide:
That Power to whom all are subordinate,
Shall crush them with an unsuspected fate.
The Mother Earth, to all her bosom yields:
Even Princes are beholding to the fields.
Who silver Covet, and Excess of Gain,
Shall ever want: this folly is as vain.
As Riches multiply; even so do they
Who feed thereon, and on their Plenty prey.
What profit to the owner can arise,
But to behold them with his careful Eyes?
Sweet is the sleep, which honest toil begets;
Whether he liberally, or little eats:
When ever-troublesome Abundance keeps
The wealthy waking, and affrights his sleeps.
What Penury than Riches can be worse,
If by the Owner turned into a Curse?
Or to consuming vice become a spoil?
Who Sons begets to misery and toil.
Naked he issued from his Mothers womb:
And naked must descend into his Tomb.
Of all, with travel got, and kept with fear,
He nothing to the House of Death shall bear:
But must return as Empty as he came;
His Entry, and his Exit, but the same.
What boots it then to Labor for the wind?
This is a sore affliction to the Mind.
He feeds his sorrow in continual Night:
Repleat with Anguish, Fury, and Despite.
This truth have I found out in her pursuit:
To feed our Bodies, to enjoy the fruit
Of our enricht endeavors, and to give
Our selves their comforts, whilst on Earth we live;
Is good and Pleasurable: this alone
Is all we have, that can be called our own.
For, to have Riches, and the Power with all
To use them freely, is the Principal
Of earthly Benefits: for God on those
He most affects, this Happiness bestows.
That man retains no sense of former Ill's:
Whose Heart the Lord of Life with gladness fills.

With sorrow seen beneath the ambient Sky:
God Riches and Renown to men imparts;
Even all they wish: and yet their narrow hearts
Cannot so great a fluency receive;
But their fruition to a Stranger leave.
What falser vanity, or worse disease,
Could ever on the life of Mortals seize?
Though he a hundred Children should beget,
Though many years should make his Age complete;
Yet if he to himself his own deny,
Then want a Grave, and violently dye:
Better were an abortive, borne in vain,
That in obscurity departs again,
Enveloped with shrouds of endless Night;
Who never saw the Sun display his Light,
Nor Good or Evil knew: he is more blessed;
And soon descends to his perpetual Rest.
Though the other twenty Ages have survived;
His Misery is but the longer Lived.
Yet both must to that fatal Mansion go,
Where they to none are known, nor any know.
All that Man Labors for is but to Eat:
Yet is his soul not satisfied with Meat.
What therefore has the wise more then the fool?
What wants the poor that can his Passions rule?
Far better is a clear and pleased aspect;
Then meagre looks, which vast desires detect;
Such as can never satisfaction find:
Yet this is vanity, and grief of Mind.
For be he what he will, he must be Man;
A Name repleat with Misery: nor can
But desperately with such a Power contend,
On whom himself, and all the world depend.
As Riches, so our cares and fears increase:
O discontented Man, where is thy peace!
Who knows what is good for thee in these thy Days
Of Vanity. A Shadow so decays.
Or can inform thy Soul what will befall,
When thou art lost, in greedy Funeral?

The fragrant smell of Precious Oils exceeds.
Even so the Hour of Death, that of our Birth:
Which Fame secures, and Earth restores to Earth.
Better to be at Funerals a Guest;
Then entertained at a Nuptial feast:
For all must to the shades of Death descend;
And those that live should think of their last End.
Sorrow then Mirth, more to perfection moves:
For a sad Countenance the Soul improves.
The wise will therefore join with such as mourn:
But fools into the Bowers of Laughter turn.
A wise man's reprehensions, though severe,
More then the songs of Fools should please the ear.
As thorns beneath a Caldron catch the fire,
Blaze with a noise, and suddenly expire;
Such is the immoderate laughter of vain fools:
This Vanity in our distemper rules.
Oppressions purchases the Judgment blind;
Make wise men mad; a Gift corrupts the Mind.
Beginnings in their Ends, their meed obtain:
Humility more conquers then Disdain.
Nor be thou to distracting Anger prone:
By her deformities a fool is known.
Nor murmuring say: Why are these days of ours
Worse then the former? does the chief of Powers
So differently the affairs of mortals sway?
Such questions but thy Arrogance display.
Wisdom, with Ancient Wealth, not got by care,
Great blessings heap on those who breath this Air.
Both are to mortals a protecting shade,
When bitter storms, or scorching beams invade:
But if divided; he who is possessed
Of Life-infusing Wisdom, is more blessed.
Gods works consider: who can rectify,
Or make that straight which he has made awry?
In thy prosperity let joy abound;
Nor let adversity thy patience wound:
For these by him so intermixed are,
That no man should presume, nor yet despair.
All perturbations, all things that have been,
I, in my days of vanity, have seen:
How their own justice have the just destroyed;
And how the vicious have their vice enjoyed.
Be therefore not too righteous, nor too wise:
For why should thou thy safety sacrifice?
Be not too wicked, nor too foolish: why
Should thou by violence untimely dye?
It Is best for thee, that thou to neither lean;
But warily observe the safer Mean.
For they shall all their miseries transcend,
Who God adore, and on his will depend.
A wise man is by wisdom fortified:
More strong then twenty which the City guide.
For Justice is not to be found on Earth:
None good, nor innocent, of humane Birth.
Give not to all that is said an open ear;
Least thou thy Servants execrations hear:
For thy own heart can tell, that thou have done
The like to others. Thy example shun.
All this by wisdom tried, I seemed wise:
But she from humane apprehension flies.
Can that which is so far removed, and drowned
In such profundities, by Man be found?
Yet in her search I exercised my Mind;
Of things the Causes, and Effects to find:
The wickedness of Folly sought to know;
Folly and Madness from one fountain flow.
More sharp then Death I found her subtle Art,
Who nets spreds in her Eyes, snares in her Heart;
Her Arms inthralling chains: the prudent shall
Escape; the fool by her enchantments fall.
Of all the Preacher has experience made;
The reasons, one by one, distinctly waigh'd:
Yet could I not attain to what I most
Desired to know: in my inquiry lost.
One good among a thousand Men have known:
Among the female, sex of all, not one.
Though in perfection God did Man create;
Yet we through vanity degenerate.

To him that can interpret Mysteries?
For wisdom makes the face of Man to shine
With awefull Majesty, and Light Divine.
Observe the Kings Commands: Remember thou,
Even in that Duty, thy Religious vow.
Depart not discontented; nor Dispute
With him, who can with Punishments confute.
For Power is throned in the Breath of Kings:
And who dare say, they charge unlawful things.
He who obayes, Destruction shall eschew:
A wise man knows both when, and what, to do.
For all our Purposes on Time depend,
And Judgment; to produce them to their end.
They wander in the Pensive shades of Night;
Who want the guide of this directing Light:
Surpised by unexpected Miseries;
Nor can Instruction make the foolish wise.
What Guard of Teeth can keep our parting Breath?
Or who resist the fatal Stroke of Death?
None shall return with conquest from that field:
Nor Vice Protection to the vicious yield.
This Vanity I saw beneath the Sun;
The Mighty by abused Power undone:
And though entombed with sumptuous funeral;
In his own City soon forgot by all.
Impiety delights in her misdeeds;
In that Revenge so tardily succeeds.
Although a Sinner, sin a hundred times;
And were his Years as numerous as his Crimes:
Yet God to those his Mercy will extend,
Whose humble Souls are fearful to offend.
But bold Transgressors with destruction meet:
Their shortened Days shall like a shadow fleet.
Among the Sons of Men, this mischief reigns;
Exalted Vice the meed of Virtue gains:
And those afflictions which to Vice are due,
Suppressed Virtue furiously pursue.
Then I commended Life-prolonging Mirth:
To feed upon the Bounty of the Earth,
And drink the generous Grapes refreshing juice;
Is all the good our Labors can produce.
This is the best of Life: by God alone
Bestowed on Man; and only is his own.

Of Men disposed: observed the restless Cares,
The travels, and disturbed thoughts, which keep
The toyling Brain from the relief of sleep:
I then perceived that humane industry
Could not the ways, nor works of God descry.
Though Men endeavor, though the wise suppose
They apprehend; yet none his wisdom knows.
But this have found; that both the just and wise,
Their industry, even all their faculties
Are in his Rule, and by his Motion move:
Nor can determine of his Hate or Love.
All under Heaven succeeds alike to all;
To good and bad, the same events befall;
To pure, impure; to those who Sacrifice,
To those who Piety, and God despise;
To the innocent, the guilty; such who fear
Flagitious Oaths, and those who fearelesse swear.
What greater mischief rules beneath the Sun,
Than this; that all unto one period run?
Men, while they live are mad; profanely spend
Their flight of time; then to the dead descend.
Yet those have hope, who with the living dwell:
For living Dogs dead Lions far excel.
The living know that they at length must dye:
They nothing know who in Earths entrails lie.
What better times can they expect, who rot
In silent graves, and are by All forgot?
Abolished is their Envy, Love, and Hate:
Bereft of all, which they possessed of late.
Then take my Counsel; eat thy Bread with joy:
Let wine the Sorrows of thy heart destroy.
Why should unfruitful Cares our Souls molest?
Please thou thy God, and in his favor rest.
Be thy Apparel ever fresh, and fair;
Power breathing Odors, on thy shining hair:
Enjoy the pleasures of thy gentle Wife,
Through all the Course of thy short-dated Life.
For this is all thy Industry has won:
Even all thou can expect beneath the Sun.
Since Time has wings, what thou intend'st to do,
Do quickly; and with all thy Power pursue:
No wisdom, knowledge, wit, or work, will go
Along with thee unto the Shades below.
I see the swift of foot winnes not the Race;
Nor wreathes of Victory the Valiant grace;
The wise, to feed his hunger wants Bread;
Riches are not by knowledge purchased;
Nor Popular suffrages Desert advance:
All ruled by Opportunity and Chance.
Man knows not his own fate. As Birds are taken
With Tramels; Fishes by th'intangling Saine:
Even so the Sons of Men are un-awares
Prevented by Destructions secret Snares.
This also have I seen beneath the Sun,
So full of wonder; and by wisdom done:
A little City manned but by a few;
To which a Mighty King his Army drew,
Erected Bulwarks, and intrench't it round:
A poor wise man within the walls was found,
Whose wisdom raised the siege: But they ingrate
Neglected him who had preserved their State.
Then wisdom before Strength should be preferred:
Yet is, if poor, despised; her words unheard.
Men more should listen to her sober Rules,
Then to his Cries, who governes among fools.
Wisdom th'habilaments of war exceeds:
But Folly is destroyed by her own Deeds.
Lo as dead flies with their ill savor spoil
Th'Apothecaries Aromaticke oil:
Even so a little folly damnifies
The Dignity and Honor of the wise.
A wise man's Heart to his right hand enclines:
A fool to his left; and such are his designs.
His own disordred Paths his life defame:
His gesture and his looks a fool proclaim.

Resent his Anger with a cloudie Brow:
Nor with obedience or thy faith dispense;
For yielding pacifies a great offense.
This in a State no small disorder breeds;
Which from the error of the Prince proceeds:
When vicious fools in Dignity are placed;
The rich in worth, trod under and disgraced.
Often have I Servants seen on Horses ride:
The Free and Noble lacky by their side.
Who snares for others sets, therein shall light:
Who breaks a Hedge, him shall the Serpent bite.
The Stones shall bruise him who pulls down a wall:
Who hewes a Tree, by his own Axe shall fall.
If th'edge be blunt, in vain his Strength he spends:
But Wisdom all directs to their just ends.
If Serpents bite before the charm be sung,
What then availes th'Inchanters babbling tongue?
A wise-mans words are full of grace and power:
A fools offending lips himself devour.
His words begin in folly; which extend
To Acts of mischief, and in madness end.
He gives his tongue the reins; as if he knew
More then Man knows: th'events that must ensue.
Who in the endless Maze of Error treads;
Nor knows the way which to his purpose leads.
VVoe to that Land, that miserable Land,
Which gaspes beneath a Childs unstai'd Command:
Whose Nobles rise betimes to perpetrate
Their Luxuries; the ruin of the State.
Happy that Land, whose King is Nobly Borne:
Whose Lords with Temperance his Court adorn.
By Sloths supine neglects the building falls:
The hands of Idleness pull down her walls.
Feasts are for Laughter made, Wine cheares our hearts:
But sovereign Money all to all imparts.
Curse not thy Rulers though with vices fraught;
Not in thy Bedchamber, nor in thy thought:
For Birds will bear thy whisperings on their wings,
To the wide ears of Death-inflicting Kings.

This thou, in tract of time, shall find again.
Thy Alms dispense to many; yet to more:
Famine or War perhaps may make thee poor.
Be like the Clouds in bounty; which on all
The thirsty Earth, in showers profufely fall.
Like pregnant Trees, that shed on every side
Their riper fruit; to none that stoop denied.
They shall not sow who for a Calm defer:
Nor shall they reap whom gloomy skies deter.
Know thou from whence the struggling Tempests come?
Or how our bones are fashioned in the womb?
Much less his greatness can comprize; who made
The Globe of Earth, and radiant Heaven displayed.
The seed of Charity at Sunne-rise sow;
And when he sets, into the furrows throw:
Know thou if this, or that, increase shall yield?
Or both with grateful Ears invest thy Field?
How sweet is Light! how pleasant to behold,
The mounted Sun descend in beams of Gold!
Yet, though a Man live long; long in delight:
Let him remember that approaching Night
Which shall in endless darkness close his Eyes:
Then will he all, as vanity, despise.
Young man, rejoice; thy hearts desires fulfill;
No other Lord acknowledge but thy will;
Thy Senses freely feast: yet shall thou come
To Gods Tribunal, and receive thy Doom:
Decline his wrath, and Sin-infflicting pain:
For both the bud and flower of Youth are vain.
Think of thy Maker in thy better days;
Before the vigor of thy age decays:
Before that sad and tedious time draw nigh,
When thou shall loath thy life, and wish to die.
Before th'informing Sun, the cheerful Light,
The various Moon, and Ornaments of Night,
In vain for thee their shining Tapers bear:
Or fretting drops of Rain deep furrows wear.
When they shall tremble, who the House defend:
And the strong Columns which support it bend:
The Grinders fail, reduced to a few;
The Watch no Objects through their Casements view:
Those Doors shut up that open to the Street;
And when th'unarmed Guarders softly meet:
The Bird of dawning raise thee with his voice;
Nor thou in women, or their Songs rejoice.
When thou shall fear the roughness of the way;
When every Peble shall thy passage stay:
When th'Almond-tree his boughs invests with white;
The Locust stoopes: then dead to all delight.
Man must at length to his long home descend:
Behold, the Mourners at his gates attend.
Advise; before the Silver Cord grows slack;
Before the golden Boule asunder crack:
Before the Pitcher at the fountain leake;
Or wasted Wheel besides the Cisterne break.
Man, made of Earth, resolves into the same:
His Soul ascends to God, from whom it came.
O Restless Vanity of Vanities!
All is but Vanity, the Preacher Cries.
He who was wise, the People knowledge taught:
His Lines with well-digested Proverbs fraught.
He found out matter to delight the mind:
And every word he writ, by Truth was signed.
Wise Sentences are Goads; Nails closely driven
By grave Instructors: by one Pastor given.
And now my Son, be thou admonished
By what thou have already heard, and read.
There is of making many Books no End:
And studious Night th'intentive Spirits spend.
Of all the Sum; fear God, his Laws obey:
Man's Duty; to Felicity the way.
For He shall every work, each secret thing,
Both good and bad, to public Judgment bring.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.

This City sits! thrown from the pride of State!
How is this Potent Queen, who laws to all
The neighboring Nations gave, become a Thrall!
Who Nightly tears from her salt fountains sheds:
Which fall upon her Cheeks in liquid Beads.
Of all her Lovers, none regard her woes:
And her perfidious Friends increase her Foes.
Judah in exile wanders: ah! subdued
By vast afflictions, and base servitude.
Among the Barbarous Heathen finds no rest:
At home, abroad, on every side oppressed.
Ah! see how Sion mournes! Her Gates, and ways,
Lie unfrequented on her solemn Days.
Her Virgins weep; her Priests lament her fall:
And all her sustenance converts to gall.
A wretched vassal to her salvage Foes:
Her numerous Sins the Authors of these Woes.
Behold, how they, who by her losses thrive,
Into captivity her Children drive!
O Sions Daughter, all thy Beauty's lost!
Thy chased Princes are like Hearts imbost,
Which find no water; and infeebled fly
Before the Eager Hunters dreadful Cry.
Jerusalem in these her Miseries,
And Days of Mourning, sets before her Eyes
Those vanished Pleasures which she once enjoyed;
Her People now by hostile swords destroyed:
Whilst none afford Compassion to her woes;
Her Sabbaths scorned by her insulting foes.
Jerusalem has sinned; is now removed
For her uncleanness: those who lately loved,
As much despise; her nakedness descried:
Who sighs for shame, and turns her face aside.
Pollution stains her skirts; yet her last end
Remembered not: for this without a friend
Stupendiously she fell. Great God behold
My Sorrows, since the Foe is grown so bold!
Has ravished all wherein she took delight;
His Insolence contending with his Might.
Ah! she has seen th'uncircumcis'd profane
Thy Temple, whose approach thy Laws restrain.
Her People, sighing secke for bread; who give
Their wealth for food, that their faint souls may live.
Consider Lord; o look on the forlorn!
Who am to all the world a general Scorn.
Who Passengers, though this concern not you,
Here fix your Steps, and my strange Sufferings view.
Was ever sorrow like my Sorrow known!
Which God has on me in his fury thrown!
He from the breaking Clouds his flames has cast;
Which in my Bones the boiling Marrow wast:
Has set snares for my feet, thrown to the ground;
Left desolate, and fainting with my wound.
Who of my Sins has made a yoke, to check
My Insolence; and cast it on my Neck.
My Strength has broken; to my Enemies
Subdued my Powers: now, ah! too weak to rise.
He, in the midst of me, has trodden down
My mighty Men; and those of most Renown.
His Troops on my strong youth like Torrents rush't:
As in a wine press, Judah's Daughter crush't.
For this I weep! my eye, my galled Eye,
Dissolves in Streams: for he who should apply
Balm to my wounds, far, o far of is fled!
My Children desolate; their Foe, their head.
Her Hands sad Sion raised; no Comfort found:
Jehova charged her foes to guir'd her round.
Jerusalem, O thou of late beloved;
Now like a Menstruous Woman art removed.
The Lord is just: it is I that have rebelled;
And by my wild revolt his Grace expelled.
Hear, and behold my woes: my Orphans torn
From my forced Arms, and into exile borne.
I to my boasting Lovers called for aid:
But they their vows infringed, my trust betrayed.
My Priests and Princes, while they seek for bread
To feed their hungry Souls, augment the Dead.
Lord look on me! my heart roules in my Breast:
My Bowels stoyle, like Seas with Storms oppressed.
I have provoked thy Vengeance with my Sin:
Without the Sword destroys, and Dearth within.
My sighs no pity move: my cruel Foes
Enjoy thy Wrath, and glory in my Woes.
Yet that presaged Time will come, when they
Shall equal Sorrows to thy Justice pay.
O set their impious deeds before thine eyes;
And press them with my weighty Miseries:
(The Birth of Sin) which break into complaint;
My groans are numberless, my Spirits faint.

A veil of Clouds about thy Daughters head!
From Heaven to Earth thy beauty, Israel, thrown!
Nor in his fierce displeasure spared his own!
How has he swallowed Judah's Mansions! ra'st
His Holds! and to the ground his Bulwarks cast!
The Land in his relentlesse rage profaned;
And with the Blood of her own Princes stained!
He, in his Indignation, has the Horn
Of Israel from his bleeding forehead torn.
Before the Foe, O forced to fly with shame!
His wrath to Jacob a devouring flame.
Foe-like has bent his Bow; his Hostile hand
Advanced, and slain the Beauty of the Land:
All that the eye attracted with Desire;
And powered his anger forth like floods of Fire.
Against thee, Solyma, Converts his Powers:
Sad Israel, and his Palaces, devoures.
His strong built Fortresses to ruins turns:
Whilst Judah's Daughter for her Children mournes.
His Tabernacle He with Violence
Has now demolish't, like a Garden Fence.
None Sions feasts and Sabbaths celebrate;
Both King and Priest abnoxious to his hate.
Detests his Sanctuary, and forsakes
His flamelesse Altar: while the Enemy takes
His Palaces and Walls, filled with their Cries:
As late by us in our Solemnities.
The ruin of Jerusalem designs:
And levels the Foundation with his Lines.
Nor his fierce hand withdrawes: the tottering walls
And stooping Turrets, languish in their falls.
Her Gates sink to the Earth, with shivered bars:
Her King and Princes Slaves, or slain in wars.
All Laws surcease. Jehova to her Seers
No more by Visions or by Dreams appears.
Her Elders sit on earth, with silent Woe;
And Dust upon their Silver Tresses throw:
In sackcloth mourn. Her Virgins hang their heads,
Like drooping Flowers that bow to their cold Beds.
My Bowels toil; mine eyes with tears are drowned;
My bleeding Liver powered upon the Ground:
To see my tender Babes, unpittied, lie
On flinty Pavements, and through famine dye.
While others to their weeping Mothers say:
O give us Food, our hunger to allay!
Then, fainting by the bloodlesse wound of Death,
In their enfolding Arms sigh out their Breath.
How shall my tongue express, o how compare
Thy matchless Sorrows, to assuage thy Care,
Distressed Sions Daughter! for thy breach
Is like the Seas; whose rage no bounds impeach.
Vain tales, and foolish, have thy Prophets told;
Nor would they thy exiling Sins unfold:
False Burdens, and false Prophecies, invent;
The fatal Authors of thy Banishment.
The Passengers, they wry their heads aside;
Hiss at thee, clap their hands, and thus deride:
Is this their only Joy? which they of all
The world the Beauty and Perfection call?
Thy Foes make mouths, scoff, grind their teeth, and say;
Now have we swallowed our desired prey:
This is that Day we did so long expect,
Wherein our hopes have had their wished effect.
God has accomplished his old Decree;
We thy oft-menaced Destruction see:
Has ruined without pity; made a Scorn
To thy Triumphant Foe, and raised his Horn.
To him their hearts now cry: O Sions Towers!
All Day, all Night, let tears descend in Showers.
O never give thy laboring Thoughts repose!
Nor let the humid Night thy eyelids close!
Arise, and cry; cry from the Nights first hour:
Thy Heart before thy God, like water, power.
O raise thy Hands to Heaven; least Famines force
Thy Childrens souls from their pale corpse divorce.
Lord, see thy Masacre's! shall cursed wombes
Become their newborn childrens fatal Tombs!
Thy Priests and Prophets by the sword are slain:
And with their Blood thy Sanctuary stain.
Lo! in the Streets old Men and Infants lie:
My Virgins and bold Youth by slaughter dye.
Thou with their Blood thy Vengeance did imbrew:
Thy burning Fury without pity slew.
As in a solemn Day, thy Terrors have
Environed me: thy Anger cloyes the Grave.
Those whom I swatled, in my Bosom bred;
The Barbarous Foe has sent unto the Dead.

Have seen afflictions storms, and felt his Rod!
He has deprived me of the cheerful Light;
Inveloped with Shades more dark then Night:
Against me his revengefull Forces bent;
Nor sets his Anger with the Suns descent.
My slesh has wasted; wrinckled my smooth skin
With Sorrows age, and broke my Bones within.
Against me dug atrench, cast up a mound;
With travels bitter gall besieged me round.
Imprisoned where no beams their brightness shed*
Like that dark Region people by the Dead.
On every side my Flight with Bars restraines:
And clogs my galled Legs with massy Chains.
Who stops his ears against my Cries and Prayers:
With Stone immures, and spreads my Path with snares.
He like a Bear, or Lion, lies in wait:
Diverts, in pieces tears, leaves Desolate.
At me, as at a mark, his Bow he drew:
Whose Arrows in my Blood their wings imbrew,
He lets the People circle me in Throngs;
Who all the Day deride, with spiteful Songs.
With wormwood made me drunk, with gall has fed:
My teeth with gravel broke, with Ashes spread.
My soul to Peace is such a Stranger grown;
As if I never better Days had known.
When I my wrongs to memory recall;
My Miseries, my Wormwood, and my Gall;
My Passions thus exclaim: Ah! Perished
Are all my hopes! from me my strength is fled!
These thoughts my Soul have humbl'd: trod to Earth
My Pride; and given my Hopes a second Birth.
It Was thy abundant goodness, Lord, that all
Did not together in one Ruin fall.
Thy Mercies with the rising Light renew:
And thy Fidelity, as large as true.
My soul is armed with steadfast Confidence:
Since thou my Portion art, and strong Defense.
To those, how gracious, who on thee rely!
Who seek thee with unfainting Industry!
It Is good to hope, and rest upon thy Truth:
It Is good to bear thy yoke in early youth.
Alone he silent sits; nor will distrust
Thy Promise, when he hides his head in Dust.
His cheek submits to blows, by all reviled:
Yet knows at length thou will be reconciled.
When God with grief has fixed thee to the ground:
His Mercy will power balm into thy wound.
For He delights not in our Misery;
On those to trample who in fetters lie:
Hates that the weak should be oppressed by might;
Or Justice suffer in the Judges sight.
O tell, what can befall beneath the Sun,
That is not by the Lords appointment done?
Both good and bad from Him proceeds: why then
Grudge you at punishment; vain sinful Men?
Turn we to God by trial of our ways:
To Heaven our hearts, our hands, and voices, raise.
We have transgres'd, rebelled; no pardon gain:
The Food of Wrath; by thee pursued and slain.
Thou have with Cloud's thy self enclosed of late:
Through which no Prayers of ours can penetrate.
With Men, the refuse and off-skouring made:
Whom all our Foes with open mouths upbraid.
Filled with vastation, ruins, snares, and fears?
While for my Childrens loss I melt in Tears.
Nor shall those briny Rivers cease to flow,
Till God look down with pity on our woe.
Mine eye, ah! wounds my heart; when I behold
My Cities Daughters to Afflictions sold.
Those who thy Beauty, Solyma, deface,
My soul like a retrived Partridge chase:
Cut from the living, in a Dungeon thrown;
And overwhelmed with a Pile of Stone.
Storms ore my head their rolling billows tossed:
Then cried I, ah! I am for ever lost!
Thou from the Dungeon, Lord, my cries did hear:
O never from my sighs divert thine Ear!
Thou stood'st besides me in that horrid Day:
And said; Take courage; nor thy fear obey.
My cause, thou Lord, have pleaded in this strife:
And from their greedy jaws redeemed my Life.
Thou that have seen my wrongs, restore my right:
Thou have their vengeance seen, and cursed spite.
The malice heard which their false tongues disclose:
The thoughts and machinations of my Foes.
When they sit down, and when they rise, I still
Become their Music, and their Laughter fill.
Rewards according to their works disburse:
Their Hearts with Sorrow wound, blast with thy Curse.
Pursue, destroy: nor, Lord thy wrath restrain;
Till none beneath the arch of Heaven remain.

Refined and pure, has now his Luster lost.
That Marble, which the Temple beautified;
Torn down by impious Rage, and cast aside.
The wretched Sons of Sion, ah! behold!
Of late so precious; more esteemed then Gold:
How slighted! to how low a value brought!
Like Earthen vessels by the Potter wrought.
The Monsters of the Sea, and Salvage Beasts,
Their young ones gently foster at their Breasts:
My Daughters, ah! more cruel are then these:
Or then the desert-haunting Estriges.
Their Children cry for Bread, but none receive:
Whose thirsty tongues to their hot pallats cleave.
Who fed Deliciously, now sit forlorn:
And those who Scarlet wore, on dung-hils mourn.
The Punishments, as did their sins, excel
That which from Heaven on wicked Sodom fell,
Devoured with sudden flames. No Creature found
To whom his wrath could add another wound.
Her Nazarites, late pure, as falling Snow;
More white then Streams which from stretched udders flow:
Not Rubies of the rock such red insphear'd;
Nor polisht Saphires like their Veins appeared:
Their faces now more black then Cinders grown;
To such as meet them in the Streets, unknown.
Whose withered Skins, more dry then saplesse wood,
Cleave to their fleshlesse Bones, for want of Food.
O far less wretched they, whose parting Breath
Breaks through their wounds, then those who starve to death!
For they in lingering torments pine away:
And find not Death so cruel as Delay.
Soft-hearted Mothers live by horrid spoil:
And their beloved Babes in Caldrons boil.
On these with weeping Eyes, and hearts that bleed,
The famisht Daughters of my People feed.
The Lord his vengeance now accomplished has;
And powered forth the Viols of his wrath:
Forsaken Sion sets on fire; whose Towers
And Palaces the hungry flame devoures.
You Kings that sway the many-Peopled Earth;
All who from groaning Mothers take your birth:
O would you have believed, that thus the Foe
Should have triumphed in her sad overthrow!
Her Priests and Prophets sins, who should have taught
By their Example, have her ruin wrought:
With humane flesh her flaming Altars fed;
And blood of Innocents profusely shed.
Who blindly wander; so defiled with gore,
That none would touch the Garments which they wore.
Depart, they cried, Depart, and touch us not:
Depart o you whom foul pollutions spot.
Thus chid, they strayed, and to the Gentiles fled:
Yet said, ere long we shall from hence be led.
For this, the Lord has scattered in his Ire;
Nor ever shall they to their homes retire:
Their unregarded Priests slain by the Foe;
Who would no pity to the aged show.
Yet vainly we, in these our Miseries,
With expectation have consumed our eyes;
And fostered flattering hopes: built on their word,
Who can no aid to our Extremes afford.
Like cruel Hunters they our steps pursue:
While we in Corners lurk from public view.
That Fatal Day draws near; wherein we must
Descend to Death, and mingle with the Dust.
Not Eagles fearful Doves so swiftly chase;
As they with winged feet our footsteps trace:
Pursue over Mountains; watch at every Straight;
And to entrap us in the Defart wait.
The Lords Anointed, even our nostrils Breath,
They have ensnared, and rendered up to Death.
Of whom we said; Among the Heathen we,
Beneath his wings, shall live in exile free.
Daughter of Edom, thou that dwelst in Hus,
Exalt thy Joy: This Cup to thee from us
Shall swiftly pass: thy brains inebriate so,
As thou thy nakedness shall boldly show.
Yet when thy Sins deserved Punishment,
O wretched Sions Daughter, shall be spent:
Jehova will thy Banishment repeal;
Foment thy wounds, and all thy bruises heal.
Then he on Edoms Issue shall impose
Our yoke, and her deformity disclose.

See how we are to all the world a Scorn!
Our Lands and Houses forreiners possess:
Our Mothers, Widows; and we Fatherless.
To us our wood the greedy Strangersels;
And dearly purcha'st water from our wels.
Our necks with heavy burdens are oppressed:
All Day we toil, at Night deprived of Rest.
We, in the Egyptian and Assyrian Lands,
Are forced to beg our bread with stretcht-out hands.
Our Fathers, who transgrest, in Death remain:
And we the pressure of their sins sustain.
Who were our vassals, now our Sovereigns are:
And none survive to comfort our despair.
With peril of our lives we seek our food;
The sword in pathlesse Deserts thirsts for blood:
While Storms of Famine mutiny within;
And like a furnace tan the saplesse skin.
In Judah's Cities Virgins they deflowre:
In Sion, ravished wives their wrongs deplore.
They crucify our Princes in their rage;
Nor honor the aspect of reverend Age.
Our Youth enforce to grind, with lashes gall:
And Boys beneath their cruel Burdens fall.
No Judge on high Tribunals now appears:
No Music draws our Souls into our Ears.
Joy, from our broken hearts exiled, flies:
Our mirth is changed to mourning Elegies.
The crown from our ecclipsed Brows is torn:
By all, except thy punishments, forlorn.
Woe to our Sins! for these we waste our years
In Servitude. We drown our Eyes with tears
For thee deserted Sion: Foxes dwell
Among thy ruins! who our woes can tell!
Yet, Lord, thou ever liv'st: Thy Throne shall last,
When funeral Flames the World to Cinders waste.
O why have thou so long forgot thine own!
Will thou forsake us as if never known!
O call us back, that we thy face may view:
Those happy Days we once enjoyed, renew.
But thou have cast us off to tread the path
Of Exile: made the Object of thy wrath.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE SONGS COLLECTED OVT OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.
EXODUS 15.
As the 8. Psalm.
THE Praise of our triumphant King
And of his Victory we sing:
Who in the Seas with horrid force
O'rethrew the Rider and his Horse.
My Strength, my God, my Argument,
My Fathers God, has safety sent.
To him will I a Mansion raise;
There celebrate his glorious Praise.
His Sword has won eternal fame;
And great Jehovah is his Name.
Lo Pharaoh's Chariots, his proud Host,
Are in the swallowing Billows lost.
God, in the fathomlesse Profound,
Has all his choice Commanders drowned.
Down sunk they, like a falling stone,
By raging Whirl-pits ovethrowne.
Thy powerful Hand these Wonders wrought;
Our Foes by Thee to ruin brought.
Thou all that durst against thee fight
Have crushed by thy prevailing Might.
Thy Wrath thy Foes to Cinders turns,
As Fire the Sun-dri'd Stubble burns.

In heaps, like solid Mountains, stood.
The Seas divided Heart congealed;
Her sandy Bottom first revealed.
Pursue, over take, th'Aegyptians cried;
Let us their wealthy Spoil divide;
Our Sword these Fugitives destroy,
And with their Slaughter feast our Joy.
Thou blew'st; those Hills their Billows spread:
In mighty Seas they sunk like Lead.
What God is like our God! so high!
So excellent in Sanctity!
Whose glorious Praise such terror breeds!
So wonderful in all thy Deeds!
Thy Hand out-stretcht; the closing Womb
Of Waves gave all his Host one Tomb.
But us, who have thy Mercy tried
In our Redemption, thou will guide:
Guide by thy Power, till we possess
The Mansion of thy Holiness.

Sad Palaestine grow pale with fear.
Those who the Edomites command,
And Moabs Chiefs shall trembling stand.
The Hearts of Canaan melt away,
Like Snow before the Suns bright Ray.
Horror shall seize on all; not one
But stand like Statues cut in Stone:
Until thy People pass; even those,
Whom thou have ransomed from their Foes.
Thou shall conduct, and plant them, where
Thy fruitful Hills their Shoulders rear:
By thy Election dignified;
Where thou for ever shall abide.
Thy Reign, eternal King, shall last,
When Heaven and Earth in vapors waste.
While Pharaoh's Chariots and his Horse
'Twixt walls of Seas their way enforce:
Thy Hand reduced th'obedient Waves,
Which closed them in their rolling Graves:
But Israel through the bottom sand
Securely past, as on dry Land.
DEVTERONOMY. XXXII.
As the 1. Psalm.
LEND, O you Heavens, unto my voice an ear:
And thou, O Earth, what I shall utter, hear.
My words shall fall like Deaw, like April showers
On tender Herbs, and new-disclosed Flowers;
While I the Goodness of our God proclaim:
O celebrate his great and glorious Name!
Our Rock, whose Works are perfect. Justice leads,
And equal Judgment walks the Way he treads.
In him unstained Sincerity excels;
The God of Truth, in whom no falsehood dwells.
But you are all corrupt, perverse; nor bear
Those Marks about you, which his Children wear.
O fools! deprived of intellectual Light!
Do you your great Preserver thus requite?
Your Father? He who made you? did select
From all the World, and with his Beauty decked?
Remember; ask the Ancient: They will tell
What in old times, and Ages past, befell:
When the most High did distribute the Earth,
With liberal hand, to all of humane birth:
When yet you were not, He, according to
Your numerous Race, designed a Seat for you.

The Inheritance alone reserved for His.
He, when he wandered through a desert land,
And in a horrid Wilderness of sand;
Conducted, taught him his high Mysteries;
And kept him as the Apples of his Eyes.
As the old Eagle on her Ayery spreads
Her fostring Plumes; renewes their downy beds,
Feeds, trains them for the flight, subdues their fears;
And on her soaring wings her Eaglets bears:
So he sustein'd, So led him; He alone:
No stranger-Gods to Israel then were known.
Whom like a Horse the towering Mountains bore;
That those rich fields might feast him with their store.
With Honey the hard Rocks supplied his want;
And pure Oil dril'd from cliffes of Adamant:
Him with the Milk of Ewes, with Butter fed;
With fat of Lambs, and Rams in Bashan bred;
With flesh of Goats, with Wheats pure Kernels filled;
And drank the Blood, which from the Grape distilled.

Full of high feeding, and untamed force:
Forsook his God, who made, sustein'd, adorned;
And that strong Rock of his Salvation scorned:
With barbarous Gods, and execrable Rites,
His Jealousy and Wrath at once excites.
To Devils they profanely sacrificed;
Gods made with hands, before their Maker prized:
Gods brought from foreign Nations; strange and new:
Gods, which their Ancestors nor feared, nor knew.
Their Father, their firm Rock, remembered not;
And Him, who had created them, forgot.
This having seen with burning eyes, the Lord
His Daughters, and degenerate Sons, abhorred:
Said, from these Rebels I will hide my face,
And see the end of this unfaithful Race.
Since they with Gods, that are but Gods in Name,
My Soul with so great Jelousie inflame;
And through their vanities my wrath incense;
I, by the like will punish their offense.
Their Glory to an unknown Nation grant,
And in their room a foolish People plant.

Even in the depth of Hell devour them all:
Polluted Earth with her productions burn;
And ayery Mountains into ashes turn.
One misery another shall invite,
And all my arrows in their bosoms light:
Famine shall eat them, hot Diseases burn;
And all by violent deaths to Earth return.
The teeth of salvage Beasts their blood shall spill;
And Serpents with their fatal poison kill.
The Sword without, and homebred Terrors shall
Devour their lives. Their Youth untimely fall;
Betrothed Virgins, such as stoop with Age,
And sucking Babes, shall sink beneath my Rage.
Scatter I would like Chafe by Tempests blown,
Nor should their Memory to Man be known:
If not withheld by their insulting Foe;
Lest he should triumph in their overthrow:
And boasting say; This our own hands have done;
Our Swords, the Gods which have their battle won.

Incapable of Council; void of sense.
O that my Words could to their hearts descend;
To make them wise, and think of their last End!
How would One man a Thousand put to flight!
And Two a Myriad overthrow in Fight!
But that their Strength has sold them to their Foes;
And left them naked to their deadly blows.
For, though our Enemies should judge, their Powers
Are faint to His; their Rock no Rock to ours:
Their Vine of Sodom, of Gomorrahs fields;
Which Grapes of Gall, and bitter clusters yields.
Poison of Dragons is their deadly Wine;
To which cold Aspes their drowsy venom join.
Is not all this unto my Sight revealed?
Laid up in store? and with my Signet sealed?
To me belongs Revenge and Recompense:
Which I will in the time decreed dispense.
The Day is near which their destruction brings;
And Punishment now flies with speedy wings.

And of his Servants miseries repent:
Then when they are of all their power bereft,
No strength, no hope of humane succor left.
And say, Where are the Gods of your defense,
Those Rocks of your presuming confidence;
Whose flaming Altars you so often fed
With fat of Bieves, and Wine profusely shed?
Now let them from their crowned Banquets rise,
And shield you from your furious enemies.
Behold! I am your God; I, only I,
Assisted by no foreign Deity.
I kill, revive; I wound and heal; no hand
Or power of Mortals can my strength withstand.
I, to the Heavens I made, my arms extend;
Pronounce, I ever was, and have no end.
Whet I my glittering Sword; if I advance
My hand in Judgment; woes past utterance,
And vengeance, equal to their merits, shall
Upon my Foes, and those who hate me, fall.
The hungry Sword shall eat their flesh, like Food,
My thirsty Arrows shall be drunk with blood:
For Captives slain, and for the blood they spilt,
I will with horror recompense their guilt.
You wiser Nations, with his People joy;
For he will all their Enemies destroy:
His Servants vindicate from their proud Foe;
And to their Land, and them, his Mercy show.
JUDGES V.
As the 8. Psalm.
YOUR great Preserver celebrate:
He who revenged our wrongs of late;
When you, his sons, in Isreal's Aid
Of life so brave a Tender made.
You Princes, with attention hear;
And you who awful Scepters bear;
While I in sacred Numbers sing
The Praise of our eternal King.
When he through Seir his Army led,
In Edoms fields his Ensigns spread;
Earth shook, the Heavens in drops descend;
And Clouds in tears their substance spend.
Before his Face the Mountains melt:
Old Sinai unknown fervor felt.
When Israel Sangars Rule obeyed,
And Jael, that Virago, swayed;
She bold of heart, He great in War;
Yet to the fearful Travailer
All ways were then unsafe: who crept
Through Woods, or past when others slept,
The Land uncultivated lay:
When I arose, I Deborah,
A Mother to my Country grew;
At once their Foes, and fears subdue.

Then were their Walls besieged by Foes.
Did One of Forty Thousand wear
A Cote of Steel? or shook a Spear?
You, who with such alacrity
Led to the Battle; O how I
Affect your Valor! with me raise
Your voices; Sing Jehovahs Praise.
Sing You who on white Asses ride,
And Justice equally divide:
You, who those VVayes so feared of late,
Where now no Thieves assassinate:
You lately from your Fountains barred,
Where you their clattering Quivers heard:
There, with united joy record
The righteous Judgments of the Lord.
You who your Cities repossesse,
Who reap in peace, his Praise profess.
Arise, O Deborah, arise;
In heavenly Hymns express thy Joys.
Arise, O Barak; Thou the Fame
And Offspring of Abinoam;
Of Israel the renowned Head,
Captivity now captive lead.

Of our strong Aids in silence die:
The Quiver-bearing Ephramite
Marched from his Mountain to the Fight:
Those who on Amalek confine,
The small Remains of Benjamin:
From Machir, Princes: Not a few
Wise Zebulun with Letters drew:
The valiant Chiefes of Issachar,
With Deborah, troopt to this War;
Who down into the Valley tread
The way which noble Barak led.
But Reuben from the rest disjoined
By Hills and Floods, was so in mind.
Did thou these glorious Wars refuse,
To hear the bleating of the Ewes?
O great in Council! O how wise!
That could both Faith and Fame despise.
Gilead' of thundering Drums afraid,
Or slothful, beyond Jordan staid.
Dan his swift-sailing Ships affects,
And public Liberty neglects:
While Ashur on his Cliffes relides,
And fortifies against the Tides.
But Zebulun, and Nepthali,
Who never would from danger fly,
Were ready, for the public good,
On Tabors top to shed their blood.

On Taanach Plains addressed their Fights;
Where swift Megiddo's Waters ran:
Yet neither Spoil nor Trophee wan.
The Heavens against Sisera fought; The Stars
Moved in Battalia to those Wars:
By ancient Kishon swept from thence;
Whose Torrent salling Clouds incense.
Thou, O my joyful Soul, at length
Have trod to Dirt their puissant Strength.
Their wounded Horse with flying haste
Fall headlong, and their Riders cast.
Thus spoke an Angel; Cursed be
Thou Meroz, all who dwell in thee;
That basely would no aid afford,
In that great Battle to the Lord.
Cinoeian Hebers Wife, thou best
Of Women, be thou ever blessed;
Blessed above all: Let all that dwell
In Tents, thy Act, O Jaell, tell.
She brought him Milk, above his wish;
And Butter in a Princely Dish.
A Hammer, and a Nail she took,
This into Sisera's Temples struck.
He fell, fell down, down to the Flore;
Lay where he fell, bathed in his Gore;
Lay grovelling at her Feet: and there
His wretched Soul sighed into Air.

And thrusting out her shoulders said;
Why are his Chariots wheels so slow!
Nor yet my Son in Triumph show!
When her wise Ladies standing by,
(Yea she her self) made this reply;
Have not their Swords now won the Day?
Have they not shared the wealthy Prey?
Now every Soldier for his pains
An Hebrew Dame or Virgin gains:
While Sisera, choosing, lays aside
Rich Robes, in various Colors died;
Rich Robes with curious Needles wrought
On either side, from Phrygia brought:
The Thread spun from the Silkworms womb,
Such as a Conqueror become.
Great God! So perishall thy Foes;
Love such as love thee: O let those
Shine like the Sun, when he displaies
In The Orient his increasing Rays.
1 SAMVEL. II.
As the 29. Psalm.
GOD has raised my head on high:
O my Heart, enlarge thy joy!
God has now my Tongue unti'd,
To retort their scorn, and pride.
In thy Grace I will rejoice;
Praise thee, while I have a voice.
Who so holy as our Lord!
Who but he to be adored!
Who such Wonders can effect!
Who so strongly can protect!
Be no longer arrogant,
Nor in Folly, proudly vaunt:
God our secret thoughts displaies;
All our works his Balance weighes.
Giants Bows his Forces break;
He with strength invests the Weak.
Who were full, now serve for bread;
Those who served, infranchised.
Barren VVombs with Children flow;
Fruitful Mothers childlesse grow.

Those who sleep in Death, revives:
Leads us to our silent Tombs;
Brings us from those horrid Rooms:
Riches sends; sends Poverty:
Casts down, and lifts on high.
He from the despised Dust,
From the Dunghill takes the Just;
To the height of Honor brings;
Plants them in the Thrones of Kings.
God, Earths mighty Pillars made;
He the World upon them laid.
He his Servants feet will guide:
Wicked Souls, who swell with Pride,
Will in endless Darkness chain;
Since all humane strength is vain.
He shall grind his Enemies;
Blast with Lightning from the Skies:
Judge the habitable Earth,
All of high and humble birth:
Shall with strength his King renown,
And his Christ with Glory crown.
II. SAMUVEL I.
As the 39. Psalm.
THY Beauty, Israel, is fled,
Sunk to the Dead.
How are the Valiant fallen! the Slain
Thy Mountains stain.
O let it not in Gath be known;
Nor in the streets of Ascalon!
Lest that sad Story should excite
Their dire delight:
Lest in the Torrent of our woe
Their pleasure flow:
Lest their triumphant Daughters ring
Their Cymbals, and cursed Paeans sing.
You Hills of Gilboa, never may
You Offerings pay;
No Morning Deaw, nor fruitful showers
Cloth you with Flowers:
Saul, and his Arms there made a Spoil;
As if untoucht with sacred Oil.
The Bow of noble Jonathan
Great Battles wan:
His Arrows on the Mighty fed,
With Slaughter red.
Saul never raised his Arm in vain;
His Sword still glutted with the Slain.
How lovely! O how pleasant! when
They lived with Men!
Then Eagles swifter; stronger far
Then Lions are:
Whom love in life so strongly tied,
The stroke of Death could not divide.
Sad Isreal's Daughters, weep for Saul;
Lament his fall;
Who fed you with the Earths increase,
And crowned with Peace:
With Robes of Tyrian Purple decked,
And Gems, which sparkling light reflect.
How are thy Worthies by the Sword
Of War devoured!
O Jonathan, the better part
Of my torn Heart!
The salvage Rocks have drunk thy blood:
My Brother! O how kind! how good!
Thy love was great; O never more
To Man, Man bore!
No Woman, when most passionate,
Loved at that rate!
How are the Mighty fallen in fight!
They, and their Glory set in Night!
II. SAMVEL VII.
As the 4. Psalm.
MY Lord,my God, O who am I!
Or what is my poor Family,
That thou should crown,
With Power renown,
And raise my Throne on high!
As this were little; in my place
Have promised to confirm my Race,
Do men, O Lord,
To men afford
Such, such transcendent Grace!
Not to be hoped for, nor desired;
Not to be uttered, but admired:
My Thoughts to me,
Then they to thee,
Less known, when most retired.
These great things did Thou, to fulfill
Thy Word and never-changing Will.
Into my Sight
This knowing Light,
Thy Wisdoms Beams, distill.
In Goodness, as in Power complete:
No God but thee: O who so great!
All this of old
Our Fathers told;
And often did repeat.
What Nation breaths, who can or dare
With thee, O Israel, compare?
For whom alone
God left his Throne,
As his peculiar Care.
To amplify his Name; to do
Such great, such fearful things for you:
Such Wonders wrought;
From Egypt brought;
From men, from gods withdrew.
Established by divine Decree;
That thou might be our God, and we
For evermore
Thy Name adore;
As consecrate to Thee.

The Promise to thy Servant made.
Confirm by Deed,
What to his Seed
Thy Word long since displaid.
Great God, O be thou magnified!
Whose Hands the strife of War decide:
Let David's Race,
Before thy Face
For ever fixed abide.
Thou said (who Israel do protect)
I will my Servants House erect.
My Thoughts indu'd
With gratitude
These Prayers to Thee direct.
Thou Lord, in Goodness infinite!
Whose Word and Truth like Twins unite.
Thy Promise has
Confirmed my Faith,
And filled me with delight.
Be then my House for ever blessed,
Of thy dear Presence still possessed.
Thus have thou said;
This Promise made:
O with thy Grace invest!
ESAIAS V.
As the 9. Psalm.
NOw I, to my Beloved, will
A Song of my Beloved sing:
He has a Vineyard on a Hill,
Which all the Year enjoyed the Spring.
This he enclosed with a Mound,
Picked up the Stones which scattered lay:
With generous Vines plants the rich Ground;
Dig'd, pruin'd, and weeded every day.
To press the Clusters made a Frame,
Placed in a new erected Tower:
But when the expected Vintage came,
For good, the Grapes proved wild and sour.
You who on Judah's Hills reside,
Who Citizens of Salem be;
Do you the Controverse decide
Between my Vineyard judge, and me.
Though partial Judge. Could I have more
To my ungrateful Vineyard done?
Yet such unpleasant Clusters bore,
Unworthy of the soil, or Sun.
Then know; This Vineyard, late my Joy,
Manured with such diligence;
Wild Bores, and Foxes shall destroy,
When I have trampled down her Fence.
Then shall she unregarded lie,
Vndig'd, unpruin'd, with Brambles spread:
No gentle Clouds shall on her dry
And thirsty Womb their moisture shed.
That ancient House of Israel,
The great Jehovahs Vineyard is:
They who on Judah's Mountains dwell,
Those choice, and pleasant Plants of his:
From whom he Justice did expect,
But Rapine, and Oppression found:
Thought they sweet Concord would affect;
When all with Strife, and Cries abound.
ESAIAS XXVI.
As the 2. Psalm.
OUR Sion strongly is secured,
Which God himself has fortified;
High Bulwarks raised on every side,
And with immortal Walls immured:
Her Gates at their approach display,
Who Justice love, and Truth obey.
Who fix on him their confidence,
He will in constant Peace preserve.
O then with Faith Jehovah serve;
Your strong and ever sure Defense:
Who hurles the Mighty from their Thrones,
And Cities turns to Heaps of stones.
Their Structures levels with the Floor,
Which Sepulchers of Dust enclose:
Trod underneath the Feet of those,
That were of late Despised and Poor.
Straight is the Way the Righteous tread;
By Thee at once informed and led.
For we thy Judgments, Lord, expect,
And only on thy Grace rely:
To thy great Name and Memory
The Affections of our Souls erect.
My Soul pursues thee in the Night,
And when the Morn displayes her Light.

Then Mortals should the Truth discern:
And yet the Wicked would not learn;
But thy extended Grace despise:
Among the Just to Injustice sold;
Nor will thy Majesty behold.
Should thou advance thine Arm on High,
Though wilfull-blind, yet should they view
The Shame and Vengeance which pursue
All those, who thy dear Saints envy:
Those vindicating Flames, which burn
Thy Foes, shall them to Cinders turn.
Thou our eternal peace have wrought,
And in our works, thy Wonders shown.
Though other Lords, besides our own,
Had us to their subjection brought;
Yet, through thy only Goodness, we
Remembered both thy Name and Thee.
Dead are they, never more to rise
From those dark Caves of endless Night;
Nor ever shall the cheerful Light
Revisit with their closed eyes.
Thy Vengeance has expelled their Breath,
And closed their Memories in Death.

In punishing thy Glory shown:
Far from thy cheerful Presence thrown;
Even to the Worlds extremest bounds:
Amidst our stripes, and sighings, we
Addressed our zealous Prayers to Thee.
As Women groaning with their Load,
The time of their Delivery near,
Anticipating pain with fear,
Screeke in their Pangs; So we to God:
So suffered, when in thy Disgrace;
So cried out, when thou hid'st thy Face.
For we, with Sorrow's burden fraught,
Pain, and anxiety of Mind,
Brought only forth an empty Wind;
Nor our desired Delivery wrought.
We neither could repulse our Foes,
Nor give a period to our Woes.
The Lord thus to his People spoke;
Thy Dead shall live; those who remain
In peaceful Graves, shall rise again.
O you who sleep in Dust, awake;
Now sing: on you my Plants I Will shed
My Deaw; the Graves shall cast their Dead.
Go, hide thee in thy inward Rooms
A little, till my Wrath pass by:
To punish Man's impiety,
The Lord from Heaven in Thunder comes:
The Earth then shall your Blood reveal,
Nor longer shall the Slain conceal.
ESAIAS XXXVIII.
As the 39. Psalm.
IN the substraction of my years,
I said with Tears;
Ah! now I to the Shades below
Must naked go:
Cut off by Death before my Time;
And like a Flower cropped in my Prime.
Lord in thy Temple I no more
Shall Thee adore:
No longer with Mankind converse,
In my cold Hearse.
My Age is past ere it be spent;
Removed like a Shepherds Tent.
My frail Life, like a Weavers thread,
My Sins have shred:
My vital powers Diseases waste
With greedy haste:
Even from the Evening to the Day
I languish, and consume away.
And when the Morning Watch is past,
Think that my last.
Thou like a Lion break'st my bones,
Nor hear'st my groans:
Even from the Dawning to the Night,
Death waits to close my failing Sight.
Thus Swallow-like, like to a Crane,
My Woes complain:
Mourn like a Turtle-Dove, but late
Robbed of his Mate.
I my dim eyes to Thee erect:
The Weak o strengthen, and protect!

O thou Most High!
Thy Words are ever crowned with Deeds:
Joy Grief succeeds.
My bitter pangs at length are past;
And long my peaceful days shall last.
My lively vigor do restore,
Increa'st with more:
My Years prolonged, now flourishing
In their new Spring:
Thou have with Joy dried up my Tears;
And with my Grief exiled my Fears.
Thy Love has drawn me from the Pit,
Where Horrors sit:
My Soule-infecting Sins thou have
Behind Thee cast.
The Grave can not thy Praise relate;
Nor Death thy Goodness celebrate.
Can they expect thy Mercy, whom
Cold Earth intombe?
The Living must thy Truth display;
A I this Day.
This Fathers to their Sons shall tell,
While Souls in humane Bodies dwell.
The Lord as ready was to save,
As I to crave:
I therefore to the warbling string
His Praise will sing:
And in his House, till my last Day,
My grateful Vows devoutly pay.
JONAH I.
As the 9. Psalm.
ON Thee my captived Soul did call;
Thou, who art present every where,
From the dark Entrails of the Whale,
Did thy intombed Servant hear.
Thy Hand into the Surges threw,
The Seas black arms forthwith unfold;
Down to the horrid Bottom drew,
And all her Waves upon me rould.
Then said my Soul; For ever I
Am banished from thy glorious sight:
And yet thy Temple with the Eye
Of Faith reviewed, in that blind Night.
The Floods my Soul involved below;
The swallowing Deeps besieged me round:
And Weeds, which in the bottom grow,
My Head with funeral Dresses bound.
I to the roots of Mountains dived,
Whom bars of broken Rocks restrain:
Yet from that Tomb of death revived,
And raised to see the Sun again.
I, when my Soul began to faint,
My Vows and Prayers to thee preferred:
The Lord my passionate complaint,
Even from his holy Temple heard.
Those who affect false vanities,
The Mercy of their God betray:
But I my Thanks will sacrifice,
And Vows to my Redeemer pay.
HABAKKVK. III.
As the 72. Psalm.
GReat God, with terror I have heard thy Doom;
The fearful punishments that are to come:
Yet in the midst of those devouring Years,
Then when thy Vengeance shall exceed our Fears,
Thy Work in us revive; confirm our Faith,
And still remember Mercy in thy Wrath.
God came from Theman, and the Holy-one
From Parans Mountain, where his Glory shone:
Which filled the heavens themselves with brighter Rays;
And all the Earth replenisht with his Praise.
His Brightness as the Suns: his Fingers Streams
Of Light project; his Power hid in those Beams.
Devouring Pestilence before him flew,
And wasting Flames his dreadful Steps pursue.
Then fixed his Feet, and measured with his Eyes
The Earths Extent: pale Fears her Sons surprise,
The ancient Mountains shrunk; eternal Hills
Stoopt to their Bases; All Amazement fills.
His Glory and his Terror he displaies,
In his unknown and everlasting Ways.
I saw the afflicted Tents of Cushan quake,
And Midians Cortines in that Tempest shake.

And on the Chariots of Salvation ride,
Through the congested Billows of the Seas:
Was it because thou wast displeased with these?
According to thy Oath thou drew'st thy Sword;
Thy Oath sworn to our Tribes; thy constant Word.
From cloven Rocks new Torrents took their flight,
And ayery Mountains trembled at thy sight:
The overflowing Streams enforce their Ways;
The Deeps to Thee their Hands and Voices raise;
The Sun and Moon obedient to Command,
Till then in restless Motion, made a Stand.
Thy Darts and flaming Arrows, swift as Sight;
Confound thy Foes, but give thy People Light.
He, in his Fury, marched through the Land;
And crushed the Heathen with a vengefull Hand.
The Anointed, with thy Sword, their Leaders slew;
The Joints disclosed, where Heads of Princes grew.
With thy transfixing Spear their Subjects struck:
Who like a black and dreadful Tempest brake
Upon our Front, with purpose to devour,
And triumph over our despised Power.
He through the roaring Floods his People guides:
Through yielding Seas on fiery Horses rides.

And my unnerved knees each other struck.
My lips with panting swell, my cheeks grow wan;
Through all my bones a swift Consumption ran.
O where may I repose in that sad Day,
When armed Troops upon my Country prey!
Although the Fig Tree shall no blossoms bear;
Nor Vines with their pure blood the pensive cheer:
Although the Olive no requital yield;
Nor Corn apparel the deserted Field:
Though then our Flocks be ravished from the Fold,
And though our Stalls no well-fed Oxen hold:
Yet will not I despair, but cheerfully
Expect, and in thy known Salvation joy.
For thou my Strength and my Protection art:
My feet, more nimble then the flying Heart,
Ascend the Hills; where I, with holy fire,
Will sing thy Praises to my solemn Lyre.
LVKE I.
As (...)
MY ravished soul extols his Name,
Who rules the Worlds admired Frame:
My Spirit, with exalted Voice,
In God my Savior shall rejoice:
Who has his glorious Beams displayed,
Upon a poor and humble Maid.
Me all succeeding Ages shall
The blessed Virgin Mother call.
The Great, great things for me has wrought;
His Sanctity past humane thought.
His Mercy still reflects on those,
Who in his Truth their Trust repose.
He with his Arm has Wonders shown:
The Proud in their own pride ^re thrown;
The Mighty from their Thrones dejects:
The Lowly from the dust erects.
The Hungry are his welcome Guests;
The Rich excluded from his Feasts.
He mindful of his Promise, has
Maintained, and crowned Isreal's Faith:
To Abraham promised, and decreed
For ever to his holy Seed.
LVKE I.
As the 46. Psalm.
O Praise the Lord, his Wonders tell,
Whose Mercy shines in Israel;
At length redeemed from Sin and Hell.
The Crown of our Salvation,
Derived from David's royal Throne,
He now has to his People shown.
This to his Prophets did unfold;
By all successively foretold,
Until the infant World grew old.
That he our wrongs would vindicate,
Save from our foes inveterate hate,
And raise our long deprest estate.
To ratify his ancient Deed,
His promised Grace, by oath decreed,
To Abraham, and his faithful Seed.
That we might our Preserver praise,
Walk purely in his perfect ways,
And fearelesse serve him all our days.
His path thou shall prepare, sweet Child,
And run before the Vndefil'd;
The Prophet of The Almighty styled.
Our knowledge to inform, from whence
Salvation springs: from penitence,
And pardon of each foul offense.
Through mercy, O how infinite!
Of our great God, who cleares our sight,
And from the Orient sheds his Light.
A leading Star t'enlighten those,
Whom Night, and shades of Death enclose;
Which that high Tract to glory shows.
LUKE II.
As the 34. Psalm.
O Thou who art enthroned on high,
In peace now let thy Servant die,
Whose hope on thee relies:
For thou, whose words and deeds are one,
At length have thy Salvation shown
To these my ravished Eyes.
By thee, before thy Hands displaid
The Heavens, and Earths Foundation laid,
Unto the World decreed:
A Lamp to give the Gentiles Light;
A Glory, O how infinite!
To Isreal's faithful Seed.
FINIS.
Gloria Deo in excelsis.
DEO OPT. MAX.
O Thou who All-things have of Nothing made,
Whose Hand the radiant Firmament displayed,
With such an undiscerned swiftness hurled
About the steadfast Center of the World:
Against whose rapid course the restless Sun,
And wandering Flames in varied Motions run;
Which Heat, Light, Life infuse; Time, Night, and Day
Distinguish; in our Humane Bodies sway:
That hung'st the solid Earth in fleeting Air,
Vein'd with clear Springs, which ambient Seas repair.
In Clouds the Mountains wrap their hoary Heads;
Luxurious Valleies clothed with flowery Meads:
Her trees yield Fruit and Shade; with liberal Breasts
All creatures She (their common Mother) feasts.
Then Man thy Image made; in Dignity,
In Knowledge, and in Beauty, like to Thee:
Placed in a Heaven on Earth: without his toil
The ever-flourishing and fruitful Soil
Vnpurchas'd Food produced: all Creatures were
His Subjects, serving more for Love then Fear.
He knew no Lord, but Thee. But when he fell
From his Obedience, all at once rebel,
And in his Ruin exercise their Might:
Concurring Elements against him fight:
Troops of unknown Diseases; Sorrow, Age,
And Death, assail him with successive rage.
Hell let forth all her Furies: none so great,
As Man to Man. Ambition, Pride, Deceit,
Wrong armed with Power, Lust, Rapine, Slaughter reigned:
And flattered Vice the name of Virtue gained.
Then Hills beneath the swelling Waters stood;
And all the Globe of Earth was but one Flood:
Yet could not cleanse their Guilt: the following Race
Worse then their Fathers, and their Sons more base.
Their God-like Beauty lost; Sins wretched Thrawle:
No spark of their Divine Original
Left unextinguisht: All inveloped
With Darkness; in their bold Transgressions dead.
When thou did from the East a Light display,
which rendered to the World a clearer Day:
Whose Precepts from Hels jaws our Steps withdraw;
And whose Example was a living Law:
Who purged us with his Blood; the Way prepared
To Heaven, and those long-chain'd-up Doors unbar'd.
How infinite thy Mercy! which exceeds
The World thou made, as well as our Misdeeds!
Which greater Reverence then thy Justice wins,
And still augments thy Honor by our Sins.
O who has tasted of thy Clemency
In greater measure, or more often then I!
My grateful Verse thy Goodness shall display.
O Thou who went along in all my way;
To Where the Morning with perfumed Wings
From the high Mountains of Panchaea springs:
To that New-found-out World, where sober Night
Takes from th'Antipodes her silent flight;
To those dark Seas where horrid Winter reigns,
And binds the stubborn Floods in Icie chains:
To Lybian Wastes, whose Thirst no showers assuage;
And where swollen Nilus cooles the Lions rage.
Thy Wonders in the Deep have I beheld;
Yet all by those on Judah's Hills excelled:
There where the Virgins Son his Doctrine taught,
His Miracles, and our Redemption wrought:
Where I by Thee inspired his Praises sung;
And on his Sepulcher my Offering hung.
Which way so e're I turn my Face, or Feet;
I see thy Glory, and thy Mercy meet.
Met on the Thracian Shoares; when in the strife
Of frantic Simoans thou preserv'dst my Life.
So when Arabian Thieves belaid us round,
And when by all abandoned, Thee I found.
That false Sidonian Wolf, whose craft put on
A Sheep soft Fleece, and me Bellerephon
To Ruin by his cruel Letter sent,
Thou did by thy protecting Hand prevent.
Thou sav'dst me from the bloody Massacres
Of faithless Indians; from their treacherous Wars;
From raging Fevers, from the sultry breath
Of tainted Air; which cloyed the jaws of Death.
Preserved from swallowing Seas; when towering Waves
Mixed with the Clouds, and opened their deep Graves.
From barbarous Pirates ransomed: by those taught,
Successefully with Salian Moors we fought.
Then brought me Home in safety; that this Earth
Might bury me, which fed me from my Birth:
Blessed with a healthful Age; a quiet Mind,
Content with little; to this Work designed:
Which I at length have finished by thy Aid;
And now my Vows have at thy Altar paid.
Iam tetigi Portum, -- Valete.
LONDON, Printed by John Legatt. 1637.


