PART OF DV BARTAS, ENGLISH AND FRENCH, AND IN HIS OWN KIND OF Verse, so
near the French Englished, as may teach an Englishman French, or a Frenchman
English.

[Sequitur Victoria junctos.] With the Commentary of S. G. S.

By WILLIAM L'ISLE of Wilburgham, Esquier for the Kings Body.

Sufficit exigua fecisse in part periclum.
Haec Regi placeant, and sic quoque caetera vertam.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. M.DC.XXV.

A Pastoral Dedication to the King.
I Soong of late as time then gave me scope;
Howbee't for other times a way left open:
But now, as now; to the end my Lord may hear,
My voice, then hoars, to day is waxen clear:
My former Shepherds song devised was
To please great Scotus, and his Lycidas,
But this for Galla, whom th'All-mightie power
Has made a Lilly-Rose, and double flower:
O Valley Lilly, and Sharon-Rose her bless!
Though this good speed prevented has my press:
Else had I not this piece of book alone,
But whole Du Bartas offered at your throne;
For either nation counterpaged thus,
T'acquaint more us with them, and them with us.
Yet (o!) vouchsafe it thus and grant an ear
To these two Swains, whom I ore-heard whilcare.
As Shepherd Musidor sat on a balke,
Philemon comes to him, and they talk
(Least on [quoth he] my tongue ore-often run)
Thus each with oth'r; I stay till they have done.
Phi. Good day! what not a word? how do thou fare?
Or art thou sick, or take thou some care?

Mu. Care, Shepherd? yea, to show what joy I can.

Ph. How? that is a riddle; what is thy meaning man?

Mu. For since a Nymph, a daught'r of Shepherds God,
Who rules a world of sheep with golden rod,
From lofty shrine descending yet will daigne
To stoop at this my cottage homely-plaine,
And of her favor make herself the guage
To me, that ought her seek on Pilgrimage:

Phi. Oh, now I see whereon thy mind is bent;
How to prepare fit entertainment.

Mu. What shall behooue me do, or how to look?
For though I pawn my fairest pype and hook;
That one, which Damon gave me by his will,
That other won in game on Magog hill;
I Will entertain her (She, I pawn my life,
Will prove the greatest Kings child, sister, wife.)
I Will entertain her: If I not mistake,
Some Wheat-floure have I for a bridall-cake,
And Abricots, and Plums black, red, and white,
Preserved with honey clear as chrysolite;
And nuts, and pears, and apples pretty store,
My poultrie will afford me somewhat more,
Except the Fox deceive me.

Phi. Shame him take!
Often has he made our Chaunticleer to quake:
But Cream and Butt'r is skarce yet out of horn,
And all Achats this year apprize to corn.

Mu. I nothing buy, nor have I much to sell.
Store is no sore; my house it finds full well.
For there is corn, and milk, and butt'r and cheese,
Thanks unto Pales: then, if please my bees,
(That waxen wasps when any shrews do fret them)
But if I may by gentleness entreat them
To lend m'a comb as sweet as is my guest,
Enough it will be for a Sheepheards feast.

Phi. Thou make me think of my great gransirs cheer,
That would, but did not, Ovid. 8. Mei. de Philemone and Baucide. Vnius anser
eral minuna cuslodi^ villae.
kill for Iupitere;
And that he would was but a single goose,
The Sentinel of that skant furnished house.

Mu. I know the Gods do heart and welcome prize
Above great store of cheer and sacrifize.

Phi. True, and their cheer some more, some less by rate
Not of their own, but of their hosts estate.

Mu. I have a flock too, Pan I praise therefore;
Though not so fat as has been heretofore.
But i will receive this guest with such device,
As Shephard best becomes; no Muse is nice;
They quickly yield to grace a Pastoral,
Vranie, Thalie, Calliop, and all:
Such I prepare, and they will all be here,
With all the music of their heavenly queere.

Phi. But how (I pray thee as thou love the kirk)
Will thou devise to set them all awerke?

Mu. I have a pricke-song for Calliope,
To try her voice in every mood and key:
And she shall sing the battle of those Rams,
Who, to th'affrighting of our tender lambs,
In riualling for Helens of the flock,
Affront each other with a cannon knock,
Some fair Ewes wool-lock wearing each in horn,
Or other favor as they wont toforn,
At feast of Gor, good Shepherd, that of yore
Embrew'd the Crosier-staffe with Dragons gore.
This order shall she sing of all most liefe;
Because my fair guest weds thereof the chief.

Ph. So for Calliope: What for the rest?


Mu. In Orchard, that my self with care have dressed,
My rarest tree (it bears but only seau'n)
Has apples streaked like the Globe of Heaven.
On one of them Vranie shall discourse
Of every star the setting and the sourse;
And show the Bride and Bridegroom all confines
Of his and her land, by the midday lines.

Ph. Were lines of length, and breadth like-easly seen
It were not heard.

Mu Then on the flowrie green,
Or in my garden shall Thalia sing,
How diverse ways dame Flora decks the Spring;
And how she smiles to see May after May
Draw'n-out, for her to trick this Ladies way
With diverse kinds of diuers-colour'd flowers,
Some strewn aground, so hanging on the bowers;
As curious writers wont embraue their Text
With new and gueason words.

Phi. On, on to th'next.


Mu. Well-pleasing Euterp shall the next in order
With gentle breath enwhisper my Recorder;
And after playing sing, and after song
Trull-on her fingers all the cane along;
High, low, amids; now up, now down the key
With Re-Mi-Fa-Sol, and Sol-Fa-Mi-Re;
Declaring how by four the selfsame notes
Are set all tunes of Instruments and Throats,
Which are to sound the Queens sweet harmony,
Both of her mind and bodies Symetrie.

Ph. As I have heard report, such if it be,


Mu. (Fy-on that If)


Ph. Deserves it only she.


Mu. But I proceed; On harp shall Polymnie
Renew great Orpheus sacred memory;
For loving only one; and her so well,
That he assayd to fetch her out of Hell.

Phi. So Poets say, but such come never there:
From death perhaps.

Mu. So would I do (I swear)
For such a wife.

Phi. So would not I for mine.
But now the rest; for here is but five of nine.

Mu. Sweet Erato that sets my guest a fire,
Shall play the romant of her hearts desire:
So be it her Grace it hold no disrepute
To hear it charmy-quauerd on her lute.
Then shall the Bride-maids and the Bride-men dance,
The Men of England, with the Maids of France;
And sing with Venus, Cupid, Himene,
This Madrigall, set by Terpsichore.
Spring-Quyristers, record this merry lay;
For Galla fair to day
Goes forth to gather May.
Grow all the Ground, but chiefly where she goes,
With White and Crimsin Rose;
Her Love is both of those.
She shall him choose and take before the rest,
To deck her locks and breast;
And both shall be so blessed,
That they and theirs shall golden Scepter weild
Whereto must bow and yield
The proudest plant afeild.

Ph. So, here is work for Muses all but two;
What have thou more?

Mu. Enough for them to do.


Ph. Nay, use but Clio; leave Melpomene.


Mu. Why leave her out? a stately Muse is she.


Ph. But still so sad, with look cast-downe on earth,
I doubt her presence will defeat the mirth.

Mu. No, no, I will not part her from the Queere;
But fit her humor; and to mend the cheer,
(Out-set all other woeful destiny)
My fattest lamb shall make a Tragedy.
And sing the Muse will of no greater bug,
Then war betwixt a young child and his dug;
Controuling some, though not of high degree,
As cause thereof; ye Ladies pardon me!
The melancholy Muse yet says, not I;
All that your Sex dishonor I defy;
But your fair bottles Melpomen does think
Dame nature filled, for your fair bab's to drink.

Ph. Milk would she give else only to the poor,
Not unto such as drye't and spill'c a floor.

Mu. And this it is like she will add unto the rest;
That Ladies child deserves a Ladies breast;
That brauer spirit sucked shall more embraue him,
And make him, man-grown, like a knight behave him.

P. When others make their gentle blod far-wors^
By sucking young the baseness of their nurse.
Mu For as their Heathen gods, the Heathen sayn,
No mortal blood had running in their vain;
But Venus wounded once by Diomed,
Ambrosian liquor at her finger shed:
Right so in blood of men there is great odds;
And such among them as are styled Gods,
The finest have, to breed their children food:
Blood was late milk, and milk will soon be blood.

Ph. And some love more (as cause of better luck)
Then womb that bore them, paps that gave them luck.
What parent would not such a reason move,
Drawn from the gain, or loss, of childrens love?

Mu. I once beheld where Lady of high degree,
As with her Lord and others set was she,
In mids of dinner had her child brought-in,
And gave it suck, scarce showing any skin,
Through ynch-board hole of silk, pinned up again
When child was fed, without more taking pain.

Ph. And is not this instinct through all dyssown,
That eur'y femall hatcheth-vp her own?
Well, make an end.

Mu. How can I be too long,
When Muses bear the burden of my song?
But here is a Trumpet, Fame self has no better;
And Clio sounds it well, and i will entreat her
Hereafter sing on high what foe shall bow
To th'issues of this happy match; but now
To surd it, as young trompeters are wont,
And, lest it sound too loud, set stop upon it;
Yet first bid welcome with a cheerful clank
The French Deluce to Brytaines Rosy bank.

Phi. Well fare thine heart for thinking on these things,
To please the children of so mighty Kings.
My self, though poor, will thereto join my myte
On solemn day: so leave thee for to night.

Mu. And I so thee: time is our sheep were penned:
The Sun is soonken at the Landskop end.

Then Musidor made haste home, and began
Take order for the business with his man.
(Wife had he none, the more was he distressed)
See (lad, quoth he) the house and garth well dressed
To morrow morn; for then, or soon at least,
The sweetest Nymph on earth will be my guest.
Without, plash thistles and presumptuous thorns,
That near the way grow-vp among the corns;
For fear they raze her hands more white the^ milk,
Or tear her mantles windy-wauing silk:
Within, if Spiders heretofore have durst
With cunning webs (where through the stronger burst,
And weaker flies are caught) presume to quyp
The sacred laws of men; with besome stryp
Both web and weauer down: be-rush the floor,
The porch, and th'entries, and about the door;
Set eau'n the trestles, and the tables wax,
And strew the windows: house that mistres lacks
O how (quoth he, and deeply sighed thereat)
It Is out of order; wants I know not what!
Have care (my lad) and be as 'twere my son,
He lowted low, and said it should be don.
Much hereto more was written when the Queen
Her beauty shat'd your sea and land between:
But after landing long will be my book
Held under press: on part then please you look,
Till come the rest; but o with gracious eye,
And pardon, for applying Majesty
To Shepherds style! so may you see conspire
The English and French, as no third tongue comes nigher;
No not the Greek, vnt' either; though Sir Stephen
Has made the same with French to march full
As does our English, and it shall yet more,
Now heart, and hand ye Princes join: wherefore eauen.
I pray, and will, with Hymen all mine hours,
That, for the good success of you and yours,
While earth stands Cent'r, and Heaven in circle goes
Together spring French Lilly and English Rose.
Your Majesty's faithful subject and servant, W. L'isle.

To the Readers.
COnyes, whom Solomon reckons among the wise Little-ones upon earth, do make
many skraplets and profers on the ground, before they dig earnestly for their
neast or litter; and writing-schollers draw first in blotting paper many a
dash, roundell, and minime, before they frame the perfect letters that shall
stand to their coppie: so entending some work that may (if I be so happy)
remain some while after me, many ways do I essay and try first my style and
pen; that according also to the wise rule of Horace, I may thereby judge my
self and discern quid valiant humeri, quid far recusent. Nor do I trust my
own judgment herein, so likely to be partial; but commonly present my work
in writing, before it be printed, unto some Quintilius or other, whose noble
disposition will, authority may, and learning is able to find fault and advise
me. Yet among the sundry versets or prosets, which besides this, I have or
shall set-out, if you find some that savor of my younger time; pass by them
(I pray you) or afford them the favor, that my Quintilius does, to let them
pass, because they were the way that led me to a grauer kind: as also the
grauest of humain Poetry, brought me at last to the divine; whereof I have
many Essays, now almost ready for the press. This translation of Salust du
Bartas what present occasion draws from me you may well perceive: yet think
me not herein Acta agere, to do that which was before done, and very well by
Joshua Siluester; for it is in a diverse kind, and, many years ere he began,
this had I lying by me: yea partly published in print (as Anno 1596, and Anno
1598) and dedicated to the late Noble Charles Earl of Nottingham. But now the
cause why in this I begin so abruptly, is for that I was loath to come near
the book next aforegoing; which our late Sovereign Lord King James in his
youth so incomparably made English; yet had I a desire to fall upon that brave
commendation of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and her people, in
the second book here, and that of France, in the third; both laid together
betokning (as it were) some new bond of Love shortly to come betwixt that
Realm and this; which we all pray the Lord to prosper.

To make way then yet more for this mutual acquaintance by communication of
Language, thus much of that Noble Poet I thought meet to counterpage with
French and English. Not all, both because the Kings happy match growing on so
fast, I had no time to finish and print so great a volume; and for that I may
say of this Author, as of Homer, know four of his books, and know them all:
for thus much only may suffice (I presume) to help an Englishman understand
the whole French of Bartas, or a Frenchman the whole English of Siluestor. If
you ask me why I keep this kind of Hexameter verse, I need say no more, but
that it is the same which the Author kept in the original: and he doubtless,
for the more grave, made choice thereof with great reason, according to the
counsel of Horace, who advises all writers, Descriptas seruare vices,
operumque colores: his reason follows (which with little alteration of the
verse I may hereto fitly apply) Indignantur enim communibus and prope socco,
Dignis carminibus, dici primordia Mundi.
And what is our English Pentameter but the same kind of verse which is used in
our Comedi^s? Besides, I had a desire to try how French and English would go
hand in hand; for enter changeable help and teaching of the one by the other;
now both Nations are so well inclined to learn and confer together. For
which purpose I found this work very fit, and readiest on such a sudden to
present my Lord the King withal, at the here celebration of his marriage. And
herefore only, if there were none other cause, yet (gentle Readers) my hope is
ye will hold me excused. I was about to end; but may not forget to let you
understand, that this Bartassian verse (not unlike herein to the Latin
Pantameter) has ever this property, to part in the mids betwixt two words:
so much do some French prints signify, with a stroke interposed, as here in
the first two pages you may see, for example. The neglect of this has caused
many a brave Stanza in the F^irie Queen to end but harshly, which might have
been prevented at the first, but now the fault may be sooner found then
amended. I do but note it unto you, that you may the better observe the true
cadence of this our Authors verse: and so craning your favorable construction
of these, and all my like endeauours, I rest willing to do you what further
service I am able.

VV. L.

Iusqu'a la fin du Mond la lys Francoise
Fleurisse iointe auec la Rose Angloise.


Fin d' Adam, and commencement de Noe. The end of Adam, and beginning of Noe.
PVis il commence ainsi. La branlante cite
Des peuples escaillez: tout ce lambris voute.
Ou du grand Foudroyeur la puissance eternelle
Mit Phoebus and Phebe par tour en sentinelle: Adam declaire ason fills en
co^bien de iours le monde a este cree.

L'air, des nues la lice: and le camp assine,
Oule coler^ Autan, le Nort mutine
Se donnent le battaille, and siers iettent par terre
Maint bois, qui moytoien veut esteindre leur guerre
Des fragiles humains le diapre sciour
Fut fait en six Solcils, and le septiesme iour
Fut le sacre Sabat. Ainsi la terre, l'onde,
L'air, and l'azur door des pauillons du Monde
Subsisteront six iours, mais longs, and touts diverse
Des iours bornez du course de l'oeil de l'Vniuers. Combien d'aages il dureia.

L'vn co^mence par moy. L'autre a pour son Aurore
Le pere inuente-nef. qui les coutaux decore
D'vn pampre cultiue. L'autre ce grand Berger,
Qui suit le Tout-puissant en pays estranger:
Et dounant plus de foy a la saint parole
De Dieu, Le premier aage du monde sous Ad^. Le second sous Noe. Le troifiesme
sous Abraham. Le quatriesme, sous David and ses success^s.
qu' a la raison, son fills unique immole.
L'autre un autra Pasteur dextrement courageux,
A qui la fonde-sert d'vn canon orageux,
Et qui change, veinceur, en septre sa houlette:
Grand Prophet, grand Roy, grand Chantre, grand Poets.
Celui la qui le suit, prend-son commencement
Par lannict de ce Roy, qui void cruellement
Massacrer ses enfans: and sur la riue grass
D' Euphrase transporter la Iudaique race.
Le cinquiesme sous la capti^i^e d^ Zedechias. Le ^^xiesme sous Jesus Christ.
Le de^nier qui sera le repos du monde.
Et lautre a pour Soleil le Messie attendis.
Qui batu, qui chasse, qui moque, qui pendu,
Qui mis dans le cercueil, a de nostre injustice,
Blen que just, souffert l'execrable supplice.
Mais le dernier sera le vray iour da Repos.
L'air deuiendra muet: de Neptune les flots
Chommeront paresseux: le ciel perdra sadance,
Le Soliel saclar^e, la terre sa chena^u^e:
Et nous, estans plongez, en eternels esbats,
Celebrerons au ciel le Sabat des Sabats.
Las! que doy-te esperer de larace voisine,
Du seu qui doit, vengeur, cendroyer la machine:
Considerations d'Adam sur ce qui doit auenir a ses descendans iusques a la sin
du premier mo^de extermine par le deluge: comme le rout est expose par Moses.
Des hommes qui n' auront que leur dosir pour loy,
Et qui n' orront parler nide Dieu, nide moy?
Puis que, pleins de sureur, ceux qui prindrent naissance
Dessus le sacre sueil Enos ^establi^ le (...)
Qui sentent bruire e^cor le divine judgment,
Et sont comme tesmoins de mon bannissement,
Semblent despiter Dieu. Ame traistre and mutine,
He (...) est ce ass^z d'auoir fuit triple l'Androgyne,
N' est c^ assez, O Lamech, d'auoir ton lict souille,
Si it is n'auois encor ten coutclas mouille
Dans le sang hisayeul? sans que ni la defense
De cil sou qui sleschit l'internale puissance,
Ni la marque qu' au front l'Assassin inhumain
Port^il p^ur saufconduit, ait retenu tamain.
(...) O saint Enos, sus, courage: redress
L' est (...) la soy, Enos ^establi^ le (...)
que l'humaine sagesse
Foulois la sous les pieds: inuoque l'Immortol:
Pourpre d'v^l^e le sang les coins de son autel:
D' un enceas vaporeux son nez sacre parfume,
Et l'amor^i slambcau de Verite r' allume.
V^^^ (...) ^^sciple Henoe, du monde l'ornement,
(...) ^ou^ a sey, vit a Dieu seulement.
Voy, Par soy Henoca este emporte, a fin qu' il ne vist point la moir: and ne
fut point tronue, pource que Dieu l'auoit emporte. Car deou^t qu'il fust
emporte, il a cu tesmoignage d'auoit pleu a Dieu Hebr. 11.5.
voy comme its s' ^werce a seussrir la lumiere,
Qui foud^^^-^^^e luit eu l'essence premiere:
Comme libre duioug des corporelies loix,
Et sequestre des sons, il vole quelque foi^
Dans le saint cabinet des Idees plus be^ies,
Ayant la Foy, le Ieusne, and l'Oraison pour ailes:
Comme a certains momonts, bien qu' host de celieu,
Saint il posse de tout, sent tout, void tout en Dieu:
Comme pour quelque temps montant de form en form
(...) la form de Dieu, heureux, il se transform*
Voy comme le Tout-beau, qui brulant d'amitie
Pour ses rares beantez, le vent non par meitie,
Ains tout and pour tousiours, dress a son Tout ^eschelle
Qui conduit d'icy bas a la gloire eternelle.
C'est donq fait, tu to en vas? tu to en vas donq a Dieu?
Adieu mon fills H^^^c, adieu, mon sils adieu.
V^ia haut bien heureux. Ia ton corpse que so change
(...) nature d'Esprit, ou bien en form d'Ange,
Vest l'immortalite. Iaces youx, non plus yeux,
Heno^ chemin^ selo^ Dicu. and na'p^^^^^ (...): ^ar Di^^ le t^ansporta. Genesis
5.^4.
Deco^ent slamboyans d'astres nonueaux les cieux.
^u hum^^ a longs traicts la hoisson Nectaree:
Ton ^abat est sans fin. La courtaine tiree,
T^ ^^is Dieu front a front: and sainctement vni
An bi^n trinement-vn, tu vis en l'infini.
Ce pendant icy has, nouuel Ange, tu laisses
Un peuple desbord^ i^ses mains sont pilleresses:
Sa langue (...) s^ pla^s^ qu' a semer des discors:
Les (...) Pa^^i^^ (...) ^^^ampe^t and ^^ioigne^^a^ fill^^ (...) ^ac^^^ Ca^^.
Son ventr^ est un abisme inceste tont son corpse.
Qui l'oust iamais pense? La bien heureuserace,
Le p^uple facresainct, ceux que Dieu par sa grace
Adopte, sont, helas, ceux qui plus impudents
Pour courre apres le vice ont pris lemors aux dents,
Embrassant, eschaufez, les impudiques silles
Des pr^pha^es humains: confendant les familles
De Seth and de Cain: and prisant, effron^^^,
Moius les honnestes moeurs, que les fresles beautez.
Deces sal^s ba^sers a prins son origin
Vne ^ngeance qui vit de sang and de rapine:
Iene sc^y quels Geants, cruels, hauts a la main,
Pestes de l'Vniuers, Genne engendtez de ce meslinge. Coutroux de Dieu contre
le premier monde. Genesis 6.3.
fleaux du genre humain.
Adonques Dieu, qui voit que sa lent justice
Par ses trop longs delais confirm leur malice,
Ne voulant plus plaider, colere, se resout
D' abolir soudain l'homme, and pour l'homme ce Tout.
Au moins tout ce qui fend les airs a tire d'aile,
Ou qui hance, mortel, la terre riche-belle.
Houure d'vne main les fenestres des cieux,
Deluge vniuersel sur le premice monde do^t null n' eschappe fors Noe, and ce
qui estoit enclos auce lui dans l'Arche. Genesis 6.7. and 8.
D'ou tombent mill mers sur les chefs vicieux
Des rebels humains. De l'autre poing il serre
L' espongeuse rondeur de l'execrable terre:
La met dans le pressoir, and lui fait peu a peu
Regorger tous les flots qui iadis elle a beu.
Dans chaque creux rocher vngrand torrent s' avine:
La neige a son secours des niontaigues arrive:
Les Cedres and Sapins ne monstrent que les bras:
Les fleuues se font hauts, and leurs bors se font bas.
Las! qui d'arriere-fils perds-ie dans les abimes
Pour ne scauoir nager? and sans les aspres cimes
Des monts plus eleuez, sur qui les plus gaillars
Pour se sanuer du flot, grimpent de toutes pars,
Le scrois sans neneux. Mais quoy? las! mais quoy l'onde
Fait ia moindre ces monts: la surface du monde
Deuient un grand estang. Enfans, ou suyez-vous?
Las! vos pieds sont par tout talonn^z du courrous
Du Dieu croule Universe. Le flot in tout ranage:
Les fl^^ues and la mer n'ont desia qu' un riuage:
Scanoir un etelaoirei, un ciel qui charge d'eaux
V^nt produire, irrite, des Oceans nouueaux.
Exclamation pleine de passions and affections bien accommodees a ce discourse.
O pere sans enfans! O pere miserable!
O riens par trop seconds! O race dommageable!
O goussres inconus; ou pour moy descouuerts!
O na^^rage du monde! O sin de l'Vniuers!
O ciel! O vaste mer! O terre non plus terre!
O chair! sang! A ces mots la tristesse lui serre
Les conduits de la voix. Il meurt presque d'ennui,
Et l'esprit prediseur se retire de lui.
Adam shows his son in how many days the world was created.
THen thus he began foretell. The wauy territory
Of people skalie-backt, all this high vaulted story,
Wherein the thundering God by his e'rlasting might
Has placed sentinel Sun for day, Moon for night.
The highest Air, the Mean wherein the clouds do play,
And this below, the field appointed for the fray
Of sturdie counterwinds that with a roaring sound
Throw many a wood that stands betwixt them, to the ground:
The flower-decked Inn that lodges crazie Man,
Were all by th'awfull word in six days made, How many ages it should continue.
and than
Was hallowed the seventh. In like sort Earth, Sea, Air,
And the Azure-guilt that foldes the world in curtain fair,
Shall last six other days, but long and far unlike
The days that Heavens bright eye meates-out with golden-strike.
That first begins at me, The first age under Ada^. The second under Noe. The
third under Abraham.
the next at him that first
Invented Ship, and taught dry hills to slake his thirst
With cheerful juice of grapes: the morning of the third,
Is he the mighty Groom that led his flock and heard
From home to follow God, and sacrifizd his Son
By faith in heavenly word more than by reason woonne.
The fourth under David. The fifth under Zac^^^^hias.
And he begins the fourth that had the cannon-sling,
And changed hook to mace, great Prophet, Poet, King.
The fifth a dismal day begins at the night.
Of that disastrous King whose last most-rufull fight
Was, of his children slain, and Jews all drove in ranks,
To lead a slavish life by fat Euphrates banks.
The sixth days Sun is Christ, the Savior lookt-for long,
Who sinnelesse, yet for sin of man is mocked, beat, The sixth under Jesus
Christ.
hong,
And laid in grave. The last is th'euerlasting rest.
Then shall th'embillowed Sea be down a level pressed:
The Sun shall lose his light, The last shall be the worlds rest.
Heaven stay his whirling round,
All fruit shall cease to grow upon th'all-bearing ground.
And we that have on earth beiecued Heavenly troaths,
Shall keep in Heavenly joy the Saboth of Sabothes.
What shall I hope (alas) of all the latter age,
Adam considers what shall betide his posterity till the first world is ended
by the Flood.
Or fiery vengeance sent to burn this worldly stage,
Or men who law'd by lust, nere heard of God, nor me?
What shall I hope of them, when these whose pedigree,
So late from Eden draw'n, continues lively sense
Of Heavenly doom on me, when these with mad offense,
Gods anger still provoke? Ha traitor, and rebel soul,
Ha Lamech, was it a fault so light thy bed to soul:
To third the paire-of-man: that yet more hellish wood,
Needs must thou dip thy blade in double-gransiers blood?
Nor could the Rogues pasport embrant betwixt his brows,
Nor his charge stay thine hand who power infernal bows?
But Enos, O thou Saint, be bold, Enos restablisheth Gods service.
and plant again
The standard of belief, which man's vnsteddie brain
Has laid along the ground: Call-on the Sou'raine Good:
Besprinkle his altars horns with sacrificed blood:
Send unto his sacred smell the sweet perfumie clouds,
And Truths bright lamp retinde in Errors ashie shroudes.
See Enoch thy disciple, he with a godly strife,
Still dying to himself, lives in the Lord of life.
Grace of the world, Faithful Enoch taken away to the Lord for pleasing him
Heb. 11.5. Genesis 5.24.
and sets to abide th'ey daunting shine
That blazeth lightning-like i'th'essence first divine:
Lo how delivered from yoke of bodies weight,
And sequestered from sense, he meats the toplesse height
Of Heaven, and borne on wing of Fasting, Faith, and Prayer,
Styes up the tent of Saints embroyd'red all so fair,
He, though a guest on earth, in heavenly trance does fall;
Know'th all, sees all, has all, in God that is all in all.
He passing each degree, from form to form ascends,
And (O most happy man) in Gods own likeness ends:
For lo, the All-goodly-faire him for his virtue loves,
And, not in part, but all, from earth to heaven remoues.
Gone art thou? art thou gone unto the starrie blew?
Adieu my son Enoch, adieu my son, adieu.
Live happy there on high, thy body now a sprite,
Or changed wondrously to shape of Angel bright,
Puts-on eternity; thine eyes now no more eyes,
But newly-flaming stars, do beautify the skies.
Thou drinkest now thy fill of Nectar wine, thy day
Of Saboth never ends; the veil now draw'n away,
Thou see God face to face, and holily unite
Unto the Good Three-one thou live in the infinite
An Angel new: but lo thou leauest here behind
The Patriarchs children corrupt themselves by marrying with the prosanerace of
Cain.
Men of unbounded lust, their hands-rake all they find,
Their belly like a gulf is ever gluttonous,
Yea (would a man beleeu't?) the very chosen race,
And holy peopl' of God, th'adopted sons of grace,
They are (alas) the men most impudent of all;
They gallop after sin with bit in teeth, and fall
To Embrace in lustful heat man's daughters lewd and vain,
Profanely tempering the blood of Seth and Cain:
So with a shameless eye they choose the gaudy face
Before the godly mind: From these foul beds a race
Of Giants (God knows what) spring up with bloody mind,
Strong, fierce, plagues of the world, and whips of humane kind.
Then God who sees that sin more by the long delay
Of his revenging hand increases day by day,
Is angry and now no more will plead the reason why;
But man an all for man will suddenly destroy:
At least what ere with wing does clip the yielding air,
Or haunt in mortal state the land so richly-faire.
With one hand sets he open the windows of the sky,
Whence on men's rebel heads there falls from on hie
A thousand showrie seas; he gripes i'th'other hand
The soaken spongie globe of the all defiled land,
And sets it hard in press, and makes it cast anon
What floods it ever drunk sen first the world began.
From every vaulted rock great rivers gin to flow,
And downe-hill so increase with floods of moulten snow,
That Fur and Cedar trees scarce any bow do show,
The wat'r swol'n so hie, and banks are sunk so low.
O what posterity for want of skill to swim,
Loose I within these gulfes, yet some full bravely climme
The craggie peakes of hills, t'escape the raging deepes,
And grapple about the rocks, but (ah) the wat'r up creeps,
And lesning all these hills makes all the world a mere.
My children whither now? O whither can you steer
From God, but unto God? whose anger has shook the world
Quite cut off all your legs, in flood your bodies horld.
Now grows ye flood so high that th'erth is more then drowned
The rivers and the sea have all one only bound,
To wit, a clowdy sky, a heaven still full of rain,
As traveling with child of many another maine,
To make me childerlesse. O father miserable!
O too-to fruitful reins! O children dammageable!
O gulphes revealed for me that were before unknown!
O end of all! O world en wrackt and ouerflow'n!
O Heaven! O mighty sea! O land now no more land!
O flesh and blood! but here his voice began to stand;
For sorrow stopped the pipe, and ny of life berest him:
So fallen a swoond with grief the Prophet Spirit left him.
Annotations upon the end of Adam and beginning of Noe.
1 THe wining Territory. The verses are grave, and full of majesty, and
agreeable to the person that speaks, Adam shows unto his son in how many
days the world was created; and how many ages it shall endure. To give more
weight to this declaration, he brings in the first of Mankind, to speak
thereof as it were by the rauishing power of the holy Ghost; for that his
purpose was to join to the former discourse of Creation, the sequel of diverse
ages of the world, which Adam could not speak of, but by Spirit of prophecy.

2 That first. As God created Heaven and Earth in six days, and rested the
seventh; so Adam shows that the world shall continue six ages, and in the
seventh shall be the eternal rest of the Church triumphant in Heaven. Some
there are, both old and new writers, who discoursing on this number of six, and
constring to their purpose the saying, That a thousand years are as one day
before the Lord, have imagined that the world from beginning to the end shall
fulfill the number of six thousand years; to wit, two thousand before the law,
two thousand under the law, and two thousand under Grace. But this opinion has
so little foundation in holy Scripture, that contrariwise it is refuted rather
by express testimony of Christ, who says, the latter day is unknown both to
men and Angels. Now that which the Poet propounds here concerning the worlds
six ages, not defining the number of years, it is founded in the word of God.
The first age then begins from Adam and continues till Noe, 1656 years. The
second from Noe who built the Arc, and planted the Vine, till Abraham, 292
years. The third lasts from Abraham, the great shepherd drawn out of
Chalden, who obaying the voice of God was ready to sacrifice his only son
Isaac, from Abraham (I say) unto Da^id 942 years. The fourth, from David the
valiant and nimble shepherd, who with one cast of his sling overthrew the
Giant Goliath; and of shepherd was made King, renowned above others; who was
also a great Prophet, and excellent in Poetry and Music; unto the taking of
Jerusalem under Zedechias; who after he had seen his children slain, and the
people of ludea led capture into Babylon, had his eyes put out; contains 475
years. Now, from the destruction of the first Temple built by Solomon, unto
the destruction of the second Temple destroyed by the Romans, about forty
years after the death of Christ, some reckon 656 years; and that is the fifth
age. The si^t holds on from Christ to the worlds end. If this latter age last
yet but 51 years longer, the Lord shall have attended it with as long patience
as he did the former world destroyed by the blood; but the destruction of this
world shall be by fire, Hereof see what Saint Peter says in the third Chapter
of his second Epistle.

3 What shall I hope (alas.) In all the rest of this discourse upon the first
day of the second week, the Poet makes a ^^iefe of the History in holy
Scripture contained from about the end of the fourth Chapter of Genesis, to the
end of the seventh. Adams first consideration here is of his descendants by
Cain: who given wholly to the world, forgot to exercise themselves in
godliness and true justice: Whereupon there ensued such vngedlinesse,
unrighteousness, and debauched life, as brought the del^ge and universal
flood upon them. Adam foreseeth that such as shall be living in the latter age
(wherinto we are fallen) are like to be wondrous perverse, sithence his so
near successors, even in his life time, durst provoke the just Judge of All.

The Poets have fained four ages of the world, the first of Gold, the second
of Silver, the third of Brass, the fourth of Iron: And we may put thereto a
fifth, mingled with Iron and Clay. They said the first was of Gold, for the
abundance of all good things: for then was there more knowledge and wisdom in
the soul of man; Justice and all other virtues were more honored, men's bodies
were much more big, strong, and vigorous: and so much the longer living, by how
much the less they need care to maintain health. After this life so
commodious and ensie, there followed another more troublesome; and, after that,
a third and a fourth, declining still by little and little, from worse to
worse. Compare ye the peaceable time of Adam with the broils and m^ssakers of
these our days, and you shall see plainly in the one Gold, and in the other
Iron. Nay even in the days of Hesiod and Ovid, many hundred years ago, the
Iron age is discovered by their complaints. But in that Golden age, before the
flood, when Adam, Seth, Enos, Henech, and other excellent Patriarchs lived in
the school of God, reigned ever good order: or, if there were any disorder, as
in Cain and his line, which corrupted the posterity of Seth; that same Enos
and other good men found remedy for it. Whereas now a days vice it self is
held a virtue, and right is tried only by the swords point: so are both the
bodies and souls of men decayed and abased. But, least these my notes turn to
a Satire, let us stay them here with the 12 verse of the 12 chapter of the
Apocalips, well agreeing with this latter age. Woe to you inhabitants of the
Earth and Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you, which has great wroth,
knowing his time is short.

4 Ha traitor and rebel Soul. For example of vice and wickedness, he notes
Lamech, mentioned in the fourth and fifth Chapters of Genesis accusing him to have
tripled the Paire-of-man: that is, to have brought in Poligamie, by marrying
and having two wives at once; so as contrary to the Lords appointment (who of
one body made two, and of two but one) he went about to join three bodies in
one: and whereas he ought to have but one wife, took two, viz. Ada and
Tsilla. Beside this desiling the marriage bed (which the Apostle says, Hebr.
13. is honorable among all men, and calls it the bed undefiled) Lamech is
here also accused, to have embrued his sword with the blood of his
Grandfathers Grandfather, that is, to have killed Cain, of this descent see
Genesis 4. where you shall sinde Lamech in the seventh degree; counting Adam the
first, and Cain the second, etc. Philo Judaus (Lib. de Praem^js and Poe^^s)
holds that Cain was not killed; but, as his offense was a thing never known
before; so was it punished after a new fashion: and bearing a certain mark of
Gods anger, languished in coutinuall misery, without hope of grace, or comfort.
Certain ancient Doctors give Lamech the title of a Murderer and bloody minded
Man; and his menaces in the Text show no less: hence it is that the Poet,
after diverse others, has gathered that Cain was killed by Lamech; some say
purposely, some unawares. But these Traditions having no ground in holy
Scripture, and little concerning the stay of our faith; let the Poet say, and
the Reader think what they will; Howbeit Muses shows plainly that this
Lamech of Cains Posterity was a cruel man, and given to his pleasure.

5 But Enos, O thou Saint. It is recorded by Moses, Genes. 4. Chapter the last
verse, that unto Seth the third son of Adam, was borne a son called Enos:
and it follows that then men began to call on the name of the Lord, as much
to say, as then began a distinction apparent between the Church of God and the
Race of Cain. For as much as Adam, Seth, Enos, and their Families only of all
the World, called themselves the children of God, and rejoiced in that name.
The Poet so follows this exposition, that he ioynes in opinion with such as
say, when Enos came into the world, Adam was 239. years old; and that then the
Race of Cain was so multiplied, as the service of God began to be of small
account, the due calling upon his name neglected, and the doctrine of
Sacrifices misunderstood. Whereupon these good Patriarchs, perceiving the
disorder, opposed themselves against it, by all the best means they could.
Some learned men there are, who consider the words of Moses otherwise, and as
though in the time of Enos, some others, even the descendents of Seth also,
with whom the truth of God remained, began to be debauched in following the
course of Cainites. Howsoever, most likely it is, that Enos and other good
servants of God by all means endeavored to maintain true righteousness and
holiness, and so much the rather, because they saw that issue of Cain given
over wholly to the world. And hence it is that we read in the sixth Chapter of
Genesis, that the posterity of Seth were called the Children of God; and there
also, by the Daughters of Men are meant women descended of Cain.

6 See Euoch. Moses is brief, but as grave and pithie as may be, speaking of
the holy Patriarch Enoch, Genesis 5.22. Enoch after he begat Methusala, walked
with God three hundred years; and begat sons and daughters. So Enoch walked
with God and appeared no more; for God took him. To walk with God, is to
please God, as the Apostle expounds it, Hebr. 11. Hereto the Poet affords his
learned Paraphrase. As that Enoch dying to himself, and living unto the Lord,
was exercised daily in meditation of the joys of heaven, and raised himself,
as it were, above the world with the wings of faith, fasting and prayer. As
also the Apostle says, By says Enoch was taken away, that he might not see
death; neither was he found; for God had taken him away. Saint Iu^e, in his
general Epistle, says that Enoch the seventh from Adam, prophesied against
the wicked, saying: Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to
give Judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of
all the wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all their
cruel speeches, which wicked sinners have spoken against him. The Poet holds
(according to the opinion of many Divines, both old and new) that Enoch was
taken both soul and body up into heaven, for a manifest witness, to the
former world, of everlasting life. For this was no such invisible departure or
disappearance as is of the soul from the body. And whereas the Apostle says,
he was not found; it shows, that such, as then lived in the world, laid to
heart this miracle, and after diligent search made, the godly were much
comforted thereby, as the wicked could not but be much dismayed. Moreover, the
Chronicles do reckon but fifty six years betwixt the death of Adam, and the
taking up of Enoch: and as the death of the one taught all After-commers to
think on their weakness; so the life of the other made the godly more assured
of life everlasting, and glory of body and soul for ever. I desire each
Christian Reader to consider well the fifth Chapter of Genesis; that he may well
compare the times of these Patriarchs, and mark how long some of them lived
with their fore and after-beers, whereby they might the better learn of the
one, and teach the other, what was the true service of God.

7 Men of unbounded lust. Although the first world endured 669. years after
the Assumption of Enoch; yet true is the Poets saying, that after this
Patriarch was gone, all godliness, holiness and righteousness began to
decay; howsoever Noe, and his Father Lamech, and his Grandfather Methusala
(who deceased not many months before the Flood, but in the same year) did set
themselves mainly against those disorders; and showed themselves, even by way
of preaching, to be as it were the Heralds of Justice. Moses shows plainly
the particulars throughout the whole fifth Chapter, and, in the beginning of the
sixth, what horrible sins the descendants of Seth committed by joining
themselves to those of Cain: as first the neglect of Gods word; then, Tyranny,
violence, oppression, injustice, wantonness, polygamie, or having more wives
at once than one, and all wickedness grown to a height altogether
incorrigible: so as the estate both of Church, Kingdom, and Family, were all
turned vpside down; and, to be short, a deluge of impiety and filth had
covered the face of the whole earth.

8 Of Giants (God knows what.) Moses says (Genesis 6.4.) that in those days
were Giants upon the earth, and chiefly after that the sons of God (which were
the posterity of Seth) grew familiar with the young women descended of the line
of Cain; and had issue by them. He says also that these Giants were mighty
men, which in old time were of great renown. Some apply the word Giant to the
exceeding stature of those men, whereby they made all afraid that beheld them;
Others, whom the Poet follows, to the Tyranny and violence of such as Irued
immediately before the Deluge: among whom some there were, who bore all before
them, and became a terror to all others. Goropius in his Antiquities, handles
at large this point concerning Giants; especially in his second book entitled
Gygantomachia. 1. Chassagnon has answered him in a Latin Treatise, where he
disputes of the exceeding height these Giants etc.

9 Then God who saw. The causes of the Deluge, the fore-tellin^, and execution
thereof, are set down by Moses briefly, but sufficiently, and hereto may be
applied that which our Lord and Sa^iour says, as touching these latter times,
which he compares to the time of Noe, Matthew. 24. As also that of St. Peter in
his first general Epistle, 3.20. and in his second, 2.5. Lay also to this
prediction of Adam, the description of the general Flood, set down by the
Poet at the end of the second Day of his first Week. All this requires a full
Commentary; but this may suffice in brief.

The end of the second Week^s first Day, called Adam.
The second day is called Noe; because the most remarkable things, in all the
time of that holy Father and his successors until Abraham, is there
represented in four Books following, and thus entitled: The Arche, Babylon,
Colonies, and Columns or Pillars: whereof the first is as it were a brief
Commentary upon diverse passages of the six, seven, eight, and ninth Chapters of
Genesis. But hear the Poet.

L'ARCHE. The first Book of Noe, called the Arc.
Auant propos, auquel par vne modeste plainte le poet rend les lecteurs
attentifs, and se fait voye a linuocacion du nom de Dieu.
SI vous ne, coulez plus ainsi que de coustume
Et sans peine, and sans art, o saints verse, de maplume:
Si le Laurier sacre, qui m'ombrageoit le front,
Esueille se sletrit: and si du double Mont,
Ou loin de cest Enfer vostre Vranie habit,
Ma muse a corpse perdu si bas se prceipite:
Accusez de ce temps l'ingrate cruaute,
Le soin de mes enfans, and masoible sante.
Accusez la douleur de mes pertes nouuelles:
Accusez mes preces, accusez mes tuteles.
Voila le contrepois qui tire, violant,
En bas les plus beaux soins de mon esprit volant:
La gresle de mon champ: les poignantes espines,
Qui estoufent en sleur les semences divines
Qui germoient en mon ame. O Dieu, despestre moy.
De tant d'empeschemens: r'allume de ma foy
Les charbons presque estemts: attiede un peu ton ire,
Et de moy ton esprit, o Seigneur, ne retire.
Comparaison propre, enrichistant le saint desir du Poet.
Peigne, door, poli mes verse mieux que deuant:
Et permets que ie soy, non point tell que le vent
Qui desploye, mutin, sa bruyante puissance
Contre l'orgueil des monts voisins de sa naissance:
Desplante les forests, and fait parson courroux
Dans les plains bondir les scintillans cailloux:
Mais courant il se less, and sa carriere isnelle
De lieue en lieue perd vne plume de l'aile.
Que plustost ie soy tell qu'vn fleuue qui naissant
D'vn sterile rocher, goutte a goutte descend:
Mais tant plus verse Thetis il fuit loin de sa source,
Il augmente ses flots, prend force de sa course:
Fait rage de choquer, de bruire, d'escumer,
Et desdaigne, orgueilleux, la grandeur de la mer.
Le prophet discourse de nostre premier pere
Ne fut point sans effect. Car le ciel, qui colere
Scait punir les humains obstinement peruers.
En fin enseuelit sons les eaux l'vniuers.
Iamais plus des oiseaux les bands peinturees
N'eussent d'un vol hardi dessie les Borees.
C'eust este fait de nous; and la terre eust en vain
Pousse horse tant de fruicts, tant d'herbe, tant de grain:
Si le sils de Lamce; d'un nouuel artifice
N'eust charpente, penible, un si vaste edifice,
Que dans ses cabinets, saint asile, il receut
Les parens accouples de tout ce qui se meut.
Au fin du second Iour de la premir Semain.
Ils n'y furent entrez, que dans l'obscure grotte
Du mutin roy des vents le Tout-puissant garotte
L' Aquilon chasse-nue, and met pour quelque temps
La bride sur le col aux forcenez Autans.
D'vne aile toute moyte ils commencent leur course.
Chasque poil de leur barbe est vne humide sours:
De nues vne nuict envelope leur front:
Leur crin des bagoule tout en pluyes se fond:
Et leur dextres pressants l'espaisseur des nuages,
Les rompent en esclairs, en pluyes, en orages.
Les torrens escumeux, les fleuues, les ruisseaux
S'enslent en un moment: ia leur confuses eaux
Perdent leur preniers bords, and dans la mer salee
Rauageant les moissons, courent bride auallce.
La terre tremble tout, and tressuant de peur
Daus ses veins ne laisse vne goutte d'humeur.
Et toy, toy-mesme, O Ciel, les escluses desbondes
De tes larges marests, pour desgorger tes ondes
Sur ta soeur, qui vinant and sans honte and sans loy,
Se plaisoit seulement a desplaire a ton Roy.
Ia la terre se perd, ia Neree est sans marge,
Les flounes ne vont plus se perdre en la mer large;
Euz mesmes sont la mer, tant d'Oceans diverse
Ne font qu'vn Ocean, mesme cest universe
Nest rien qu'un grand estang, qui vient ioindre son onde
Au demeurant des eaux qui sont dessus le monde.
L'estourgeon costoiant les cimes des Chaste eaux
S'esmerueille de voir tant de toits sous les eaux.
Le Manat, le Mular, s'allongent sur les croupes
Ou n'aguere broutoyent les sautelantes troops
Des cheures porte-barbe: and les Dauphins camus
Des arbres moutaignars razent les chefs ramus.
Rien ne sert au leurier, au cerfe, a la tigresse,
Au lieure, au caualot', sa plus viste vitesse:
Plus il cerche la terre, and plus and plus (helas)
Il la sent, effraye, se perdre sous ses pas.
Ia Bieure, la Tortue, and le fire Crocodyle,
Qui iadis iouissoient d'un double domicile,
N'ont que l'eau pour maison: les loups and les aigneaux,
Les lions and les dains voguent dessus les eaux
Flanc a flane, sans soupcon; le vantour, l'arondelle,
Apres auoir long temps combatude leur ailo
Contre un certain trespass, en fin tombent lasses,
(N'aians ou se percher) dans les flots courrouces.
Quant aux poures humains, pense que cestui gaigne
La point d'une tour, l'autre d'une montaigne:
L'autre, pressant vncedre or'des pies, or'des mains
A bouttees, grauit an plus haut de ses rains.
Mais las, les flots montans a mesure qu'ils montent,
Soudain qu'ils font arrest soudain leur chef surmontent.
L'un sur un aiz flotant hazardeux se commet,
L'autre vogue en un cofre, and l'autre en vne met:
L'autre encor mi-dormant sent que l'eau debordec
Savie and son chalit'rauit tout d'une ondce.
L'autre de pies and ^^ra^par mesure ramant
Resist a la seer ^ur du slot, qui fresch^ment
A son slanc abisma so^ germans, sa more,
Le plus cher de ses fills, sa compaigne and son pere:
M^is en fin il se rend, ia las de trop ramer,
A la discretion de l'indiscrette mor.
Tout tout mourt ace coup: mais les parques cruelles,
Qui iadis, pour racler les chooses les plus belles,
S'armoyent de cent harnois, u'ont ore pour bourreaux
Que les efforts baueux des bouillonantes eaux.
Tandis le patriarch qui doit peupler le monde
Seillonne sur les monts la surface del' onde,
Et-ja la saint nef sur l'eschine azuree
Du superbe Ocean nauigeoit assuree,
Bien que sans mast, sans rame, and loin loin de tout port:
Car l'Eteruel estoit son pilote and son Nord.
Trois fois cinquante iours le general naufrage
Degasta l'vniuers: durant un tell rauage
Noe n'abrege point par ieux and vains discourse
L'ennuieuse longueur and des nuicts and des iours.
Ains, comme aux mois plus chauds la doux-tombante orce,
Que la champaigne attend d'une bouche alteree,
Fait reuerdir les prez and resleurir les fleurs,
Que le ciel and l'Auton fanent de leur chaleurs;
Le miel charme-souci, qui doucement distille
De son gosier disert, r'anime sa famille,
Flate son desespoir, tarit ses teides pleurs,
Et releue son ceur abatu de doleurs.
Il console and encouragesa famille par la consideration des grandes
miscricordes du Seigneur, qui n'oublic peint a tousiours sis enfans.
Courage, mes enfans, bon caeur, ia dieu retire
Les meurtriers Oceans que le vent de sonire
A soussle sur le mond: ire qui semble armer
Con tree nous pour un temps le ciel, l'air, and la mer,
Tout ainsi que bien tossed sa pitoyable grace
Rendrale ciel serain, l'air doux, la mer bonace.
Son ire and sa pity se suyuent tour a tour
L'ire est comme vinesclair, quine fait point seiour
Long temps en mesme part: and l'autre sous ses ailes
Couure de pere en fills les familles fideles:
Dieu, le bon Dieu depart l'ire auec chiche pois.
Et sans pois la pity. Il nous bat quelque fois
Sur nos biens, sur nos fills, sur nos corpse, sur nos ames:
Mais il iette soudain ses verges dans les flames.
Il nous frappe du doigt, mais non de tout le bras.
Il tonne plus souuent, qu'il ne soudroye pas.
Et prudent Oeconome, Il fait boire aux fideles
Le vin de sacholere, and la lie aux rebels.
Ainsi le Pere saint du second Universe
Celebroit du Seigneur les traitemens diverse.
Cham plein d'impiete, est introduit repliquant a son pere, and combatant en
diuerses sorts la sage and irreprehensible providence de Dieu tout puissant
and tout bon l'humble devotion de Noe.
Mais Cham, qui nourrissoit dans sa lasche poitrine
Du profane Atheism vne aueugle racine:
Ou qui ia desiroit degrader le grand Dieu
De ses ordres sacrez, pour occuper son lieu:
Et, Demon, posseder un temple magnifique
Sous le nom de Iupin dans les sablons d'Afrique:
En rechignant la face, and froncant le sourci,
D'vn accent desdaigneux parle ason pere ainsi.
Las! que ie suis marri que ces craintes seruiles,
Geines des bas esprits, and des ames debiles,
Prenent en vous tell pied! Mon pere, he, voulez-vous
Tousiours d'vn Judge feint redouter le courroux?
Vous voulez vous forger un Censeur, qui balance
D'vn just pois vos mots, judge vostre silence,
Et conte vos cheueux? un sin Contrerolleur,
Qui tient tousiours en main la clef de vostre coeur:
Vos souspirs enregistre, epsy vos pensees,
Et les pechez presens joint aux fautes passees?
Un barbare Bourreau, quid'vn glaiue saigneux
Menace nuict and iour vostre col crimineux?
He! ne voyez-vous pas que cest aueugle zele,
Ceste bigote ardeur, forge en vostre ceruelle
Mill impies erreurs? que la credislite
D'vne extreme vous pousse en l'autre extremite,
Faisant un Dieu qui sent mill orages dans l'awe,
Les Atheistes consurent a^dacieusement la miscricord^ and la justice de
l'Etern^l.
Plus furieux qu'vn Ours plus lasche qu'vne femme?
Celui qui, mol de coour, pleure en voyant ple^rer,
S'esmeut du mal d'autrui, and ne void point tirer
Vne goutte de sang, que foible, il ne se pame,
Sous un masle estomac cache v^ vray coeur de femme:
Comme celui, qui sier laisse en toute saison
Aux roides flots de l'ire emporter sa raison,
Et sorcene, gromele un horrible mena^^,
Cache le coeur d'vn Ours sous vne human face.
Ce pendant vous voulez que tantost vostre Roy
Se fond tout en pleurs, ausi tossed que le d^^
Nous fait un peu de mal: and tantost il foudroye,
Il rauage, il assomme, il tue, il brusle, il noye?
Larage d'vn Sanglier ne brigande qu'vn bois:
Un Tyran, qu'vn pays. Et ce Dieu toutefois
Tempeste d'vn despit, and tout transporte d'ire,
Extermine, cruel, le Monde son Empire.
O la belle justice! Un ou deux d'entre nous
Out (peut-estre) pecheurs, irrite son courroux;
Tous en portent la peine: and ses mains punissantes
Frapent mesme, o pity! les bestes innocents.
Mon pere, Au lic^i de s'csleuer iusques a la main de Dieu qui punit iustewent
les hemmes a cause de leurs iniquitez, les Atheistes (contrefais aucc les
Philosophes) s'arrestent a Nature, and pensent pounoir render raison des
iugemens de Dieu.
Dieu n'est point un esprit inconstant,
Picque de tans diverse, passionne, slotant,
Ireux, vindicatif: and qui pour vne iniure
Renuerse l'Vniuers, and sa propre nature.
Tant d'humides vapeurs, tant ne nuaux slotans,
Tant de mers, don't le ciel auoit fais des long temps
Un rich magazin, du pois entrepressces
Se sont or tout a'vn coup sur la terre versees.
Et puis l'air insini, qui par secrets tuyaux,
Rare, s'estoit perdu dans les sombres caueaux
Des monts, butes des vents, and change sous la terre
En un crystal ondeux, par le froid qui le serre:
N'aguere verse le ciel iallissant a bouillons
Seulement n'a noye les moissonneux scillons,
Ains d'vn flot coutrouce dans peu de iours counertes
De Sapins montagnars les cheucleures vertes.
Lors le Pere, dague d'vne just douleur,
Response de Noe a tousles blasphemes de Cham.
Arrache un long souspir du center de son coeur,
Et prononce ces mots. O Cham race traistresse,
Honte de ma maison, chagrin de ma vicillesse,
Croire trop a toy mesme au saint Esprit trop peu,
Source de l'Atheisme.
A de ton judgment le plus sain corrompu,
Et ie crain (o bon Dieu, fay menteur mon augure)
Quelle est la sin des Atheistes.
Que du Pere tonnant lamain pesamment dure,
Foudroira sur ton chef. Ie crain que tu seras
L'obiect de sa fureur: and que tu publiras
Par l'estat mal-heureux de ton infame vie,
Ce qu'auiour dhuy ta bouche impudentement nie.
Iescay bien, Dieu merci, que ce Cercle parfait,
Don't le center est par tont, 1. Response. Dieu est immuable.
est sur tout son rond trait
Que celuy qui seul est, ne sent dans son courage
De mill passions vntempesteux orage:
Qu'immuable il meut tout: and que d'vn seul penser
Il peut bastir le ciel, and le ciel renuerser.
Iescay qu'il a son throsne au milieu d'vne slamme
Inaccessible a nous: 2. Il est incomprehensible.
que nostre ame est sans ame,
Nostre esprit sans esprit, lors qu'il vent conceuoir
Dans son cercle sini son infini pouuoir.
Iescay certes, iescay que saface estoillee
Est du flambant cerceau des Cherubins voilee:
Qu'on ne voit point le saint, le Grand, le tout-puissaut,
Si ce n'est par le dos, and c'est mesme en passant.
La trace de ses pas nous est plus qu'admirable
Son estre est incompris, son nom est ineffable:
Par ainsi les ho^mes ne peuuent parler de luy qu'improprement.
Si bien que les bourgeois de ce bas clement
Ne peuuent point parler de Dieu qu'improprement.
Si nous l'appellons fort, ce sont basses louanges,
Si bieu-heureux Esprit, nous l'egalons aux Anges;
Si grand sur tout les grands, il est sans quantite;
Si bon, si beau, sisainct, il est sans qualite:
Veu que dans le parfait de sa divine essance
L'accident n'a point lieu; tout est pure substance:
C'est pourquoy nostre langue en vnsi haut subject
Ne pouuant suyure l'ame, Pourquoy nous ne pouuons parler de Dieusinon
humainement.
and l'ame son object,
Begaye chaque coup: and voulant, peu faconde,
Render le nom de Dieu plus redoutable au monde,
Par Anthropopathie elle le dit ialoux,
Repentant, Pitoyable, and Bruslant de courroux.
La repentance and le changement que l'rescriture attribue a Dieu est loin de
tout erreur and defaut.
Bien est vray qu'il n'est point par ceste repentance
Accuse, comme nous, d'erreur and d'ignorance.
Le ialoux souuenir ne le rend enuieux:
La pity, miserable, and l'ire, furieux:
L'Immortel a l'esprit serainement tranquile:
Et ce que l'homme fait, comme instrument fragile,
Et pousse par l'ardeur d'vn esprit vehement,
Le Tout-puissant le fait auec meur judgment.
Premiere comparaison a ce propos.
Et quoy? le Medecin, sans perdre le courage,
Sans s^escouler enpleurs, sans changer de visage,
Verra bien son ami de cent maux tourmente,
Lui tastera le pouls, lui rendra la sante:
Et Dieu, qui tousiours est a soy-mesme semblable,
Ne pourra voir du ciel un homme miserable,
Sans fremir de douleur, sans se fondre d'ennui:
Ni guerir sa langueur sans languir auec lui?
Le Judge punira, Deuxiesme Comparaison.
sans se mettre en cholere,
D'vn supplice honteux l'estranger adultere,
Comme ayant sixement son regard attache
Non point sur le pecheur, ains sur le seul peche:
Et l'Eternel aura ses volontez bouclees,
Ses bras emmanotez, ses volontez reglees
La Justice, virtue en l'homme, ne peut estre vice en Dieu. Dieu ne chastie pas
pour se garantir and maintenir: mais pour garantir la virtue and confondre le
vice.
A l'appetit humain? Donc il ne poura pas,
Sans estre forcene, condamner au trespass
L' Athee and le Brigand? Sera donc la justice
En l'homme vne virtue, en l'Immortel un vice?
Dieu donques n'aura point en horreur le peche,
Que de cruelle rage il ne soit entache?
Le Pere tousiours-vn ne s'arme a la vengeance,
Pour craintif garcutir d'outrage son essance,
Qu' un mur de Diamans defend de toutes parts,
Et qui se camp au ciel horse du port de nos darts:
Ainspour regler nos moeurs, remparer l'innocence,
Estanconner les loix, and brider la liceuce.
Dieu n'a pass mesure, Les iniquitez du monde meritent un chastiment extreme.
alors qu'il a noye
Presque tout l'Vniuers du saint trac desuoye,
Car le tige d'Adam (souche de nos deux mondes)
Forcheu, se diuisant es deux branches fecondes
De Cain and de Seth; la premiere a produit
Un amere, un sauuage, un detestable fruict.
L'autre fertile enbiens, s'est a la fin entee
De ces greffes bastards: and fait vne portee
Digne d'vn tell inceste. Quand tous sont corro^pus entierement, tous meritent
d'estre exterminez.
Et qu'est-ce qu'on pouuoit
Sur la terre trouuer ac bon, de pur, de droit?
La race de Cain comme par heritage
Possedoit le peche; L'autre par marriage
L'acqueroit comme en dot: si qu'entre les humains
Ces bigarrez baisers subornoyent les plus saints.
Et nous, Les moins imparfaits passe^t condemnation lors mesmes qu'il sont plus
viuement chastiez.
nous di-ie encor, qu'vn si cruel naufrage
Espargne pour ce coup portons dans le courage
Mill and mill tesmoins, qui d'vne mesme voix
Deposent contre nous denant le Roy des Roys:
Sans que contre pas-vn, comme nos parens proches,
Nous puissions alleguer plaintes, obiets, reproaches.
Dieu n'a faict du Tyran, couurant de tant de mers
Les bestes de la terre, Dieu exterminant l'ouurier ne fait tort aux instrumens
s'il les brise and ruin auce leur maistre.
and les hosts des airs.
Car puis qu'il ne viuoyent que pour fair service
A l'homme; l'homme estant efface par son vice
Du liver des viuans, ces excellents outils
Prive de leur ouurier, demeuroit inutils.
L'homme est l'unique chef de tout ce qui respire.
Celuy qui perte un membre, encor se peut-il dire
Plein de l'esprit vital. Mais les pieds and les bras
Separez de leur chef, sentent le froid trepas.
Dieu n'a fait du cruel en submergeant la terre.
Le criminel de lose majesty me rite qu'on raze sa maison.
Car puis que l'homme auoit si l'ong temps fait la guerre
A Dieu son souuerain, nestoit-il pas raison
Que pour sa felonnie on rasast sa maison?
Qu'on (...) semast dusel? and que dans sesruines
On leust pour quelque temps les vengeances divines,
Qui causent ce desbord, non un slottant amas
Des eaux qui sont en l'air and des eaux de la bas?
Le deluge n'a point este un accident naturel, mais un tres-iuste judgment de
Dieu. Les eaux du deluge n'ont este esmeues d'vn mouuement naturel seulement
and sont procedees d'ailleurs que des causes naturelles qui ne peuuent produire
tells effects.
Si touts les bleus nuaux, qui, meslez d'air and d'onde,
Parles deux Orizons encourtinent le Monde,
En quelque angle du ciel, fuitifs, s' alloient loger,
Sans doubt ils pourroient bien un pais deluger.
Mais nostre Gallion en sa flottante course
Ayant ore la Croix pour son Pole, ore l'Ourse,
Et voguant tant de mois en climats si diverse,
Monstre que ce Deluge a noye l'Vniuers.
Que si, vaincu, tu fuis es cauernes profondes
Pour renforcer ton camp par le secours des ondes
Que tu forms de vent; monstre nous en quels monts
Peut-on imaginer d'antres ass^z profonds
Poury loger tant d'air, que sourdant en foutaines
Il flotte sur l'orgueil des croupes plus hautaines:
Veu que tout l'air qu'il faut pour emplir un grandseau,
A peine suffiroit pour fair un verre d'eau.
Et puis que deuiendroient tous ces espaces vuides?
Quels corpse succederoient aux parties liquides
De cest air, qui, fait moindre, en fontenilles bout,
Puis qu'on ne peut trouuer rien de vuide en ce Tout?
La consideration de la puissance de Dieu, assuiettissant les animaux a Noe,
lez soustena^t and nourrissant tant de te^ps en l'arche (qui estoit comme un
sepulcher) refute toutes les objections des Atheistes.
D'ou vient donc (diras-tu) ceste mer, don't larage
Les venteuses forests des Riphees saccage:
Met le Liban en friche: and tasche de ses eaux,
Enuieuse, amortir les celestes flambeaux?
D'ou vient (diray-ie o Cham) que les Loups and Pantheres
Bridant pour quelque temps leurs fumantes choleres,
Et des bois ombrageux quittant le triste effroy,
Ont, adiournez du Ciel, comparu deuant moy,
Qui tenant sous mon ioug tant de feres captives.
Suis remis es honneurs, estats, prerogatives,
Don't Adam est decheu? Qu'ici de toutes pars
Me sont venus au poing les oiseaux plus hagars,
Sans estre reclamez? Que si peu de fourrage,
Si peu de grain froisse, si peu de doux bruuage
Suffit pour sustenter tant danimaux gloutons,
Qui viuent, confinez, dans ces obscurs grotons?
Qu'ici du sier Autour la Pordris na point crainte,
Ni le Leuraut aile de la Tigresse peinte?
Que le flot contre nous tant de fois mutiue
Nait brise nostre nef? que lair emprisonne,
Les sales excremens, and la punaise haleine
Des corpse, don't la Carraque est confusement pleine,
Ne nous ait estousfez? and que bourgeois de l'eau
Nous ne trouuons ailleurs la vie qu'au tombeau?
Ceste nefn'a tant d'ais, tant de cloux, tant de tables,
Que de miracles saints and prodiges notables.
Icy l'entendement de merueille englouti,
Sans point, and sans discourse, rest comme abruty:
Et Dieu n'a moins monstre quelle estoit sa puissance
En restaurant ce Tout, qu'en luy donnant essence.
Appaise, o saint Patron, appaise ton courrous:
Guide au port ce vaiseau: seche l'onde, and fay nous
Cognoistre, soit auant, soit apres la mort blesme,
Ta sureur sur autruy, ta bonte sur nous-mesme.
Divine Verse, if with ease thou flow not as to fore
The Poets modest complaint to breed attention, and make way for his Innocation.
From out my weary quil, but make me toil the more:
The sacred crown of Bay, that wont my forehead shade,
If now decheueled, it wither, dwindle, fade:
So that my Muse be fallen into these earthly hels
From that twypointed Mount where thine Vranie dwells,
Accuse the deadly fewds of this unthankful Age,
My many suits in Law, mine often gardianage,
My household care, my grief at late and sundry losses,
And bodies crasie state: these and such other crosses,
They downward force my thoughts aspiring heretofore,
And damp my Muses wings that erst so high did soar.
This hail beats down my corn, these bushes and these weeds
Before my harvest comes choak-vp those heavenly seeds
That in my soul shot-out. 2. O rid me of all these lets,
My God and Father deerel kindle in me the emberets
Of Faith so nie put out: and, least man's wit deceive me,
Be pleased, o Lord, and o let not thy spirit leave me!
Paint, varnish, guild my Verse, now better then before,
And grant I be not like the wind that in a rore
Sends all his hurring force upon the first he meets
And proudest hills of all, rooting trees, scouring streets;
That driving over the plain, makes with his angry blast
The stones to bound-againe and fiery sparkles cast;
But faints more and more, as though his winged sway
Did scatter here and there her feathers by the way.
O rather make me like the stream that drop by drop
At first beginning falls from some rocks barren top;
But farther from the Spring and nar to Thetis flowing,
Increases in his waves and gets more strength by going;
And then enbyllowed-high does in his pride disdain
With foam and roaring din all hugeness of the Maine.
It came to pass at length, as our fore-sire foretold
And hausned long before, that angry heaven enrould
And toomb'd the world in flood, t'auenge (as well it can)
The many plighted sin of stubborn hearted man.
Never had the birds again in coueys checky-pide
The windy-whirled air with hardy flight defide;
Nor beast nor man had been: but on the land in vain
Had sprung all kind of ftuit, of tree, of herb, of grain:
Had not the godly son of Lamech learned the skill,
And took the pain to build, that Arche huge as an hill,
Which of all breathing kinds safe from so great deluge
A pair of breeders held in sakersaint refuge.
When all were once i'th'Arche, At the end of the second day of the first week.
The Almighty binds fast
In Eols closest cave the clearing Northen blast,
And lets the South go loose; he flies with myslie wing:
From each bristle of his berd there trickleth down a spring:
A cloggy night of mist embowdleth round his brain,
His hair all bushy-shagd is turned into rain.
He squeaseth in his hand the sponge of cloudy soods;
And makes it thund'r and flash, and power down showry floods.
Forthwith the foamie drains, the rivers and the brooks,
Are puffed up all at once: their mingled water looks,
And cannot find, her bound; but having got the rain,
Bears harvest as it runs into the brackie Maine.
All Earth begins to quake, to sweat, to weep for fear,
That nor in vein nor eye she leaves drop or tear.
And thou, O heaven, thy self draw'st all the secret sluses
Of thy so mighty Pooles to wash away th'abuses
That had thy sister soyld, who void of law and shame
Pleased only to displease thy King and scorn his name.
Now lost is all the land. 5. Now Nereus has no shore;
Into the watery waste the rivers run no more;
Themselves are all a Mere, and all the sundry Meeres
That were before, are one: This All naught else appears
But as a mighty Poole, and as it would convent
And join flood with the floods above the firmament.
The Sturgeon mounting ore high Castles is abasht
To see so many towns all under water dashed.
6. The Secalues and the Seals now wand'r about the rocks,
Where late of bearded goats, were fed the iumping flocks.
Camoysed Dolphins haunt the place of birds, and browse
Upon the hugest hills, the tallest Cedar brows.
A Greyhound or a Tygre, a Horse, a Hair, a Hind,
It little auailes them now to run as wight as wind.
They swin and try to stand, and all but little auailes them;
The more they footing seek (alas) the more it fails them.
The cruel Crocodile, the Tortesse and the Beuer
Have now but wet abode that wet and dry had ever.
The Wolf swims with the Lamb, the Lion with the Dear,
And neither other frayes; the Hawke and Swallow steer
About with weary wings against a certain death,
At length for want of perch in fierce wave loose their breath.
But miserable men, how fare they? think one treads
On point of highest hill, anoth'r on turret-leads;
Another in Cedars top bestirs him hand and foot
To gain of all the boughs the farthest from the root.
But (o alas) the Flood, ascending as do they,
Surmounteth every head, whereas it makes a stay.
Behold then some their lives to floting plankes commit,
And some in troughes, and some in coffers tottring sit:
One half asleep perceiues the wat'r away to iogge
His bed and life at once, another (like a frog)
Casts out his hands and feet in equal breadth and time,
And striving still with head above the slood to clime,
Sees nere him how before it newly drowned his brother,
His only child, his wife, his father, and his mother:
At length his weary limbs, no longer fit to scull,
Unto the mercy yield of wat'r unmerciful.
All, all now goes to wrack; yet Fates and deadly sear,
That erst with hundred kinds of weapons armed were
To spoil the fairest things, now only by the force
And foamy sway of Sea make all the world a corse;
Mean while the Patriarch, who should the world refill,
Plowes up the fallow-waue above the proudest hill;
And th'Arche on dapled back of the ocean swollen with pride,
Without or mast or oar does all in safety ride,
Or ankers ankerlesse, although from hav'n so far:
For God her pylot was, her compass and her star.
A hundred fifty days in general profound
Thus is the world ywrackt; and during all the flound
7 Good Noe abridgeth not the space of night or day,
Nor puts-off irksomeness with vain discourse or play;
But as in dog-day seas'n a rain shed west-by-south,
When Earth desires to drink and thirst has parcht her mouth,
Reflowreth every stalk, regreeneth all the field,
That sun and southern wind with drought before had peild:
So from his pleafull tongue falls cheering dew and air,
R'alliuing all his house and beating down despair.
And thus he washed their face and wyp'd away their tears,
And raised up their heart oppressed with ugly fears.
He incourageth his family with consideration of Gods great mercies who never
forgets his children.
Good ^heere (my lads) quoth he, the Lord will soon rebinde
And stop the murdring Seas, which his fierce angers wind
Has whirled ore the world; and as his ang'r (I find)
Has armed Sea and Air and Heaven against our kind;
So shall sure, er't be long, his mercy more renownd
Clear heaven, vnghust this air, and bring the Seas to bound.
Still follow one anoth'r his Anger and his Grace.
His anger lightning-like it stay's not long in place:
But the other under wing it broodeth as an Hen,
The manifold descents of faithfull-hearted men.
The Lord, the gracious Lord, bestows his wroth by weight,
And never waighes his grace; he whips us and throws straight
His rod into the fire; were on our body laid,
Or soul, or child, or goods; he makes us only afraid
With fingers tyck, and strikes not with his mightfull arm.
More often thunders he, then shoots a blasting harm.
And, wise-housholder-like, gives them that bend him knees
His angers wholesome wine, and enemies the lees.
This wise, that holy man, sire of the second age,
Discourses on the praise of Gods both love and rage.
Wicked Cham replies upon his father, and diverse ways opposes the wise and
blameless providence of God, and the good and humble devotion of Noe.
8 But Cham in whose foul heart blind roots were lately sone
Of godless unbelief; that thought ere this t'vnthrone
The mighty God of heaven, and bear the scept'r himself:
To hold in Afric sands, with help of hellish Elfe,
By name of Hammon Jove, some temple stately built,
Where, as a God, he might have Altars bloudy-guilt:
With anger-bended brow, and countenance ill apaid
Thus in disdainful tone his father checkd; and said,
9 Fie fath'r, I am ashamed to see on you lay hold
These slavish thoughts, that seize base minds and fly the bold.
This fained angry Judge thus always will you fear?
As peyzing words and thoughts, and counting every hear?
A Censour feign you still that bears in hand the keys
Of yours and every heart; to search out when he please
Yours, and all hidden thoughts; yea all your sighs t'enroule,
And present faults and past together to control?
That aiming at your neck with bloud-embrued knife
Is hangman-like at hand to cut the strings of life?
Alas perceive you not how this hood-winked zeal
And superstitious heat (to reason I appeal)
Makes errors many and foul your wits bright lamp to smother?
How light belief you drives from one extreme t'another?
You make a thousand qualmes your great Gods heart to strike:
You make him fell as Bear, Thus Atheists presumptuously censure the mercy
and Justice of God.
and queasie woman-like.
Let any sinner weep, his tender heart will melt;
As if a wretches harm the great Commander felt:
He sees no drop of blood, but (ere we know what ailes him)
Swoons, and in manly breast his female courage fails him:
And yet you make him fierce, and suffering often the sway
And foamy stream of wroth to bear his reason away:
With heart of savage Bear in manly shape he freats;
He rages then, he roares, he thunders out his threats.
Thus if your nail but ache, your God puts fing'r ith'eye;
Again he kills, burns, drownes, all for as light a why.
A wild Boares tusked rage but only one forest harries,
A Tyrant but a Realm; when angers tempest carries
Your God against the world with such a spightfull ghust,
As if his Realm of All should out of All be thrust.
Here Is Justice! here is good Right! (what other can ensue it?)
Some one or two perhaps have sinned, and all do rue it.
Nay, nay, his venging hand (alack) for our offense
The Atheists co^spiring with the Philosophers, ascribe unto natural reason
all that is done by the just revenging hand of God.
Destroys the very beasts for all their innocence.
O fath'r it cannot be that God's so passionate;
So soon in diverse fits, peace and war, love and hate:
Or so given to revenge, that he for one default
Should hurt his own estate, and bring the world to naught.
The many watrie mists, the many floating clouds,
That heaven has stored up and long kept under shrowds,
By selfe-waight enterprest and loosned of their bands,
Now gush out allatonce, and ouer-flow the lands.
Then Air amightie deal that under looser ground
(As thin it is) a way by secret leaking found,
And lay in wind-shot hills, by cold turned crystal wave,
At first well'd up the sky, then downward gau to rane,
And drowned the corny ranks; at length so sweld and wox,
It passed the green-lock heads of tallest vpland oaks.
Nots answer unto all the blasphemies of Cham and his like.
10 By this the father gauld with grief and godly smart,
A long sigh yexed-out from deep cent'r of his heart.
And, ha vile Came, quoth he, head of disloyal race,
Discomfort of mine age, my houses soul disgrace,
Undone thou art, and deceived, thy sense is grown vnsownd
By trusting to thy self without the Spirits ground.
And sure I fear (but o! God let me prove a liar)
I fear with heavy hand the lofty-thundring Sire
Will blast thy godless head, and at thee shall be floong
His angers fiery darts: that, as thy shameless tongue
With bold and brazen face presumes now to deny him,
Thy miserable estate in time to come may try him.
First that God is infind^, vnchage able, Alinightie, and incomprehensible.
I know (and God be thankt) this Circle all whole and sound,
Whose cent'r has place in all, as over all go'th his round,
This only being power, feels not within his mind
A thousand diverse fits driu'n with a counter-wind;
He mooues All yet vnmooud, yea only with a thought
Works-vp the frame of Heaven, and pulls down what he wrought.
I know his throne is built amids a flaming fire,
To which none other can (but only of grace) aspire.
For breathless is our breath, and ghostlesse is our ghost,
When his unbounded might in circl 'he list to coast.
I know, I know, his face how bright it through shines
The double winged mask of glorious Cherubines.
That Holy, Almighty, Great, but on his back behind,
None ever saw, and then he passed like a wind.
The step-tracke of his feet is more then meruellable,
His Being vncomprisd, his name unutterable:
That we who dwell on earth, so low thrust from the sky,
Do never speak of God but all improperly.
For, call him happy Ghost, ye grant him not an ase,
Above an Angels right: say Strong, and that is more base:
Say Greatest of all Great, he is void of quantity:
Say Good* Fair, Holy one; he is void of quality.
Of his divine estate the full accomplishment
Is mere substantial, and takes not accident.
And that is the cause our tongue in such a lofty subject
Attaining not the mind, Why we cannot speak of God, but in terms of
manhood.
more then the mind her object,
Does lispe at every word, and wanting eloquence
When talk it would of God with greatest reverence,
By Manly-sufferance it has him Jealous named,
Repenting, pitiful, and with just ang'r enflamed.
Repentance yet in God emplies not, Repentance and change ascribed unto God in
Scripture, is far from error and fault.
as in us,
Misdome or ignorance; nor is he envious
For all his Iealosie; his pity cannot set him
In miserable estate; his anger cannot fret him.
Calm and in quiet is the Spirit of the Lord:
And look what goodly work frail man could ere afford,
Thrust headlong on with heat of any raging passion,
The Lord it works, and all with ripe consideration.
What? 1. Comparison for that purpose.
shall the Leach behold without a weeping eye,
Without a change of look, without a swoone or cry,
The struggling of his friend with many sorts of pain;
And feel his fainting pulse, and make him whole again:
And shall not God that was, and is, and shall be th'same,
On miserable man look down from heavenly frame,
Without a fit of grief, without a woeful cry;
2. Comparison.
Nor heal infirmities without infirmity?
Or shall a Judge condemn, without all angers sting,
The strange adulterer to shameful suffering;
As aiming sharp revenge and setting his entence
Not on the sinn'r at all, but on the sole offense;
And shall the fancy of man so bind the will of God,
That which is Justice in man, cannot be vice in God.
He may not lift his arm and just revenging rod
Without some fury against a thief or Athean?
Or is it a vice in God, God punishes not to defend his own estate: but to
maintain virtue and confoun vice.
that is held a virtue in man?
And cannot God abhor a sin abominable,
But of some sin himself he must be censurable?
He always one-the same never takes up arms to guard him
Or his estate from hurt, as if some treason skard him;
Whose camp is pight in heaven beyond reach of our shot,
And fens'd with Diman walls, this, that-way; which way not?
But even to guide our lives, to maintain righteousness,
T'establish wholesome laws, and bridle unruliness.
The worlds iniquities deserved extreme punishment.
Nor yet by drowning thus ny-all the world in flood,
Go'th he beyond the bounds of reason in his mood.
For Adam, who the root was of this world and the other,
Shot-forth a forked stock, of Cain, and Seth, his brother,
Two rank and plentious arms; the first a wylding bore,
Disrelisht, verdourlesse, but in abundant store.
Good fruit on the other grew; yet graff'd it was ere long
With thossame bastard ympes, and thereof quickly sprung
What lawless match begot. Then where, on all this round,
Could any right, or good, Since all were corrupted, all deserved exile.
or innocence be found?
For Sin, that was the right inheritance for Cain,
To Seths posterity was given in dower again
With daughter-heires of Cain: so were defiled then
The dearest grooms of God by marrying brides of men.
Yea we, we, that escape this cruel influence,
The best without excuse.
A million witnesses bear in our conscience,
Which all, and each alike upon our guilt accords;
Nor have we any excuse before the Lord of Lords.
Who deals not tyrant-like to whelme in wauy brees
The beast that goes on foot, and all on wing that flees:
Because for man's behoof they were created all;
And he that should them use is blotted by his fall
From out the Book of life: Th'acecssory sollowes the principal.
and why then should they stay
When he, for whom they were, is justly taken away?
Man is the head of all that draws the breath of life.
Let one a member loose, he lives yet; but if
A deadly sword the head from bodies troonke divide,
How can there any life in leg or arm abide?
But happily God's to feirce that has the land orewheld.
Yea? A traitor deserves to have his house raised.
had so many years disloiall man rebeld
Against the Lord his King, and had the Lord no reason
To raze the traitors house for such high points of treason?
To sow salt on the same, and mak't a monument
The flood was no natural accident but a just judgment of God.
That his divine revenge, not Sea or Air has sent
This rauing water-Masse?
Let all the clowdie weather
That round-encourtaines Earth be gathered thick together
From either cope of Heaven, and bee'tall powered down
In place what e're, it would but some one country drown:
But this our saving ship, by floating every where,
Now vnd'r a Southern Cross, now vnd'r a Northen Bear,
And thwarting all this while so many a diverse Clime,
Shows all the world is wrapped in general abysme.
But if thou, vanquished here, to caves in earth do fly,
With floods there made of Air thy forces to supply:
What are those hills, and where, with caves so deep and wide,
To hold-in so much air, as into water tri'de,
Might heal the proudest heights; when hardly a violl's filled
With water drop by drop of ten-fould air dystil'd?
Besides, when the air to drops of water melts apace,
And lesned falls to spring, what body filles the place?
For no where in this all is found room bodilesse:
Sad wave will sooner mount, and light air downward press.
Then how (thou wilt ask me) come these huge and raging floods,
That spoil on Riphean hills the Boree-shake^ woods,
Drown Libanus, and show their envious desires
To quench with tost-vp wave the highest heavenly fires?
He ask thee (Cham;) how Wolves and Panthers from ye Wild
This refutes all the objections of Atheists.
At time by Heaven designed before me came so mild.
How I keep under yoke so many a fierce captive,
Restored as I were to the high prerogative
From whence fath'r Adam fell! how wild foul never mand
From every coast of Heaven came flying to my hand!
How in these cabins dark so many a gluttonous head
Is with so little meat, or drink, or stouer fed!
Nor fears the Partridge here the Falcons beak and pounces;
Nor shuns the light-foot Hare a Tigers look or Ounces!
How th'Arch holds-out so long against the wauy shot!
How the air so close, the breath and dong it choaks us not
Confused as it is! and that we find no room
For life in all the world, but as it were in toombe!
There Is not so many planks, or boords, or nails i'th'arch
As holy miracles, and wonders; which to mark,
Astonnes the wit of man. God shew'th as well his might
By thus preserving all, as bringing all to light.
O holy Sire, appease, appease thy wroth and land
In hau'n our Sea-beat ship; o knit the waters band;
That we may sing-of now, and ours in after age,
Thy mercy showed on us, as on the rest thy rage.
Annotations upon the first Book of Noe, called the Arc.
1 DIvine verse. He complains of the miseries of our time, of his bodies
crasinesse, and care of household affairs, which hinder his bold designs, and
make his Muse fall (as it were) from heaven to earth. He calls the verse divine
because of the subject matter which he handles; acknowledging withal, that,
as Ovid says, Carmina proueniunt anime deducta sereno: and this serenitie or
quietness of spirit, which is all in all for a Christian Poem, is a gift from
Heaven. And therefore this our Poet, In stead of calling upon his Muse (which
is but himself, or help of profane inventions) looks up rather unto that
power, from whence comes every good and perfect gift, that is the father of
light.

2 Oh rid me. This is a zealous invocation, and well beseeming the Authors
intent: which also is enriched with a dainty comparison. For verily the chief
grace of a Poem is, that the Poet begin not in a strain over high to continue,
and so grow worse and worse to the end: but rather that he increase and advance
himself by little and little, as Virgil among the Latin Poets most happily
has done. Horace also wills a good writer, in a long-winded work, ex sumo
dare lucem, that is, to goe-on and finish more happily then he began. Who so
does otherwise, like is to the blustering wind, which the longer it continues,
grows less and less by degrees: but the wise Poet will follow rather the
example of Rivers, which from a small spring, the farther they run grow on
still to more and more stream and greatness.

3 As our foresire foretold. Saint Peter in his 2. chapt. of his 2. Ep. calls
Noe the Herault or Preacher of righteousness; and in the eleauenth chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is said that Noe, being advertised from God of
things not yet seen, conceined a reverent sear; and built the Arch for
safeguard of his family: through the which Arch he condemned the world, and was
made heir of the righteousness, which is by says. By these places may be
gathered, that Noe laying hold on the truth of Gods threats and promises (as
Moses also shows in the sixth of Gen.) prepared materials for the Arch; and in
building the same, did, as well by work, as word of a Preacher, condemn the
impiety and wickedness of men; warning them of the judgment which hung over
their heads; which also was put in execution at the very time appointed by the
Almighty.

4 When all were once in the Arc. This history of the Deluge our Poet had
before touched in the end of the second day of his first week; which passage I
the Translator thought good here to insert, that the description might be the
fuller. These verses, and the rest to the end of this book, show us the
fearful judgment of God upon the sins of that former world; set down
first by Moses in the 6.7. and 8. chapters of Genesis. Were I to write a full
commentary thereof, I should discourse of Noah's Ark, and diverse questions which
present themselves concerning that rare subject, with the precedents,
consequents and coincidents: but I touch lightly these things, to draw the
Readers care, and make still more and more known unto him, the great learning
and Art showed in this divine Poem. To see how our Author is his crafts-master,
let a man confer this decription with that of Ovid in the first book of his
Metam: concerning the Deluge of Deucalion. Some of his verses I thought good
here to set down, for encouragement of such as have leisure, more nearly to
consider, and compare the French with the Latin. Protinus Aeolijs Aquilonem
claudit in antris,
Et quaecunque fugant inductas flamina nubes;
Ennttitque Notum; madidis Notus euolat alis,
Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum;
Barba grauts nimbis; canis fluit vnda capillis;
Front sedent nobulae, rorant pennaeque sinusque;
Vtque manu late pendentia nubila pressit,
Fit fragor, and densi sunduntur ab aethere nimbi.


Then speaking of the land and outlet of Rivers, thus: Intremuit motuque vias
patesecit aquarum,
Eupatiata ruunt per apertos slumina campos,
Cwnque satis arbusla trabunt, pecudesque, virosque,
Tectaque; cumque sais rapiunt penetralia sacris.


See the rest of Ovid; who has not so exactly described these things, as our
Poet.

5 Nereus. By this word he means the Sea, which at the Deluge ouerflowed the
whole Earth; because it was not then held within the proper bounds thereof by
the powerful goodness and providence of the Creator. Ovid expresses it thus;
Omnia pontus erant; deerant quoquelittora ponto. Virgil, thus; Spumeus atque
imo Nereus ciet aequora sundo. Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, lib. 8. cap. 6.
has much of Nereus and the Nereides: where also he gives a reason why the
Poets so call the Sea.

6 The Sea-Calues. So I translate [le Manat] for the Veal-like flesh thereof;
though this be indeed a great Seafish described by Rondeletius in the 18.
chapter of his sixth book. He is also like a young Bull with a broad back, and
a very thick skin: they say he weighs more then two oxen are well able to
draw. His flesh (as I said before) comes near the taste of Yeale, but it is
fatter, and not so well relished: he will be made as tame as a dog; but has a
shrewd remembrance of such as hurt him. P. Marlyr of Millaine, in the 8. book
of his 3. Decade, tells great wonders of one that was tamed and made so familiar
with a certain Cassike or Lord of India: that he would play and make sport
like an Ape; and sometimo would carry ten Indians at once on his back, and
pass or ferry them in that wise from one side of a great Lake there to the
other. And for as much as having four feet like a Sea-dog, he lived on the
land as well as in the water: he would now and then wrestle with Indians, and
take meat at their hand; but would in no wise be reconciled unto the Christians
there, because one of them (whom he knew, it seems, very strangely, by his face
and clothes) had once struck him with a lance, though hurt him not, by reason
of his hard and thick hyde. Ouiede, in the 13. book and 10. chap. f his
History, describes one, but not as a creature living both at Sea and Land; nor
yet foure-footed. Howbeit he says the name of Manat is given to this fish by
the Spaniards, because he has (as it were) manus duas, two hands near his
head, which do serve him for fynnes to swim withal: he tells further many
things of singular note, and that this Manat or Seabullocke is found about the
Isle of Hispaniola. As for other fishes here mentioned, they shall be handled
in another place hereafter; but who so desires to know more of the history and
nature of them, let him read Gesner, Rondeletius, and Bellon. So much out of
the second day of the first week: Now let us go on with this book of the
Arc.

7 Good Noe. In the history of Moses, Genesis 7. there are certain points worthy
noting, to prove that the faithful and holy Patriarck Noes heart failed him
not, though he saw then the Arc tossed up and down the boundless waters of
this general Flood; though all the fountains of the great deep broke forth,
and the floodgates of Heaven were opened, so as the rain fell amain and
without ceasing upon the face of the earth forty days and forty nights
together; and the water swelled fifty cubits above the highest of all hills.
The first is, that he entered the Arc himself with his wife and children, and
their wives also, at the commandment of God. The second is, that, after all
the beasts, pair by pair, were also come in, God himself shut the door upon
them. For this shows that the holy Patriarch with a lively faith obeyed the
voice of God, and upon his only wise providence wholly rested. And therefore
good reason had the Poet to set down such holy exercises, as were likely to be
used by Noe, being now close prisoner (as it were) for the space of a whole
year and ten days: as may be gathered by the 11. and 13. verses of the
seventh chapter of Genesis; and by the 13. and 14. verses of the chapter
following. The sum of his discourse is grounded upon consideration of the
great mercy of God, who never forgets his children and such as fear him and
rest upon his goodness. This goodness and mercy well showed it self unto Noe
and his, among so many fearful shapes of death; while in the Arc they were
so preserved alive from the Deluge, together with the whole seminary of the
world next to ensue. The Almighty now held all creatures obedient unto the
Patriarch, as he had before disposed them to come and range themselves by
couples into the Arc, where they were, during this imprisonment, to be fed and
kept clean. Let the Reader duly consider how many ways the faith, patience,
and constancy of Noe was exercised in so weighty a charge; and how needful it
was, that God, who had shut up his servant in this prison of wood, should be
there also with him from time to time, to strengthen and make him rich in
faith, as he was; whereby he onercame all these dangers. God therefore
doubtless was the Patron of his ship; the stern, Load star, Ancor and Haven
of this Arc, sloating amid the waters now hurried after a strange manner. To
this purpose says a learned Father: Noah iactatur procellis, nec meigitur;
serpentibus and beslijs sociatur, nec terretur; ei serae colla submittunt, and
alites famulantur. It was the great mercy of God toward Noe, that he gave him
the skill and knowledge how to fit the several places in the Arc for the
creatures and their food: as also, that under one man, and so few more as were
saved with him, he held in obedience so many beasts, and (for the most part)
one contrary to another; that the men were not cho^ked up with this close air,
and ill savor of excrements: that amid so many fearful apprehensions they
were able to keep life and soul together. But the blessing of God is the stay
and sure hold of all his children.

8 But Cham. I will not speak here now of the questions arising about the time
when began, or how long continued the Flood; nor curiously examine the Hebrew
words; lest these Annotations grow too long. And the Poet has chosen matter of
more importance to be considered. I have said elsewhere, that it graceth much
a Poem, where the certame truth appears not, there to stand upon likelyhoods.
Cham showed himself a profane wretch and a scosser straight after the Flood;
whereupon both he and his posterity were accursed. The Poet therefore with
great probability supposes he could not long conceal and hold-in the poison
whereof his heart was full: but began to vent and vomit it even in the Arc:
Noe then, a man endued with the fear of God, was (surely) not silent the space
of a whole year and ten days; and his care was not employed altogether upon
the beast: it must needs be therefore that he spent some time in teaching and
comforting his family. Cham was certainly graceless, and had no feeling of
the Spirit; and fitly then does the Poet personate in him all that are profane
striuers against the judgments of God. For whatsoever is here imputed unto
Cham, may be gathered for likely, by that which he and his posterity did after
the Deluge. Noe who lived yet three hund^ed and fifty years longer, returned
(it seems) from the Armenian hills, where the Arc staid, into his own former
habitation, about Damascus, where his forefathers were buried. It is held for
certain that Sem also came again thither; and that his issue peopled the
lands thence reaching toward the East and the South; Cham drew to the South and
West; Iaphet to the North and West; whereof read ye the 10. chap. of Genesis.
Cham had one son called Cus, whose posterity inhabited a part of Arabia, and
that of Ethiopia which is under Egypt: another called Mitsraim, of whom came
the Egyptians; and another called Canaan, father of the Cananites. He had also
Put, a fourth son; but of his posterity Moses has not a word. Josephus, in
the sixth chapter of his first book of Antiquities, says he peopled Lybia. And
it was indeed in the sandy deserts thereof that the children of Cham held the
Temple and Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, or Chammon. For the doctrine of truth by
little and little being corrupted, and at last quite abolished amongst them (as
among the Cananites the Scripture shows Idolaters, Magitians, and persons
every way debauched and profane) these now blind and ignorant of the true God,
make to themselves a God; and give him a double name: one drawn from the name
of the true God Ichoua, turned into Jupiter; and the other from their great
Auncestor Cham. After this, the Devil played terrible pranks in this Temple;
and it became the most renowned among the Gentiles; as you may read in the
second book of Herodotus. And it is not unlikely that Cham, even at the time
of the Flood, was plotting in his heart for such honors, to be done him by his
posterity, prejudicial to the glory of Almighty God. As for his objections
here, they tend all (as all Chamites or Atheists reasons do) first to control
the wise and unblameable providence of the All good and Almighty God. Secondly,
to shake the foundation of devout humility in his Church. Thirdly, to censure
both the mercy and justice of the Lord. Fourthly, to make the order of Nature
his buckler, to keep off all apprehension of the vengeance of God; whose
ways, though the wicked think to follow them with natural reason, are all
past finding out, as witnesses the Prophet Isay and S. Paul.

9. Fie Father. I come now to set down in brief the reproaches, and foul
speeches uttered here by Cham, whereof I need say but little, because the
Reader may very easily distinguish them; sithence there is nothing in the Poets
words, but easy to be understood. The chief point is to consider well of Noes
answers; which I have one by one observed as they stand in the Text.

10. By this the father gauld. After he has witnessed his grief in preface,
he bestows upon this scoffer such titles as he deserved; and then lays open
the wellhead of Atheism; which is, for man to trust overmuch in himself, and
little regard what is taught by the Spirit of God: then foretelling the
miserable end of all Atheists, he answers the objections of Cham very
punctually; enriching and beautifying his discourse with descriptions,
comparisons, inductions and proofs necessary; which well considered, afford
much instruction, and comfort unto men of an upright heart. The two last
answers are very remarkable; whereunto the Patriarch most fitly adioynes the
calling on the name of God; of purpose to show, unto whom the faithful ought
to fly in all their troubles and tentations. I will not add hereunto what
Josephus has in the first of his Antiquities, because there are many things
little to the purpose, and such as sort not with the state and majesty of that
sacred history set down by Moses. Something it is that Philo Iudaeus has
written of Moses and the Deluge in his second book of the life of Moses toward
the end. Upon this history of the Flood have the Heathen people forged that
fable of Deucalion, described by Ovid in the first of his Metamorphosis. But in
these answers, by our Author put upon Noc, the Reader may find wherewithal to
stop the mouth of all Atheists and Epicures, which are so bold to censure all
that the holy Scripture says, as well of the Essence and Nature of God, as of
his works; whether they concern the creation and preservation of the world,
with the redemption of Mankind; or his just judgments upon the profane and
reprobate unbelievers.

C'est ainsi que Noe sa prison adoucit,
Enchante sa tristesse, Dieu fait cesser le deluge.
and le temps acourcit,
Nayant espoir qu'en Dieu, quiresserrant les veins
D'ou surgeonnoyent sans fin tant de viues fontaines:
Arrestant l'eau du ciel, and faisant que les airs
Raffermissent tancez, les digues de leurs mers,
Met les vents en besongne. Pour cest effect il co^mande auxvents de fair
retirer les caux and dessecher la terre.
O balais de la terre,
Frais esuentaus du ciel, o des forests la guerre,
O mes herauts, dit-il, posts and messagers:
O mes nerfs, o mesbras: vous oiscaux, qui legers
Parl'air train mon char, quand ma bouche allumee
Ne souffle que brassiers, que souffre, que sumce:
Que le foudre est monsceptre: and que l'effroy, le bruit,
L'horreur roll atrauers l'espesseur d'vne nuict:
Esueillez-vous, courez, humez de vos haleines
L'eau qui desrobe au ciel and les monts and les plains.
Labrigade des vents asa voix obeit:
Fin du deluge, and arrest de l'arche sur les montagnes d'Ararat.
L'orgueil plus escumeux de l'eau s'esuanouit:
La mer fait saretraite: and la Carraque saint
Prend terre sur un mont, don't les astres ont crainte,
Qui se perd dans le ciel, and qui void, sourcilleux,
Presque dessous ses pieds mill monts orgueilleux.
Noe, Le corbeau mis horse l'arche pour descouurir la terre La colombe a la
second fois apporte au bec un rameau d'oliuier sign de paix.
qui ce-pendant a'vn doux espoir s'allete,
Done la clef des champs au Corbeau, qui volete
Antour des monts voisins: and voyant tout noye
Varetrouuer celuy qui l'auoit enuoye.
La Colombe sortant par la fenestre ouuerte
Fait quelques iours apres vne autre descouuerte:
Et coguoissant qu'encore la marine est sans bort,
Less de tant ramer, se sauue dans le Fort.
Mais sept-fois par le ciel Phoebus n'a fait la ronde,
Qu'elle reprend le vol pour espier le Monde:
Et rapporte a la fin en son bec vnrameau
D'Oliuier palle-gris encore mi-couuert d'eau.
O bien-heureux presage! O plaisante nouuelle!
O mystere agreeable! Io, la Colombelle
Paisible port au bec le paisible rainseau
Dieu fait paix auec nous: and d'au si sacre seau
Authorize, benin, son auguste promise,
Qu'au combat on verrasans rage la Tigresse,
Le Lion sans audace, and le Lieure sans peur,
Plus-tost qu'anos despens il se monstre trompeur.
O primice des fruicts, osacre-saincte Olive,
Branche annonce-salut, soit que turestes viue
Apre's le long degast d'vn Deluge enrage,
Ie m'esgaye que l'eau n'apoint tout rauage:
Soit que, baise le slot, ta verdeur rebourgeonne,
I'admire la bonte du grand Dieu, qui redonne,
L'ame a tant darbres morts, and dans moins d'vn moment
Decore l'Vniuers d'vn nouueau parement.
Noe parle en la sort. Noe ne vent sortir sans conmandeme^t expres de Dieu qui
l'auoit enclos en l'arche.
Or combien que le Monde
Monstrast ja la plus part de ses Isles sur l'onde,
Luy presentant logis: qu'enuieilli dans sa nuict
Il descouure un Soleil qui sauorable luit:
Qu'vn air infect l'estouffe en si puante estable:
Il ne veut desloger, que Dieu n'ait agreeable
Son desembar quement, and que deuotieux,
Il soit auec tout ce qui estoit enserre de viuans auec luy.
Iln'entende tonner quelque oracle des cieux.
Mais si tossed que Dieu parle il sort de sa cauerne,
Ou plustost des cachots d'vn pestilent Auerne
Auec Sem, Cham, Iaphet, sa femme, ses trois Brus,
Et cent and cent facons, soit d'animaux pollus,
Soit de purs animaux: Car le saint Patriarche
En auoit de tout genre enclos dedans son Arche.
God makes the flood to cease.
11 Thus Noah past the time and lesned all their harm
Of irksome prisonment with such like gentle charm,
His hope was only in God, who stopping now the veins,
Whence issued-out before so many wells and raines,
Chidde the air, To that end commands the winds to drive back the water, and
dry the earth.
and bid her shut the flood-gate of her seas;
And sent North-windes abroad; go ye (quoth he) and case
The Land of all this ill, ye cooling fannes of Heaven,
Earths broomes and war of woods, my herauts, posts, and cau'n
My sinnows and mine arms; ye birds that hale so lightly
My chariot ore the world, when as in cloud so nightly
With blasting scept'r in hand I, thundering rage and ire,
From smoaky flamed mouth breathe sulph'r and coals of fire.
Awake (I say) make have, and soop the wat'r away,
That hides the Land from Heaven, and robs the world of day.
The winds obey his voice, the flood begins t'abate,
The Sea retireth back, 12 The Arklanded.
And the Arch in Ararate
Lands on a mountains head, that seemed to threat the sky,
And troad down vnd'r his feet a thousand hills full high.
13 Now Noes heart reioic'd with sweet conceit of hope,
The Raven sent out to discover.
And for the Rau'n to fly he sets a casement open.
To find some resting place the bird soars round-about;
And finding none, returns to him that sent her out:
Who few days after sends the Dove, another spy,
That also came again, because she found no dry.
But after senights rest, The Dove sent out the second time brings an Olive
branch in sign of peace.
he sends her out again,
To search if any Land yet peer'd above the maine;
Behold an Olive branch she brings at length in beak:
Then thus the Patriarch with joy began to speak.
O happy sign! o news, the best that could be thought!
O mystery most-desir'd! Io, the Dove has brought,
The gentle Dove has brought a peaceful Oliue-bough:
God makes a truce with us, and so sure seals now
The patent of his Love and heavenly promises,
That sooner shall we see the Tiger furylesse,
The Lion fight in sear, the Leuret waxen bold,
Then him against our hope his woonted grace withold.
O first fruit of the world! O holy Oliue-tree!
O saufty-boading branch for wheth'r alive thou be
And were all while the flood destroyed all else, I joy
That all is not destroyed: or if, since all th'anoy,
That waters brought on all, so soon thou did rebudde,
I wonder at the Lord that is so mighty and good:
To ralliue every plant, and in so short a space
Cloth all the world anew in liueries of his grace.
14 So said he: Noe comes not out of the Arc but by the commandment of God
who sent him thereinto.
yet (although the flood had so reflowd,
That all about appeerd some Islets thinly strewn,
Him offering where to rest: although he spied a bright,
And cheerful day amid his age-encreasing night:
Although the infected air of such a nastie stall
Ny choakt him) would he not come forth before the call
Of God that sent him in: before some thunder-steauen
For warran^ of his act gave Oracle from Heaven.
No sooner spoke the Lord, He comes forth and all other living creatures that
were with him.
but he comes out of Cell,
Or rath'r out of dens, of some infectious Hell,
With Sem, Cham, and laphet, his wise and daughters three,
And all the kinds of Bruits that pure or impure be,
Of hundred hundred shapes: for the holy Patriarch
Had some of every sort enclosd with him i'th'Arch.
11. Thus Noah. In the beginning of the 8. Chap. of Genesis Moses reports that God
remembered Noe and every beast, and all the cattle that were with him in the
Arc; and made a wind pass upon the earth; and the waters ceased. This the
Poet expounds, giving by the way very proper Epithites unto the winds: and
such also as are mentioned in the Psalms 18. and 104. This wind dried the
earth by degrees, and caused the waters to retire into their proper place of
deep Sea and Channels; for the waters enterlaced with the earth make but one
globe: And though at the Deluge, by Gods appointment, they went out far beyond
their bounds to drown the wicked; yet when the same God would deliver his
servant Noe out of danger, at his command they remasse themselves into their
wonted heap, furthered thereunto by the winds; and there continue so settled,
that they pass not the bounds of an ordinary ebb and flow. This is done by
the power of God, and for the promise he made to Noe, that there should be no
more general Flood, to destroy the earth.

12. And th'Arke. The Poet here calls it the Holy Carraque, as built by the
commandment of God, and containing his Church. On the seventh day of the
seventh month (says Moses, Genesis 8.4.) rested the Arc upon the Mountains of
Ararat. Some by this name understand the great Armenia; others, the top of
Caucasus. So Goropius, who thereupon discourses at large in the 5. book of
his Antiquities, entitled Indo-Scythica. Josephus, in his first, shows what
thought Berosus, Nicolaus Damascenus, and others very ancient concerning the
Arc; but follows the first opinion. The Poet contents himself here to
signify, and express only in general, some very high hill.

13. Now Noah's heart reioyc'd. From the end of the seventh month to the end of
the ninth (says Moses) the waters began to abate daily more and more; and on
the first day of the tenth month (that is, eight months and thirteen days
after the Flood began) the tops of the hills appeared: so then already were the
waters soonke above fifteen cubits. This fust made the Patriarch be of good
hope. For after forty days, he opened the window of the Arc, and let go the
Raven; which went and came, till the waters were dried from the surface of the
earth. He sent out also a Dove to try if they were yet further abated; but the
Dove not finding where to rest the sole of her foot, return^d unto him again
into the Arc: for the waters were yet over the whole earth, and he reached out
his band, and took her to him into the Arc. And when he had waited yet seven
days longer, he sent out the Dove again, and in the evening she returned
unto him, having in her mouth an Oliue-leafe, which she bad plucked, etc. I
have recited the Text of Moses, whereupon the Expositors discoursing are wont
to show, wherefore Noah sent-out the Raven and the Dove rather then any other
birds: and why the Dove after the Raven, and thrice. He knew full well the
nature of these two was fit for the discovery; and went on with a discreet
fear, attending, in all that he did, the manifest declaration of Gods will,
touching his coming forth of the Arc. He had also a strong hope and
confidence in the goodness of God, now proving the patience and constancy of
his servant; and strengthening him still more and more by those means of
discovery. And although the Dove at last staid and returned not unto him; the
waters being dayed from the earth; yet would he not come forth of the Arc, but
contented himself to remove the covering thereof, and behold the dry land
round about him; and staid so 27. days longer, expecting the will and pleasure
of the same God, to call him out of the Arc, which commanded him to enter into
it. A singular example of obedience and reverence due unto the Almighty. As for
the rest, the ancient Divines have at large allegorized upon this Dove and the
Olive leaf, for a token of peace betwixt God and his Church: as also upon the
resemblance, that this delivery has, with our redemption by Jesus Christ.
These are contemplations of good use, whereof the Poet makes a brief in
speaking of the Olive. Here it may suffice to have touched them in a word, and
leave the Reader to meditate thereupon. Whom I wish also to peruse the third
chapter of the 1. Epist. of S. Peter, and see what the Apostle there says
concerning the correspondence of Baptism and the Deluge.

14. Although the Flood. When Noe had patiently attended many days after the
surface of the Earth began to wax dry; God spoke unto him (Genesis 8.15. etc.)
saying, Come out of the Arc, thou and thy wife, and thy sons and their wives
with thee. Bring forth with thee every beast that is with thee, of all flesh,
both foul and cattle; and every thing that creeps and moves upon the
earth. Then Noe came forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons wives
with him. Every beast, every creeping thing, and every foul; all that moves
upon the earth, after their kinds, went out of the Arc; as it were out of a
prison most noisome and deadly, but for the presence and singular favor of the
Lord, who preserves both man and beast, as the Psalmist says. Here are many
things to be admired: Noe and all his come forth safe and sound; the beasts
also come forth without preying one upon another; and they retire themselves to
their several haunts; their dens, nests, and places sit for them: and he
retains what was requisite for sacrifice.

Mais i'enten les meschant qui n'agueres souloyent
Manger leur mots rompus: and ^raintifs, ne parloyent.
Que a un murmr sourd a l'oreille enter eux-mesmes,
Ores a cor and cri publier leur blasphemes.
Qui croira (disent-ils) sice n'est un lour daut,
Qu'vn vaisseau quin'a point trent brasses de haut,
Cent cinquante de long, and dix fois cinq de large,
Pout porter tant de mois vne si grande charge:
Ven que le fire Cheual; l'Elephant ride-peau,
Le Chameau souffre-soif, le courageux Taureau,
Et le Rhinocerot auecques leurs fourrages
D'vn plus grand Gallion combleroit les estages?
O profanes moqueurs! Response que les animaux bastards n'estoye^t en l'Arche,
la capacite de laquelle est prouuee en un mot.
Si ie n'heberge pas
Dans ce parc vagabond ie nescay quel amas
D'animaux nez apres, and de qui l'origine
Ne pend de la faueur d'vne douce Cyprine:
Les fantasque Mulets, and Leopars madrez,
Qu'vne inceste chaleur a depuis engendrez:
Tant de sorts de Chiens, de Coqs, de Colombelles,
Qui croissent chasque iour en especes nouuelles
Par un baiser meste: sujet, ou de tous temps
La Daedale Nature a prins son passe-temps.
Si ie vous prouue encore mesure par mesure,
Et comme pied par pied, que ceste ample closture
Faite par symmetrie, and subtiliugement,
Pouuoit tant d'animaux loger commodement,
Veu que chaque coudee estoit Geometrique,
Sans doubt vous serez, o Momes, sans replique:
Siceux qui contre Dieu s'arment obstinement,
Peuuent prendre, enragez, raison en payement.
Seure replique a toutes obiectio^s profanes.
Mais joy i'ayme mieux admirer la puissance
Du trois-fois Tout-puissant, and commander silence
Au discourse de la chair: S'il l'a dit, il l'a fait:
Car en luy vont ensemble and le dire and l'effect.
Aussi par son bras seul les hosts de la Barque
Noe and ses enfans sacrifient a Dieu.
Se sentent recourus du gossier de la Parque:
Et font, deuotieux, monter iusqu' a son nez
La pacifique odeur des animaux plus nets,
Les bruslant sur l'autel: puis sur l'estoille Pole
Poussent d'vn zele ardant ceste ailee parole.
15 Here yet the damned Crew, I lowdly bawling hear,
That durst ere now no more the^ whisper each oth'r itth ear.
Who but a fool (say they) will think a ship so small,
A hundred fifty long, and thirty cubits tall,
And fifty broad, can hold so many months a charge
So combersome and huge? when as the Snout-horne large,
The rinde-hide Elephant, the Camel, Horse, and Bull,
They and their fodder stuff the greatest Carack full.
O hellish-blasphemie! if of unlawful matches
Sproong since a world of beasts, The answer, that many sorts of beasts are
bred since, which were not in the Arc.
that were not under hatches
In that same floating park, a many diverse kinds
Of Cocks, of Doves, of Hawks, of Dogs, of Cats, of Hinds,
Pyde Leopards, giddie Mules, and such as daily increase
By linsiewoolsie love to a sundrie-seeming spece:
A thing wherein we find dame Nature has delight,
And ever had to show her cunning and her might:
Nay if I plainly prove, The capacity of the Arc proved in a word.
with measure foot by foot,
That in so large an hulke they might all well be shut,
So cunningly deuisd and so proportional,
(Since every cubits length was Geometrical)
What Momus can reply? if reason go for pay
Among the mad, who stand against the Lord in ray.
But let me rath'r admire, A sure answer to all profane objections.
then bring into dispute
The thrice-Almighties might; and here let flesh be mute.
What he has said is done, I build thereon my creed;
For all is one with him, the saying and the deed.
Noe and his, offer sacrifice unto God.
So brought his arm alone from-out the jaws of Hell,
The skarr'd inhabitants of that same floating Cell:
Who now a peace offering devoutly sacrifise,
And from his Alter make perfumes to Heaven arise
Of purer kinded beasts, and therewithal let fly
Zele-winged, hearty prayers; and thus aloud they cry.
15. Here yet the damned Crew. Before he goe-on, he shows what certain
profane wretches do object, who make doubt of this history, concerning the
Deluge; because they cannot conceive how it is possible that the Arc, being
but 300. cubits long and 50. broad, and 30. high, should live (it is the
Sea-mans phrase) so many months, in so great a storm of wind, rain and
violence of waters, with so heavy a charge; and contain so many creatures
together with their competent food and fodder; sithence the greatest Gallion
upon the Sea, has hardly stoage for the nourishment of a Horse, an Elephant, a
Cammell, a Bull, and a Rhinoceros, the space of ten months. The Poet has
diverse answers to this objection. First, that the mungrell beasts, of what sort
soever since engendered (as Mules, Leopards, and other like, that Nature daily
brings forth) were not in the Arc. And this may be gathered out of the very
text of Moses; who speaks of the simple and true kinds, not the mingled or
mungrell sort; as all Expositors agree. The second is, that the Arc (because
it contained so many cubits geometrical) was able to receive of all the true
and simple kinds, wild, tame, creeping, flying, both male and female. This is
briefly said; but we will speak thereof a word more. Moses has recorded (in
the 6. chap. of Genesis ver. 14. etc.) that God, having a purpose to destroy the
world, said unto Noe, Make thee an Arc of Gopher-wood (which is thought to be
a sort of Pine or Cedar) Thou shall make cabins in the Arc, and shall pitch it
inside and out with pitch. And thus thou shall make it: The length thereof
shall be 300 cubits, and the breadth 50 cubits, and the height 30 cubits: a
window shall thou make in the Arc, and in a cubit shall thou finish it abone;
and thou shall set a door in the side thereof: And thou shall make it with a
low, second, and third room, or story. The timber then of the Arc being of
such a fast and sad wood, not easily rotting, was like to hold out: and I
imagine it was a kind of Cedar, such as Pliny names in the 15. chap. of his
13. book, saying, Hanc quoque materiam, siccatam mari, duritie incorrupta
spissari, nec vllo modo vehementius. 1. That this kind of timber, dried with
the Sea, more then any ways else, grows so sad and hard, that it cannot rot.
But sithence the Commentors upon this place differ much in the interpretation
of this word Gopher; which in all the Old Testament is not found but here; I
leave the Reader, that will be exact and curious, to search it out himself. As
for the rest, it is not to be doubted, but that Noe endowed with a great
measure of the holy Spirit, and with exquisite wisdom, did herein even to the
full conceive and execute the commandment of God: So as the Arc (that is, the
close or covered ship) was surely made and finished according to the proportion
set down by Moses: and that, of choice, well seasoned, and most durable
materials, 100 year a preparing, as may be gathered by comparing the 7. chap.
and 6. verse, with the 6.10. and the 5.32. of Genesis. And for as much as the
whole business was managed by the express ordinance of God, who gave a secret
instinct to the beasts, both clean and unclean, to enter after Noe by payres
into the Arc, I conclude there was room distinct and sufficient both for them
and their provisions. Apelles an ancient Heretic, and the disciple of a most
ungodly Master called Marcion, having presumptuously controuled the books of
Moses, gave occasion to some of the Fathers, and chiefly Origin, among other
points, to treat of the capacity and largeness of Noah's Ark: wherein he
accounts each cubit Geometrical; the Quadrate whereof is as much as six other
cubits. And this, I. Buteo, a learned Mathematician of Daulphine, very
cunningly declares, in a treatise purposely written of the Ark of Noah: where
he proves to the full whatsoever may be questioned concerning that admirable
piece of Architecture, and all the cabins that it had for the creatures, and
their several provisions. Io. Goropius discourses likewise hereof, and at
large, in the second book of his Antiquities, entitled Gigantomachia;
inserting also some part of Buteo. But, to speak plainly, if we take the cubit
in common signification, for a foot and a half, and confider the different
syze of men of that age from ours, together with the length, breadth and height
of the Arc, and three stages (whereof the lowest was for the provision, the
next for the foure-footed and creeping creatures, and the uppermost for the
birds, with Noe and his family) and over all these a covering; we shall find
room enough to lodge and place all, according to the number in general set
down by Moses, to wit, male and female of every sort unclean; and seven of
the clean, male and female. The Poet here speaking of the Geometrical cubit,
means a cubit solid, that is, in length, breadth and height taken together.
There are that make the cubit two foot long; and make difference betwixt the
cubit legale (as they call it) and the cubit of a man: glancing at that which
is said (Deuteronomy. 3.) of the bed of Og king of Basan. Look what Arias Montanus
says in his Tubal Cain and Noah; where he discourses of the measures and
Architectures mentioned in holy Scripture, and of the Arc. These books are in
the Volume which he calls Apparatus, joined to the great Bibles in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, and printed at Antwerpe. That which has led these Atheists
and profane wretches into error, is, that they consider not that Noe, and the
men of that Age, by reason of their higher stature, had longer cubits; and hard
it is to give a just proportion of theirs unto ours. When Moses wrote, certain
it is, that men's bodies were abated of their bigness; yet that which he wrote
was easily understood of the Israelites, who received these things by
tradition, and knew them as perfectly, as if they saw them with their eyes. The
last argument here used by the Poet, adoring the wisdom of Almighty God, who
made all things in number, weight and measure, is a reason of all reasons; and
altogether unreasonable are they that reason to the contrary: then beside
reason were it, to propound reason to them that have lost the true use of
reason, and will conceive nothing, but that which their own mad and
extrauagant reason sounds in their ears. But again to the Text.

Pere port-trident, Pricre de Noe a Dieu.
Roy des vents, dompte-mer,
Voy nous d'vn oeil benin. O Dieu, vueille calmer
Les bouillons de tonire, and conduire au riuage
Les tableaux eschapez d'vn si piteux naufrage,
Et ranger pour iamais les enragez efforts
De l'orgeuse mer dans ses antiques bords.
L'immortel les oyant n'eut pas son si tossed
La retraite des caux, 2. Iour de la 1. Sepmaine.
que soudain flot sur flot
Else gaignent au pie: tous les sleuues s'abaissent:
Lamer rentre en prison: les montagnes renaissent:
Les bois monstrent desia leurs limoneux rameaux:
Ia la campaign croist par le discroit des caux:
Et bref la seule main du Dieu dar-detonnerre
Monstre la terre au ciel, and le ciel a la terre.
16 Noes prayer to God.
O Father, King of winds, world-shaking, taming-seas,
O God, with gracious eye behold us, and appease
The billows of thy wroth: these planchers hardly sau'n,
Of such a piteous wrack, O bring at length to hau'n:
And once for eu'r again pen-vp i'th'ancient bounds
The breezy Seas mad sway, that yet the land surrounds.
These verses are taken out of the second day of his first week.
The Eternal heard their voice, and bid his Triton sound
Retreat unto the flood; then wave by wave to bound
The waters have away; all nuers know their banks,
And Seas their wonted shore; hills grow with swelling flanks;
Upon the tufted woods appear the slimie webbes;
And earth it seems to flow as fast as water ebbes.
So did the Lord again with mercy-might-full hand
Show unto Land the Heaven, and unto Heaven the Land.
16. O father, o king of winds. Moses says (Genesis 8.15.) that God spoke unto
Noe, after that he had been shut up in the A^ke a year and some days, and
bade him come forth with his family and the beasts; and gave them all a
blessing, which continues unto this day. The Patriarch obeying the
commandment, built an Altar unto the Lord, and took of all the clean
foure-footed, and of all the clean birds (having learned this difference in
the holy school of his forefathers, who were taught it from God) and offered
thereon whole burnt Sacrifices, in repentance and faith apprehending the
Messiah and Redeemer to come. For Sacrifices were unto the faithful as visible
witnesses of their miserable estate in Adam, and Grace offered them in their
Savior, applied with the eyes and hands of a lively faith. Out of doubt these
holy ceremonies were accompanied with most carnest prayers also: because true
faith in a heart enflamed with the love of God, could not be idle; He believed,
and believing spoke, as did the Psalmist, Psalm. 116. This prayer of Noe,
supposed by the Poet, is fitted unto the consideration of time past and to
come, and founded upon the text of Moses.

Puis croissez vous (dit-il) faites par tout le monde
Commandemens and promesses de Dieu a Noe and a sa prosperity: selon que Moyse
le declare au 9. chap. de Genese. Defense de manger le sang des bestes. Le
meurtre desendu.
Formiller dans peu d'ans vostre engeance feconde.
Reprenez vostresceptre: imposez nouueau frein
Aux animaux qui siers, se sont de vostre main
Iadiscomme sauuez, r'entrez en l'exercice
De vostre estat premier. Chers enfant, vostre office
Est de leur commander. Vsez doncques de tous:
Prenez, tuez, mangez, Mais las! abstenez vous
De leur rougeastre esprit, laissez, race divine,
Laviande estouffee aux oiseaux de rapine.
Ie hay l'homme de sang. Ie suis saint, soyez saints,
Done ne vous souillez point aux sang de vos germains:
Fuyez lacruaute, detestez le carnage:
Et ne romp. z, brutaux, en l'homme mon image.
L'homme cruel mourra d'vne cruelle mort*
Le meurtrier sentira, quoy qu'^l tarde, l'effort
D'vn paricide bras; and tousiours mest empestes,
Grondant, poursuiueront les homicides testes.
Au rest, Promise qu'il n'y aura plus de deluge vniuersel.
ne craignez qu'vn Deluge second
Couure de toutes pars de la terre le front.
Non, ie le vous promets. Non, non ticle vous iure.
(Et qui me vit iamais containcu de pariure?)
Ie le reiure encor par mon Nom trois-fois-sainct:
Et pour seau de ma soy, L'are au. Ciel done pour gage de ceste promise.
dans les nues s'ay peint
Ce bell Arc piole. Quand done vnlong orage
Menacera ce Tout d'vn ondoyant rauage:
Que le ciel charge d'caux a vos monts touchera:
Que lair en plain midi la terre anuitera:
Haussez deuers cest Arc vostre alaigre visage;
Car bien qu'il soit empreint dans un moite nuage.
Qu'il soit tout board d'eaux, and qu'il semble humer,
Pour noyer l'Vniuers, tous les flots de la mer:
Il fera qu'au plus fort de vos viues destresses
Vous penser^z en moy, and moy en mes promesses.
Noe regard en haut, Description de l'arc au ciel.
and void, esmerucille,
Un demi-cercle en l'air de cent teints esmaille,
Et qui, clair, se poussant verse la voute atheree,
A pour son diametrevne ligne tiree
Enter deux Orizon: un arc de toutes parts
Egalement plie: un arc fait de trois ares,
Don't l'vn est tout au long peint de couleur doree,
De verte le second, and le tiers d'azuree
Mais de tell facon, qu'en cest or, vert, and bleu,
Any voit le plus pur riole quelque peu:
Arc qui lunt en la main de l'Archer du tonnerre,
Don't la cord subtle est comme a steur de terre,
Et qui mi-part le ciel: and se courbant sur nous,
Mouille dedans deux mers de ses corns les bouts:
Temporel ornement des flambantes voutures,
Ou Nature a broye ses plus viues teintures,
Que si tu ne comprens que le rouge, Quelles chooses sont representees par cest
arc.
and le bleu^
Pren les pour sacrement de la mer and du feu:
Du rauage ondoyant, and rauage contraire:
Du judgment ia fait, and judgment a fair.
17 Then blessed he man, and all, and said again, Gods commands and promises to
Noe and his posterity. Genesis 6.
Go breed,
And ouerswarme the world with fast-encreasing seed:
R'enhand your Princely Mace, rule, and hold hard again
The wildest of the beasts, that erst had got the rain.
Command all as before, take, use, and kill for food:
But this, Blood-eating forbidden.
beware (my sons) you eat no flesh in blood,
The life thereof, beware; unto the rau'ning foul
The strangled carcass leave, you of so heavenly soul.
I hate the man of blood, be holy, as am I.
Shun all blood thirstinesse, Murder forbidden.
but more especially
Regard a brothers life, and do not raze in man
The likeness of your God: my soul does curse and ban,
And ever shall pursue with stormy ghust of hate,
And strike with murdering hand the murdrer soon or late.
Moreover, God promises there shall be n^ more general stoods.
of a flood stand you no more in fear,
The world shall never again be ouerflow'n, I swear,
I swear even by my self (and when broake I mine oath?)
Yet for a seal and more assurance of the troath,
Behold I set my bow upon the cloud of rain:
That, The Rainbow a sign thereof.
when long season wet the world shall threat'n again;
When the air all cloudie-thick at noone shall bring you night;
And heaven orelaid with rain shall on your hills alight;
Ye may rejoice to see my seal so eue'nly bowed:
For, though it imprinted be upon a misly clowd,
Though albeset with rain, and though it seem to call
The waves of all the sea to drown the world withal;
Yet at the sight thereof, in all your sore distress,
Ye shall remember me, and I my promises.
Then Noe cast-vp eye, A description of the Rainebow.
and wondered to behold
A demy-circl' i the air of colors manifold,
That brightly shining-out, and heauing-vp to heaven
Has for Dyameter a line estrained eau'n
Betwixt both Horizons; a goodly bow to see
And coming all alike; nay one bow made of three,
A yellow, a green, a blew; and yet blew, yellow, green,
But dapled each with oth'r in neith'r is to be seen.
A bow that shines aloft in Thunder-shooters hand,
That halfe-diuides the heaven, and lays on face of land
(As twere) her fine spunne string; and bending ore the rocks
Against a misly Sun i'th'Ocean dips her nockes:
The short enduring grace of Heavens enflamed blewes,
Whereon dame Nature lays her most-quicke-lustred hewes.
What things are signified by this Bow.
But if thou do perceive no more then blew and red,
Take them for Sacraments, as if they figured
The Water and the Fire; whereof the one has of yore,
And the other at latter day shall all the world deuore.
17. Go breed. The rest of this book contains a short exposition of the
chief points handled in the ninth chap. of Genesis Whereof the first shows the
blessing of God, that would have Noe and his children with the rest, increase
and multiply, and replenish the earth. For the world, now as it were created
anew, had need be sanctified and quickened from God with a new blessing. The
second point is, that all creatures should be subject unto man: which we find
true at this day; as well by the inventions we have to master them all; and
skill to draw food, service, profit and pleasure many ways from them; as also
by this, that the fiercest of them do us but seldom hurt, though easily they
might destroy us, if that word of God (The fear of you be upon all the beasts
of the earth) were not verified, and cast, as it were, a bridle into the jaws,
and shackle to the paws of enemies armed with so much advantage against our
kind. The third, that Noe and his have leave given them, as freely to make use
of the beasts, as of any fruit growing upon the Earth; so that they eat not the
flesh with the blood for God would by this restraint show how abominable murder
is in his sight: whereof, as the fourth point, there is mention made expressly
in the text. And lastly, to comfort Noe and his, the Lord tells them, and
swears thereto, that the world should never more be destroyed by a general
Flood; and further to assure them hereof, says; This is the token of the
covenant, which I make between me and you, and between every living thing
that is with you for ever: I will set my Bow in the cloud, etc. Gen 9.12. etc.

18. Then Noe cast-vp eye. To this elegant description of the Rainebow, nothing
can be added It appeared certainly before the Flood; but then was it not a
token of Gods covenant with mankind (as now it began to be) that the world
should be no more destroyed by waters. That our Poet so plays the Philosopher
upon the colors of blew and red; he takes it of some ancient Fathers of the
Church; and it is no ways impertinent or absurd. But the Reader is at liberty,
to settle his iudgument on that he shall think more convenient. Such
Allegories and Poetical license, have their grace and good use, when a man
propounds them with modesty (as does our Poet) not importuning any to receive
them; but leaving all men their judgment free.

Ayant inuoque Dieu, Noe cultiue. la terre, comme il faisoit auant le deluge.
Les enfans de Cain s'estomt adonnez aux arts and hauts estats, tandis que ceux
de Seth s'occupe^t a l'agriculture.
nostre Ayeul ne veut pas
Qu'vn paresseux repos engourdisse ses bras:
Ilse met en besongae, and sage recommence
Exercer le mestier appris des son enfance.
Car les fills du Tyran, qui dans le sang germain,
Premiere of a tremper sa detestable main,
Ayant comme en horreur l'innocent Labourage
Et preferant, mignards, le delicat ombrage,
Les oisiues citez aux champs, rocher, and bois,
Embrasserent les arts, les sceptres, and les loix.
Mais les enfans de Seth, scachant que la Nature
Se content de peu prindrent l'Agriculture
Pour leur saint exercice, ou guiderent, soigneux,
Et les velus troupeaux, and les troupeaux laineux,
Comme usure louable, and prosit sans envy,
Art nourrice des arts, and vie de la vie.
Noe est labouteur and plant la vigne.
Aussi le cher honneur des celestes flambeaux
N^a si tossed ventouse la terre si gros d'eaux,
Que celuy qui sauua dans vne Nef le Monde,
Suant, raye le dos de sa mere feconde:
Et quelque temps apres plant soigneusement
Du sep porte-Nectar le fragile sarment.
Lieu commode pour la vigne, and les facons d'icelle.
Car parmi les caillous d'vne coline aisee,
Aux yeux du clair Soleil tiedement exposee,
La crossette il ^^^^erre, ou le tendrescion
Maintenant en godean, and tantost en rayon.
Houe la vigne en Mars: la bisne, tierce, emonde,
Taille, amend, eschalasse: and la rende si feconde,
Que dans le tiers Septembre il treuue en cent facons
Son rich espoir vaicu de vineuses moissons.
Noe est surprins de vin.
Or Not desireux de tromper la tristesse
Qui cruelle, assligeoit sa tremblante vieillesse
Pour voir tant de Palais de mol limon couuerts,
Et rester presque seul bourgeois de l'Vniuers:
Vniour relache un peu de sa facon de viure
La severe roideur: s'esgaye, boit, s'enyure:
Et, forcene, pensant dans si douce poison
Noyer son vifennuy, il noye sa raison.
Ia la test luy pese, Description de l'homme yure.
and le pied luy chancelle.
Vne forte vapeur luy bless la ceruelle.
Ses propos horse propos de sa bouche eschapez
Sont consus, sont mal-sains, be gayans and coupez
Il sent geiner de vents sa poitrine trop soul,
Et tout son pauillou branslant se tourneboule.
En sin ne pouuant plus sur ses pieds se tenir,
Accable de sommeil, commence deuenir
D'homme en sal pourceau, and veautrer sans vergongue
Au milieu du logis sa ronflante charongue,
Oublieux de soy-mesme: and noye, ne couurant
Les members que Cezar couurit mesme en mourant.
Comparaisons propre and qui representent le naturel des calumniateurs,
imitateurs de Cham.
Ainsi que le corbeaux d'vne pen* venteuse
Passent les bois pleurans de l'Arabie heureuse:
Mesprise les iardins, and pares delicieux,
Qui de sleurs esmaillez vont parfumant les cieux,
Et s'arreste gloutons sous la sale carcass
D'vn criminel rompu n'aguerre a coups de mass:
Ou comme un Peintre sot d'vn apprentis pinceau
Tire negligemment ce qui luit deplus beau
Au poursil d'vne face: and cependant remarque
Les imperfections, and soigneusement marque
L'enfonceure du nez, des leures la grandeur,
La profondeur des yeux, ou quelque autre laideur:
Ainsi les sils malius du Pere de m'ensonge
Hument ingratement d'vne oublieuse esponge
Les traicts de la virtue: and iettent, enuieux,
Sur les moindres pechez le venin de leurs yeux:
Rient du mal d'autruy: trompettent en tous ages
Les legeres erreurs des plus grands personnages:
Tells que Cham, Impudence de Cham.
qui repaist son regard impudent
Du parent deshonneur, and qui, se desbordant
En un rire profane, annonce sans vergongne
Le miserable estat de ce vieillard yurongne:
Ce qu'il dit a ses freres voyant la honte de son Pere.
Venez, venez, dit-il: venez, freres: courez
Voir ce Contrerolleur quinous a censurez
A tort and si souuent: comme il sallit sa couche,
Vomissant par le nez, par les youx, par la bouche,
Le vin son gouuerneur: and descouurant, brutal,
Aux yeux de tous venans son membre genital.
Ha, mastin effronte (dit l'vn and l'autre friar,
Sem and Iaphet reprime l'outrageuse moquerie de leurs friar, and font leur
deuoir.
Qui port escrite au front vne just cholere)
Vilain, desnature, monstre pernitieux,
Monstre indigne de voir les beaux slambeaux descieux:
Au lieu que tu deuois cacher en nostre absence
De ton propre manteau, mais plus par ton silence,
Ton pere, que lennuy, le vin troop vehement,
Et l'age out fait gliser vne fois seulement.
Tu iappes le premier: and trains, pour tesbatre,
Sa honte au plus haut lieu d'vne infame Theater.
Et prononcant ces mots, de leur pere chenu
(Tournant ailleurs les yeux) ils voilent le corpse nu.
Noe esucille de son yuresse maudit Cham and sa race.
Le vin estant cuue, ce bon homme s'esueille:
Reconnoit son erreur: vergongneux s'esmerueille
De la force du vin: and poingt d'vn vif soucy,
D'vn gosier Profetique ases fills parle ainsi.
Que mandit sois tu Cham, and que maudit encore
Soit Canan ton inignon: que la perleuse Aurore,
Le vespre catharreux, and le midi luisant
Voye tousiours chargeton corpse d'vnioug pesant.
Dieu se tienne auec Sem: Il benit Sem and Iaphet. Detectatio^ de l'yurognerie,
descrite en ses effects honteux, dangereux and excecrable.
and que bien tossed sa grace
Estende de Iaphet la formillante race.
Salle desuoyement terreur, mais on erreur,
Ains rage volontaire! o transport! o fureur
Court, mais dangereuse, and qui tues, cholere,
Clyte par son ami, Penthee par sa mere!
Phrenesie qui fais le vanteur insolent,
Bauard le grand parleur, cruel le violent,
Le paillard adultere, and l'adultere inceste,
Enflant tous nos deffauts du leuain de ta peste:
Qui vis sans front, sans yeux: qui l'ame en l'ame esteins^
Qui d'horrible forfaits diffames les plus saints:
Et qui comme le moust, Comparaison.
qui bou-bouillant sautelle,
Fait craquer les liens de sa neuue vaisselle,
Tourne-vire la lie, and regorge, fumeux,
Du fond de son vaisseau l'excrement escumeux,
Vas ruinant ton host: and pousses, indiscrete,
Du profond de son coeur toute chose secret:
Quandtu n'aurois iamais, o vilaine poison,
Fait ca bas autre mal, que priuer de raison
L'exemple de virtue, voire la virtue mesme,
On te deurois fuyr plus que la Parque blesme.
19 All holy rites performd, our gransire Noe ne will
That idleness and ease benome his arms, Noe tills the earth as he did before
the stood:
and kill
His muskles vnexersd; but hies-him to the field,
And wisely takes in hand the work he learnd a child.
Whereas the sons of Cain gave themselves to policy.
For all the tyran-stocke of brother-killing Cain,
More liking sin with ease, then innocence with pain,
Preferred a citie-life, to rule the peoples wills
With Scepters, arts, and laws, before fields, woods, or hills.
Whereas the race of Seth, well knowing nature will
With little be sufficed, began the ground to till
For holy exercise, and kept on dales and rocks
The lowing hairie herds, and bleating woolly flocks.
A praise-worth usury, gain void of envy and strife,
Art nourishing all Arts, and life maintaining life.
No sooner had the Sun, grace of coel estiall brands,
Dried with rebounding beam the water-soaken lands,
But he that kept in ship the worlds seed from a wrack,
Plowes up with sweating brow his mothers fruitful back.
Noe plants a vine.
Then careful is to plant a Nectar-bearing vine
Fit place for a Vine, and the manner of dressing it.
Upon a grittie bank where Sun does all day shine:
There either sets he pots, or else a trench he diggs
To sow-in steed of grape, or quick set younger twiggs.
The next ensuing March he hoes the vine and lops it,
He rubbes, he trims, he spreads, he prunes, and underprops it.
So fruitful then it was, that far beyond his thought,
A harvest rich-of-wine the third Septemb'r it brought.
20 Now Noe waxing old, Noe is overtaken with wine.
and daily sad to see
So many towrs in mud, while none but his and he
Enhabited the world, to driue-of melancholy,
He took upon a day more liberty then holy;
He quaffd and tripsie grew; he thought but for a season
To drown his grief in wine, and madly drowned his reason.
A drunkard described.
His tongue-strings ouerwet do cause him lisp and stut;
No word flies through his teeth, but witless, broke and cut:
His stomach ouer-laid with hot fume hurts his brain,
And rawly belcheth wind; his feet stumble on the plain,
So heavy was his head; the place is turned round;
No longer can he stand, but sleep him lays aground
Amid his open tent; there he now like a swine
His snoaring carren rowles embrewd with cast-vp-wine:
And albeside himself, not knowing what he did,
He naked lays the parts, that dying Caesar hid.
Fit comparisons for all such slanderers as Cham.
Behold as carren crows with fanny wings oreflie
The Manna-dropping woods of happy Arabie:
And reckning light the lawns and gardens of delight,
Whose ammell beds perfume the sky both day and night,
Seiz-on with glouton beaks, or rath'r anatomize
Some executed corse all-rotting as it lies:
Or as young Painters wont with bungling penecyll
Good features of a face to miss, and hit what is ill;
To draw with little heed what ere is fair to see,
And more then duly mark the least deformity,
A mole, a wart, a wen, a brow or lip too-fat,
Or else an eye too deep, or else a nose too flat:
So do the spightfull sons of Satan prince of Hell
Spoonge with forgetfulness the show of all that is well,
And biting lip thereat, cast venom of their eyes
Upon the lightest faults of men's infirmities:
They laugh at others hurt, and sound through-out all ages
The very least escapes of greatest personages.
The impudence of Cham.
So shameless Cham beheld his drunken fathers shame,
It showed, and laughed thereat, and made thereof a game.
21 Come (brothers) come, quoth he; lo he that often controules
Each little fault in us, how up and down he roules,
And spewing wine, his mast'r, at mouth, at eyes, at nose,
To all does like a beast his priuitie disclose.
Sem and Iaphet reprove him: and do their duty.
Ha dog, ha brazen face (good Sem and Iaphet said,
And with a clowdie brow just discontent bewraid)
Ha monster vile, unkind, unworthy of this light;
Thou should thy self alone, though we were out of sight
Cast on thy mantle, or hide with silence at the least
Thy fathers fault, that, once in all his life, oppressed
With grief, wine, age, has fallen; and do thou make a game
To bring his hoary head first on the stage of shame?
Noe waking curses Cham and his posterity.
Thus rate they Cham, and then with fromward look reti^e
To h^ale the nakedness of their enyeared Sire.
22 Slept-out the surfeit was, and he awoke at length,
And blushing knew his fault, and wondered at the strength
He found in blood of grape: then pricked with inward tine
He propheside, and said, Gods heavy curse and mine
Befall the race of Cham, let South, let East and West
For ever see them serve: He blesses Sem and Iaphet.
but evermore be blessed
Sems holy-chosen seed; be Canan slave to them;
A detestation of drunkenness.
And Iaphet God persuade to dwell ith'tents of Sem:
So ended. O foul vice, error, enormitie,
Nay voluntary rage, distract, and phrenesie,
Not long, but dangerous! by thee, mad as a fiend,
Agave slew her son, and Alexand'r his friend.
Does any burn in sin? thou do increase the fuel;
Thou make the prater vain, the hasty cutter cruel,
The vaunting insolent, the angry tempestuous,
The wanton mind unchaste, th'vnchast incestuous:
Thou can nor blush nor see, thou life in life destroy'st,
And holiest men of all with many faults accloy'st:
Yea, as the strong new-wine with boiling inshut heat
Cracks even the newest hoopes, and makes the vessel sweat;
Turns vpsedowne the lees, and froths out at the vent
From bottom of the caske the settled excrement;
So thou vndo'st thine host, and rashly make to fly
From bottom of his heart all matt'r of secrecy.
Though no more to thy charge be laid, o poison vile,
And this were all thy fault, to bruten for a while
A vertue-teaching life, nay vertue-selfe; I swear
Man ought thee more then face of ghastly death to fear.
19. All holy Rites performed. The Scripture says (Genesis 9.20.) that Noe was an
Husbandman, and planted a vineyard. Hereby appears that he, before the Flood,
had betook himself to the vocation of planting and tilling, with all that
belonged thereto. A trade worthy such holy Fathers, and well beseeming their
long lives. For then, and a long time after, was this exercise (by good right)
held a lawful usury, a gain void of Envy, an Art maintaining all Arts, and
the true means of long living. In the mean time, while the posterity of Seth
followed husbandry and tillage, they of Cain gave themselves wholly to high
matters of State and government in the world; whereby they came short of
health, and true wisdom. Furthermore it is said, that Noe planted a vine,
which was it may be a thing known of him before, but never dressed to the full
proof, till then; as may be gathered by that which the history shows fell
out thereupon; to wit, that Noe drunk of the wine, and was drunken, and was
vncoured in the mids of his tabernacle. For likely it is that if wine had been
used before the Deluge, drunkenness in those days would have showed it self
among other vices, and increased them: so as Noe might thereby have taken
occasion, after the Deluge, to beware thereof and stand the more upon his guard
But these words (he drank of the wine) seem to import that before then he
never had tasted the sweetness of this fruit, and was taken therewith at
unawares. Some are of opinion, that it pleased the divine goodness, because
the strength of man's nature was impaired by the Flood, to help and recompense
him with eating of flesh and drinking of wine; as meat and drink more strong,
and remedies available, against the assaults of diverse diseases and
infirmities, then like to ensue. For well may it be thought, by the curse of
God, now redoubled upon mankind, that the earth lost a good part of the force
and vigor it had before; and that the Deluge was (as it were) a strong
buck-water, to fret and diminish the force of all creatures, especially the
body of man, which after the Flood waxed more feeble, and of less continuance
then before: and for this cause it pleased God to comfort our poor and weak
Nature, with drink more vigorous and meat more solid. And for the places and
countries destitute of wine, he has furnished them with corn and fruit fit to
make (for their comfort, strength and batling) drink of such force and
strength, as will make them drunk, if they take too much of it. The Poet has
hereto fitly adjoined the description of a place fit for a Vineyard; and the
manner of dressing it. Whereof look what Pliny says in his 17. book, chap.
21. and 22. and Chapter Stephen at the chapter of the Vine in his Country Farm.

20. Now Noah waxing old. Some think that Ianus, whom the writers of old time
have made so famous, was the Patriarch Noe, and that they gave him that name of
Ianus, for the invention of wine, called by the Hebrews Iasin: but others hold
that Ianus came of Iauan (the son of Iaphet, Genesis 10.) of whom descended the
Greeks and Latins. Moreover, they paint this Ianus with two faces, one before
and another behind; to show his wisdom; or rather to signify, that he saw
both the world that was before the Flood, and that which came after. All this,
in process of time has been dawbed up with strange fables; as appears by
the writings of the Gentiles. That which the Poet here says this one fit of
Noes drunkenness, is touched and couched in a word by Moses, Genesis 9.21. but
our Author has amplified it very artificially; describing in right kind a man,
no man, when he is ouercharged with wine: of purpose to make us abhor and
detest that vice, which overthrew the ancient Greeks and Romans; though since
their time it is grown a custom, and (as may seem by the strange debauchment
and outrage of our days) now taken for a virtue. Among the works of S. Basil,
that ancient Greek Bishop, there is an Homily against drunkenness, and the
strange behavior of a drunkard; right so set down in all points, as liere by
the Poet. That which is reported of Caesar, that dying he covered himself with
his garment, when Brutus, with the rest of that conspiracy, killed him in open
Senate; is written by Plutarch in his lives. The drunken man never thinks of
his shame, as Caesar did; for, during the fit, his reason is gone; which proves
that a fit of drunkenness is much more dangerous then death it self: what is
then the habit, and continual custom thereof; besides the daily and great
offense given by these men, no men, to God and his Church? The comparisons here
used, to show the nature of a slanderer (taken from Plutarchs flatterer, etc.)
are so fitly applied by the Poet to his purpose, that they need no further
exposition.

21. Come (brothers) come. Moses says (Genesis 9.22.) that Cham the father of
Chanaan saw the nakedness of his father, lying drunk in the tent (as ver.
21.) and told his two brethren without, and Sem and Iaphet took a garment, and
laid it upon their shoulders, and went backward and covered the nakedness of
their father; and their faces were fromward, and they saw not their fathers
nakedness. And this is the point which the Poet handles in this section.

22. Slept out the surfeit was. It is recorded in the foresaid chapter also,
that Noe awoke from his wine, end knew what his younger son had done unto
him; he knew it either by some part of his memory confusedly retained in
drunkenness, or by renelation from God; except we should think rather that
Sem and Iaphet told him; that he might reprove the foul impiety of their
brother: and he is noted the younger, for aggrauation of the crime. Whereupon
the Father said: Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be to his
brethren: and again, Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and Canaan shall be his
servant: God shall enlarge Iaphet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, and
Canaan shall be his servant. The Divines propound here many questions to be
considered; whereof these two are the chief. 1. Why Noe went here so far as to
denounce that curse against his grandchild Canaan and that race. 2. What is the
meaning of these blessings upon Sem and Iaphet. The Poet answers in a word,
that Noe pronounced these curses and blessings by spirit of prophecy.
Forasmuch as God, in his infinite wisdom, when he had before humbled his
poor servant Noe, was pleased now to arm him again with fatherly authority;
wherewith he might pronounce the just and always venerable sentences of his
eternal decree. For in few words here have we the state of the world and Gods
Church, set down by this great Patriarch; who could not have spoken those
things (so after verified in destruction of the Canaanites, and Gods
extraordinary favor to the Israelites, and faithful Gentiles) but by the
Holy Ghost, to whom is always present, even that which is to come. For the rest,
Moses compriseth all (after his manner) briefly; but with words so lively and
significant, as are easy to be understood of all that weigh and read them
with reverence and humility, and take help of the good Commentaries of
Fathers both old and new.

23. O soul vice. He detesteth in most proper terms, and gravely inueigheth
against drunkenness, saying, that though it did no more hurt in the world,
then impeach the reputation of this Patriarch, otherwise an example of virtue;
it were to be hated above death. And further, in very few lines he presses
together what the ancient Authors, both holy and profane, have said against
drunkenness. There are certain eminent places of holy Scripture, which I need
but quote unto the Reader. See Prou. 20.1. and 21.17. and 23.20.29.30. etc. and
31.4. Esaias 5.11. and 22. and 28.1. Hosea 4.11. Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13. and 1
Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21. Ephesians. 5.18. Among the ancient Fathers, S. Chrysostom
and S. Basil have in diverse their Homilies very grave and expressly condemned
this vice. And there is a whole Homily against it in the first Tome of S.
Basil, and the 80. of the fourth Tome of S. Chrysostom, upon those words of S.
Paul to Timothy, Modico vino vtere. See also what S. Austen writes hereof to
the holy Virgins, and in his fifth book upon Genesis where he speaks of Lot. And
what S. Jerome has to Oceanus and Eustochium, upon the first to Tim. the third
chap. and to Titus. Among the works of the Heathen, the 84. Epistle of Seneca
is worthy to be read. The Greek and Latin Poets have also infinite inuectiues
against this vice, so beastly, nay condemned even by nature it self in beasts.
As for the examples here alleged by the Poet, of Clytus and Pentheus, see
Plutarch in the life of Alexander the Great, and Ovid in his third book of
Metamorphosis, toward the end: and apparent examples has the holy Scripture of
mischief ensuing upon this wine-bibbing; Not, Lot, Nabal, Ammon, Ela,
Balthazar, and others. But the Histories of our time have a thousand times
worse, and more tragical; which our after-beers will detest and wonder at.

BABILONE. The second Book of Noe, called BABYLON.
Preface representant la felicite des estats puplics gouuernez par bo^s and
sages Princes, and le malheur des peuples assuicttis a un tyran. Ce que le
Poet propose proprement, afin de ce donner entree en lavie and esfaitz de
Nembrot.
O QVE c'est un grand heur de viure sous un Prince,
Qui prefere a son bien le bien de sa pronince!
Qui fleau des vicieux, and des bons protectuer,
Ounre l'aureil au sage, and la ferme au flateur:
Qui de soy-mesme Roy chasse plustost le vices
Par ses honnestes moeurs, que par loix and supplices:
Qui est humble en son ame and grave par dehors:
Qui a l'amour de siens pour guard de son corpse:
Qui le luster emperle d'vn Scepre n'idolatre:
Et qui se cognoissant monte sur un Theater,
Ou pour Contrerolleur tout un Monde le voit,
Ne fait ce qu'il luy plait, ains plustost ce qu'il doit.
Mais c'est bien un Enfer de passer en seruage
Sous un cruel Tyran tout le course de son age:
D'vn Denis, qui se fait tondre auec un tison,
D'vn Neron, qui remplit dinceste sa maison:
D'vn Chathuant, qui fuit le soleil des Dietes,
Estats, and parlemens; qui tient mesme suspectes
Les langues des priuez: qui pour ses doux esbats
Fait iouster ses vassaux, and nourrit leurs debats:
Qui n'a deuant ses yeux Honneur, Foy, ni Justice:
Qui chaque iour erige office sur office:
Qui ne veut des sujets sages, doctes, puissans,
Ains couppe chaque iour les espics paroissans
Sur toute la maison: and pire qu'vne fere
Ne pardonne a son sang, non pas mesme a son friar.
Qui bien qu' enuironne d'espieux and coutelas,
Craint beaucoup plus de gens qu'il n' en effraye pas:
Fait gloire d'inuenter quelque subside estrange,
Et les siens insqu'aux os, Anthropophage, mange.
Imprime, Priere a Dieu, bien accommo dee au propos precedent, and donnant
entree au suyua^t.
o Roy duciel, dans le coeur de nos Roys
L'amour de leurs vassaux, and l'honneur de tes loyx.
Que si des courtizans l'enuenimee langage,
Ou les desbordemens familiers en nostre age
Y laise quelque traict qui sent son Nembrot,
Pass dessus ta plume, and l'efface bien tot:
Asin que pour Babel Solime se bastise,
Et que sous eux ma Muse en tous lieux retentise.
A preface representing the felicity of commonwealths governed by good and
wise Princes, and the distress of people subject to a Tyrant. Fitly fore
placed of the Poet to lead him to the life and deeds of Nimred.
O What a blessed life do men lead vnd'r a Prince,
That seeks, before his own, the weal of his Province!
That punishes the bad, and rids the good of wrong,
That entertaines the grave, and shuns the pleasing tongue,
That sou'raine of himself does all vice ouer-awe
More by his honest life then punishment or law:
That being inward meek, outward maiesticall,
Has for his guard the love of all his comminall.
That makes not his God the bright-emperled Mace;
And knowing that he stands on stages highest place,
Where, to control his works, a world has him in sight,
Commands not what him list; but rather what is right.
But sue a hell it is to suffer servitude,
And daily bear the yoke of Tyrant blood-embrude:
A Denis that for fear with brand himself yshau'd,
A Nero that his house with incest all deprau'd:
An Owl that e're auoids the light of government,
Of Parliament and Peers, that fears the prattlement
Of every private tongue; that for his only game
His people sets at odds, and feeds their angers-flame.
That honor, faith and right, has never before his eyes:
That powling Offices does every day devise;
That likes-not of the men best learned, wisest, strongest;
But, as in field of corn, does ever crop the longest
And best-y flowred ears: That, worse then Tygre wood,
Without respect of kin sheds even his brothers blood:
That, though he sensed be with sword and halberds aid,
Yet fears many more, then he does make afraid.
That boasts to devise a tax before vnknone,
And Canibally gnaw'th his peopl' all to the bone.
A prayer to God, fitly arising of the words and matter aferegoing, and making
way to the sequel.
Imprint (o king of Heaven) within our Princes breasts
Love to their-people-ward, and reverence of thine hests:
And where a courtly tongue with venomous language,
Or oth'r enormities too-well known in this Age,
Shall taint a princely mind with Nimrods property,
Draw there thine iron pen, and raze it speedily.
That for proud Babels tower they may thy Sion rear,
And my Muse under them may chaunt it every where.
1. Prince. Here is the lively image of a good Prince set down unto us in a
few lines, borrowed of many good Authors both divine and humane, that teach in
their writings rules and examples notable for this purpose. Moses in the Law,
David in the 101. Psalm, do declare unto us, the rules of duty belonging
unto Governors: and they themselves, with all those the good Judges and Kings
that were among the people of God, serve for sure patterns and examples to all
such as mean faithfully to discharge the like duties. Also Plato, Aristotle,
Xenophon, and Plutarch, with diverse others, for the instruction of those that
came after them, have set forth many godly precepts and examples. The
commodities that arise out of every one of these virtues here described (each
one whereof requires a large Commentary) are infinite: and where there are
now adays such Princes in the world, their subjects may think themselves
exceeding happy. For next after the sincere knowledge and worship of the true
God, there is no greater happiness in the world for us to enjoy, than to be
governed by such virtuous personages as are here described: mark then the
perfect image of the good Prince.

2. Tyrant. To give the better gloss to the former picture, another clean
contrary, and marvelous fearful to behold, he sets here before our eyes;
the picture of a Tyrant that lives in mistrust of the whole world, as did
Dionysius the elder tyrant of Sicilie, of whom we read among the lives of
Platarch. He was so mistrustfull, that for fear of his Barbers, he made his
daughters bring him a burning cole to sindge his hair withal. More than this,
a Tyrant defiles himself with incests, whoredoms, adulteries, and the sin
of Sodom, and therewith infecteth his whole Court and Country: as that filthy
Nero did, whose life is written by Suetonius, Tacitus, and others, reciting
therein many horrible and shameful cases. Again, the Tyrant will be subject
unto no law, nor order whatsoever; he overthrows the ground laws and pillars
of the state: or if he seem willing to submit himself thereunto, it is to
further himself so much the more in the undermining, by diverse hid practices,
and destroying all such as might any way resist, or make head against him.
Hence comes it to pass, that he may in no wise abide any inquisition or
examination to be made of his unworthy and vile outrages, but vaunteth of the
injury that private men suffer, and discredit they are driven unto by means
of his oppression. To maintain his state the better, he entertaineth and
vpholdeth all manner of hurlyburlies, factions, quariels, and civil wars: he
favors ruffians, bawds, slatterers, liars, light and loose persons,
murderers, impoysoners, Epicures, Atheists, and such as are defiled with all
manner of vice and wickedness. He promises mountains, performs nothing:
glories to break oath and promise, and to deceive and surprise both small and
great by fair words, sweet speech, humble and courteous countenance, when his
heart imagines villainy and treason to his country. He never forbeareth any
thing, he never pardons any man, nourishes and fatteth himself with blood
and fire: all peaceable and virtuous persons he disgraceth and overthrows,
supporting and advancing all peace-breakers, robbers, and wicked livers: he
takes bribes for all offices, and oppresses the people with the unbridled
number of catchpole-officers, that maintain themselves only by grating upon
others: his subjects he would have live all days of their life in ignorance:
painful, wise and learned men, and those that have well to take unto, because
they need the less to depend on him, or else sell themselves for his favor,
he chaseth far from him, and makes beholding unto him, none but fools,
idiots, iesters, anticks, wranglers, and such copes-mates as of naught worth
are suddenly start up, that wholly depend upon him, and revel in his cofers,
not giving him (as they cannot) any good counsel for the commonwealth; they
care not which end thereof go forward: but all their care and counsel is for
their private gain, which serves to no better use, than to entice and draw
them on daily to careless and wicked living. Further yet, so far is he from
regarding or placing near about him men of worth and good qualities, that on
the contrary, to the imitation of Tarquinius surnamed the proud (whose story
Liuie writes in the first book of his second Decade, concerning the Poppie
heads he broke down with his staff, to teach his son by a dumb show, that
he should rid out of the way all the Peers of the City, and forsake (as
another says) fifty frogs to catch one Sammon) he breaks down the highest
cares of corn: that is, he causes all those to be put to death, that might
any ways hinder his wicked intents. What should I say more? Such a cursed
creature, without God, without conscience, worse than any wild beast, spares
neither kith nor kin, but either by sword or poison makes away the very
nearest of all his blood, that he may reign alone, if it were possible. But
notwithstanding the many bands of his guard, he stands in fear of every man,
and is despised, mocked, and detested of all. For why? Besides that is
aforesaid, he glories and takes delight to devise new subsidies, imposts, and
tributes, whereby the comminaltie may be impouerished, and held in bondage, and
so in steed of Homers people-feeder, he becomes a people-eater. Of this image
of a tyrant, there are examples above number found, both in ancient and late
writers of Church histories, and others: So I return to the Poet.

Nen brot petit sils de Cham, des son enfance veut dominer, and est l'image des
ambitieux tyrans. Ses exercices, asin de se render maistre redoutable par
succession de temps.
Nembrot n'a point encor atteiut le douziesme an
Qeentre ceux de son age il tranche du Tyran:
Paroit sur ses esgaux, and sous si bon augure
Iette les fondemens de sa grandeur future:
Et portant dans sa main pour Sceptres des Roseaux:
Fait son aprentissage enter les pastoreanx.
Puis sachant que celuy qui genereux aspire
A l'heur imagine d'vn redoutable empire,
Doit passer enbeaux faicts le vulgaire testu,
Ou porter pour le moins le masque de virtue:
Il ne pass la nuict sous vne molle plume,
Le iour dedans un poisle: ains, ieune, s'accoustume
Au bon and mauuais temps: ayant, ambitieux,
Pour cheuet un rocher, and pour rideau les Cieux.
Les ares sons sesiouets, la sucur ses delices,
Les Moineaux ses Autours: ses cher Turquets, let lices:
Et ses mets plus friands, d'vn bean Cheureul la chair,
Que tremblant il n'a point acheue d'escorcher.
Continuation des labcurieux exercices de Nembrot.
Quelque-sois il s'esbat a vaincre d'vne haleine
L'asprete d'vn rother qui domine vne plain:
A fendre coutremont un torrent enrage,
Qui d'Hyades repeucent ponts a rauage,
Et d'vn flot bondissant court a bride auall^e
Atran^rs les rochers a'vne estroite vallee:
A r'atraper le traict eschappe de sa main:
Aprendre a belle course ou la Biche ou le Dain.
Il chasse aux bestes pour chasser puis ap^es aux hommes.
Mais ayant ia pass cinq lustres de son age,
Et sentaint, orgueilleux, ses norss and son courage
Digne d'vn Mars plus fire: s'il scait enquelque part
Vu grand Tigre, un Lion, un Ours, un Leopart,
Ill' attaque sans peur, le vein, l'assomme, and plant
Es lieux plus esleuez sa de spouille sanglante.
Lors le peuple, qui void par ses guerrieres mains
Les chemins affranchis d'assassins inhumains,
D'horrible hurlemens les forests solitaires,
Et les troupeaux de crainte: aim ce domte-feres,
Cest Hercul chasse-mal: luy monstre safaueur,
Et l'appelle par tout son Pere, and son Sauueur.
Nembrot par les cheueux empoignant la fortune,
Et battant le fer chaut, flat, press, importune
Ore l'vn, ore l'autre: and hastant son bon heur,
De veneur d'animaux se sait d'homme veneur.
Car comme il employoit enses premier chasses
Les glus, les trebuchets, les pipeaux, les tirasses:
Et sur la fin encor, contre les plus hagards,
Les masses, les espieux, les fleches and les dards,
Il gaigne quelques-vns par des belles promesses
Les autres par presens les autres par rudesses:
Et rompant, furieux, les liens d'equite,
Au lieu qu'auparauant le chef de chaque race
La commandoit apart, sans que la ieune audace
D'vn esprit fretillant, brouillon, ambitieux,
Mist, comme ore, sa faux en la moissons des vieux.
3. Nimrods first study and exercise, to get the sovereignty of the people,
surthered by nature.
Scarce is the son of Chus now waxen twelve year old,
But straight over all his Peers he plays the Tyrant bold.
He ouer-growes them all, and of his power to come
Upon a trim foreshow he lays the ground with some:
And in his childish hand for scepter bearing reeds
Among the shephard-swaines beginn'th his prentise-deeds.
Then knowing that the man, whose courage does aspire
Unto the deemed bliss of an awful Empire,
Must pass in brave exploits the doltish vulgar sort,
Or else by seeming good obtain a good report;
He wastes not the night in downie leather-bed,
Nor yet the day in shade; but, young, accustomed
Himself to good and ill, and made ambitiouslie
His pillowes of a rock, his curtains of the sky.
To toil is his delight, to shoot, his chiefest game,
His baby-play the lysts, his hawk some Sparrow tame:
His most delicious meat the flesh of tender Kid
Which trembles yet, and scarce is out of skin yslid.
The continuance of his labors to obtain the peoples savor.
Sometime he sports himself to conquer with a breath
Some craggy rocks ascent that ouerpeers the heath;
Or else some raging flood against the stream divide,
That, swollen with rain, has drou'n a hundred brigs aside,
And with a bounding course unbridled gallops fast
All overthwart the stones in narrow valley cast:
Or else straight aft'r his throw to catch again his dart,
Or else by footmanship to take the Hind or Heart.
He chaseth beasts first and afterward men.
Thus till his twentieth year his exercise continues,
Then understanding well his manly mind and sinews
May fit some great'r attempt, if he know'th any where
A Leopard, a Tyg'r, a Lion, or a Bear,
He stoutly goes t'encount'r, and knocks him down with mace,
And plants the goary spoils in most apparent place.
The people then that see by his all-conquering hands
The ways enfranchised, and all the waster lands
Rid of such roaring thieves, and feeding now at ease
Their fearful flocks and herds; they love this Hercules,
This rid-ill monster-mast'r, and show him special favor,
And call him evermore their fath'r and even their savior.
He leaves his former chase for a better prey.
Here Nimrod by the locks hand-fasting his good fortune,
And striking th'iron hot, does flatter, press, importune
Now one and then anoth'r, and hasting to his bliss,
Before that hunted beasts, now of men hunter is.
For as he did employ about his prey before
The grins, hare-pipes, and traps, and all the lymiestore;
Yea furthermore, at need for stoutest had his art,
The heavy club, the shaft, the sharp sword and the dart:
So some he wins by gift, and others by hard dealing:
And breaking all in rage the bonds of equity,
Of that renforcing world vsurps the royalty.
Whereas in time before the chief of each household
The same did rule apart; nor did the young man bold,
Aspiring, gyddie-braind, upon a wanton brave
His sickle thrust, as now, int'haruest of the grave.
3. Scarce is. The posterity of Noe being much increased, as Moses reckons
in the 10. chapter of Genesis, they began to spread abroad and take several
habitations, but not far one from another so soon after the Flood. Among other
the sons of Cham, is numbered Cus the father of Nimrod, of whom the history
makes mention, that he began to be great on the earth, and was a mighty hunter
before the Almighty, and that the beginning of his reign was Babel, Erech,
Archad, and Calnch, in the land of Sennaar. Upon this place are given two
diverse expositions: The first is, of some that hold that Nimred was the first
after the Flood that gave any meet form of public government, and by the
consent of many families, considering his wisdom and valor, was accepted for
master and governor, to rule and order many households together: by reason
whereof (say they) he is called a strong hunter before the Lord: and namely,
for that he repressed, by maine force, the wicked and unruly, who, like savage
beasts, preied upon the life of man. But the greater part of Expositors take
this otherwise, and hold, that Nimrod by force and diverse subtleties (here
finely set down by the Poet) got the supremacy; and that this power ascribed
unto him, was not truly Roy all lawful, but a power usurped by force, a
hunters power, where with he surprised men, and reigning over them cruelly,
handled them as if they were beasts, and that before the Lord, which is as much
to say, as in despite of God, who had established a gentle rule and government
among the families. This second exposition is the more certain; whether we
consider the race of Nimrod, or the proper meaning and sequel of the words of
the text, or the buildings of Nimrod, or what success his proud attempt had.
The Poet relying on this opinion, has further followed in the description of
the youth, and exercises of this first Tyrant that was in the second world,
such things as were likely to be, and that with such a grace, as in a discourse
is requisite, that out of the holy Scripture has so narrow foundation, and in
other books is, with many fables and names uncertain, darkened.

Dessus le throne assis, Domination tyrannique de Nembrot.
violent, il exerce
Cent mill cruautez: pesle-mesle renuerse
Droit humain, and divine: brave le tout-puissant,
Luy port iusqu'au nez son Scepre fleurissant.
Ses artifices pour se maintenir.
Et de peur qu'a la sin le peuple aise ne pense
Asecouer sou ioug, il le met en despense:
Espuise sa richesse, and occupe ces bras
A bastir vne Tour, ou plustost un Atlas.
C'est trop, Sous couleur d'esleuer un bastiment contre le deluge, il veut
affermir sa tyranny.
dit-il, vescu en bestes passageres:
Quittons ces toicts roulans, ces tents voyageres:
Massonnons un Palais, quifrappe, ambitieux,
Les abismes du pied, de la test les cieux:
Asyle inviolable, and sacre-sainct refuge
Contre l'ire desbord a'vn rauageur Deluge.
Sus fondons vne ville, and passons la dedans
Encorps and sous un Roy le rest de nos ans:
De peur que diuisez en pauillons and Princes,
Nous ne soyons espars par toutes les provinces,
Que la lamp du iour visit de son course,
Sans nous pouuoir donner ni conseil, ni secours.
Que si l'ardent tison d'vn intestine guerre,
Ou quelque autre mal-heur nous espand sur la terre,
Au moins friar laissons pour jamais engrauez
Nos beaux noms dans ces murs iusqu'au Pole esleuez.
Comme un foible Vulcan, Comparaison propre, monstrant combien grande efficace
ont les desseins des tyrans, fleaux de la vengeans de Dieu sur les peuples.
que la troop frilleuse
Des pasteurs laisse choir dans loree fueilleuse
D'vne vaste forest, se tient quoy quelque temps,
Esleuant les nuaux fumeusement flottant
Sur un humble buisson, puis aid par Zephyre
Fait voye rougissant aux efforts de son ire,
Monte du bas hallier au slairant Aubespin
De l'Aubespiu au Chesne and du Chesne au Sapin,
Gaigne tousiours pays, en courant serenforce,
Et ne laisse Dryade en sa natale escorce:
Ainsi ce doux propos premierement issu
De deux ou trois mignons, favorable, est receu
Des esprits remuants: puis de main en main pass
Iusqu'au plus malotru du confus populace,
Qui desireux de voir parfaite ceste Tour,
En mestier divise, trauaille nuict and iour.
Le peuple execute le desir de Nembrot, and s'employ a bastir sa prison and le
nid de la tyranny.
Les vns d'vn fer trenchant font trebucher les Presnes
Les Aunes bazardeux, and les durables Chesnes:
Degradent les forests, and monstrent au Soleil
Des Champs, qu'onque il n'auoit esclaire de son oeil.
As-tu veu quelque-fois vne ville exposee
Au sac a'vn came vaineucur? Le pleur and la risee
Bruyent pesle-meslez. Qui charrie, qui prent,
Qui train, qui conduit. Le Soldat insolent
Ne treune lieu prou seur, ni serreur assez forte,
Et la ville en un iour fuit toute par sa port.
Ainsi ces charpentiers pillent en un moment
Des collines d'Assur le fucilleux ornement:
D'vne ombrageuse horreure despouillent les montaignes,
Et moissonnent, bouillants, les rameuses campagnes,
Les chars and les mulets s'entre-choquent, espais:
Et l'essieu sl^chisant gemit dessous le fais.
Viue description d'vn peuple embeso^gne a quelque gia^d besongne.
Ici pour dur ciment nuict and iour on amasse
Des estangs bitumeux l'eau gluantement grass.
Le Tuillier cuit ici dans ses fourneaux fumants
Enbrique les poussiere. Iciles fondemens
Insqu'aux enfers on creuse: and les impures ames
Reuoyent contre espoir du beau soleilles flammes.
Tout le ciel retentit au dur son des marteaux,
Et les poissons du Tygre en tremblent sous les coux.
De tonr and de longuer les murs rougeastres croissent,
Leur ombre s'est end loin, Ia de loin ils paroissent.
Tout bouillonne d'ouuriers: and les foibles humains
Pensent au premier iour toucher le ciel des mains.
Quoy voyant l'Eternel, Dieu courrouce de l'audacieuse entreprise de Nembrot
and des sie^s, conclut de ro^pre les desseins, en confondant leur langage.
renfrongne son visage,
Et d'vn son qui grondant roll comme un orage
Par les champs nuageux, desracine les monts,
Et fait crouler du ciel les immobiles gonds.
Voyez, dit-il, ces Nains, voyez ceste racaille,
Ces fills de la poussiere. O la belle muraille!
O l'imprenable Tour! O que cefort est seur
Contre tant de canons braquez par ma fureur!
Ie leur auois iure que la terre feconde
Ne craindroit desor mais la cholere de l'onde:
Ils se font un rempart. Ie voulois qu'espandus
Ils peuplassent le Monde, and les voicy rendus
Prisonniers en un parc. Ie desirois seul estre
Leur loy, leur protecteur, leur pasteur, and leur maistre:
Ils choisissent pour Prince un voleur inhumain,
Un Tyran, qui veut fair a leur despen sa main:
Qui despite mon bras: and qui, plein de branade,
A ma saint maison present l'escalade.
Sus, rompons leur dessein: and puis qu'vnis de voix
Aussi bien que de sang, de vouloir, and de loix,
Ils s'obstinent au mal: and d'vn hardi langage
S'animent, sorcenez, nuict and iour a louurage:
Mettons un enrayoir aleur courant effort:
Frappons les vistement d'vnesprit de discord:
Confondons leurs parole: and faisons que le pere
Soit barbare a son fills, and sourd le friar au friar.
Execution de la sentence de Dieu, qui conf^nd le langage des bastisseurs de la
tour and de la cite, qui a cause de ce sut appellee Babel. Comparaison
representant le son consus de ceux qui en diverse langages parlent les vos aux
autres. Representatio^ de la confusion de ces bastisseurs.
Cela dit, tout soudain s'espand confusement
Vnie nescay quel bruit par tout le bastiment:
Un tintemarre tell, qu' on oit parmi la band
Des paisans, que Denis de son Thyrse command.
L'vn parle enter les deats, l'autre parle du nez,
L'autre form au gosier ses mots mal-ordonnez:
L'vn hurl, l'autre sisle, and lautre encore begaye.
Chacun a son iargon: chac un en vain essaye
A trouner les accents, and terms bien-aymez,
Dans le berceau tremblant auec le laict humez.
Leave toy du matin and tandis que l'Aurore
D'vn clair griuolement l'huis d'vn beau iour decore,
Escoute patient les discordantes voix
De tant de chantres peints, qui donnent dans un bois
L'aubade aleurs amors, and chacun ensa langue
Perch sur un rameau, prononce sa harangue:
Et lors tu conprendras quel meslange de sons
^esle-mesle couroit par-my tant de macons.
Porte-moy cry l'v^^ porte-moy la truelle:
On luy port un marteau. Venez-ca, qu'on ciselle,
Dit l'autre, c'este tuille: adonc un Chesne on fend.
Sus, qu'on tend ce cable: alors on le destend.
Planchez cost eschasaut: on le iette parterre.
Baillez-moy le vniueau on luy baille l'esquierre.
On cry, on se tourmente, on fait signs en vain.
Ce que l'vn a ia fait, lautre desfait soudain.
Les confus hurlemens les mettent horse d'haleine.
Tant plus chacun trauaille, and moins paroist sapeine.
Autre elegante comparaison monstra^t qu'il n'y a conseil, industry force,
diligence, ni multitude, qui puisse resister a Dieu.
Bref, comme les macons, qui bastissent soigneux
Dedans le bas courant d'vn fleuue rauineux
Les haut spiliers d'vn pont: voyant des monts descendre
Cent torrents tous nouueaux, and ia loin loin s'espandre
Le flot qui hait ce ioug, quittent soudainement,
Fuyans deca dela, ce beau commencement:
Tout ainsi ces ouuriers, voyans venir l'orage
De la fur^ur de Dieu, perdent force and courage:
Laissent laleur besongne: and d'vn courrouce bras
Iettent regles, marteaux, plombs, and niueaux en bas.
4. Now he enthroned is, The tyrannous government of Nimrod, and his froud
attempt.
he bends all his thought
To blood and cruelty, profanely sets at naught
The laws of God and man, out-braues The Almighty king,
And beardeth him (as 'twere) with scepter flourishing.
And lest the peopl' at length, when ease had bred their pride,
Should aim to cast his yoke he keeps them occupyde:
He lauisheth his wealth, to make them labor still
In building of a town; nay rath'r an Atlas hill.
We live too long (quoth he) in brutish wandering;
Now leave we roaguing tents, our houses wayfaring;
And let us a palace build that stately may be joint
In Base unto the deep, and unto heaven in point.
A privileged fort against another flood:
And there incorporate live vnd'r a royal blood.
Lest, if we part in tents with many guides, we run
Asunder, void of help, as far as roules the Sun.
And in case burning coals of at-home-bred sedition,
Or what mishap so-er'e shall drive us to division:
Yet (brothers) let us leave, as high as heavenly flames,
Upon this Tower engrau'n our everlasting names.
5. As fire by shepherds left amidst the dry-leafe woods,
At first is hid, or makes but only smoakie floods
Among the lower shrubs, and then with help of winds
A way by flaming force to further mischief finds;
Unto the bloomy thorn from the humble shrub it stirs,
From Thorn to Oak, from Oak unto the tallest Firres;
And, ever gaining ground, runs faster narre the mark,
And leaves not a nymph within her native bark:
Right so this pleasing speech when first it had been graced.
By fawning Favorites, of others 'twas embraced;
Among the gyddie-braines then goes from hand to hand
Unto the baser sort of people through the land;
Who greatly bent to see the famous tower made,
Do labor day and night in all and every trade.
Some trip the speare-wood Ash, with sharp-edg'd axes stroke,
And some the sailing Elm, and some th'enduring Oak;
So they degrade the woods and show unto the Sun
The ground where his bright eye before had never shone.
Who ever did behold some foreign army sack
A city vanquished? there is grief and joy, no lack,
Together hurly-burld; he carts, and he lays-hold,
He drags by force, he leads; and there the soldier bold,
Can find no place too sure, nor yet no lock too strong,
The whole town in a day forth at the gates does throng.
So quickly do these men pull-off with one assent
From those Assyrian hills the shaking ornament:
The wilderness of shade they take from off the rocks,
And sheare off albeswat the level countries locks:
The waynes and yoked Mules scarce one by the other wend;
A lively description of a people, busied about a great work.
The groaning axeltrees with load surcharged bend.
Behold here one for mort'r is day and night abruing
Of some thicke-slimic poole the water fatly gluing.
And here the Tyler bakes within his smoakie kell
His clay to stone; and here one hollows down to hell
So deep foundations, that many a damned Spright
Aggazeth once again the Suns unhoped light.
Hea^'n echoes out the sound of their mauls clitter-clatters,
And Tigris feels his fish all trembling vnd'r his waters.
The ruddy-colourd walls in height and compass grow,
They far-off cast a shade, they far-off make a show.
The world's all on toil, and men borne all to die
God being angry with the bold enterprise of Nimrod and his folowers,
determines to break of their enterprise, by confounding their language.
Think at the first days work their hand shall reach the sky.
6. Hereat began th'Lord to sour his countenance,
And with dread thu^ders sound that storm-wise wont to glance
Athwart the clowdie racks, that hills wont overthrow
And make heavens steady gates flash often too and fro,
See see (quoth he) these dwarfes, see this same rascal people,
These children of the dust. O what a goodly steeple,
What mighty walls they build! Is this the Cittadell,
So recklesse of my shot that shakes the gates of Hell?
I swear an oath to them henceforth the fruitful ground
Should never stand in fear of waters breaking bound:
They doubting fence themselves; I would by their extent
Have peopled all the world, they by themselves are pent
In prison-walls of brick: I would have been for ever
Their master, their defense, their shepherd, their lawgiver;
And they have chose for King a savage Liue-by-spoile,
A Tyrant seeking gain by their great loss and toil;
Who does my force despise and with vainglory swone
Attempts to scale the walls of my most holy throne.
Come let us defeat their drift, and since the bond of tongue,
Of blood, of will, of law, does egg on all day long,
And hearten them in sin; to stop their hasty intent,
Among them let us send the Spirit of dissent;
Their language to confound, to make, both one and other,
The father strange to son, the brother deaf to brother.
7. The execution of Gods sentence.
Thus had he said, and straight confusedly there went
I know not what a brute throughout the buyldiment,
None other like (I guess) then drunken peasants make
Where Bacchus does his lance with Ivy garland shake.
One does his language too the, another nose his note,
Another frames his words unseemly through the throat;
One howleth, one does hiss, another stuttereth;
Each has his babbl', and each in vain endeavors
To find those loved terms, and tunes before expressed,
That in their cradle-bands they drew from mothers breast.
Go get thee up betimes; and, while the morning gay
A sit comparison.
With rainbow-glosse bedecks the portaile of the day,
Give ear a while and mark the disagreeing moods
Of winged quiristers that sing amid the woods
Good Morrow to their loves; where each one in his fashion
Is pearched on a bough and chaunteth his Oration:
Then shall thou understand what mingle-mangle of sounds
Confusedly was heard among the Mason-lounds.
A Trowell ho, says one; his mate a beetl'him heaues:
Cut me, says he, this stone; and he some timber cleaues.
Come ho, corn ho, says one, and wind me up this rope;
Then one vnwinding strives to give it all the scope.
This scaffold bourd, says one; one makes it down to fare:
Give me the line, says one; and one gives him the square.
He shouts, he signs in vain, and he with anger boyles;
And look what one has made forth with another spoils,
With such confused cries in vain they spend their wind;
And all the more they chafe, the less is known their mind.
At length as men that stand an arched bridge to build,
In rivers channel deep that wont surround the field,
Another excellent comparison declaring how neither counsel, art, force,
diligence, nor multitude, is able to resist God.
And suddenly behold how unexpected rain
Has sent a hundred floods, that downhill stretch amain
Their yoake-refusing waves; they leave with one advise
(Some hasting here, some there) their carnest enterprise:
So when these Architects perceived the stormy smart
Of Gods displeasure come, they straight were out of heart.
And there they ceased their work and with hands malecontent,
Rules, mallets, plomets, lines, all down the tower they sent.
4. Now he enthroned is. This is the exposition of the words, mighty hunter
before the Lord: to wit, that Nimred, Chams nephew, did proudly lift himself
up against God and man. His buildings, and the beginning of his reign could
not have been such, without offering violence to the peace and liberty of
diverse families over whom he bare rule: and there is no show to the contrary,
but that by diverse practices from time to time he got the Sovereignty. The
holy Scripture oftentimes by the names of hunters and chasers, means God,
enemies, and the persecutours of his Church, Psa' 91. and 124. Ezech. 32.
Lament. 3. The seventy Interpreters translate the Hebrew text after this
manner: This Nimrod began to be a Giant on the earth, and a huntesman, or
leader of hounds before the Lord God. By the hounds of Nimrod may be understood
his guards, and the favorers of his tyranny. Moses called him (...) Gi^or
isaid, that is, Iustie, strong, or great and mighty chaser. Which notes not
only the stature and height of body, but also might and authority joined with
violence, in all those that want the fear of God. Now although Moses in the
cleuenth Chapter of Genesis, where he speaks of the City and Tower of Babel,
make no mention of Nimrod, yet has the Poet aptly gathered out of the Chapter
aforegoing, that Nimrod was the author and promoter of those buildings; in as
much as Babel is called the beginning of his reign, who could not any ways
reign without some habitations for himself and his subjects, and considering
that Moses in the selfsame place affirm^th, that the Cities founded by
Nimrod, were in the country of Sennaar, and that in the 12. verse of the 11.
Chapter he says, that these builders of Babel dwelt on a plain in the
country of Sennaar: by good reason the invention and beginning thereof is here
ascribed to Nimrod, who by this means sought to set his state on foot. Also
this Monarchy of Babylon, was one of the first, and with it that of Niniuie,
as may be gathered out of the words of Moses. But the more particular discourse
of these matters, and diverse other questions concerning Nimrod and his
outrages, require a larger commentatie.

5. Like as the Vulcan weak. The Poet says, that as a small deal of fire let
fall by some Shepherds among the dry leaves of a great Forest, setting it
self, and hatching (as it were) the heat a while, at length with help of the
wind, grows to so great a flame, that it takes the whole Forest, and
leaves not a Driad, that is, not a tree in his proper or natural bark: So
the words first uttered by Nimrod, then blown with the bellows of his Minions
and favorites set the hearts of the people on fire, that he soon obtained his
purpose. This is it that Moses notes in the eleventh Chapter of Genesis, the
third and fourth verses, They said one to another (the chief men having put it
in their heads) Come, let us make brick, and burn in well in the fire: so had
they brick in stead of stone, and s^^me had they in stead of mortar. Then said
they, Go, let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach unto the
heavens, that we may get us a name, lest we be scattered upon the whole earth.
The Poet in his verse discourses upon this devise. It is thought that this
proud building was begun about an hundred and fifty years after the Flood.
The good Patriarch Noe, that lived yet long time after, saw his posterity
confounded and scattered: for so it was the Lords will to exercise the patient
faith of his servant, to whom in recompense he showed the effect of his
blessings in the family of Sem, where still remained the Hebrew tongue,
together with the doctrine and discipline of the true Church. Now out of this
history of Moses touching the building of the Town, and the confusion of the
builders, is sprung (as it seems) the fabulous discourse of the Poets, set
down by Ovid in his first book of Metamorphosis, touching the Giants that
heaped hills one upon another to scale heaven, and dispossess Jupiter of his
throne. Thus has Satan endeavored to falsify the truth of sacred history.
Well, this arrogant building shows us how vain are the imaginations of
worldly men; namely, to set at naught the true renown of heavenly life, and
seek after the false of earth. Carnal men have no care at all to worship and
reverence the name of the true God, they regard only to be accounted-of
themselves, and so to write their names in the dust. Against the attempts of
the men of Babel, and all their successors, let us oppose these sentences, the
18. and 21. of Proverbs. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, thither shall
the just repair and be exalted. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
force, can prevail against the Lord: and that which is written Psalm. the 127.
Except the Lord do build the house, the builders labor but in vain.

6. God seeing this: Moses in the 5. and 6. verses of the 11. chapter says:
Then the Lord came down to see the City, and Tower, which the sons of men
had built. And the Lord said, Behold the people is one, and they all have one
language, and this they begin to do, neither can they now be stopped from
whatsoever they have imagined to do: come on, let us go down and there
confound their language, that they understand not one another. Then he adds
the execution of the sentence, saying; So the Lord scattered them from thence
upon all the earth, and they left off to build the City. Therefore the name of
it was called Babel, because the Lord did there confound the language of all
the earth, and scattered them from thence over all the world. God, that is all
in all, never changes his place, he goes neither upward nor downward, but the
Scripture says, he goes down then when he works any thing on earth, which
falling out beyond and against the ordinary course of nature, witnesses his
particular presence. Under these few words of Moses, a many things are to be
considered: chiefly, he notes the great sins of the builders, in that he
brings in the Lord, judge of the whole world, vouchsafing to bow down his
eyes particularly upon that foolish people. For it is not without cause that
the great God of heaven and earth should arise from his throne, and (if I durst
so say) leave the palace of his glory to come and view these durt-dawbers or
morter-makers By this manner of speech Moses shows, and gives us to
understand, that, long time before, these Babylonians had built in their hearts
most wonderful high and stately towers, and that long ago they had baked in
the sire of their concupiscence some marvelous brickes: to wit, they had much
counseled one with another, and discoursed of means to get renown, and found
no better way to attain their purpose, then to raise a tower up to the
heavens, to ravish with astonishment all those that should behold it. So Moses
says that this pride and froward self trust deserved a grievous punishment:
but as God is perfectly just, so lays he upon the builders a chastisement
proportionable unto their offense.

7. Thus had he said and straight. In God it is all one to will and to do: And
further he sends not lightning, wind, nor tempest against the tower: but
contenteth himself to strike the proud and puffed-vp brains of the builders:
and so the building founded upon their folly was overthrown by their foolish
iangling that God mingled with their language; and the vainglorious masons
instead of their imagined renown, have gotten themselves everlasting shame.
Who would have thought that God had had so ready such kind of rods to punish
mankind withal? But let the Reader consider whether the world at this day be
not full of Babel-towers. Mark what a number of men do in every kind of
vocation. Since I do not take upon me but to write bare Annotations, I leave
it to the Readers consideration, who may see, now more then ever, that the
world continues the building of Babel: that is, men madly gainset their own
wisdom and power against the wisdom and power of God; who treading as it
were with woollen feet, and stealing on softly, is able with an arm of Iron to
surprise and seize upon these builders, and turn by diverse means their vain
purposes and weak endeavors to naught. The Poet has used many very sit
comparisons to represent the confusion of these workmen. The first is taken
from that which woe see fall out in a great rabblement of Pesants, ouerruled by
the Lance or Mace of Bacchus: that is, such as have the wine in their heads,
and are drunken: for among such people is commonly heard a strange confused
noise and iangling, as the Church-ales and Wakes, and other such passe-times
do now and then declare. The second is taken from the chirping of Birds, in
voice and song diverse. The third from Masons, constrained by the sudden rage
of a land-flood, to leave off the begun work of a Bridge. And here is a lively
description of Gods judgments, together with their degrees and consequences:
namely, in the confusion of understanding first, then of speech, and lastly of
the whole company; which being unable longer to continue, was quickly so
scattered, that (as Moses says) they ceased to build the City.

O superbe reuolte, Detestation de l'audace de Nembrot and des siens, cause de
la desunion and barbary des peuples.
o traistre felonnie,
Voy de quelle facon l'Eternel to apuine
Par cebigarrement! Las! se langage doux,
Saint lien des citez, puissant frein de courroux,
Mastic de l'amitie, iadis vni, s'esgare
Et cent ruisseaux taris. Cest or richement rare,
Dompte-orgueil, charme-soin, traine-peuple, emble-coeur
Mesle change de son, de poids, and de couleur.
Ce don se sophistique, and du Nort insqu'au More
La cheute de Babel confuse bruit encore.
Le Finlandois eust peu visiter l'Africain,
L' Indien l'espagnol, Incommoditez causees par la confusion des langues aux
bastiment de Babel.
l'Anglois l'Amiricain,
Sans aucun interpret. Auiourd'huy le riuage,
Qui borne nostre bourg, borne nostre langage:
Et sortant quatre pas horse de nostre maison:
Muets, las! nous perdons l'outil de la raison:
Commoditez contraires.
Ou bien si nous parlons an peuple moins estranges,
C'est par bouche empruntee, ou par gestes estranges.
Sans maistre and sans trauail, en sucant le laict dout,
Nous apprenions la langue entendue de tous:
Et les sept ans passez, sur la poudre de verre
Nous commencions tirer la rondeur de la terre,
Partir, multiplier: and montant d'art en art,
Nous paruenions bien tossed an sommet du rempart,
Ou l'Encyclopedie en sign de victoire
Couronne ses mignons d'vne eternelle gloire.
Misere des ho^mes depuis la confusion des langues apres la cognoissance
desquelles ils vieillessent, and le plus fouuent n'out cognoissance que des
mots.
Ore tousiours-enfans nous vieillissons apres
La langue des Romans, de Hebrieux, and des Grocs.
Nous n'auons que babil: and pour la cognoissance
Des secrets de Nature, ou de l'Vnique essence,
Qui done essence a tout, nous vacquons sans repos
Aplier bien un Verb, a trouuer de beaux mots:
A mettre au trebuchet les syllabes and lettres:
Et pendons, ia cheuus, de la bouche des maistres
Qui nous monstrent a lire: and nous mettent en main
Un petit Alphabet, au lieu du droict Romain,
Des oeuures d'Hipocrate, and du volume encore,
Ou Dieu se communique an lecteur qui l'adore.
Et que diray-ie plus? La langue Hebraique en la bouche de tous anant la
confusion des langues.
On disoit en tout lieu
L'idiome sacre, le langage de Dieu:
Langage qui parfait, n'a point de caractere,
Qui ne soit enrichi de quelque grand mystere.
M^is depuis cest orgueil chasque peuple use a part
D'vn iargon corrompu, effemine, bastard,
Qui chaque iour ce change: and, perdant salumiere,
Ne retient presque rien de la langue premire.
Iadis les Phrygiens, Les Phrygiens and Egyptiens de batent de l'anciennete de
leurs langages and ^'en ^apportent (...) deux enfans, qui ^uge^t a lauantage
des Phrygiens.
and ceux-la que le Nil
Paist, alme, d'vn desbord heureusement fertile,
Desireux de scuoir quel de leur deux langages
Estoit plustost en estre: ils commirent, mal-sages,
Le droit de l'eloquence au mol begayement,
Et firent judge ceux qui n'ont point judgment:
Scauoir deux enfancons, que leurs muettes meres
Nourrirent dans l'effroy des lieux plus solitaires,
Sans que d'aucun humain la charmeresse voix
8 O proud rebellion I o traitorous impiety!
In what a fearful sort, The harms that men suffer by the confusion of
speech.
by this thy tongues variety,
Has God thee punished? alas that pleasant tongue,
That holy bond of towns, of anger bridle strong,
Strong glue of amity, once one, now does waifare
A hundred narrow ways: this gold so richly rare,
Wrath-taming, charming-care, men-tysing, hart-entangling,
Both color, weight, and sound has lost by mingle-mangling.
This gift corrupted is, and from the North to South
Confused Babels fall sounds yet in every mouth.
The cold Finlanders once might visit Affricans,
The Spanish Indians, The English Americans,
Without Interpreter; but now the compass small
That does our Cities bound, our language bounds withal:
And if we from our home but never so little went,
Dumb should we seem, and reft of reasons instrument.
Or if we speak to some that are but neighbor Nations,
It Is by a borrowed tongue, or by strange animations:
Without or School, or pain, and sucking mothers breast,
We might have learned the tongue that every thought expressed,
And after seven years old upon the glistring sand
Begun to draw with skill the shape of Sea and Land;
To part and multiply; and so from skill to skill
We might have climbed soon the double pointed hill,
Where Arts-perfection, in sign of their victory,
Her favorites does crown with everlasting glory.
Now, ever baby-like, we, ere we learn to sound
The Latin, Hebrew, Greek, are going to the ground.
We learn but even to prate, and for the deep inseying
Of Natures secresies, and of that only Being
Which makes all things to be, we labor, as in maze,
To coniugate a verb, and register a phrase.
In age we learn to spell, like young Grammaticasters,
And naught we know without authority of Masters;
Who teach us still to read, and put into our hands
An A. B. C. for what the Civil Law commands:
Instead of Physic skill, and of that holy Writ,
Where God's to them revealed, which godly readen it.
9 Nay, shall I tell you more? they spoke in every place
That holy tongue of God; The Hebrew tongue generally spoken before the
confusion of tongues.
so full of sense and grace,
As not a letter it has, no not a point so small,
Without some ornament exceeding mystical.
But since the proud revolt, in sundry sort they prate
A bastard bibble-babble, impure, effeminate,
And change it every day; so loosing all their light
They utter not a word of that first language right.
10 Once when The Inhabitants of plenty-flowing Nile,
The Phrygians and Egyptians contend for antiquity of tongue.
With men of Ida strove for eldership of style,
The right of Eloquence they tried by stammering,
And such as judgment lackt they set to judge the thing;
To wit, two sucking babes, whom their two Mothers dumb
In hermitages kept, where no man else did come.
No charmy voice of man was heard sound near the place,
8. O proud rebellion. A fine description of evils ensuing this confusion of
speech. First, the acquaintance of all mankind together, the knot and
loue-bond of Nations, is so loosened and broke, that scarce is there found any
remedy for it, some of them not thinking on, or not at all ca^^ng for others.
Secondly, that only one language which decked and imbellished the acquaintance
and fellowship of men, that kept them in peace and temper, such as it was, that
made them all well appaid, that moved each one to his duty, and was much
regarded of all, has lost all this by this change; and in a word, has neither
show, nor grace of a language: insomuch, as even at this day the fall of the
Tower of Babel is heard from North to South, from East to West. That is to say,
in the diverse languages of so many Nations, we may observe almost nothing else
but a kind of chattering and confused sound, neither fit, nor comely, nor
expressing at all the nature of things: At least one people so judges of
another tongue. For I pray you what pleasure takes a Frenchman to hear a
Moscouite or a Mexican speak? And even the tongues that we understand, and
speak (as we think) reasonable well, what are they unto us in respect of our
mother tongue, or the principal tongues? Thirdly, whereas the Nations dwelling
farthest asunder, might easily have come together, been acquainted, and
trafficked one with another: Now a man is no sooner gone out of his own
doors, but he has much ^dooe to understand those that he meets withal;
and if he set foot in any far country, he needs interpretouts, or must
have spent a long time before to learn the tongue, or else must speak by
signs, or always hold his peace, and live like a dumb creature. Fourthly, to
amplify further this misery, the Poet shows that if this disorder had not
happened, a man might have learned in short time all the Liberal sciences, and
gained the top of that hill where Encyclopaedia, (that is, the full compass of
all Arts) crowns all such lawful aspiring minds: and in a word, obtained
the perfect knowledge of all things; whereas now we spend our whole life in the
learning words of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, and that is nothing
else but babbling: and in stead of being well seen in the heavenly Philosophy,
and that of this lower world, we must take pains in syllables and words,
circuits of speech, and other like exercises, until we be gray headed and
white-bearded, and so end our lives scarce having yet attained any sufficient
knowledge of Law, Physic or Divinity, that are the chief professions. The
learned know how hard a matter it is to have a good style, which is called
(...), the measure of learning; and that Aristotle, who has so excellently
well set it down, in that wonderful work of his, commonly called the Organ,
is understood but of a few. What may a man say then of the most part of the
discourses and speech of men now adays living? It is nothing but babble, it is
Babel it self. I speak not here of the substance of things, but of the
fashion, order, and manner that is used to make them be conceived of those to
whom we speak, be they never so cunning in the tongue themselves. Then of
Barbarism and ignorance, what shall a man think?

9. What shall I tell you more? Moses says, in the beginning of the eleventh
Chapter, that then (that is, many years after the Flood, and about the same
time when Chams posterity left the East parts to come and dwell in the plain
of Sennaar) the whole earth was one language and one speech, to wit, Noe and
his children: and all the families from them issued, though they dwelt not
together, yet spoke they all the same language. All of them parted not from the
East to the foresaid plain of Sennaar: but likely enough is their opinion,
that hold that Noe and Sem parted not so soon so far a sunder, and
especially that they accompanied not these builders of Babel, who sought
renown, and set up their rest in this world. A man may ask now what was that
only language they spoke in the world before the Flood, and after, until the
building of Babel. The Poet answers, it was the language of God himself.
Hereupon arises two opinions: The first is, of those that to honor their
country, after the example of some ancient Heathens, would make us believe
they are sprung of the earth, or fallen from the Moon, and think their speech
the most excellent of all other. The Egyptians and Phrygians have long
sithence debated this matter, as shall be said more at large in the next
Section. A few years ago a Physician of Brabant named I. Goropius, set forth
a great book entitled Origines Antuerpiana, wherein he aims especially at
this mark, to prove the Cymbrike tongue (which in his opinion is the base
Almaine) to be the first speech of the world. Since his death a certain writer
of Liege, has set forth many other books of his about the same matter: and in
one of them, that is called Hermathena, this Cymbrike tongue or low Dutch, is
preferred far above the Roman, Greek and Hebrew. It asks a long discourse to
answer his Reasons: for this time I will answer but in a word: Namely, that all
that which he alleges for the pre-eminence of his own tongue, is a mere
cavil, that is called in the Schools, Petitio principij: when a Sophister
takes for granted that which is expressly denied him, and he knows not how to
prove. Goropius groundeth all his discourse on this: that the Cymbrike tongue
has borrowed nothing of any other, and that the Hebrew is comen of it, and
even borrows of the Cymbricke. This a man will deny Goropius and his
disciples: and whereas they show some Hebrew words or Phrases that resemble the
words and terms of the base Almaine, and so conclude that Adam spoke low
Dutch, and that the language of Moses and the Prophets is hard, ambiguous,
poor, and borrowed of the Cymbricke, which they were not well able to follow:
I answer, that they are deceived, and that on the contrary they ought to say,
the Hebrew was before all other tongues; who were begun in Babel, and have
sithence brought forth infinite others, as the high and low Dutch, and other
like, now used in the world. I would the learned professors of principal
tongues would find some time to refute the allegations of Goropius: Especially
those that make against the Hebrew, which he has too saucil^e disgraced in the
second book of his Hermath, Page 25.26. etc. The second opinion, which I hold
with the Poet, is, that the Hebrew tongue, enclosed chiefly in the Canonical
books of the old Testament (which have been wonderfully preserved until our
time) is the first speech of the world, and the same that Moses meant, when he
said, The whole earth had one mouth or language, before the building of Babel.
The reasons thereof are touched in a word by the Poet, who does hereafter treat
of them more at large, as we have also noted in the margent, and mean to
speak somewhat thereof in the 12. Annotation. Now whereas this first language
has at this day no letter nor word, but is full of maimes and miseries, it may
be said of every tongue since the confusion: that it is nothing but corrupt
^angling, weak, uncertain, and changing ever from time to time, as many have
already showed heretofore. The Greek and Latin tongues have changed five or
six times: and the learned know what wrangling there has been about the
writing, pronouncing, and disposing of their terms and phrases. Then what is
to be said of the Greekish and Latinish tongues, those that are but apes of the
other? What of the barbarous, strange, and new tongues? Or of those whose
foolish pronunciation only no man can abide, or of others that by use, time,
and force of people, are waxen current? But this I leave to such as list to
Comment hereupon at large.

10. Long since the Phrygians. The Egyptians, being ever great braggers,
vaunted long ago that they were the most ancient people of the world: a
certain King of theirs named Psammetichus, attempted to search out the truth;
and for that end thought meet by some means to discover what was the first
language of the world: Thus, he took two newborn babes, and delivered them
unto shepherds to be nourished, commanding they should be brought up in a
secret staule, there to suck the milk of Goats, and straightly forbidding, that
none should come there to pronounce any word before them: then after a certain
time when they were of age, they should be left alone, and made to fast a
while. Now so soon as they were past three years old, their governor having
in all points accomplished the Kings commandment, came to open the staule, and
then the two children began to cry Bec, bec: the shepherd said not a word:
they repeat still the words: and he let his Master understand thereof, who
caused the children to be brought secretly unto him, and heard them speak. So
when the meaning of the word was asked, and the Egyptians understood it
signified bread in the Phrygian tongue, they granted the pre-eminence of
antiquity unto the Phrygians. Herodotus writes that the Priests of Vulcan, in
the City of Memphis, told him the same tale. There are some others that think
these Babes were brought up of dumb nurses: howsoever it be, sure it is that
the pride of the Egyptians was by some such devise daunted. Suidas, touching
the very point, says that babes nourished of a Goat, must needs cry somewhat
like a Goat, and such was the sound of the word Bec; a meet reward for his
wisdom that made such a trial. The Grecians in old time were wont to call an
old dotard (...), a word composed of Bec and (...), the Moon: the same is
turned into a proverb which Erasinus expounds. But Goropius in the fifth and
ninth book of his Origines plays the subtle Sophister, as his manner is,
and uses his beak upon the word Bec: concluding, since Bec in low Dutch
signifies bread, and Psammetichus his babes called for Bec, that so long ago
they spoke low Dutch; whereupon it follows, that his tongue was the most
ancient of the world. He calls also his discourses upon the same
Bocceselanea, offering the subject of a Comedy to some new Aristophanes. But
let us consider the answers of the Poet to the Phrygians, and to Goropius.

Resonnast a l'entour de trois-fois douze mois.
Eux conduits au milieu and des peuples de Xante,
Et des Egyptiens, d'vne halaine impuissante
Crient Bec plusieurs-fois, Bec, bec, est le seul mot
Et que leur langue form, and que leur bouche esclot.
Refutation du judgment de ces enfans.
Adone les Phrygiens sachans qu'en leur langage.
Bec veut dire dupain, peignent de leur courage
Laioye sur le front, pour auoir eutant d'heur
D'obtenir de Nature arrest en leur faueur.
Sots! qui ne pensoient pas que les belantes troops,
Qui retondoyent les fleurs des plus voisines croupes,
Leur enseignoit ce term: and que les mots Gaulois,
Memphiens, Grecs, Hebrieux, Troyens, Latins, Anglois,
Ne naissent auec nous: ains que chasque langage
S'aprend and par hantise, and par un long usage:
L'aptitude a parler demeurant seulement
Naturelle aux humains, comme l'autre ornement,
Qui richement diverse, les rend plus dissemblables
Aux stupides troupeaux des bestes miserables.
Respo^se a l'obiection prinse de la voix confuse des animaux.
Que si tu mets en ien que le Taureau misgit,
Le tardif Asne brait, and le Lion rugit
Ore haut, ore bas: and que partels langages
Ils nous semblent, diserts, descouurir leur courages:
Ce ne sont point des mots, ains des expressions
Dubrouille mouuement de peu de passions:
Des indices confus de douleur, de tristesse,
Dire, de soif, de faim, d'amour, on de liesse.
Response a la second objection prinse du gazouillis des oiseaux.
On en peut dire autant de ces chantres ailez,
Qui sur les verds rameaux des bussons reculez
Gringotent le matin. Car bien que, comme il semble,
Deux a deux, trois a trois, ils deuisent ensemble:
Que leur voix se flechisse en cent mill facons:
Qu'ils decoupent hardis, cent mignardes chansons:
Qu' Apollo ait este disciple en leur eschole:
Cest un son sans sujet, des notes sansparole:
Vne chanson redite en vniour mill fois:
Un discourse qui, muet, se perd dedans les bois.
Auantage de l'homme, dove de rayson, pardessus tous autres animaux.
Mais le seul homme peut discourir d'attrempance,
De force d'equite, d'honneur, and de prudence,
De Dieu, du ciel, de l'eau, de la terre, and des airs,
Au^c terms choisis, signisians, diverse:
Desuelopant son coeur, non par un seul langage,
Ains comme Scaliger merucille de nostre age,
Louange de Joseph Scaliger, tres-docte enter les doctes de ce temps.
Le Soleil des scauant qui parle cloquemment
L'Hebrieu, Gregois, Romain, Hespagnol, Alemant,
Francois, Italien, Nubien, Arabique,
Syriaque, Persan, Anglois, and Chaldaique,
Et qui, Chameleon, transfigurer se peut.
O rich, o souple esprit! en tell autheur qu'il v^ut:
Digne fills du grand Iule: and digne srere encor^
De Sylue son aisne, que la Gascongne honor.
Mais quant aux Perroquets, qui faisant leur se jour
Responce a la troisiesme objection toucha^t les Perroquets semblables a
l'Echo, and parlans sans parler.
Dans un logis perce de toutes parts a-iour,
Plaident auecque nous lapalme deloquence:
Prononcent tout au long des Crestiens la Croyance:
Redisent du Seigneur la deu^te oraison:
Appellent nom par nom tous ceux de la maison:
Ils sont tells que la Voix, qui de nostre voix fille,
Par les creusez vallons, importune, babille,
Sans scauoir qu'elle dit. En vain ils battent l'air,
Et parlant sans s'entendre, ils parlent sans parler,
Sourds a leur propre voix: d'autant que le langage
N'est rien que de l'esprit un resonnant image:
Mesme qu' and it est court, qu'il est peint, qu'il est doux,
Et tell quauant Nembrot il estoit seen de tous.
La langue Hebraique est la premiere de toutes les autres, pource qu'elle
exprime toutes chooses en peu de mots.
Or quand in enter en discourse, que la langue Hebraique
Auec bien peu de mots heureusement explique
Les pensers plus brouillez: and guide l'auditeur
Par tous les plis secrets des Dedales du coeur,
Beaucoup mieux que la Grecque auec ses Synonymes,
Epithotes hardis, metaphores sublimes,
Ses couplements de mots, ses diverse temps, ses cas,
Et mill autres beautez don't on fait tant de cas:
Elle comprend vne infinite de secrets en ses ettres, selon l'oppinion des
maistres and docteurs d'icelle.
Quand ie pense a par-moy que l'Escole Rabbine
Treuue dans l'Alphabet de la langue divine
Tout ce qu'on voit de l'oeil, tout ce qu'on croit par foy,
Et que tous ars encor sont comprins dans la loy:
Soit qu'auec grand trauail en cent facons diuerses,
Les lettres de ses mots, curieux in renuerses:
Car ainsi qu'en contant, des chissres le transport
Augmente fort le nombre, ou le decroist bien fort:
L'anagramme roidit, ou relache la force
Du nom, a qui, subtle, elle done un entorce:
Ou soit que iustement tu mettes comme en blot
Les nombres, qui naissans des elements d'vn mot
Expriment un mystere: and que sous ce vocable
On en comprenne un autre en nombre tout semblable:
Soit qu'vn nom soit marque par un seul element,
Ou toute l'oraison par un mot seulement:
Comme sous un portrait d'Egypte le silence
Seelloit, mysterieux, vne longue sentence:
Il n'y a nation sous le ciel qui ne retienne quelques mots d'hebrieu.
Quand ie pense a par-moy, que du riuage Indois
Iusqu'au mont iette-feu du riuage Irlandois:
Et que du chaut Tambut insqu' a la mer Tartare
Tu n'oeillades, o ciel, nation si barbare,
Peuples tant ignorant es saints loix de Dieu,
Qui ne retienne encor quelque mot de l'Hebrieu:
Et don't les elements, pour bien qu'on les desguise,
N' approchent des saints noms des lettres de Moyse.
Le vieil Testament and la doctrine du plus ancien peuple ne se trouue qu'en
langage hebraique.
Quant ie pense a par-moy, que le volume saint
Du premier testament n' est d'autre lettre peint:
Qu'Vrim, la Vision, le Song ne prononce
Qu'en la langue d'Isac sa Prophet response:
Que mesme l'Eternel a voulu de son doy
Grauer en mots Hebrieux sur deux marbres sa loy:
Et que long temps depuis ler clairs courriers du Pole
En terms Palestins nous portent sa parole.
Les mots, specialement les noms propre hebraiques, so^t de gra^ds poids and
signification.
Et quand ie pense encor qu'aux premiers des humaius
On n'imposoit des noms hazardeusement vains:
Ains qui, riches, marquoyent aues grande energie
Quelque insigne accident du discourse de leur vie:
Et toutefois void-on qu'encor tout ces mot vieux
Sont de son and de sens auiourdhuy mesme Hebrieux:
Qu' Eve veut dire vie: Adam, form d'argile:
Campremier acquis: Abel, comme inutile:
Seth, remis en saplace: and cil, sous qui les flots
Laissent en pais laterre, est nomme le Repos:
I'accorde volontiers, quoy gue gronde la Greece,
A l'idiome Hebrieule sacre droit d'ainesse.
Louange de la langue hebraique, mere and Reyne de toutes les autres.
Ie te salve donc, o surgeon perennel
Des pourtraicts de l'esprit parler de l'Eternel,
Claire perle, o matrice, and Reine des langages,
Qui, pure, as ia franchi l'abysme de tant d'ages:
Qui n'as mot qui ne pese: and don't les Elemens
Sont pleins de sens cachez, les poincts de Sacremens.
Saint dialecte, en toy les propres noms des hommes*
Des pays, and citez, sont autant d'epitomes
De leurs gestes fameux: Et ceux lades oyseaux,
Des hosts de la terre, and des bourgeois des eaux,
Sont des livers ouuerts, ou chacun eust peu lire
Leur naturelle histoire, auant que par son ire
Le Pere roule-ciel d'vn flambant coutelas
Eust coupe le chemin de l'Eden de ca bas.
Adam impose les noms hebrieux a tous les animaux.
Car Adam imposant en sigue de maistrise
Noms a tous animaux dans les vrais champs d'elise,
Lors que deuant ses yeux deux a deux, flanc a flanc,
En monstre generale ils marcherent de rang,
Il les choisit si beaux que les doctes oreilles
Portant leson a l'ame, y portoyent les merueilles,
Don't la Voix forme-tout embellit richement
Les peuples and du sec and du moite element.
Il entichit ce langage, par composition de verbes and de clauses.
Et dautant que tout Corpse souffre, ou fait quelque chose,
Ayant f^rge les Noms, les Verbes il compose.
Et puis pour enrichir d'autant plus l'oraison,
Y joint quelques membrets seruans de liaison,
Pour coudre proprement ses members plus notables,
Ainsi qu'vn peu de colle unit deux grandes tables: Comparaisons.

Comme seruent encor les pennaches ondants
Sur le sommet creste des morions ardents,
Les franges aux manteaux, les piedestals and bases
Aux statues de marbre, and les anses aux vases.
La Langue hebraique paruient d'Adam iusques au teps de Nemb. ot, depuis lequel
elle demeute en la maison d'Heber, de qui elle a este surnomee hebraique.
Ce langage d'Adam de pere en fills coulant
Paruient incorrompu iusque aux temps violant
Du prince eschelle-ciel: and seul sit par le monde
Retentir les accents de sa rich faconde.
Mais comme partial, il se retire alors
En la maison d'Heber, soit qu'il ne fust du corpse
De la troop rebelle: ains, sage, fit a l'heure
Loin des champ de Sennar sa paisible demeure.
Ou soit qu'estant conduit par contraint en ce lieu,
Gemissant, il priast en cachettes son Dieu,
Et d'vn esclaue bras maconnast les murailles,
Qu'il vouoit, despite aux profondes entrailles
De l'Enfer tenebreux: ainsi que le Forcat,
Qui combattant la mer, miserable, combat
Contre sa liberte, and maudit en son ame
Ceux pour qui unict and iour il occupe sa rame.
Soit que de l'Eternel les liberales mains
Allant comme au deuant des oeuures les plus saints
Pour l'amour de soy-mesme, eust laisse de sa grace
En despost ce thresor a Hebraique race:
Lors que le demeurant des superbes macons,
Brouillon le desguisa en cent mill facons:
Et que chacun, courant ou le destin l'appelle,
Porta des nouueaux mots en sa terre nouuelle.
Till three times had the Sun run out his yearly race.
When brought they were abroad, and set betwixt the people
Of Pantus and of Nile,, they cry with voices feeble,
And often cry they Bec: bec, bec is all the ground
That either tongue can frame, or else their mouth will sound;
Whereat the men of Xanth, who knew the word implide
In Phrygian language Bread, in face they signifide
The joy they felt in heart, and thought them highly blessed
T'obtaine on their behalf dame Natures own arrest.
11 O fools! who never cast how that the bleating flocks
That shore the tender flowers upon the neighbor rocks
Had taught them such a tongue, and that the Dardanish,
French, Latin, Hebrew, Greek, Egyptian, or English,
They are not borne with us; but well may be discerned,
That every tongue by haunt and by long use is learned.
Disposednesse to speech indeed is Natures gift;
As is the grace of tongues diversity and shift,
So variably rich, and richly variable,
As makes a man to beast the more incomparable.
And if you list oppose, Men only speak. An answer to the objection taken
from the vndistinct voice of beasts. An answer to a second objection taken from
the chirping of biras.
how that the Bull he bellows,
The slothful Ass does bray, the Lion and his fellows
Now treble roar, now base, and by those tunes ye find
They seemen eloquent to make us know their mind:
I say these are no words but only declarations
Of their disquiet sturres, prouokt by sundry passions;
Confused signs of grief, or tokens of their sadness.
Of ioyfulnesse, of love, of hunger, thirst, or madness,
The like may well be said of that light-winged quier
That on the greene-locke heads of Oak, Elm, An answer to the third objection
touching Parrets.
Ash and Brier
Record the morning lay: for though (as is the weather)
By two, by three, by more, they seem to talk together,
And though their voice it bends a hundred thousand ways,
And descant though they can a hundred wanton lays;
Though great Apolles self within their School was taught;
A groundless tune it is of notes entending naught:
A thousand times a day the selfsame song repeated,
A dumb discourse, amid the wild of woods defeated.
But only man has power to preach of modesty,
Of honor, of wisdom, of force, of equity,
Of God, of heaven, of earth, of water, and of air,
With words of good import, ye culled and sundry-faire.
Unfolding all his thoughts not only in one language,
But like to Scaliger, the wonder of our age,
The Lamp of learned men, can wisely speak and much,
In Latin, Hebrew, Greek, English, Italian, Dutch,
In Spanish, Arabicke, French, and Slauonian,
Caldean, Syrian, and Ethyopian.
This man Camelion-like will make his transformation,
(O rich, o pliant wit!) to any authors fashion.
Great Iulies worthy son, great Syluies younger brother,
In Gascany renoun'd more then was ever other.
But as for Popiniayes, that passing all their ages
Within the pierced grates of thorow-ayred cages,
In eloquence are bold to plead with us for chief,
Pronounce all thorow-out the Christian belief;
Repeat the form of Prayer that from our Savior came;
And all the household call together name by name;
They like dame Echo be, our sounding voices daughter,
That through the vaulted hills so rudely bableth-after,
Not weening what she says: In vain this air they break,
And speaking without sense, they speak, but nothing speak:
As deaf unto themselves: for language is definde.
A voice articulate that represents the mind:
And short it was, and sweet, and decked with many a flower,
And understood of all, before the Babell tower.
12. The Hebrew tongue most ancient.
Now when I duly wey how th'Ebrew does report,
And readily express in words both few and short,
Most cumbersome conceits, and through each secret plight
Of reasons Labyrinth affords the reader light;
The first reason. Yea far above the Greek with her Synonyma,
Her lofty Metaphors, her bold Epitheta,
Her compounding of words, her tenses, and her cases,
And of so great request a thousand other graces:
The second reason. When I consider well how in the Letter-row
Of that same tongue divine the Rabby-schoole does show,
All we beleoue with heart, all that with eye we see,
And that within the Law all arts employed be:
By turning too and fro, and changing letters room;
(As in Aritchmeticke it mends or bates the sum)
By gathring of some word the numbers mystical,
And drawing them throughout a word proportional.
Or that some word is known by some one Element,
Or by some only word a perfect speech is meant;
As in a short devise of mystical emblem
The silent Egypt wont employ alonger theme.
The third reason. When I consider well that from th'East-Indie sand
Unto the flaming Mount that borders Iserland,
And from the frozen Sea to scorched Tombuts shore,
Thou Sun no people see so void of wit and lore,
No men so ignorant of Gods most holy Law,
But they retain as yet, some words of Ebrew saw;
And but their letters do (though out of order set)
Come near the sacred names of Moses Alphabet.
The fourth reason When with my self I wey that the holy counterpawne
Of Gods old Testament was in those letters drawn:
That Vrim, that the Dream, and that the Vision wise,
But in this Hebrew tongue spoke not their prophesies;
And that The Eternal self did with his finger daigne
To grave in Hebrew style his Law on tables twain;
And, many winters since, the Messengers divine
Did preach the joyful word in tongue of Palestine.
And when I further way, that the ancient Patriarchs
The fifth reason. Had all their names imposed as reasonable marks,
And such as fully showed with mighty consequent
What was of all their time the rarest accident;
And thereto that we find how every ancient name,
By writ, by sound, by sense, from Hebrew language came
(As Eve is consterd Life, Cain, first of all begot; (...)

And Adam made of Clay, and Abel, profit not)
Seth, set in others place, and he surnamed Rest,
Who saw th'all-hurting flood below the ground suppressed)
I cannot choose but grant, though Greece with fury some,
Preeminence of age to th'Ebrewes I diome.
Great commendation of the Hebrew tongue.
Then thus I thee salute, o ouer-running spring
Of utterance of mind, leide of the eternal King,
Thou brightly-shining Pearl, queene-mother of languages,
That spotless have escaped the dongeon of all ages:
Thou have no word but wai'th; thy simplest elements
Are full of hidden sense; thy points have Sacraments.
O holy dialect, in thee the proper names
Of men, towns, countries, are th'abridgements of their fames
And memorable deeds: the names of winged bands,
Of water-habitants, and armies of the Lands,
Are open treatises whereout a man might gather
Their natures history, before th'heau'n-rowling father,
By man's offense prouokt with flaming Symiteer,
The way of Eden carved from these base countries here.
Adam gave Hebrew names to all creatures according to their nature.
For Adam when in tok'n of his prerogative
He did in true Elise each creature title give
When as before his eyes in muster general
Two by two, side by side, in rank they marched all;
He chose the names so fit, that every learned ear
Which understood the sound, might als the wonders hear
Whereby th'alforming word did richly beautify,
Or those that live in wet, or those that live in dry.
He enriched the tongue with verbs and clauses
And for each body must or suffer thing, or do,
When he the nownes had framed, the verbs he joined thereto;
And more to beautify this goodly ground of pleading,
He many tittles made, that serve for knots in reading,
The parts of most account to join, as best it sits,
Right as a little glue two plankes of timber knits;
As eke for ornament like wauing plume of Feathers,
Which on the chamfred top of shining helmet weathers:
Or as Marbl' Images their foot-stals have and bases,
And silver cups their cares, and velvet robes their laces.
The Hebrew tougue continued generally spoken, from Adam to Nimrod, then it
remained only in the family of Heber: whence it was called Hebrew.
This tongue that Adam spoke, till in bad time arrived
That heaven assaulting Prince, sincerely was derived
From Father unto Son, the worlds circumference
Did thoroughly sound the tunes of her rich eloquence:
But after partial woxe and quickly she retired
To Hebers Family; for either he was not hired
Among the rebel crew, or wisely did abide
Far from the Sennar plain in so disaster tide.
Or, if he thither were with other more constrained,
In corners worshipped God and secretly complained,
And so with slavish hand them help to build the wall
Against his will, and wished it suddenly might fall
Into the darkest hell; as gally-slaue in guyues
That combating the Sea most miserable strives
Against his liberty, and curses in his heart
The head for whom he toils in such a painful art.
Or beit the eternal God, with his hand euer-giuing,
Preventing as it were the works of men well living,
For his own honors sake, and of his only grace,
This treasure least in trust with Hebers holy race:
While all the ungodly rest of Masons ill-bested
A hundred thousand ways the same disfigured,
And eu'rychone dispersed where destiny them tarried,
Into their newfound land a new-made language carried.
11. O fools, that little thought. The first answer is, that this word, Bec,
that the children spoke, was a confused found coming near the cry of Goats:
And how could they ask bread, seeing that they understood it not, never heard
it spoken by any body, never heard the meaning of it? The second is, that words
are not borne with us, but that we learn them by haunt and long usage. If they
were borne with us, doubtless these infants would have spoken as well other
words: for the understanding being moved, the belly pinched with hunger, would
not content it self to express his passion in one syllable. The third is,
that men are only the right and proper speakers, yet if they be not taught it,
and thereto fashioned, but are brought up among beasts, in stead of a right and
framed speech, they shall make but a sound and cry confused like unto beasts.
In a word, (...) take this discourse of Herodotus, touching the two infants and
their Bec, to be but a tale made upon pleasure, and a very heard-say; and
there-against I oppose the antiquity of the Hebrew tongue. Yet if I were bound
to believe Herodotus, I would say the Phrygians Bec was drawn from the Hebrews
(...) Lechem. The disciples of Goropius will confess that the Phrygians are
come from the successors of Noe: so can it not seem strange unto them, that I
say the Phrygians retaining some tokens of their grandfathers language, have
(like infinite others) lengthned and shortened the most part of the words: some
whereof yet remain whole, to witness the antiquity and principality of the
Hebrew tongue. After this the Poet answers those that build upon the vnframed
noise of beasts, the chirping and chattering of birds, and the babbling of
Parrets, to prove the birth of speech with us, and cast a cloud over that
perfection he granted only to the first language; and so he says that man only
endued with reason, is the only creature on earth capable of distinct, ordered,
important, and proper speech, and further speaks many several tongues:
whereof he brings in for example the learned Scaliger. Hence it ensues that
a man cannot learn to speak, if he be brought up among beasts that have no
reason whereby to deserve the name of a speech, or to use the same aright: or
if he be brought up with such as are dombe, of whom he can learn nothing but
signs and confused sounds, he will never speak treatably, nor understand any
thing, except another do speak first unto him, and make him understand the
speech with often repeating: As appears not only in young children, but in
the oldest men also, who learn as long as they live the words and names of
those very things which they have oftentimes scene before. It follows then,
that all the discourse of the Phrygians Bec is a devised tale, and therefore
unworthy for them to build upon, that go about to prove the Phrygian tongue,
or theirs that would draw their pedigree from the Phrygians, to be the first
language of the world. Another man may find in his own tongue a many like
words, and draw thence as good conclusions as Goropius does. But a strange
thing it is, that the Heathen Authors have faid nothing, nor made any mention
in their books of the beginnings and occasions of diversity of tongues:
especially that the Grecians, and other such learned people that have professed
the knowledge of all things, knew not the beginning of their own language.
Moses only has set us down this notable history, and opened to the Heathen
the spring of their tongues. And this further is to be wondered at in the
History of Babel, that the Hebrew tongue alone, as being the first of the
world, has remained among that people that were the Church of God, where the
Messiah was borne, and from whence arose the preaching of the Gospel, touching
the appearance of the promised Savior: which Gospel has sithence by the gift
of tongues, and ministry of the Apostles, ouerspread all the parts of the
world. Thus Moses handling the beginning of tongues, proves his history to
have long fore-gone all others, and therewithal engraueth upon the gates and
walls of the City and Tower of Babel, a goodly warning to all men, to fly and
avoid Atheism, and all vainglorious folly, which builds Towers against
Heaven, and rebelleth against God: who suffers the wicked to advance and
hoyse up themselves the space of some few months or years, to the end he may
give them a fearful overthrow at length. What would the presumption of a man
have done (says Saint Augustine) when algate the top of this Tower had raught
unto the clouds? It is humility that lifts up the heart on high, to the
Lord, not against the Lord: she it is that leads us the true, right, and sure
way to heaven. These few words I thought good to add unto the rest, because
the proud aspiring mind of man cannot be sufficiently discovered, nor too much
cried out on. Whereas these builders busily forecast in their mind, and
labored to make themselves renowned among their posterity, and thought men of
some worth; let us remember that the true praise consists not in works of
goodly outward show, but in such as are good indeed, and approved of God. So
let us return to the text of the Poet, who having touched in a word the
beginning of tongues, and refuted some contrary objections, shows now which
of all the tongues that have been, are, or shall be in the world; ought to be
accounted the chief and most ancient, and whereof a man may truly say, it is
the most excellent of all other.

12. The Hebrew tongue. He propounds five reasons, whereby he is induced to
believe that the Hebrew is the first tongue of all, whatsoever the. Greek and
others doc allege for themselves.

The first is, that this tongue compriseth much matter in few words, is very
significant, briefly and plainly expresses whatsoever a man can think, and
when it is requisite to discover the most secret and hidden plights of the
heart, she slippeth none, but for all things has words lively, pleasant,
weighty and of great import: and for her circuits of speech and long
discourses, they are more wonderful then the best and sweetest the Greek
has: which notwithstanding her store of selfe-meaning words, her bold and
far-fetcht Epithites, her cunning Metaphores, her words compounded, her tenses
and other fine devises, is no more comparable to the other, then the chirping
of a Goldsinch is to the song of the Nightingall. Proof hereof may be made by
the earnest and diligent consideration, and waying the words, sentences, and
discourses of the Hebrew with those of the Greek, and all others: not only in
Grammers and Dictionaries, but even in whole books and volumes. It shall
suffice me to wage and lay the book of Psalms only, or the works of
Solomon, or Job, or of Esaias, against all other Authors: and I dare bouldly
avouch, that in one of these a man shall find almost in every chapter, more
elegance, state and majesty, more figures, and more of all kind of ornaments
for a discourse, than in all the tedious works of those that man's wisdom
setteth-by so much. I speak not now of the matter and substance of things,
which nevertheless is in this tongue as happily expressed as in any other; let
them strain themselves never so much, they are not able but very grossly and
a-farre-off to make a show of that which this other painteth out in orient
colors, what matter soever it has occasion to utter.

The second reason is, that the Rabbines or Hebrew Doctors (men wondrous
careful to preseiue the whole body of the old Testament, so as the least
letter, point, and accent, they have counted over and again often times) have
noted in the 22. letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, either apart or together
considered, all the secrets of divinity and of Philosophy, both natural and
moral. This is a notable thing in the Hebrew tongue, that all the letters have
their proper signification: and that the letters of most of the principal
tongues in the world have taken their beginning from them: as also that the
primitive words, and those of whom infinite others are derived in diverse
principal tongues, are drawn from the letters, syllables, and words of the
Hebrew. To say nothing of the excellency of her accents, and the property of
her vowels: the Rabbines have further found out many secrets by
diuers-way-turning and alter-placing the letters of Hebrew words: and that
which the Greeks and others have after their example invented, is nothing in
comparison. For there is scarce any word in the Hebrew, but being inuerted (as
may easily be done, and sometimes two, three, or four ways, as the number of
the letters are) offers to our consideration another word, either of like
sense, or contrary: or making relation to the first, gives thereto such light,
beauty and liuelihood, that it is wonderful to behold. Again, oftentimes a
Nowne or other word, yea a letter, imports a whole sentence, like unto the
Egyptians Hieroglyphikes, invented of them to the imitation of the Hebrew
letters and words, yet nothing in comparison of them. This matter would require
a whole volumne, to be writting according to Art, by the hand of some one that
were well seen in the tongues: and I could name three pair yet living that
are well able to do it. In the mean season, whosoever is desirous to search
further herein, let him read the Harmony of the World, written by Franciscus
Georgius, and Guido Faber: the Heptap. of Ioannes Picus, Earl of Mirandola,
the Hieroglyphickes of I. Goropius, from the beginning of the seventh book, to
the end of the sixteenth: three books of I. Reuclinus De art Cabalistica, and
other three books of his De Verbo mirabil^, the Cabala of Picus, with the
interpretations of Angelus Burgoneuensis thereupon Further, much good matter to
this purpose a man may find in Thesauro linguae sanctae, set out by S.
Pagninus, and after augmented by many other learned professors of this tongue.
See further the Syriac Institut, etc. of Camnius: the Mithridates of C.
G^snerus: the Alphabet in 12. tongues of Postella, and his book. De ant
quitate linguae Hebraicae, there are many such Treatises set forth by diverse
learned men: whereout, and of the books aforenamed, may be gathered infinite
proofs of that which the Poet has touched in this second reason.

The third is, that there lives no Nation under the cope of heaven, but keeps
still some words of Hebrew in their speech; First, the Caldean, Syrian,
Arabian, Egyptian, Persian, Ethiopian, and many other, as the Gotthicke,
Troglodyticke, Punicke, are so derived thence, that they come as near it as
Italian to Latin, some more, some less. Secondly, the Greek, Latin, and
those others, that are farthest off, have yet here and there some words that we
must needs grant are sprung from the same fountain: a man may set down a
many of them, but it were too long here to coat the examples. Thirdly, the
roots of many words that are taken to be Greek or some other tongue, are found
to be Hebrew, as Franciscus Iunius has plainly showed in his learned oration
Deliuguae Hebraea antiquitate and praeslantia.

The fourth reason is, that the doctrine of the old Testament, which is the
doctrine of the first and most ancient people of the world, was not written but
in Hebrew. No man denies that the people that came of Sem the son of Noe, is
the most ancient: among these remained the Church of God and the Hebrew tongue.
God spoke not but in the Hebrew tongue by the high Priest that wore the sacred
Ephod, and the breast plate of judgment, whereon was set (...) Vrim and
Thummim (words signifying lights and perfections) which some think was the
(...) or foure-letered name Iehoua, contained within the breast plate: others
say it was the ranks of those twelve precious stones there enchased, that on
them had engraven the names of the twelve tribes of Israel: as if it were a
repetition of that which Moses says in the 17, 18, 19, and 20. verses of the
28. chapter of Exodus, where he speaks of (...), Vrim and Thummim in the 30.
verse: others hold they were certain names: others are of diverse other
opinions. Some late writers think those words were engraven in the
breast plate: This is a secret, the search whereof (whether one dispute of the
words, or what they meant, or what is become of them, etc.) is very painful and
needless; for that now sithence the coming of Christ we ought to follow the
truth it self, and not stay upon shadows. These words doubtless gave to
understand, that all light and perfection comes of our Savior, in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily dwells, in whom are hid all the treasures
of understanding and knowledge, who is the light of his Church, that is made
unto us of God his father wisdom, justice, redemption, and holiness. In all
judgments, demands, oracles, and revelations that were made by Vrim and
Thummim (as may be gathered out of the 27. chapter of Numbers, the first book
of Samuel the 13. and 30. chapters, and other places where advise and counsel
was asked of God, and answer was made by the mouth of the high Priest, there
appeared a clear light, a sure truth and perfection: all which in Christ is
accomplished. Now these demands and answers were propounded and rendered in the
Hebrew tongue, long time before any other language was used in the world. For
so soon after their scattering at Babel they could not well be incorporated
into a common wealth: and as for religion, that was not kept but in the race of
Sem, as Moses plainly declares all through the history of Abraham. Concerning
the Prophets, their dreams and visions, God spoke not, they understood not,
neither answered or taught they the Church but in the Hebrew; that significant,
unmingled, holy, chaste and heavenly tongue; whereas others lispe and
stammer-out uncertain sounds, and are infinite ways defiled through the
dishonest, foolish, erroneous, and ungodly discourses of their inuentours: I
except the books of the new Testament, and all writings drawn from the clear
fountains of holy Scripture, besides the which there is nothing but vanity,
filth, wickedness, and ungodliness in the world. Moreover, the Lord himself
sets down his law to his people, and writing it twice with his own finger,
and speaking with his own mouth to Moses and his other servants in the Mount,
used the Hebrew tongue. So did the Angels and Prophets, and Jesus Christ spoke
the Syriacke, a tongue so derived of the Hebrew, that they are very like; as
their Grammars declare. The Apostles spoke diverse tongues, and wrote also
according to the people and persons with whom they had to do: yet for all that
in their books may be noted an infinite many of phrases borrowed of the
Hebrew: as the learned interpreters of the new Testament have exactly showed.

The fifth and last reason set down by the Poet is, that the Hebrew words,
especially the proper names (some are alleged for example, and many other may
be added) are of great weight and importance: for sometimes they lay open unto
us the chief things that do befall the person so named. Nay further, if a man
would take the pains to change the order of letters, he may sinde in them
many goodly mysteries. The Greeks have found the way, and followed it in the
interpretation of their proper names: but they come far short of the
liuelihood and majesty of the Hebrews, who begun the thing before them many
hundred years. As for other tongues the most part of their proper names have
no meaning; they are devised at-all-auentures; so are they right tokens of
barbarism. Some tongues there are more happy and plentious than others in this
behalf: but their interpretations are for the most part uncertain, especially
if the Root thereof come not from or near the Hebrew. Herehence again the
curious reader may take occasion of a large commentary: I leave it unto him.

13. Then do I theesalute. It is not without cause, that the Poet straight
upon the former discourse, uses these words: considering the excellency of the
Hebrew tongue, and that he sets out in so few verses her wonderful
perfections, each one of them requiring a large treatise, and himself being
unable to shut up so great matters in so few words. For example sake let us
consider but very briefly those three points that the Poet here touches: to
wit, that the two and twenty Hebrew letters are full of hidden sense; that the
proper names of persons, Countries, and Cities in this tongue are as much as
abridgements of their life and deeds; that the names of birds, beasts and
fishes, contain the history of their natures: howbeit since the fall of Adam
the knowledge thereof is greatly darkened. To make the Reader somewhat more
desirous to enter mediation hereon, I will set him down some examples.
Concerning the mysteries of the Hebrew Letter-row Eusebius and S. Ierom in his
Epistle ad Paul. vrbic. which is the 155. expounds them, as I shall show you
in our tongue. The first letter (...) Aleph signifies doctrine, (...) Beth a
house, (...) Ghimel, Fullness, (...) Daleth Tables, (...) He This, (...) Vau
and (...) Zain That or she there, (...) Cheth Life, (...) Teth Good, (...) Iod
Beginning, (...) Chaph a Hand, (...) Lamed Discipline, or the Heart, (...) Mem
Theirs, or of these, (...) Nun Continual, (...) Samech Aid or succor, (...)
Ain a Spring, or an Eye, (...) Phe a Mouth, (...) Sade Justice, (...) Coph
Calling, (...) Resch a Head, (...) Schin Teeth, (...) Tau Signs. All which may
be thus put together and expounded. The Doctrine of the Church, which is the
house of God, is found in the fullness of the Tables: that is, the holy
Scriptures. This doctrine and that fullness of the tables is the life; for what
life can we have without the knowledge of holy Scripture? Out of these we
learn Jesus Christ, who is the life of them that believe. And although this
knowledge be excellent and perfect in God, yet as for us, we know not but in
part, we see as it were by a glass in darkness: But when we shall ascend up
into heaven, and become like unto the Angels, then the doctrine of the house,
and the fullness of the tables of Gods truth, shall be accomplished: then shall
we see face to face the Good prince (to wit, God himself the Sovereign Good,
who is the Beginning of all things) even as he is in his own nature. In the
mean-time we must lay Hand to the work of our Calling, by the means of a
right Discipline or a true Heart, assuring our selves that we shall find
Continual Succor in this heavenly truth, which is the Spring or Eye of the
Mouth of Justice, namely Christ our Head, whose Calling is in Signs, or marks
of Teeth or framed voice of the Scripture. I desire the Reader to take in good
part this short Allegory that I am bold to make upon the Hebrew Letters; and
if he desire more in this kind; let him repair to the Roots of the essential
words of these letters, there may he view the matter more at large. For this
time it shall suffice to have shot this arrow toward the mark our Poet aimed
at.

Now for the second point touching the names of several men, of Nations and
Cities, I will note you a couple of examples of each: (...) Abraham signifies
a Father of many, so was his household much increased temporally and
spiritually, he is the Father of all the Believers, whose number is
vncountable. (...) Moses signifies taken out of the waters, so was he by
Pharaos daughter, when his mother, loath to have him slain according to the
Kings cruel commandment, had laid him forth in a pitched flasket by the
Rivers brinke, Exodus 2. By him also God guided his people through the waters of
the red sea, and wrought many miracles. The Arabians are a people who even at
this day have no certain place of abode, they wander still up and down the
champion countries and wilderness, they are famous thieves, and lurking in
secret places, make often sallies out upon their neighbors, and set upon all
passengers unawares. Their name comes of the Verb (...) Arab, by Ain in the
first Conjugation. (...) Hearib, which signifies to mingle day and night
together: and because that in a desert and waste place all things are confused,
as if day and night were mingled together, therefore the country for the
situation is called Arabia. This agrees right with another (...) Arab, written
by Aleph, which signifies to he in ambush, or to lurk in dens, as thieves
and ravening beasts do. The Egyptians in the Scripture are called (...)
Mitsraim, because of their strong holds and places of defense, that have been
long amonst them: the primitive word is (...) Tsor, that signifies to trusse
close together: In some places of Scripture Egypt is called (...) Rahab, that
signifies Proud: so indeed they have always been high-minded, and greater
braggers than any other people. Now for Cities (...) Jerusalem signifies The
vision of peace, and just according to the truth: for the peace and grace of
God has been seen and continued upon that place many hundred years, and
chiefly because it has been a sigure of the Church militant and triumphant;
as often mention is made of the new and heavenly Jerusalem. Babylon comes of
the word (...) Babel, which is derived of the Verb (...) Balal, to confound
mingle, or trouble, as water when it is mudded. For so indeed the earthy Babel,
that was in Chadaea, has made a hotchpotch of the world: and that Babel, the
spiritual, that is spoken of in the Revelation, has made so many confusions,
that it is impossible to name them all.

There remains the third point, touching Birds, foure-footed Beasts, and
Fishes, whereof and every of them I will name two only, for a pattern, lest I
seem too long in the Annotations. The Storke, so commended for her love toward
those by whom she received life, is called (...) Chasida, that is to say,
dutiful, loving, and religious. The Eagle is called Nescher, that comes
near to Shor and (...) Iashar, the one signifies to look the other to be
rightful: and this bird of all other has the sharpest sight and looks
against the Sun. There is further a lively description of this bird in the
39. Chapter of Job, as also of the Ostrich, and many other in diverse places of
Scripture. The horse, called (...) Sus, is thought to come of the Verb (...)
Nasas, if rather this verb be not thence derived, which signifies to advance
himself: for it is the brauest and siercest of all other foure-footed beasts:
as Job finely describes him in his 39. Chapter. The Hebrews have three names
for a Lion; (...) Arieh, (...) Labi and La^jsch: the first comes of a Verb
that signifies to snatch, and tear in sunder: the second of the word (...)
Leb, that signifies the Heart, and (...) Laab, to be in solitary and desert
places: the third is commonly interpreted a great and roaring Lion, not unlike
the Verb (...) Losh, that signifies to surprise or devour, for that this
beast rampeth upon and swalloweth up his pray. The Whales and great fishes are
called (...) Thannim, Snakes, Serpents, or Dragons, because they are of a great
length, and turn and fold themselves every way, and are no less dangerous in
the Sea, than Serpents and Dragons on the land. In the 40. Chapter of Job, that
great Fish is called (...) Leuiathan, which some derive of the Verb (...)
Lauah, which signifies to borrow, or take a thing for his recreation: because
the Whole seems to play up and down the sea, as in a place borrowed for
recreation. The Crocodile, that lives both on land and water, is called (...)
Hatsab, and seems to come of the word (...) Tsab, which signifies the
covering of a Chariot, because this mighty creature has so long and so thick
a skin. More over, the Hebrews of the whole kind of fishes speak commonly
as if they were of another world, because they are so far parted and severed
from the sight and conversation of men: they make three sorts of them, which
they express by the words (...) Dagh, (...) Thannim, and (...) Leuiathan. This
have I added the more to show the liuelihood and natural importance of this
tongue, and herewith I will content my self at this time, desiring that some
other, stirred up by my example, would take this matter in hand, and discourse
of it better and more at large.

15. For when Adam. Moses says plainly, in the 19. and 20. verses of the
second Chapter of Genesis: That God made all the beasts of the field, and
fowls of the heaven come before Adam, to see how he would name them, and that
howsouer he named every thing living, so was the name thereof. The Man
therefore gave names unto all Cattle, and to the Fowls of heaven, and to
every beast of the field. The wisdom, wherewith our first Father was endued
before his fall, imports thus much, that he should give meet and couenable
names unto all creatures under his dominion: and although the knowledge and
search of birds and beasts names be hard, because of the weakness of man's
judgment now since his fall, yet is it not impossible, as men well seen in
the Hebrew tongue have already showed.

16. And for each Body. Adam, a man perfectly wise before he sinned, gave not
only meet names to all creatures, that were (in a manner) the moueables and
instruments of his house, and of this great shop of the world, whereof the Lord
had made him master; but further enriched his language with all manner of
ornaments that might be required to make it perfect: So that before his fall he
spoke more eloquently than any mortal man since. After he had sinned, entered
ignorance into his understanding, and frowardness into his affections: which
have made the speech of him and his posterity unfitting, vnparfit, deceiuable,
and often false, even in humane and indifferent things, yea such sometime as we
most curiously study upon: But the grace of God, the long life of this
Patriarch, and his fresh remembrance of the wondrous things that he had seen
in the Garden of Eden, have brought to pass doubtless, that the conversation,
instruction, reports and authority of so great a personage, had a marvelous
force to persuade and teach all those that were in his school. For from him
had we first our Arts and Sciences derived, and especially the knowledge of the
true God. And although since his time things have been more and more
illightened and p^rfited, yet must we needs confess that Adam was the first
teacher of them. Who so desires to know the depth of his wisdom, let him at
his leisure meditate upon the four first Chapters of Genesis, and he will
confess there is contained the sum of all that all men have known, or shall
unto the worlds end. Now out of all doubt it is, that Adam taught his children
and their posterity all these things exactly. But Moses, by the direction of
the spirit of God, thought it sufficient to tepresent only the ground of
things: otherwise the world neither had not would ever be able to contain the
bookus that might be made upon these four first Chapters.

17. This tongue that Adam spoke. The first world continued 1656 years. Adam
lived 930. years, his posterity kept his language, and although they possessed
with their tents and dwellings a large piece of ground, yet is there no place
of Scripture to be found, whereout may be gathered any proof of the diversity
of tongues before the flood. There being then but one, it must needs be the
same that Adam taught his children: as may also appear by this, that all
proper names until the flood are Hebrew. Noe the true son of Adam retained
and spoke this tongue, and taught it his children. And although three or four
score years before the Flood they began to spread abroad themselves, and
corruption grew more and more among them (as by that may be gathered, that is
written of Nimrod and Asshur, and the children of Cham, Genesis the 10.) yet in
the beginning of the eleventh Chapter Moses witnesses that at what time they,
that came to dwell in the plain of Sennaar, spoke of building the City and
Tower afterward called Babel, all the earth was one language and one speech:
which I understand not only of those that dwell in the plain of Sennaar, but
of all people then living in the world. It is likely that they that came out of
the East Countries, and settled themselves in Sennaar were a great number. They
spoke Hebrew, but when consusion befell their tongue, some drew one way, others
another way, and in continuance of time their Hebrew varying by means of their
separation was embased, and every several people had their language apart. As
for such as were not mingled in this disorder, namely the families of Sem, or
the most part of them, they kept the original and primitive tongue, whereof
Heber was the chief professor at the confusion of Babel; and thence it
comes (as it is thought) that the tongue was called Hebrew, and the people
Hebrews; as Abraham, in whose family that speech remained, is surnamed an
Hebrew. The Poet, with some interpretors, leaves it in doubt whether Heber was
among the builders of Babel, or dwelt apart. I think with some others, that he
was not of the number, but hearing how the Tower-builders were scattered, he
gave the name of Peleg (that is, Division) to his son that then was borne:
because (says Mases, Genes. 10.25.) that in his time the earth was divided.
Thus much of the Hebrew tongue, which was after preserved by Moses and the high
Priests, the Judges, Kings and Prophets. Now let us consider what the Poet
says further as touching those other tongues, that first arising of the
Hebrew, were after the confusion a hundred thousand ways altered and disguised
by the nations living asunder, who themselves invented, and carried new words
and language, each to the place of their abode.

Mais l'age doux-glissant, Les premiers la^gages diuisez en plusieurs parcelles.
gaste-tout, enuicux
Desfigura bien tossed tous ces langages vieux,
Qui nez dessus les tigre au milieu du tonnerre
Des ouuriers martelans, parcoururent la terre:
Et pour render aiamais plus confus l'Vniuers,
Fendit le moindre d'eux en langages diverse.
Toutelangue se change, D'ou procede^t les diverse chan gemens en un mesme
la^gage.
ou soit que le commerce
En nous communiquant de l'Amphitrite Perse
Les thresors precieux, and ceux de terre au flots,
Heureusement hardi, troque mots contro mots:
Soit que l'homme disert d'vne facon gentile
Frisant sos mots dorez and mignardant son style,
De gloire desireux, marque de nouueaux coins
Les chooses and les faicts: on done pour le moins
Course aux noms descriez, and remet en nature
Les sur-annez, moisis, gastez de vermoulure.
Comparaison.
Ilen est tout ainsi que des fueilles d'vn bois:
L'vne chaet, l'autre naist. Les mots qui d'autre fois
Le temps change le langage comme les autres chooses.
Brilloient par-cy par-la dans l'oraison diserte,
Comme des fleurs de Lys dans le campaigne verte,
Ne sont plus ore en vogue: ains bannis de la Cour,
Honteux font sous les toicts d'vn bas hameau sejour:
Et ceux qui du vieux temps la chagrine censure
Auoit mis au billon, sont de mise a ceste heure.
Un bell esprit conduit d'heur, L'Esprit humain peut enrichir un langage.
and de judgment,
Peut donner passe-port aux mots, qui freschement
Sortent de sa boutique: adopter ler estranges,
Enter les sauuageons: rendant par ces me slanges
Son oraison plus rich: and d'vn esmail diverse
Riolant sa parole, ou sa prose, ou ses verse.
L'vsage est la Loy des langages du monde: and quelle est la diversity diceux.
Un langage n'a point autre Loy que l'vsage
Courant sans frein, sans yeux, oule peuple volage
Le va precipitant: l'autre courant, enclos
Dans les lices de l'art, agence bien ces mots.
L'vn desia vieillissant sur l'huis de son enfance,
A le bers pour tombeau: l'autre fait resistance
Aux filiers des ans. L'vn afaute de coeur
Vit comme confine dans un valon obscur:
Lautre enter les scauans hardi se fait entendre
Duriuage de Feza l'autel d'Alexandre.
Tells sont pour le iourd'huy l'Hebrieu, Excellence de l'Hebrieu, Grec, and
Romain par dessus tous autres la^gages.
Grec and Romain^
L'Hebrieu, d'autant qu'encore nous tenons de sa main
Du trois-fois eternel la sacree parole,
Et que du droict diuinil est le protecole:
Le Gregeois, comme ayant dans ses doctes escris
Tout genre de scauoir disertement compris:
Et le masle Romain d'autant que sa faconde
Fut par le for plantee en tous les coins du monde.
But softly sliding Age, The first languages derived from the Hebrew are each
of them agai^e diu ded into diverse others.
whose envy all does waste,
Those ancient languages soon eu'ry' chone defaced,
Which in the thunder-sound of Masons clattring hands
On Tygris bank devised had ouerspread the lands:
And that the world may be more out of order left,
Into a many tongues the least of them has cleft.
Whence comes the alteration of a tongue.
And language alters by reason of Merchandise,
Which bringing us to land the diverse treasuries
Of azure Amphatrite, and sending ours aboard,
With good success assaies to change us word for word:
Or when the learned man delightfully endighting,
With guilt and curled words attires his wanton writing,
And hunting after praise some stamp never seen before
Sets both on deeds and things; or does at least restore
Disclaimed words to use, and makes anew be borne
The same that ouer-age with rot and mould had worn.
For herein falls it out as with leaves in a wood,
One sheds, another grows; the words that once were good
And like fair Lyllie-flowers in greenest Meadow strewn,
All over a learned style their glittring beauty showed,
Now are not in request; but, since Court them exiles,
They blush and hide themselves even under cottage tiles:
And such as long ago were censured curiously,
For base and counterfeit, now passe-on currently,
A well-esteemed wit, discreet and fortunate,
May warrant words to pass, albe they but of late
His own efforged ware; he on the natural
May graffe some foreign impe, his language therewithal
Enriching more and more, and with a diverse gloss
Enameling his talk, his Poetry or Prose.
Some language has no Law, but use vntame and blind
That runs wheresoever the peopl' as light as wind
Goes headlong driving it: another closely running
Within the bounds of Art, her phrases fits with cunning:
Some one straight waxing old as soon as it is borne
Is buried in the cradl'; anoth'r it is not worn
With file of many years; some one faint-couraged
Within a straight precinct lives ever prisoned;
Another boldly does from Alexanders altar
Among the learned reach unto the Mount Gibraltar:
And such now th'Ebrew tongue, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin the best of al
tongues.
the Greek and Latin be:
For Hebrew still does hold, as by her hand do we,
The sacred word of God, eternal mak'r of all,
And was of Laws divine the true Original:
The Greek, as one that has within her learned writ
Comprised all the skill of man's refined wit:
And Latin, for the sword, wherewith her eloquence
Was planted through the worlds so wide circumference.
17. But softly-sliding Age. The Poet here enters into consideration of other
tongues beside the Hebrew: and says these first tongues that begun in Babel,
being all (as it were) Meslins of Hebrew, by tract of time are so worn out,
that each one of them has engendered a many others, as a man may quickly
vnde^stand, if he consider the great variety of ancient people that were
before the Greeks and Latins. It shall suffice at this present thus to have
pointed hereat in a word. Who so is desirous of more, let him cast his eye upon
the three first and principal Monarchies, and all the diverse Nations subject
unto them, and mentioned in the Chronicles of the world: the Abridgement of all
is to be found in the first Volumne of the Historical library of N. Vignier.

18. And language alters. He shows by diverse reasons whence comes the
change of tongues. First, the traffic that one country people has with
another, as well by sea (which he calls, Th'azur'd Amp^^^^^e) as also by
land, is cause why we learn some new words, as if we made no less exchange of
words than of wares. Secondly, a writer that dares venture, and is desirous to
enrich his mother tongue, decketh it bol^ly with that which he borrows of
others, sets forgotten words on foot again, inuenteth new words, coloring
and fashioning them according. Thirdly, time alters a speech; as we see it
does all things else; that we might be forced thereby daily more and more to
see and confess, that nothing is sure and steadfast under heaven; and to beat
down also the vanity of ^ans conceit, who commonly vaunteth himself and
takes pride in such things as have nothing constant in them but their own
inconstancy.

19. A courage bold. This comes too near the second reason to be counted a
fourth. The French Commentar must pardon me; I think rather the Poet having
spoken of Writers, Merchandise and Time, the right and only means whereby new
words and phrases are first brought into a language: here he shows us how
they are accepted, for as before he touched in a word that the Courts dislike
of old words bred their disuse; so here he tells us plainly that the
authority of him, that deuiseth or uses new words, is cause of their
acceptance: which is afterward confirmed by use, Q^empenes arbitrium est, and
vis and norma loquendi: as Horace writes. But forasmuch as use without Art
draws a language headlong into Barbarism, and so out of request, and Art
without authority of Empire, shuts it up in a narrow compass, he says,
that the Hebrew, Latin, and Greek, had all these maintaining means, whereby
they have continued ^o long, and spread so far abroad. So begins he
cunningly to make his passage from words and phrases unto entire languages, the
better to come at length to that excellent discourse, that follows in the
next Section, upon all the principal tongues now spoken or known in the
world. As for the Hebrew, besides the perfections above mentioned, he says, in
it God has revealed his will, and that it is the original of the divine Law:
both of great force to make the tongue far^e known, and continue long: it had
further the Art and knowledge of high Priests and Prophets, the wisdom and
state of Solomon, and was a long time used and accustomed to be spoke in the
famous commonwealth of the Jews. But these because they belong not unto that
tongue only, but as well to the other two, the Poet here le^ueth our. The
Greek he says, in her books contains at large all the liberal Sciences: a
great cause and most proper to the Greek: the rest as common to the others are
let pass. The Latin more grave and forcible then the Greek (that was a more
neat and wanton tongue) was advanced and continued in request by the Romans
force of arms: whose Empire was the greatest and most warlike of all the rest;
and therefore is this cause here only mentioned, as most proper to the Latin
tongue, and the rest omitted. These three tongues do at this day far
surpass all others; but ungodliness and contempt of the true Divinity, is
cause why the Hebrew is not esteemed as it deserves: the more is it regarded
of them that know it. As for the Greek, that which is now commonly spoken is
very gross. The pure and good Greek is contained within the books of Plato,
Aristotle, Zenophon, Demosthenes, Iscerates, Homer, Euripides, Sophocles,
Plutarch, Basil, Nastanzen, Chrysostom, and many others. The Latin, after
some ignorant and unlearned men had gready embased it, was refined and set on
foot again within these fourscore years, at what time there flourished many
great and learned personages in Europe, as Melancthon, Erasmus, Picus Myrand.
and others: but they come short of that grace and liuelihood that the ancient
Latin writers have: Cicero, Caesar, Liuie, Virgill, Horace, and a number of
others well enough known: of whom (as also of the most excellent authors in
other tongues) the Poet here goes about to entreat.

Tracant les derniers verse, Le Poet s'excuse, and reprend halaine pour entrer
plus alaigrement au suiuant discourse, ou il descrit poctiquement and represente
les langues principales, and ceux qui ont este plus excellens en icelles. Song
du Poet.
and comme a demi-las
Du labor attrayant de la saint Pallas,
Ie frappe bien souuent du menton ma paictrine.
Mes deux yeux arrousez d'vne humeur Ambrosine,
Se ferment peu a peu. Ie pers le mouuement,
La plume de ma main coule tout bellement.
Dessus le lict cheri de rechefie m'allonge,
En dans le flot Lethal tous mes enuuis i^ plonge.
I'y noye tous mes soins si ce n'est le desir
De donner a la France un veil plaisir.
Car le tan sacre-sainct de l'amour qui m'emflamme,
Ne peut mesme en dormant laisser dormir mon ame.
Le Song aux-aisles-d'or sortivers le Leuant
Par son huis de cristal, qui s'ouure un peu deuant
Que la port duiour, fantastique me guide
En un valou le ioux, and la nuict fresche-humide,
Le Ciel calm and les Nords, les chauds and les frimas,
La pluye and l'air serain ne sentresuyuent pas:
Le May tousioursy regne and nuict and iour Zephyre
De Roses courronne mignardement souspire
Par les bruyans rameaux d'vn bois qui doux-flairant
Va ce champ porte-fleurs en ouale murant.
Instement au milieu de la plain esmaillee
Description du logis and de l'Image d'Eloquence.
Se sleue vne grand' Roche en piedestal taillee,
Et dessus sacorniche un Collosse a' airain,
Qui tient un clair brandon en sa senestre main,
En l'autre un vase d'eau. De sa langue door
Naissent mill chenons qui par toute la pree,
Subtils, semblent trainer un monde d'auditeurs
Parl'or cille attachez, plus encor parles coeurs.
Ases pieds le Sanglier gist sans baue, and sansrage:
Le Tygrey dort charm, and l'Ours s'y desauuage.
Le proche mont sautelle: and lenceinte du bois
Danse, comme on diroit, an doux air de savoix.
Piliers autour de l'image d'eloquence, f^r lesquels sont les principales
langues du mo. de, auec ceux qui les ont enrichies. L'hebraique a pour
principaux apuis. Moyse.
De piliers faconnez par vne main subtle
A la cariatique un double peristile
De l'Eloquence ceint l'Image rauisseur:
Hauts piliers, qui fond^z sur un plinthe bien seur,
Portent de quatre en quatre vne langue de celles
Quece siecle scauant couche au rang des plus belles.
Or enter les esprit, qui fauoris des cieux
Estanconnent icy la langue des Hebreux,
Celuy de quile front flambe comme un Comete
Orne-ciel, donne-peur: qui port vne baguete
Seche and fleurie ensemble: and tient enter ses doigts
Leregistre sacre des dixplus saints Loix:
Est la guide d'Isac: l'autheur, qui premiere ose
Vouer ases neueux and ses verse and sa prose;
Escrits qui seulement ne dauancent, sacrez,
De long temps les escrits, ains tout les faits des Grecs.
Le second est David, David.
de qui l'agile pouce
Attire auce sa voix l'harmonie plus douce
Des cieux organis^z sur son luth qui bruira
Tant que l'astre du iour sur nos testes luira.
Mesme, peut estre apres que lescelestes flammes
Donront fin a leur bal, les bien heureuses ames
Des champions de Christ, au son de ces accors
Danseront a l'honneur du Royle fort des forts:
Et des Anges encor les bands emplumces
Chanteront, Saint, o Saint, o Saint Dieu des armees.
Solomon.
Le tiers est Solomon, qui^es beanx monumens
A, sage, marquete de plus d'enseignemens,
De plus de mots dorez, que sariche couronne
Derubis de grenats, de perles ne rayonne.
L'autre est le fills d'Amos, Isaie.
vehement en menaces,
Figure, grave, saint, accompagne des graces.
La Grecque a pour apuis. Homere.
La Grecque a pour apuy un Homere aux doux verse,
Don't l'eschole a produit les regimens diverse
Des philosophes vieux, and fait par tout le Monde
Comme un grand Ocean ruisseler su faconde.
Platon.
Platon le tout divine qui semblable a l'viseau,
Qu'on dit de Paradis, ne se souille onc en l'eau,
Iamais ne touch a terre, ains sur les astres vole
Plus haut que sur l'Enfer ne s'cleue le' Pole.
Herodote. Demosthene.
Herodote au clair style: and Demostene encor,
Loy des hommes diserts, Roy des coeurs, bouche d'or.
La Roman a pourapuis. Ciceron.
L'enuemi capital d'Antoine and Catiline,
Qui foudroye, qui tonne, and de qui la poictrine
Source mill torrens, ou de merueille espris
S'enyurent chasque iour l^s plus rares esprits:
Caesar, qui ne scait moins bien fair que bien dire:
Saluste plein de nerfs: Caesar. Salaste. Vngile.
Et celuy qui retire
Ilisn sur le Tybre: escriuatin chen des cieux,
Quine serma iamais, pour s'endormir les youx:
Qui iamis ne broncha: tousiours clair, tousionrs grave,
Hont eusement hardi, and modestement brave,
Tousiours semblable a soy, and dissemblable a tous,
Soustiennent des Romans le parler graue-dous.
La Tosca^e, auce ses apuis. Bocace, Petrarque. A^^^^^. T^^^.
Le toscan est sondesur le gentil Bocace:
Le Petrarque aux beaux mots, esmaille, pl^in d'audace:
L'Arioste conlant, pathetique, and diverse:
Le Tasse, digne ouurier d'va Heroiquevers,
Figure, court, aign, lime, riche^^ a l^^gage,
Et premier enhonneur, bien que derniore en age.
Le langage Arabesque a pour f^rmes apuis
Le subtle, L'Arabesque. Auenrois Auicenne. Eldebag. Ibnu-farid. L'alemande,
Beuther. Luther. Peucer Butric. La Castilane. Gueuare. Le Boscan, Grenade.
Garcilace.
le profond, le grand fills de Rois:
L' Auicenne facond, l'Eldebag Satyrique,
L'Ibun-farid conlant, gentil, alegorique.
Le Tudesque a celuy, qui refait Alemand
Le gentil Sleidan: l'eternelornement
D'Islebe and Vvitemberg: and Peucer qui redore
Ses attrayans discourse: and mon Butric encore.
Gueuare, le Boscan, Grenade, and Garcilace.
Abreuuez du Nectar, qui rit dedans la tasse
De Pitho verse-miel, portent le Castillan.
Et si l'antique honneur du parler Catalan
N'eust Osias raui, docte, il cust pen debatre
Le laurier Hespagnol auec l'vn de ces quatre.
L'Angloise. Morus. Baccon. Cydne.
Le parler des Anglois a pour fermes piliers
Thomas More, and Baccon, tous deux grands Chancelliers,
Qui seurant leur langage, and le tirant d'enfance,
Auscauoir politic ont conioint Peloquence.
Et le Milor Cydne qui Cygue donx-chantant.
Va les flots orgueilleux de Tamise flatant.
Ce fleuue gros d'honneur emporte sa faconde
Dans le sein de Thetis, and Thetis par le Monde.
Mais quel nouueau Soleil me done sur les yeux?
Sui-ie fait tout d'vn coup heureux bourgeois des cicux?
A l'occasion de l'Angleterre il fait vne digression and enter es louanges de
la Reyne Elisabet Princess sage, paisible, docte, and eloquente.
O quel auguste port! quelle royale grac!
Quels yeux doux-foudroyans! quelle Angelique face!
Filles du souuerain, doctes soeurs, n'est-ce pas
La grand' Elisabeth, la prudente Pallas,
Qui fait que le Breton, desdaigneux, ne desire
Changer au male long d'vne femme l'Empire?
Qui tandis qu'Erynnis less d'estre en Enfer,
Rauage ses voisins and par flamme, and par fer,
Et que le noir effroy d'vn murmurant orage
Menace horriblement l'Vniners de naufrage:
Tient en heureuse paix sa prouinse, ou la Loy
Venerable, fleurit auec la blanch Foy.
Quin'a pas soulement l'opislence feconde
Du maternel langage: ains d'vne bouche ronde
Peut si bien sur les champ haranguer en Latin,
Grec, Francois, Hespagnol, Tudesque, and Florentin,
Que Rome l'Emperiere, and la Greece, and la France,
Le Rhin, and l'Arne encor plaident pour sa naissance.
Clair perle du Nort, guerriere, domte-Mars,
Continue a cherir les Muses and les Arts.
Et si iamais ces verse peuuent d'vne aile agile,
Franchissant l'Ocoan, voler iusqu' a ton Isle,
Et tomber, fortunez, enter ces blanches mains,
Qui sous un just frein regissent tant d'humains,
Voy les d'vn ocil benin, and fanorable pense;
Qu'il faut pour to lover auoir ton eloquence.
Mais qui sont les Francois? Lalangue fiancoise a pour ornemens and apuis.
Marot.
Ce term sans facon.
D'ou la grossiere main du paresseux macon
Aleue s^nlement les plus dures escailles,
C'est toy Clement Marot, qui furieux tranailles
Artistement sans art: and poingt d'vn beau souci,
Transportes Helicond' Italy en Querci.
Marot, que ie reuere ainsi qv'n Colisec
Noircy, brije, moussu: vne medaille vsee:
Un escorne tombeau non tant pour leur beauty,
Que pour le saint respect de leup antiquite.
Vigenere. Amyot.
Ie ne puis bonnement cest autre recognoistre
Il abien, quel qu'il soit, la facond'vn bon maistre,
Ie demeur en suspens: carry le pren tantot
Pour Blaisse Vigenere, ore pour Amyot.
Ronsard.
L'autre, ce grand Ronsard, qui pour orner sa France,
Le Grec and le Latin despouille d'eloquence:
Et d'vn Esprit hardi many heureusement
Toute sort de verse, de style, and dargument.
De Mornay, en ion docte ocuure de la verite de la Religion Chrestienne.
Cest autre est De-Mornay, qui combat l'Atheisme,
Le Paganism vain, l'obstine Iudaisme,
Auec leur propre glaiue: and press, grave, saint,
Roidit si bien son style ensemble simple and peint,
Que ses vines raisons de beaux mots empennees
S'eufonsent comme traicts dans les anses bien-nees.
Et puis ie parle ainsin. O beaux, o clairs esprits,
Qui bien-heureux, Southait du Poet considerant les hommes doctes; des escrits
desquels la France iouit.
auez consacre vos escrits
A l'immortalite: puis que sur mes espaules
Ie ne puis auec vous porter l'honneur des Gauls:
Que, las! ie ne vous puis mesme suyure desyeux
Sur le Mont, qui besson s'auoisine des cieux:
Au moins permettez moy que, prosterne ^embrasse
Vos genous honorez: permettez que i'entasse
Sur voschefs rayonneux d'vn Auril les moissons.
De grace permettez, que mes soibles chausons
Vne gloire cternelle en vostre gloire puisent,
Et que tousiours vos noms dans mes carmes se lisent.
Fin de la vision.
Accordant ma demand, ils abaissent le front:
Le vallon disparoit, les Colomnes s'en vont:
Et le song suyeit de-mesme auecques else,
Si ic ncusse englue de mon ancre ses ailes,
When this I wrote, behold, The Poet takes breath to enter afresh into the next
discourse, whereby way of a Vision, he cunningly describes the principal
tongues, with their best authors
with tysing labor led
Of Pallas heavenly skill, full heavy grew mine head:
And now and then I strike my chin upon my breast,
That softly both mine eyes are closed up to rest
With sweet Ambrosian dew; knit is my senses band,
And fairly slides my pen forth of my fainting hand.
Upon my flattring couch I spread my self again,
And plonge in Lethe-streame all troubles of my brain:
So drown I all my care, save one, that with no trance
Is discontinued, to please and profit France;
Whose sacred forge of love, that me enflamed keeps,
Will not let sleep my soul although my body sleeps.
Then golden-winged dream from of th'East-Indy shore
Came forth at Crystal gate, and little while before
The day-gate was unlocked to valley of pleasant air
By fancy led my soul, where day, night, foul and fair,
The North winds and the South, the Summer and Winters hew,
The spring and fall of leaf did neu'r each other ensue:
Where always reigned May and Zepherus bedight
With rosy coronets did breath-on day and night,
A young woods whizzing boughs, that blossoms sweet did yield,
And ouall-wise bewald the flowre-embossed field
In middle point of all this ammell-blooming glade
Arose a mighty rock in footstall-manner made;
Upon the top thereof a brasse-colosse did stand,
That in the left hand held a flaming fierbrand,
And in the right a spout; she showed a golden tongue,
And thence a many chains all over the meadow sprung,
That worlds of hearers drew, with fine devise of art;
For some were held by the ears, and some were held by th'hart.
Before her feet the Boar, that forest wild had haunted,
The Tiger slept, and Bear, all aft'r a sort enchaunted.
The neighbor hillocks leapt, and woods rejoiced round,
Carranting (as it were) at her sweet voices sound.
A double circled row of pillars high and dight
By cunning workmans hand all aft'r a Carian right
With bases vnder-pinn'd, to fasten their foundation,
Beset this goodly shrine of eloquent Oration;
And four by four bore-vp amid-them one language
Of those that flourish most in this our learned age.
Among the blessed wits, to whom was given the grace
1. The Hebrew.
To beare-vp th'Ebrew tongue in such a sacred place;
The man whose forehead shines, as does a blazing star,
Skie-gracing, frighting-men; who for his scepter bar
A sear, yet budding, rod, and has in fingers hent
The ten-fould register of Gods Commandment;
Is he that Isac led: and first authority,
Both of free style and verse, left to posterity:
Such holy works as do not only long fore-run
The writings of the Greeks, but all that Greece has done.
The second David is, whose touch right cunningly
Combined with his voice draws down sweet harmony
From th'Organized heavens, on harp that aye shall sound
As long as days great star shall over our heads go round:
Nay long'r, as who can tell, when all these heavenly lights
Are at their measures end, but that the blessed sprights,
And Champions of Christ, at sound of his accords
Shall honor with a dance The Almighty Lord of Lords:
When all the Quire of heaven, and bands of winged ghosts,
Shall Holy, holy sing, O holy Lord of hosts.
The third is Solomon, whose work more bringtly beams
With golden sentences, then does his crown with gems.
The last is Amos son, beset with graces all,
Grave, holy, full of threats, devout, rhetorical.
2. The Greek.
The Greek on Homer leanes; who sweetly versifies,
Whose learned school has taught a many Companies
Of old Philosophers, and from whose cunning plea
Run rivers through the world, as from an Ocean Sea,
On Plato th'all-diuine, who like the bird we call
The bird of paradise, ne soyles himself at all
With earth or waters touch; but, more then hels descent
Surmounted is by heaven, surmounts the firmament.
On Herodote the plain; and him, of pleaders arts
The Law Demosthenes, the guilt-tongue Prince of hearts.
Then he that thunder-speaks, with lightning blast and shine
3. The Latin.
The Foe of Anthony, the scourge of Catiline,
The spring of thousand floods wherein the rarest wits
Do daily toil themselves aghast with wonder-fits;
And Coesar, that can do as well as he can plead:
And sinowie Salust next; then he that Troy does lead
Again to Tyber-shore, a writer sent from heaven,
That never shuts his eyes to slumber, morn or cu'n;
That ever treads sure, is ever plain and grave;
Demurely venterous, and temperately brave;
That still is like himself, and unlike others all;
These hold the sweet-graue tongue was last imperial.
The Italian founded is on Boccace pleasurous;
4. The ^^al^^^.
With Petrarch finely dight, bold and sententious;
On slowing Ariost, selfe-vnlike, passionate;
With Tasso, worthy wight to frame a verse of State,
Sharp, short, filled, figured, with language rolling fast,
The first to be esteemed albeet he wrote the last.
The Arabian tongue is here most worthily sustained
By great Auerroes deep-reaching, 5. The Arabian.
suttle-brained;
Ibunfarid the smooth allegorizing wag;
And faire-spoake Auicen, and Satyr Eldebag.
The glory of Wittenberg and Isleb, Martin Luther
Is one that bears the Dutch; 6. The Dutch.
another is Michael Buther,
Who Sleydan Almaned; my Butrick is the next;
With Peucer, who reguilds his all-entising text.
Then Boscan, then Gueuare, 7. The Spanish.
Grenade and Graoilas,
With Nectar all distained, that mantleth in the glass
Of hony-powring Peith, vpheld the Castillane.
And had not the ancient grace of speaking Catallane
Osias ouer-pleas'd, his learning might have bore
The Spanish Crown of Bay from one of the other four.
8. The English.
The burd'n of The English tongue I find here undertaken
By quick Sir Thomas More, and grave Sir Nicolas Bacon;
They knit and raised the style, and were both eloquent,
And Keepers of the Scale, and skilled in government.
Sir Philip Sydn'y is next, who sung as sweet as Swan
That slaps the swelling waves of Tems with silver fan:
This Riu'r his honor bears, and eloquence together,
To snow-foot Thetis lap, and Thetis every whither.
But what new sun is this that beams upon mine eyes?
Or, For the fourth pillar of the English tongue he names our gracious Queen
Elizabeth, duly and truly praising her for wisdom, maintenance of peace,
learning, and cloquence.
am I rapt amongst the heavenly companies?
O what a princely grace! what State Imperial!
What pleasant-lightning eyes! what face Angelical!
Say, O ye learned guirles begot of heavenly breath,
Is It not the wise Minerue, the great Elizabeth?
Who rules the Briton stout with such a tendering,
That never did he wish to change her for a King.
She whiles her neighbor Lands are spoiled with sword and fire,
By Furies weary of hell, with head of snakie tire,
And, whiles the dark affright of tempest roring-great
Does to the worlds Carack a fearful ship wrack threat,
Retains in happy peace her Isle, where true belief
And honorable Laws are reckned of in chief.
She has not only gift of plenty delectable
To speak her Mother Tongue; but readily is able
In Latin, Spanish, French (without premeditation)
In Greek, Italian, Dutch, to make as good Oration,
As Greece can, as can France, as Rome Imperial,
As Rhine, as Arne can, plead in their natural.
O bright Pearl of the North, martial Mars-conquering,
Love still and cherish th'Arts, and hear the Muses sing:
And, in case any time my verses winged-light
Shall over The Ocean Sea to thine Isle take their flight,
And by some happy chance into that fairt hand slide,
Which does so many men with lawful Scepter guide;
O read with gracious eye and favorable thought:
I want thine eloquence to praise thee as I ought.
But what are those of France? this Image was vnshap'd,
9. The French.
Whence has the bunglar hand of Idle mason skrap'd,
No more then th'harder skales of en'ry rugged knor;
Thee (Marot) sure it means, that labourest so hot
Without Arc Artist-like, and pricked with Phoebus Lance
Remouest He'icon from Italy to France.
Thee (Clement) I regard even as an old Colosse,
All soiled, all to broke, and ouergrow'n with moss;
Astabl' or tomb defaced, more for th'antiquitie,
Then any bewty in them, or cunning that I see.
What one this other is, I searce remember me;
A Cunning one he seems, what one soere he be.
I rest yet in suspense, sometime he does appear
To be James Amiot, sometime Blase Vigineere.
Great Ronsard is the next, who does of Graces wrong
The Grecke and Latin both to grace his Mother Tongue;
And with a bold attempt does manage happily
All kind of Argument, of style of Poetry.
De Mornay this man is, encountering Atheism,
Jews stubborn unbelief, and foolish Paganism,
With weapons of their own; he godly, grave, and pressed,
So solideth his style both simpl' and courtly-drest,
That feathered with fair words his reasons sharp as darts
Instrike themselves adeepe into the brauest hearts.
The Poets desire considering the learned Writers of France.
Then thus I spoke to them, o bright, o goodly wits
Who in most happy case have consecrate your writs
To Immortality! fith that my feeble shoulders
May not among you be the French renownes vpholders,
Alas! since I uneath you follow can with eye
Upon the twy-top hill so near acoast the sky:
Yet suffer me at least here prostrate to embrace
Your honorable knees! o give me leave to place
Upon your shining heads a garland of the Spring,
And of your goodness grant that these mean tunes I sing
May in your glory draw an everlasting glory,
And always this my verse may register your story.
The end of the Vision.
They yielding to my suit, made semblance with their head;
So vanished the vale, and all the pillars fled:
In like sort had the dream with them together hasted,
But that I with mine Ink his nimble feathers pasted.
20 Tracing these latter lines. Before he ends this Book or discourse,
having begun to speak of tongues, and their comparison one with another, he
takes thence occasion to set before our eyes the three principal tongues,
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, accompanied with six other greatly now-a-daies
esteemed throughout all Europe. For this purpose, and to enrich his Poem with
some new ornament, worthy the things he treats of; he declares, how being
weary with ouer-watching himself in these his former studies, he cast him on
his bed and slept; yet so as the earnest desire he had to delight and profit
his countrymen, kept still his soul awake; which caused him to see in his
Dream the Vision here following. A fine invention, and framed to the imitation
of the best ancient Poets both Greek and Latin, who, being to handle matters
of great importance, are wont by such devices cunningly to provoke the Readers
to mark and give care unto them.

21. And golden-winged Dream. Of Dreams and their causes has been spoken
sufficiently in the first day of this second Week, entitled Eden, page the
46, 47, 48, etc. having here to speak of a Dream clear and easy to be
conceived, he distinguishes it from such as are darksome and deceivable,
saying it was about the dawning of the day, when the golden-winged (that is,
the sweet, pleasant, and untroubled) Dream came forth at the Crystal gate in
the East: as much to say, as when the day star arises, or the morning
draws on, we feel (if we were awake before) sleep gently seazing on us, and
our spirits coming and going, as it were, through Crystal gates: for then be
Dreams and Visions cleerest and best distinguished; whereas before our meat be
fully digested, our brain ouer-loden with vapors, receives but troublesome
impressions, waued so to and fro, and so enterlaced one with another, that in
the twinkling of an eye, it frames a thousand shapes, that presently vanish
away, and are no more remembered. Now the Poet says, he was guided (as he
thought) into a place mo^^ delightful, which he describes in few verses, and
it is very fit for the matter following.

22 Just in the middle point. First he describes the dwelling of Eloquence: to
wit, on a great Rock, wrought and fashioned in manner of a foor-stall, or base
for an image to stand on: to show how steadfast and certain a thing this
excellent gift of God is. Secondly, the resemblance or Image of Eloquence, he
calls a Colosse, that is, of stature surpassing all others: which betoketh
thus much, that eloquent and fair spoken men go many degrees beyond others,
whom they use at their pleasure, and draw whither they list, as the example of
Pericles and Cicero declare, and many proofs thereof are found in the holy
Scripture. He makes this Image of Brass, which implies the fair gloss, the
sweet sound and strong force of Eloquence; he places in the left hand a
firebrand, to signify that learned, true, and fair utterance makes men see
and touch (as it were) the right nature of things: in the right hand an Ewer,
because the speech of the wise dampeth and puts out the flame of passions. I
might note hereof many examples, but I leave them for the diligent Reader to
search: meaning here to offer him but Annotations, which I fear already are
grown too long. The little chains that come forth from the Images golden
tongue, and draw such a number of hearers by the ears and heart, signify the
great power of a well framed speech: the truth whereof appears chiefly in
preaching the word, in counsels of grave common-wealths-men, and orations of
good Magistrates and valiant Captains. In this manner did the ancient
Frenchmen paint and set out their Hercules, surnamed Ognius: whereupon Alciat
has made a pretty Emblem: it is the 180. expounded at large by Cl. Minos. The
sum of all is, that Eloquence is to be preferred before force. Our Poet
aims at that description. Further concerning the Bore, the Tygre, and the
Bear, lying tame at the feet of this Image, it signifies that a pleasant and
learned speech appeaseth all angry, cruel, and savage men; and cuen the
maddest and most brutish people in the world: it makes the woods and hills to
dance and leap: that is to say, it moves, bends and instructs very
block-heads, and such as are most hard of understanding; and this may be the
meaning of those fained tales of Amphion, Orpheus, Arion, and other like.
Lastly, this Image is environed with a double rank of pillars, well and
strongly grounded and vnder-pinned, that bear up in due proportion the nino
languages following, each by her own chief authors and maintainers. For every
pillar was wrought in fashion of a man, and framed to the countenance of one of
their best writers in a long gown, or stole. And that is the meaning of the
French a la Cariatide: After the Carian right: as Vitruuius writes at large in
the first Chapter of his first book of Architecture. This I note because the
French Commenter lets it pass, and it troubled my self to understand it at
the first.

23. Among the blessed wits. For chief props of the Hebrew tongue (which he
places in the forefront of Eloquence, as in every regard it was meet, whether
we cofider the sweet gravity, the natural impliance, the shortness, hautines,
liuelines of it: or the sincerity, holiness, light, and heavenly Maiestic) he
names first Moses, because he is the most ancient of those whose writings in
this tongue are extant. As for the book of the Prophecy of Henoch, it was lost
a long time ago. He describes this holy Law-writer after an excellent manner,
as was requisite in a discourse of eloquence. His face shines like a blasing
Star: alluding to that in the Scripture, that Moses coming down from the
Mount where he had talked with God, his face so shined, that none was able to
behold his countenance; in so much as he was feign to wear a veil over it:
the rest is very easy to be understood, especially of such as have never so
lightly turned over the history. Now for the books of Moses, they were written
many hundred years before the Greeks were known: who were not heard of in
the world, but a little before the reign of Saul, and had but few works in
writing, or none at all, till after the time of Solomon, as their own
Histories witness, whosoever will take pains to turn them over. Nay further,
all their knowledge came from the Egyptians, Phenicians and others, who had
leaned somewhat by conuersing with the Hebiues. And to come again to Moses, he
has been in marvelous account with insinite Heathen Writers. If any have
lightly regarded, or found fault with him, it was either because they
understood him not at all, or maliced him exceedingly, which a man may easily
find in their writings. The second Author of the Hebrew he counts David,
whose Psalms he speaks of much in few lines; but little it is in comparison
of their excellency, whereof many ancient and late Writers have spoken notable
things: I will not heap them up here, assuring my self that all true
Christians will grant me that the Book of David's Psalms is (as Saint Basil
says) the Storehouse and treasury of all good learning, for all men to come
at; and will confess with Saint Jerome, and Saint Chrysostom, that nothing
better becomes a man, be he Peasant or Crafts-man, great or small, than to
sing unto the Lord the praises and thanksgiving in these excellent songs
contained: the very lively and true Anatomies of a believing soul. O how
cursed and abominable before God and his Church are those wicked ones, that
have forbidden Christians the understanding and use of them, and banished them
out of Christendom: that have suffered, allowed, maintained, commanded, and
commended unto the people these shameful and wanton Poesies, these books of
vanity, error, and leasings, which with their Authors deserve the fire: not
the quiet and peaceable persons, that call upon Jesus Christ, and belecue
steadfastly the life everlasting. The soul that fears God will not take this
my digression ill, nor think it needless: As for the ungodly, let them spit
at it, if they will, I regard them not. The third Author and ornament of the
Hebrew, is reckoned Solomon in his Proverbs, the Book of the Preacher, and the
Song of Songs, books more besprinckled with golden words and notable
sentences, than his Crown was with precious stones and pearls embossed.
Happy is the man that takes delight to mark and daily think upon so
profitable and necessary instructions. The fourth is the Prophet Esaias, the
son of Amos, right such a one as the Poet has described. These four he
thought sufficient to name, because they have most Writings extant, and are
withal exceeding cloquent, as might easily be proved by particulars, if I were
to write a Commentary, or a whole discourse thereof.

24. The Greek. Homer, his Illias and Odyssea containing 48. books, is the
most ancient Greek Author we have: his inventions are wonderful, his vain
natural, his verses smooth, and full of Art, and the more they are considered,
the greater grace they have. There is also in them a hidden sense, and the very
wellspring of all humane knowledge; as may appear by that infinite pieces of
his poesies are cited in the books of ancient and late Philosophers,
Geographers, Historiographers and Orators, as Plutarch and others witness. The
next to Homer is Plato, not in time but in worthiness: he is called the divine
Philosopher, because he is so marvelous pure, so high and lofty in all his
disconrses; the true scholar of him that professing himself to know but one
thing, namely that he knew nothing, declared that he knew all things that might
be learned in the world, as touching the world. For concerning the knowledge of
salvation, Plato and his master both were ignorant: and since all other
knowledge is nothing in comparison of that (the more are we bound to God that
have it) he said most truly, that he knew nothing. The third is Herodotus, who
writes in the Ionick Dialect, that is a kind of Greek differing a little in
phrases and pronuntiation from the common-spoken, as some far situate shires
do from the Court or mother-Citie of their Country: in diverse points it
agrees with the French. Plutarch deals somewhat too roughly with this worthy
Historiographer, in whose defense I will oppose the authority of a learned man
of our time; who in a certain Preface of his, says of Herodotus: Narrationes
eius sunt disertae, iudicationes expressae, speciosae, explicationes accuratae
and euidentes, collectiones certae atqueplenae, in his rerum gestarum, hominum,
temporum fides, accurata compertorum relatio, dubiorum coniccturasag^x,
sabulosorum verecunda commemoratio, miravbique simplicitas, and eximius quidam
candor. See the great praises, and perfections of a grave Historiographer. The
fourth is Demosthenes, the prince of Greek Orators, the very rule and square
of all that endeavor to speak eloquently, a man that leads other men's minds
as he list, excellent in all his discourses: which are extant, the most of
them, and read to the great use and prosit of those that know how to apply them.

25. Then he of Anthony and Catiline great foe. That is Cicero, surnamed the
father of Eloquence: he is the first and chief of those that grace and
maintain the Latin tongue. He was extremely hated of Mark Anthony and
Catiline, both whom he has also bitterly pursued and touched to the quick, as
his Catilinarie and Philippicke Orations declare: the often printing of his
works, and learned men's continual reading of them, and borrowing thence the
best graces of their writings, do prove his learning, eloquence and plenty of
speech to be such as the Poet here describes. The second is Caesar, the most
valiant of eloquent men, and most eloquent of valiant men, as may well appear
by his life in Plutarch, and his Commontaries de bello Gallico: by which work
he has wrung the pen out of learned men's hands, and in a manner discouraged
them all from writing Histories, because they see such perfection therein, as
they are not able to come near. The third is the Historiographer Salust: we
have of his works, besides diverse Orations, two Histories remaining,
Coniuratio Catilinae: and bellum Iugurthinum, short they are, but full of
sentence and sinews, witnessing the ancient force and vigor of the Roman
tongue. The Reader may hereto add the commendations of these three Authors, as
they are in many learned books of late writers here and there scattered. As
for those that think Cicero bableth without learning, and that Caesar the
Dictatour and first Emperor wrote not these Commentaries that bear his name,
and that Salust writes a hard and forced style: because their accusations are
false, and they so far out of the way, I think them worthy none other
answer, than our Poets few verses here. Of the fourth, which is the Poet
Virgil, too much cannot be spoken: his books of Georgickes and Aeneidos, being
such marvelous works, and so far exceeding all other books of humanitic: I
speak not only for the excellence of his verse; but sure in the depth of his
inventions, his judgment, his decence, his modesty, his gravity, and his
state, how much he does outstrip and go beyond all others, may be seen not
only in every book of his, but even in every verse; wherein is contained a
thousand thousand secrets, and as it were the abridgement of all kind of Arts
and knowledge; besides his proper terms, his Epythites always fit, his
metaphors and figures sow'n and sprinkled in their right places, and his speech
quite throughout eloquent and pure, without any bodging or dawberie whatsoever.
The learned Caesar Scaliger, among many others, has plainly and at large
declared in his Art of Poetry, the excellency of this Author.

26. The Italian. For ornament of the Italian, a language risen of the Roman or
Latin, he names three Poets and one Orator, slipping diverse writers of
history and Secretaries, that have left diverse excellent works, Orations, and
Epistles among us. The reason is (I think) because these four contain in
them all the graces of the others. He names also the Tuscan tongue, because of
all the diverse Dialects of Italy the Luquish, Milanish, Geneuish, and
Venetian, none are so pure and fine as the Florentine or Tuscan. John Boccace
has written long time ago, but a very fine and pure style; as his Decameron,
his Fiametta, the Philocope, The Laberinth, and his other books witness, that
with the world are in so great request. Francis Petrach has written since, and
invented goodly words, and partly by his own pregnant wit, partly by imitation
of the best Authors, has enriched the tongue with many graces: he has
ventured also far and made Sonets, Chapters, and Cantoes wonderful curious.
Then Ludouico Ariosto of Ferara has set forth a legend of Love, entitled
Orlando furioso, in verses sweet and meet, famous throughout all Italy; he is
full of affections in his discourse, and as delightful as is possible, by
reason of the variety of that fabulous matter he writes of, which he
shadoweth so cunningly, that the Reader is therewith often affected and mou^d,
as if it were a true story, or at least not altogether false. Torquato Tasso
is last of the four in time of writing, but in account (as the Poet says) the
first and chief: he was the son of Bernardo Tasso that eloquent man, whose
excellent Epistles are in print. This his son has written in twenty books
or Cantoes, of stately verse, a poem the best of all Italians, entitled
Gierusalemme liberata, all the graces and riches of the Greeks and Latins are
there gathered together, all wrought into it after the best manner, so grave,
so short, so learned, so comely, so lively, so stately, as if it were the work
of another Virgil. There are also printed at Ferrara three volumnes of his
works, containing other kinds of verse, and all sorts of fine inventions, a
Comedy, a Tragedy, diverse Dialogues and discourses in prose, all are worth
reading, and all make good the judgment that our Poet has given of the
Author.

27. The language Arabicke. This language is comen of the Hebrew: among other
learned men's books that have made this tongue of account, we have the works
of Aben Rois, that is, the son of Kings: for Ben signifies a son in
Hebrew: and the Arabians add to the beginning this preposition A, and sometime
Al. This Aben Rois is the same that we commonly call Auerroes, the Commentar, a
very excellent Philosopher. He has commented upon most of Aristotle, and is
translated into Latin, printed at Venice; the work does show the deep reach
and subtle brain of the man. Auicen was a great Rhilosopher and Physician, as
his writings also declare. Gesner says Auerroes was of Cordway, and Auicen of
Seuill, and so I think: but it appears by their works that they were both
Arabians, and professed the superstition of Mahomet. As for Eldebag, Johannes
Leo writes of him in the fifth book of his description of Asticke. This poet
borne at Malaga in Grenade, of great name thorough all the parts of Buggie and
Thunes, was very eloquent in the Arabian tongue, and wonderful sharp in
railing on those that did him hurt: he made the men of Tebesse feel it in a
Satyr he wrote against them, the effect whereof is this: that Nature knowing
the Tebessians should be men of little worth and very swine, would make no good
thing grow about their City but Nuts. The last, to wit, Ibnu-farid, the French
Commentar knows not what he was, and I cannot learn.

28. The Dutch, For the Dutch or Almaine tongue he sets us down Michaell
Beuther, who very well has translated the Latin Commentaries of Sleidan: the
next is Luther borne at Islebe, as learned and eloquent a man as any was among
the Divines and Preachers of Germany, as all will confess, that have read his
works in Dutch: he Preached and read Divinity the space of many years at
Wytteberg in Saxony. Then Gasper Peucer son in law to Phillip Melancibon, an
excellent Philosopher, Mathematician, and Physician, as his works declare. And
lastly Peter Beutricke, Counceller to Duke John Cosimer, and chief dealer for
him with diverse Princes; lately deceased. I could name you many more, but I
content my self, as the poet has done, with these four.

29. Then Gueuare. The Books of Anthony de Gueuare, du Bosean, de Grenade, de
Gracylace, have been for the most part, translated into Latin, Italian and
French: but they are far better in their Castilian: which is the most pure
Dialect of the Spanish tongue, and wherein the men of learning and good
nourtriture are wont ordinarily to write and speak. And these four the poet
has chosen for the most eloquent writers in this tongue: yet nothing
foredeeming diverse others that have written well both in verse and prose; as
namely Osias, whom but for his old Dialect, he judges as good an author as the
other.

30. The speech of English. For ornament of the English tongue he names Sir
Thomas Moore and Sir Nicholas Bacon both Lord Chauncellours: the first of them
was very learned in the Arts and tongues: the second exceeding well seen in
the common laws of England: and both very eloquent in their mother language.
As for Sir Philip Sidney he deserves no less commendation then the poet has
given him. Chaucer deserves the like commendation here that Osias did among
the Spanish Authors.

31. But what new Sun is this. He makes a digression in praise of the Queen
of England, who the space of seven and thirty years has governed her Realm
in great prosperity; so as, during the troubles and overthrows of other
kingdoms about her, herself and her people have been preserved from infinite
dangers. This famous Queen has also the tougues, here mentioned by the poet,
very par fit, and at this day by the singular grace of God she is accounted the
precious pearl of the North, and very fortunate in all the wars she takes
in hand: her happy success and victories are every way so memorable, that they
deserve to be written in a large history, and reverenced of all posteritic.

32. But what are these of France? Clement Marot worthy to be admired for his
time, in regard of the ignorance and barbarism that reigned in Europe many
years before him, has led the Muses over the Alps, and arrayed them after
the French fashion: as witnesses, among other his works, the translation of
nine and forty Psalms of David, a work that will continue in account as long
as Yea and Nay are spoken, even to the worlds end. Indeed he wants that Art,
and those fine devices that some later Writers have; but even in this want, and
these imperfections he has done wondrous well; and shows in his natural
vain, that if he had list he could have been excellent: yea in some points
and places he has so done already, as the best of them all could have done no
better. For translations we have Iacques Amiot, who has turned into French
the Ethiopian History of Heliodorus, seven books of Diodorus Siculus, and
all Plutarch, wherein he has labored to very good purpose, and with happy
success: I would to God he had set his hand also to Thucidides, Xenophon, and
Seneca: his style is pure and natural, not affected, not forced; right good
and true French. Blase Viginere has also translated many books, as the
Polonian History, a part of Liuie, Caesar, Chalcondylas, Philostratus, three
Dialogues of Friendship, and the Psalms in free verse, all which I have read
over and again, yet do I prefer Amiot before him. Indeed I find in
Viginere a very ready style and matter well chosen, but the other (I know not
how) me thinks has a better carriage of himself. The S^iour de Vauprinas in
his French Library says, of all the foster-children of the Muses, that were
bred in France, Viginere has so written, that, as well for learning, as for
eloquence of speech, he has prevented all that shall come after him, and as it
were shut the gate against them. See what a commendation here is: I leave the
Reader to judge of our opinions. Our Poet stays in doubt, but I have been
bold to go further; I trust without any great offense: in this consists not
the good or bad state of France. Concerning Poets, he names Peter Ronsard, who
has made himself rich with Greek and Latin spoils, as his Treatises of
Love, his Odes, Elegies, and Hymns do witness: wherein a man may read all
sorts of verses, and all kind of matter, sometimes in a low style, sometimes
in a mean, sometimes in a lofty style: For which the Poet calls him Great
Ronsard. I will note here a notable speech of his: After our Poets first Week
was come forth in Print, being asked his opinion of the work, he answered,
alluding to the title, Mounsieur du Bartas has done more in one week, than I
have done in all my life time. As for Philip de Mornay, Lord of Plessie Marly,
his learned work of the truth of Christian Religion, honored thus by the true
title, and written in good French, with lively reasons there gathered together,
moves and draws to his purpose, that is, to acknowledge the truth, all that
read it with a heart desirous of peace and good. The like may be said of his
Discourse of Life and Death, of his Treatise of the Church, his Meditations,
and some Epistles and Demonstrations of his. For all his Writings are
strengthened with Arguments, Inductions, and proofs invincible, and all in a
style with gravity and sweetness mixed, well knit, and well sounding, and
easy enough to those that are never so little acquainted with it. The Poet
having so lively represented his Vision, ends his discoarse of Elequence, and
her most renowned sauourer in every Language, and so shut up his sixth Book:
Which is the second of the second day of his second Week.

LES COLONIES. The third Book of Noe, or the Colonies.
Ayant a parler des migrations de tant de diuets peuples issus de Noe, il
desire y estre adresse par quelque faueur speciale.
TANDIS que ie conduy par les deserts du Monde
Du Pilote premier la famille second:
Que ie vay descouurant and par terre and par eau,
Adelantade heureux, maint Royaume nounean:
Et que du grand Noe la plautureuse vigne
De l'vne and l'autre mer, penible, ie prouigne:
Quel nuage clair-brun me conduira de iour?
Quel feu me guidera la nuict dans le sejour
Promis a chaque peuple, auant que l'Androgyne
Eust receu dans Eden sa double-vne origin?
O sacre-sainct flambeau, qui, clair, marchois deuant
Pour cest effect, sous la sigure de l'estoile des Sages d'Orient il implore la
grace and lumiere du S. Esprit.
Les trois Magitiens de l'Odoreux Leuant,
Pour monstrer le maillot de cil, don't la ieunesse
Vit tousiours en sa fleur; chasse la nuict espesse
Qui me band les yeux: a fin que par mes verse
Ie suiue tous les coins de ce grand Universe.
Car bien quemon esprit durant si long voyage
Voltige ca and la si n'ay-ie en mon courage
Autre plus grand desir qu'a mener par la main
Mes lecteurs a l'enfant diuinement-humain.
Being to speak of so many peoples remoues as came from Noe, a hard matter, he
desires the furtherance of Gods special favor.
WHile ore th'vnpeopled world, I lead the fruitful stock
Of him that first aslaid the waters wrackfull shocke;
While I by sea and land all in their places range
Discou'ries fortunate of many a kingdom strange;
And while of mighty Noe I toil to spread and twine
Fro the one to the other Sea the many-branched Vine;
O what twilighty cloud by day shall guide my sight,
What fiery pillar shall my course direct by night
To seats each peopl' ordaind before the Pair-of-Man
Their twy-fold-one estate in Paradise began!
Thou Holy-holy Flame, that led'st the Persian Wyses,
From th'all-perfumy coast where-out fair Titan rises,
To show the cradle of Christ, whose youth in living light
For ever flourishes; drive hence the gloomie night
That seeleth-vp mine eyes: and so my Muse it shall
Search all the darker nookes of this great earthy Ball.
For though my wandering thought al-throw this journey long
Turn here and there, yet I no way more bend my song,
Nor ought do more desire, than to direct and waine
My Readers to the Child that was Diuine-humaine.
1. What twilightie cloud. The Poet being to make in and out so many ways, and
cross so many seas and countries, huge and unknown, good cause he had to
demand (as he does) a greater help than man's wit can afford, such as the
children of Israel had, a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, to guide
them through the wilderness; and surely God gave him a a very extraordinary
gift, otherwise he had never been able so well and briefly to have comprised
so many, hard, and worthy matters, as he has done, in less than six hundred
verses. He says here further, that each peoples place of abode was ordained of
God before the pair of man (that is, Adam and Eve) had received in Paradise
their twifold-one beginning; that is, before Adam was created of earth, and Eve
of one of his ribs: noting thereby, how of one they were made two in creation,
and after of two one by marriage. And so before the world was made, the Lord had
in his eternal deeree marked and skored out the dwelling places of all people:
it remained therefore that the same deeree should be accomplished, as appeared
afterward.

2. Thou Holy-holy Flame. The Pole-starre is the Mariners guide: but here the
Poet asks another manner help to show him the right way in his travel: and
glancing at the marvelous new Star that appeared to the Wisemen that came
out of the East to see and worship our Savior Jesus Christ, then borne in
Bethlem, he calls on the Holy Ghost the true light of our understanding,
auerring that although the matter which he has taken in hand, constraines him
to discourse sometime of one thing, and sometime of another, yet is Jesus
Christ the chief ma^ke he almeth it, unto whom the desire is to lead his
Reader, as also whatsoever is set us down in the doctrine of Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles, tends to the selfsame end. This the Poets holy
desire makes much to the shame of those, that having themselves an unclean
heart, by setting their filthy works in print, desile also the eyes and ears
of many, whom (as much as in them lies) they lead unto the Devil.

Comparaison monstrant l'effect de l'estonnement suruenu enter les bastisseur
de Babel, apres que leur la^gage fut confondu.
TOVT ainsi que le choc de l'esclatant tonnere
Que dans le coeur d'vn bois le ciel triste desserre,
Fait quitter tout d'vn coup aux oiseaux tremblottans
Leurs perches and leurs nids dans l'air obscur slottans;
L'vn fuit ca l'autre la: le sisslement des ailes
Bruit tout aux enuirons: les grises Tourterelles
Ne vont plus deux a deux: and ceux qui sont conuerts
Encor d'vn poil folet osent tenter les airs:
De mesme les macons de la grand Tour d'Euphrate,
Oyant la voix de Dieu, qui bruit, tonne, and s'esclate
En la diversity de leur barbare voix,
Prennent, esponuantex, leur vol tous a la fois,
A main dextre, a main gauche: and par la terre vuide
Chacun voyage a part ou l'Eternel le guide.
Pourquoy Dieu n'a voulu que les descendans de Noe demeurassent en la plain de
Sennaar.
Car le grand Roy du ciel ayant de longue main
Enson Conseil prive fait don au genre humain
De ce bas Universe, ne voulut que la Terre
Fust un nid de brigands: qu'a coup de cimeterre
On en sit le partage: and que brutalement
Pesle mesle on peuplast ce bourbeux element:
Aincois coupant chemin au feu de conuoitise,
La grandeur de la Terre en trois lots il divise
Enter Sem, Cham, Iaphet. Sem s'acase verse l'Est,
A Cham eschet le Su, Iaphet gaigne l'Ouest.
A comparison silly showing the effect of that astonishment befallen the
builders of Babel.
As, when the sky o're-cast with darksome cloudy rack
A woods heart thorow-strikes with some great thunder-crack,
The Birds even all at once their nest and perch forsake,
And throw the troubled air they flit for fear and quake,
One hear, another there; their pinions whizzing sound
Is noised all round-about; no greisell Turtle is found
Together with her mate; with downy-callow feather
Some young ones dare assay to wrastl' against the weather:
Right so the men who built the great Assyrian Tower,
Perceiving Gods great voice in thunder-clashing stower
Of their confounded speech, each barbarous vnt' either
Betake them to their heels all fearful altogether.
Some run the left hand way, and some acoste the right;
Why God would not have the posterity of Noe stay in the plain of Sennaar.
All tread th'vnhaunted earth as God ordained their flight.
For that great King of heaven, who long ere creature breathed
In privy counsel had this vnder-world bequeathed
Unto the race of Man, ne would at all abide it
To be a den of thieves, as if men should divide it
By dreadful dint of sword, and every people border
This thickened Element beast-like and out of order:
But, fire of war to quench, he did all try-diuide,
The earth dinided between the sons of Noe.
Among the sons of Noe allotting each his side.
So Sem enhabited the day-beginning East,
To Cham befell the South, and Iaphet gained the West.
3. The men who built. That which the Poet says concerning the affright of
these builders, is implied by the words of Moses, Genesis 11.8. they ceased to
build: by the one is the other understood: for upon the sudden chance of so
strange a confusion, they were scarred, as with a thunderclap, and after by
necessity constrained to sunder themselves. Yet I am of their opinion, who
think the diversity of tongues is to be considered, not in every particular
builder, but only in families. As that the goodness of God was such in his
judgment, that the builders departing thence, each led his wife and children
with him, who understood and spoke as he did, otherwise man's life could hardly
have been sustained. They also that parted furthest at the first from those of
Noes successors that were not leagued in this presumptuous enterprise, soonest
forgot all their former language. And true it is, that at the first they
sundered not all very far one from another: but, as it pleased God more and
more to increase them, they sought further and further for new countries to
dwell in, and all by the secret direction of the wonderful providence of God.

4 That great King of heaven. He reaches even to the first cause of the
Colonies, and diuers-way-partings of Noes posterity. Staight after the Flood
God blessed Noe and his children and said, Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth: and the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of
the earth, and upon every foul of the heaven, upon all that moves upon the
earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea, into your hands are they delivered,
Genesis 9.1, 2. Therefore if the builders had continued and fast settled themselves
in the Plain of Sennaar, they had (as much as was in them) made void the Lords
blessing, and berest themselves and their posterity of those great privileges
which he had granted them. But the deree of God must needs be fulfilled, and
therefore according to his ordinance he chaseth far away these donataries, to
the end that year by year, some in one place, and some in another, they may
take possession of that which was given them, the whole compass of the world.
Whereas the Poet says further, that the Lord divided the whole earth into
three Lots, that may be gathered out of the tenth Chapter of Genesis, and 32.
Chap. of Deuteronom. verse. 8. Noe a wise and learned man, and one of groat
experience, was the instrument of Gods blessing in this behalf: and though the
bounds of these habitations be not all and thoroughly specisied, as were the
divisions of the Land of Canaan among the Tribes of Israel, yet out of the
tenth Chapter of Genesis a man may gather, that in those days Noe and his
sons, and their posterity, knew more a great deal hereof, than men can now
perceive: as may appear by so many diverse Colonies, so many strange languages,
so many names changed and rechanged. A good Commentary upon this Chapter would
assoile many questions hereabouts arising.

5 To Sem was given. Because the sons of Noe were but three, therefore here
are named but three quarters of the world, the East, West, and South: Some of
the successors of Iaphet peopled the North also, as shall be showed hereafter.
Concerning the names of these four cardinal points, somewhat has been said
upon discourse of the winds, in the second day of the first week, verse 571.
The order of the sons of Noe is this, Iaphet is the elder, Sem the second,
Cham the last, Genesis 9.24. and 10.21. But Sem is named first, because of the
favor of God showed to his posterity, by thence raising the Messiah, and
there maintaining his Church. Iaphet the second, for that in the vocation of
the Gentiles he is received into the reuts of Sem, that is, united to the
family of the faithful Abraham, according to the Prophecy and blessing of
Noe, Genesis 9.27. Now in the tenth of Genesis verse. 25. Moses further affirms,
that Heber, Sems under nephew had two sons, the one named Peleg, which
signifies Division, or parting asunder (for in his time the Earth was divided)
and the other Ioktan. Whereout some gather, that in the time of Peleg, that is
(as I take it) before the cofusion of tongues, Noe and his sons remembered the
grant that God had made them of all the Earth: and that Noe then made a kind
of partition thereof among his sons. If we reckon the confusion of the
builders, together with the partition of the world, though about the fiftieth
year of Peleg, who was borne but an hundred years after the Flood, and lived
239. this confusion must happen within 150. years after the Flood: which were
very soon: yet some take it sooner, as from the time that Peleg received his
name, for remembrance (as they say) of both things so note-worthy to all
posterity, and especially to the Church of God: which well might be advertised
thereof; for Peleg lived 46. years after the birth of Abraham, as appears by
the eleventh Chapter of Genesis. Two things then are here to be considered: the
one, that the partition of the Earth, which Noe made, was to his posterity a
token of Gods great blessing, which nevertheless the Babel-builders for their
part have turned into a curse: the other, that this partition (as many Divines
and Chroniclers think) was made before Nimrod and his train came out of the
East, and sat down in the plain of Sennaar, what time they were scattered
thence again by the confusion. Whereunto this I will adioyne, that as then the
builders language was confounded: so by continuance of time, the speech of
others also was corrupted, especially when they began to forget the true
Religion, which even in Sems family was decayed, as appears plainly out of
the 24. Chapter of Joshua, where it is said that Terah, father to Abraham and
Nachor, had served strange gods. It was no reason that the Holy tongue should
remain entire and vncorrupt with such as had corrupted the service of God. But
the Lord being merciful unto Abraham, restored to him again, and kept for his
faithful children the first Language, which had not been so much corrupted in
the family of Sem, who parted not so far from his father.

La terre partagee enter les enfans de Noe. Sem tire verse l'Orient.
Ce pays qui s'estend, non moins rich que large,
Iusqu'au board Perosite, ou reide se descharge
L'Ob Roy des douces caux, l'Ob au superbe course,
Fleuue qu'a peine on peut trauerser en six iours,
Iusques a Malaca: les Isles, ou s'amasse
La Canelle, and le Clou: Sumatre, sur qui pass
Le Cercle egale-nuicts: and iusqu'au slot encor
De Zeilan porte-perle, and Binasgar porte-or.
Depuis la mer Euxine, and l'onde fraternelle
Des fleuues Chaldeans, iusqu' a l'onde cruelle
Du destroit Anien: les paresseuses eaux
Habitation des successeurs de Cham.
Ou Quinzit est hasty: Chiorze, ou les Taureaux
Aussi grands qu'Elephans son habillez de soye,
Est la part du grand Sem. Car le destin enuoye
Assure en l'Assyrie, a sin qu'en peu de iours
Chale, Resen, Niniue, au ciel haussent leurs tours,
Le porte-scepre Elam saisit les monts de Perse,
Et les fertils guerets que l'Araxe trauerse:
Lut, le champ Lydien: Aram, l'Aramean:
Et le docte Arphaxat, le terroir Chaldean.
This countrry reaching forth as rich as it is large,
From Peake of Perosites, Sem went toward the West.
where does himself discharge
The stately running Ob, great Ob, fresh waters King,
A river hardly crossed in six days traveling,
To Malaca, to th'Isles from whence are brought huge masses
Of Calamus and Cloves: Samotra whereon passes
Heavens Equinoctial line; and to the waters far
Of Pearly Zeilan Isle, and goldie Bisnagar:
And from the Pont-Eusine, and from the brother waves
Of those two Chaldee streams, unto the Sea that raues
With hideous noise about the Straight of Aniens,
To Quinsies moorie poole, and to Chiorza, whence
Come Elephantick bulls with silken-haired hides;
This hight the share of Sem: for Gods decree it guides
Ashur t'Assyriland, that after some few days
How and what Nations came of Sem.
Chal, Rezen, Niniue, their towers to heaven may raise.
The Persian hills possessed great Elams kingly race,
And those fat lands where-through Araxes bont his pace.
Lud held the Lydian fields, Aram th'Armenia,
And learned Arphaxad the quarter Chaldean.
6. This Country. He sets down the lots of Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, first in
general: after meaning to show the particular Colonies of each. So then to Sem
he allotteth Asia. The proof of these several shares may be gathered out of
the tenth Chapter of Genesis. It is not meant that Sem in his own lifetime
took possession of this huge plot of ground, although he lived 600 years: but
the posterity of his five sons ouer-spred it by succession of time, as the
Poet declares at large hereafter; and a man may perceive some token hereof, in
that Moses reckons in the foresaid Chapter the sons of Joktan the son of
Heber peti-sonne of Arphaxad, son of Sem. Now before I show the bounds here
noted by the Poet in this lot of Sem, I will set down the description and
division of Asia, as now it is. The map-drawers of our time differ in their
order: some consider it by the whole mass; others by the seaborders and parts
best known, which they reckon to be nine, and those particularly deciphered in
the first chapter of the twentieth book of the Portugal history. But this
kind of division, because it is more obscure and farther from my purpose, I
leave, and rest on the other, which deuides the mass of Asia into sieve
principal parts: the first, which is ouer-against Europe, and under the
Emperor of Moscouie, is bounded with the frozen sea, the river Ob, or Oby, the
lake of Kittay, and the land-straight that is betwixt the Caspian and Euxine
sea. The second is Tartary subject to the great Cham, which abutteth Southward
on the Caspian sea, the hill Imaus and the river Juxartes; Northward and
Eastward on the Ocean, and Westward upon Moscouie. The third part is possessed
by the Turk, and contains all that lies between the Euxine, Aegean and
Midland seas, and so further betwixt Egypt, the Arabian and Persian Gulfes, the
river Tygris, the Caspian sea, and the land-straight there. The fourth is the
Kingdom of Persia, abutting Westward on the Turk, Northward on the great
Cham, Eastward on the river Indus, and Southward on the Indian sea. As for the
fist part, it is the same which we call the East Indies, so named of the river
Indus, and distinguished the higher from the lower by the famous river Ganges.
These Indies are very large Countries, as the Maps declare, and front out
Southward as far as Malaca, having besides, an infinite sort of Islands great
and small, which the Card-men have well set down, both in Maps and writing.
Now see we the manner how the Poet considers Asia. He takes it first by right
line from North to South, to wit, from the Peake, foreland or cape of Perosites
as far as Malaca, where he takes in the Moluckes and Taprobana, and from
thence rises again to Zeilan and Bisnagar. Then draws another line from the
Mayor or Euxine sea on the West, to the straights of Anien Northeast, and
touches by the way some few Countries most note-worthy, reserving the rest
until his particular description of the Colonies: which follows from the
297. verse unto the 319.

To make plain some words in the text, the Peake of Perosites is a promontory
about the farthest part of Moscouy, near the Scythian sea, where lives (as
Cellarius reports of Asia in his great book entitled Speculum orbis terrarum,
and Mercator in his world-map) a certain people which have so small a vent for
their mouth, that they are nourished only by the savor and steeme of sodden
flesh. And about this promontory the River Ob, rising from the lake of Kythay,
grows to an huge breadth, and so emptieth into the Scythian or frozen sea.
The Baron of Herbestoin notes it in his map of Moscouie, and in his History
says as much as here follows touching this river, fol 82. They that have
been thereon say they have labored a whole day without cease, their vessel
going very fast, to pass the River, and that it is fourscore Italian miles
broad Which ageeth well with that the Poet here says, and with report of
Merator and Cellarius: so that by good right it may be called, rather then any
other stream, the king of all fiesh waters, because in all the world besides
there is none so large, and this also is of a wonderful great length: for as
the foresaid Baron affirms, from the one end to the other, to wit, from the
lake of Kythay to the frozen-sea, it asks more then three months sailing.

The realm and city of Malaca are described in the sixth book of the
Portugal history, chap. 18. It is near the Equinoctial above Taprobana: so
therefore Asia reaches from the North Pole beyond the Equator.

The Isles from whence are brought buge masses of Cloves and Cassia, are the
Moluckes, sieve in number, Tidor, Terenat, Motir, Machian, and Bachian, beset
with diverse other Isles and Islets un ler and near the Equator in the East,
which with their properties and manners of their inhabitants are well set down
in the 13. book of the history of Portugal, Chap. 8.

Samotra, whereon passes the night-equalling line, or the Equator, is the Isle
Taprobana Southward over against Malaca: it is above 450. leagues long, and
120. broad, I have described it in the fist day of the first week: see further
the history of Portugal in the sixth book, the 18. chap.

Zeilan is an Isle right against the Cape of Calecut, above Taprebana toward
the East, it lies North and South, in length about 125. leagues, and in the
broadest place is 75. over. There are taken out of the sea great store of
pearls very fair and brighte for the further description thereof, see the 4.
book and 20, chapter of the history of Portugal.

Bisnagar is a kingdom lying between Decan and Narsingua, the mountains of
Calecut, and the sea called the great gulf of Bengala. It is rich in gold
which is there found in rivers. Look the situation thereof in the Map of the
East Indies, and in the Asia of Ortelius and Cellarius.

The Pont-Eusine, is now called the Mayor or the Hacke Sea: at the one end
thereof toward the Midland-sea is Constantinople, the Card-men call it by
diverse names, which Orteliu: has set down in his Synonym.

By the Brother waves of those Chaldean streams, is meant (as. I suppose) the
Persian sea, whereinto Euphrates and Tygris both together empty, being before
joined about Babylon, now called Bagadet, and so the Poet takes as much of the
breadth of Asia at the West end as he does at the East: the one from Quinsay to
Chiorze, the other from the sea of Constantinople to the Persian Gulse.

Concerning the straight of Anion, the Cardmen are not all of one opinion:
Mercator, Ortelius, Cellarius, Theuet, and others, set down plainly a good
broad arm of Sea betwixt the North-east point of Asia and America. But
Vopelius ioynes Asia and this fourth part of the world together, greatly
enlarging Asia and cut tolling the other, contrary to the opinion of the
Authors aforesaid, and many Spaniards that have written of the newfound world:
the reasons that may be alleged in favor of either side, require a large
Commentary. Vopelius his opinion indeed cutteth off many doubts that arise
about the enpeopling of America: but Mercator and the others, who are most
commonly followed, seem to ground more upon Geography and better to agree with
the seas natural sway and easy compassing the earth. Arias Montanus in his
book entitled Phaleg, where he treats of the habitations of Noes
posterity, sets down a Map according to Vopelius, this book of his bound
in the volume called Apparatus, is joined with the great Bibles of Antwerp. But
the Poet follows Mercator, Ortelius, and the common opinion of the Cardmen of
our time: for Ptolome, Strabo and Mela in their days had not discovered so
much.

Quinsay, which the Poet calls Quinzit, is a famous city in the Northeast point
of Asia about ten leagues from the sea, built upon peers and arches in a
marrish ground; it is twenty leagues or one hundred miles about, and by reason
as well of the great Lake-waters there, as also of the ebb and slow of the
sea, it bath (as M. P. Venet, reports in the 64. chapter of his second book)
12000. bridges of stone: the most renoumed bound-marke of all Asia, and the
greatest city in the world, if that be true. But Theuet gainsaith it in the
27. chapter of the 12. book of his Cosmography, where he describes the City
and Lake with the River that causes the Lake to swell; he says it is not above
four leagues in compass: yet M. Paul affirms he has been there.

Chiorze is another worthy part of Asia set down here for a bound-marke,
because of the strange Bulls there, as great as Elephants, with hair as smooth
and soft as silk. Howsoever now adays that country is nothing so civil as
others inhabited by the posterity of Cham and Iaphet, yet the fruitfulness of
the ground, and great commodities there growing, for maintenance of man's life,
declare it has been in times past one of the best portions of the children of
Noe.

7. Ashur to Assyriland. Moses says the sons of Sem were Elam, Ashur,
Arphaxad, Lud and Aram: The Poet here in six verses has noted out the first
habitations of these five: reserving afterward, about the 300. verse and so
forth, to show their first, second, third, and fourth out-going over the rest
of Asia. Concerning Ashur it may be gathered out of the 10. of Genesis, verse
the 11. that having sorted himself with the people that now began to fear
Nimred, and liking not to live under that yoke, went on further, and in the
Country after his name called Assyria built Niniuy (which a long time remained
one of the greatest Cities in the world, as appears by the prophecy of Jonas
and other places of Scripture) and Caleh and Resen not far asunder, which
have been long ago destroyed, Elam, that was the eldest, seated himself by
the river Euphrates near the Persian Gulf, which now is called the Sea of
Mesendin. The Poet gives him a Princely title, because the Monarchy began
betime and long continued thereabouts, where also reigns still the Sophi, a
great Emperor and deadly enemy of the Turks. The River Araxes is described by
Ptolome in his third Map of Asia, where he makes it spring from the soot of
Pariard which some men take for the hill Taurus, and so passing Scapene,
Soducene, and Colthene to empty into the Caspian sea. These Countries are very
rich, and therefore the Poet calls them sat lands. Lud having passed the River
composed of Tygris and Euphrates, which straight after voids into the Golfe,
had Elam on the North, the two Rivers joined and the Gulf on the East, and on
the West the Marches of Seba, which is the upper part of Arabia. The poet here
allotteth him the Lydian fields, if by Lydia be understood that part of the
lesser Asia called Meonia by Ptolome, Herodote and Pliny, Lud should have
wandered further then the other four brothers. Moses reports not any thing of
his Colonies, and his far going may be the cause, for according to the Poet
he should have coasted up as far as Aeolia and the Midland sea. The seat of
Aram is Mesopotamia, to wit, the Countries about Babylon, and the mountains of
Armenia, which were after called by the name of Taurus. This also contains
Syria and the great Armenia, betwixt the which runs Euphrates. Arphaxad
passing Euphrates stayed in Chaldea: and for that Astronomy and other excellent
arts there chiefly flourished, the Poet surnameth him the Learned, which
appertains also unto him in regard of the true doctrine maintained by his
posterity, and after some corruption reformed in the house of Abraham, whom
the Lord removed from Vr of the Chaldeans into Syria.

Cham tire verse le Midi.
Cham fut fait le Seigneur de la terre bornee
Verse l'Autan, par les flots de la noire Guinee,
De Sephal, Botongas, Gaguametre, Benin,
Et du chaut Concritan trop fertile en venin.
Verse le Nort, de la mer qui naissant pres d'Abile,
Depart lariche Europe and l'Afrique sterile.
Verse la part ou Tytanle soir noye ses rez,
De l'onde de Cap-verd, de Cap-blanc, and de Fez.
Et verse celle ou Phoebus le matin se resueille,
De l'Ocean d'Aden, and de la mer Vermeille.
Et qui plus est, encore tout ce qui gist enclos
Enter le mont Liban, and les Arabes slots,
Habitation des successcuts de Cham.
Enter l'onde Erytree and le Goulfe Persique,
Il l'adiouste, grand Prince, a son scepter d'Afrique,
Canan l'vn de ces fills s'amaisonne a l'entour
Du Iourdain doux-glissant, ou se doit quel que iour
Heberger Israel: Pheud pouple la Lybie:
Mizraim, fon Egypt: and Chus, l'Ethiopie.
Cham Lord was of the Land that Southward is beset
With black Guineas waves, and those of Guagamet;
Of Benin, Cefala; Botongas, Concritan,
That fruitful is of drugs to poison beast or man.
It Northward fronts the sea from Abil, pent between
The barren Afric shore, and Europs fertile green:
And on the Western coast, where Phoebus drownes his light,
Thrusts-out the Cape of Fesse, the green Cape and the white:
And has on the other side, whence comes the Sun from sleep
Th'Arabick seas, and all the ruddy-sanded deep.
Nay all the land betwixt the Liban mountain spread,
And Aden waves, betwixt the Persick and the Red,
This mighty Southern Prince, commanding far and wide,
Unto the Regiment and scept'r of Afric tide.
For Canan one his son began to build and dwell
By Jordan, gentle stream, whereas great Israel
Was after to be lodged: Phut peopled Lybia.
Misraijm Egypt had, Chus Ethiopia.
8. Cham. The share of Cham was Afric, which the Poet boundeth out as
follows. It has on the Southside the Ae^hiopicke Ocean, or the sea of
Guinea, the land of Negros, the realms of Caefala (which comes near the
South Tropicke, and is right-ouer against Madagascar, or as the Spanish call
it, the Isle of S Laurence) Bolongas (lower and hard by the Cape of good hope)
Guagamet, about the lake of Zembre, from whence the river Nile springs, as
Daniell Cellarius notes in his Map of Afric; and Benin, that Ises above
th'Equator near the great bay betwixt Meleget and Mauicongo. As for Concritan,
it is a great wilderness between Cefala and Bolongas, which by reason of
extreme hear brings forth great store of poisonous things. Now the Northbound
of Affricke is the Midland-sea, and on the West it shoots out three capes or
promontories named in the text, all toward the Atlanticke Ocean, but the green
cape; which is more southward and points more toward the Sea, called (in
respect of the Antatticke pole) the North Sea, though it lie very near the
Equator: on the East of Affricke plays the Arabian Gulf, and the great red
Sea now called the Indicke Ocean: and beyond these bounds the Poet says Cham
also possessed Arabia, which is distinguished into three parts, the Happy, the
Desert, and the Stony, all enclosed by the Mount Libanus, and the Red and
Persian Gulfes.

9. Canan. He sets down briefly and in four verses the several abodes of
Chams four sons, according as they are named in the tenth chapter of
Genesis. Chus the eldest brother had Aethiopia, which some take for that under
Egypt, others for the land of Chus which is a part of Arabia the Happy, as may
be gathered by many places of the old Testament, well noted of M. Beroals in
the sixth chapter of his fourth book of Chronicles. Mizraim peopled Egypt,
that of the Hebrews was commonly called Mitzraijm, and long after Egypt of
the name of King Aegyptus, who succeeded Belus in that kingdom, and was
brother to Danaus, who came into Greece and was Author of that name general to
the Grecians, which, as Saint Augustine thinks De Ciu. Dei, the eighteenth
book and tenth chapter, happened about the time of Joshua. Phut the third son
of Cham, gave name (says Josephus) to the Phutaeans, after called Lybians, of
one of the sons of Mesren or Mizrain named Lybis. He adds also that in
Mauritania there is (...) certain river and country called Phute. Ezechiel
30.5. numbreth Phut among those that were in league with Chus and Lud, which
the Latin interpreter translateth Ethiopia, Lydia, and the Lydians: so also
did the 70. Interpreters. This I say to mou^ the Reader, that is so delighted,
unto a further and more diligent search. I think Phut was seated near Arabia
and Egypt; although Arias Montanus and others place him in the coast of
Affricke now called Barbary, about Tunis, Bugie, Algeri and the Mountains of
Maroco. Now of Canan or Chanaan, the fourth son of Cham, was called that Land
of Promise, which the twelve Tribes of Israel under the conduct of Joshua in due
time entered and possessed. The bounds thereof are plainly set down in the
book of Exodus, chap 23. verse 31. and elsewhere: I need not here discourse
of them, except I were to write a long Commentary.

Iaphet tirevers le Septentrion and l'Occident.
Iaphet s'estend depuis les eaux de l'Hellespont,
La Taken and flot Euxin, iusques au double mont
Du fameux Gibaltar, and l'Ocean qui baigne
De son flus and reflus le ruiage d'Hespaigne:
Et depuis ceste mer, ou les chars attelez
Se promenent au lieu des Gallions ailez,
Iusqu'au flot Prouencal, Tyrrhene, Ligustique,
L'onde de la Morce, and de la docte Attique,
Contre le beau terroir de l'Asie mineur,
Second iardin d'Eden, and du monde l'honneur,
Et ce large pays, qui gist depuis Amane
Iusqu'au source du Rha, and du board de la Tanes
Habitation des enfans de laphet, and leurs descendans.
Des reins de so Gomer se disent descendus
Tant de peuple guerriers par la Gaul espandus,
Et les Germains encor, iadis dits Gomerites:
De tubal, ceux d'Hespaigne, and de Magog, les Scythes:
Mazaca, de Mosoch: de Madai, les Medois:
Les Thraces, de Thyras: de Iauan, les Gregeois.
Iaphet to the North and West.
Now Iaphet spread along from th'Ellesponticke waters,
Th'Euxine, and Tanaies, unto the mount Gibraltars
Renowned doubl' ascent, and that sunsetting Maine,
Which with his ebb and flow plays on the shore of Spain:
And from that higher sea, upon whose frozen alleyes
Glide swiftly-teemed carres insted of winged galleys,
Unto the Genoan Tyrrhene and prouence Seas,
With those of learned Greece, and of Peoloponese.
Accoast the goodly shore of Asia the less,
(The second paradise, th'worlds chief happiness)
And Tartarie, the ground that reaches from Amane
Unto the springs of Rha, and pleasant banks of Taken.
All those brave men at arms, that France have ouer-spred,
Of Gomers fruitful seed, themselves profess, are bred;
And so the Germans are, sometime hight Gomerites:
Of Tubal Spaniards came, of Mosoch Moscouites,
Of Madai sprung the Medes, of Magog Scythians,
Of Iauan rose the Greeks: of Thyras Thracians.
10. Now Japhet. Moses reciting Genesis 9.27. how Noe blessed his two children,
sets down two notable points; the one concerning the great and many Countries
which Iaphet and his posterity should possess, the other of the favor that
God should show them, by lodging them in the tents of Sem, that is, by
receiving them at length into his Church; which has been fulfilled in the
calling of the Gentiles. For the first point, whereas he says, God enlarge
Iaphet (For so the Hebrew word signifies, although some translate it Persuade)
it is as much as if he had said, Let Iaphet and his race possess the Countries
round about him far and near. And this has also been accomplished in that
so infinite a multitude of people has issued out of the stock of Iaphet, and
peopled Europe; which, though it appear lesser then the other parts, has
always had more inhabitants, and fewer void Countries: The Poet has set down
so perfect a description thereof, as it needs no further to be opened, if the
Reader have never so little beheld the Maps. On the East it is parted from the
greater Asia by the Mayor Sea, the Meotis Lake called by Ortelius the Zabach
sea, the River Taken or Deu, which voids into the Lake, and the Spring-herds of
Rha, Edel, or Volga, running by Tartarie into the Caspian Sea: and from Asia
the less, sometime the honor of the world and exceeding rich, as still it
has sufficient, it is divided by the Straight of Gallipoli, sometime called
Hellespont. On the West it has the Straight of Gibraltar, the Spanish and
British Oceans: on the North the Frozen Sea, and on the South the Midland Sea,
which is diversely called, to wit, the Sea of Marseil by the coast of Genes, the
Adriaticke about Athens and Morea, and otherwise according to the places
adjoining. This goodly part of the world, beside the Roman Empire, has many
great kingdoms full of people, well set forth by the Card-men. Daniell
Cellarius accounts it in length, from Lisbon to Constantinople, about six
hundred leagues Almaine, and very near as much in breadth from Scrifinie to
Sicily.

11 Gomer. Moses reckeneth seven sons of Iaphet, Genesis 10.2. So does here the
Poet, not standing much upon the order of them, to follow the verse; of Gomer
are come the Gomerites, whom the Greeks called Galates and Gauls: of them
came the people that spoiled Delphos, and then sat down about Troas in Asia,
and were called Gaule-Greekes, or Asian Galates, who afterward seized a good
part of Phrygia. The Lord threatening by Ezechiel, 38. Chapter; Gog, chief of
the Princes of Mesech and Tubal, says he, will destroy him with this Gomer and
all his bands, and the house of Togarmah, of the North-quarters. They that
expound the Prophecy, gather out of this place that the Gomerites were people
bordering on the North of Asia, and brought by the Kings of Syria and Asia to
destroy the Jews after their return from Babylon. They preased forth of Asia
and enlarged their dominions greatly (as has been said) for they were a very
warlike Nation. Of them, the Poet says, are come the Germans, so Melancthon
affirms upon Carrion, so do others also, and chiefly Goropius in his fifth
book. But there is great diversity in these outworne matters, between the
late and ancient Writers. A diligent conference of places in the old Testament,
and the ancient Latin, Greek, and Chaldean translations serve best for the
purpose: next, a careful examining of the best Greek and Latin Histories:
but this requires a whole volume, whereunto the searches of Goropius, being so
well handled, might afford a man great help. Concerning Tubal, the Poet
follows the opinion of Josephus, that he was Author of the Spanish: which must
be rightly understood, that is, after a long tract of time. For by the 38. and
39. of Ezechiel, it seems that the people issued from Tubal and Mosoch, which
were neighbors, dwelt near Arabia, and were governed or led to war by the
Kings of Asia and Syria. And in the 32. chap. where is mention made of the
mourning that should be among the Nations for the King of Egypt, there are
named among others, Ashur, Elam, Mosoch and Tubal: whereby it may be gathered
they were of Asia. As for their Colonies and outcreases into Spain, they are
very dark and hardly proved. Vasaeus indeed in his Chronicle of Spain, and
Taraphe in his History, and others that have written of Spain in diverse
languages, following Joseph and Berose, make Tubal first King of Spain: but
sithence they declare not what time he came thither, I leave the Reader to
consider of, and search further into the matter. Look the historical Library
of N. Vignier, the first part, page 15. where he treats of the people of
Europe.

Magog, as the Poet says, is father of the Scythians: his first habitation and
Colonie was in Coelesyria, as may be gathered out of the fifth book and 23.
chapter of Pliny, and the 37, 38, and 39. chapters of Ezechiel. At this time
the right Scythians are the Selauonians, Moscouites and Tartarians, who vaunt
of their descent from Iaphet. This might have been by tract of time, but not
so soon, as the Poet in the sequel. Melancthon in his first upon Carrion takes
the prophecies against Gog and Magog to be meant especially of the Turks, whom
he calls by the name of Scythians, and applies also unto them that which is
written in the Revelation. And in the end of his second Book he gives the name
to all people that profess Mahomet. I think my self, that, some while after
Noes partition of the lands, Magog and his people dwelt in Coelesyria, or there
abouts, and thence by succession of time thrust up into the higher Countries.
Now as the ancient people of God were much vexed and outraged by the Kings of
Syria and Asia, successors of Seleucus Nicanor, and signified by the name of
Gog, who aiding the people of Magog, Mosoch and Tubal, their subjects, greatly
annoyed the Jews then returned from Babylon: so has Satan in these later
days against the holy City, the Church of God, stirred up again Gog and
Magog, many Kings and Princes enemies to the Faith, who have conspired
together, and made a League to overthrow it utterly: but the Almighty in due
time and season shall confound them. Read the 20. Chapter of the Revelation,
and the 89. Sermon of Bullinger thereupon.

As for Mosoch, Joseph says, of him are come the Cappadocians, and for proof
thereof, alleges a certain Town of their Country called Mazaca. It may be
gathered out of the 120. Psalm, that Mesech, or Mosoch, was a neighbor people
to Syria and Arabia, which place the Chalde Paraphrast expounding, uses words
of this import: O wretch that I am! for I have been a stranger among the
Asians, and dwelt in the Arabian tents. The Poet considers what might have
been in continuance of time, and how far the man's posterity might have
stretched.

Madai sure was Author of the name of Medes, whose Empire was very great in the
higher Asia; they destroyed the Chaldean Monarchy, as may be noted out of
Ierem. 51.11. and Dan. 5.18.

The Thracians ( Joseph says, and the Poet) are descended of Thyras.
Melancthou thinks that of him are come the Russians, but the Scripture
speaks not of his posterity. Pliny makes mention of a River Tyra in the
Russian or European Sarmatia: Melancthon, Goropius and others call it Nester.
Goropius in his seventh Book puts the Getes, Daces and Bastarnes among the
Thracians, as all of one stock, and speaking almost the selfsame tongue,
which also (as he says) comes very near the Cimbricke and Brabantish.

Iauan, the fourth son of Iaphet, gave names to the Ionians, who after with
their neighbors were called Greeks: and therefore the Latin Interpreter,
translating the place of Ezech. 27.19. for the Hebrew Iauan has put Graecia:
so have the seventy put (...), which is the name of Greece, for the same word.
As also in the 13. verse of the same Chapter, and in the 19. of the 66. of
Esaias, they both have translated the Hebrew Jeuanim (...) and Graeci. The
Country of Athens has in old time been called Ionie, as Plutarch says in the
life of Theseus, and Strabo in his ninth Book recites out of Hecataeus, that
the Ionians came out of Asia into Greece. Now the Greeks as they were great
discoursers, they have devised a thousand tales of their first beginning: but I
let them pass, because my notes are already waxen over long.

Joy si-ie voulois, ie ferois vne list
Discrete modesty du Poet, qui aim mieux se taire que traiter de chooses
obscures and cachees sous le voile de l'Antiquite.
De tous nos deuanciers: and marchannt sur la piste
D'vn suppose Berose, and d'antres qui menteurs
Abusent du loisir and bonte des lecteurs,
Hardi i'entreprendrois de toutes les provinces
Nommer de pere en sils les plus antiques Princes:
Chanter de l'Vniuers les diverse peuplemens,
Et des moindres citez fouiller les fondemens.
Mais quoy? ie ne veux pas abandonner ma voile
Au premier vent qui souffle: and sans la clair estoile
Qui luit sur tou^ les cieux, temeraire, ramer,
Sur les flos inconus de si lontaine mer,
Toute pleine d'escueils, and de Scilles profondes,
Ou ne roulle pas moins de naufrages que d'ondes:
N'ayant autres Patrons que certains escriuains
Forgeurs denoms de Roys, autheurs decontes vains,
Qui sont tout a leur post: and conuoiteux de gloire,
Sur un pied de Ciron bastissent vne histoire.
He will not enter into matter far out of knowledge.
Here if I were disposed upon the ground to tread
Of that supposed Berose, abusing all that read
As he and others do; well might I let you see
Of all our Ancestors a fained pedigree:
I boldly might assay of all the worlds Provinces,
From father unto son, to name the former Princes:
To sing, of all the world, each peoples diverse lot,
And of the meanest to w^^es to lay the grunsill-plot.
But what? I mean not, I, as every wind shall blow,
To leave the former course, and rashly assay to row,
(The bright Load-starre unseen) upon the waves vnknow'n
Of such an Ocean sea, so full of rocks bestrow'n
And Scyllaes glutton gulfes; where tumbleth equal store
Of shipwracks on the sands, and billows to the shore:
Not having other guide then writers such as feign
The names of ancient Kings, and romants tell us vain;
Who make all for themselves, and gaping after glory,
On footing of a fly can frame a perfect story.
12 Now. The like is seen in many books of late times and ancient, that treat
of the Kingdoms, Countries, and people of the world: for many labor more to
come near Noah's Ark, and to find there the foundation of their Towns, and
names of their first Princes, then about other more certain and sure grounds.
And they had rather forge names, and devise matter of their own head, than
leave to pack huge volumes full of tales, witnessing the strange vanity of
man's brain. The Poet condemns this foolish ambition, and by good ^^ght: all
the matter, when it is at the best, being very doubtful and vnprofit^ble: for
man was placed on the earth to think rather on the service of God, than so to
trouble his head with curious out-search of his ancestors names.

13 Of that suppos'ed Berose. Who so desires to know that the Berose late
printed is false, supposed, and clean contrary to the right Chaldean, cited
often by Joseph in his Antiquities against Apion, let him read the fourth
book of Goropius his Origines Antuerpianae. And so let him think also of
Manetho, Metasthenes, Fabius Pictor, Sempronius, Myrsilus Lesbius and others
packt, as they are, into one volume, by some one that thought to do great
matters by abusing so the Readers, and holding them in amuse by false devises
from further search of the truth. I will not here set down the words of
Goropius, who at large discouers the forgednesse of this new Berose and his
followers: let it suffice to have pointed at the place. The true Berose was one
of the Priests of Bell, and at the commandment of Antiochus the third, who
succeeded Seleucus, wrote three books of the Chaldean History: so says
Tatianus, Joseph, and Clemens Alexandrinus. Some fragments of his we read in
Joseph against Apion, and they make flat against that other Berose published in
our time.

Pourquoy la recerche de l'Antiquite est obscure: and co^bien sont mal apuyez
ceux qui sondent sur les etymologies and allusions des mots.
L'allusion des mots n'est un seur fondement
Poury sur-maconner un ferme bastiment:
Veu que les monts plus hauts, les riuieres plus belles,
Et les plus grandes mers changent, bien qu'eternelles,
De nom a chaque coup: que la posterite
De celuy quibastit les murs d'vne cite
N'en est point heritiere: and qu'ici nullerace
En fief perpetuel ne possede vne place:
Ains qu'a ferme, a louage, ou par form de pressed,
Elle possede un champ, un mont vne forest.
Et comme quand l'orage esmeut la mer profonde,
Migrations and diuerses habitations des peuples.
Le flot chasse le flot, and l'onde choque l'onde,
Toutes les nations s'entre-poussent des bras:
L'vn peuple chasse l'autre, and le second n'est pas
Sur l'huis de la maison don't il pense estre maistre,
Qu'vn troisiesme le fait sauter par la fenestre.
Ainsi le vieil Breton, Exemples a ce propos. les Bretons.
exile par l'Anglois
De sa grande Albion, de sloge le Gaulois
Du terroir Armorique: and done a la campaigne,
Ou le Loire se perd, le surnom de Bretaigne.
Les Lombards.
De mesme le Lombard ayant abandonne
De l'Istre audouble-nom le marge seillonue
Aux Hongre balafrez, chasse, plein de fury,
Le rest des Gaulois de la rich Insubrie;
Qui tomb derechef sous la main des Franco is
Domptee par le fer du plus grand de nos Roys.
Non autrement l'Alain, Les Alains and Vandales.
and l'Arctique Vandale,
Desplace par le Goth de Cordube and d'Hispale,
Se saisit du Carthage: and puis sent du Romain
Sous l'autheur de nos loix la vainqueresse main:
Et le Romain enoor, joint au camp Barbaresque
Du More au poil-frize, fait ioug a l'Arabesque.
Cause de ces migrations and deslogeme^s de peuples
La sacrilege faim des Sceptres and de l'Or:
La soif d'vne vengeance and le desir encor
D'vnfantastique honneur fond sur des rauages,
Ruins, cruautez, embrassements, carnages,
Desbornent le pays; and font en mill parts
Et vaguer and voguer les peuples fills de Mars.
Laissant a part les courses incertaines des Arabes, Mores and Tartares, il
vient a parler des voyages and changemens faits par diverse peuples belliqueux.
Ie ne discour icy des rauisseurs Scaenites,
Des Nomades pasteurs, ou des Hordes vrais Scyches,
Qui suyuant les pasquis, errent par bataillons,
Et sichent ca and la leurs velus pauillons:
Comme les noirs essaims des vistes Arondelles,
Qui deux fois tous les ans franchissent de leurs ailes
La mer porte-nauire, and vont chasque saison
Amies d'vn doux air changer de garnison:
Ains d'autre peuple fire qui par toute la terre
Aux despens de leur sang on recerche la guerre:
Qui scachant beaucoup mieux vaincre que commander,
Demolir que bastir, conquester que garder,
Et preferant Bellone au saint repos d'Astree,
Braues, ont inonde contree apres contree.
Tout tell fut le Lombard, Origin, migrations voyages and conquestes des
Lombards.
qui nay dedans Schonland*
Saisit la Liuonie, and de la Rugiland.
Puis ayant revenge sus le peuple Bulgare
Le trespass d'Agilmont, audacieux s'empare
Du terroir de Polongne: and de Polongue anant
Va dans les eaux du Rhin ses blonds cheuenx lauant:
D'ou rebroussant chemin, se parque en Morauie;
A Bude tossed apres; de la vole a Pauie:
O u deux cens ans il regne: and fait quele Tesin,
Royal, ose egaler son flot au Pau voisin.
Tell le Goth, Des Gotht.
qui sortit de la froide Finlande,
Scanzie, Scrifinie, Noruege and Gothlande,
Se camp sur Vistule: and voyant que son air
Aprochoit de celuy de la Baltique mer,
D'vn ost victorieux sait sit la Sclauonie.
Le terroir Valachide, and la Transsiluanie.
De la se parque en Thrace: and quittant les Gregeois,
Desireux du butin entreprend quatre fois
D'arracher aux Romans, fills aisnez de la guerre,
Les lauriers conquestez dessus toute la terre;
Tantost sous Rhadaguise, ores sous Alaric,
Tantost sous Vidimare, ore sous Dietric.
S'acase apres en Gaul: and chasse de Gascongne,
S'arreste en Portugal, Castille, and Catalogne.
Tell l'antique Gaulois, Des anciens Gaulois.
qui, vagabond, rodant
Par tout ou le Soleil ses rayons va dardant,
Occupe l'Italie and furieux saccage
De Romule, ou plustost de Mars mesme l'ouurage.
De la pass eu Hongrie: and puis du froid Strymon
D'vn soc victorieux renuerse le limon:
Degaste l'Aemathie: and sa main pilleresse
Ne veut mesme Espargner les plus grands Dieux de Greece.
Ia soul de l'Europe, il pass l'Hellespont:
Du Dindyme chastre saccamento le Mont:
Ruin la Piside, occupe la Mysie,
Et plant vne autre Gaul au milieu de l'Asie.
L'histoire des peuples est ob scure aux plus cler voyant
Des peuples plus fameux l'obscure antiquite
Estcomme vne forest, ou la Temerite
Bronche de pas en pas: la docte Diligence
S'entortille elle-mesme: and Paucugle ignorance
Brossant tout a trauers ses eternelles nuicts,
S'enfonce en des marests, baricaues, and puits.
Why it is a hard matter to search Antiquities.
The Allusion of words is not a suer ground
For any man thereon a steady work to found;
Since greatest hills and seas, and most renowned rivers
(Though they continue still) among long-after livers
Are often diuers-nam'd; as eke the generation
Of him that built a wall, or laid a towns foundation,
Enhabits not the same; nor any mortal race
Has an eternal state in any one earthly place:
But holds for term of life, in fee-farme, or at will,
Possession of a field, a forest, or an hill.
And like as when the wind amid the main-sea rustles,
One wave another drives, and billow billow iustles;
So are the peopl' at odds each one for others room,
One thrusts anoth'r away, and scarce the seconds, come
To threshold of that house whereas he means to keep,
But comes a third and makes ^un forth at window creep.
A fit Exampe*
So from grea Albion the old Brit^on being chased
By Saxon-English force, the Gauls forthwith displaced
That wond in Armoricke, and called the Land Britain,
Where Loyre his gliding charge vnloadeth on the maine.
So when the Lombard left (with mind to rome at large)
Unto the Skotched Hunnes the diverse furrowed marge
Of Ister double-nam'd, he made the French to fly
By force of warlike rage from out rich Insubrie;
But vnder-fell again the French revenging heat,
And was to bondage brought by sword of Charles the Great.
And so th'Alaine, and so the Northen-borne Vandall.
Dislodged by the Goth from Cordube and Hispall,
In Carthage harbored, then by the conquering stroke
Of him that framed our Laws, sustained the Roman yoke.
The Roman eke, and all the soil Barbarian
Of frizell-headed Moors, obay'd The Arabian.
What causes people often to remove and change their dwelling.
This hunger ne'r-suffiz'd of gold and great Empire,
This thirst of sharp revenge, and further this desire
Of honor in conceit (all builded on rapines,
On slaughters, cruelties, towne-burnings and ruins)
Dishabiteth a Land, and diverse ways and far
To wave and wander makes the people sons of War.
Diverse examples of wandering people.
I do not speake-of here the spoiling Arabes,
The Hordies ancient Scythes or shepherds Nomades,
Who gazing on in troops disdained every fence,
And pitched where they list their bristle-hairy ten's;
Like as with wing are wont black swarms of swallows swift
Cross over th'embillowed sea their airy bodies lift,
And changing their abode, as 'twere on progress go
For milder seasoned air, twice yearly to and fro;
But other Nations fierce, who for a war-renowne,
With often loss of Blood have roamed up and down:
Who better skilled the way how t'ouercome then weild;
To conquer, then to keep; to pull down, then to build;
And chosing rather war, than holy and lawful rest,
Have boldly diverse lands, and one aft'r other, pressed.
Right such that Lombard was, The natural Country of the Lombardes, their
diverse remoues and conquests.
who, borne in Schonerland,
Seized on Liuonia, thence went to Rugiland;
And having wrought revenge upon the Bulgar-men
Of Agilmond his death, he boldly ventured then
Upon Polonia; so marched on brave and fine
To bathe his golden hair in silver stream of Rhine:
Thence turning him about he settled in Morauie,
And so to Buda went, and after flew to Pauie:
There reigned two hundred years, and honored Tesin so,
He princely dares compare streams with his neighbor Po.
Such was the Goth, Of the Goths.
who left the freezing-cold Finland,
Scanzie, and Scrifinie, Norway and Gottherland,
To sit on Wixel-bankes; and, for that air did please,
As most in temper near his own of Baltic seas,
With his victorious host entering Sclauonia
Supprised Zipserland and all Valachia:
Then fortified in Thrace; but scorning long to toil
Among the beggar Greeks, for hope of greater spoil
Four times the Roman tried, God Mars his elder son,
To rob him of the crown that he from all had won,
Led once by Radaguise, led once by Alarick,
Then under Vidimare, then under Dietrick:
And after dwelt in France; then (chased from Gascoine)
Aboade in Portugal, Castile and Cataloine.
Such whilome was the French, Of the ancient Gauls.
who, roaming out as far
As darted are the beams of Titans fiery carre,
Invaded Italy, and would in rage have spilt
The Towers that Romulus, or Mars himself, had built:
Went thence int' Hungary, then with his conquering plough
He fallow'd-vp the soil cold Strimon runs through:
The fair Emathick fields he then does all-to-fleece,
And spares not at all the greatest gods of Greece:
At last with Europe cloyed he passes Helespont,
Of th'Eunuck Dindym hill he wastes all the Front,
Pisidia ruineth, surpriseth Mysia,
And plants another Gaul in midst of Asia.
Of people most renowned the dark antiquity
Is like a Forest wide, where hardy-foolery
Shall stumbl' at every step, the learned Souuenance
It self entangled is; but blindfold ignorance
By blundring through the dark of her eternal Fogges,
Falls headlong down in pits, in dungeons and bogges:
14 Th'Allusion. They that in our time have entreated of the Nations pedegrees,
have much stood upon the resemblance that one word or proper name has to
another, and have aptly framed conjectures of good import and likelihood, as
man may note in Carrion, Melanc^hon, Peuter, Althamer, Lazius, Goropius, and
others. But the Poet holds that a simple resemblance of words is no good ground
for a story. His reasons are, first, that hills, rivers and seas change their
names, as by Ortelius his treasure of Geographie does appear, comparing the
books and tables of Ptolomie, Strabe, Mela, and other ancients, with the maps
of Gemma Frisius, Vopelius, Mercator, Postel, Theuet, Cellarius, and other late
Writers. Secondly, that Cities and Countries are not always called by the
names of their founders and first inhabitants. Thirdly, that no stock or
Nation has sure hold of any place in the world, because of the many changes
that befall this life. Fourthly, that as in the sea one wave thrusts on
another, so the people, and chiefly those of old time, have driven each other
out of place, and in a manner played In docke, out nettle. All stories prove
these reasons to be true, and for the last, the Author shows three notable
examples to confirm it.

15 The Old Britton. It is above 1200. years ago since Vortiger King of
England, then called Great Britain, or Albion, (that is, a white-sand Isle)
having war with his neighbors the Scots, sent for aid to the Saxon-English a
people of Germany, who, after they had done him good service, played as the
Turks did in Greece: for they seated themselves in a part of the Island, on
the East, where few years after they kept such a coile, that the old Britton,
the natura^l Inbred of the Country, was constrained to forsake it. So with a
great multitude passed the sea, and landed in Armoricke, now called little
Britain: where they gathered more and more together, and increased much by
succession of time. See more hereof in the Chronicles of England and Britain.
The river Leyre falls into the trench of Nantes, and so voids into the Ocean.

16 The Lombard. About the year of Christ 568. Alboin King of Lombardes having
heard of the fruitfulness of Italy, left Pannonia, or Hungary (where he dwelt)
in guard of certain Hunnes, upon, conditions, and in few weeks after made a
rode into Italy with a mighty army, and got many Towns chiefly in Insubria,
now called Lombardy, of those Lombards, who reigned there about two hundred
years, till they were overcome and brought to thrall by the Emperor
charlemaine, about the year 774. Look the Histories of France, and the second
part of the Library of N. Vignier, Ishall speak anon of their beginning more
particularly.

17. The Aline. About they year 412. when Ataulphe King of Goths had driven
away the Alaines and Vandals from Cordway and Seuill, which they possessed, as
also most of the provinces of Spain, the Vandals sat down in Betica, which
after was of their name called first Vandalosie, and then shorter Andalosie: The
Alaines in Lusitania and the province of Carthage, or (as some say) betwixt the
rivers Iberus and Kubricatus, whereabouts in time past dwelt a people called
Iacetani, not unlikely to be the men of Arragon; afterward they joined and went
both together into Affricke, where they reigned a long time. But in the year
534. the Emperor Justinian, who caused the Roman laws to be gathered together
into one body, sent an army against them under the command of Belissarius: he
regained Affricke, took Carthage, and led Gllimer command of Belissarius: he
regained Affricke, took Carthage, and led Gllimer king of Goths prisoner unto
Rome. After all this the Romans and the Moors also were constrained to give
place in Affricke to the Arabians, who pressed in there, and encamped
themselves in sundry places.

18. This hunger never sussiz'd. The Poet says, that desire of rule, revenge,
and vainglory, ambition and covetousness, have chiefly caused so many people
to remove and change their dwellings. As also many stories of Scripture and
others plainly show. Seneca reckoned diverse other causes in his book de
Consolatione ad Elbiam, where he says, The Carthaginians made a road into
Spain, the Greeks into France, and the Frenchmen into Greece. neither could
the Pyrene mountains hinder the Germans passage; over ways unknown and
vntroad the lightheaded people have carried their wives and children and
ouer-aged parents: some after long wandering up and down seated themselnes not
according to their free choice, but where they first might, when they waxed
weary of travel: some on other men's possessions s^ized by force of arms: some
as they sought unknown places were drowned in the sea: some there sat down,
where they first began to want pro^ision. And all for sooke not their countries
or sought other for the same causes. Many, after their cities were destroyed by
war, sled from their enemies, and so berest of their own possessions, were
feign to press upon other men's: many left their dwellings to avoid the
disquiet of civil wars: and many to empty Cities of their ouerceasing
multitude: some by pestilence, or the earths often gulsing, or like
insufferable faults of a bad soil, were cast forth; and some were ent^sed from
home by report of a larger and more fruitful ground: some for one cause, some
for another, etc.

19. I do not speake-of here. The Poet has Scoenites, which I translate
Arabes, because they were a people of Arabia, great robbers and har^^ers of
Egypt and the coast of Affricke (...) the shopheards Nomades are (as I take
them) the Numidians and Moors: or (as some think) a kind of Scythiant. The
Hordies are the Tartarians, who live in the field in chariots and tents. Now
the Poet leaving the uncertain course of these roguing Nations, who have had
no more stay in them then swallows and other wandering, birds, intends to
speak of a more warlike people: whereof he alleges some notable examples.

20. Right such that Lombard was. He sets down much matter in few ords,
concerning the Lombards. There are diverse opinions of their pedigree:
Melancthon and Peucer in the third and fourth book of Carious Chron, hold they
dwelt in a Saxony by the river Albis, about where now are the Bishoprics of
Meidburg and Halberstad, and a part of the Marquess of Brandburg; and from
thence under the conduct of Alboin entered Jtalie, and in the time of the
Emperor Justin the second, seated themselves between the Appenine hills and
the Alps, where they began a kingdom. They were called Lombards, either
because of their long Ianelines (for thence it seem are come the names of
Halbards and Iauclines de barde) or because they dwelt in a country flat and
fruitful, as the Dutch word Bard may signify. Some otherutho rs count them
farre-northerne people, yet show not their ancient abode. Ptolomee in the
fourth table of Europe deriues them from the country of Swaube; as also he
notes in the second book and 11. chapter of his Geogr. with whom agrees C.
Tacitus in his Histories. But Lazius in the 12. book of his Migrations of the
Northern people, Vignier in the first part of his Library page 905. and out
Poet, here follows the opinion of Paulus Diaconus: they differ not much but
only about the time of their stay, and place of their first abode. Melancthon
and Peucer set them first in Saxonic, Paulus Diaconus, the Poet and others, in
Scandinauie, or Schonland, a great nearelsle of the Sound or Baltike Sea, from
whence they might come in by the banks of Albis, all or some of them, and some
by the coast of Mekelborg, etc. For Paulus Diaconus, in his first book second
chapter, says of this people, They increased so fast in their foresaid
Country, that they were feign to part themselves in to three companies, and
cast lots, which of them should go seek another seat. This I say, to show the
Poets cunning drift, that in so few lines has set down matter enough, for any
man to write-on whole volumes of books. Thus then to follow the Poet, the
first notable and fast abode of the Lombards, who came from the Goths and
Vandals, was Schonland, whence a part of them, dislodging under the conduct of
Ibor and Agio settled in Scoring, which is about the marches of Liuonia and
Prussia: and after they had there dwelt certain years, were constrained by a
dearth to seek further, so as they came to Mauringia, and at length to
Rugiland, and the countries near adjoining, which Paulus Diaconus sets
down by name. There after the death of their leaders, they chose Agilmond for
their king. He had reigned 33. years, when the Bulgares, a neighbor people,
assailing them unawares, slew King Agilmond. After him was chosen Lamisson for
King, who to revenge the death of his predecessor, made war with the
Bulgares, got and held a dart of Pologne: then waxing weary of that country,
he led his people toward the Rhine, to the coast of the Country Palatine, as
Tacitus notes in his second book of Histories, and Velleius Patere. in the
life of Tiberius. About Heidelberg there is a town called Lamberten, which
seems to make somewhat for the Lombards abode there: so says Lazius. But many
years after, they coasted back again, and dwelt in Moranie, where they
warred against the Heru^es, Sucues and Gepides. Then went they up into Hungary
under the safe-conduit of the Emperor Justinian, to whom they paid tribute (as
Procopius and Diaconus declare at large.) There had they cruel war with the
Gepides, but at length agreed and joined with them; and understanding by the
practice of Narses, that Italy was a Country much sitting their nature, their
King Alboin made a road thereinto, and got Lombardie before called Insubria;
there they rested and reigned two hundred years, until Charles the groat
vanquished them, as is before laid.

21. Such was the Goth. Lazius in the tenth book of his Migrations, has
handled well and largely the History of Goths, gathered out of Procopius,
Iornandes, Tacitus, Claudianus, Olaus Magnus, Eutropius, and many others. I
will shut up all in short, and by way of Paraphrase upon the Poets verse. The
Goths, and Almaine people, had for their first assured seat the Isles of the
Sound, or Baltike Sea, and Gothland yet retains the name of them. In Syllaes
time they left these Isles, and came to dwell in Almaine beside the river
Vistula, now called Wixel. After they had warred there against the Frenchmen,
they bent toward Transsiluania, Hangaria and Valachia, where they remained
until the time of Valentinian, maintaining themselves by force of arms
against the Greeks and Romans. Then, for many causes alleged by Lazius, they
went forward into Thrace, and there dwelt and became tributaries unto
Valentinian and Valens. Eutropius says, all went not thither, but a good part
of them kept their former place, and the cause of their sundring was a civil
disagreement about religion: the one side retaining Heathenisme under
Athalaricke their King: the other under Fridigerne mingling with Christenisme
the abominable heresy of Arrius, which takes quite away the true religion of
Christ: The Arrians drew toward the West, and wore after called Visigothes or
Westgothes, the other to the contrary, and were called Ostrogothes or
Eastgothes, who out of Thrace moved into Hungary and the countries adjoining,
where they had much ado with the Roman Emperors, as Lazius well records:
at last they got Sclauonia, and all fort ward unto the Adriaticke Sea: there
growing to a mighty number, they determined to set on Italy under the command
of Radaguise their King in the time of Theodosius the first, son of Arcadius.
Their Army was in number above two hundred thousand strong, but by the
special grace of God they were overthrown, captiued and sold most for ducats
a piece, their king slain, and all scattered into diverse countries; but, in
the time of Honorius, Alaricke the king of Westgothes made another voyage, and
entting into Italy, asked the Emperor a place to dwell on: having obtained
the coast that marches upon France, as he was going thitherward with his
company upon Easter day, one of the captains of Sulico set upon him, and
taking him so at disadvantage, by treason slew a great number of the Goths.
They, stirred up with anger and disdain of such vnf. ithfull dealing of the
Romans, make back to Rome, waste Italy, and in the month of September 1164
beleaguer and take the City, and three days after depart thence laden with
the spoil. As Alaricke was marching toward Rome, there appeared a reverend
personage unto him, and advised him, since he would be counted a Christian,
that he should not make such havoc as he did: whereunto the king answered; it
is not my desire to go to Rome, but every day ^^m I forced by some one (I know
not who) that still cries unto me, Go on, go on, and destroy Rome. As the
Goths retired Alaricke dyed, and Athaulph succecded him, who led them back to
Rome again. So they went through with their saccage, and led away captive
^alla Placidia the sister of Honorius, whom Athaulph married. He was after
slain of his own people at Barcelona in Spain, for seeking peace for his
wives sake with Honorius. The third road they made into Italy was under the
command o^ Vidimer: but they were encountered and beaten back by Glycerius, as
Jornandes writes: and so they pressed again upon the French, and Spanish
Nations. Afterward the Goths of Sclauonia, weary of easy living, got leave of
the Emperor Zeno and entered Italy, and overcame Odocacer the Exarch of
Rauenna, and there held estate for many years. At length about the year of
Christ 411. in the time of Honorius, they seated themselves in Spain under
Alaricke and his successors. Now during the time of their abode near the
M^oticke marshes they had nine kings: while they remained in Gothland (which is
now divided into the East and West Goth^e, betwixt Swethland and Norway) they
had 8. kings; and 10: about the banks of Wixel, and in Transsiluania and
Sclauonia 26. After that being sundred into Eastgothes and Westgothes, the
Eastgothes had in Italy 11. kings from Alarick: to Teias, who with the greater
part of his people was overthrown by Narses. The Westgothes in Lion-Gaule, in
Languedoc and Guien, had six kings; and the kings of Westgothes in Spain, from
Alaricke in the year 411. to Philip that now reigns, are eight and twenty in
number, according to the account to Lazius; who reckons also two and thirty
kings of Arragon, and two and twenty of Navarre, unto the kings father that now
is. Of these matters it may suffice to have touched thus much in a word.

22 Such was the French. To enter into the whole history of the Frenchmen, it
was not the Poets meaning, but only to note briefly the chief O^troads of
this brave Nation, and that within the compass of two thousand years. I will
go no further, but follow the text. The first beginning of the French is
diversely recorded, and all the opinions thereof are well gathered and examined
by the Author of the French Antiquities: who in the end shows his own
judgment, and avouches it to be very likely, that the land of Gaul (which in
old time, besides the Realm of France, did contain also the Low Countries,
Germany within Rhine, and Lorraine) was first inhabited by the line of Gomer,
hither coming upon diverse occasions, and increasing more and more with the
time: as also by the Germans a neighbor people: for little could the Rhine
hinder the Gauls and Germans from coming together, but that either, as they
prevailed in-strength, might come into others country for their better liking.
And as the men of Marseil are counted an outcrease of Asia, it is like the rest
of the Towns and quarters of France were peopled after the same sort. Amianus
Marcellinus lively painteth out the Gauls in his fifteenth book. So does
Polybius, Caesar, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and others. All agree they were a
very warlike people; and their multitude gave them to think upon such remedy
as others had used before. Their first outroad, that was of any account, was in
the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, and about the time of the Jews thraldom in
Babylon, some six hundred years before the birth of Christ. The Celiae (which
were the ancient Gauls) possessed the Countries now called Suisse, Sauoy,
Daulphine, Languedoc, Vellay, Viuaretz, Lionnois, Forest, Auuergne, Berri,
Limosin, Quercy, Perigort, Xanctoigne, Angulmois, Po^ctou, Brettaigne, Anjou,
Tourraine, Maine, Perch, Normandy within Seine, the Chartrain, Hurepois,
Beaulse, Gastinois, Brie, Champagne, the Duchy and Count of Bourgongne: their
King Ambigat sent forth Sidoveze and Belloveze to seek other dwelling.
Sidoveze taking toward Germany, left people in Bauaria, Bohemia and
Carinthia, and seated himself in the point of Europe, toward and beyond the
Riphean mountains. Belloveze a while staying at the foot of the Alps, was
after by the persuasions of a certain Tuscane, called Arron drawn into Italy,
and possessed Insubria. Some of his company seating first among the Pyrene
hills, at length entered a part of Arragon, and gave the name to Portugal. But
these were nothing so renowned as the other: who preasing further into Italy,
marched under Brennus as far as Clusium, and so to Rome. Of his exploits
there Liuie writes, and Plutarch in the life of Camillus, which was 386.
years before the coming of Christ. A third company that followed Belleveze,
because they would have room enough, ouer-ran Slauonia, and maugre all stay
entered Hungary, and after many skirmishes departed thence in two bands: the one
coasting into Macedonie, the other into Greece, where they made the whole world
afraid of them: after they had slain Plol^meus Keraunus, brother to
Philadelphus King of Egypt. Pranses was their King, whom others call Brennus;
but was not he that sacked Rome. This man not content to have obtained a great
victory of the Macedonians, and harried their country, presumed so far as to
spoil the Temple at Delphos, whereby himself and all his were brought to a
miserable end. Nevertheless the French that stayed behind, to guard the
Frontiers of the Country, fainted not at the report of these news, but went to
field with 1500. foot, and 3000. horse, ouerc^me the G^tes and Triballes, and
wasted all Macedonie: only through negligence, as they retired laden with
spoil, they were brought to their end. Yet they that remained in Gaul sent
forth other companies into Asia: who passed on as far as Bossen and Dardanie,
where, by reason of a quarrel that fell between them, they sundred
themselves. One part of them cast into Thrace, and reigned there a long time:
the other settled about where Sauus and Danubius meet, not far from Belgrade.
These that remained in Dardanie, when they heard tell of the fruitful soil of
the lesser Asia, went on so far as Hellespont, and there because they were
three Companies, they parted Natolia between them into three parts. The
Trocynes had the coast of Hellespont; the Tolystoboges, Eolide and Jonie (which
the Turks call Quision.) The Tectosages, the country further into the maine
land. All that part of Asia which lies on this side Taurus, they made their
tributary, planting themselves all along the river H^lys, that parts
Paphlagonia from Syria. That Province where the Gauls dwelt in Asia, from
their first arrival to the height of the Roman Empire, retained the name of
Gaul-Gre^ce, together with that same language which Saint Jerome (six or seven
hundred years after) says was like that he heard spoken in Gaul about the
quarter of Treues. Thus concerning the ancient Gauls: no to clear some few
dark words of the Text. The work of Romulus, etc. He means Rome, builded by
Romulus, the most warlike City of all the world; and therefore Mars, whom the
Painims counted the God of War, may be thought the founder of it. Cold
Strymon, a river parting Macedonie from Thrace, as Pliny says: and because
Thrace is no very warm country, he gives Strymon the adioint of Cold. The
Emathicke fields, to wit, Macedonie, so called of King Emathion, Pliny speaks
thereof in his fourth book and tenth chapter thus, Macedonie, a Comtrie
containing an hundred and fifty Nations, sometime renowned for two Kings (he
means Philip and Alexander) and for the Empire of the whole world: it was
afore-time called Emathia: which word the Poets, as Virgil and Lucan, do
sometime use for Thessaly, a Country near Macedonie. Lucan in his very first
verse, Bella per Emathios plusquam ciuilia Campos. And Virgil in the end of his
second Georgie. Nee fuit indiguum superis his sanguine nostro
Emath^am and latos Aemi pinguescere campos.


The Pharsalian fields are in Thessaly, as Fliny records in his fourth book
and eight Chapter.

Dindyma. A hill in Phrygia. The Poet calls it Dindyme chastre, guelt Dindym:
because the Priests of Cybele, called Curetes, kept and sacrificed there, and
were Eunuchs atrired like women. The Poets meaning is, that these Gauls
harried also Phrygia, and called the country where they dwelt in Asia,
Gaul-Greece, after the name of that from whence they first came, and so
planted, as it were, another Gaul in the midst of Asia. What became of their
successors in the Romans time, because the Poet makes no mention thereof, I
pass it also.

23 Of people most renowad. He shows in few words wherefore he thrusts no
further into discourse of the out-roads the people made in old time. For though
Carrion, Melancthon, P^ucer, Lazius, Rhenanus, Goropius, and others of our time,
have that way far ventured, and some-while with very good success; yet it
cannot be denied, but that they leave many doubts, and do not all-where clear
the matter. See then how fitly the Poet adds that follows.

Il dit en sum queles trois fills de Noe peuplerent le monde.
Il me suffira donc de suiure son oree:
Et pendant attentif de la bourche dorce
Du sage fills d'Amram, rechanter dans ces verse,
Que Sem, laphet, and Cham, peuplerent l'Vniuers:
Et que du grand Noe la Fuste vagabonde
Pour la second fois flott a par tout le Monde.
Cela ne se fit point tout a coup mais par trait de temps.
Non que i'enuoye Sem de Babylone auant
Tout d'vn vol es terroirs du plus lontain Leuant,
Du Tartare Chorat boire l'onde argentine,
Et peupler le Catay, le Cambalu, la Chine:
En Espaigne Iapheth: and le profane Cham
Es pays alterez de Medre and de Bigam:
Es champs de Cephala, dessus le mont Zambrique:
Et le Cup d'Esperance, angle dernier d'Afrique.
Car ainsi que l'Hymete, Comparaisons bien propres pour monstrer comment les
parties du mo^de furent peuplees par les
ou le mont Hiblean
Ne furent tous couuert a^ Auetes en un an:
Ains la moindre ruchee enuoyant chaque prime
A leurs slancs, a leurs pieds, a leur flairant cime,
Deux ou trois peuplemens, cher nourissons du ciel,
En sin tous leurs rochers se fondirent en miel.
descendans de Noe, asauoir peu a peu, and comme d'an en an, par multiplication
de peuple.
Ou plustost tout ainsi que deux Ormes fecondes,
Qui croissent au milieu d'vn champ emmure d'ondes,
An tour de leur estocs produisent des Ormeaux:
Ceux-cy d'autres encor: and tousiours les nouueaux
Gaignent pied a pied l'Isle, and font mesme en ieunesse
D'vn grand pre tondu-ras vne forest espesse.
Tout ainsi les macons de la superbe Tour
S'en vont, esparpillez, acaser a l'entour
De Mesopotamie: and peu a peu leur race
Frayant heureusement sleuue apres sleuue pass:
Saisit terre apres terre: and si le Tout-puissant
Ne va de l'Vniuers les iours accourcissant,
Il ne se trouuera contree si sauuage,
Pourquoy la premiere monarchy se dress en Assirie.
Que le tige d'Adam de ses branches wombrage.
C'est pourquoy les pays au Tygre aboutissans
Pendant l'age premier sont les plus fleurissans:
Qu'il se parle d'eux seuls: qu'ils commencent la guerre,
Et qu'ils sont la Lecon aureste de la terre.
Babylone viuant sous la grandeur des Roys,
Tenoit l'empire en main auant que le Gregeois
Logeast en ville close, and que des murs Dircees
Un luth doux eust, mecon, les pierres agences:
Le Latin eust des bourgs, des maison les Gaulois,
Des hutes l'Alemant, and des tents l'Anglois.
Les Hebrieux, Chaldeans and Egyptiens auoyent la Philosophy super naturelle,
auant que les Grees s^euss^t quelque chose.
Les fills d'Heber auoient commerce auce les Anges:
Detestoient les autels dressez aux Dieux estranges:
Conotssoient l'Inconu and des yeux de la foy
Comtemploient bien heureux leur invisible Roy.
Le Chaldee scauoit des estoilles le nombre:
Auoit aulne le ciel: comprenoit comme l'ombre
De la terre eclipsoit l'Astre au front argente,
Et la sienne esteignoit du Soleil la clarte:
Le Prestre Memphien philosophoit des ames:
Obseruoit, curieux, le sacrebal des slammes:
Qui pour render leurs fronts slamboy antement beaux,
Les lauent chaque iour dans les marrines eaux:
Discouroit de nature: estoit bon Geometre,
Auant qu'aucun des Grecs sceust cognoistre vne lettre.
L'Egypte treluisoit en vtensiles d'or,
Les Egyptiens and Tiriens iouissoyent de richesses and delices a coeur saoul,
auant que les Greos and Gaulois sceussent que c'est du monde.
Que lefeuure boiteux n'auoit sous Aethne encor
Martele sus le fer: and que par promethee
La flamme enter les Grecs n'estoit point inuentee.
Nous n'estions point encor: ou bien si nous estions,
Nous sentions le sauuage, and barbare, portions
Des plumes pour habits, banquetions sous les Fresnes,
Et beans attendions que le Gland cheust des Chesnes,
Que les bourgeois de Tyrosoyent desia ramer
Contre l'azur salle de l'Afriquaine mer:
Hazardeux trasiquoyent, s'habilloient d'escarlate,
Et que les voluptez regnoyent ia sur l'Euphrate.
Car comme le caillou, Belle comparaison a ce pro pos, monstrant que tous les
Arts sont sortis de la plain de Sennaar pour s'espandre peu a peu par tout le
monde.
quilisse, tomb en l'eau
D'vn viuier sommeilleux, form un petit aneau
A l'entour de sacheut. and qu'encor il compass
Par le doux mouuement qui glise en la sur-face
De cest ondele marbre, and crystal tremoussant,
Vne suitte de ronds qui vont tousious croissart,
Iusqu'a tant qu'a la fin des cercles les plus large
Frappe du sleuue mort and l'vn and l'autre marge:
Ducentre de ce Tout qu'icy ie siche au board
Des ondes, ou uasquit des langue le discord.
L'homme de iour en iour cultiuant sa prudence,
Fait color tous les Arts par la circunference,
A mesure qui croist, and qu'en troupeaux diverse
Il esseme fecond par ce grand Vniucrs.
Premieres colonies ou peu plades de Sem en Orient.
De l'Assirie auant du cost de l'Aurore
On se retire au board que l'Hytane redore
De son grauois brillant: on se met apeupler
L'Oroate Persan: le Coaspe, qui clair
Leche les murs de Suse: and les valees grasses
Des croupes du Caucase, ou regnoyent les Arsaces.
On s'heberge en Medie: on commence a semer
Les champs Hircaniens confrontans a la mer.
Secondes Colonies.
Les eufans de ceux-cy ainsi que d'vne ondee
S'espandent largement sur la terre bordee
Du fleuue Chiesel, dessus Thachalistan,
Charas, Gabel, Chabul, Bedan, and Balestan.
Troisiesmes.
Leur race puis apres bouillonnante desfriche
Besinagar, Nayarde, and la campaigne rich
Que le Gange entre-fend: peuple Aue, Toloman,
Le Royaume de Mein, le musque Charazan:
Et cernele desert de l'Op, ou les phantomes
Masquezen cent facons espouuantent les hommes.
Quatriesines.
Quelques ciecles apres marchans en diverse osts
Elle saisit Tipur rich en Rhinocerots,
Caichin en Aloes, Mangit, and le riuage
De Chinsit and d'Anie arreste leur voyage.
Premieres Colonies ou peuplades-de laphet en Occident.
De ce center premier tirant verse le Couchant,
Les Nepueux de Noe se vont loin espanchant
Verse la moindre Armenie, and puis dans la Cilice:
Occupent peu a peu les ports de Tarse, and d'Isse,
L'antre Corycien, antre delici^ux,
Colonies ou peuplades du Septentrion.
Qui des cymbales rend le son harmonieux:
Les croupes du Taureau, Cappadoce, Ionie,
Du Meandre les bords, Troade, and Bithynie.
Passant le Phar de Seste, ils s'abreuuent des eaux
De Nest, Secondes Colonies.
Hebre, and Strimon: pasturent leurs troupeaux
Es vallons de Rhodope: and sement les campaignes
Que pres de ton cercueil, o Danube, tu baignes.
La Thrace d'vn cost peuple les champs Gregeois:
La Greece l'Italie ayme-Mars, Troisiesmes, diuisees en plusieurs branches.
donne-laix:
L'Italie, la Gaul: and la Gaul, l'Hespaigne,
Le riuage du Rhin, and la grande Bretaigne.
Et de l'autre cost se decharge a lentour
Or' de la Moldauie, or' de la mer Maiour:
S'estend verse Podalie, occupe la Seruie,
Le pays Transsyluain, Hongrie, Morauie,
Le Prussien terroir, de Vistule le board,
Premieres Colonies on peupla des de Cham verse le M^di.
Et de la l'Aleman qui tire verse le Nord.
Ca, turn verse le Su. Voy comme la Chaldee
Desgorge en Arabie, en Phenice, en Iudee
La lignee de Cham, qui, fertile, croissant
Enter deux Oceans, en Egypt descent:
En semence Cyrene, and la cost fameuse
Ou la Punique mer se debat escumeuse:
Dara, Gusole, Fez, Argin, Galate, Aden,
Tombut, Melli, Gago, Terminan, and Gogden;
Les deserts bluettans de la triste Lybie,
Cano, Zeczec, Benin, Guber, Borno, Nubie,
Et sablons mouuants du terroir altere,
Ou le Nom de Jesus est encor reuere:
Ou le Prest-ian command, and bien qu'il Iudaise,
Retient, deuotieux, quelque form d'Eglise.
Que si tu veux scauoir comment tout ce long traict,
Qui couuert de glacons gist sous l'ardent pourtraict
D'vn beau char glise-doux: and qui d'vn tour oblique
Est clos des flots mutins de l'Ocean Cronique,
Fut assorti d'humains: pense qu'ayans quitte
La campaigne, ou le Tigre enter ensociete
Deux fois auec les eaux du loin courant Euphrate,
Ils se logent au pied du blanchissant Niphate.
De l'Armenic auant le champ Iberien,
L'Albanois, le Colchide, and le Bosphorien,
Sont fournis de bourgeois, and de la verse l'Aurore
Ceste vaste estendue, ou vagabondent ore
Les Tartares cruels, and deuers l'autre part,
Que la Volgue au long-cours pres sa source mi-part,
Les plain de Moskou, Permie, Liuonie,
Biarme, le lac blanc, Russie, and Scrifinie.
It shall suffice me then to follow the ancient bounds,
He groundeth all his discourse upon holy writ; and shows more particularly
how the sons of Noe peopled all the world.
And from the golden mouth of Moses taking grounds,
With all religious heed in verses to record
How Sem, Iaphet and Cham, the world with people stored;
And how of mighty Noe the far-out-roaming boat
Did thus the second time all countries ouer-float.
Yet not as if Sems house from Babylon did run
Together all at once unto the rising sun;
To drink of Zaiton the water siluer-fine,
To peopl' all rich Catay with Cambalu and Chine:
Nor Iaphet unto Spain; nor that ungodly Cham
Unto the droughty soil of Meder and of Bigam,
The fields of Cephala, the Mount of Zanzibar,
The promontory of Hope, which Africa thrusts-out far.
Very meet comparisons.
For as th'l blean hills, or those Hymettick trees,
Not all in one years space were covered with Bees;
But first some little rock, that swarmed every prime
Two surcreases or three, made on their tops to clime,
Aside and all about those nurslings of the Sun,
At length all over the cliffes their hony-combs to run:
Or as two springing Elmes, that grow amids a field
With water compassed, about their stocks do yield
A many younger trees; and they again shoot-out
As many like themselves encroaching all about;
And gaining foot by foot, so thrive: that aft'r a while
They for a shared mead a forest make that Isle:
Accordinly the men who built th'Assyrian tower,
Were scattred all abroad; though not all in an hour;
But first enhous'd themselves in Mesopotamie;
By process then of time increasing happily,
They passed stream after stream, and seizd land after land;
And were not the age of all cut short by Gods command,
No country might be found so savage or vnknow'n
But by the stock of man had bin ere this o'regrown.
And this the cause is why the Tigre-abutting coast,
In all the former time of all did flourish most.
That first began to war, that only got a name,
And little knew the rest but learned of the same,
The cause, why the first monarchic was in Assiria.
For Babylon betimes drawn vnd'r a kingly throne
Th'emperiall scepter swaid before the Greeks were known
To frame a polity, before by charming tones
Amphion walled Thebes of self-empyling stones;
Yer Latins had their towns, yer Frenchmen household rents,
Or Dutchmen cottages, or Englishmen their tents:
The Hebrews and their neighbors were learned and religious before the Greeks
knew any thing.
So Hebers sons had long abhorred Altars made
For any heathen gods; with Angels had their trade;
And knew the great Vnknowue, yea (o most happy thing!)
With eyes of faith beheld their vnbeholden king.
The learned Chaldee knew of stars the numb'r and laws,
Had measured the sky, and understood the cause
That muffleth up the light of Cinthia's silver lips,
And how her thwarting does her brothers light eclips.
The Priest of Memphis knew the nature of the soul,
And straightly marked how the hean'nly flames do roll;
Who, that their faces might more flaming seem and gay,
In Amphitrites poole once wash them every day:
He physic also wrote and taught Geometree,
Before thar any Greek had learned his A Be Cee.
The Egyptians and Tyrians had all riches and delights, before the Greeks and
Ganles knew the world.
All Egypt ouershone with golden vtensils,
Before the limping smith by Aetnaes burning kills
Had hammerd iron bars: before Prometheus found
The fire and use thereof upon th'Argolian ground.
Alas, we were not then, or, if we were, at least
We led an uncouth life, and like the savage beast,
Our garments feathers were, that birds in moulting cast;
We feasted under trees and gaped after mast.
When as the men of Tire already durst assay
To raze the saltie Blew twixt them and Africa,
Aduentur'd merchandise, with purpl'enguirt their flanks,
And pleasure kept her court about Euphrates banks.
For as a peble stone if thou on water fling
Of any sleepie poole, it frames a little ring
First whereabout it fell; then furth'r about does raze
The wauing marbl', or even the trembling Crystal face
With moving paralels of many circles more,
That reaching furth'r abroad together-waxing flow
Until the round at length most outward and most large
Strikes of the standing lake both one and other marge:
So from the Cent'r of All (which here I mean to pitch
Upon the waters brinke where discord sproong of speech)
Man dressing day by day his knowledge more and more
Makes arts and wisdom flow unto the circle-shore;
As does himself increase, and as in diverse bands
His fruitful seed in time has ouergrowne the lands.
The first Colonie^ of Sem in the East.
From fair Assyriland the Semites began to travel
Unto the soil beguilt with glystring Hytan-grauell,
And peopling Persiland drunk Oroates juice,
And wat'r of clear Coaspe that licks the walls of Suse:
So took the fruitful dale and flow'r-embellyd plains
Betwixt high Caucase tops, where shortly Arsace reigns:
And some in Medye dwelt, and some began to make
The fields abutting on the great Hircanian Lake.
The second.
These men's posterity did like a flood surround
And ouerflow in time the Cheisel-fronting ground:
They came in diverse troops upon Tachalistan,
Caras, Gadel, Chabul, Bedane and Balistan.
^he ^hi^d.
Their Offspring afterward broke-vp with toyling hands
Narzinga, Bisnagar, and all the plenteous lands
That Ganges through flows, and peopled Toloman,
The realm of Mein, and Aue, and muskie Carazan:
They saw the fearful sprights in wilderness of Lop,
That mask in hundred shapes way fairing men to stop,
The fourth.
Long aft'r at sundry times this Race still coasting east
Tipura seizd that breeds the horny-snowted beast,
Mangit and Gaucinchine that Aloes has store;
And stopped at Any straights and Cassagalie shore.
The first Celonies of Iaphet in the West.
Now from the Center-point in clining to the Set
Far spread abroad themselves the children of Iaphet,
To Armenie the less, and after to Cilice,
So got the hau'ns at length of Tarsis and of Ise,
The sweet Corician cave, that near to Parnas hill
Delights the comers* in with Cymball-sounding skill:
Huge Taure his lofty downs, Ionie, Cappadoce,
Meanders winding banks, Bythin^ and Illios.
The second.
Then boldly passing-o're the narrow cut of Sest,
They drunk the water chill of Strimon, Heber and Nest:
The Rhodopean dales they grazed, and laid in swathes
The leas that (running-by) Danubies water bathes.
The third parted into many c^anches.
Thrace did a thonside fill the Grecian territory;
Greece peopled Italy, law-giuing, louing-glory;
By Italy was France, by France was filled Spain,
The borderings of Rhine and all the Great Britain:
Ath'otherside again it sent a Colonie
Both to the Pont-Eusine, and toward Moldauie;
So raught Transyluanie, Morauie, Hungary,
And Seruie farther-west, and eastward Podolie.
Thence men to Prussie came and Wyxell borders eared,
Then that of Almanie that narre the Pole is r^ar'd.
Now turning to the South, The firs^^ of (...) Sou^
consider how Chaldea
Spewes-out in Arabie, Phenice and Chananea,
The cursed line of Cham; yet ne'rthelesse it grows,
The second.
And twixt Myd-sea and Red along int'Egypt goes:
So stores the town Corene, and that renowned coast
Whereon the Punick Seas are all to-froth betost;
Fesse, Gogden, Terminan, Argin, Gusola, The third.
Dara,
Tombuto, Gualata, Melli, Gago, Mansara,
The sparkling wilderness of Lybie breeding-venim,
Caun, Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubye, The fourth.
Benim;
And of the droughtie soil those euer-moouing sands,
Where Jesus yet is known and Prestre Ian commands;
Who, though in many points he comes near the Jew,
Yet has a kind of Church not all unlike the true.
How the North was peopled.
Here if thou mean to know whence all the land so large,
Which vnder-lies the draught of many a sliding barge,
All-ouer pau'd with Ise, and of the sea of Russe
Environed about with surges mutinous,
Was come-vnto by men; think after they forsook
The plain where Tegil flood swift-running ouertooke
Once and again the stream of running-far Euphrates
They lodged at the foot of hoary hill Nyphates.
So forth of Armenie the field Hiberian,
The Colchish, the Albanick, and high Bospherian
Might well be furnished, and thence unto th'Vprist
Might come the Tartar fell, who roameth where he list
All on that circuit huge; and thence accoast the Set
Was stoard the land that Rha does near his rising fret,
The shore of Lyuonie, the plain, of Moscouie,
Byarmie, Permie, Russe, White-lake and Scrifinie.
24 It shall suffice. The Poet has heretofore compared Antiquity (chiefly
concerning the Nations Out-roads) unto a great forest, wherein the cunningest
guides have often lost themselves. Now therefore he says it is the safer way
to follow and keep near the verge of the forest, rather than venture too
far into it. He shows thereby, that his meaning is to give us a general
view of these matters, not curiously to minse the particulars, as they have
done, who undertake to gather out of Authors, and teach others the course of
Noes posterity every mile, as they have run until this present; and pore
still into the Arc, to find there the names of their Countrymen and
ancestors. Therefore he voweth to rely wholly upon the golden mouth of Moses,
which was the son of Amram, as the Scripture witnesses, Numb. 26.59. Now
Moses says, Genesis 10. in the end of the Chapter, That of the children of Noe
were the Nations divided on the earth after the Flood. And before in 5.20. and
30. verses, he shows plainly from whence they began to people the world, and
(as it were) to lead again the Arc over the face of the earth: in filling
most countries of the world with their great posterity, increased, as it was,
by virtue of Gods wonderful blessing, Genesis 9.1. Increase and multiply, and
fill the earth.

25. Yet not as if Sems house. He says Sem peopled not the East all at once,
but by succession of time; that Iaphet when he came out of the Arc, did not
forthwith run to Spain, nor Cham to hide himself in the furthest part of
Afric: but that by little and little, and in process of time their issues
ranged so far forth either way. He speaks of diverse Countries far up in the
East, and far down Southward, the site whereof appears plain in the
Mappes: and to emich this true story, he uses two pretty comparisons, of the
rocks of Bees in Hybla, and Elmes in an Island: and as by their surci ease
both places are by peecemeale at length quite ouergrowne, so (he says) the
world by yearly increase of Noes posterity was part after part ouer-peopled
as it is. First after the confusion of tongues they lodged one behind another,
about the coast of Mesopotamia: afterward as they increased in stock, their
new families passed the rivers hills and straights, looking-out other dwelling
places to their liking: the providence of God directing all (as appears) for
the better grace and trimming of the earth, and the commodity of all manking.

26. And hence it comes to pass. This ensues necessarily of that goes before.
Where the posterity of Noe were most together in the beginning, there we must
confess was the chief sway and greatness of mankind, and that was in Assyria
and Chaldea, as Moses witnesses, Genesis 11. whereout the Poet concludes as
before: see further, Genesis 14. Concerning the Kings wars that are there named,
with their countries marching upon Tigris or there abouts; and of Nymrod it is
namely said that the beginning of his reign was Babel, etc. in the Country of
Sennaar, marching upon the river Tygris.

27. For Babylon betimes. Having spoken in general of the first peoples
greatness, he specifieth now the first Monarchy; whereof it seems Meses
has enough written in the tenth chapter aforesaid. Now the best Authors many,
of these and the former times, declare and prove by the account of years that
the first Monarchy as in Babylon, and Babylon was in Chald^a: whereupon some
dispute for Nimnie and Assyrians, and some because these two great Cities began
about one time, had several Princes, and reigned both many hundred years,
they make a double Monarchy of the first, until such time as the Chaldean had
swallowed the Assyrian. I take not the word Monarchy too precisely, as if in
the time of the Babylonian there were none other in the world. Egypt began in
good time to be of power, and great Kings there were in the Land of Canaan, and
the countries adjoining. But I understand with our Poet that the first rule
plainly appeared at Babylon, even in the time of Noe. He that would upon this
point compare profane Histories with the Scripture, might sinde matter for a
long discourse, the sum whereof may be seen in Funccius, Carrion, Vignier and
other Chroniclers. To be short, I say the reign of Nymrod mentioned, Genesis
10.10. many years fore-went all other we read of, and especially those of
the Greeks, Romans, Gauls, etc. as is proved plainly by the account of time.
Thebes, a Town of Boeotia in Greece: it has a spring by it called Dirce,
whereof the Towne-selfe among the Poets is often surnamed. Amphion, a wise
Politician, who by his eloquence and slight persuaded the people of those
times, rude as they were and uncivil, to join together in building the walls
of Thebes; whereupon the Poets, to show the force of eloquence, feign that
Amphion by the cunning strokes of his Lute made the stones to come down from
the rocks and lay themselves together in order of a wall. And thus says
Horace in his Epistle of Poetry ad Pisones: Dictus and Ampbion Thebanae
conditor vrbis Saxa mouere sono testudinis, and piece blanda Read more of him
in Appollonius his Argonauticks.

28. The sons H^ber. This proves again that the near successors of Noe
silled not the world all at once, but by succession of time. So the true
religion remained in the family of Sem: The Chaldeans were excellent
Astronomers and Philosophers; the Egyptian Priests knew the secrets of Nature,
before there was any knowledge of letters in Greece: which was not peopled so
soon as the other by many years, as the histories even of the Greeks
themselves declare. See the latter Chronicles.

29. All Egypt ouershone. Another proof. If the world had been peopled all
straight after the flood, riches and dainties would have been found used in
all countries at the same time. But they were in Egypt and Tire long before the
Greeks and Gauls knew the world. So it follows that Greece and Gaul were
not so soon peopled as Egypt and Phaenicia. By the limping Smith, he means
Vul an, that first found out the use and forging of Iron in Sicilie. Prometheus
was the first that found the use of fire among the Argol ans or Greeks. Of him
says Hor. 1. book 2. Ode. Audax Iapeti genus ignem sraude mala gentibus
intulit. That is, the bold son of Japhet brought fire by craft among the
Nations. Of this matter the Poets have set forth many fables, the true drift
whereof our Author shows in a word. Look what I have noted upon the 707.
verse of the sixth day of the first week. The rest of this place is easy to be
understood.

30. As is a pebble stone. A fine similitude concerning the aforesaid matter:
to show how all the Arts began from the plain of Sennaar to spread by little
and little over all the world.

31. For from Assyria. He begins here to treat of the more particular
peoplings. And first he shows how the posterity of Sem began to fill Asla.
Their first oute-ease, leaving the coast of Assyria, bent toward the East. Of
this river Hytan, Pliny says 6.23. Carmaniae slumen Hytanis portuosum and
auro fertile. Look Solinus cha 67. They having peopled this quarter, thrust on
further toward Oroatis a river of Persia: whereof Pliny faith in his 6. book
the 23. Flumen Oroatis oslio dissicili nisi peritis; Insulae 2. paruae: inde
vadosa nauigatio palustri similis, per curipos tamen quosdam peragitur, and in
the 25 chap. Persidis initium ad Flumen ^roatin, quo diuiditur ab Elimaide.
Read also the 24. chapter of the said book of Pliny, for the better
understanding of their dwelling here. Then they drew further forth into Persia
toward the City of Susa, close by the which Coaspis runs: such is the
sweetness of that water, that (as Pliny, Soline, Plutarch, and others record)
the Kings of Persia drink of none other. So they came into the valleys of the
famous hill Caucasus, where dwelt the Parthians, whose Kings were commonly
called Arsaces. From hence into Medie, and lastly up higher toward the
Hyrcanian, or Caspian lake. Look Ptolomie in his first, second and third table
of Msia, Mercater, Ortelius, Cellarius and Theuet. All these remoues are
contained within the compass of five or six hundred leagues.

32. These men's posterity. He sets down in four verses the chief
countries peopled by the second ouercrease of Sems Issue. The land fronting
Cheisel is a part of Tartarie, not far from the Caspian sea, whereinto that
river falls, and rises near the wilderness of Lop, above Tachaliston;
which is a great Country neighbor to the mountain Imaus. Charasse,
Charassan, or Chorasan, it is a Country that lies between Isligias, Bedane
and Tacalistan, which I note more particularly then I find in the French
Commentary, because there is so little difference of letters between that and
the name of Carazan, whereof the Poet speaks in the fourth verse following.
This Charasse, Gadel, Cabul, Bedane and Balistan, are provinces enclosed by the
river Indus, the mountain Imaus, the Caspian Sea, and realm of Persia, a
circuit of land somewhat more then 600. leagues.

33 Their offspring afterward. He comes to the third ouercrease of the
Semites, who went forth Southward as well as North and Eastward. The
inhabitants of Cabul thrust forward their Issue toward Bisnagar, a rich
country of South Asia, lying between the Persian sea and the Gulf of
Bengala. Narfinga (for so I have translated the French Nayarde) is a kingdom
lying yet lower, and very rich. That plenteous land that Ganges thorow-flowes,
it contains the higher India, where are many wealthy kingdoms set forth well
at large in the Maps, as Cambaie, Decan, Bengala, Pedir, etc. Toloman, is
further up toward the North. Aua, is beyond the Gulf of Bengala, toward the
East, about Pegu and Siam, countries of infinite wealth, Mein, on the West has
Ganges, on the East Macin, on the South Bengala, and on the North Carazan,
which the Poet surnameth Muskey, because there is great store of the best
Musk, Lop, a Desert thirty days journey over, lying yet higher Northward. It
seems the Roet follows the opinion of M. P. Venet, who in the first book of
his Tartarian History, chap. 35. makes very strange report of the fearful
sights that the poor passengers there meet with, often to the loss of their
lives. Not unlike it is that certain legions of cuill Spirits there abiding,
have had some special power given them so to punish the Idolatrous
Mahometists, who still inhabit those quarters. The Poet says all che countries
marching this Wilderness were peopled by this third outerease of the Semits.
It is an opinion somewhat likely, and thereon I rest, until I hear some other
(if it be possible) give more certain intelligence of the matter.

34. Long after sundry times. He speaks of the fourth and last ouercrease of
Sem. Tipura, a Country breeding many Rhrinocerots, which, according as the
Greek name signifies, I have translated horny-snouted beasts: read the
description of them in the exposition of the fortieth verse of the sixth day of
the first week: this Tipura lies Eastward above Toloman betwixt Carazan an
Caichin, or Gaucinchine, for so I have translated: it has on the West Tipura
and Toloman, on the South Campaa, on the North China and Mein, and on the East
the East-Ocean: a land very large and bearing great store of Aloes Mangit is
far up in the North: so is also Quinsai, Ania, and Tabin, one above another
even unto the Anien Straight and Seythicke Ocean. By this description, plain
to be seen in the Maps of Asia, the Poet meant to show us all the several
remoues of Sems posterity; who not passing beyond the Anian Straight, might
long content themselves with ^o large a portion as Asia containing above four
thousand leagues of ground. As for the particular description of these
Countries, their length, breadth and commodities, I neither dare, nor will ever
charge therewith my notes enten^ed for short. Besides, it was not the Poets
mind to hold the Reader long with view and study of such matter and questions,
as may be had and plainly resoiled of the Card-men.

35. Now from the center-point. Out of Affyria and Mesopotamia, Iaphet, or the
next race from him, drew toward the West, into those places that the Poet
names, set down (as they are) in the ancient and later Maps of Asia and
Europe. I need not mine (...) every word of the text. Armenis is distinguished
into the Great and Less, it lies near the Caspian sea, and coasteth toward
Europe. The sweet Corician cave, it is in Cilicia, and is described of Pliny
in the 27. chapter of his 5. book, and Strabo in his 4. book, and Solinus in
his 51. chapter. Concerning the strange matters which the Poet reports of it,
read Pomponius Mela his description of Cilicia, the first book. Besides many
notable properties of the place, he says moreover that when a man has gone
there a troublesome narrow way a mile and more, he shall come through pleasant
shades into certain thick woods, which make a sound (no man can tell how) of
certain country-songs: and after he is passed through to the end thereof, he
shall enter another deeper shadow, which amazeth much all that come there, by
reason of a noise is heard, loud and passing man's power to make, as it were the
sound of many Cimbals. These are his words: Terret ingredientes sonitu
Cimbalorum diuinitus and magno fragore crepitantium. He sets down also at
large all other the pleasant delights of the place. Concerning this music,
some think it a fable: others ascribe it to a natural cause; as that the air
entting by a natrow mouth into a vault of stone, wide and very deep, soon
grows thereby exceeding raw, and so turns into water, then dropping still
down in many places and quantities somewhat proportionable upon the sounding
stone, makes in those hollow rockie places a noise, as it were, musical. Taure
his lostie downs, this great mountain reaches hence well toward Pisidia
Westward, and on the other side a great way into Asia, as Ptolomee shows in
his first table. Meander a river arising out of the mountains of Pelta and
Totradium in Asia the less, runs through Hierapolis, P^sidia, Licaonia,
Caria, and other countries thereabouts, into the Midland sea. Illios or Troas,
Bithynia and the rest, are higher toward Hellespont and the Mayor sea.

36. Then boldly passing ore. He spoke before of Illios, which lies in low
Phrigia upon the shore of the Midland sea, about the Sigean Peake and the river
Sin Sis, hard by the Straight of Gallipolie, where Abydos on Asia-side
stands, and Sestos on the side of Europe: now he says the second ouercrease
of Semites past the Straight, it being in breadth but the fourth part of a
league, as Bellon nuoucheth in the second book and third chapter of his
Singularities. In times past there stood two towers, one in Sest, the other in
Abide, in the tops whereof wont to be set great lights to waine the marrinets
by night. Look what we have noted upon the word Phare in the first day of the
first week, verse 448. and what upon the word Leander, first week, fifth day,
912. verse. At this time Sest and Abide are two Castles, where the Turk has
Garrisons, and are the very keys of Turkey in that quarter: so near is
Constantinople unto them. Strimon, Hebre and Nest, are three great rivers
passing through Thrace (which is now called Romania) and ^alling into the Aegean
sea, called now by some Archipelago, and by the Turks the white sea. Look the
ninth table of Europe in Ptolomee. The Rhodopean dales. Rhodope is a mountain
bounding Thrace: in the dales thereof, beside other Towns, are Philippoli and
Hadrianopoli. Danubie or Donaw is the greatest river of all Europe, springing
out of Arnobe hill, which Ptolomee and Mercator puts for a bound between the
Sweues and Grisons: this River running through Almaine, Austria, Hungaria,
Slauonia, and other countries with them interlaced, receives into it above
fifty great Rivers, and little ones an infinite sort, so emptieth by six great
mouths into the Mayor sea. Moldauia, Valachia, and Bulgaria, are the countries
near about the fall of Danubie.

37 Thrace. These countries near the Mayor and Aegean Seas, and the Thracian
Bosphore, thrust on the third ouercrease of people further West and Northward,
as the Poet very likely says: the Maps of Europe show plainly the coasts he
names for their chief seats. But to show how and when they changed and
rechanged places and names of places, driving out one the other, and removing
by diverse enterspaces, it were the matter of a large book.

38 Now turning to the South. He comes now to handle the Colonies, or
ouercreases of Chams posterity: first in Arabia, Phaenicia, and Chananaea,
which was after called Judea: the site of these countries we know well: they
are easy to be found in the general Maps, and those of Europe, beside the
particulars in Ptolomce and other late Writers, as namely in the Theater of
Ortelius. When the Chamites had ouerbred Arabia, and the countries South from
Chaldaea, which lies betwixt the Arabian and Persian Gulfes, they went at the
second remove down into Egypt betwixt the red and Midland seas: thirdly, they
entered Afric, and by little and little filled it. The Poet points out many
countries, for better understanding whereof, we must consider that Afric
(the fourth part of the world known) is divided into four parts, Barbaria,
Numidia, Lybia, and the Land of Negroes. Barbaria contains all the North
coast, from Alexandria in Egypt to the Straight of Gibraltar along by the
Midland sea, and is divided into four Kingdoms, Ma^oco, Fessa, Tremisen, and
Tunis, containing under them 21. Provinces. Under the same Southward lies
Numidia, called of the Arabians Biledulgerid, and having but few places
habitable. Next below that is Lybia, called Sarra, as much to say as Desert, a
country exceeding hot, marching athonside upon the Land of Negroes: that, the
last and greatest part of Affricke reaches South and Eastward very far. In
the further coast thereof is the country of Za^zibar, certain kingdoms and
deserts near the Cape of good hope, which is the utmost and Southerest peake
of all Afric. Cor^ne is near Egypt. The Punick Sea, the Sea of Carthage,
put for the Midland that parts Europe and Afric asunder. Fesse, is the name
of the chief City of that Realm in Barbary. Gogden, a Province of the
Negroes, as are also Terminan, Gago and Melli, near the same. Argin, lies
near the White Cape. Gusola is one of the seven Provinces of Maroco in
Barbary. Dara, a country in the North-west of Numidia, not far from Gusola.
Tembuto, agreat country in the West part of the Negroes, near about the River
Niger. So is Gualata, but somewhat higher and right against the Green Cape.
Mansara (which I have put in for the verse sake, as I left out Aden) it lies
near Melli upon the lowest mouth of Niger. By Aden, that the French has, I
take to be meant Hoden, which is betwixt Argin and Gualata, or somewhat lower.
The Wilde^nesse of Lybie is surnamed Sparkling, because the sands there
ouerchafed with a burning heat of the Sun, fly up and dazzle men's eyes. Cane,
Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubie, Benim: all are easy to be found in the
Map near about the River Niger, saving Benim which is lower by the Gulf
Royal, and Nubie higher toward Nilus. Amas^n (which I have added) is a great
country, near the place where Niger diueth under the Earth. From these
quarters South and Eastward lies the great Ethiopia, a country exceeding hot,
sandy, and in many places uninhabitable, because of the sands, which by the wind
are so moved and removed oftentimes, that they ouer-heate and choke-vp diverse
great countries, that might otherwise be dwelt in. There the great Negus,
called Prester-Ian, reigns far and near. His Realms, Provinces, Customs,
Laws, Religion, and the manner of his peoples living, are set forth at large
by Franciscus Aluares, is his History of Ethiopia, that is joined with
Johannes Leo his description of Afric.

39 If thou desire to know. Hitherto the Poet has told us how Asia, Europe,
and Affricke, were peopled by the successors of Noe. But he has not showed
how the Iaphethites from Chaldaea got up to the furthest Northern parts: and
that he now goes about, and does in sixteen verses: supposing them from
Euphrates to coast up to the mountains of Armenia, and so to enter Albania and
the neighbor places, from thence to people Tartaria, Moscouia, and all the
North Countries, they are plainly set down by Mercator, Ortelius, Theuet and
others in their Maps of Europe: and I thought good, for causes often
afore-told, not here to entreat of them particularly. There is left us yet to
consider two notable questions concerning these outroades and Colonies of Noes
posterity. The one, how they came unto the West Jndia, which has so lately,
within these hundred years, been discovered. The other, how it came to pass
that so few of them, in the short space of some hundreds of years, were able
to increase to such a number, as might empeople and fill so many huge and
diverse countries of the world. The Poet straight makes answer hereunto. Let us
mark his discourse upon either the demands.

Mais par ou, Comment le monde nouue au descou^it de nostre temps a este peuple.
diras-tu, tout ce Monde nouueau
Que l'Hespagne, en flottant comme Dele sur l'eau,
N'a guere a del err du tombeau d'oubliance,
Et qui par sa ruin est mis comme en essence,
Reoeut ses habitans? Si c'est de longue main,
He, d'ou vient que le Grec, le Perse, le Romain,
Qui siers ont estendu si loin leur dextre armee,
Ne le conurent onque mesme par ronommee?
Et si c'est depuis hier, d'ou vient que ses citez
Four millent en bourgeois? que ses antiquitez
Font honte au Mausolee, aux vieilles pyramides,
Aux murs de Semirame, aux Palais Romulides?
He, Response, les habitans du nouueau monde ne so^t point tombez des nues, ni
nez de la terre.
quoy? tu penses done que ces hommes icy
Cheurent, ia tous formez, des nues tout ainsi
Que ces petits Crapaux, que quelque tiede oree
Dans les fentes des prez verse sur la seree
Apres un iour ardent, and qui s'entre-touchans
Bou-bouillonne parmi la poussiere des champs:
Ou bieu, que deschirant certaines secondines,
Qui douillettes sichoient en terre leurs racines,
Ils virent la clarte du Solcil alme-beau,
Ayant l'humeur pour laict, and l'herbe pour berceau:
Qu'ils sortirent parmi les grasses motelettes
Comme des Potirons, des Naueaux, and des Bletes:
Ou qu'ainsi que les os par le Thebain semez,
Ils nasquirent, gaillards, de pied en cap armez.
Tout ce large pays, Le monde nouueau n'a pas este peuple si tossed pource qu'il
est plus eslongne de la plain de Sen naar que l'Afrique, l'Europe and l'Asie.
qu'on appelle Amerique,
Ne fut si tossed peuple que la cost d'Afrique,
La terre ingenieuse, ayme-loix, porte-tours,
A qui Iupin donna le nom de ses amors:
Et celle qui s'estend depuis le froid Bosphore
Iusqu'au lict saffrane de la perleuse Aurore:
D'autant que celles-ci voisinent de plus pres
Du Tygre brise-ponts les marges diaprez,
D'ou nos premiers ayeuls, estonnez, descamperent,
Et comme Perdriaux par tout s'esparpillerent
Que le Monde, ou Coulom sous un belliqueux Roy
De Castille porta les arms and la Foy.
Les edifices, thresors and gouuernement du nouueau monde monstrenl qu'il est
habit des long temrs, encor quele moyen (comme cela s'est fait) soit inconu.
Conjectures touchant les peuplades du nouueau monde, en Septentrion Occide^t,
O^ient and Midi.
Mais la rich grandeur de ses berux edifices,
Ses thresors infinis, ses contraires polices,
Monstrent que de long temps (bien qu'en diuerses fois,
Et par diverse chemins) il receust ses bourgeois:
Soit que lacruaute des nuageux orages
Ait leurs bateaux brisez iette sur ces riuages:
Soit que le desespoir d'vn penple tourmente
De peste, guerre, and faim: soit que l'authorite
D'vn homme d'entreprise ait es Indes nouuelles
Auec trauail conduit ses lasses carauelles.
Qui doubt que iadis de Quinsay les vaisseaux
Nayent, auentureux, peu trauerser les eaux
Du destroit d'Anien, and trouuer un passage
Des Indes d'Orieut au pays de Tolguage,
Par un chemin si court, que les flottes s'en vont
D' Asie au port Gregois a trauers l'Hellespont:
Singlent d'Hespaigne ex Fez par le destroit d'Abile,
Et par le Phar Messin d'Italie en Sicile?
Des grans lands de Tolme, and Quiuir, ou les Veaux
Ont toison de Belier, eschine de Chameaux,
Et crin de Courserots, Diuerses contrees du nouueau monde.
ils peuplent l'Azasie,
Toua, Topir, Mechi, Calicuza, Cossie,
La Floride, Auacal, Canada, Bacalos,
Et les champs de Labor ou se gelent les flos.
Merueilles du nouueau Moude.
Ils sement d'autre part la terre Xaliscaine,
Mechuacan, Cusule: and dans l'eau Mexicaine
Fondent vne Venise. Ils voyent, estonnez,
Que les arbres plus verds sont aussi tossed fanez
Que touchez de leurs doigts: and que mesme il se tr^uue
Dedans Nicaragua un enflamme Vesuue.
Et de la saisissant l'Isthme de Panama,
A main droicte il s'en vont bastir Oucanama,
Cassamalca, Quito, Cusque: and dans la contree
Du renomme Peru, terre vrayment doree,
Admirent ce beau lac, don't Colle est abreuue,
Qui dous par le dessus, est de sell tout paue:
Auec l'eau de Cinsa, qui, forte, transfigure
La Croy en un saillon, la fange en pierre dure.
Ils occupent Chili, ou l'onde auec grand bruit
Court a val tout le iour, and sommeille la nuict:
Chinca, les Patagons, and toute ceste cost
Ou du grand Magellan le bleu Neree flote.
S'eslargissent a gauche au long du Darien,
Ou l'Huo les de slasse: au champ Vrabien:
A l'entour de Zenu, qui verse Neptune roulle
Des grains d'or aussi gros que les oeufs d'vne poulle:
A Grenade, ou le mont des Esmeraudes luit:
Au board Cumanean, qui d'vn espesse nuict
Leur aueugle les yeux: and du board de Cumane,
Se logent en Parie, Omagu, Caripane:
Aupres de Maragnon, dans le cruel Brasil,
Et les champs plats de Plate, on coule un autre Nil.
On pourroit dire encor, Autre conjecture.
que Picne par Grotlande,
Et les champs de Labor par la Bretonne Irlande
Ont este rafreschis: comme par Terminan,
Par Tombut, and Melli, les bords de Corican.
How America was peopled.
But all this other world that Spain has new found-out
By floting Delos-like the Western Seas about,
And raised now of late from out the tomb of Leath,
And given it (as it were) a living by a death;
How was it inhabited? if long agone: The first objection.
how is it
Nor Persians, nor Greeks, nor Romans ever wist,
Or inkling heard thereof, whose ever conquering hosts
Have spread abroad so far, and troad so many coasts?
Or if it were of late, The second objection.
how could it swarm so thick
In every town, and have such works of stone and brick,
As pass the towers of Rome, th'antike Egyptian Pyramid,
The King Mausolus tomb, the walls of Queen Semiramis?
How think you then? Answer negative by an Ironie.
belike these men fell from the sky
All ready-shap'd, as do the srogges rebounding fry,
That ast'r a sulty day, about the sunset hour
Are powered on the meads by some warm Aprill-showre,
And entertouch themselves and swarm amid the dust,
All over the gaping clists that former drought had brust:
Or grew of tender slips and were in earthly lap
(Instead of cradle) nursed, and had for milk the sap:
Or, as the Musherome, the Sowbread and the Blite,
Among the fatter clods, they start up in a night:
Or as the Dragons teeth sow'n by the Duke of Thebes,
They bravely sprung all-arm'd from-out the fertile glebes.
Indeed this mighty ground, The first earnest answer.
ycleaped Americke,
Was not enhabited so soon as Affericke;
Nor as that learned soil, tow'r-bearing, louing-right,
Which after Jupiter his deare-beloued hight;
Nor as that other part, which from cold Bosphers head
Does reach the pearly morn at Titons saffran bed:
For they much more approach the diaprized ridges;
And faire-endented banks of Tegil bursting-bridges;
From whence our ancestors discamp'd astonished,
And like to Partridges were all-to-scattered;
Then does that newfound world whereto Columbus bore
First under Ferdinand the Castill arms and lore.
General.
But there the baildings are so huge and bravely dight,
So differing the states, the wealth so infinite;
That long agone it seems some people thither came,
Although not all atonce, nor all by way the same.
For some by cloudy drift of tempest raging-sore,
Percase with broken barks were cast upon the shore:
Some others much avoid with famine, plague and war,
Particular.
Their ancient seats forsook and sought them new so far:
Some by some Captain led, who bare a searching mind,
With weary ships arrived upon the Western Inde.
Or could not long ere this, The second.
the Quinsay vessels find
A way by th'Anien straight from the one to the other Inde?
As short a cut it is, Colonies according to the cond Answer: noting by the way
certain meruailes of the country.
as that of Hellespont
From Asia to Greece; or that, where-ore they wont
Sail from the Spanish hill unto the Realm of Fesse;
Or into Sicilie from out the hau'n of Resse.
So from the Wastes of Tolme and Quiver (where the kine
Bring calves with weathers fleece, with Camels bunchie chine
And hair, as Genets, slicke) they peopled Azasie;
Cosse, Toua, Caliquas, Topira, Terlichie,
And Florida the fair, Auacal, Hochilega,
The frosen Labour-lands, Canada, Norumbega.
They sowed ath'other side the land of Xalisco,
Mechuacan, Cusule; and founded Mexico
Like Venice, over a Lake; and saw, astonished
The greenest budding trees become all withered,
As soon as ever touched; and eke a mountain found
Vesevus-like enflamed about Nicargua ground.
So passing forth along the straight of Panama,
Upon the better hand they first Oucanama,
Then Quito, then Cusco, then Caxamalca built;
And in Peruuiland, a country thorow-guilt,
They wondered at the Lake that waters Colochim,
All vnder-paued salt, and fresh about the brim:
And at the springs of Chinke, whose water strongly-good
Makes pebble-stones of chalk, and sandy stones of mood.
Then Chili they possessed, whose rivers cold and bright
Run all the day apace, and rest them all the night:
Quinteat, Patagonie, and all those lower seats,
Whereon the foamy bracke of Magellanus beats,
Upon the left they spread along by Darien side,
Where Huo them refreshed, then in Vraba spide
How Zenu's wealthy waves adowne to Neptune rould
As bid as pullets eggs the massy grains of gould;
A mount of Emeralds in Grenad saw they shine;
But on Cumana banks hoodwinked wear their eyne
With shady night of mist: so quickly from Cumane
They on to Pary went, Omagu and Caribane:
Then by Maragnon dwelt, then entered fierce Bresile
Then Plata's leauell fields, where flows another Nile.
Moreover, The third answer.
one may say that Picne by Grotland,
The land of Labor was by British Iserland
Replenished with men: as eke, by Terminan,
By Tombut and Melli the shore of Corican.
40 But all this other world. This is the first of the foresaid questions: how
it came to pass that the new world, discovered in these latter times, could be
so replenished with people, as the Spaniards (who have thereof written very
much) did find it. He speaks of the West India, which is called another
world, or the new world, for the hugeness thereof; being more then 9300.
leagues about, as Gomara says in his Indian History 1. book. 12. chap. it is
longer then all the other three parts of the world: and two or three ways as
broad as Asia and Europe laid together. This quarter, so great and full of
kingdoms and people, if it have been long agone inhabited, how hap (says our
Poet) the Perstans, Greeks, and Remans, who undertook so many far voyages came
never there, nor once heard thereof? For Ptolomee, Strabo, Mela, and other
ancient writers make no mention of it: and if it were peopled but of late
years, he asks, how came so many people there, so many great Cities and
stately monuments, as Gomara, Benzo, Cieque, Ouiede, Cortes, and others write
of. Benzo and Barthelemi de las Casas do report, that, in that little the
Spaniards have there gotten within these thirty or forty years, they have
slain above twenty millions of people, undone and brought to great distress
as many or more, and wasted and unpeopled twice as much ground as is contained
in Europe, and a part of Asia to that. Nevertheless in many places, and even
in Mexico, New Spain and Peru, where they have used all the cruelty,
wickedness and villainy that man's heart or the devils rage could imagine,
there are yet living many thousand Indians. Concerning the ancient Monuments of
this new world, I will reckon at this time but one of them, taken out of the
fourth book and 194. chapter of Gomara: There are (says he) in Peru two great
highways, ^eaching the one through the hills, the other over the plains,
from Quito to Cusco, which is above five hundred leagues outright, a work so
great and chargeable, that it is well worthy noting: that over the plains, is
25. foot broad, and walled on either side, and has little brooks running
along in it, with store of the trees called Molli planted on the banks. The
other is of like breadth, cutting through the rocks, and filling up the lower
grounds with stone work: for they are both of them level without mounting or
descending any hill, and straight without stopping at any lake or poole. In a
word, whosoever has seen either of them, will say it is a work far
surpassing all the great buildings and paued causies of the Romans, or the
walls of Babylon built by Queen Semyramis, or those most wonderful Pyramides
of Egypt. Guaynacapa, a certain King of the Indians (who lived about an
hundred years ago) caused these ways to be repaired and enlarged; but he was
not the first beginner of them, as some would make us believe: for he could not
have finished them in all his lifetime, and the stone-worke semes to be much
more ancient. There are built upon them a days journey asunder, many goodly
Palaces, called Tambos, wherein the Court and armies of the Princes wont to
lodge. But, Gomara says, our Spaniards have by their civil wars utterly
destroyed these causies, and cut them asunder in many places, that they might
not come one to another: yea the Indians themselves have broke off and severed
their parts in time of war. Now let us hear the Poets answer.

41 What then alas? belike. His first answer is, that the people of the
West Indies fell not out of the air, as many little frogs do in a warm
shower, framed, by the virtue of the Sun, of the dust or vapors arising out
of the earth: nor that they grew not out of the ground, like roots or plants:
nor by any strange or vain enchantment, as of the Serpents teeth sown by
Cadmus, the Poets feign, grew soldiers in complete harness. But these they
are men well-featured, stout, and long-liuing, chiefly in the North and
South-parts of the Country, where both men and women in stature, strength, and
continuance, far excel the people of Europe, Asia, and Affricke. The
commodities they have for health, their meat, drink and dwelling, their
ceremonies, civil government and other properties, duly noted by the
Historians, make very good proof of the Poets saying.

42 Indeed this mighty ground. This newfound world is called America, of the
name of Americus Vespusius, a certain famous Pilot of Florence, one of the
first discouerers of the Country, not much more than an hundred years ago.
His second answer is, that this part of the world could not be so soon
inhabited as the other three: because it is discoasted further from the plain
of Sennaar, for in Asia the plain it self was. And Arabia being peopled,
Afric was very near at hand, and Europe from the lesser Asia is parted but
with a narrow Phare: whereas America is far beyong all these, which way
soever we coast. He calls Europe a learned Soil, tower-bearing,
louing-right, for the number of learned men and cunning Artisans, of Kingdoms
and States well governed, and Fortresses that are there, That after Jupiter his
deare-beloued hight, lo wit, Europa, that was the daughter of Agenor, King of
Phaenicia. For the profane Poets feign their great god, being in love with
her, to have taken the shape of a Bull, and on his back to have carried her
over Hellespont, and therefore the place, where he first landed her, was called
by her name. From this fable seems to be drawn the name of Besphore: which is
as much to say as Bull-ferry. Perhaps this Jupiter was some notable Pirate or
Tyrant there-about reigning, who in a Ship called the Bull, stole away some
young Lady, and fled for safety into Europe. These words (which from cold
Bosphors head Does reach the pearly dow of Tithons saffron bed) set down the
length of Asia, that is, from the Bosphere of Thrace unto the East-Ocean. The
Castile arms and lore: that is, the Spanish Religion and forces, which
Christopher Columbus brought first into America, and there planted in the name
of the Spanish King.

43 But there the buildings. The third answer is, that the stately buildings,
infinite treasures, and diverse governments that are there, will witness that
the country has been long inhabited, although hard it is to learn how. I
have already spoke of the great Causeyes of Peru. Now the sumptuousness of
Themixtetan, the great City of the Kingdom of Mexico, and the Kings Palaces
of Peru (such they are described by the Spaniards) make further proof of the
Poets saying. As for the vncountable wealth of the Indies it plainly appears,
that above ten thousand millions of gold have been brought thence into Europe,
beside heaps of Rubies, Emerauds and Pearl, much wracked in the sea, and much
brought for a yearly tribute into Spain. Whereunto I will add what
Franciscus Lopes de Gomara says concerning the invaluable riches of
Guainacapa, (the name signifies young and rich) the father of Antibalippa,
last King of Peru, whom the Spaniards put to death. All the furniture of his
house, table and kitchen (says he in the 120. chapter of his fourth book)
were of gold and silver, and the meanest of silver somewhat embased with copper
for the more strength. He had in his Wardrop Giantlike Images of gold lively
featured; as also all kind of beasts, fowls, trees, herbs, and flowers that
the Land there bears; and all kind of fishes, that either the Sea there, or
any fresh water of his Kingdom breeds, in the said metals well and
proportianably resembled, not so much as cords, paniers, troughes, billets, and
other such implements, but were so; to conclude, there was nothing in his
Kingdom, whereof he had not the counfeit in gold or silver. It is also said
that the Kings of Peru, called Ingaes, have a garden in a certain Isle near
Puna, where they delight themselves when they list take the Sea, that has in
gold and silver all herbs, slowers and trees, and other things whatsoever meet
for a pleasant garden: such a sumptuous device, as never was heard-of, or seen
elsewhere. Besides all this, that King, last but one, had gathered into Cusco
huge masses of gold and silver vnfined: which the Indians hid so secretly, as
the Spaniards could never come by it, there was also in and about Cusco great
store of picture-tables and tombs all of sine silver, worth some thirty, some
fifty, some threescore thousand Ducats a piece: also dining-tables, vessels,
and Images a great number, all of fine gold. The Spaniards at the taking of
Antibalippa, found as good as 252000. pounds of silver, and of gold 1300265.
pezoes, every pezo valued at a Ducat and a halse. Besides the great golden
table of Antibalippa, worth nigh 40000. Crowns. Now for all this great spoil
that the Spaniards got, and hauock that they made, as well in Peru, as other
the Provinces there-about, yet the Indians (as Benzo reports, who stayed there
with the Spaniards fourteen years, and wrote in three books, worthy reading,
that whole story) they stick not to say, they have yet more remaining than all
that the Spaniards ever had. And to make their meaning plainer, they will take
out of a great vessel full of wheat one grain betwixt their singers, and say:
See you this? the Viracochie (so they call the Spaniards) have taken, as it
were, this one grain away: but thus much (say they, pointing to the rest in
the vessel) thus much and more have they left behind them. Now the word
Viracochie, because it comes thus in my way, Benzo himself in his third book
says, it signifies the froth or scumme of the Sea: and that the Peruvians so
call the Spaniards for deep hatred and abomination of them; saying also
sometimes one to another in their language: The wind bears down houses and
trees, and the fire burns them, but these Viracochie they do worse than wind
and fire. They waste all, they eat all, they turn the earth and all vpside
down: they turn the course of Rivers: they are never at quiet: they never
cease ranging up and down to seek gold and silver: and all they find is too
little for them. When they have it, what do they? They take their pleasure,
they war one with another, rob one another, kill one another: they are ever
given to lying, blaspheming, and denying the same God whom they profess: and
these men have cruelly slame without cause our fathers, our children and
kinsfolks, taken from us, contrary to all right, our goods, our liberty and
country. Having thus commended the Spaniards, they cause the Sea for vomiting
on the Earth so cruel and wicked a people, and often have vpbraided the
Spaniards themselves with this notorious reproach: that Gold was the Christians
God. O how shall this people in the latter day condemn that ever greedy
covetousness, for which Europe now adays hears so ill, and is by the
selfe-people thereof so wasted and unpeopled! But concerning the diverse
governments of the West Indies, seeing they are set down so well at large by
Lopes, Ou^ede, Benzo and others, it is too great a matter for me to handle in
this discourse, which is (I fear me) grown too long already: therefore will I
draw to an end. The Poet at the 413. verse begins to show some likely opinions
how this newfound world was pleopled: and first in general, that the people of
countries inhabited, exercising their ordinary traffic one with another, might
sometimes be cast by force of tempest upon the West-Indian shore, and so be
constrained (their ships being broken) to remain still there. Others by
plague, war, or famine were driven to leave their countries, and seek some
quietter dwelling far off, and so have lighted on these new Countries. Or
perhaps some great man of authority, or cunning Pilot, by ventring made a
discovery thereof, and led the ouer-creases of some people thither. As the Poet
shows more particularly in the verses following.

44 Nay could not long ago. He guesseth in special (and most likely) that the
inhabitants of the furthest Northeast shore of Asia, to wit, the men of
Quinsay, and other places there, might have emptied their ouer-peopled Cities,
by passing the Anien Straight (a part of Sea no broader (as he says) then the
Phare of Gallipoli, Gibraltare, or Messine) and so from the East Indies might
they have stored first the land of Tolguage (which Thieves, in his map of the
new world, places betwixt the Realms of Anian, Tolm, and Quiuir, within 15
degrees of the North Pole:) then the rest as follows.

45 So from the Wastes of Tolm and Quiuir. In all this huge Northren part of
America, few people there are, especially toward the coast over against Quinsay
and the other East countries. There are therefore great Waste-lands (as the
later Card-men have noted) about the kingdoms or countries of Anian, Tolguage,
Quiuir and Tolm, about 12000 leagues compass.

So then the Poet holds opinion that some of Sems posterity, having once
passed from the farthest East-point of Asia over to the West-Indian Coast,
thrust their offspring farther into the land. The Countries here named by the
Poet, are to be found in the Sea-cards and Land-maps betwixt Now-Spaine and
Estotilant: as if he meant that the North-part of America was first inhabited:
concerning the properties and particular descriptions of these places, read
the third volume of the Spanish Nauigations, the second Book of the general
history of Lopez de Gomara, chap. 37. etc. the History of Florida, Benzo, the
Reports of Johannes Verazzanus, laques Cartier, and other French Captains,
concerning their discovering of the Land of Labor (where the Sea is frozen)
Baccalos, New France, Canada, Hochilega, and other lands thereabouts. Read
Thenet also, and the later Card men. For the French Calienza I have translated
Caliquas, according as I find it writted both in others and in Ortellus; who
also has for Mechi Terlichi-mechi; and therefore I translate it Terlichi.

46 They sowed at'nother side. Xalisco, now called Noua Gallicia, is described
by Gomara in the 21. chapter of his fifth book. It is a land very fruitful,
and rich in honey, wax and silver: and the people there are Idolaters and
Men-eaters. Nunnius Gusmannus, who seized the country for the King of Spain in
the year 1530. has written a discourse thereof, and it is to be read in the
third volume of the Spanish Nauigations The Province of Mechuacan (from whence
not far lies Cusule) is about 40 leagues lower southward then Xalisco: that
also the said Gusmannus conquered, after he had most cruelly and traitorously
put to death the Prince and Peers of the country, as Gomara shows in his
book and chapter above quoted. Mexico (which some account all one with
Themixtetan) is the mother-Citie of that kingdom, now called Hispania Nona:
wonderful rich it is and strong, and of high renoume: built, far more
curiously then Venice, upon a lake salt on the north-side, because it is there
of a Sea-like breadth, and on the southside fresh, because of a River that
empties there into it. Greater is the City thought to be, then Seuille in
Spain, the streets are passing well set, and their channels in such manner
cast, as cannot be mended. Diverse places there are to buy and sell-in the
needful and ordinary wares, but one there is greater then the rest, with many
walks and galleries round about it, where every day may be seen above
threescore thousand Chapmen. There is the Judgment Hall for common Pleas: and
were also many temples and shrines of Idols before the coming of Ferdinando
Cortez, who made thereof the first conquest for the king of Spain, exercising
most horrible cruelties upon all both young and old in the City, as Barthelemi
delas Casas, a Monk and Bishop of Spain, reports in his history of the
Indies, where he stayed a long time. Look the description of Mexico in the
third volume of the Spanish Nauigations, fol. 300. See also Benzo of Millaine
his history of the new world, the second book and 13. Chapter. Now from these
parts abouenamed, (after report of some wonders of many there seen, and worthy
a larger discourse by themselves) the Poet draws his Colonies down further
toward Peru, by the Land-straight of Panama, which parts the South Sea from
the Ocean, and thereabout is hardly 20. leagues in breadth. The fiery mountain
of Nicaragua is by Gomara described in his fist book, chap. 203. so are the
other wonders, which the Poet here notes, in his fourth book, chap. 194.

47 Then Chili they possessed. Gomara, in his fourth book, chap. 131. holds
opinion that the men of Chili are the right Antipodes or Counter-walkers unto
Spain, and that the country there is of the same temper with Andaluzie. This
Chili lies on the shore of el Mar Pacisico, so also does Quintete (which I
have put for Chinca) both near the Panagones or Giants, whose country is full
of people, and has certain rivers that run by day and stand by night, some
think because of the snowes which in the day time are melted by the Sun, and
frozen by the Moon in the night: but I take it rather to be some great secret
and miracle of nature. The cause, why here I made exchange of Chinca, was first
for that the Poet had spoke before of the springs of Chink, which I take for
the same; then because it is so diuerfly placed of the Card-men: for Ortelius,
in his Map of the New World, sets it above, and Theuet beside Chili, in either
place it stands well to be taken for the Chink aforenamed: but Mercator places
it a great deal lower, and on the contarry coast, near the river of Plata,
where indeed is a country called Chica, that perhaps has bred this error.
Lastly, Quintete stands so right in way, which the Poet follows, from Chili to
the Patagones, that I thought it not amiss to take the same rather then the
doubtful Chinca. By the somie Brack of Magellanus, he means the Sea and
Straight of Magellan close by terra Australis. Gomara describes it well in the
beginning of the third book of his Portugal History. The Poet has already
showed how people came first on the North- America from the kingdom of Anian
over the maine land to the Atlantic sea shore, then on all the further coasts
from Quiuir to the Magellan Straight, along the Archipelago de San Lazaro, Mar
del Zur, and Pacifico: and now he takes the higher side on the left hand from
the Land-Straight of Panama to the river of Plata, which is not far from the
Magellan: noting by the way the most note-worthy places of all this huge reach
of ground, represented, as it is, by our late writers in their general and
particular Maps of the Newfound world. Huo is a great sweat-water stream
arising at Quillacingas, (that lies under the Equator) and running athwart the
country called Caribage into the Sea at Garra. Vraba is the country that lies
betwixt that river and Carthagene. Concerning Zenu, mark what Gomara says
thereof in his second book and 69. chapter. It is the name of a River and
City both, and of a Haven very large and sure. The City is some 8. leagues
from the Sea. There is a great Mart for Salt and Fish. Gold the inhabitants
gather all about; and when they set themselves to get much, they lay
sine-wrought nets in the river of Zenu and others, and oftentimes they draw-vp
grains of pure gold as big as eggs. This country is not far from the
Straight of Darien. In the said second book, chap. 72. He describes also Noua
Grenada, and the Mount of Emeraudes: which is very high, bare, and peeld,
without any herb or tree thereon growing, and lies some five degrees on this
side the Equator. The Indians, when they goe-about to get the stones, first use
many enchauntments to know where the best vein is. The first time the
Spaniards came there, they drew thence great and little 1800. very fair and of
great price: but for this commodity, the country is so barren that the people
were feign to feed on Pismers: till of late the Spanish covetousness has made
them know the value of their Mountain. Cumana is described in the foresaid
book, chap. 79. in the end whereof Gomara says, the vapors of the river
Cumana engender a certain little mist or slime upon men's eyes, so as the
people there are very pore-blind. Parie is described in the 84, chapter of the
said second book. Maragnon, a River, which (as Gomara says, 2 book, 87
chapter) is threescore miles over. It emprieth at the Cape of Alinde, three
degrees beyond the Equator: but springs a great way further South, by Tarama
in Peru; thence running Eastward, it casts only an Arm into the Amazon about
Picora. Which has caused many the first writers of America to count from that
place both but one river. So also does our Poet here: otherwise he would have
msntioned first how the people passed the Amezon, that other great stream now
known by the name of Orenoque; which rises about Carangui, and emptieth (as
Theuet says) 104. leagues above the mouth of Maragnon. Bresile, which the
Spaniard discovered in the year 1504. is surnamed fierce, because of the
Canibales, Caribes, and other man-eating people there. I. de Leri has written
very fully all the history of his adventure in part of the country, where
dwell the people called Toupinamboes. The river of Plata the Indians call
Paranagacuc, which word imports as much as a great water. Gomara speaking
thereof in the 89. chapter of his second book, says, In this river is found
silver, pearls, and other things of great price. It contains in breadth 25.
leagues, making many Islands and swells like Nilus, and about the selfsame
time. It springs first out of the mountains of Peru, and is after increased
by the infall of many rivers: for the country thereabout is level, or slat,
whereof it seems to have received the name of Plate.

Thus the Poet guesseth at the manner of this newfound worlds empeopling by
the coast of Asia. Whereunto I will add what Arias Mont that learned Spaniard
has written thereof in his book entitled Phaleg. He says Ioktan the double
pety-sonne of Sem, (that is, whose double grandfather Sem was) had thirteen
sons, which are named by Moses in the 10. of Genesis, and some of them
peopled the West Indies from the East. That which Moses says, Genesis 10.
chap. 30. verse. concerning Sephar a mountain of the East, Arias applies to the
great hills of Peru, which the Spaniards call Andes: they reach out further in
length then any other in the world, and near them stands an ancient town
called Iuktan. Moreover, there lies higher a neere-Isle, betwixt Cuba and
Mexico, called Iukatas: which may be thought to resemble still the name of him
that first brought people into the country. To Ophir, one of the sons of
Ioktan, Arias allots the land of Peru: for as much as in the third chapter, and
six verse of the second book of Chron. there is mention made of the gold of
Paruaim. To Iobab the country of Paria, which is near the Straight of Panama,
very ^i^h also in gold and pearl. I have said elsewhere that Arias Montanus
took Asia to be all one main-land with America, and knew no Anian Straight. If
that be true, sure the race of Sem peopled those quarters. But others
considering the horrible ignorance and brutishness of the West-Indians so
lately discovered, and the rather to excuse their outrageous cruelty exercised
upon the poor people, cannot think but that they are some relikes of the race
of Cham. This opinion has but a weak ground, as he may well perceive that
will duly examine the circumstances. For strange it is not that the race of
Sem, after so many generations, and in so far discoasted Countries, should at
length be thus corrupted. Besides, the West Indies in diverse places live still
after the manner of the East. But for better answering sundry objections, that
make to prove them Chamites, read the Preface to the Newfound world of Benzo,
Frenched by M. Vrbain Chauueton.

48 Morcouer one may say. This is another guess of the Poet; as that the
West India was peopled from the North by some Iaphethites, who ventured over
the Straight of Grotland. Indeed these Northern countries have ever swarmed
with people: and well it may be, that some thence by others driven, or by
necessity, or of their own heads, have sought that way other places more to
their liking. As also that the coasts of Bresile and Plata (which I think the
Poet means by the Shore of Corican) were peopled by some Chamites from
Terminan, Tombut, and Melli, Countries lying in the West of Affricke, about the
fall of Niger. For vnlikery it were, seeing Almighty God gave the whole earth
to Noe and his three sons, ( Gen 9.) that the race of any one of them should
engrosse all this Newfound world, beside his part in the other. Thus rather
doubtless, as the Poet guesseth, and I am further bold to gather, by little
and little, at sundry times and places, did all the three Families of Noe
possess those quarters as the rest: that the will of God might be fulfilled,
and the light of his glory appear, in so equal parting and ouer-peopling the
whole earth: howsoever all that huge reach of ground that lies under the
South-pole, and is thought the fist and greatest part (if it all be habitable)
is as yet unknown, or very little discovered.

Rien n'est impossible a l'ambition.
I'accorde volontiers (me diras tu possible)
Que ce bas Universe n'a rien d'inaccessible
A nostre ambition: qu'elle breche les monts,
Court a sec sur les slots des abysmes profonds:
Et despitant la soif ses carauanes guide
Par le sable Tolmois, Arabesque, and Numide.
Objection. Qu'il n'est pas possible que Noe and ses trois fills aycnt ainsi
foisonne. 1 Response son dee surla benediction de Dieu. 2 Resp. fondee sur
l'exemple des septante persons don't nasquirent tant de gens en Egypt. 3 Le
pur traitement, la bon ne sante, la paix, la vigueur de corpse corpse, le repos,
la longue vie, l'vsage de pleusieurs semmes causoyent la^ multiplication
duger^re humain on ce premier temps.
Mais ie ne puis peuser qu'vne seule maison
Reduite a quatre licts, ait rompu la cloison
D'Afrique, Europe, Asie: and qu'encor tout le Monde
Semble estre trop estroit pour sa race second.
Si tu fais peu d'estat de l'immortelle vois,
Qui puissante benit pour la second fois
L'amour que le noeud saint du marriage serre,
Disant, Croissez humains, and remplissez la terre.
Si, profane, tu tions pour baye, que iadis
Des enfans d'Abraham seulement sept sois dix
Pullulerent gaillards dans l'Egypte fertile
Durant quatre cens ans iusques acinq cens mile:
He considere au moins, que nos premiers ayeuls,
Pour estre alimentez des fruicts delicicux
D'un non-fume terroir, and repeus de viandes,
Que l'art gaste-sante des cuisines friandes
N'alteroit point encor: pour n'estre moissonnez
Par l'homicide for des voisins forcenez:
Et pourn' auoir le corpse enerue de paresse,
Ou casse de tranaux; viuoient pleins de ieunesse
Quelques centaines d'ans, and que ia tous chenus
Ils pouuoint exercer le mestier de Venus:
Que la poly gamie en leur temps familiere
Fit que cest Vuiuers fust vne formiliere
D'animaux marche-droict: and que bien tossed des reins
D'vn Patriarche seul sortissent tant d'humains.
Comparaisons a ce propos.
Ainsi un grain de bled si tout ce qu'il rapporte,
Est souuent reseme dans vne terre forte,
Charge en sin les greniers, and iaunit de moissons
Toute vne grand campaigne. Ainsi de deux poissons
Lettez dans un viuier la semence fertille,
De viuers en peu d'ans pouruoit toute vne ville.
Exemple en nostre temps.
N'a-t'on pas en nos iours conu certain vieillard,
Qui du fruict de son corpse auoit peuple gaillard,
Un village a cent feux: and heureux en famille,
Veu ioints d'vn just Hymen sons fills auce sa fille,
L'arbre de parente ne pouuant plus de rang
Fournir assez denoms aux degr^z de leur sang?
Scait-on pas, Autre exeple.
que bien peu de maisons d'Arabie
En moins de trois cens ans remplirent la Lybie
D'habitans tous nouueaux? and Fez, Tunes, Oran,
Tesse, Bugie, Arger, des loix del' Alcoran?
Siles Africains moins propres a la generation ont peu en peu d'annces em^^lu
de grands pays, beaucoup plus les peuples Septentrionaux.
Que si cela se void es bourgeois de l'Afrique,
Qu' un hum^ur corrosif, picquant, melaneholique,
Chatouille nuict and iour, and rend plus desireux
Du plaisir Cyprien, mais non si vigoureux
A fair des infans: d'autant que la frequence
De l'amoureux deduit rend foible leur semeace,
Et qu'vn frilleux Hyuer au center de leurs corpse
Regne eternellement, comme un Este dehors:
Songez vnpeu combien ceux, qui prez de leur test
Voyent tourner du Ciel la slambante charette,
Frayent secondement: d'autant qu'ils n'entrent pas
Qu' a temps and rarement aux amoureux combas:
Et le froid demeurant sous l'Astre de Parrhase
Tousiours victorieux en la campaigne raze,
La chaleur se retranche, and dans le Fort du corpse,
Active, se serrant les rend beaucoup plus sorts.
Les peuples de Septe^trion tousiours en beaucoup plus grand nombre que ceux du
Midi qui sot foibles and ne multiplient pas ainsi.
Aussi de la les Huns, Francs, Herules, Bulgares,
Sueues, Bourguignons, Circassiens, Tartares,
Alains, Cimbres, Teutons, Tigurins, Ostrogots,
Vandales, Tures, Lombards, Normans, and Visigots,
Ont deluge la terre: and comme sauterelles,
Gaste del' Universe les provinces plus belles.
Mais le sterile Su a peine en tout iamais,
Poible, a pen desbander deux osts, qui renommez
Ont fait trembler le Nort: don't l'vn suyuit la rage
Du Borgne, quirendit Reine and serve Cartage:
Et l'autre par Martelpres de Tours martele,
Espuisa de soldats tout le terroir brusle.
How it was possible that Noe and his three sons should increase as they did.
Well may I grant you then (says one perhaps) there is naught
In all this lower world, but will at length be raught
By man's ambition; it makes a breach in hills;
It runs dry by Sea among the raging Scylls;
And in despite of thirst it guides the Carauands
Amids the dry Tolmish, Arabic, Numyd sands.
But yet he lewdly thinks it goes against all sense
That one house, beds but four, should break so large a sense,
As t'ouerbreed the lands of Afric, Europe, Ase,
And make the world appear too narrow for the race.
What ere thou be, 1. Answer.
if light thou reck The Immortals hest,
That once again the bond of sacred marriage blessed,
And said Increase and fill: ^. Answer.
if thou profane deny
That Jacobs little train so thick did multiply
On Pharoh's fruitful ground, that in four hundred year
The seventy living souls five hundred thousand were.
Alas, yet think at least, 3. Answer.
how (for in elder time
The fruits they are ne grew not on so foggy slime
As ours do now, nor was their meats with sawces dight,
Nor altered as yet with health-empairing slight
Of gluttonating Cooks; and for with murdring sword
Of neigh bour enemies they seld were swept aboard;
And for their mighty limbs they dulled not by sloth,
Or want of exercise) they wox in lively groth,
And lived some hundred years, and in their latter days
With siluer-haired heads were able sons to raise.
So that Polygamie, then taken for a right,
This world an ant-hill made of creatures bolt-vpright,
And many peopl' arose in short time (if thou mark)
From out the fruitful raines of some one Patriarch.
Even as a grain of wheat, Two sit comparisons.
if all the increase it yields
Be oftentimes resow'd upon some hearty fields,
Will stuff the barnes at length and color mighty launes
With yellow-stalked ears: and as two fishes spaunes
Cast int' a standing poole, so fast breed up and down,
That aft'r a while they store the larders of a town.
An example of late years.
And have we not of late a certain Elder known,
That with his fruitful seed a village had o're-growne
Of fiuescore houses big; so blessed that he saw
His sons and daughters knit by ord'r of marriage law?
The tree of parentage was ouershort and thin
To branch-out proper names for their degrees of kin.
Another example.
Who knows not that within three hundred years and less,
A few Arabians did Lybie fill and press
With new inhabitants, and taught Mahound in Fesse
In Oran, in Argier, in Tunis, Bugy and Tesse?
Now if they so increased that woon'd in Afferick,
That with an humor sharp, fretting, melancholic,
Prouok'd are day and night, and made more amorous,
Then able to beget, (for deed venerious,
The more enforced, the less it is of force (no doubt)
And inward do they freize that most do boil without)
Imagine how the men, who nearer to the Poule
Behold the flaming wheels of heavenly chariots roll,
Do wax and multiply: because they come but seeld
And at well chosen times, to Cithareas field:
And since cold weather stays about the northen Bear,
Over all that rugged coast triumphing every where,
The lively heat reures into the bodies tower,
The North has swarmed with people, not the South.
And closer-trussed makes their seed of greater power.
And thence the Cimbrians, Gauls, Herules and Bulgares,
The Sweues, Burgundians, Circassians and Tartares,
Huns, Lombards, Tigurines, Alanes, and Estergoths,
Turks, Vandalls, Teutonicks, Normans, and Westergoths,
Have ouerflow'd the lands, and like to Grasshoppers
Destroyed the fairer parts of all this Universe:
Whereas the barren South in all those former days
Has scarce been able enough two martial bands to raise
That could the North affright; one under Haniball;
Who brought the Punick State both unto rule and thrall;
Anoth'r impression made as far as Towers wall,
And there with Abderame was knocked by Charles the Maule.
49 Well may I grant. This is the second objection against that has been said
concerning the Colonies drawn from Noes three sons: to wit, that it is
impossible so few households should in so short time fill so many countries as
are in the world, so thick as now they swarm.

50 Jf little thou regard. The Poet answers at large, and very exactly to the
said objection. First, out of the words of Moses, Genesis 9. And God blessed Noe
and his children, and said unto them: Increase and fill the earth. This answer
is right to the point, and very sufficient to stop the mouths of all curious
questioners, that at least believe the word and power of God. Such is also the
answer following.

51 If thou profane deny. He that believes the holy Scripture knows well that
in the space of four hundred years the family of Jacob, no more than seventy
persons, increased in Egypt unto the number of five hundred thousand, besides
women and children. This is an argument from the less to the greater: if in
one little country a few so much increased, and that in the short space of
400. years; how much more might all the people else in the world increase in
4000. years? But the profane man will not believe the story, he will say it
is impossible. I will make no miracle of it, although the Scripture notes how
the people increased maruellously; and therefore uses a word which signifies
to multiply, or spawne like fishes. But let him cast account, as near as he
can, not of excess, but the ordinary increase that might arise of seventy
persons in the space they were in Egypt, and before he come to two hundred and
fifty of the four hundred, he shall have the number, as Morneus notes in his
book Deveritate, Chap. 26.

52 At least consider how. This the third answer is also of great importance,
especially for Atheists: because it relieth upon natural reason: as namely,
that a purer sood, and better health, with peace, strength, rest, long life,
and Polygamie (which is the use of many wives) made greatly for the increase of
mankind in those former times. Each point of this answer is of great weight,
and may persuade easily all that is written of the matter.

53 Right so a grain of Wheat. For confirmation of the foresaid arguments, he
brings in two fine comparisons, and sit for the purpose. The one drawn from
a corn of Wheat, the other from the spawne of two fishes. Both so much the
better in this case, because they are of common things, and such as we daily
see before our eyes.

54 Have we not in our days. He confirms his reasons further by a notable
example of a certain man, who lived to see a whole town, of no less then 100,
houses, peopled only with persons issued of himself and his: so that there
were no names in law for their degrees of blood: Ludouicus Viues affirms he
saw the man in Spain. There died also lately an honorable Lady in Germany,
who saw of her self and hers borne a hundred and threescore children;
notwithstanding many died unmarried, and those that were married are yet like
to have more.

55 Who knows not that within. Lo another notable example of a few Arabian
families, set down at large by John Lion in his history of Afric, and cited
also by Philip Morney in his 26. chapter de Veritate. And we see (says he)
how the threescore Families, that for the Sect of Califa moved out of Arabia,
in less then three hundred years have peopled all Afric: so as at this day
the countries there are surnamed after them Beni Megher, Beni Guariten, Beni
Fensecar, etc. that is, The sons of Megher, the sons of Guariten, the
sons of Fensecar, etc. as each of them grew-vp to a people. In like sort the
East Indies, that were discovered now a hundred years ago, and straight
ahnost unpeopled, within another hundred will be stored again and repeopled by
the Spaniards.

56 Now if they so increase. A strong conclusion from the Less to the More,
gathered out of the example next aforegoing: thus, If the people of Afric,
that are not very fit to engender, were able in few years to store so huge
countries; how much more might the Northern and Asiaticke people increase? and
if a small number of weaklings; how much rather an infinite sort of lusty and
fruitful men? This is grounded upon natural reason, regarding the climats and
site of each countries, together with daily experience of the matter.
Hipocrates in his book de Acre, aquis and locis, and his enterpreters
discourse at large thereon. It were long to follow their steps, and I have been
too long in this matter already.

57 And thence the Cambrians. For a further proof of the last conclusion, he
alleges, and no man can deny, that the North has always brought forth most
and most warlike people: (and diverse he reckons-vp, of whom we have spoken
heretofore) whereas from the South have hardly ever come above two Armies worth
naming. The one under command of Hanibal, whom the Poet notes by the name of
Borgne, (which is as much to say as Blind, or bad-eyed) because he lost an eye
by ouer-watching himself in the passage of certain great marrish grounds into
Hetruria, Liuie. 22. He it was that enlarged the Empire of Carthage, by means
of the great overthrows he gave the Romans, but was after driven out of
Italic, and in Afric quite vanquished at Zama field, where the Carthaginians
were forced to yield themselves wholly to the Romans mercy, so had their City
razed and their State viterly destroyed. The other Army of the South was of
Sarasens, no less then four hundred thousand strong, led by their King and
Captain Abderame: they set out of Afric into Spain, from thence marched
forward into Aquitaine, and came wasting all the way as far as the City of
Tours; there three hundred thousand of them, with the King himself, were
slain by the French, who had for General the Duke or Prince Charles, that for
this great and happy victory was after surnamed Martel the Maul: because he
broke and battered the force of that Southern people, as a great maul or
hammer does Iron. Look the Histories and Chronicles of France in the life of
Charles Martel.

A l'occasion du propos precedent il enter au beau discourse des merueilles de
Dieu en la diueise temperature and complexion des peuples.
Que tu es, o Nature, en merueilles feconde!
On ne void seulement en chaque part du monde
Les hommes differens en stature, en humeurs,
En force, en poil, en teint, aincois mesmes en moeurs:
Ou soit que la coustume en nature se change:
Qu' a l'exemple des vieux la ieunesse se range:
Que le droict positif change diuersement
En Royaumes diverse: que le temperament
Qu'ici bas nous humons des tousiours-viues flammes,
Semble comme imprimer ses effects en nos ames*
Differences des hommes Septentrionaux and Meridionaux.
L'homme du Nort est beau, celui du Midi laid:
L'vn blanc, l'autre tanne: l'vn fort, l'autre foiblet:
L'vn a le poil menu, l'autre gros, frize, rude:
L'vn aim le labeur, l'autre cherit l'estude.
L'vn est chaut and humide, and l'autre sec and chaut:
L'vn gay, l'autre chagrin. L'vn entonne bien haut,
L'autre a gresle la voix. L'vn est bon and facile,
L'autre double and malin. L'vn lourd, and l'autre habile.
L'vn d'vn esprit ledger change souuent d'auis,
Et l'autre ne demord iamais ce qu'il a pris.
L'vn trinque nuict and iour, l'autre aim l'abstinence:
L'vn prodigue le sien, l'autre est chiche en despence.
L'vn se rend sociable, and l'autre chaque fois
Ainsi qu'vn Lougarou se perd dedans les bois:
L'vn s'habille de cuir, l'autre de rich estofe:
L'vn est ne Martial, and l'autre Philosofe.
Naturel des peuples enter le Septentrion and Midi.
Mais celui du milieu a part aux qualitez.
Du peuple qui se tient aux deux extremitez,
Ayant le corpse plus fort, mais non l'ame si viue,
Que celui qui du Nil seem la grass riue:
Moins robuste au contraire, and mill fois plus sin
Que les hommes logez de la l'Istre, and le Rhin.
Le peuple de Midi represente la vie contemplative.
Car dans le clos sacre de la cite du Monde
Le peuple de Midi, qui, curieux, se fond
En ectases profonds, songs, rauissemens:
Qui mesure du ciel les reglez mouuemens,
Et qui contemplatif ne peut son ame paistre
D'vn vulgaire scauoir, tient la place du Prestre.
Celui du Septentrion la vie active and manuelle.
Cil du Nort, don't l'esprit s'enfuit au bout des doigts,
Qui fait tout ce qu'il veut du metal and du bois,
Et qui peut, Salmonee, imiter le tonnerre,
Y tient rang d'artisan, and rang d'homme de guerre.
Celui d'entredeuxla vic politic.
Le tiers, comme sachant bien regler un Estat,
Tient grauement accort le lieu du Magistrate:
Et bref l'vn studieux admire la science,
L'autre a les Arts en main, and l'autre la prudence.
Restriction de la reigle precedente.
Bien est vray que, depuis quelques lustres Pallas,
Phoebus, Themis, Mercure, and les Muses n'ont pas
Dress moins leur eschole en la province Arctique,
Que Bellone sa lice, and Vulcan sa boutique.
Diuersitez no tables enter les peoples de l'Europe, specialement le Francois,
l'Alemain, l'Italien, and l'Espagnol.
Mesme ne void-on pas enter nous qui viuons
Quasi pesle-meslez, and qui pauures n'auons
Pour partage a peu pres qu'vne motte de terre,
Ceste variete? L'Alemand est in guerre
Courageux, mais venal: l'Hespaignol lent, and fin:
Le nostre impatient, and cruel le Latin.
L' Alemand en conseil est froid, le Romain sage,
L'Hespaignol cauteleux, and le Fancois volage.
L'Hespaignol mange peu, le Romain nottement:
Le Francois vit en Prince, en pour ceau'l Alemant,
Le nostre est doux en mots, l'Hispaignol fire and brave,
L'Alemand rude and simple, and l'Italien grave:
L'Ibare en habio propro, impropre le Germain,
Inconstant le Prancois, superbe le Romain.
Nous brauons l'ennemi, le Romain le caresse:
L'Hespagnol onc ne l'aime, and l'Alemand le bless.
Nous chantons, le Tuscan semble apeu presbeller,
Pleurer le Castalian, le Tudesque hurler.
Le nostre march viste, en sier Coq le Tudesque:
L' Ib^re en basteleur, en boeuf le Romanesque.
Nostre ameureux est gay, le Romain enuieux,
Suberbel' Alemand, l'Hespaignol surieux.
P^u^quoy Dieu a voulu que les infans de Noe f^sse^^ ^^pais par ^out le monde.
Toutes sois l'Immortel v^ulut que nostre race
De ce vaste Universe cou^rist toute la face:
Asin que retirant ses enfans des pechez,
Don't leurs pays nataux semblent estre entachez,
Il nous monstrast sa grace: and que du ciel les slammes
Peuu^nt bien incliner, mais non forcer nos ames.
Qu'es lieux plus reculez ses seruiteurs deuets
Lui peussent presenter sacrifice de los:
Et que son Nom s'onist de la froide Scythie
Iusqu' aux tristes deserts de l'Asrique rostie:
Que les tresors produits par les champs estrangers
Ne fussent comme vams parsaute d'vsagers:
Ains que les regions de Thetis separees,
En semble trasiquant, troquassent leurs deurees.
Le monde compare a vne grand ville, ou les vns troquent auec les auti^es.
Car comme dans les murs d'vne grande cite
Le Palais est ici, la l'Vniuer site,
Deca sont les Marchans, dela les Mechaniques:
Ce quartier de souliers a plcines ses boutiques,
Cest autre de chalits, cest autre de chapeaux:
Cest autre de pour points, and cest autre de peaux:
Vne rue fournit le drap, l'autre la soye,
L'autre l'orfeurerie, and l'autre la monnoye:
Cen'est qu'vn contr'eschange, and tout ce que chaeun
A de propre, se fait par l'vsage comman.
Ainsi le pays se fournissent les vns les autres de ce qu'ils ont: le tout pour
la commodue, and pour l'entretenement de la grande Cite qui est le monde.
Ainsi le Sucre doux nous vient de Canarie,
D'Inde l'yuoire blanc, l'Amome d'Assyrie.
L' Antractique Perunous fait part de son Or,
Damas de son Albastre, and l'Arabie encor
De son Encens fumeux. La trasiqueuse Hespaigne
Nous pauruoit de Sasran, de cheuaux l'Alomagne.
L' ardent Chus nous produit l'Ebore rougissant,
Et le Baltique flot son Ambre pallissant.
Le terroir Russlen ses Martres nous e^uoye^
Albion son Estain, l'Italie sa Soye.
Bref chaque terre apporte un tribut tout diverse
Es c^ffres du thresor de ce grand Universe.
L'homme est Seigneur du monde, qui contribue tous ses biens pour la commodite
de la vic.
Et comme encor iadis la compaigne du Prince
Des Persans belliqueux nommoit vne province
Sa rob, ou son mateau, l'autre ses brasselets,
Et l'autre ses patins, and l'autre ses collets:
L'homme le peut de mesme. He, quel mont si sauuage,
Quel si vague desert, quelle si triste plage,
Quel slot si naufrageux, quel si sterile board
Peut on imaginer du Mady iusqu'au Nord,
Qui ne lui face rent: and, despouille d'enuie,
N'aille emtribuant au bon-heur de sa vie?
Declaration speciale de ce que dessus.
Les vallons esmaillez, que maint ruisseau bruyan^
Fend du course reply de son verrcondoyant,
Nous seruent de tardins: and leur herb fanee
Met en oeuure nos faulx deux ou trois fois l'annee.
Ceres regne en la pl^^^c, Ce que les Atheisies estiment auoir este cree en
vain and ne seruir comme de rien, est bien souuent ce qui nous aid le plus:
tesmoms les mont^gnes les deserts and la Mer.
and Bacchus es cout auts,
Ces esch^llons du Ciel, ces monts asprement hauts,
Magazins de l'orage, and forges du tonnerrs,
Que tu nommes a tort la honte de la terre,
Et crois que l'Eternel (o profane sureur!)
Les forma par malice, ou le sort par erreur;
De confins eternels limitent les Empires:
Produisent des forests, don't tu fais des nauires:
Bastis, ingenieux, ta superbe maison,
Et te defens du froid de la grise saison:
Vomissent nuict and iour des prosondes riuieres,
Qui les peuples voisins nourrissent voicturieres:
Engraissent les guerets de leurs fertils brouillars:
Font tourner les moulins: sont au lieu de rempars
Pour arrester le course d'vne bouillante guerre,
Et ioignent a la mer le milieu de la terre.
Ces lands and deserts, qui to effrayent si fort,
Sont autant de pasquis, don't chaque heure te sort
Le bestail a miliers pour labourer les plains,
Et te fournir de peaux, and de chair, and de laines.
Et mesme ceste mer, qui ne semble seruir
Qu' a noyer l'Vniuers, and bruyante couurir
Tant de larges pays, ou pour ses perses ondes
Des orget on verroit flotter les moissons blondes,
Est un grand reseruoir, qui sous ses vagues eaux
Nonrrit, pour te nourrir, innombrables troupeaux:
Viuandiere pouruoit un million de villes
Qui criroyent a la faim, and languiroyent debiles
Sans elle, tout ainsi qu'vn Dauphin, qui mi-mort
A sec l'ondant reslus a laisse sur le board:
Augmente le trafiq, acourcit les voyages:
Exhale nuict and iour les flo-flottans ni^^ges
Quira fraichissent l'air, and se fondant en eau
Font croistre aveue d'oeil le fromentier tuyau.
Le Poet se retire de ceste ample description comme d'v ne vaste mer pour se
render au port de France.
Mais seray-ie tousiours le iouet de Borec?
L'obiet de la fureur du tempesteux Neree?
Verray ie point iamais mon Ithaque fumer?
Maschalupe fait cau: ie ne puis plus ramer.
C'est fait, c'est fait de moy, si quelque humain riuage
Ne recoit promptement les ais de mon naufrage.
Ha, France, ie te voy: tume tends ia le bras:
Tu m'ouures ton giron, and, mere, ne veux pas
Qu'en estrange pays, vagabond, ie vicillisse.
Tu ne veux qu'vn Brasil de mes os s'orgueillisse,
Un Catay de ma gloire, un Peru de mes verse:
Tu veux estre ma tomb aussi bien que mon bers.
L'ouanges de la France, pays and royaume exellent par dessus tous au ^es, qui
a produit les guerriers, les artisans, les doctes.
O mill and mill fois terre heureuse and feconde!
O perle de l'Europe! o Paradis du Monde!
France, ie te salve, o mere des guerriers,
Qui iadis ont plant leurs triomphans lauriers
Sur les riues d'Euphrate and sanglante leur glaiue
Ou la torche du iour and se couche and se leave:
Mere de tant d'ouuriers, qui d'vn hardi bon-heur
Taschent comme obscurcir de Nature l'honneur:
Mere de tant d'esprits, qui de scauoir espuisent
Egypt, Greece, Rome: and sur les doctes luisent
Comme un iaune esclattant sur les palles couleurs
Sur les astres Phoebus, and sa fieur sur les fleurs.
Tes sleuues sont de mers, Ses grandes commoditez.
des provinces tes villes,
Orgueilleuses en murs, non moins qu'en moeurs ciuiles.
Ton terroir est fertile, and temperez tes airs.
Tu as pour bastious and deux monts, and deux mers.
Le Crocodile sier tes riuages n'infeste,
Exemple des dangers qui ruinent plusieurs autres pays.
Des piolez Serpens la race porte-peste
Sur le verd de tes fleurs a rompu-dos-rempant,
N'aune de sa longueur la longueur d'vn arpent.
Le Tigre aux pieds volans ne fait ses brigandages
Dans tes monts cauerneux, le Lion ses carnages
Dans tes bruslants deserts: and le Cheual de l'eau
Ne train tes enfans sous un vagueux tombeau.
Ses rich esses estriuent de la preference contre les thresors and biens des
autres pays.
Que si le rich flot de tes fleuues ne roll
L'or auecses caillous: si de tes monts ne coule
Un Argent espure: si nous n'y trouuons pas
Le Grenat, le Ruby, la Perle a chaque pas:
Tes toiles, tou Pastel, tes Laines tes Salines,
Ton froment, and ton Vin, sont d'assez riches mines
Pour te fair nommer Reine de l'Vniuers.
La seule paix te manque. Elle a rout, sors la paix, que le Poet demand a
celui qui la peut donner.
O Dieu qui tiens ouuers
Tousiours les yeux sur nous, de l'eau de ta Clemenco
Amortile brasier qui consume la France.
Balaye nostre ciel: remets o Pere doux,
Remets dans ton carquois les traicts de ton courroux.
A fine discourse upon the wonderful wisdom of God that appears in the
diners temper and complexion of people.
O world of sundry kinds! O Nature full of wonders!
For every part thereof, as from the rest it sunders,
It has not only men of diverse hair and hew,
Of stature, humor, force; but of behavior new:
Be It that some custom held at length a nature makes,
Or that the younger sort still after the elder takes,
Or that the proper laws of diuers-coasted Realms
Do greatly disagree, or these enflowing beams
Of h'umour-alering lights, that whirling never stint,
Here in our minds below their heavenly force imprint.
The Northen man is fair, the Southern fauor'd hard;
One strong, another weak; one white, another sward;
This has hair fine and smooth, that other gross and twinde;
He loves the bodies pain, and he the toil of mind;
Some men are hot and moist, some other hot and dry;
Some merry, and other sad; one thunders out on hie,
Another speaks low; one dudgen is and spightfull,
Another gentl' and plain; one slow, another slightfull.
Some are unconstant so, they often change their thought;
And others never let go conceits they once have caught.
He tipples day and night, and he loves abstinence;
A penyfath'r is one, and one spares no expense.
One is for company, another has his moods,
And like a Buggle-bo straies eu'r amids the woods:
One goes in leathern pelch, another richly dight;
On's a Philosopher, another borne to fight.
The middle man takes part of all the qualities
Of people dwelling near the two extremities;
In body strong'r is made, but not of mind so frank,
As they who till the gleabes of Nyle his fruitful bank.
Again, he is not so strong, but many ways more fine
Then they that dwell betwixt the Donaw and the Rhine.
For in the wide precinct of th'vniuersall Town
The Southern men that often with ouer-musing sown,
That fall int' ecstasies, that use to dream and prove,
That measure how the heavens by rules appointed move,
And are so curious none other knowledge base
May satisfy their minds; they hold the Priest his place.
The Northen whose conceit in hand and finger lurkes,
That all, what ere he list, in wood and metal works,
And like Salmoneus with thunder-sound compares,
He Is for the man of war, and makes all cunning wares.
The mean, as knowing well to govern an Estate,
Sits with a grauer grace in throne of Magistrate:
And, to be short, the first seeks knowledge wondrously,
The second handie-crafts, the third good policy:
Though fourscore years ago Themis that mends abuses,
Apollo, Mercury, Minerua with her Muses,
Have taught their holy schools as near the Northen coast,
As Vnlcan ever forged, or Mars encamped his host.
How the French, Dutch, Jtalian, and Spanish nations differ in many points.
Now even among our selves that altogether mell,
And have of all the world no more whereon to dwell
Then as it were a clot, how diverse are the fashions?
How great variety? the Dutch of all our Nations
Most stout, is hired to war; the Spaniard soft and neat;
The Italian merciless; the Frenchman soon on heat.
The Dutch in counsel cold, The Italian all things weeting,
The Spaniard full of guile, the Frenchman euer-sleeting.
The Italian finely feeds, the Spaniard does but minse,
The Dutch feeds like a swine, the Frenchman like a Prince.
The Frenchman gently speaks, the Spaniard fierce and brave,
The German plain and gross, the Roman fine and grave.
The Duch attire is strange, the Spanish is their own,
The Italian sumptuous, and owers never known.
We brave an enemy, The Italian friendly looks him,
The Duchman strikes him straight: the Spaniard never brooks him.
We sing a cheerful note, the Tuscan like a sheep;
The German seems to howl, the Lusitan to weep.
The French march thick and short, the Duch like battel-cocks,
The Spaniards Fencer like, the Romans like an Ox.
The Duch in love is proud, The Italian envious,
The Frenchman full of mirch, the Spaniard furious.
Why it pleas^d God the world sho^^d be inhabited of so diverse natured people.
Yet would The Immortal power appoint so strange a race
Of this great earthie bowl to cover all the face:
To the end he clensing all his children from the foil
Of sin, which had as 'twere bestain'd their native foil,
His mercy might unfold, and show how heaun'ly signs
A little only move, but not o'resway our minds.
That even in further parts his servants every chone
A sacrifice of praise might offer to his throne:
And that his holy name from Isye Scythia
Might sound unto the sands of red-hot Africa:
Nor should his treasures hid in far-asunder lands
Created seem in vain, and never come to hands.
But that all country-coasts where Thetis enter-lyes
The world compared to a great City.
Might traffic one with oth'r and change commodities.
For as a City large contains within her wall
Here th'Vniuersitie and there the Princes Hall;
Here men of handie-crafts, there Merchant-venterers;
This lane all full of ware and shops of shoomakers,
That other changing coin, that other working gold,
Here silk, there cloth; here hats, there leather to be sold;
Here furniture for beds, there doublets ready made;
And each among themselves have use of others trade:
So from the Canar Isles the pleasant sugar comes,
And from Chaldea spice, and from Arabia gums,
That stand us much in stead both for perfume and plaster,
And Peru sends us gold and Damask Alabaster;
Our Saffron comes from Spain, our Ivory from Inde,
And out of Germany our horse of largest kind;
The scorched land of Chus brings Heben for our chamber,
The Northren Baltike Sound imparts her bleakish Amber,
The frostie coasts of Russe her Ermyns white as milk,
And Albion her Tynne, and Italy her silk.
Thus every country pays her diverse tribute-rate
Unto the treasury of th'vniuersall state.
Man Lord of the world.
And as the Persian Queen this province called her chains,
And that her stomachers; her plate this, that her trains;
So man may say; for lo, what desert so vntrad,
What hill so wild and wafte? what Region so bad?
Or what so wrackfull sea? or what so barren shore
From North to South appears, but pays him evermore
Some kind of yearly rent, and grudging not his glory
Unto his happy life becomes contributory?
A particular declaration of the great use of some vnl^kely creatures against
the A^heist, who says they are to little use, or made by chance.
These moors enamelled where many purling brooks
Enchase their winding ways with glassie-wauing crooks,
They stand for garden plots; their herbage, ere it sades,
Twice yearly sets on work our swapping two-hand blades.
The plain field Ceres holds, the stony Bacchus fills;
These ladders of the sky, the rough-aspiring hills,
The storehouses of storms, and forging-shops of thunders,
(Which thou untruly call'st th'erths faults and shamfull wonders,
And think the living God (to say it I am aserd)
Created them of spite, or in creating erred)
They bound the kingdoms out with euer-standing marks,
And for our shipping bear of timber goodly parks:
The same afford thee stuff to build thy sumptuous Hold;
The same in wintertime defend thee from the cold:
They pow'r-out day and night the deep-enchaneld rivers,
Which breed and bear on them to feed the neighbour-liuers:
They often manure the lands with fruitful clouds and showers,
They help the mylls to turn, and stand in stead of towers
And bulwarks to keepe-off Bellona's dreely stound,
They mortar to the sea the mid-point of the ground.
The wasternesse of land, that men so much amazeth,
Is like a common field where store of cattle grazeth,
And whence by thousand heads they come our tylth t'enrood,
To furnish us with furre, with leather, wool and food.
The Sea it self, that seems for nothing else to sarue
But even to drown the world (although it never swerve)
That roaring ouer-heales so many a mighty land,
Where, in the waters stead, much wauing corn might stand;
A mighty Stew it is, or vnd'r a watery plame
Flocks numberless it feeds, to feed mankind again.
For of the Cates thereof are thousand Cities saru'd,
Which could not otherwise but languish hunger-staru'd,
As does a Dolphin whom upon the shore halfe-dead
The tide untrusty left, when back again it fled:
It shorter makes the ways, increases merchandise,
And causes day and night the reaking mysts arise,
That still refresh our air, and down in water flowing,
Set, even before our eyes, the graynie pipe a growing.
The Poet as after a long voyage landeth in France.
But shall I still be tossed with Boreas boisterous puffs?
Still subject to the rage of Nere's counterbuffs?
And shall I never see my country-chimnies reake?
Alas, I row no more, my boat begins to leake:
I am undone, I am, except some gentle bank
Receive, and that with speed, this wrack-reserued planke.
O France, I ken thy shore; thou reachest me thine arm;
Thou op'nest wide thy lap to shend thy son from harm:
Nor wilt I end my days from home so many a mile,
Nor over my bones triumph the Caniball Bresile,
Nor Catay over my fame, nor Peru over my verse;
As thou my cradle were, so will thou be mine hearse.
The praise of France.
O thousand thousand times most happy land of price,
O Europes only pearl, and earthly paradise!
All-haile renowned France: from thee sprung many a knight,
Which has in former time his flag of triumph pight
Upon Euphrates banks, and blood with Bylbo^ shed
Both at the suns vprist, and where he goes to bed.
Thou breedest many men which happy and boldly dare
In works of handy-trade with Nature self compare:
And many wits that seek out all the skill divine
From Egypt, Greece and Rome, and over the learned shine
As over the paler hewes do glister golden yellowes,
The Sun above the star's, thy flower above the fellows.
Thy rivers are like Seas; thy Cities provinces,
In building full of state, and gentle in vsages;
Thine air is temperate, thy soil yields good increase,
Thou have for thy defense two mountains and two seas:
The Egyptian Crocodile disquiets not thy banks,
The Infectious kind of Snakes with poyson-spotted flanks
Ne crawle not burst-in-plights upon thy flowrie plains,
Nor mete an ak'r of ground by length of dragling trains:
No Hircan Tigers flight boot-hailes thy vaulted hills,
Nor on thy scorched wastes The Arcadian Lion kills
Thy wandering habitants; nor Cayrick water-horses
Drag vnd'r uncertain toombe thy childers tender corses;
And though like Indie streams, thy fairest rivers drive not
Among their pebbles gold, although thy mountains riue not
With veins of silver Ore, nor yet among they greet
Carbuncles, Granats, Pearls, lie scattred at our feet;
Thy cloth, thy wool, thy woad, thy salt, thy corn, thy wines,
(More necessary fruits) are all sufficient mines,
T'entitle thee the queen of all this earthie scope:
Thy want is only peace. Peace, the only want of France, prayed-for in
conclusion.
O God that hold open
Always thine eyes on us, we humbly thee desire
Quench with thy mercy-drops the France-deuouring fire:
O calm our stormous air; Dear Fath'r us all deliver,
And put thine angers shafts again into thy quiver.
58 O world of sundry kinds! Without this discourse, all that went before
concerning the worlds enpeopling, were to lit'le purpose or none at all, save
only to breed many doubts in the Readers understanding. For a man may ask, How
falls it out that the Nations of the world, coming all of one father, Noe, do
vary so much one from another, both in body and mind? The Poet therefore
making this objection, most worthy to be considered, gives also answer
thereunto: first, in general, by way of exclamation and marvel, then in
particular manner, setting down some special reasons of this wonderful
diversity, that appears in the stature, complexion, strength, color, and
custom of people wheresoever dispersed over the face of the earth. The first
and principal cause is Nature it self, that is, the wise providence of God,
marvelous in all his works. If God had made the earth in all places alike,
all flowers of one color and savor, all beasts, fowls, fishes and creeping
things, of one kind; had he made the heaven without stars, or the stars
all of one bigness, and men all of the same hew, beauty, feature, strength and
disposition, as well of body as mind: the diverse colors of his infinite
wisdom had not so shined in them. But as he is above all (yea only) wise,
good and beautiful, so would he in his works keep a certain resemblance of
his own perfection, provoking us thereby daily to advance and raise our
thoughts unto the high consideration, perfect love and due reverence of
himself. Now if we consider all his works, the light of his wonderful glory
no where appears more, then in the diligent view of Man, who is very fitly
called of the Greeks (...), the little world. For in this little table has he
lymbed-out in orient colors, for all that will behold, the wonders of his
unsearchable wisdom: and they are here some of them by the Poet well
pointed-out. And a wonderful thing indeed it is, that among so many men as
have been since the beginning, are, or shall be to the worlds end, there never
was, nor is, nor can be any one, but differing much from all the rest, both in
body and mind, and in many things else that ensue thereon. This I am content
to note, but in a word, leaving all the particulars of this miracle for the
Reader privately to consider; that he may wonder the more thereat, and praise
there-according the almighty Creator, the Sovereign Good: neither will I now
take in hand to dispute against those that in searching the causes of this
diversity, ascribe all to Fortune or Nature, as they call it (meaning a secret
property and power of the creatures) or to the stars and other heavenly
bodies; to man's laws, custom or nourishment, in stead of God: who is indeed
the first and only working cause of all things; in whom we live, move and are.
This matter would require a long discourse; and though the Poet here, beside
the chief and only tine cause, reckons certain vnder-causes; as custom
growing to Nature, the example of Elders, provincial Laws, and the influence
of Stars; it is not his meaning to take from the Lord of Nature this honor due
unto him for the diversity of his wonderful works: but only to lay open unto
us a few such instruments as his incomprehensible wisdom uses, to make us the
better conceive the manner of his heavenly working. The Philosophers,
Astronomers, Physicians and Politics, discourse at large upon these
differences: he that would see them well handled, let him read the fifth
chapter of Bodines Method, entitled de recto historiarum indicio, and the
first chapter of his fifth book de Republica, which is the sum of all that he
writes thereof in his Method. Peucer also in the 13. and 14. books of his
discourse upon the principal sorts of diuinations: and Hippocrates in his
book de Aere, aquis and locis: but especially Bodin, may ferue to expound our
Poet; who in very few lines has penned matter of so long discourse.

59 The Northen man. He enters consideration of many points, wherein the North
and Southern people differ Bodin in the places afore-quoted shows the causes
thereof, according to Philosophy and Physic: because his books are common,
specially his Politics, I will not here set down what he says, nor examine
his opinions, but leave that wholly to the diligent Reader. Concerning that the
Poer notes, the best Histories auerre the same: and namely for the Southern
people, Johannes Leo, and Franciscus Aluares; for the Northen, Olaus Magnus,
the Baron of Herbestan in his Muscouie, Buchanan in the history of Scotland,
and diverse others.

60 The Middle Man. Bodm in the fifth book of his Politickes, the first
chapter, divides all people dwelling on this side the Equator into 3. kinds,
to wit, the hot and Southern people from the Equator 30. degrees upward; the
Mean and temperate in the next 30. and the Extreme cold and Northen people,
from the 60. degree to the Pole. And so of the nations and countries beyond the
Equator. The reason hereof he sets down in his Method, chap. 5.

61 For in the sacred close. The Poet goes on according to the said division:
and in few words implies all that discourse of Bodin: who says among other
matters there, that the people dwelling in the middle Regions have more
strength and less wit then the Southern; better parts of mind, and less
bodily force then the Northen: and are moreover the fittest for government of
Commonwealths, and iustest in their actions. And if a man do mark well the
histories of the world, he shall find that the greatest and most valiant
Armies came ever out of the North: the deepest and subtilest knowledge of
Philosophy, Mathematickes, and all other contemplative Arts, from the South:
and the best government, the best laws, Lawyers and Orators from the Middle
countries; and that the greatest Empires were founded and established there,
etc. What reason there is for this, he shows also in his fifth chap. of his
Meth. Look more thereof in L. Regius, de vicissitudine and varietate rerum.
For my part, I am of opinion that Almighty God as he has knit and bound
together the Elements, and Creatures made of them, with a marvelous compass,
in number, weight and measure, best for continuance of the whole work, and
mutual agreement of the parts; so he has also placed the chief subtlety
and liuely-hood of spirit farthest from the greatest bodily force, either in
beast or man; for the better maintenance of humane society in a just
counterpoys, and gave the middle kind of people a nature of either tempered,
though if a man enter into particular discourse, he may easily find the
northern, southern and middle Nature in every Nation. What say I, every
Nation? nay I dare say in every one of us, so fitly is Man called a little
world. But the southern men, for the most part having so quick and lively
parts of mind in a body less charged with flesh, they represent the
contemplative and studious kind of life: the northern that have their wit in
their fingers ends, that is, that are so cunning craftesmen, inuenters of
warlike engines, artillery, and all sorts of needful instruments, they may
well be likened unto the active and trading life: and the middle sort unto the
civil government and politic life; which is a mean betwixt the other two.
Yet this the Poet well restrains, saying, that the northern people also in
these latter days have been renowned for the Tongues, the Laws, the
Mathematics, Poesy, Oratorie, and all good learning; as well as in times
past, they were, and are still, for warlike valor and cunning handworks. Not
without cause; for in England, Scotland, Polonie, Denmark, and other such
countries, are and have been diverse very learned men flourishing: and Germany
especially, which is (as it were) Vuleans forge, and the Camp of Mars, has
brought forth many men excelent well seen in all kind of learning it were
needless to name them, they are so well known.

62 But even among our selves. The more to magnify the vnsoundable wisdom of
God, appearing in the creation of so diuers-disposed people, he notes out many
points of great difference even among those Nations that live near together,
and are severed only by certain hills, rivers, and forests: as the French,
Dutch, Jtalian, and Spanish. He paints them out all in their kind, for such
properties as are daily seen in them, and may be easily gathered out of their
own Histories: for there are not the like-differing neighbour-nations in all
Europe, no not in the world. Let me consider, and all my Contrymen with me,
what he says of the French: the other three may do the like by themselves if
they list. The French (he says) is in War impatient, in Counsel wavering,
in Diet sumptuous, gentle in Speech, diverse in Apparel, out-facing his Enemy,
a sweet Singer, a swift Paser, a merty Lover. If any man can draw a righter
counterfeit of our Nation, let him take the pensill.

63 Yet would the immortal God. He shows for what cause it pleased God the
earth should be inhabited by men of so diverse natures: As first, to the end he
might show forth his mercy and loving kindness in raising his chosen out of
the sincks of sin, wherewith each of their birth soiles were bestained.
Secondly, That it might appear how neither the soiles, nor yet the heavenly
Signs (though they have great power over earthly bodies) can force the minds
of men, especially such as God himself has blessed. Thirdly, That there might
be some in all places of the world to acknowledge his manifold goodness, and
glorify his Name. And fourthly, that whatsoever needful things the earth any
where, by his gartious blessing, brings forth proper and severally, they
might be enterchanged and carried from place to place for the use of man.

64 For as a City. The last consideration gives the Author occasion to compare
the world unto a great City, such as Paris, Roan, Tolouse, Lions, or any other
like, where there are merchants and craftesmen for all kind of wares, each in
their several wards, buying, selling, changing and trading one with another.
And even so one Country affords Sugar, another Spice, another Gummes; and
Gold, Alabaster, Iuory, Heben-wood. Horses, Amber, Furs, Tynne and Silk,
they are brought from diverse coasts, all the more to furnish with things
necessary this great City of the world. Whereby we may note that no Country
(be it never so well appointed) can say that it needs not the commodities of
another. And again, that there is no Land so barren, but has some good thing
or other which the rest want. For even in men we see the like; there is none so
poor but has some special gift: none so rich, but has need of the poorest.
Our Poet therefore having so fitly resembled the world by a great City, he
brings-in thereupon a sine example of the Persian Queen, who (as Herodotus,
Xenophon and Plutarch report) called one Province her lewell-house, another her
Wardrope, etc. for even so may every man say, that has the true knowledge and
fear of God; such a man may say, Peru brings forth Gold for me: the Moluckes
or Chaldea, Spice: Damask, Alabaster: and Italy, Silk: Germany sends me great
Horses: Moscouie, rich Furs: Arabia, sweet Parfumes: Spain, Saffron: Prusse,
Amber: England, Cloth and Tin: France, Corn and Wine. Yea more the child of
God may say; the Earth, the Sea, the Air and all that is therein; the Sun,
the Moon, the Heavens, are mine: for he that needs nothing, made all things
of nothing to serve me, and me to worship him. But of this let the Divines
discourse more at large. I will go on with the Poet: who says further,
against the carping Atheist, that nothing was created in vain, but even the
most unlikely places bring forth many good fruits, and very necessary for the
life of Man. And he proves it plainly by some notable particulars that follow.

65 The Moors enameled. First, The Fenny Valleys, though too moist they are
and ouer-low for men to build and dwell upon, yet are they so beset with diverse
harbes and flowers, so lagged, guarded, and enter-trailed with rivers, that they
are, as it were, the common gardens of the world: as also the plain fields are
our seed-plots, and the stony grounds our Vineyards. Secondly, The huge
Mountains, about whose tops are engendered thunders, lightnings and tempests:
for which cause the Atheists count them hurtful, or at least superfluous, or
made by chance and error: they are in truth clean contrary (as Th^odoret has
long ago showed in his Sermons of Gods Providence) ^uen the sure standing
Bounds and Land-markes of every Kingdom and Country: they bear great store
of timber trees for ships and houses, and fuel to burn: from them spring the
great riners, that breed much fish, and help the conueyance of provision and
other merchandise unto many people dwelling farre-off: by them are stayed and
gathered the clouds and thick mists, that manure and fatten the lower
grounds: the Wind-milles are much helped by them, as if they were the the store
houses of wind: like rampires and bulwarks they keepe-of the sudden force of
warlike neighbors: and to conclude, they are (as it were) the very mortar that
ioynes Land and Sea together. Thirdly, The great Deserts and wast-grounds, that
are for men (by reason of some wants) searse habitable, yet like huge Commons
they feed an infinite sort of beasts great and small, whereof we have good use
and commodity. Fourthly, The Sea, it breeds fish, maintains many Cities,
increases Traffic, and makes the ways for travel easier, and shorter: And
lastly, thereout the Sun draws vapors, which after, turned into rain, do
refresh the Air, and make the ground fruitful. The like good uses may be
found in all other the Creatures of God, how unlikely foeuer they seem to
wicked Atheists. Look more in S. Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose and others, who
write of the Creation, and at large have declared what excellent commodities
man may reap of every creature.

66 But shall I still be tossed. Fitly and in very good time the Poet, having
ouerslipt nothing worthy note in this discourse of Colonies, now strikes sail,
and after his long voyage through all Climates of the world, ariues happily at
the haven he most desired, to weet, in France: and well he takes occasion to
reckon-vp the great commodities of his country, as commending the same above
all the Kingdoms of the world. After he has saluted the land with diverse
honorable terms and titles, he says very truly, that it has brought-forth
many worthy warriors, cunning workmen, and learned Scholars: more is the
marvel, because it is but a small kingdom in comparison of Polonia, Persia,
Tartaria, China and others. But indeed the commodities thereof are most
wonderful. Besides the seas that bound it, as on the North and West the Ocean,
and the Midland on the South, it has many rivers of great name, and even
little seas: as the Rosne, Saone, Dordogne, Loire, Marne, Seine, Oise: and yet
a great number of other lesser streams and brooks. Cities it has, as Paris,
Tolouse, Ro^^m, Lion, Bourdeaux, and others of more value then diverse whole
Dutchies, Earldomes, or Provinces elsewhere. There are Forts and Castles now
stronger and goodlier than ever were. As for the civil behavior of the
people, I report me to the judgment of other nations. The Land for the most
part is very fruitful, and the air there temperate almost every where.
Against the sudden invasion of enemies, all is well defended by the two Seas
aforesaid, and the Alps toward Italy, and the Pyrenes toward Spain. More than
all this, the country is no where troubled with Crocodiles as Egypt is, nor
with monstrous long Serpents, or any wild ravening beasts, as the inner
countries of Affricke are. And in stead of Gold and Silver, Pearls and
precious stones, which diverse Lands barren of necessary fruits abound with, it
has of Cloth, Woade, Wood, Salt Corn and Wine, euer-growing Mines, and even
vnwastable: Woade and Salt in Languedoc; and Salt again in Guyenne; Wine in
most places; Wool and Corn in Prouence and Beausse; and in every Province,
but four or five, good store of diverse the said commodities. More there are,
but the Poet notes the chief only, and such as the neighbor countries and
many farre-off do most of all trade-for. Hereby we are taught, and should be
moved with hearty thanks to acknowledge the great benefits that God has
bestowed on us: for the Poet rightly concludes that we lack nothing but peace,
and peace he craves of the Lord: with whom, and all my good countrymen, I
join humble suit from the bottom of my heart, that once again this Realm
(sometime so flourishing) may enjoy a sure, that is, a just and right Christian
peace. Amen.

LES COLOMNES. The Pillars, or fourth Book of Noe.
ETernel, Il inuoque Dieu, estant question d'entrer en la deduction d'vne
matiere nouuelle, haute, and tresdiffici le a comprendre asauoir des
Mathematiques.
si iamais le plus pur de mon ame
Put espris de l'ardeur d'vne celeste flamme,
Et si de ton esprit mon esprit inspire
T'offrit onques un verse de la France honor,
O Pere de lumiere, o source de doctrine,
Il est temps, ou iamais, que ta fureur divine
Quint'essance mon ame, and qu'vn sacre souci
Meutrier de tous soucis, m'emporte loin d'ici.
Il est temps qu'espure des passions humaines,
Par les brillans climats du Cieltu me promeines:
Que bien-heureux i'accolle Vranie and ses soeurs:
Que i'enyure mes sens des charmeuses douceurs
Des Syrenes du Pole: and qu'en paix ie contemple
Le lambris estoille d'vn si superbe temple:
A sin que tout ainsi que nos premiers ayeux
Receurent de ta main les loix du course des cieux,
Tu me dictes un verse, qui grand and beau responde
Il introduit Phalec, qui ayant trouue.
Aux grandeurs and beautez des plus clairs feux du Monde.
Apres que des humains l'ambitieux discord
Eut ce bas Universe part age comme au sort,
Phalec, le fills, d'Heber, passant chemin rencontre
Un Pilier, qui, brauache, en la plain se monstre
Tell qu'vn Roc, qui veincueur du flot-flot importun
Semble, assis au milicu, fair peur a Neptun.
Et qui portant un Phare, empesche qu'Amphitrite
De ses flots ne nous iette es noirs slots de Cocyte.
Puis en void un second tout semblable en grandeur,
Mais non point en estofe, and moins encor en heur.
Car il gist estendu sur la terre esmaillee,
Basti tant seulement d'vne tuile rouillee,
Au lieu des grands carreaux du I aspe faconne,
Et Porphire eternel, don't l'autre est maconne.
Quels miracles, dit-il? quelles masses enormes!
Quels mons faits a la main! quelles estranges forms
D'antiques bastimens? Toy donq qui tout-sc^nant
Tiens comme sur le doigt les siecles de deuant,
O Pere debonnaire, instrui moy de l'vsage,
Du temps, and de l'aut beur de ce iumeau ouurage.
Seth disciple d'Adam, Heber respond que les Mathematiques ayans este aprises
par Seth a ses enfans, eux preuoyans la ruin du monde dresserent ces deux
colomnes pour refister au fcu and a l'eau and grauerent de dans les re^gles and
precepts des Mathematiques.
grand disciple de Dieu
(Commence adonq Heber) ayant appris le lieu,
Aspect, course, and grandeur de tant e'esparses flammes
Qui dorent le seiour des bien heureuses ames,
L'apprend a ses enfans: ses enfans d'autre part
Escoliers studieux cultiuent ce bell art.
Car paissant leurs troupeaux sur les herbeuses riues
Des ondes du Leuant murmurantement viues,
Tandis que la douceur du sum abrege-nuis
Du rest des humains fait dormur les ennuis,
Et robustes, viuans l'age de trois Corneilles,
Ils obseruent du ciel les brillantes marueilles,
Et sur le pilot is de l'ayeul fondement
Parfont auec le temps un pompeux bastiment.
Mais sachant bien que Dieu rauagcroit le Monde
Vne fois par la flamme, vne autre fois par l'onde,
(Cabale hereditaire) ils surhaussent, massons,
La superbe grandour de ces Piliers bessons,
Et les font pour long temps loyaux depositaries,
En faueur de leurs sils de cent doctes mysteres.
Il ouure le cabinet ou sont les statues des Mathematiques.
Heber disant ces mots, ouure subtilement
Vu huis ie ne scay quel du pierreux bastiment:
Et suyui de Phalecy treuue vne chandelle;
Qui a'vn suif eternel paist sa slamme immortelle.
Comme un homme prine, Comparaison.
qui cent fois esconduit
Par un severe Huissier, en sinest introduit
Au cabinet d'vn Prince, admire sacheuance,
Et i^tite haut and bas de ses youx l'inconstance,
Ainsi Phalec s'estonne. Demand de Phalec.
O mon Pere, dit-il,
De qui sont ces portraicts, qu'vn Imagier subtle,
D'vn art partout egal, a fait tant agreables,
Que quatre gouttes d'eau ne sont point plus semblables?
Quel est leur equipage? and quels diuins secrets
Sont cachez doctement sous ces outils sacrez?
Les Mathematiques ou sciences liberales. Arithmetique. Geometry. Music. 1
Arithmetique auec sa contenence.
Mon sils, respond Heber, voici quatre pucelles,
Quatre silles du Ciel, quatre soeurs les plus belles,
Que l'Esprit eternel d'vn double esprit yssu
Ait engendre iamais, and nostre ame conceu.
Celle-la qui tousiours remue, comme il semble,
Et sa langue, and ses doigts: qui leave, couche, assemble,
Ses gets en cent facons, est l'art industrieux
Qui peut, hardi, conter les medailles des cieux,
Les glacons de l'Hyuer, and les fleurs diaprees
Don't l'odoreux Printemps enghirlande les prees,
Il pare sa beauty d'vn magnifique attour:
Son parement.
Ila de grands monceaux d'argent tout a l'entour.
Le ciel, comme on diroit, sur sa test sacree
Verse les clairs thresors d'vne pluye doree.
Sarobe est a plein fonds; A sa ceinture pend.
Au lieu d'vn clair miroir, un tableau qui comprend
Ses nombres don't tous les autres sont composez iusques a l'infini. L'vn.
L'honneur de son scauoir: and, maugre tant de siecles,
Guard comme en depost la plus part de ses regles.
Voy de quel charactere on marque l'Vnite,
Racine de tout nombre, and de l'infinite,
Les delices d'Amour, gloire de l'harmonie,
Pepiniere de tout, and but de Polymnie:
Non-nombres ain' plus que nombre, en qui comme parfait
Tout par puissance gist, lui en tout par effait.
Le deux.
Voy quel sign lettre denote le Binaire,
Fills premier nay de l'vn, premier nombre, and le pere
Des pairs effeminez. Le Trois.
Quel design le Trois,
Friar aisne des impairs, propre au grand Roy des Rois,
Ou le nombre and non-nombre amourensement enter:
Nombre cheri de Dieu, nombre de qui le center
Des deux extremitez s'eloigne egalement,
Et qui premier a fin, milieu, commencement.
Le Quart, Le Quatre.
baze du Cube, and quantite qui pleine
Auec ses propres parts acomplit la Dixaine,
Nombre du Nom de Dieu, nombre des Elements,
Des saisons, des vertus, des humeurs, and des vents.
L'Hermaphrodite Cinq, Le Cinq.
qui iamis ne s'masse
Auec un nombre impair, qu'il ne monstre sa face
Tout au premier abordicar cinq double cinq fois
Ne fait que vingt and cinque, and quinze cinq fois trois.
L' Analogique Six, Le Six.
and qui, par fait assemble,
Pour composer son tout, tous ses members ensemble.
Car trois est sa moitie, sa sexte un, son tiers deux,
Et l'vn, le deux, le trois font le six, ioints enter eux.
Que le critique Sept, Le Sept.
le sept masle and femelle,
Nombre des seux errants de la voute eternelle,
Des clairs brandons du Pole, and du sacre Repos,
Et qui tient, bien-heureux, le trois and quatre enclos.
Le Huit. Le Neuf.
L'Huit doublement quarre La sacree Enncade,
Qui des muses comprend vne triple triade.
Le Dix, Le Dix.
qui la virtue de tous nombres conioint:
Le Dix, qui fait la ligne, ainsi que l'vn le poinct,
La figure le Cent, le Mile un corpse solid:
Le 'Dix, qui redouble peut du board Atlantide
Nombrer la molle arene, and les flots agitez
Par le souffle orageux des Austres irritez.
L.'ddition.
Coutemple comme ici plusieurs sommes escrites
L'vne sur l'autre a plomb, sont en vne reduites.
La Soustraction. Lamultiplication. La division.
Voy comme d'vn grand nombre un petit on extrait,
Comme un nombre petit, multiply, se fait
A peu pres infini. Et d'autre part advise
Comme en mainte parcelle vne sum on divise.
La vierge aufront terni, la Nymphe audos voute,
Qui, 2. Geometry and sa contenance.
triste, contre terre a tousiours l'oeil plant,
Et qui, comme on diroit, d'vne verge scauante
Imprime quelques traicts dans l'arene mouuante:
Son habillement.
Qui port un beau manteau de Torrents chamarre,
Recame de fin Or, de cent fleurs bigarre,
Parseme d'arbrisseaux au verdissant fuellage,
Et frange de l'azur d'une mer soufre-orage;
De qui les bordequins poudreux and deschirez
Monstrent qu'elle a courules climats alterez,
Eternal, o, if e're the purest of my mind
Has been possessed with heat of any heavenly wind,
If e're my heart enspir'd with thine high spirits glance,
Has to thine Altar brought a verse of famous France,
O Father of shining light, o first Fountain of skill,
Or now, or neu'r is time, 1. Thine heavenly fury fill
And quintessence my soul, and that some thought divine,
Base cares abandoning, me lift-vp to the skine.
Time is thou lead me far fro men's cares and alarmes,
That I endronke my sense with heavenly Sirens charms,
Embrace with peace and joy Vrany and her sisters,
And view th'all-starry roof, that over this Temple glisters.
To the end, as heretofore our Elders have been taught
By thine own hand the rules of this high rolling vaut,
Thou pro^pt my Muse a verse, whose bewty and state may square
With state and bewty of all heavens clearest lights that are,
When The Earth was severed by men's ambitious I arre.
2. Old Heber on a time with Phaleg walking far,
A pillar found upright that on the plain stood-out
As Rock that scorns the Sea assaulting round-about,
And bears a sign in top, to warn least Amphitrite
Cast any there to waves of helly-darke Cocyte:
He saw not far-aside, another like in mass,
But not in stuff the same, nor that like happy was;
For on the flowery land Cylinder-wise it lay,
All-only built of brick and short enduring clay:
Whereas the standing pile was hew'n and framed strong
Of I asper quarries huge, and Marbl'enduring-long.
What miracles be these, quoth Phaleg to his father,
What great enormous heaps? hills handy-wroughen rather:
I wonder what so strange a frame of work entends;
Say thou (I pray) that have ykon'd at fingers ends
The monuments of old, o say for what intent,
When, and by whom, these twins of ancient work vp-went.
Then Heber said; my son, of Gods eternal breath
First Adam learned all, and he enstructed 3. Seth
The compass, course, and site of all those flaming boules
That gild th'abiding-place of th'euer-happy souls:
And Seth his children taught, they also viewed the skies,
And trimmed and perfected this Art in curious wise.
For, on the fourdy banks of th'easterne hurring streams,
All-out the careless night, when other lay in dreams,
They fed their bleating flocks, and living many Ages,
Might well the wonders mark of all the shining stages.
And building on the plot of their forefathers groundwork,
They raised-vp in time a rich, a fair, a sound work.
But understanding well that Gods revenging Ire
Should once the world destroy by wat'r, and then by fire,
(As the old Tradition was) thus high above the land
They raised a pair of Pyles with cunning Masons hand.
That there from throat of Time for their posterities,
They might the treasures hoard of Algrim Mysteries.
4. Thus having said, he went unto the standing Rock,
And did (I know not how) a secret door unlock:
So went with Phaleg in, and to a candle came,
Which with eternal thirst maintained immortal flame.
5. As, when a private man is through a hundred ways
Brought by some husher stern unto the shining rays
At length of royal seat, he wonders at the sight,
And glaunces up and down his eyes unstayed light;
So Phaleg was amazed, and said, o father dear,
What cunning work is this? whose are these statues here?
I think four water-drops may scarce be more then they
Th'each unto the other like. How strange is their array?
What secret mystery of heau'nly-learned skilles
Is hidden under veil of these fair vtensilles?
6. My son (quoth Heber) see four daughter-twins of heaven,
Four sister-ladies brave, the fairest doubled eau'n
That ere The Eternal Spirit proceeding one of twain
Begotten has, or e're conceived manly brain.
7. She there, which ever shifts or ever seems to shift
Her fingers and her tongue, to gather, lay, and lift
Her counters many-wise, is Thou Art of Odd and eau'n,
Whose industry can search and count all th'oast of heaven,
The winter I sickles, and flowers diapreade,
Wherewith sweet sauoury Prime enguyrlands every meade.
She sets her beauty forth with rich acoutrements,
And round about her lie great heaps of silver pence;
Heaven over her sacred head a shining treasure powers
(Like Jove in Danaes lap) of many golden showers.
Her gown trailes on the ground; instead of glassie plate,
To view her bewties in, hangs at her girdl' a slate,
Which maugr' all force of time for us here keeps still
The more part of the rules of her most certain skill.
See with what manner mark is painted 8. Unity,
The root of every numb'r, and of Infinity,
True Friendships dear delight, renown of Harmony,
Seed-plot of all that is, and aim of Polymnie;
No numb'r and more then numb'r, on all-sides so exact,
It has in it all by power, and is in all by act.
See here the Caracter, that signifies 9. Twain,
The firstborn son of One, first numb'r and fath'r again
Of heavens effeminate: See here of numbers Odd
That eldest brother 10. Three, which proper is unto God;
Wherein no-numb'r and numb'r is sweetly-kissing met,
Whose two extremities and cent'r are eau'nstly set
Asunder each from oth'r, a numb'r heavens favor winning,
And first of all that has both end, middle and beginning.
Here Is 11 Four, base of the Cube, and that with one, two, three,
His own contents, amountsiust to the tenth degree;
The numb'r of The Elements, and of the name of fear,
Of Virtues, Honors, Winds, and seasons in the year.
Here Is 12. Five, th'Ermaphrodite, which never is multiplide
With any numb'r vneu'n, but shows it self in pride
Just at the first Encount'r; as five times five we see
Full Five and twenty makes, and Fifteen, five times three.
13 Lo th'Analogicke Six, which, with his own content,
Nor mounts above it self, nor needs complement;
For three is half thereof, a third two, one, a sixth,
And all the six is made of one, two, three, commixt.
Behold 14 The critic seven, male, female, even, and odd;
Containing three and four, and called the Rest of God,
The numb'r of clearest brands that fixed are near the Pole,
And those that guyrding heaven with course uncertain roll.
Here Is 15 Eight the double square, 16 And sacred nine lo here
The sister-Muses holds in triple-triple queere.
17 See Ten, that does the force of numbers all combine;
As one sets down prick, ten draws in length the line,
An hundred broads the plain, a thousand thickes the bulk;
So by redoubling ten, the ballast of an hulke
Or all the sand is summed upon th'Atlantike coast,
Or all the swelling waves that angry winds have tossed.
18 See here how diverse sums, each right over other set,
Are altogeth'r in one by rules of Adding met;
How by abating here the lesser numb'r is tried
From out the more; and here how small ones multiplide
Wax almost infinite: and then how counter-guided
Into as many small the greater summ's divided.
This Nymph that sadly frowns, with back and shoulders bent,
And holds her steadfast eye still on the ground intent,
And draws, or seems to draw, with point of skillful wand
So many portratures upon the moving sand,
In mantle of golden ground with rivers chamleted,
With many embroydred flowers all-ouer diuersed,
Embost with little trees, and greeny-leaued slips,,
And edged with azur-frenge of some sea bearing-ships;
It is Geometry; her buskins dusty and rent
Show well she trauell'd far, and over the Climats went
1. Thine heavenly fury. That is Inspiration; a word well taken among the
Poets, who say, Est deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. The Prophets also,
swayed by the Spirit of God, had their extraordinary motions, ecstasies, and
rauishments; which were holy possessions and inspirations: yet such suffered not
the inspired servants to wander from the way of truth; howsoever they had their
spirits then raised far above condition of all worldly things. The Poet then
craves that the holy Spirit might be present with him, after a special manner,
to raise him unto the heavens, where he may learn to sing worthy so great a
subject, as he now takes in hand. The Muses are all sisters of Urania, whose
proper office is to treat of heaven and heavenly things. By heavenly Sirens
charms, he means the Harmony of the Spheres; whereof hereafter. He says
also that our Elders, that is, Adam and his sons, were taught, by the hand of
God himself, rules of the course of Heaven; that is, the knowledge of
Astronomy: which is very likely, because the wit of man was not able to
atraine to things of so high a nature, without some extraordinary help and
favor.

2. Old Heber. Josephus in his first book of Antiquities, toward the end of
the second chapter, speaking of the children of Seth, is of opinion that they
first invented Astrology; and applied their minds to know the course and
motion of those heavenly bodies: And to the end their invention should not be
forgotten, or perish before it was known, ( Adam having foretold that all
things should be destroyed, once by water, and again by fire) they erected two
pillars; one brick, another stone, the better to withstand the waters; and
graued, and set therein the records and rules of their inventions, for
posterity to learn. The pillar of stone some say is yet to be seen in Syria.
This does Josephus report upon hearsay: which the Poet terms an old
Tradition, or Cabala. Thus Josephus thrusts-in many things among his
Antiquities, that have no good ground, but are taken upon trust of the
Caballists and Rabbis; who never considering the majesty and sufficiency of
holy Scripture, thought to help out and adorn it with fillets and labels of
their own. Many learned men think that Noe and his sons had the Arts well
settled in their minds: and the Arc is a sufficient proof of Noes skill in
Arithmetike and Geometry: but the Reader may, if he will, ascribe the
invention to Noes predecessors: so does the Poet, following the opinion of
Josephus. For the rest, he gives the whole discourse of Mathematikes to Heber
and Phaleg; because, the earth being in their time divided, it was requisite
that these Arts were known, to be carried every way for comfort and help of
Colonies, in peopling the world. Cylinderwise it lay. (So I translate) that is,
along the ground like a rouller; supposing the waters had overthrown it.

3. Seth. Polidore Virgil, in his first book de Inuentoribus rerum, chap.
14.17.18. and 19. speaks of the first finders-out of the liberal Sciences,
alleging the testimony of diverse Authors. But it came never into his mind to
derive all from the springhead, as here the Poet has done, who shows, with
great probability, that Adam, being endowed with excellent knowledge of hidden
things concerning both great and little world, taught it his son and scholar
Seth, and others that conuersed with him; who also conveyed it over to their
descendants. And this was not hard to be done, considering the long life of
them all. So the true Cabala of inheritance left to posterity, was the
instruction which they received one from other by word of mouth; and this might
be so continued from father to son, as it need not be graued in brick or
stone. But sithence the Poet was content to set-out the opinion of Josephus,
rather then his own; I Will say no more against it. The means and order kept by
Seths posterity, to continue the knowledge of the Mathematics, was not all of
one sort; though the Poet propounds but one, which was very likely.

4. Thus having said, he went. That is, Heber. Poets, missing sometime the
certain truth, are wont yet to stand-vpon that is likely; wherefore this our
Author, having before spoke-of the pillar of stone, which stood still upright,
brings-in Heber opening the door thereof by a slight, and finding therein a
burning lamp or candle. This secret of burning lamps of some unquenchable
stone, or other matter of that nature, has been used in the world long ago;
and proved true by diverse ancient sepulchers found under the ground. Selinus in
his 12. chap. says there is in Arcadia a certain stone of the color of Iron,
which once set a fire cannot be quenched, and therefore is called Asbeslos,
which signifies as much. Plutarch, in the beginning of his book De cessatione
Oraculorum, says as much of the unquenchable lamp in the Temple of Jupiter
Hammon; which was the most ancient, and of most renown among the Chamites, who
soon fell from the true Religion. Pliny, in the first chapter of his 19.
book, tells also a great marvel of a kind of linen cloth which consumes
not in the fire. I think the immediate successors of Adam and Noe had
knowledge of many secrets in Nature, which we now would think incredible,
impossible, or altogether miraculous, if we saw the experience thereof.

5. As when a private man. By an excellent comparison the Poet here describes
the affection that Phaleg had to understand these things; and so makes way to
his discourse of the Mathematike Arts; which he faines to be sisters, and one
much like another; because they are all composed as it were of numbers,
concords and proportions, which by Addition, Multiplication, Substraction, and
Division, do bring forth great variety of rare and dainty secrets.

6. My son. He shows in few words the just commendation of these Liberal
Sciences, called here Virgins, because of their simplicity and purity:
Daughters of Heaven; because they are placed in the understanding, the
principal faculty of our soul, which is from Heaven; though the
understanding adorned with Mathematikes, do many times bring forth effects,
which depart farther and farther from their springhead; and so by little and
little fall among the Mechanics, or Handycrafts. He says also further, that
these four Sciences are the fairest, which that one Spirit issuing from two,
(that is, the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son) did ever
beget, or man's soul conceive: he speaks this only of such gifts as the Holy
Ghost has imparted unto men, for the maintenance of their society. For what
were the life of man, if it had neither number, weight, nor measure; neither
sight, nor hearing well governed? as (needs) it must be while it wants the
Mathematikes: whose due praise and profit ensuing, with what other Arts depend
thereon, you may read at large in the Prefaces before Euclide^; especially in
one of Christopher Clanius, and another of our English John Dee.

7. She there. The learned differ concerning the order and disposition of these
four Arts: some set Geometry in the first place, Arithmeticke in the second,
Music in the third, and Astronomy last. Others clean contrary. Our Author
has followed the most received opinion. Read Scaliger against Cardan, Exer.
321. The chief thing is to consider well the bounds and coherences of these
Arts, that we neither confound nor sever them among themselves, nor mingle them
with others: for, this doing sometimes has brought most dangerous errors both
into Church and Commonwealth. To proceed: In this description which the Poet
makes of Arithmetikes both habit and gesture, we may see what is required to
the right understanding that abstract Art; now adays far out of the way, or
soyled with gross materials.

8. Unity. In forty verses, or thereabouts, the Poet has set down the
grounds of infinite Arithmeticall secrets. He that will search what the ancient
and late Authors have written, shall find matter enough for a good thick
book: I speak here but briefly, so much as may serve for understanding the
text, leaving the rest to a larger Commentary. First, he calls Unity, or One,
the root of all numbers; because every number, great and small, arises from
One. Secondly, he calls it also the root of Infinity; for the greatest
numbers, and such as unto us are vncountable or infinite, what are they but
multiplied Unities? Thirdly, he terms Unity, True friendships dear delight;
because the faithful lover delights in one only, and seeks no more. Fourthly,
The renown of Harmony; which tends to one sweet consort of diverse voices.
Fifthly, The seed-plot of all that is; because by one spice or kind, of man,
beast, fish, foul, etc. was filled the whole world. Sixthly, he calls it the
Aim of Polymnie. I think by this he means the intent that all learned men
have, in their discourses by word or writing, to tend always to some one
certain point or end, as the only mark they aim or leuell-at. Let the Reader
find out some better note hereupon; for mine own scarce contents me.
Seventhly, this Unity is said to be no number; because a number (taken as it
is commonly for a name of multitude) is composed of many unities: and more then
number, because it gives a being to all numbers; and thus it has a power to
comprehend all numbers, and is actually in all. Let us add a word more to the
praise of Unity; God is one, and the Church, of many gathered together, is but
one; yea there was but one Creator, one world, one man; for of him was the
woman framed; one language before the confusion of Babel; one Law, one Gospel,
one Baptism, one Supper of the Lord; one hope, one love, one Paradise, one
life everlasting. Concerning the diverse significations of one, and other
numbers in holy Scripture, I forbear to speak; because the Poet makes no
plain mention thereof. But this I note further; that out of these verses, so
artificially couched together, nothing can be drawn, which may any way seem
to favor their vain speculations; who go about to build upon numbers the
rules of Religion; and such as are of force to establish or overthrow
Commonwealths: and least of all has any support or rellyance for
Arithmanticall Cheaters, Magicians, and other like mischiefs of the world; who
abusing the passages of holy Scripture, where numbers are used, think they
have found therein the way to foretell what is to come; or power to raise up
Spirits; and in a word, to practice many things unlawful; which the curious
and profane have taught by their books published in Print: but let their names
be buried in everlasting silence.

9. Twain. The Pythagorians called the number of two or twain, Isis and
Diana; because as Diana was barren (says Plato in his Th^^te^us) so Two, being
the head and beginning of Diversity, and unlikeness, has no such power, as
other numbers have. It is the father of numbers huen, which the Poet calls
esseminate, because they bring forth nothing; but are cause rather of the ruin
of Unity. For, to divide a thing, is to destroy it, as Aristotle argues very
punctually in the eight Book of his Metaphysickes. Plutarch in his Treatise of
the Souls creation, says that Zaratas, the Master of Pythagoras, called Two
the mother of Numbers, and One the father; whereof he yields a reason, which
our Author has in a word.

10. Three. Some account Three the first of all numbers; for, as for Two, the
Pythagorians do not vouchsafe it the name of a number; but call it a
confounding of Unities, which are (to speak properly) no numbers, but the
roots and beginnings of numbers. I will say nothing here of the praise of
Three, set down by Plutarch in his Treatise of Isis and Osiris, and elsewhere:
nor yet what say the Poets; whose Chief has this; Numero Deus impare gaudet;
meaning not an odd number whatsoever, as Five or Seven, but only Three, which
is the first of all the odd numbers, and makes in Geometry, of three surfaces
only, the first body that has length, breadth, and thickness, called a
Triangle. The Pythagoreans call this kind of Solid Minerua; and in their
purifications and washings, do use much the number of Three. Virgil also
touches upon this secret in the 6. of his Aeneids. Thus, Idem ter socios pura
circumtulit vnda and in the first of his Georg. thus, Terque nouas circum
saelix cat hoslia fruges. And Ovid. 2. Fast. thus, Et digitis tria thura tribus
sublimine ponit. And in the 6. Protinus arbutea posts terin ordine tangit
Fronde, ter arbutea lamina fronde notal. Infinite authorities have we to this
purpose: to name one, Pliny says, (in translating, I searched out the place)
Not. Hist. 28.4. Terna despuere deprecatione in omni medicina mes suit, atque
ex hec effectus adiu^are. But for as much as this, and the like favors of
superstition and witchcraft, I leave it; and for bear also to show further how
curiously some apply this number unto diverse mysteries of Religion; contenting
my self only to expound the Poets words. First, he says it is a number
proper unto God, and I think he means it of the holy Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, which is one true God: for of nothing else can it be said, that
Three are One, and One is Three. Again, he says it is the eldest brother of
all the Odd numbers, but of that we spoke before. Thirdly, he says that in
this number Three is No number and Number well met. Then he says further, it
is a number well beloved of Almighty God; I translate it Heavens favor
winning; and it has respect either to the sore-alledged place of Virgil; or
rather to the effects that God works in his creatures, which would make a
large Commentary: for the number of three has been observed by some in the
Order of Angels sent down unto Men; in Men themselves, in Sciences, in Virtues
and other things so many, as can hardly be numbered. Moreover, he says the
number Three has a Center and two Extremities of equal distance one from
another: which is easy to be understood, for the Center of Three is the second
Unity, which is equally distant from the first and the third, and by this
reason also is it the first of all number, that has End, Middle, and
Beginning, which is also very plain to conceive.

11 Four. The Cube, or perfect Square body in Geometry, has a piedestall, or
base of four corners, and is the most perfect of Solid bodies, representing
steadfastness, continuance and virtue; whereof came the proverb of Homo
quadratus; not square faced like the Chinois (Trigault, in expedit one
Iesuitica) but a man disposed and dealing squarely; a man sound, constant, and
virtuous. Read Pierius his Exposition of this number, with the rest, before
and after it. I have said much thereof in my Commentaries upon the Quartaines
of le Sieur de Pybrac. Expos. 39. where he says, that Truth is framed of a
perfect Cube. Now to the rest of our Poets words. Secondly then he ascribes to
the number of Four this property, that with his own contents, which are one,
two, three, he makes up I en: this is plain. Thirdly, he says it is the
number of the name most to be feared, that is, the name of God. For the Hebrews
write the name of God with four letters, and say it is vn-vtterable, and
pronounce ever Adonai for Ichoua, which name the Divines call Tetragramaton.
John Reuelm has discoursed largely thereof in his Cabala, and in his books de
Verbo Mirifico. Other Nations also have given to God a name of four letters.
The Assyrians Adad, the Egyptians Amun, the Persians Sire, the old Romans
Aius, the Greeks THEOS, the Mahumetans Alla, the Goths Thor, the Spaniards
Dios, the Italians Idio, the Germans Got, the French Dieu. I pass by the
names Adon, Adni, Iaho, Jesus; as also what some have invented upon the names of
Cain, Abel, Seth, Enos; for they have written herein very much to little
purpose. The Spirit of God would have us rest upon the substance of things, not
upon the number of letters used in their names. For the fourth commendation of
this number, he says it is the number of the Elements, to wit, the Earth, the
Water, the Air, and the Fire: whereof thus Ovid, Metam. 15. Quatuor ^ternus
genitalia corpora Mundus-Continet etc. And in his first book more distinctly:
Ignea conuexi vis and sine pondere coeli Emicuit, summaque ^^cum sibi legit in
arce. Proximus est Aer illi leuitate locoque. Densior his Tellus, elementaque
grandia traxit, Et pressa est grauitatesui. Circumsluus hu^^^ Vltima possed^t
solid^amque coereuit orbem. For the fist, he says it represents the four
Seasons of the year; the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. For the sixth, he
compares it to the four Cardinal Virtues, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, and
Prudence. For these seventh, to the Huanours of Man's body, blood, Collar,
Phlegm, and Melancholy. For the eight, to the principal Winds, East, West,
North, and South. Let me say moreover, that the Pythagoreans (as Ma^rebius
reports) had this number in so great esteem, that they were w^n^ to swear by
it.

12. F^ue, th'Ermaphrodite. So called, because it is composed of the Femall
(...), and Masculine Three, which is the first Odd number. That which
follows, how this number multiphed always shows it self, is easy. Plutarch
(de Cessatione Oraculorum) and upon the Title of Et, in the Temple at Delphos,
tells great wonders of this number of Five.

13 Th'Analogicke Six. Saint Augustine in his fourth book, De Trinitate, and
in his fourth book also, De Genesi ad literam; and Hugode Sto Victore, in his
book, De Sacramentis, both say the number of Six is a perfect number, because
it is composed of his own proper parts. For the Diuisors of Six (besides the
Unity, which diuides all numbers by themselves) as 1, is in Six six times, and
so of the rest) are 6, 3, and 2. Divide then Six by Six, the Quotus is 1,
divide it by 3, the Quotus is 2, divide it by 2, the Quotus is 3, that is a
Sixth part, a Third, and a Second, which 1, 2, and 3, being put together,
make-vp again the whole Six, which preoues it a perfect number. Other numbers
(the most) thus examined, are found more or less than their parts. As the
Diuisers of 10. are 10.5. and 2. Ten is in ten once, Five is in Ten twice; two
is in Ten five times, so the Quotes of Ten thus divided, are 1.2. and 5. which
added make but eight, two less than the number divided. Whereas the Diuisers of
12. being 6.4.3. and 1. The Quote of 12 divided by twelve is 1. by six 2. by
four 3. by three 4. by two 6. and these Quotes 1.2.3.4. and 6. make a Total
of 16. which is four more than the number divided Some say then that, Six
being the first perfect number, and answerable to his own parts, therefore it
pleased God to create the World in six days, to show that all was perfect;
nothing more than need, nothing less. So by good right is this number termed
Analogicke, that is, proportionate, and answerable in all points to it self;
as has been showed.

14 The Critic Seven. First, the Poet calls Seven a Critic number, as much
to say as Judging of a matter. For that on the seventh day Physicians are wont
to judge of a disease to life or death: though sometimes, where a strange and
resisting nature is, they double the number, and awaite the fourteenth day;
which is (as says Hippocrates in his Aphorisms) the term of diseases, that
are simply acute or sharp. If the malady pass this day, it is commonly seen
that it continues to the one and twentieth, which is a third Seventh. Look
what Galen says in his books De diebus Criticis; and what Consorius in his
book De die Natali: as also what the Physicians hold concerning every Seventh
and Climactericall year, as of the nine and fortieth, composed of seven times
seven, and the sixty three, of nine times seven. In the second place the Poet
calls this number Male and Female, because it is made of an Eauen and an Odd,
three and four: hereof see Scaliger in his 365. Exer. against Cardan. In the
third and last place, he commends it for the number of the Planets, and of the
holy Rest-day; because the Lord rested the seventh day, and hallowed it.

15 Eight the double Square. The smallest Latus of any Square-number is two,
which multiplied by it self makes four, and the same again multiplied by the
Latus two, is eight, which is the first Cube, and double the first Square. Some
have played the subtle Figure-slingers with the Greek name of our Savior
(...), and found it to make 888. to wit, eight Unities, eight Tens, and eight
Hundreds; applying also thereto certain Prophesies of Silylla, but I leave
this subtle device, sithence the Poet gives me no occasion to handle it.

16 And sacred Nine. So styled for the number of the Muses; though otherwise in
Music this number makes a discord; and the Astrologers call it a sinister
number, and ill-betokening. In the Theogonie of ^^^lodus, and in Virgil, where
he speaks of the nine turnings of the infernal River Styx, some are of
opinion that it represents the disagreeing Complexions of Man's body. See the
Hieroglyphikes of John Pierius in his 37. book.

17 Ten. Of this number Ovid in his book, De Fastis, speaks very properly;
Semper adusque decom numero crescente venitur Principium spatijs sumitur inde
nonis. But to our Poet, he says it contain in it self the force and virtue
of all numbers, either simply, or by multiplication; as it is plain in the
Text. Again, he says it is like the Line in Geometry, because it is the
first that makes a length, for all that go before it are expressed by single
Characters, as 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. and so stand like pricks or points not
flowing to a Line: but Ten having always one other Figure or Cipher joined
unto it, thrusts-out into length, and so makes (as it were) a Line in
Arithmeticke: beyond which Line there is no proceeding, but by multiplying this
Ten again, and so forth to the greatest number that can be given, which may
surmount the waves, or sands of the sea. Forcadel in his Arithmeticke, and
others, besides those of old, have showed the manner how. But Archimedes wrote
thereof long ago, and entitled his work De numeo arenae. And surely by the
multiplication of Ten it may be done. Let them examine or try it that have
leisure: or rather let us all leave this to him that made all things in number,
weight, and measure; who only knows the the number of the Stars, with all
things past, present, and to come.

18 See here. He speaks of the four fundamental Rules of Arithmeticke,
Addition, Multiplication, Subtraction, and Division; where-out do spring an
infinite sort of brave and pleasant secrets, which the Masters of this Art have
plainly set-downe in their books. Sithence then the Rules aforesaid are, or
may be, well known to all men; I say no more of them, but goe-on to consider
what our Poet says of Geometry.

Et les terroirs du Nord; est la Geometry,
Guide des artisans, mere de Symmetrie,
Ame des instruments en effect si diverse,
Loy mesme de la Loy qui forma l'Vuiuers.
Ie ne voy rien qui poids, Ses instrume^s. (...) eftects and ^^^rages. ^^^igne.
(...) Triangles. Quadrangles and sigures au tres geometriques.
que compass, que mesures,
Que regles, que niueaux, qu'esquierres, que figures.
Regard comme ici iadis l'ouurter subtle
A tire dext ement vne ligne a (...) fill:
Les Triangles guerriers, les maisonniers Quadrangles,
El cent autres facons de forms a plus d'Angles,
Droits, mousses, ^u poinctus. Remarque en cest endroit
Celle-la, don't iamais le traict ne glisse droit:
Comme la limac^use auec la serpentec:
Et la sigu^^ en^or des scauans tant vantce,
Le Cercle.
Le Cercle compass, don't l'arrondissement
Est du center par tout distant egalement.
Les figures solides. Le Rond, figure parsaite, and excellent enter toutes les
autres, par diuerses raisons icy mar quees clairement par le Poet.
Mesure ici de l'oeil les figures Solides,
Cubes, Dodechedrons, Cylindres, Pyramides.
Admire ici le Rond, image de ce Tout,
Qui tout en soy compris, n'a ni milieu ni bout:
Perfection de l'art, and l'honneur de ses freres,
Merueille contenant cent merueilles contreres:
Immobile, and mobile: and conuexe, and creuse:
Oblique en son contour, and du droit compose.
Voy qu'il n'a pas fi tossed commencesa quarriere,
Qu'il march en haut, en bas, en auant, en arriere:
Et que d'autrui pousse ne se meut seulement,
Ams esmeut ses voisins de son esbranlement.
(Le Cicl en est tesmoin.) Qui plus est comme il semble,
Lors qu'il est en repos, de tous costez il tremble,
D'autant qu'il n'a qu'vn poin^l pour baze and fondement,
Et que de toutes parts il panche iustement
D'vne de ses moitiez. Et tout esfois la Boule,
Sur qui nous habitons pendue en l'air, ne croule:
Car elle est le moyen des concentriques corpse,
Qu'aucun angle ou forjet ne press par dehors.
Les autres corpse iettez dans le vague, figurent
Autres forms qu'ils n'ont: mais les traicts tousiours durent
Semblables en un globe, a cause qu'il n'a point
Part qui ne soit pareille aux autres de-tout-poinct.
Puis apres tout ainsi qu'es l^ges Ambligones
Se rangent plus de corpse qu'es maisons Oxygones,
Vieu que les angles Droits, and les angles Aigus,
Vont moins eslargissant leurs iambes, que l'Obtus:
Le Rond non autrement en sa mousse closture
Contiendra plus de lieu que tonte autre figure.
Les autres corpse choquez se rompent aisement,
D'autant qu'on treuue en eux sin and commencement:
Qu'ils ont des aspretez, des plis, des commissures:
Mais le Rond est sans coins, sans points, sans ioinctures.
La quarreure du Cercle and le redoublement du Cube.
Sur tout, mon cher Phalec, band ici tes esprits,
Etcompren deux secrets de peu de gens compris,
Noeuds cents fois renouez, and cruelles tortures,
Qui sans fin geineront les Escholes futures,
La quarreure du Cercle, and le redoublement
D'vn corpse qui soit quarre par tout egalement.
Certitude de la Geometry, qui a inuente mill vtilitez ala vic human.
Plus durque dans l'airain tien pour iamais grauees
En ton sidele esprit cent regles non prouuces
Parfoibles arguments, par syllogismes vains,
Ains don't la verite se touch de nos mains:
Science sans dispute: and qui mere feconde,
De miracles nouueaux remplira tout le Monde.
Les Moulins.
Par elle le flot bas des ruisseaux fontaniers,
Comme les foibles vents, seruiront de Meusniers,
Et le grain ecraze dans la rouante press
Payerace qu'il doit a sa chiche maistresse.
L'artillerie.
Par elle le boulet fumeusement vomy
Par un gosier d'air ain contre un mur ennemy
Broyera, tonnerreux, les rochers mesme enpoudre,
Et rendra parson bruit contemptible le foudre.
Le Gouuernail and equip page des nauires.
Par elle les cerceaux d'vnfauor able vent
Tireront du Bresiliusq' au rich Leuant,
Puis des flots Afriquains iusqu'aux glacons de Thyle
Un Palais de Sapin, ou plustost vne ville:
Et le Pilote assis remuera promptement
Auec un court leuier tout ce grand bastiment:
L'Imprimerie.
L'Imprimeur en un iour f^ra plus de volumes
Que le subtle trauail de mill doctes plumes:
Vne Grue a bastir vaudra cent crocheteurs:
La Grue and autres machines. Le Rayon and autres engines pour mesurer
promptement toutes hauteurs, largeurs and profondeurs. Les horloges. Les images
de bois parlantes artificiellement and autres inventions merueilleuses.
Un Rayon mesureur, mill ailez arpenteurs,
Pour partager la terre enclimats and ceintures,
Et la grandeur du ciel en huict fois six figures:
L'eau, le sablon, la verge and des rouets les tours,
En quatre fois six parts diuiseront les iours:
D'vne image de bois sourdra quelques parole:
Un globe contiendra les miracles dis Pole:
Les hommes se guidans par le vuide des airs,
D'vn temeraire vol trauerseront les mers.
Et lon ne doubt point, que si le Geometre
Treuue un autre universe pour a son aise y mettre
Ses pieds, and ses engines, que comme un nouueau Dieu
Il ne puisse porter ce Monde en autre lieu.
Of North and Southern Pole; painful 19. Geometry,
The guide of Artisans, and mother of Symmetrie;
Life of those instruments so diuers-vsuall
And law even of the law that framed all this All.
20. Behold here is nothing else but compass, measure, weight,
Rules, plommets, squiers, shapes: See vnd'r a line drawn straight
The soldiour Triangles, and th'architect Quadrangles,
With hundred other shapes of more increased Angles,
Sharp, blont, or falling right; Lo here two crooked lines,
One like a crawling Snake, one like a Dodman twines:
Lo many crooked shapes, and here, of all the rest
The Circle in favor most with every learned breast;
Whose roundell does it self right-equally display,
And from the Center stands like distant every way.
21. Here measure with thine eye all manner Cors-solids,
The Cubes, Dodechedrons, Cylinders, Pyramids;
And wond'r here at the 22. Globe, which all does comprehend,
So like the world it self, and has nor mid, nor end:
The highest point of Art, and top of all his kynt
A marvel that contains much counter-maruaile in it:
Moouabl' and immoouabl', inward-bent and bent-out,
Composed of a straight, yet crooked round about.
Behold, at any time when on a plain it is throne,
It down and upward stirs, back, forward, all in one.
Nor stirs it all alone when cunning force it moves,
But neighbor moouables proportionally shoues;
As by the heavens appears; nay more, though still it bide,
It seems to threat'n a fall and shake on every side:
Because a point is all it has for standing-place,
And half on every side hangs over so small a base.
And much more wond'r it is how this great earthie ball
Whereon we dwell, sans-base, hangs fast and cannot fall
Amids the yielding air: it self is (out of doubt)
The commyd bodies midst, that are not pressed without.
All bodies other-shap'd, into the water cast,
Make shapes unlike their own; but always round do last
Th'impressions of a Round: because it cannot strike
With any diverse part, all are vnt'all so like:
Beside as more may stand in houses Amblygons,
Then can in equall-bought of any Oxygons;
Because the sharp and right take not so large a stride
As corner blunt; so does the Round in cloister wide
More hold then all the rest.
And other bodies break
With every knock, because they have both bay and peake,
Beginning, end, and joints; whereas the body round
Is creastlesse, cornerlesse, and eu'ry-side-way sound.
Son, summon here thy wits, and mark that few have found,
23. The doubling of a Cube, and squaring of a Round:
Such hundred-folded knots, such hidden mysteries,
As shall troubl' all the schools of our posterities.
24. Keep faster then in brass for ever grau'n in mind,
In faithful mind, these rules, which thou shall proved find,
Not by vain syllogismes or probable arguments;
But whose undoubted truth appears even unto sense:
An Art of certainties, whose euer-fruitfull womb
With wonders new-deuis'd shall fill the world to come.
25. By her the gentle stream, by her the feeble wind,
Shall drive the whirling press, and so be taught to grind
The grain of life to meal; that with increase it may
Unto the sparing Dames all that is due repay.
By her the brazen throat shall vomit Iron balls,
With smoke and roaring noise, upon besieged walls:
The force whereof shall rent the hardestrocks asunder,
And give more fearful thumps then any bolt of thunder.
By her the borrowed wings of some assisting wind
Shall bear from out Bresile unto the rich East-Inde,
And to the frozen Sea from Affricks boiling flood,
A iogging tower, or even a floating town of wood:
Wherein the Pylot set shall with a leauer light
Most huge waights easily move, and make all coast aright.
So shall one Printer work more learned sheets aday,
Then even a thousand hands of ready-writers may:
One Crane shall more avail then Porters many a score;
And then a thousand men one Staff shall profit more
To measure-out the fields; to part the earth into lines,
And all the cope of heaven int' eight and forty signs:
So shall the wat'r, and sand, the Style and clock in towers,
Most euenly part the day to four and twenty hours:
An Image made of wood some voice shall utter plain;
An artificial globe heavens wonders shall contain:
Men through th'ayres emptiness their bodies peysing right
Shall ouer-mount the Seas with bold-aduentring flight.
And doubtless if the wise Geometer had place
To plant his engines on, and stand himself in case
To stir them aft'r his Art, so could he thrust and shoue,
That like some pettie-god the world he might remove.
19. Geometry. She is described as a Nymph that frowns, or has a wrinkled
forehead: because the study of this Art is very painful, and makes the
student wax old apace; and crookbackt also, by reason of their much stooping
downward, to measure and compass their plots. She is sad and looks steadfastly
on the ground: because all hard works make men pensive and full of care;
Geometry especially, which causes a man to six his eye wholly upon that he
goes about. She has a wand, or straight rod, also in her hand, wherewith she
draws certain figures and shapes in the dust; for that in this Art, above
others, must be demonstrations used, without which the Theoremes and
Propositions cannot be understood. And for as much as She measures the whole
Earth, the breadth and deepnesse of Rivers, high Mountains, low Valleys and
Mines, with pleasant Meadows, prospects of Seas and Climats from one end of the
world to the other; therefore has the Poet her so apparelled, as we see in his
verse. Furthermore She is called the Guide of Artisans; because they without
her can do nothing answerable to the expectation of an understanding eye: and
in this respect also is she called the mother of Symmetrie, or proportion,
requisite in all Crafts Mechanical; yea the soul or life of all those
different instruments, which without due measure and proportion would do more
hurt then good, as we find by experience. Whereas she is called, The law even
of that law which framed all this All: the Poet herein expounds well that
saying of Plato, That God exercises Geometric from day to day. This also Moses
well signifies in those words, And God saw all that he had made was perfectly
good: and the Wiseman in those; God made all things in number, weight and
measure: as indeed a man shall not find any creature, small or great, in
heaven, earth, or Sea, that is not made (as it were) by the rounding-toole,
weight-beame, and squire; by the compass, level and perpendicular of an
infinite wisdom.

20. Here Is nothing else. First he shows the tools and instruments necessary
for the practice of Geometry: then draughts of one dimension, as of leggth
only: to wit, Lines straight, for Optics and planting of Ordnance; and
crooked, for mines, ways under ground, and Labyrinths; as we are taught by the
story of Theseus and Ariadne. Thirdly, shapes of two dimensions; as of length
and breadth also; to wit, Triangles for commanders in war, to range their
battles thereby; Quadrangles, for building, because they are most sound and
fast-standing; and other figures, wreathed, bulked, longer-one-way-then-other;
Ovalls, Lozenges, and Rounds; all which are set-downe particularly in the
Commentaries of Candales, Pellitier, Clauius, and others upon Euclide.

21. Here measure. In the third place he propounds certain figures, called
Bodies solid; because they have both length, breadth, and thickness. As the
Cube, fouresquare every way, like a dye; the Dodecacdron, of twelve corners or
angles; the Cylinder, long and round like a rouller; the Pyramid, which has
three or four corners in base, and but one above in point. These four,
together with the Sphere (which is round through all dimensions) are called the
five Bodies regular; whereof Euclide and his Expositors have spoken at large in
their sixth book: as they have also many propositions touching the same before.

22. The Globe. This is a kind of Geometrical Solid most excellent and
perfect above all others; as all men, that have written thereof, do plainly
declare: whom the Poet here also follows. Their chief reasons are, 1. That
it has the same fashion and shape, that the world has. 2. That it has
neither beginning, mids, nor end. 3. That it is moveable in place, and
immovable out of place. That it is concaue and conuex, which is as much to
say, as Inbent and Out-bent, or crusye and bulked; that it is made of straight
lines, meaning the diameters, and yet crooked round about, as is the surface
thereof; that it moves every way at once, upward, downward, backward,
forward, rightway, leftway; that it swayes and mooues with it, according to
proportion, all round bodies next it: This we may well perceive by that heaven
called Primum mobile, which draws with it the firmament of fixed stars,
together with the seven spheres of Planets: That, although it stand still, as
when the sphere is laid on a plain; yet seems it to be in continual motion,
and every way nods and threatens to fall, because the base or foot it stands-on
is but a point, from whence on euery-side half hangs-ouer. This may seem
strange then, even where there is a foundation to rest-on. Much more in the
Earth, that has no foundation to sense, but hangs in the Air; whereof the
Poet gives a good reason; because it self is the resting place, or middle
point, of all the bodies concentrike, and round of it self, is not by any
promontorie or corner forced from abroad. More ample reasons hereof shall ye
find in the Commentaries of Clauius, Junctinus, Schreckensuschius, and others,
upon the Sphere of John of Hallifax, commonly called Johannes de sacro Bosco;
and in the Commentary of Millichius upon the second book of Pliny. 4. The
Sphere is always and every where throughout like it self; so are not other
bodies Geometrical. 5: As houses that are blunt-cornerd, receive more into
them, then do the straight or sharp-cornerd; because these stride not so wide
as the other: so the Sphere being (as it were) every way blunt, contains more
then any Geometrical body of other shape. 6. Other Solides are broken
oft-times, by reason of their beginnings, ends, plights, knobs and joints:
whereas the Sphere is void of all those; and therefore must needs be more
perfect and sound; as all Astronomers and Geometricians do prove both by their
own experience, and to the view of others.


23. The doubling of a Cube, and squaring of a Round. About these two secrets
of Geometry diverse learned men of our Age have taken great pains; as well in
their Commentaries upon Euclide, as in Books and Treatises printed apart. But
because these matters do require demonstrations with distinct number and
figure, it was impossible for me to set them down here; and my aim is at
things of more use and profit. He that would be further satisfied herein, let
him repair to the learned Mathematicians, or to their Books set forth in
Print. Nicolas de Cusa, Orontius, Cardan in his work de proportionibus,
Pelletier, Clauius, and Candales, in diverse demonstrations upon Euclide, have
largely discoursed upon these Secrets, and others drawing near unto them.

24. Keep faster. The Theoremes, Problemes and Propositions of Geometry,
contained in the books of Euclide are most certain, and out of all
controversy, among people endued with reason; as the Expositors of this Author
do plainly show. Howbeit the Sceptikes and Pyrrhonians, both old and new, do
oppose them. But the Poet simply considers the truth of things, rejecting all
Sophistry; which deserves not to be disputed withal, especially when it
denies principles; and such as these, whereby Geometry has filled the whole
world, and that but a hundred years since, with an infinite sort of rare and
admirable inventions.

25. By her the gentle stream. For proof of that last point, he brings in 1.
The use of Wind-mills and Water-mills. 2. Artillery. 3. The Sail, mast,
stern, and other furniture of a ship. 4. Printing. 5. The Crane or wheel,
devised to draw or lift-vp great stones to a high building; and other Engines,
to command and beat down pyles, planks and whole trees (if need be) into the
earth under water. 6. The Crosse-staffe, or Iacobs-staffe (as we call it) to
measure the Earth, Air, Heaven and Sea, and under this may be comprised all
other instruments, which the Surveyours of Land, Camp-masters, Geometors,
Astronomers, and other men use to that purpose, or the like. 7. All kind of
howre-glasses, of sand or water, Dyals of all sorts, and sounding clocks, to
mark how the time passes both by day and night. 8. Certain statues and
devises of wood, which by means of sundry gynnes of motion within them, have
been made to pronounce some words of man's voice: whereto may be added the
wooden Pigeon of Archytas, the Eagle and Fly of John de Montroyall, the
brazen head of Albertus Magnus, and the clock-cock of Strausburg. 9. The devise
of Daedalus, to fly in the air; which has been imitated since by others.
In the tenth and last place he glaunceth at the vaunt which Archimedes made,
that he would move the Earth out of place, if he had but elsewhere to stand.
These all deserve thoroughly to be considered; but for the present I will
content my self thus only to have pointed at them. And so come to the third
Image, which is Astronomy.

3. L'Astronomie ne peut estre bien veue que de ceux qui conoissent
l'Arithmetique and la Germetrie.
Or d'autant que ces deux nous donnent seure entree
Dans le saint Cabinet, ou l'Vranie astree
Tient sa ceinture d'or, ses lumineux pendans,
Ses Perles, ses rubis, and ses saphirs ardans:
Qu'homme ne peut monter sur les croupes iumelles
Du Parnasse estoille, que guinde sur leurs ailes:
Que quiconque est prive de l'vn de ces deux yeux,
Contemple vainement l'artifice des cieux:
Le sculpteur a dress pres de l'Arithmetique,
Et l'Art mesure-champ, l'image Astronomique.
Ornemens de l'Astronomie.
Elle a pour Diadem un argente Croissant,
Sous qui iusqa'aux talons a iaunes flots descend
Un Comet allume: pour yeux deux Escarboucles:
Pour robe un bleu Rideau, que deux luisantes boucles
Attachent sur l'espaule, un damas azure,
D'estoilles, d'animaux richement figure:
Et pour plumes encor elle port les ailes
De l'oiseau mouchete de brillantes roueles.
Now these two Arts because they lead us onward right
Into that sacred tent where Vranie the bright
Sits guirt in golden belt, with spangles albedight
Of carbuncl' and of pearl, of rubye and chrysolite;
And that a man withou the help of eithers quill
May never mount the twyns of starrie Pernas hill;
But whosoever wants one of these Eagles eyes,
In vain beholds the glore and fabric of the skies;
Therefore this cunning Wryght has near Arithmetrie
And Thou Art of measuring set-forth Astronomy.
A siluer-bright new Moon she wears for dyademe,
Wherevnder to her foot shines down with golden beam
A fiery blazing star; two pyrops are her eyes,
Or flaming Carbuncles; her gown is like the skies,
Blew damask, all with stars and pictures beautiside,
And with two golden claspes on either shoulder ty'de:
And for her plume or fan she bears the train and wings
Of bird whom nature decked with shining studs and rings.
26. Now these two Arts. Without the help of Arithmetike and Geometry (says
our Poet) a man is not able to reach unto the excellency of the third: as by
the Astronomical Institutions appears most plainly.

27. A siluer-bright New-Moone. Here is a fit dress for Astronomy; The Moon
her Coronet, because of all the Globes of Heaven that is nearest unto us; and
under that, her train is a Blazing star; because that fiery Meteor,
anciently thought to be engendered in the upper region of the Air, and ever
under the Moon, till of late it has been proved, by the Parallax, to be
sometime above. By the two Carbuncles here set for her eyes, are meant two
bright stars: the blew damask gown embrodered with stars and pictures of
living creatures, is the sky and Zodiac: the two golden clasps or buckles are
the Poles: by the plume, or fan of Peacocks feathers, may be meant the starrie
firmament, or eighth heaven A description very proper, and representing the
whole subject of Astronomy.

Mais que sont, dit Phalec, Les deux Globes, celui de sa main dextre est le
Tertestre ou la Sphere du monde ou se voyent La Terre,
dit Phalec, que sont ces globles peints
Qu'elle nous semble offrir en estendant ses mains?
Mon sils, respond Heber, ceste figure ronde
Faite a cercles croisez, est la Sphere du Monde,
Ou la verte rondeur du terrestre element
Retient le plus bas lieu comme vil excrement
Et marc de l'Vniuers, que la sage Nature
Entoure obliquement d'vne perse ceinture:
Ou plut ost que la mer couure des toutes pars,
Sice n'est quelques poincts confusement espars.
Car l'ondeux Ocean se laisse aller, La Mer,
humide,
Dans les creux plus profonds de l'Element solid:
Et cerche en l'inegal de sa vaste rondeur
Le center de son poids, and non de sa grandeur.
La seroit l'air, L'air, le feu. Les cieux des estoilles errantes and fixes ne
peuuent estre peints. Ils sont representez par des^ Cercles.
le feu, les cieux des sept Errantes,
Le plancher marquete de platines brillantes,
Les mobiles plus hauts, and le seiour des Saints,
L'vn sur l'autre estendus, s'ils pouuoient estre peints.
Maiis l'ouurier de ce Rond ayant feint en leur place
Dix circles embrassans la celeste sur-face,
Les a representezen un globe creuse,
Ily en a six grands: asauoir. L'Acquateur ou Equinoctial.
Pour nous guider la haut par un trac plus aise.
Enter les six plus grands, and qui d'vn pli contrere
Partent en deux moitiez le contour de la Sphere,
Le Cercle egale-nuicts est iustement distant
De ces deux Gonds, qui vont tout le monde portant,
Aussi chaque flambeau, qui sous lui se tournoye,
Postillonne tousiours par vne longue voye:
Fait vne plus grand traite, and va plus vistement
Que tout autre brandon qui luise au Firmament:
Qui se rend paresseux, tant plus pres d'vn des Poles
Au son du luth de Dieu il poursuit ses caroles:
Et tandis que Phoebus sous sa ligne conduit
Le char donne-clarte, la lumiere and la nuict
Marchent d'vn mesme pas, and la docte Nature
Les aune en tous pays d'vne mesme mesure.
Le Zodiaque.
Cest autre, qui sous lui se couche de trauers,
Escartant ses piuots de ceux de l'Vniuers
Vingt and quatre degrez, est dit le Zodiaque,
Lice des vagues feux ou Phoebus tousiours vaque
A r'amener les ans, and changeant de maisons,
Cause le changement de deux fois deux saisons.
Le premier Colure.
Cest autre, qui passant and par les Gonds du Monde
Et par les Gonds du cercle ou Phoebus fait sa ronde,
Form des angles droicts: and, courbe, va fendant
Dela le Capricorn, ici le Chancre ardant:
Des arrests du Soleil est nomme le Colure.
Car le Pere du iour rend morn son alleure
Aux poincts du coupement, comme ne dressant pas
Au long, ains sur les flanes de la Sphere ses pas.
Le deu xiesme Colure. Le Meridian.
C'est autre, qui le coupe en egale distance,
Auecques le Belier, les Poles, la Balance,
Est le second Colure. Et cestui le Mi-iour,
Qui ne fait dans le ciel en mesme poinct seiour,
Ains suit nostre Zenit, comme auec nostre veue
L'inconstant Horizon deca de la se mue.
L'Horizon. Les 4. petis cercles sont.
Quant aux quatres petits: voici de ce cost
Le Tropique hyuernal, la celui de l'Este:
Le Tropique du solstice d'hiuer. Le tropique d'Este. Le Cercle meridional. Le
Cercle Septenttional. Le globe en la main gauche, est le Celeste, representant
les estoilles du pole arctique and anttarctique.
Et plus pres des Piuots de la Sphere doree,
Ici le cercle Austral, la celui de Boree:
Cercles, qui ne passant, comme on void, a trauers
Du poinct qui, ferme, sert de center a l'Vniuers,
Ains faisant de la Shere inegales parcelles,
Enter eux and l'Equateur demeurent paralleles.
La Balle qu'elle tient en son senestre poing,
Est le portrait du Ciel. Car encor que de loing
L'Artsuyue la Nature, ici les belles ames
Admirent les beautez du lambris porte-flammes.
He Dieu quel plaisir c'est, qu'en tournant lentement
L'abrege rayonneux du door firmament,
On void comme passer d'vne superbe suite
Les luisans bataillons du Celeste exercite.
Figures attribuces aux estoilles par les Astronomes.
L'vn est arm de traicts and d'arc and de carquois,
L'autre de coutelas, and l'autre de long bois.
L'vn chet and l'autre assis dans un coche se roll
Sur l'airain azure de la flambante Boule.
L'vn est des gens de pied, l'autre march a cheual:
L'vn deuant, l'autre a dos: l'vn a mont, l'autre a val.
L'ordre est ence desordre: and leur paisible guerre
Engrosse l'Ocean, and feconde la terre.
Aspects diverse des corpse celestes.
Ie ne les voy iamais s'eutr'oeillader a part,
En triangle, en quadrangle, en sextile regard:
Or'doux, ore malins, qu'en un pre ie ne pense
Comparaison.
Voir des paisans galliards vne lasciue danse,
Ou l'vn and l'antre sex alegre, s'esiouit,
Ou l'vn file apres l'autre, ou l'vn pied l'autre suit,
Ou l'vn d'vn oeil ami guigne sur son espouse,
L'autre va descohant vne fleche ialouse.
Mais pourquoy, Objection de Phalec, pensant que Dieu ait imprime au ciel ces
diuerses figures selon qu'elles ont este imagintes par les.
dit Phalec, le Tout-beau, quine fait
Ca bas rien qui ne soit en beauty tout-parfait,
Imprima dans les pers de la voute supreme
(Ou doit auec l'Amour viure la Beauty mesme)
Tant de Monstres hideux, tant de fires animaux
Dignes concitoyens des esprits inferuaux?
Certes, replique Heber, la Divine industry
Astronomes: a quoy Heber respond proprement.
Ne fait rien qu'auec art and just symetrie:
Et ce qui mesme rend plus beau cest Universe,
C'est qu'il est haut and bas infiniment diverse.
Puis nos doctes parens, qui sur ce rond ouurage
Des clairs Signs du ciel firent le beau partage,
Donnerent a chacun and les noms, and les traits
Qui vont symbolisant a leurs quissans effaits.
Raison des noms donnez aux douze signs du Zodiaque.
Il ont fait un Mouton de l'Astre a double corn,
Qui vestu a'Or frize, des ans choque la borne,
D'autant que l'Vniuers sous ses tiedes chaleurs
Se pare richement d'vne toison de fleurs.
1. Au Monton.
Du second un Taureau d'autant qu'on couple a l'heure
Les Taureaux, 2. Au Taureau.
qui fuma^ts vont d'vne morn alleure
Seillonner la nouale: and renuersant les champs
Refourbissent l'acier de leurs coutres tranchans.
Et du tiers, 3. Aux Iumeaux.
des Iume aux, d'autant que la quadrelle
Du doux fire Cupidon fait du masle and femelle
Un corpse vraiment parfait: les fruits croissent bessons:
Et qu'on void tout d'vn coup fleur and grain and moissons.
4. Al'Escreuisse.
Au quart ils ont baille le non d'vne escreuisse,
D'autant qu'alors Phoebus deuers l'Autan reglisse,
Va comme elle en arriere: and, n'estant iamais las,
Sur vne mesme orniere il r'imprime ses pas.
A l'autre, 5. Au Lion.
d'vn Lion. Car comme son haleine
Brule pesteusement, la moissonneuse plain
Bluette sous cest astre, and tousiours sur les eaux
Le perruque Soleil sagette ses flambeaux.
Celui qui vient apres, 6. A La Vierge.
est nomme la Pucelle,
A cause que la terre abomine sous elle
Le regard amoureux du Soleil qui la cuit,
Et que ceste saison, vierge, rien ne produit.
L'autre, 7. A la Balance.
le Trebuchet, pour raison qu'il balance
La clarte guide-peine, and l'ombre aime-silence,
Le froid and la chaleur: and qu'au mois donne-vin
Le iour and nuict, pesez, demeurent sur le sin.
L'autre, 8. Au Scorpion
le Scorpion. Car sous lui lon endure
Les premiers aiguillons, d'vne triste froidure.
9. A l'Archer.
L'autre retient la form and le nom del' Archer,
Qui cruel, nuict and iour ne fait que descocher
Sur les bois, sur les tours, sur les herbs fenees
Ses sleches de glacons and de neige empennees.
De l'autre on fait un Bouc: 10. Au Boucou Cheurueil.
car tout ainsi que, pront,
De rocher en rocher le Bouc sautelle a mont,
L'estoille au crin door, l'ornement des Panetes,
Commence en remontant r'approcher de nos testes.
Et pour ce que le ciel sous les signs suyuans
Semble tousiours pleurer, nos bisay eux scauans
11. Au Verscau.
Out peint un Verseur d'cau dans le lambris du Monde,
12. Aux Poissons.
Et puis deux clairs Poissons, qui slottent dans son onde.
Autre raison, plus subtle.
Que si tu ne te peux contenter de ceci,
On peut, mon cher Phalec, dire que tout ainsi
Que plustost que le Rien par vne voix feconde
Fust fait and la matrice and l'embryon du Monde,
L'exemplaire eternel, l'auant-coucen portrait,
Et l'admirable seau de tout ce qui s'est fait,
Logeoit Diuinement dans l'esprit du grand Maistre,
Et l'Vniuers auoit essence anant son estre:
Ainsi le Trois fois grand tendant, ingenieux,
Du ciel esclaire-tout le rideau precieux,
Le chargea de facon, and des futurs ouurages,
Ainsi qu'en un tableau y peignit les images.
Au ciel sont. les modelles de ce qui est co terre.
Voici pas le crayon d'vn fleuue iaunissant,
Qui par le bleu plancher, tortueux, va glissant?
Ici le Corbeau vole, ici l'Aigle se jove:
Le Daufin nage ici, la Baleine ici noue:
Le Cheualy bondit, l'aileureuly fuit:
L'ardent T'aureauy fume, and le Dragony luit:
Et l'air, la terre, and l'eau n'ont en eux chose belle,
Qu'on en treuue la haut quelque insigne modelle.
Mesme nos coutelas, nos couronnes, nos traits,
Nos balances, nos dards, ne sont que le extraits
Des saints originaux, que Dieu par sa porole
Escriuit pour iamais dans les livers du Pole.
28 But what (quoth Phaleg) mean these globes of diverse hew
She holds in hand, and seems to reach unto our view.
My son (quoth Heber then) this round shape set-out here
With circles overthwart, is of the world the Sphere:
Where th'element of Earth made like a greenie ball,
The settled residence and cent'r of all this All,
Retains the lowest place; this the wise Naturante
With azure-wauie skarfe has guirt-about aslante:
Or (plain to say) 29 The Sea does cou'r all every where,
But only certain parts disparpled here and there.
For The Ocean Tide he flows and leaking finds a vent
Into the deepest holes of all th'erth-element;
And where her ouer-face has any unequal traite
Seeks-out the midder point not of his mass; but wait.
30 Here should the Air and the Fire, and all the wandering seau'n,
The starre-empowdred vault, the highest-whirling heaven,
And th'empyrean-selfe be one ore other set,
But that each upper seen would sight of th'vnder let.
Therefore in place of them the workman of this Round
Ten circles here has made one over others bound,
And Armyllary-wise has set-out their array,
To lead us up on-high an easy and gainer way.
Six great Circles.
31 Among the greater Six, that with a counterplight
Do halfe-diuide the globe, the circl' of match-day-night
The Aequater.
Is justly set betwixt the North and Southern pole,
Which beare-vp, and whereon is turnd-about the Whole:
Now every lamp of heaven that vnderglideth it
A longer journey takes, and does more wightly flit
Then any of all the rest, who narre the Poles have leisure
Unto the Lute of God to dance a slower measure:
And always when the Sun his give day charrot guides
Right under line thereof, and rometh not besides,
The day and night go even, and cunning Nature than
In every country metes them out with equal span.
The Zodiac.
32 This other couched here next vnd'r it ouerth war,
Whose poles do from the poles of The All warp-out apart
Some twenty four degrees, is called the Zodiac,
The race of wandering flames: here Phoebus keeps his track
To bring-about the years, and monthly changing Innes
Procures the quarter-change of Seasons double twins.
The first Colure.
33 This other passing-through the poles both of the world
And of the foresaid wheel where Phoebus round is horld,
And framing angles even on th'Equinoctiall rote
A th'onside thwarts the Crab, ath'otherside the Goat,
The Solsticial Colure is called, for Phoebus there
Runs slow, as not along, but ath'onside the Sphere:
The second Colure.
34 And this here crossing that in spheryck angles even
And running by the Ram, the Skoles and Axe of heaven,
The second is, and called the nigh-equall Colure.
The Meridian.
35 And this the circle of Noone, that never stands sure,
But with our Zenith flits: as also with our sight
The Horizon.
Th'vnstedfast Horizon takes every way his flight.
Now for the lesser four, aside th'Equator lie
Four less Circles.
36 The winter Tropic low, and summer Tropic high.
The Tropicks.
And higher then the high is 37 th'Artick circle pight;
And lower then the low th'Antartick out of sight.
The North Circle and the South.
These four miss common Centr' and wry-part heau'ns-high wheel; --
Each to th'Equat'r and each vnt' each is paralleel.
The Globe of heaven.
38 The Ball she bears in left the portrait is of heaven;
For howbeit Art we find to Nature match uneven,
Good wits yet ner'thelesse thus also take delight
To view and maruaile-at the Vault so flamie-bright.
O what a pleasure it is that turning softly about
This starrie brief of heaven we see as 'twere come out,
And with a stately train before our eyes to coast,
The bands and banners bright of that all-conquering host!
One has a quiu'r and bow, Shapes given by diverse aspects.
with arrows quick-to-strike;
Another swayes a Mace; another shakes a pike.
One lies along, anoth'r enthrond in stately chair
Rowles-ore the brazen blew of th'euer-shining Sphaire.
Behold, some march afoot, and some on horseback ride;
Some up, some down, and some before, behind, beside:
Here Is ord'r even in disord'r; and of this jar does come
Both unto Sea and Land a plenty-swelling womb.
39 I never see them look one aft'r anoth'r askance
In tryangl, in quadrangle, or in sextile agglance,
Sometime with gentle smile, and sometime with a frown,
But that me thinks I see the brave youth of a town
All dancing on a green; where each sex freely plays,
And one another leads to foot the country lays:
Where one darts as he go'th a look of I elousie,
Another throws his Less a lovely glauncing eye.
40 Then Phaleg said, Phalegs objection concerning the strange shapet given by
the
how is it (Sir) that the Souerain-faire
Who naught unseemly makes in Sea, in earth, in air,
Yet on this heavenly vault, which does all else contain,
(Where ought delight her self and grace and beauty reign)
Sets many a cruel beast and many a monster fell,
That meeter were to abide among the fiends in hell?
Son (answers Heb'r) indeed the curious hand of God
Makes all by rules of Art, Astronomers.
and nothing gracelesse-odde;
And this especially the world does beautify,
Hebers answer.
That both aloft and here is such variety.
Yet more, our ancestors that wisely drew the lines,
And skoared first the Globe according to the Signs,
Gave each a name and shape implying such effects
Reason of the names given to the Signs.
As on all vnder-things they work by their aspects.
For thy a Ram they made the Suns twyhorned Inn,
His curly-golden sign whereat the years begin.
1. The Ram.
Wherevnd'r is all the land lukewarmed piece by piece
And puts on rich attire, a flowrie-golden fleece.
The next they made a Bull, 2. The Bull.
for there they wont to yoke
The softly-drawing steers that in a sweaty smoke
Plow-vp the fallow grounds, and turning-ore the mould
Do skowre the coult'r again that rust before had fould.
Twins of the third they made, 3. The Twins.
where Love that angry-sweet
The male and female makes in one together meet
For eithers perfiture; when fruit in cluster grows,
And all at once are seen both flowr' and graynie rows.
The fourth a Crab, 4. The Crab.
whereat this prince of wandering fires
A coast the South again vntireably retires;
And backward (like a Crab) the way before he trod
Reprints with equal steps, and keeps his beaten rode.
The fifth a Lion fierce; 5. The Lion.
for as the Lions are
Of hot-infecting breath, so under this same star
Our harvest glowes with heat; yea on the Sea and streams
The Lyon-maned Sun shoots-out his burning beams.
The sixth by their devise the title has of a maid,
6. The Virgin.
Because The Earth like a Girl therevnd'r is ill apaid
To bear the loue-hot looks that Phoebus on her flings,
And then, chaste as a maid, no fruit at all she brings.
The next has of the Scoales, 7. The Balance.
because it seems to way
The silence-louing night and labour-guiding day,
The Summer and the Wint'r, and in the month of Wines
Makes either side so even, as neither more declines.
The next, because we feel then first the Summer gone,
And sting of Winter come, 8. The Scorpion.
they called a Scorpion.
The next, in name and shape an Archer, bow in hand,
9. The Archer.
He shoots day and night upon the witherd land,
Upon th'embattled towrs, upon the tufted woods,
His arrows fethered with Ise and snowie soods,
The next they made a Goat, where, as in shaggie locks
10. The Goat.
The Goat is wont to clime and countermount the rocks,
Our goldy-locked Sun, the fairest wandering star,
Remounting up the Globe begins to come us narre.
And in the latter signs, because they saw a wet
And euer-weeping heaven, our fathers wisely set
11. The Water-bearer.
One with a water-spout still running over the brim,
12 The Fishes.
And fishes there apaire which in the water swim.
But if-so this (my son) not satisfy thy mind,
Another more subtle reason.
A man may well thereof some other reason find;
As, that before the word of God made all of naught,
Before that breeding voice not only The Infant wrought
But even the womb of All; th'eterne exampl' and plot,
The wondrous print of things, (now being, and then not)
On heavenly manner lodged in th'Architects foreseeing;
And thus, before it was, the world it had a being.
So first the great Three-One with drift ingenious
Diplaid of shining heaven the curtain precious;
And, as upon a slate, or on a painters frame,
The shape, of things to-be, portrayed on the same.
Lo, is not there the draught of some gold-sandy brook
On the beauens are the models of all on earth.
That on this azure ground glydes (as it were) acrooke?
There softly fannes a Rav'n, here swiftly an Eagle drives;
There walloweth a Whale, and here a Dolphin dives:
A Dragon glisters here, a Bull there sweating frets;
Here runs the light-foot Rid, and there the horse curuets;
What thing so goodly abides in air, at sea, aground,
But some right shape thereof in heaven aloft is found?
Our balances, our crowns, our arrows, darts and maulles,
What are they but estreats of those originals
Whereof The Almighty word engroue the portraiture
Upon the books of heaven for evermore to endure?
28 But what (quoth Phaleg.) Phaleg asks Heber concerning the two Globes that
Astronomic held in her hands Heber makes answer that in her right hand is the
Globe of Sea and Earth: and because there-ouer could not be painted the
Elements of Air and Fire; nor over them the heavens of Stars wandering and
fixed; the Primum mobile, and Empirean; they are all here together tepresented
by ten Circles, whereof I shall speak hereafter: but first concerning the Seas
interlacement with the Earth, to make on Globe.

29 -- The Sea does cou'r all every where, But only in certain parts
d^sparpled here and there. All the points hence arising to be considered, may
be drawn to eight Articles. 1 Concerning the diverse names of the Sea. 2.
Concerning the place or Channel thereof. 3. To show the parts thereof, and
whether it composse the Earth, and how. 4. Why it is not increased by the
waters continually falling into it. 5 Concerning the Ebb and Flow. 6. Why the
Seawater is salt. 7. Of the Enterlacement of the Sea with the Land. 8. Whether
the Earth be round or flat.
Of them all in order.

1 For the Names of the Sea, it is called of our Poet, The Ocean, Neptune,
Neree, and La-Mer. Some think this last was drawn from the Latin Amarum,
because the Seawater is salt and bitter. Why not rather of Mare, which comes
of Marath, signifying the same? The word Ocean has diverse Etymologies. For
Suidas holds the Sea so called of a privative turned into (...), and (...)
diuido, because the waves thereof so follow one another, as they cannot be
severed. Others derive it of (...), that signifies Swift; because the Sea has
so quick a continual motion. The other two names are merely poetical, and
used by a Metonymie.

2 Now concerning the place or Channel of the Sea: It is said in the 33.
Psalm, That God has gathered the waters together as into a vessel, and
heaped them up as a treasure: Whereto not unlike is the Philosophers opinion;
that the Earth is the Center of the world, girt and compassed (though here and
there uncovered) by the Sea; which also falles-into, and filles up the hollow
deepes thereof; and so becomes a huge mass and treasure (as it were) of
waters, from whence the Divine providence draws innumerable Rivers, to run
through the veins and over the face of the Earth. And further, that the Sea is
not only the receptacle of all rivers thereinto falling; but is also the great
storehouse of waters, both for the Earth, and Sun; which haling-vp the
steeme of waters from Sea, to mid region of the Air, makes thereof diverse
Meteors, but most store of Rain. Our Terrestrial Globes, and the report of
Pilots and Nauigators, that within this hundred years have t^auelled all Seas,
make-good that is said of the great bed or channel of the waters. And thereto
also accords that which Ovid has, 1. Metam. Tum freta dissundit rapidisque
tumescere ventis.
Iussit, and ambitae circundare littora terrae.
Then spread the Seas, them bad with boistrous wind
To swell, and all the Shores of Earth imbind.


3 Whereas it has been aforesaid, in ordering the Elements, that the Water is
above the Earth; this breeds a scarre to the third Article: for if the Sea lie
higher then the Land, and does the same round about enuiron; how comes it to
pass that the Land is not ouerflowed thereby? Considering this Element is not
easily kept within bounds; but of a moist and flowing nature, still running
downward. But this is before answered in the second Article, where it is said,
that the Sea is gathered together on a heap to a large compass; so as the
parts thereof next the land, tending toward the proper Center of their whole
mass, draw not from, but rather to the Sea; which has for maine bed or
channel that large extent of the East and West O^ean: where, what do we see
(to speak of) but waters? For a few Islands, here and there scattered, are
nothing to the huge wasternes of the Sea. And that is moved three kind of
ways: One way, as it is Water; another way, as it is the Sea; the third, as it
is accidentally forced by the winds. Of the later I will not here speak, but
of the two former together. It is the nature, indeed, of all water to run
downwards; but the Sea, as well in proper channel (where it is hoised far
above the land) as also in the parts and arms thereof, has set-limits and
bounds which it cannot pass. For so Almighty God the Creator has ordained;
who shut the Sea with do^res, when it b^ake forth as if it had iss^od out of
the womb, Job. 38.8. Who bound the Sea with Sand, by a perpetual decree,
which it cannot pass; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can
they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it, Ier.
5.22. and diverse like places there are in holy Scripture. Now, whereas the Sea
and Land do make one Globe together, certain it is that the highest part of
the Land is commonly furthest from the sea, as plainly appears by the current
of Rivers; and the highest of Sea furthest from Land. This also is proved by
diverse of the learned, and men expert in Navigations; who say, that coming to
land, they perceive the Sea still to decline, and that under the Equator it is
higher than in any place else: the reason is (I think) because there it has
in furface the largest compass, and highest Arch of a Circle, or Globe; as
appears by the Card. How then does the Sea compass and enuno on the whole
Earth? First by the great body thereof, which is the Ocean; then by the
Midland-sea, the Sound, and other like Bays; by the Cimbrian, Arabian, Persian
Gulphes; and many other little Seas and great Rivers; which are to that body,
as arms, legs, veins and hair, whereby it is joined to the Earth. The
particulars of both are plainly set forth unto us, both in our globy and flat
Mappes of the world; that I need say no more of them.

4 For the fourth Article we must consider this; that the Earth so environed
with Sea is a spongie and poicus body, full of channels and conduit-pipes; both
near her ouer-face, and through her inner parts every way: whereby it comes to
pass, that all the great streams arising of little springs and fountains
far from Sea, and, before they come there, encountering and bearing with them
an ininite company of land floods, brooks, and small tides; yet increase not
the Sea; which affords so much water to the whole Earth by her secret ways
aforesaid. As for the Snow and Rain, which falls sometime in great plenty,
to increase the waters: this is but an exchange that the Air still makes in
paying that again which it borrowed of the Sea. Yet above all is the power and
wisdom of God the Creator to be thought-on, who by his only will and command
keeps so the waters heapt-together in his great Magazin of the Sea; which
otherwise, both by reason of their nature, and daily increase, would ouerflow
all, as they did before God commanded the dry-land to show it self: then fled
they at the voice of their Maker, as it is said in the 104. Psalm, And
beholding the shore stopped their course there; yea ran again backward, as
fearing their Master.

5 Hereupon it folleth out fit, that I speak somewhat of the Seas Ebb and
Flow. This is the right and proper motion thereof, considered, not as water,
but as the Sea. The Poet in the third day of his first week, shows diverse
opinions concerning this Ebb and Flow. Some think that when the waters were
first commanded to retire and show the dry-land, God gave them this perpetual
motion; which as a balance, whereof the Equator is beam, does rise and fall
without ceasing; and has this virtue from the Primouable; and shall continue
it to the worlds end. But the learneder sort hold the Moon, by her diverse
apparitions of waxing and waining, to cause this motion of the Sea. Whereunto
the Poet also, in place aboue-quoted, seems to incline. Some say also the
Sun helps it forward, and breeds great alteration in the mass of waters, by
his great heat and brightness: because it is observed that always, when the
Sun and Moon are in conjunction, the Seas Ebb and Flow is greatest: but
this also comes specially by the Moon; as by some reasons here following shall
further appear. The holy Scripture indeed here, as all where else mining the
wondrous order of Nature, teaches us to lift up our thoughts to God the
Creator; who stirs and stays the Sea, how and when it pleases him: yet may
we say nevertheless, that herein he commonly does use the service of second
causes; though keeping still to himself the sovereign authority over them
all; so as he can hinder, change, and utterly destroy them at his pleasure.
With this acknowledgement consider we these Inseriour causes. Plutarch in his
third book of the Philosophers Opinions, Chap. 17. shows what they thought of
old time concerning the T^des and alterations of the Sea. Some (he says)
ascribe the cause of them to the Sun and Winds; others to the Moon; a third
sort, to the high-rising of waters in general; a fourth, to the swelling of
the Atlanticke Sea. Now he distinguishes the motion into three kinds; to wit,
the Stream, and that is natural; the Flood, and that is violent; the Ebb,
and that is extraordinary. As for the Flood, it is a motion of the Sea water,
rising and falling twice in some and twenty hours; whereby the Sea is purged
and cleansed, by certain periods answerable to the rising and setting of the
Moon. It is in the n^ame Ocean, open to the winds, that the sloud is
strongest, but appears chiefe^y by the shore-side, and where it is not checked
or staid by some isla^ds. The Midland Sea has not the Tide: In the Adriatike
and other like Bays there is searse any. The Baltique has none at all;
because it is so straightned and bound with land every way, and is so full of
Islands. If the Moon be in the waine, or past the first qua^ter, the Tide is
every where weak; but near the new Moon, or full, it waxes very strong: and
this is held to be the reason, because this Planet being so near unto us, and
having Domimon over all moisture, increases the waters, and draws them to and
fro, as she rises or sets: for where she sets unto us, she rises unto
the other Hemisphere. The Ebb and Flow is sometime more slow and gentle,
sometime more swift and violent, according as the Moon waineth or waxes: but
herein must we note also the diverse seasons of the year; together with the
winds, which help or hinder much the Tides, and cause them to run more swift
or slow. This power has the Moon by motion of the Primouable; which makes
her tise and set, as the Sun and other Stars do, in the space of a day.
When she rises, the sea begins to swell, till she come to the Medridian or
Moone-line of any place; and from thence abateth all the while she is tending
to the set: then the Sea descends with her, till she come toward the
Counter-Meridian; where the water is again at the highest, and falls till she
rise again to this our Hemisphere. So whereas the Tides keep no certain
hour, but are sometime sooner, sometime later; the cause is, that, though the
Moon be whirled about with motion of the Primouable; yet, having proper motion
in latitude of the Zodiac, thwarting that other, she rises not always at
the same time, nor in the same Sign, not with the same light and distance from
the Sun; nor with the same conjunction and aspect of other Planets and fixed
Stars: all which cause a difference, and are some more, some less disposed to
the increase of waters. And these Sea-waters do also much differ in nature:
Some are clear and purified, and have room enough; these flow moderately, but
higher; others muddy, thick, and kept-in with straights; which run with more
violence, though not with so high a Tide. This has God appointed to cleanse
and preserve the waters: for in time of calmes they grow rank, and the Sea
sends-vp ill vapors; being the great sink (as it were) of corrupt matter,
which is to be scummed and cleansed by the Tides and winds. These also do
serve for Navigations; but chiefly to magnify the Creators wonderful power;
when we see thereby, and consider how truly it is said in the Psalm 107.23.
and 24. They that go dawne to the Sea in sh^ps, and occupy their busiaesse in
great waters, do see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep,
etc. For that huge mass of salt water yields it self captive (as it were) to
the Moone-beames, and thereby is easily commanded. I will enter no further into
the cause of this Miracle, but, lest I be too long in these notes, leave those
to search it deeper, that are more able.

6 Concerning the bitter and saltness of the Seawater, Plutarch has spoke
thereof, in his book of the Philosophers Opinions, 3.16. see what he says
there; and in the ninth question of his first book of Table-talke, and in the
first question of his Natural causes. Aristotle in the 23. Section of his
Problemos. Pliny in his second book, from the 97. chap. to the 101. where he
assoiles the most objections that are made concerning this point of the Sea:
but especially in the 110. he ascribes there to the Sun the Saltness of
Seawater at the top, not at the bottom. With him agrees Mellichius upon the
same Chapter of Pliny: Garcaeus in the 36. Chapter of his Meteorologie:
Danaeus in his Christian Physickes, 2.11. And Velcurio in his Comment upon
Aristolles Natural Philosophy, 3.7.

7 Of the seventh Article enough has been said in the third, and the
Terrestrial Globe and Mappes do make all very plain.

8 There rests, for the eight Article a word to be said concerning the form or
shape of the Sea; whether it be round or flat. That which has been
aforesaid, shows plainly it is round; but neither in it whole self, nor
parts: how then? Only as it is enterlaced with the whole body of the Earth, and
has for bed the great deep. If any be so curious, as to seek herein further
satisfaction; let him read Scaliger against Card. Exercit. 37. etc. So much
for these eight Articles touching the Sea.

30 Here should The Air. The Poet goes about here to range in proper place both
the Elements and Heavens: to wit, The Earth lowest, the Water next thereupon,
then the Air, then the Fire: next over these the seven Planets, and above them
the Fix-star-heauen embrased with the primouable; and over that the glorious
habitation of Saints. This is the common opinion of Christian Astronomy,
agreed-on by most Winters both of late and former times. Some few, as
Copernicus and his followers, gainsay it: but the Poet takes after that
opinion, which is most likely and most received.

31 Among the greater Six The Terestriall Globe has Ten Rings or Circles; six
great ones; so called, because they divide the Sphere after the full compass
thereof into equal parts: and four called lest, because they divide it into
parts unequal. The first of the great, here mined by the Poet, is the Equator
or Equinoctial, which I term The Circl' of Match-day night. This Circle in
every part thereof is like distant from the Poles of the world: divides the
Globe into two equal parts, and is the greatest of all the Circles: by reason
whereof it comes to pass that the Sun and other Planets have under this a
swifter course than other of those heavenly bodies: as contrariwise, they run
slower when they come nearer the Poles. And when the Sun is under this Line,
day and night is equal throughout the world, and that caused the name. There
are two such times in the year; the one called of the Spring the Vernall
Equinox, about the eleventh of March; the other the Autumnall of that Season,
and falls commonly near the thirteenth of September. For when the Sun
first enters Aries, or Libra; then is he under the Equinoctial, and stays
as long above, as under every Horison: that is, twelve hours a piece, half
the natural day. This and the rest would better be understood with an
Armillary Sphere in hand.

32 This other. The second great Circle is called the Zodiake, which diuides
the Equator into two equal parts, at the beginning of Aries and Libra, and the
one toward the North, is called the Articke half, and the other, toward the
South, the Antarticke half of the Equator. The Zodiake has other Poles or
Axelpoints, than those of the world, and from them also distant 24. degrees:
which also in the Globes turning draw-out the Tropicke Circles of Cancer and
Capricorn; whereof hereafter.

33 This other passing-through. The Astronomers imagine also two other great
Circles, called the Colures, which a man may think do stead the Globe no more
than to hold the parts thereof together. For the office that some give them to
distinguish the Night-qualles and Sunstaies, belongs more properly to the
Equator and Tropickes. The Poet here exactly describes the first Colure, and
says it is drawn from one of the Tropickes to the other, to note the stays
of the Sun, who coming thereto near, goes not so fast as before.

34 And this here crossing. This is the description of the second Colure, that
shows the equal space betwixt the two Equinoxes, or Eauen-nights of Spring
and Autumn, and the two Solstices or Sun-stayes of Summer and Winter. The word
Colure comes of the Greek, (...), which signifies curtolled, or cut off by the
tail: because only one part appears unto us, and the other is hid, and so
says Proclus.

35 And this the circl' of Noon. That is, the Meridian, which passing through
the Poles, and our Zenith, or Crowne-point, diuides the Globe into halues, the
one East, the other West. It is called the Noon-line, or Meridian, because
always when the Sun by sway of the Primovable comes thereto, at what time or
place soever, then there it is Noone; and Noone is nothing else but the midday
Natural, or Artificial: Whereupon it follows, that all Cities under the same
Meridian stand alike distant from East and West: and contrary-wise, if one be
nearer East or West then another, they have not the same Meridian, but diverse.
Th'arke then, or round parcel of th'Equator (reckoning from West to East)
which is between the Meridian of the Fortunate Isles, and the noon-point of
any place or City, is colled the longitude or length of that City or place;
and their Latitude or breadth is the Arc of their Noon-circle from th'Equator
to the Crowne-point. Hence also arises the distinction of Climats, implied here
in the word Horison, which moves as far as you will to North or South. The
Ancient Astionomers (says Appian in the 6. Chapter of his Cosmography) divided
the whole Earth into seven Climats, or degrees of heat and cold: but we now
observe nine, by reason of our late more exact discoueries. A Climate is a
space of the Earth between two paralels, or lines of Latitude, differing half
an hour in Sunne-dyall one from other: for the Sun drawing from the Equator
toward the Poles, must needs make the days unequal. And so much is one Climat
removed from the Equato, as makes the days there differ half an hour from
the Equinox; from Day-and night-cauen. Here further is to be noted, that every
Climate takes (...) of (...): en^^keble City, River, Country, Isle, or
Mountain etc. From the ^^qu^^^ then to reckon Northward, the first Climate is
c^lled of M^^^, because it runs through the midst of that City in d^^^ke:
(...) second of Sie^^, a City in Egypt, under the Tropic of Ca^^^: the third,
of Alexandria; the fourth, of Rhodes; the fifth, of Rome; the sixth, of Pontus;
the seventh, of Boristhenes; the eight, of the Riphean hills; and the ninth, of
Denmark: And Southward, the same with note of opposition, or relation; as the
first is Counter-Me^oe, the second Counter-Sie^^, and so the rest.

36 The Winter Tropicke. Having spoken of the six great Circles in the Sp^ere,
he comes now to handle the four less; whereof two are cal^ed Tropicks or
Turns, one of Winter, the other of Summer. The Winter-Tropicke circle is made
or drawn by the Sun first entering into Capricorn; whereof it is called also
the Tropicke of Capricorn, and falls out nigh the 12. of September, with the
Winter Sunne-stay: for then the Sun ^ay go no further from us, but turns
again toward us; and thence has this Circle the name: as also that other
Tropicke of Cancer, which is the Summer Sun-stay or Turnagaine of the Sun
then entering into Cancer, (about the 12. of June) and mounting no higher above
our Horison.

37 The two other small Circles, are the Artick and Antartick, both equally
distant from the Equator, and easy to be observed in the Maps, both flat and
round. They are imagined, for Astronomy-sake, to be drawn by the Poles of the
Zodiac moving about the fixed Poles of the world; one at North, the other at
South. That of the North is called the Artick or Beare-circle, of that Pole so
near ar markable Star in tail of the little Bear; I say so near, because,
although it be commonly called the Pole-starre, yet is it some four degrees
from the Pole: that of the South is called Antartick, because it is opposite to
the other Circle and Pole, and has not (no more then the South-pole it self)
as yet got any other proper name: though some that have that way sailed, have
observed, about the South-pole, one great and fair Star called Can^pus; and
others take notice of four, which ^^ey call the Cross.

38 The Ball she b^ares. After description of the Globe Terrestrial, he comes
to the Celestial, the Globe of Heaven; wherein are set down, from either side
of the Equator to the Poles, the suadry Constellations, according to the diverse
names and figures, which the Astronomers have given them; to show in what sort
they work upon the lower bodies on earth, and to make their postures and
distances the better observed.

39 I never see them look. By a dainty comparison he touches, in few verses,
upon the chief point of Astronomy; concerning the Aspects, influences, and
wonderful operations of the Setstars and Planets; according to their sundry
conjunctions and distances (beside their proper motions) caused by the heavens
admirable whirlung-about. To speak of these, their aspects, and glauncings one
at another, in Triangle, Quadrangle and Sextile, whereupon the Astrologers make
their discourse and judgment, would require a long Comment. Read the third
book of the Diuinations of learned Peucer.

40 Then Phaleg said, how is it. Phaleg (as the Poet makes him) imagining all
these strange and ugly shapes, which Astronomers have devised, were by the
Creators self so drawne-out and limbed on the ouerface of heaven, asks Heber
the reasons thereof: who names diverse, here cunningly set forth by the Poet.
The first is taken from the consideration of Gods infinite wisdom. who in the
diverse proportions of so many bodies, has engraven most manifest arguments of
his own greatness and power. The second is, that the ancient Astronomers,
well weighing the powerful effects of these heavenly Signs, gave them names
most answerable to their properties As in the Zodiac (to omit the rest) there
is 1. the Ram, 2. the Bull, 3. the Twynnes, 4. the Crab, 5 the Lion, 6. the
Virgin, 7. the Balance, 8. the Scorpion, 9. the Archer, 10. the Goat, 11. the
Water bearer, 12. the Fishes.
Of those Marsilius Ficinus, in his Comment upon Ficinus Platonicus (3. lib.
Ennead. 2.) has in few words to this effect. The old Heathen Philosophers did
set the Ram first of all the Signs in the Zodiac, in honor of Jupiter Ammon,
whom also they were wont to paint with two horns on his head: The Bull
follows next, because when the Sun comes there, the earth is fit for
tillage: In third place, the Twynnes, for increase and multiplication of all
things then springing and engendring: After these comes the Crab, because the
Sun in that Sign begins to recoyle and go backward: then the Lion, because
there the Sun is most hot and fiery colored: then the Virgin, because the
earth at that time scorched with heat of the Sun, is barren, or like a Maid
brings forth no increase: then the Skoales or Balance, because the Sun
therein weighs (as it were) the day and night, and makes them equal: then
the Scorpion, so called, because the Sun is there gone so far of, that the
Air begins to stnoteng us with cold: and therefore the rather next follows
the Archor: so named for the piercing cold of his arrows driven with the wind.
The Goat has the next place, because the Sun there begins again to raise up
himself, as a Goat does to brouse: The two last are allotted unto the Waterman
and Fishes, for the much rain and moist season of January and February. Some
say otherwise; that these Signs, and the rest, had their names from the
posture of stars in their sundry constellations. Let me join hereto (as it
will be are the translating) that which Macrobius has in the first book of
his Saturnals, chap. 21. The Egyptians when they would consecrate an Image for
the Sun, they made it with the head halfe-shauen and hairie on the right side
This hair kept-on does import that the Sun is never quite hidden, or hindered
from his working upon natural things: but the shaven hair, whose roots yet
are left, shows that this glorious Planet even when we see him not, has
power like hair to rise and grow again upon us. Hereby also they signified
that time of year when the day close-powled (as it were) is at the shortest;
which men of old time called the Winter-Sun-stay, in Latin So^stitium brumale,
of Bruma, drawn from (...), Short day. Thence the Sun thrusting upward
again, out of the secret places where he lay (as it were) hid, enlarges his
course, and preuailes even to the Sun-stay of Summer; which is counted his
kingdom; and therefore the Egyptians have consecrated the beast that stands in
Zodiac, where the Sun has yearly greatest heat: and call that Sign of the
Lion, the house of the Sun, because the substance of that beast seems to be
drawn from the nature of that Planet. For first he surpasses all other beasts
in force and heat, as the Sun does other Stars: then as the Sun in the
forepart of the day and year, has his force still increasing till Noone or
Summer, and then grows weaker and weaker till Set, which is the weakest part
of the day; and Winter which is the weakest of the year; even so is the Lion
made strong before, small and weak behind. Moreover, it is observed, that the
Lion has his eyes always open and sparkling; as the Sun with an open and
unweariable eye, looks on the round world continually. Thus of that Sign,
though all the rest also are held by good reason agreeable to the nature of the
Sun. To begin with the Ram; See the great agreement: For he, during the six
months of Winter, uses to lie on his left side; and all the rest, from the
Spring to Winter again, on his right: as the Sun also, from the Equinox or
Euen-night of Spring runs the right side- Hemisphere, and at the other
Euen-night changes to the left: and for that cause Jupiter Ammon, the supposed
Sunne-setting god of Libya, is fained to have the horns of a Ram; wherein lies
the force of that beast, as the force of the Sun is in his beams: The
Greeks also call him (...), a Ram, of (...), a horn. Now, that the Bull has
some correspondence with the Sun, the Egyptian Idolatry shows it by diverse
instances: one, that in Heliopolis (i. the City of the Sun) they chiefly
worship a Bull called Netiros, consecrate to the Sun: Another, because the
City of Memphis honors the Bullock Apis for the Sun: a third is, that in a
stately Temple of Apollo at Herminthi they consecrate to the Sun, and worship
a Bull, which they call Bacchis, there famous for diverse miracles agreeable to
the nature of the Sun: for his hair grows backward contrary to the nature
of other beasts; and therein they hold him like the Sun, striving against the
course of Heaven: they say also that he changes his color every hour in the
day. What to make of this I the Translator know not; except it imply the same
that Hermes Trismegistus noted, when he saw in Egypt a beast dedicated to
Serapis, make-water twelve times of equal distance in a day; and thereby
gathered that the day should be divided into twelve hours, P. Virg. de Invent.
2.5. and this may have relation to the Sun: but I come again to Macrebius.
The Sign of Twins, which are taken for Castor and Pollux, that were thought
to live and dye by turns, what may it better signify then one and the same
Sun, sometime rising upon our Hemisphere, sometime going down to the other?
The side-way crawling of the Crab, what better can it mean, then the Suns
never straight, but side-way passing through the Signs; and here especially,
where he begins to turn from aloft downward? Of the Lion we have said
already. The Sign of the Virgin with an care of corn in her hand, what means
it else, but the power and virtue of the Sun, whereby that ear and all
others are laden with Come? therefore also is this Maiden taken for Justice,
which only causes all fruits growing to serve man's use. The Scorpion, and the
Balance likewise, does wholly represent the Suns Nature, which is but cold
and stark in Winter, and sunk down as the lower Scoale; but afterward
stirs-vp again the sting of his inward force, nothing diminished by the late
could. The Archer which is lowest of all the Signs in the Zodiak, has the
forepart of a man, and hinder-part of a horse: to show that the Sun is
fallen from his highest place to his lowest; as it is a strange abasing of a
man, to become a beast; yet shootes he an arrow, to signify that all creatures
on earth be cheered and quickened by the Sun, howeuer far from them. Under
the Goat the Sun begins to advance himself again from below; and this is
the right manner of that beast, who commonly stands on his hinder legs to
feed upon the Rocks above him. And does not the Water bearer show also the
right nature of the Sun? For how should we have rain upon the earth, if the
Suns hear drew not first the vapors upward; which being turned into water by
the cold mid-region of the Air falls down again in plentiful shewers? In
the last place of the Zodiac are the Fishes. These also have been consecrated
unto the Sun; not so much for likelihood of nature, as to show the force and
virtue of that Planet, which maintains life not only in the Birds of the
Air, and Beasts of the field; but even among those Creatures also, which
living in the water seem to be unseen of him. So mighty is the Suns
operation, that with his piercing beams he quickneth such things as man would
think far out of his reach. So ends the Chapter. Now concerning such
Countries as are subject to the sundry Signs, look what Ptolomey says, and
what the Poet Manilius in the fouth book of his Astronomicall Poem; though
many toys he has, not agreeing with Ptolomey. Read also Lucas Gauricus, who
in his Geometry has set down every particular. I tell them not here, lest I
be too long.

41. But if-so this. Of the aforesaid shapes in heaven, this is the third
reason, somewhat more curious then the two former; to wit, that God, from all
Eternity conceiving in himself the Idea and pattern of the World, which he
meant to create, would have the models of all earthly things be recorded in the
heavens: I call this a curious reason; because if it be narrowly examined, it
will be found but a pretty invention to embellish a Poem, wherein a man has
leave to take any matter, sauouring of truth or likelihood, to refresh and
please the most courteous Readers withal.

Passant outre and pour aneantir les fables des Grees Heber dit que les noms
donnez aux estoil les des deux poles contienent les mysteres de l'eglise: ce
qu'il tasche de prouuer par vne brefue consideration de chascune d'icelles:
premierement du pole arctique.
Et vrayement si i'osoy (que n'oseray-ie pas
Pour arracher du ciel les forcenez combats,
Les prophanes larcins, les nopces detestables,
Et bref tout l'attirail de ces monstreuses fables,
Don't ie ne scay quels Grees a l'auenir voudront
Du Ciel glisse-tousiours deshonorer le front?)
Ie te pourroy monstrer, que sous ces characteres
La Tout-puissante main a descrit les mysteres
De sa saint Cite: que ce n'est qu'vn crystal,
Ou du sicele auenir se lit l'ordre fatal:
Un public instrument, vne carte authentic,
Qui sans order contient le recit Prephetique
Des gestes de l'Eglise. O bean Char flamboyant,
Qui comme un tourbillon enleues le Voyant,
Tu roues a l'entour d'vn des Poles du monde
Sans mouiller plus les bords de tes iantes dans l'onde;
Le Chariot.
Et sans plus establer tes courserots sumans,
Sous la ronde espesseur des plus bas Elemens.
Cependant Elisec, Boots.
attentif, te regard:
Brule a'vn feu de zele: and, conuoiteux, lui tarde
Qu'il pique tes cheuaux, and que sur l'astre mont
Il les face tourner dedans un petit rond.
A son flanc est David, Hercule.
qui dans sa main guerriere
Por te d'vn fire Lyomla flambante criniere.
Ici luit sa Couronne: ici sa Harp d'or:
Ici de sept brandons rich, La Couronne. La Lire. La petite Our se. Le Dard.
Andromode.
s'honore encor
Cest Ours, qu'll mit a mort: and la sifflante Lance
Que le Roy d'Israel, maniaque, lui lance.
Patron de Chastete, saint honneur de l'Honneur,
Susanne, en te voyant ie fremiroy de peur:
Ie pleureroy tes pleurs, and les pesantes chains
Don't tes bras sont liez, me donroyent mill geines,
Ainsi qu'a tes Parens: and, triste verse les cieux,
Cassiopee. Cephee.
Comme eux ie leuerois and mes mains and mes yeux,
Sans que d'vn Daniell'ayde sainctement pronte
Te sauue bien a temps, Persee.
and de mort, and de honte:
Et par les raise puissans d'vne horrible clarte,
Qui part non de Meduse, La Test de Meduse.
ains de la Verite,
Empierre les tesmoins: and fait qu'vne tempeste
De cailloux foudroyez leur gresle sur la test*
Aussi tant que le ciel en rond se tournera,
Un trophee si saint sur nos chefs brillera.
Auec ce grand Dragon, Le Dragon.
ceste Idol felonne,
Que ce Prophet Hebrieu dans Babel emprisonne.
Pegase.
A qui pourray-ie mieux un Pegase egaler
Qu' al' un de ces Cheuaux qui slamboyent en l'air,
Auant que le Tyran de la petite Asie,
Euflamme de courroux, Maccab. c. 5.
ait Solime saisie?
A qui l'ardent Chartier, Le Chartier.
qu' au grand Ezechiel,
Qui attelle si bien la coche d'Israel?
A qui le Cigne blanc, Le Cigne.
qu' a ce Tesmoin sidelle,
Qui pour son maistre mort souffre vne mort cruelle,
Ace Diacre saint, des Martyrs l'ornement,
Qui mesme auant mourir chante si doucement?
Le Poisson Borcal. Le Dausin.
A qui ce be au Poisson qu'on voit ici reluire,
Qu'au Poisson qui seruit a Tobit de collire?
A qui le clair Dausin, qu' a ce grand fills d'Amram,
Qui conduit a trauers le flot Erythrean
Les poissons de Jacob, and pass son armee
A pied sec and sans nef sur la riue Idumce?
Et que diray ie plus? Dieu n'a pas seulement
Engraue dans l'airain du viste Firmament
Sa devise sacree: and dessous la figure
Le Triangle. Ophiucun
D'vn Triangle portrait sa trine-vne Nature:
Ains sons ce Iouuenceau, qui tue le Serpent,
Son fills domte-Satan, son fill! qui va rompant
Par le choc d'vne Croix (sa machine plus forte)
Les verrous eternels de l'infernale port:
Et sous ce bell Oiseau, L'Aigle, ou Colombe.
mignon du Dieu des Dieux;
Qui contemple asseure le Soleil de ses yeux,
Et souuent de ses mains arrache le Tonnerre,
Son Esprit, son Amor qui visit la terre,
De plumes reuesru: Joint que cest Astre aile,
Par le chef par le col, par le dos estoille,
Ne resemble pas moins la simple Colombelle,
Quel' Aigle aubec-crochu, l'Aigle fierement belle.
Et que diray-ie encor du Baudrier, Puis du Zodiaque. Le Belier.
qui door
Est de deux fois six Feux richement decore?
Celui qui guide l'an, est l'Agneau du Passage:
Le Taureau.
Le second, ce Taureau, que l'idolatre rage
D' Isaac moule au desert. Et les clairs Ensanconr,
Les Bessons. L'escreuice.
Du saint fills d'Abraham sont les Enfans bessons.
Le quart est Solomon, qui comme v^e Escreuice,
Chemine en reculant: se touill dans le vice
Tout ainsi qu'^m verrat: and profane Vieillard,
Se rend d'ame and de cor^^galement paillard.
Le Lion.
Le quint, ce Lionceau, que la robuste adresse
Dufoy droyeur Samson comme un cheureau despece,
Et le sixiesme encor, La Vierge.
la Vierge, qui pour nous
Enfante son germain, son pere, and son esponx.
La Balance.
L' antre, ce Trebuchet, ou l'Isacide Prince
Va just balancant le droit de saprouince.
Le Scorpion.
L' autre, cest animal qui bless traistrement
Car il n' importe rien que ce sign on appelle
Ou madre Scorpion, ou Vipere cruelle.
L' Archer est Ismael. Le Sagitaire, Leuit c. 16. Le Ch^urecorne. Aquarius.
Et celui qui le suit,
Est le Bouc qu'au desert le Prestre husle conduit:
Le Vers' cau est le fills du muet Zachary,
L'auant-coureur de Dieu, le fourrier du Messie,
Qui dans le clair Iordain noye tous les pechez
Des hommes viuement d'vn repentir touchez.
Les Poissons.
Et ces ceux clairs Poissons, ceux que dessus la riue
De l'Asphaltite mer la Parole alme-viue
Benit diuinement, si bien qu' auec cinq pains
Ils soulent, nourrissiers, plus de cinq mill humains,
Finalement, celles du Pole Antarctique. Orion.
Mais ca tournons un peu l'estincellante Bale,
Et subtils visitons la demi voute Australe.
He, ne cognois-tu pas ce Guerrier furieux,
Qui pres du clair Taureau slamboye dans les cieux?
L' Eridan. Le Chien. Le Canicule. Le Lieure.
C'est le grand Iosue, le fills de Nun, qui pass
A pied see le Iourdain: and qui pass, terrasse
Les Chiens Cananea^s: and met son pied veinceueur
Sur le Lieure d'Amor ia veincu par la peur.
Voici l'antique Nef, saint asyle du Monde,
Qui superbe triomphe and du vent, and de l'onde.
L'Hydre.
Voici les launes plis du Couleuure d'airain
Qui luit dans le desert, Medicin souuerain.
Le Corbeau. La Coupe.
Voici l'heureux Corbeau qui nourrit le Thesbyte,
Voici la rich T'asse ou Joseph premedite
Ses Prophets discourse. Voici sur mesine ranc
Le Centaure.
Le Cheualier du ciel, qui reuestu de blanc
Paroit a Macabee, and don't l'argente lance
Le Loup, ou fere. Ara.
En sin du Loup Payen creue si bien la pance,
Que sur l'Autel de Dieu profane tant de fois
Refume un saint encens, que l'accordante voi^
Des Levites sacrez dans le temple resonne,
La Couronne australe. Le poisson austral. La Balaine.
Et larace Asmonee obtinent ceste Couronne
Pour regner en Isac. Voici l'heureux Poisson
Qui pay le tribut pour Christ, nostre rancon.
Et la Balcine encor, don't la poictrine infete
Tient trois iours en depost la vie a'vn Profete.
Notable correction du Poet, sur les discourse precedens en quoy sa piete and
son erudition se descouurent.
Or ce pendant qu'Heber, comme mon truchement,
Des figures du Ciel discourt si hardiment,
Qu'il tente les destours d'vne sent nouuelle,
Et bat, audacieux, vne cord pucelle,
Chrestiens, ne ponsez pas que i'aille receuant
Pour Articles de foy ce qu'il met en auant:
Que du Zenonic vneille apuyer le Portique,
Mettre aux sepi l'Eternel, and du destin Stoique,
R'ensiler les chesnons: ou, lisant l'auenir
Dans le liver duciel, Chaldee deuenir.
Rien, rien de teut cela: seulement s'entrelasse,
Un si nouueau discourse, a sin qu'il vous deslasse,
Et qu'ay ant^usqu'^ci pass tant de fossez,
Tant d'horribles deserts, taut de rocs creuassez,
Tant de baueux torrents, don't la bruyante rage
Poussant flot contre flot guorroye son riuage,
Vou^ reucontriez en fin un lieu delicieux,
Qui tousiours a'vn bon oeil soit regard des cieux,
Ou coule un clair ruisseau, ou vente un doux Zephyre,
Ou pour vous caresser la terre semble rire.
He! quiscait o Lecteur, si ceux-la qui viendront
Apres nous, comme nous, pleins de zele, rendront
Yea, Further, to blot out of memory the Greek fables, Heber says, that the
names given to the stars contain the mysteries of Holy Church.
were it not (I fear) to bold an enterprise,
(Although why should I fear to cancel all the vice,
Theft, fury, sacrilege, profane incestuous beds,
And all the monster-lyes wherewith Greeks idle heads,
(We know not what they were) to mock all After-age,
given to the stars contain the mysteries of Holy Church.
Of th'euermouing heaven dishonor would the stage?)
Well could I let thee know how these shapes under them
Contain the mysteries of new Jerusalem:
That here the fing'r of God as on a crystal drew,
For holy men to read, what ever should ensue:
A public register and chartr' authentical
Containing orderlesse the view prophetical
Of all Church-monuments. Charles-waine.
O chariot firie-cleer,
That swift and whirlwind-like vp-rauishedst the Seer,
About the Northen Pole thou draw'n art day and night,
And dippest not at all thy wheels in Amphitrite:
Nor stablest once thy teeme, still-royling, never spent,
Below the massy round of baser Element.
Boots.
Mean while Elisha (lo) full wistly thee beholds,
And with a fiery zeal his master so withholds,
That up the starrie mount he makes the steeds to sting
And round and round again to turn and troe the ring,
See David fast-him-by, Hereulet. The Crown.
who bears in warlike hand
Some Lions tufted mane, that flameth like a brand:
Here shines his royal crown, The Harp.
and here his harp of gold;
With seven stars richly decked; The little Bear^.
here th'vgly Bear behold
That for his fathers Lamb he, then a shepherd, slew;
The Lance.
And here the whizzing lance that mad Saul at him threw.
Now thee Susanna fair, Andromeda.
example of chastitee,
And honors chiefest hou'r, I tremble should to see,
And weep thy trickling tears; and those so weighty chains
That bind thy lilly wrests would yield me a thousand pains
Among thy dearest kin; and cause me to the skies
Cessiopea.
For thy deliverance join with them hands and eyes:
Cepheus.
But that a Daniel I see makes holy speed
From death and shameful doom to save a maid at need.
Perseus.
He with some powerful beams of ouer-awing light,
Which comes not of Meduse, Medusaes head.
but of the Truth and Right,
Confounds the witnesses, and breaks them head and bones
With thunder-darted hail of ly-reuenging stones.
And sure, as long as heaven does whirl-round any Sign,
Shall eu'r above our head so holy a Trophey shine
Anuyst this Idol foul, this dragon ugly and fell,
The Dragon. Pegasus.
Which was in Babel pent by that young Daniel.
To whom may Pegasus more sitly be compared
Then the one of those same horse that in the air burning flared,
Macab. c. 5.
Before the Tyrant great of Asia the Less
Did in a fiery rage Jerusalem oppress.
This earnest Wagoner, The Coachman.
who'st but Ez^chiel,
Which manageth so right the Coach of Israel?
And who is the silver swan that shines here, The Swan.
but even
That Deacon clad in white, the faithful Martyr Steu'n,
Who death endured for his master crucified,
And sung more heavenly sweet then swan before he died?
The Fish of the South.
The siluer-scaled fish that shines here in the skies
I take to be the same that heald old Tobyts eyes:
The Dolphin.
And whom this Dolphin bright but great Amramides
Which out of Egypt led athwart the ruddie Seas
The fry of Israel, and brought his armed ranks,
A dry foot, wanting ship, to th'ldumean banks?
What shall I further say? God has not only engrau'n
The Triangle.
His sakersaint Emprese on brass of whirling heaven;
And in tryangle shape embleam'd his mystery
Of nature wonderful, three in one, one in three:
But by this valiant youth, Ophiouchu^.
who slew you creeping evil,
Set-forth his only Son which overcame the Devil,
And with sway of a Cross (his engine most of might)
Broke-ope the brazen gates of everlasting night:
Yea by this goodly bird, The Eagle or Done.
the God-of-Gods delight,
Which with a steadfast eye beholds the Sun so bright,
And takes the thunder-boult often out of's angry hand,
His Spirit and Love is meant; who visited the land
Descending feathered. for why? this winged sign
In head, in breast, in back of starred-crmyline,
No less resembl' it may the Pigeon simple and meek,
Then the eagle goodly-fierce, then The Eagle crookie-beeke.
Of the Zodiac.
As for the golden belt wherewith all heaven is crossed,
Whereon the dosen signs are curiously embossed;
Who, but the Paschall Lamb, The Ram.
is he that leads the ring?
The Bull.
The Bull's that moulten calfe whom peopl' Idolatring
The Twins. The Crab.
Made Aron make for God. The Twins, that shine so bright,
Are Isacks sons who strove before they saw this light.
The next is Solomon, who like a Crab recoiles,
And in his latter time himself with sin besoiles:
And, as a swine in mud does after washing roll,
Becomes adulterer both in his body and soul.
The Lion. The Virgin.
The Lion is the same that crushed was like a Kid
By Samsons thundering hand: The Virgin, she that hid
In undefiled womb, (for us made maiden-mother)
And brought-forth at her time, her father, husband, brother.
The Balance.
The Balance here is set for Kings of Israel
To judge the peopl' aright and ponder causes well.
The Scorpion.
The next that serpent is which on the Maltan sand
With traitorous intent hung-on the Apostles hand:
For whether it be called a spotted Scorpion,
Or Viper-poysonous, it matters not, all is one.
The Ancher. Levit. ^6. Capricorn. The Water-bearer
The Bowman may be thought old Abraham's elder child.
This Goat that scape-lot is whom Aaron lets go wild.
This Ewrer is the son of dombe Zacharia,
Messia's herbenger, preparer of his way:
Which in the silver stream of Jordan drowned the sin
Of all that do repent, and will new life begin:
The Fishes.
And these two Fishes they that with five loves of bread,
Blessed of th'all-feeding Word above five thousand fed.
Of the Antartike Pole Orion.
But let the twinkling Ball now vpsidowne be rowl^d,
And with like curious eye the sotherne half behold:
O know you not the face of this fierce warlike wight,
That near the shining Bull enlustres heaven with light?
The son of Nun it is, that worthy Ioshuah,
Eridanus. The Dogs. The Hare. Argo.
Who dry ore Jordan went as on a sandy bay:
And did those Canan dogs from prey unworthy scare,
And set his conquering foot upon Loves hartlesse Hare.
Lo here that Argosie which all the world did save,
And bravely now triumphs both over wind and wave.
Lo here the yellow plights of Moses brazen snake, Hydra.

That shone in wilderness all others sting to slake.
The Rave^. The Gobles.
Lo here that happy Rav'n which did Elia feed:
Here Joseph's golden cup wherein he wont arreed
His wondrous prophesies: and here that heavenly knight
Which unto Machabee appeared all in white;
The Centaure. The wo'fe. The Altar-slone.
His ang'r-enflamed lance so struck this Pagan Woolfe
With pain and bursten-rot athwart the belly-gulfe,
That on Gods Altar-stone profaned many a year
Now reeks a sweet perfume; and Levies hallowed queere
Sings joyful Psalms again in Gods temple Idol-staind,
And the Idumean Race this Crown at length obtainde,
The southern Crown. The southern Fish. The Whale.
To reign in Israel. Now here the Fish behold
With tribute paid for him that was for sinners sold:
And here the gaping Whale, whose ill-digesting maw
Three days a Prophets life held as empawn'd by law.
The Poet by this correction shows his piety and learning.
While Heb'r all sings for me, with Muse so bold, new, odd,
And strikes a string vntouchd, and walks a path vntrod,
Think not (o Christen peopl') I take all that he says
Concerning th'oast of he^u'n for articl' of my faith:
Or that I meant set-vp old Zenoes school again,
T'embound the eternal God, and so relinke the chain
Of Stoyck destiny: or would of all to come
(As Caldeman) arreed in books of heaven the sum.
No, nothing less I mean; but only thought by grace
Of such a new devise, as here I enterlace,
Refresh your weary minds; that having past before
So many a foamy flood; such war against the shore,
And hurly-burling rage of counterbuffed wave;
So many a ghastly Wild, a dyke, a rock, a cave:
You might set foot at length on some delightful place,
Whereon the sky may show for eu'r a lovely face:
Where runs a silver stream, the wind blows sweetly awhile,
And where to welcome you the ground-selfe seems to smile.
Oh who (good Reader) knows, but fuller may be done
Hereaft'r, of some so zeal'd, this work I first begone!
42. Yea, were it not. This is the fourth reason, wherein the Poet, with
commendable courage, adventures to blot out of memory the Greek, Latin and
Arabian fables; which with so many gybrish names had soyled (as it were) the
face of heaven; and makes Heber say that the names of Constellations on either
side the Equator, do contain the mysteries of Holy Church. First then he
speaks of the North-Pole-Starres, and says the Chariot (which is commonly
called Charles Waine) is the same that carried up to heaven the Prophet or Seer
Elias, 2. King 2. And Boots is Elizeus there mentioned to withold first, and
then behold his Masters going away: As for the other names of that kind here
following, any Reader acquainted with the Bible, may conceive them at first,
and what the Poet means by them.

43. While Heber sings. The Poet, now he has made Heber so largely discourse
upon the reasons of these shapes and names given by the Astronomers to the six
Stars of both Poles and of the Zodiac, he ^oynes thereto a notable
correction thereof; to avoid two extremes: the one of Zeno, the chief Stoicke
and his followers; who so tie the first cause (which is God) to the second;
that they hold all good or evil success of our life unavoidably to depend
upon the Stars. Their opinion touching the necessity of Fate, has been
fully refuted by many famous men, both old and new Writers; but especially by
Saint Auslen in his Books De Ciuitats Dei: The other extremity is that
opinion of Judicial Astrologers, who make our whole life, from the beginning
to the end, liable to the virtue and influence of the heavens. Those also have
been refuted by diverse of our time, especially by the learned John Picus Earl
of Mirandula; and by his Nephew Francis Picus in his Book entitled De
praenotione rerum. Our Author shows therefore that he utterly disauoweth such
opinions of the Stoics and Astrologers; whom he terms Caldemen, or
Caldeans, because Judicial Astrologic was in great use among that people; as
may be gathered out of History; but most out of the Books of the Prophets, and
Esaias chiefly, Chap. 52. at length he shows the reason (which I touched
before) why he brings in this new discourse: namely, to give the Reader an
acceptable pause of recreation, and show how much he desires that our
posterity may see Heaven cleansed of these Idols, which the Heathen, by names
given to the Stars, pretend to have place there.

Cest art du tout divine, donnant a tant d'imagee
Non le nom des Payens, ains des saints personnages?
Continuation du descouurement des secrets de l'Astronomie, par la declaration
des principaux mots vsitez enter les Astronomes. Discourse sur les cieux des
Planetes destinguez subtillement and doctement par les Astronomes
Mais allons retrouuer Heber, don't le discourse
Enseigne a son Phalec des Planetes le course
Figure dans l'acier: qu'est-ce que Perigee,
C^ncentrique, Eccentrique, Epicycle, Apogee:
Et de quelle facon Mars le seme-debats,
La Torche porte-iour, la Cyprine aime-esbats,
Saturn, and Jupiter, ont trois Spheres en vne,
Cinq le facond Mercure, and deux fois deux la Lune.
Car les diuins esprits, don't nous tenons cest art,
Voyant leurs Feux errer or' d'vne, or' d'autre part,
Tantost loin, tantost pres du center de Nature,
Pour bannir de la haut le vuide, la rupture,
Et le brouillis des corpse, que leur desuoyement
Causeroit dans les cieux couuerts du Firmament,
Ont ose, plus qu'humains, des roues eternelles
Qui portent ces brandons, fair plusieurs rouelles,
Qui tousiours se baisant ne s'entreheurtent point,
Tant bien l'vn rond a l'autre est distinctements joint.
Le bas est sous le haut qui recourbe l'^^ccolle,
Ainsi que le Marron port vne taye molle.
Pour emmantellement, la taye un cuir taken,
Le cuir un feutre espais, picquant, herisonne.
Puis il prend l'Astrebale, ou la Sphere est reduite
En form toute plate. Ici ie voy descrite
La Carte des hauteurs, Lignes verticales. Lignes paralleles du Soleil
les Almucantharats,
Auec les Azimuts, and les Almadarats.
(Muse pardonne moy, si ie pein de grotesques
Un siriche tableau, side mots Barbaresques
Ie souille mon discourse, veu qu'en cest argument
Il faut pour bien parler, parler barbarement.)
Mais dessus l'autrepart se turn vne visiere,
Et sous elle vne Table, o^ se void la carriere
Des slambeaux vagabons, mais sous certaines loix,
L'Eschelle des hauteurs, les iours, les noms de mois.
Remuant l'Alhidade, un temps il se trauaille
Amonstrer, L'Vsage de l'Astrelabe.
comme on doit toiser vne muraille,
La profondeur d'vn puits, la distance des lieux,
La largeur d'vn pays par la largeur des cieux:
Chez quel sign estoille, conime par etiquete,
Le Tout-puissant logea la plus belle Planete:
En quel est son Nadir, comme on peut seurement
Trouuer and son declin, and son eleuement:
Le temps qu'vn Sign entier doit employer a fair
Son chemin pour monter dessus nostre Hemisphere:
Du Pole la hauteur, la ligne du Mi-iour,
Les heures de la nuict, and les heures du iour.
Phalec enseigae l'Astronomie a ses enfans, qui enri chissent ceste science par
nou uelles inventions. Ceste science paruient des Hebre^ux aux Chaldeans.
L'ingeni^ux Phalec a si doctes merucilles
Priest attentinement ses dociles oreilles:
Alchimiste parfait, multiply cest or:
Fait courre ce talent: present ce thresor,
Pour vne rich Estreine, a son illustre race,
Qui mesme son Docteur endoctrine surpass.
Mais tout ainsi qu'vn Mars, un Herme, vne Venus,
Vont ores visitant les Troglodytes nus,
Or' laue, or' l'Amerique: and torches vagabondes,
Muent de garnison pour hanter les deux Mondes,
Qu'vn Cercle egale-iours egalement mi-part:
Ainsi, ou peu s'en faut, l'honneur d'vn si bell art
Ne cheri, eleue chez larace Hebraique,
Des Chaldeans elle s'en va aux Egyptiens d'eux aux Grees: de rechef aux
Egyptiens, puis aux arabes, finalement aux Italiens and Alemans.
Fills adoptif, se done au peuple Chaldaique.
Puis faisant peu d'estat des sommets sourcilleux
De l'antique Babel, se retire, ^rgueilleux,
Du Tigre au Nil fecond, deuers l'Austre s'en vole,
Et dress daus l'Egypte vne fameuse eschole:
Et puis s'amourachant des Pelasges subtils,
Commet ^ntre leurs mains and soy, and ses outils:
Et derechef encor sous le grand Ptolomee,
De Peluse reuoid la riue bien-aimee:
Et d'Egypte eschappe, se done aux Musulmans,
De'ux aux Hesperiens, and d'eux aux Alemans.
Louange des doctes Astronomes.
O vrais Endymions, qui sur l'astre Latmi^
Caress^z, baisotez, embrassez vostre amie,
Qui, grand Reine duciel, a son lict entoure
D'vn miliond' Archers portans l'escu door:
Atlas non-fabuleux, colomnes eternelles
Du Palais du Seigneur, ames doctement belles:
Las! sans vos monumens la doctrine des cieux
Vtilitez de la doctrine Astronomique.
Ruineuse cherriot dans le flot oublieux.
C'est vous qui ae sbrouillez les mois, and les anne es:
Qui cottez au Nocher les heures fortune es,
Pour couper la command: and les iours que la mort
Peinte au ciel, le se mond d'aller surgir a board:
En quel temps le Bouuier doit es mains de la terre
Depositerson grain: quand un homine de guerre
Doit fair battre aux champs: quand tenir garnison:
Quand forcer un rempart: quand tonduire a foison
Leu viures en son camp: quelle saison est saine
Ou pour purger le corpse, ou pour ouurir la vein:
Et comme un Medecin doctemert curieux
Pour ses drogues mester doit regarder les cieux.
And, by the name of Saints given t'eu'ry heavenly Sign
In stead of heathen lies, this Art made all-diuine?
Now hear we Heb'r again; to Phaleg whose discourse
The principal words of this Art.
Of every Planet shows the downing and resours
Grau'n on the lasting brass; and what is the Perigee,
The Planets learnedly distinguished.
Concentrike, Excentrike, Epicycl' Apogee;
And how the bring-day Sun, and Venus fond-of-mate,
Together with the star of Mars the sow-debate,
Saturn and Jupiter, three circles have in one;
And Mercury only five, and only four the Moon:
For those same heavenly wits who taught us first this Art,
Perceiving well these Lights now that, now this-way, start;
That now allow they stoop, and now aloft they reach;
To banish from above th'vnlikely void, the breach
And bodie-piercing broile, the which their course vneau'n
Might cause among the Spheres enclosed by th'vpper heaven;
Vnt'each eternal wheel, that round each Planet soops,
Have, more then manly, durst appoint some lesser hoops;
Who kissing either-oth'r oppose not other-either:
So well is round to round distinctly set together,
A less one vnd'r a great with bent so close embras'd;
Even as the Chestnut is in tender skin encas'd,
The tender skin ypent within a tanned hyde,
The tanned hide in husk thick, sharp; rough, brittle-dry'd.
The lines ver. call. Parallels of the Sun.
Then takes he th'Astrolabe, and shows the Sphere in flats:
The Pole-heights, Azimuths, Alcanthars, Almadrats.
(Ye Muses pardon me if I deface with blots
A table of such a price, if I with barbarots
So soil my fair discourse; for why? this matt'r of mine,
In case I speak it right, I may not speak it fine.)
But on that other side a Sight-rule turns about,
And vnd'r it lies a tabl', on which they see set-out
The course of wandering stars (who keep yet certain rites)
The names of every month, the days and scale of heights.
He moving that same Rule now takes the pain to teach
The toysing of a wall, Use of th'Astrolabe.
and now to know the reach
From any place to place; the depth of any Well,
By view of breadth in heaven a breadth on earth to tell:
As als' at what-signe Inn, by tyquet as it were,
Th'Almight' appoints the Sun to lodge all months i'th'yeere;
And where his Nadir is, and how much he declines,
Or how much he advanced above th'Equator shines:
What time a Sign entire allotted has to run
Ere on our Hemisphere he mount; and how to konne
Each countries mid-day-line, the Pole-heights every way,
All hours of the night, all hours of the day.
Phaleg improues and commends this Art to his posterity.
The pregnant Phaleg yields vnt'all old Heber taught,
His eu'r attentive ear and quick-conceiuing thought;
As perfect Alcumist this gold he multiplies,
And using well the stock bequeaths rich legacies
Of learning, treasured in his increasing Casse,
Vnt' all his noble race; and they their teacher pass.
But as of Venus, Mars, and Mercury the lights
Go visit otherwhile the naked Troglodytes;
Now Iava, now Peru, and often remove, to shine
In either world, a-this, a-that side th'Equall line:
This knowledge came from the Hebrews to the Chaldeans. From the Caldeans to
the Egyptians. Then to the Grecians.
So this renowned Art was first an Hebrew borne,
And then a Chaldee adopt; soon after began to scorn
And bravely set-by light old Babels ruyn'd pile,
So south from Tiger flew unto the fruitful Nile:
There taught sh'a noble school; but thence the Grecian wits
Her tys'd, and she to them her tools and self commits:
Then to Egypt again. Then to the Arabians, and so to the Italians and Almans.
The praise of Astronomers, with commodities of Astronomy.
Then under Ptolomey she t'Egypt turns again,
Delighting to reuise her dear Pelusian plain:
And ye: unconstant went from thence int' Arabie,
From thence int' Italy, from thence int' Almanie.
O right Endymions, on Latmos star-set hill
Who coll, embrace, and kiss your welbelou'd at will,
Dame Cynthia queen of heaven: about whose bed there stand
A thousand thousand guards, with golden shield in hand:
O goodly-learned souls! o Atlasses unfeigned!
By whom the throne of God is eu'r (as 'twere) sustained!
Without your helps (alas) into the Sea or Hell
Of all forgetfulness this skill of heaven had fell.
It Is you divide the months and seasons of the year
Confused altofore; you quote the Marinere,
By searching all that Fate does on the sky descriue,
His time to hoise-vp sail, and when and where to arrive.
You teach the slow-foot ox and daily-sweating swain
What time the faithful earth may best receive their grain.
You teach the man of war to keep his hold, or fight,
And when to scale a wall, and when to vi^tl' aright
His hunger-doubting camp: of you all season good
The good Physician learnes, to purge and let us blood,
44. Now hear we Heb'r again. He begins to discover the secrets of Astronomy
contained in certain principal words used by the professors thereof; which we
are now briefly to interpret. The Apogee is the Suns greatest distance from
the earth; as the Perigee his least: for we have two kind of distances; one
Solsticiall, and the other Excentrick: the Solsticiall is, when the Sun
entering into Cancer, (that is the Sign of the Crab) and, coming near to our
Crowne-point in the Noone-line casts on us his beams most directly, which by
reflection from the earth become more scorching, sharp and violent. This
distance is not universal, but proper to that Region or Climate whose
Crowne-point the Sun then approaches nearest. The distance Excentricke
(common to the whole world) is, when the Center of the Sun is come to the
highest of his Epicyle, and so put-of farthest from the earth: and thither is
he brought by means of his particular Orb, in Center differing from the
Center of the earth; and this shows the meaning of Excentricke and
Concentricke. Now, the Sun is at highest of this kind a little after the
Sunstay of Summer, and at the lowest soon after the Winter Sunstay, whereof
before. When he is at the highest, he seems very small, and to go very
slowly: at the lowest, a man's eye may discern him to be much greater, and to
pass away swifter. Wherein appears the wondrous wisdom and providence of the
Almighty Creator. For so it falling-out, that at the Summer Stay the Sun is
hottest, because of his beams more closely gathered and reflected; and that he
tarries there the longer, because of the days length; therefore God raises
him up then into the Apogee, or highest place of his Epicycle, and furthest
of-vs; lest running below he should make our heat intolerable. And further,
his stay in that place is the longer; darting his beams more perpendicularly,
and marching more slowly through the Summer Signs; that he may the better
concoct and ripen the Fruits of the Earth. Whereas, in the Winter time, casting
his Rays aslope, and so of less force; that the Earth wax not thereby all
through cold and barren; the Sun descends into his Perigee, or lowest Chamber,
to comfort and maintain the all-nourishing Element in heat and vigor. And, to
the end the cold, which is enemy to fertility and generation, may the better
be driven away, and the Sun recover his higher Signs; from whence he may
send down more comfortable beams; God has given him, about the Winter Stay,
great swiftness to dispatch his journey withal. No man will think it
strange, that considers the huge distance that is betwixt the Apogee and
Perigee; that is, betwixt the highest, and lowest station of the Sun. For the
Astronomers cast it up to the number of 315244. Italian leagues. Besides, that
neither the other six Planets, nor the Firmament of six Stars, do with
contrary motion hinder the Sun in his course, he runs not directly against
the Primouable sway; but byasing a-to-side, and as it were yielding to that
violent motion: that he might the better come to an end of his own journey,
and draw the other Planets with him. Were it not for this course of the Sun
in Byas, or (as Heraults say) in Bend of the Zodiac, the sundry Climats and
Regions which he comes at by turns, should not be heatte and cooled in their
due seasons; Nay certain Season should there be none, nor any inequality of
night and day; but all in a hoch-poch, all confused: Diverse other benefits of
this bendy motion do the Astronomers declare; who reckon also that the space,
from hence to the Suns higest point in Apogee, is 4329244. leagues of Italy;
and from hence to his lowest, 4014000. Subduct this latter sum from the
former, and so for the distance betwixt the Apogee and Perigee, you shall have,
as before, 315244. but enough of this; For one sight of a good Armillarie
Sphere will teach more then all these words: yet whosoever desires to know more
concerning the number of Spheres and Planets, let him read 1. Bassantin, who
sets down the figures very exactly.

45 Then takes he the Astrolabe. That is an Instrument flat and round, a foot
or less in Diameter, of brass or wood, containing many lines both straight
and circular, and invented long since; though the Author be not certainly
known (some hold it was the Arabian Messahala, some Ptol^mey, some Abraham) to
cast and know the motions of these heavenly bodies and their dependances. Some
call it the Planisphere, because it has the Sphere drawn into a Flat. The
word is Greek of (...), a Sign or Star, and (...) to take, or (...) (which
comes of the same verb) a bandle to hold by; for hereby we lay-hold (as it
were) on the Stars, or take the position and height of them* For holding this
Instrument by the handle, a skillful man may soon discover the brave secrets
of Astronomy. As for the parts thereof, there is first a large ring that
beares-vp the handle, then the Astrolabe it self, which has two sides: the
fore-side, otherwise called the Mother, because she contains in her womb (as
it were) diverse other tables, serving for diverse eleuations of the Pole, and
the backside, whereon are drawn sundry lines and circles: the first of them,
next the edge, shows the degrees of Altitude, whereof there is a double use;
for, applying them to the numbers in border that exceed not ninety, they show
how many degrees the Sun or other Star is raised above our Horizon, with
many commodities thereon depending: and applying them to the numbers below,
which goe-on from thirty to thirty, they show the degrees of the Zodiake,
where the Signs are written with their names and characters, to know the true
place of the Sun every day. After these you shall find set down other
circles, wherein be the twelve Months of the year, answerable to the Signs,
with days unto each apart, or two by two, numbered by Fiues or Tens, not
exceeding 31. which is the quantity of the greatest Month. This serves to
know in what degree of the Zodiac the Sun is every day. Moreover, there are
two Diameter-lines crossing each other in Rectangle at the Center of the
Astrolabe; one called the Noone-line, drawn from the Ring by the Center
downward; and another from East to West, which represents the general Horizon,
at whose either end indifferently begin the degrees of Altitude aforesaid. Six
other small lines there are like Arches, together with the Skale of heights,
the Winds, and the Rule turning-about on the backside, whereof we shall speak
anon. As for parts of the foreside, called the Mother; there is first a circle
or border divided into 360. degrees, these stand for the Equinoxiall or Eauen
night, wherein are by just measure set down and distributed the 24 hours of
the day, containing each fifteen degrees, and every degree four minutes, so
as every hour has threescore minutes. The womb (as I said) of this Mother is
to bear sundry tables according to the Pole height of sundry places: these
tables have each about their Centers drawn three concentrike circles; whereof
the least is the Tropike of Cancer, called in the Sphere the Summer Tropike;
where the dry is at longest about the twelfth of lune: the Mid-circle is the
Equator, passing close by the beginning of Aries and Libra, in which two places
the Sun makes day and night equal throughout the whole world; to wit, about
the eleventh of March, and the 13. of September. So follows it then, that the
greatest circle of these three, which is toward the edge of each table, must
be the Tropike of Capricorn, where the day is at shortest, about the twelfth
of December. Moreover, in these Tables there are the Almucantaraths; by that
Arabian word is signified the circle of Pole height upon our Hemisphere, some
perfect some imperfect. The first of them stands for the slope Horison,
dividing the world into two parts; whereof the one we see, the other is hid
from us. The Center of the least Almucantarath stands for the Zenith or Crown
point, from whence to the Horison are ninety degrees every way drawn-out by
Twoes, Threes, Fiues, or Tens, according to the capacity of the Instrument,
and distance of the lines; which are so drawn, for the Sun or other Star
to be thereto applied; as often as a man will take their elevation above the
Horizon. Beside these, here are also the Azimuths, or crown circles; which do
cut every Almucantarath by Fiues, Tens, or Fifteenes, into 360 degrees,
quartered by ninety, and distinguished one quarter from another by the two
principal Azimuths, which are the Meridian, and the Equinoctial; that passes
from the right East-point by our Zenith to the West. Where we begin commonly to
count the degrees of the Quarters Northward and Southward. These are to make
known in what part of the world the Sun or other Star rises and sets.
After these do follow the unequal hours, called the hours of the Planets,
together with the names and characters of then Planets; the lines of twy light,
noone and midnight; the figures of the twelve houses, the line of the Zodiake,
and consequently the directory or Index which turns about the Instrument at
either side, by the brim. Lastly, there is the Hole of the Net or Cob-web,
which stands for the Pole of the world; and by the pin that goes through the
same Hole are all the tables or plates of the Astrolabe joined and held fast
together. Concerning the use of this Instrument in measuring all heights,
bulkes, lengths, breadths, thickness and depths, I. Stoster, D. Iaquinot, and
I. Bassantin have largely thereon discoursed in their books of the Astrolabe:
And what need I take further pains in Englishing more of this Subject, when
the famous Geoffrey Chaucer 233. years ago has made all so plain in the
best English of his time? Somewhat only must be said of that Alhidode, as the
Poet here calls the Rule; it is an Arabian word, in Greek (...), in Latin
Radius: as in Virgil, Descripsit radio totum qui gentibus orbem. It is the
turning Rule on the backside of the Astrolabe, whereon are fastened two square
tablets with small sight-holes persed, for the height-taking of Sun or
Star, and for measuring of quantities aforesaid, or any other use here
specified by the Poet.

46 The pregnant Phaleg yields. Having showed the excellence of Astronomy, he
comes now to declare by what means the knowledge thereof was derived unto us;
and says (as it is most likely) that from the Hebrews it came to the
Chaldeans, from them to the Egyptians, from them to the Arabians, and so to
the Italians and Germans, whose names have been gathered and set down by H.
Ranzouius, in his Treatise of the excellence of Astronomy.

47. O right Endymions. This is in commendation of the learned Astronomers, and
their profession. The Poets feign that the Moon was so in love with Endymion,
that as he slept on a high hill-top, she came thither to kiss and embrace
him. It is thought he was some great Astronomer. At least, this fable was meant
of Students in Astronomy, whom our Author for that cause here terms Right
Endymions. The great use and further commendation of this Art you may read in
Virgil. Georg. 1. Aeneid. 1. and 3. and almost every where in Ptolomey; but
especially in Peucer and such as have lately written, or prefaced upon
Astrology.

C'est vous qui parcourez les celestes provinces
En moins d'vn tourne-main: qui plus grans que nos Princes,
Possed. z. tout le monde: and faites, demi dieux,
Tourner enter vos mains les clairs Cercles des cieux.
Pour vous, Il l^^sse l'Astionomie pour consi^erer la quatriesme Image, qui est
la Music, la quelle il descrit auec ses orneme^^.
Esprits diuins, ma plus diserte-plume.
Feroit son miel plus doux color dans ce volume:
Vous seriez mon subiet, si la derniere Soeur
Desia ne me trainoit a soy par sa douceur.
Car i'enten mon Phalec, qui d'vne humble langage:
S'informe auec Heber du nom du quart Image.
I'oy qu'il respond ainst. Cher fills, ce teint noignard,
La douceur de ces yeux, ce pied qui fretillard
Semble tousiours danser: les guitterres, les fluttes,
Les cistres, les cornets, les luths, les saquebutes,
Et les lyres encor, qu'autour d'elle tu vois,
Nous monstrent que c'est l'Art qui modere la voix,
Qui mesnage le vent, and qui guide, maistresse,
Dessus les nerfs par leurs de nos nerfs la souplesse:
Le discordant accord, la sacree harmony,
Et la nombreuse loy, qui te noit compaignie
A Dieu, lors qu'il voulut donner, ingenieux,
A la terre repos, Discourse Platonique de la Music and harmoni^ des Cieux.
and des ailes aux cieux:
D'autant, comme lon dit, que la Voix souueraine
Logea dans chaque ciel vne douce Syrene,
Comme sur-intendante: a sin que ces bas corpse
Emprunt assent des hauts l^urs plus parfaits accords,
Et qu'vn Choeur aime-bal auec le choeur des Anges
Dans sa Chapelle ardente entonnast ses louanges.
Comparaison servant a representer plus aisement ce qu'il a touch de la
music des Cieux.
Ou comme un mesme vent artistement vomi
Par le souflet Panthois, se pourmetne parmi
L'ingenieux Secret, enter par les soupapes,
Qu'en battant le clauier, organiste, tu frapes:
Coule dans la graueure, and monte, divise,
Par les conduits espars du Sommier pertuise:
Anime tout d'vn c^up les aigues Cimbales,
Les flutes au-doux-air, and les aigres Regales:
De la bouche de Dieu l'Esprit tout-auinant
Des cieux organisez va les roues mounant^
Si bien que retracant leur orniere eternelle,
L'vn d'eux fait le bourdon, l'autre la chanterelle.
Music es humeurs, saiso^s and elemens. Le Bassus.
Or tous ces co^ tr'accerts enchanteusement doux:
Plus clairque dans le ciel s'entendent parmi nous.
La plus pesante humeur, l'Hyuer, la Terre basse,
Vont tenant la party and plus lent, and plus casse.
Le Phlegm blanchissant, l'humide Automne, and l'Eau,
Le Tenor. L'Altus ou Contratenor.
La Teneur qui tousiours coule comme au nineau.
Le Sang, la Prime, and l'Air transparentement rare,
La Voix qui fleuretant se peint, se tord, s'esgare.
La Cholere, l'Este, l'Element sec and chant,
La cord plus tendue, Le Superius.
and le son le plus haut,
Efficace de la Music.
Et c'est pourquoy (mon fills) les plus rebels chooses
Se laissent veincre au chant, comme tenant encloses
Les semences du nombre: and, foibles, ne viuant
Qu'en virtue de l'Esprit qui va les cieux mouuant.
Ample description del efficace and virtue de la Music. A lendroit des hommes
sages and fouls.
Le chant harmonieux fait aux plus fires gendarmes
Tout ensemble tomber la cholere, and les arms:
Sereine l'ame triste: and charmeusement doux
Acoise peu a peu les bourrasques des fouls:
Done frein au desir, and fait mourir la flamme
De celui qui, bouillant, idolatre vne femme:
Guerit le patient des Phalanges bless,
Qui proche du tombeau saute comme insense.
A lendroit des bestes.
Le Cigne en est raui, la Biche en est trompee,
Et des peints oisillons la simplesse pipee.
Le Dausin suit la Lyre, and le bruyant essain
Des Abeilles t'arreste au tin-tin de l'airain.
A lendroit de Dieu mesmes.
He, que ne peut le chant? veu que mesme il command
A l'Esprit donne-esprit: ven qu'il fait qu'il descend
Dans l'ame d'vn Prophet: and d'vn divine acceut
Unit l'esprit raui a l'esprit rauissant?
Veu que quand l'Eternel en sa fureur plus grande
Fume, tonne, treluit: que tous ses nerfs il band:
Et que courbant le dos, and haussant ses deux bras,
Ses foudres plus aigus il veut lancer en bas:
L'accord melodieux, qu'vn coeur deuot souspire,
Destrempe ses tendons, fait rendormir son ire,
Et Clemence aux-doux-yeux emble d'entre ses mains
Le supplice ensouffre des rebels humains?
Canan entrerompt le propos d'Heber, don't le Poet less pred occasion de
mettre conuenable sin aux beaux discourse de ceste second Semaine.
Mais si tossed qu'Heber veut de l'antique Music
Deschiffrer, eloquent, and l'art, and la pratique,
Canan, qui du Iourdain cerche le fatal course,
Passant pres la Colomne, interrompt son discourse.
Aussi n'en puis-ie plus. La longueur du voyage
Que, foible, i'entrepren, me fait perdre courage.
Il me faut impetrer nouueau secours d'enhaut,
Et reculer un peu pour fair un plus grand saut.
And how to mingl' his drugs: you pass all over the sky
In turning of an hand, or twinkling of an eye.
You, more then princely rule all countries under Sun;
You demigodly make heaven twixt your hands to run.
For you (o heavenly wits) my fairest painting quill
Should on these folded sheets her hony-dew distill,
Still would I write of you: but with her dainty sweets
The last sist'r of the four me calls and lovely greets.
For I this Phaleg hear with sonly-meeke language
His fath'r entreat to tell the name of th'oth'r Image;
And Heb'r him answer thus: Dear son, this painted girl
By that her wanton foot seems still to dance and tirle,
By glauncing of her eye, the Cornets, Guytterns, Flutes,
Shawmes, Sackbuts, Vyols, Harps, Bandoraes, Organs, Music, the fourth Image,
described with her Implements.
Lutes,
Which all-about her lie upon the table and ground,
Appears to be that Art which rules the voice and sound.
Which guides the gentle breath and mistresse-like appoints
How on the tuned string we trull our nimble joints.
The sacred harmony, the discordant accord,
Law numbered, number law'd, which waited on the Lord,
When his creating Word spring of All-euerie
Made the earth to stand so fast, and heaven so fast to fly.
Platoes opinion of Harmony among the Spheres.
Since every Sphere (they say) has some Intelligent,
Or Angel musical, for Lady president,
Appointed by the Word: to the end of those above
These lower things may learn the perfect cord of love;
And that with Angell-queers a dancing Set be seen
To revel on his praise in temple fyrie-sheene.
Or as from bellow-loongs a breath one and the same
The Spirit of God compared to the wind of an Organ.
In skillful wise put-out straies through the secret frame
Of curious handyworke, quits every stop and list,
That opens when the keys are tickt by th'Organist;
And mounting here and therefrom out the channel scored*
Into th'esparsed pipes o'th'Sommier thorow-bored,
Alliues, all in a trice, Recorders sweetly-still
And Regals eager-tun'd, and Cymballs sounding shrill:
So of Gods mouth the breath and Spirit all-aliuing
Stirs of the tuned heaven these wheels all lovely striving,
And as their wonted way eternally they trace,
Some of them trill the Trebl^, and some bomb-out the Base.
Now all these counter-notes; so charmy-sweet, Music in our Humors, Seasons
and Elements. B^ss^.
appear
Yet not so plainly in heaven as even among us here.
Th'humour Melancholic, the Wint'r, and cold dry ground,
They bear the Bases part, and soft and slowly sound.
The white phleame, th'Autom-time, the water cold and wet,
They all aleauell run, Tenr.
and are for Tenor set.
The Blood the prime of year, the moist and lukewarm Air,
Play Descant florisher, deuider, painter, Countertenor.
strayer.
The Choler, Summer, Fire, that are so hot and dry,
Treble.
Resembl' a strained chord that sounds eu'r on high.
The reason and force of Music.
See then the cause (my son) why song does often win them
That are most fierce by kind; there are enclosed within them
The seeds of numb'r and time: nor can their life hold-out
But by the Spirits help, that whirleth heaven about.
With wisemen.
Sweet harmony it makes the fiercest Army stay
Their deadly fewd and force; the grief it does allay
Of every pained soul; and with a gentle charm
And Fools.
Withdraws by degrees the Fool from tricks of harm;
It bridleth hot desire, and putteth-out the flame
That makes a louers-heart Idolatrize a dame;
It heales a man that is hurt with fly Phalangy's sting,
That even at point of death will madly dance and fling:
With Beasts.
The Swan delights therein, deceived thereby we find
The shye discoullard foul, and fearful starting hind.
The Dolphin loves the Leere, th'vnhiued swarm of Bees
With tinkling sound of brass, are clustred on the trees.
With God himself.
O what is to Music hard? which wont so much to merit,
Which wont so to prevail even with th'enspiring Spirit,
As bring him down on Saul, and in Elisha wed
The Spirit rauisher unto the ravished?
Yea when the eternal God, to sharpest anger bent,
Smoakes, thunders, lightens, hailes, with all his powers assent,
And with his heau'd-vp arm, and with his back enfoul't,
Is ready to discharge his forest blasting-boult;
Th'armonyons accord that hearts devout shall weep
His sinnowes albenombes, and brings his ang'r asleep:
Then sweet-ey'd mercy steals (as well she wont and can)
From vnd'r his hand the rod deserved by rebel man.
But now as Heb'r had thought to have further gone and told:
The practice and the skill of all the Music old;
See, Canan searching-out his Iordans fatal walk,
Unto the Pillernies and breakes-off all the talk.
Nor can I further go; this iourneyes irksome length
In weakness undertook, has wasted all my strength:
I must anew entreat some help of heavenly grace,
And somewhat need recoile to leap a greater space.
48 For you (o heavenly wits.) Showing that he had a good mind to dilate upon
the praise of this Art, he breaks-off to come to the description of the fourth
Image, which is Music; and her he sets-out with all the most necessary and
graceful attire, both for voice and instruments of diverse sorts. It requires a
long dispute and hard to resolve, what manner of Instruments, and how framed
they were, which we read by translated names to have been in use among the
Hebrews, Greeks, and other people of old time. This would take-vp a whole
Volume; as also that other question, what was their vocal Music; whereof
Plutarch and Boethius both have treated. I persuade my self they had in those
days a kind of skill in making and managing their musical Instruments, and
joining voice thereto; which is hardly well known or conceived now of us:
though some of our Musicians we find both in voice and upon instrument so
exceeding skillful, that they are able much to move our affections; but short
of that wonderful power which has been ascribed to the ancient Music.

49. Since every Sphere (they say.) The Poet upon this occasion of Music,
raises himself to consider the accord and harmony of the Heavens; borrowing
his discourse from the Philosophy of Plato: whereof I shall endeavor here to
set down the sum He says then that our Music on earth is but a shadow of
that superlatiue harmony which God has ordained the great Cymbals (as it
were) of heaven to make, by their so swift and orderly moving: sithence
unlikely it is, but that the Primovable and other Spheres, that whirle-about
continually and have done so long, should make some noise answerable to their
compass and cadence so proportional. And rather may we presume they make a
most excellent melody, and far exceeding our earthly Music, which from that
heavenly borrows her perfection. For so it being, that God has made all
things in number, weight and measure, very likely it is that he kept a due
proportion in the heavens; and that more exactly than on the earth: because
this is the lowest part of all, for habitation of the meanest creatures; when
they (as their English name signifies) are heauen-vp on high, to make a
beautiful and glorious palace for th'All-Creator. To consider the matter yet
more particularly; the Platonikes do say, that God (who is the Voice
Sovereign, and gives voice, sound, and harmony to all things, high and low)
has in every Sphere of heaven set an Intelligence (some call it Scule; some,
Angel; some, morion quickened by the Primouable) whereby the heavens are moved
to their cadence appointed, so exactly as no melody can be more pleasing. As
for mine own opinion hereof, I think the Platonicks (who say also that God
still exercises Geometry) meant hereby to commend the perfection of
Mathematics, and chiefly Astronomy; which is most excellent and certain of
them all. And because the mind is maruellously delighted with Musical
proportions, which no where can be found more perfect then in the heavens; who
so has the gift to understand them, enioyes a contentment surpassing all
sweetness of earthly and eare-pleasing Music. Now, to the end this heavenly
Music may be the better conceived; our Poet here uses a very choice and
dainty comparison, and says the Spirit of God gives the heavens a Musical
motion, which breeds a sweet harmony among them; even as an Organist by due
fingring the keys of his Instrument stirs up therein a melodious sound. Thus
much by the way; that the Reader may thereby take occasion to stop his ears
against the tempestuous broils and discords of this world, and raise-vp
himself toward this heavenly concord; or rather to fly-vp thither with the
wings of faith, and learn, in the company of Saints and blessed Souls, to
understand those excellent Songs, which are partly set-downe for us in diverse
passages of the Apocalypse.

50. Now all these counter-notes. Leaving that heavenly Music of the Spheres,
he shows now that we have a Music also contained even in the humors of our
bodies, answerable to the four Seasons of the year and the Elements: Our
Melancholy, like the Earth and Winter Season, holds the Basse; our Phleme, like
the Autumn time, and Element of Water, the Tenor; our Blood, like the Spring
and Air, the Counter-tenor, which runs through all kind of Notes; our
Choler, as the Summer time, and Fire, the Treble: as for all other parts used
in Music, they are ever correspondent to some one of these four.

51. See then the cause. He speaks now of the effect and power of Music. The
Platonicks held the soul of Man to be composed of numbers and proportions, the
excellence whereof is chiefly in the heavens: whereupon it ensues that
Musical harmony, somewhat partaking with the nature of ise and soul, diversely
mooues and affects all living Creatures capable thereof. The Poet plays upon
this opinion, but still with a caveat, that the truth and ground of this
doctrine be rightly understood: For man's Soul is not made of numbers, as the
word is simply taken: but thus much only means the Platonist, that these
spiritual substances enclosed in man's body are so exquisite, and (as it were)
harmonious, that all harmony concord, and proportion delights them and
contrariwise all discord and disproportion, or confused noise offends them, as
we see by daily experience. Furthermore, he that has created all things in
perfect concord and proportion, would even in such as seem farthest from well
agreeing, have the force of Music show it self, ^y the attention it
commands of hearers, and by their love and reverence thereof. Whereupon I
boldly dare avouch that soul not well ordered in it self, or not well fitted
with a body, which cannot abide sweet harmony

52. Sweet Harmony. In twelve verses here the Poet sets-out the force of
Music, both in regard of men and beasts: whereof we find in ancient History
very notable examples; as Te^^a^der, Timotheus, Ari^^, and others, wh^^by their
Music have done great wonders; made the most offended to be friends one with
another; the most melancholy and sad, to be merry; fools, to be wise; and sum
as were like to run mad for love, to be stayed; and what not? It is reported
also, that against the Ph^l^^gies poison, there ^^n help to ready and
oueraigne as the well ordered sound of Musical Instruments* See what Ae^^an,
P^^^y, and Plutarch ^y thereof.

53. O what is to Music hard. He goes on yet further, and shows how Music
is able to preua^e even with God himself. And this he proves by three
examples; the first of Soul, (1. Sam. 10.) who meeting a company of Prophets
with Instruments of Music, began also to prophecy among them; the second, of
Elizeus (2. King. 3.) who called for a Minstrell; and when the Minstrell
played, the hand of the Lord (that is his Spirit) came upon the Prophet: the
third, of God, anger appeased by devout singing of Psalms; and namely those of
David, which in the mouth of Gods faithful servants are of wonderful power;
as by many particulars of these and former times may well be proved. For God
indeed has promised to be near unto all those that call upon him faithfully,
Psalm. 145.18. And it becomes well the righteous to rejoice in the Lord and be
thankful, Psalm. 33.1. To conclude, here is the effect of a zealous prayer,
wherein heart, voice and accent run together, most lively set-out by the
Poet, describing with most elegant similitudes the fierce wrath of God against
sin, and the sweetness of his mercy, when he is appeased.

54. But now as Heb'r had thought. The Poet intending to make here an end of
the second day of his second week, brings-in Canan the son of Cham, to seek
(as it were by Fate) along the banks of Iordaine, for the Country that was
after to be inhabited by his posterity. So he coming toward the Pillar,
breakes-off the learned conference that was betwixt the other two. And here
therefore shall end our Commentary-Notes upon these high conceits of this
excellent Poet.

FINIS.
The Epistle to the Lord Admiral. 1596.
WEighing how near it concerns your Honorable Charge, what strangers pass
the Seas into England; I was thereby, and otherwise in humble duty, moved, to
give your Lordship first intelligence of this Gentleman, whom I have newly
transported out of Frame: and also thought it necessary to crave your
favorable protection of him in this his travel. A worthy man is he (my Lord)
in his own Country, howsoever here disguised, and one of the sons of that
Noble and Divine Poet LE SIEVR DV BARTAS; in my simple judgment the properest,
and best learned of them all, I am sure the best affected to England, and the
gracious Empress thereof: for which cause I made special choice of him, and
do therefore the rather hope to find favor on his behalf with your
Honorable Lordship; whose loyalty to the Crown, the Prince by trust of so
high an Office; whose love to the Land, the people by joint consent of daily
felt virtues, have so fully witnessed, that the fame thereof has spread it
self far beyond that your admirable Regiment. In so much as this gentle
stranger, though he were at the first unwilling, Vl^sses-like, to leave his
native soil, especially now in this dangerous seafaring time, while all the
world is in a manner troubled with Spanish Fleets; yet after he called to mind
what he had heard and written of the mighty Goddess of the English Ocean, and
who there swayed the Trident under her, trusting upon such a Neptune, he went
aboard with a good courage, and doubting not at all but that the proud Spanish
Carackes, if they be not yet sufficiently dismayed by the wrack they suffered
in their former adventure, but dare again attempt the like, be they never so
many more or greater than they were (if more and greater they can be) shall
again, by the grace of God, directing (as before) the courage and wisdom of
Englands renowned Admiral, be dispersed over the frowning face of our
disdainful Seas, and drunken with salt waves, regorge the bodies of their
presumptuous Pilots. And so (my Lord) with a favorable wind, breathing
directly from the French Helicon, by the safe conduit of your Honorable name,
and help of the Muses, at length I landed my stranger in England. Where since
his arrival he has gladly encountered diverse of his elder brethren, that were
come over before, some in a princely Scottish attire, others in fair English
habits, and to the intent he might the better enjoy their company, whh by this
time had almost forgotten their French, he was desirous to learn English of
me: therefore I kept him a while about me, was his teacher at home, and
enterpreter abroad; and now that he has gotten such a smattering of the
tongue, as he can (so as he can) speak for himself, may it please your good
Lordship to talk with him at your leisure: though I know you understand very
well his natural speech, I am of opinion it will much delight you to hear him
utter such counterfeit English, as in so little time I was able to teach him.
He can say somewhat of the godly government of good Princes, and the wicked
practices of Tyrants, as well in compassing as maintaining a Scepter, both
worthy your Lordships hearing for the manner sake, though the matter be not
unknown to your wisdom. But some other things he does report very strange, as
of NIMROD, that was the first Tyrant of the world, after the time of Noah, the
first Admiral of the world: his aspiring mind and practices in seeking the
peoples favor, his proud and subtle attempt in building the Tower of Babel,
and Gods just punishment thereof in confounding the language of the builders.
Very truly reckons he (that which few do consider) the great and manifold
inconveniences, that are befallen mankind by the diversity of tongues.
Further, he can tell of speech in general, whether man speak by nature, or
have but only an aptness to speak by use, and whether any other creature
have the like: as for several speeches, he can prove, with many goodly
reasons, which is the best and most ancient of them all; what alters each
tongue, what continues each in account, what languages are in greatest regard
now-adaies, and what Authors have most excelled in them. And upon occasion of
the English tongue, my Lord, he setteth-out in such manner the Queens princely
Majesty, her learning, wisdom, eloquence, and other excellent virtues, that I
know your noble and loyal heart will greatly rejoice to hear it, at the mouth
of such a stranger. The rest, if it be more curious, then for the States
weighty affairs, your L. may intend to hear, I wish referred unto those
goodly young Gentlewomen, your noble and father-like-minded Sons, whom after
your L. I do most of all honor: there shall they find profit so blended with
pleasure, learning with delight, as it may easily win their hearts, already
virtuously aspiring, from the wanton and faining Cantoes of other Syren-Poets
(wherewith many young Gentlemen, and chiefly those of greatest hope, are long
and dangerously misled) unto a further acquaintance with this
heauenly-Poeticall Writer of the truth: who is now grown into such a liking of
this Country, chiefly for the peaceable government thereof (blessed be that
Governor) and free course of the Gospel (God continue it, and send the like
into France) that he is desirous to become a Freedenizen; and hoping further to
be an eyewitness of Gods wonderful mercies toward this Land, whereof in
France he spoke but by hear say, to behold that precious Northern Pearl, and
kiss her Scepter-bearing hand, whose worthy praise he has sung so sweetly, he
humbly beseeches your gracious favor to be enfranchised, which if it may
please you to grant (my Lord) vouchsafing also the patronage of him; that under
seal of your Honorable name he may escape the carping censures of curious
fault-finders, and enjoy all honors, privileges, liberties and laws, that
belong even to the natural inhabitants of this noble Isle, my self will
undertake to Fine for him, at least hearty prayers for your daily increase of
honor, and all such obedience, as it shall please your L. to impose:

Whose I rest ever at command, WILLIAM L'ISLE.




