A BRIEF TREATISE OF VSVRIE, MADE BY Nicolas Sander D. of Divinity.

Luc. 6. Mutuum date, nihil inde sperantes.
Give to lone, hoping for nothing thereof.
printer's or publisher's device RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM

I F



LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, An. 1568. Cum Priuilegio. Subsig. De La Torre.

A BRIEF TREATISE OF VSVRIE.
The occasion of this Treatise, and the arguments which are commonly made for
the defense of usury, and what is usury. The first Chapter.
I Did not intrude my self (good Reader) to make this Treatise, but was forced
thereunto, by very necessity: except I would wilfully suffer my Christian
brethern to run hedlong into vice, and to defend that for lawful, which is
utterly against the ordinance of God. And suerly when I saw, that a sin was
not only committed (which comes of the frayltie of man) but was also defended:
then I tought it my duty, not to hold my pen any longer.

The matter I speak of, is usury, in defense whereof thus I have heard
diverse me^ reason at several times. I have (says he) a poor stock of money
lawfully gotten, it lies by me idely, and it will quickly be spent, if it be
not occupied. I was not brought up in the trade of merchandise, I have wife and
children, who are like to beg, unless I provide some perpetual relief for
them. In this case what shall I do with my money but imploye it so, that it
might not be lost, and yet might bring me some yearly profit?

Again, I lend it to such a merchant whom I know to take commodity and no
hurt thereby: why then may I not take profit of mine own money together with
him? or why should he enrich him self with my money, and not be bound to give
me some part of his gain? Hereunto when I made answer, Exodus 22. Leuit. 25.
Psalm. 14.
that the word of God did forbid usury: he replied, that he thought it was
rather a counsel given in Gods word to avoid extreme taking of usury, then
any such precept as bound men to the obedience thereof under the pain of
everlasting damnation. Nay (said I) that can not be so. For the Church has
taken it to be a commandment which must be kept under the pain of damnation,
Sub Alexa^dro tertio. in Council. Lateranest c. 25.
and thervpo^ it has forbidden open usurers to be admitted to the communion of
the altar, and to be buried in holy ground, and their offerings to be
received, under the pain of suspension to him that burieth, orels receaueth
their oblations.

Here began a new disputation, which is the true Church, and what power
positive laws have. Yea the word of God (according to these new
interpretations) is also brought forth, that such usury as byteth him sore who
boroweth, is in deed forbidden (for in the Hebrew usury is named of biting)
but not such as does bring commodity, as well to the borower, as to the
lender. I wondered to see what shift the devil made, to maintain that most
heinouse crime of usury, in so much that he has found the pretense of holy
scripture and of Gods word for it.

To make short the disputation, and to cut of th'vnprofitable talk of words
and names, I said at the last (which now God willing I will prove) usury is
utterly against God and Nature, even as mankilling is. And therefore
whatsoeeuer the holy Scripture or the Catholic Church has decreed thereof,
yt has decreed yt as against one of the greatest mortal sins that can be. So
that now it is my part to show, how usury is not only against the counsel of
God expressed in the holy scriptures, but also against his will and
commandment: the breach whereof is everlasting death* as it shall appear both
by the circumstance of the places wherein it is forbidden, and also by the
reason of the forbidding, this only being first known: that, What is usury.
usury is all manner of gains, which is either bargained or hoped for by the
force of the contract of giving to lone, whether money be lent, or oil, corn,
wine, or any like thing that is spent with the first natural and proper use
thereof* for when the use of that thing which can be but once used of the
borower without the spe^ding thereof and which by the very delivery to thend it
may be used, Real usury.
is alienated from the lender, is paid for: that is real usury* and when the
lender has a desire to be paid for the use of that thing, Mental usury.
that is mental usury.

That usury is forbidden by Gods law, under the pain of everlasting
damnation. The second Chapter.
IF men had now that obedience and faith which they once had, and still should
have: it had sufficed to have said in one word, The Church condemns
usury, and forbids it as a mortal sin. He that hears not the Church,
Mat. 18.
is to be taken as an heathen and a Publican. But now if we answer so, they
will demand which is the true Church, where is it, or how can we be assured,
that it erreth not? For which cause I am constrained, to give an account of
the Churches doctrine touching usury.

And for as much as the authority of the Church being once called into
question, the Scriptures also (which were given only to the Church, and are
known by her tradition, and by her unwritten witness) can not keep their
creditte, but are expounded according to every man's lust and fantasy: I
must also be forced, to resort unto natural reason, and thereby to show, that
usury is of it self naught and unjust. For albeit the rule of reason may not
still be followed, for as much as the articles of our faith depend not upon
natural reason which is common to all men, but upon the revelation of Jesus
Christ who powers his gifts into the hearts of the faithful abundantly: yet
now it shall not be amiss to prove, that usury is against natural reason,
because it is a matter of injury and of civil injustice, whereof reason may
judge. But who so is not able to reach unto the depth of reason, that he may
at the least not lack the authority of Gods word: I will first declare, that
the word of God shows usury to be a great sin.

Exodus 22.
It is written in the old testament after this sort: Si pecuniam mutuam dederis
populo meo pauperi qui habitat tecum, non vrgebis eum quasi exactor, nec vsuris
opprimes. If thou shall give money to lone unto my poor people which dwells
with thee, thou shall not be instant upon him as an importunate wringer,
neither shall thou oppress him with usury. First this precept stands among
other moral precepts, which are to be kept of necessity. Exodus 22.
For a little before it is forbidden, that witches should be suffered to live,
or those that had lain with beasts, or those that should offer sacrifice to
any, saving to God alone. The people were also forbidden, to hurt a child, or
a widow. After which precepts, this of usury follows.

Seeing then it is joined with those commandments, which if they be not kept,
the breaker is guyltie of everlasting death: we must think also the very same
of usury. Neither may it justly be laid against me, that not every usury is
forbidden, but only that which wringeth and byteth the poor: for both every
usury does wring and byte, and every lending ought to be made unto the
poor. For lending is a kind of charity, or of almosedeedes, which was
instituted chiefly and only for the poor. Who sees not then, that it is an
abuse to lend money to him, who has as much, or more, then he that lends yt?

If then thou lend to the poor, says God (meaning, that for other men the
contract of lending was not made) thou shall not byte him nor wring him. To
lend unto the poor, that is in deed a counsel rather then a precept, and
therefore it is not said, thou shall lend money to the poor man. But if thou
do lend him money, it is the commandment of God, not to take usury of him,
because that were to wring him, and to byte him. Now as it ca^ not be but a
great fault, to wring or byte any man: so is it much more, to wring or byte
him, who is already poor and miserable.

Moreover, Leuit, 25^
this precept is expounded by another like place. If thy brother be
impouerished, ne accipias vsuras ab eo, nec amplius quam dedisti take thou no
usury of him, nor any more then thou did deliver. Here he is called our
brother, which before was called Gods poor people: and, whom we were
forbidden to wringe or byte, of him we are now forbidden, to take any more,
then we deliuerid unto him. For he that takes one pe^ny more, then he
delivered: wringeth and byteth him, as much as that penny comes to.

Deuteronomy. 23.
Again God says: Non foenerabis fratri tuo ad vsuram pecuniam, nec fruges;
nec quamlibet aliam rem, sed alieno. Thou shall not increase money upon thy
brother by usury, nor corn, nor any other thing: but do that to thine enemy.
Fratri autem tuo, asque vsura, id quod indiget, commodabis. Thou shall le^d thy
brother that which he lacks, without usury. The carnal Jews had certain
infidels to their enemies: whom as they might kill, so might they oppress them
with usury. But now seeing every man is both our neighbor, and our brother:
we may not take usury of any man at al.

It is here farther to be noted, that usury consists not only in taking
gaynes of money, but also in corn, or any other kind of thing which may be
given to lone, as it shall afterward be declared. For all that which by the way
of lone is hoaped to be restored above that which was lent, makes the lender
guyltie of usury, and consequently of death, as in Ezechiel also we read:
Ezec. 18. and 22.
Dans ad vsuram and amplius accipiens, non viuet. He that gives (his money or
wares) to usury, and takes more (then he gave) shall not live. That is to say,
he shall not enjoy heaven, without he repent him of it.

Also when David had asked, Psalm. 14.
who should dwell in our Lords tabernacle, he answers (among other things)
he that has not given his money to usury, meani^g, that whosoever has given his
money to usury, shall not dwell with God.

Last of al Christ him self says: Date mutuum, Luc. 6.
nihil inde sperantes, give to lone, hoaping for nothing out of the lone it
self, or in the respect thereof. Where, not only express bargains for
usury: but al hope also and expectation of gain to rise thereby, is utterly
forbidden. For the very greedines to receive gain by a liberal and free
contract, makes a man to be a sinner in the sight of God: because for his part
he turns a free and charitable contract into the most wrongful and hurtful
bargain that ca^ be. For wherein he should have aided the poor, therein he
oppresses them. And where he should rather have lost somewhat of his own for
Gods sake, there he increases his own, and takes away another ma^s goods
injuriously: as it shall more plainly appear, when the matter of geui^g to lone
is fully declared. For this prohibition of usury in Gods law, is but the
opening and making plain of the law of nature in that behalf.

Whence bargains proceed, and why Almosdedes are so acceptable to God. The
third Chapter.
SVche bargains, couenantes, contractes, and obligations, as do usually pass
among men, either proceed from liberality, or else from the necessary use of
trafique. Those proceed from liberality, wherein the one party alone takes
commodity, as in all free gifts and legacies. But those bargains which are
practiced to and fro, for the necessity of each party, ought to bring loss
or gain equally to each of them: as in byeng and selling, setting, and taking
to hyer, in fellowship of mercha^dise, and in such like cases it comes to
pass. My purpose is at this time to speak only of the first kind of
couenantes, and yet not of all them, but specially of geui^g to lone or
lending, which in Latin is called Mutuu^. Now albeit a donation or free gift,
when it is really delivered, is not properly a contract: yet because many times
a man binds him self by solemn promise before hand, to give a thing
afterward, in this case there is a certain covenant between them, which must be
kept. Once that kind of doing or of bargaining, which is most liberal, or has
least hope of gain or reward to be returned, is of all other most acceptable
to God, and most honorable in it self, as coming nighest to the nature and
worki^g of Almighty God: Ephesians. 2. Gal. 5. Romans 5. Romans 2.
who first giving us freely faith and charity, whereby we may do his will:
afterward promises, and will give us life everlasting, if we believe in him, and
with his grace do keep his co^maundeme^ts. And yet for all this he looks for
no commodity, by our faith or obedience, Luc. 17.
but we are still unprofitable servants, as touching any gain that may rise to
him by our service: but only he of his botomelesse mercy spreads his goodness
upon us, to enrich our miserable poverty with his unspeakable treasures and
glory. For this cause Almosdedes are so much commended in holy Scriptures: as
in the which we give and presently deliver, or bind our selves to give and to
deliver our superfluouse or profitable goods, to our poor neighbors for Gods
sake, and that although there be no hoape to receive like kyndnesse again of
them.

Luc. 11.
A certain Phariseie did on a time bid Christ to diner, and when he saw Christ
sit down before he had washed, he wondered not a little at yt. Then said our
Lord to him: Now ye Pharisees do make clean the outmost part of the cup and
of the platter, but that which is within you, is full of ravening and of
iniquity. Ye fools, did not he who made that which is without, make also that
with is within? Howbeit give almose of that which is overplus in you, and lo,
al things are clean unto you.

By which testimony the truth it self does witness, that even our daily
sins and inward uncleanness, are made clean by Almosdedes. And therefore
when Zacheus had said, Behold, I give half my goods to the poor, Luc. 19.
and if I have deceived any man, I restore four dubble: Jesus answered, that
the same day salvation was made to that house, for that he also was made the
son of Abraham. Yea the very perfection of a faithful man is showed by Christ
to consist, Mat. 19.
in selling away al things that he has, and in giving yt to the poor. Which
who so does and follows Christ, shall have a treasure in heaven. In so much
that on the day of Judgment Christ shows, Mat. 25.
that those who have done the works of mercy, for his sake, shall have heaven
for their reward, and those who have not done them, shall go into hell fire.

This being so, yt should not seem any unwonted suit to Christian men, if I
should exhort them to give away al their goods to others who lack, and so to
follow Christ. But now I ask not so much. It is now no world wherein to
require any such perfection. I would think my self happy, if I were able to
persuade men to give away only that which they have superfluous and more then
is needful. Nay neither that do I now ask which yet in cases of other men's
need, they are bound to do. But I ask and beseech men only to avoid and
eschew those, which are extreme great sins, and most enemies to Almosdedes,
I mean, usury, and Symony. Of which Symony is committed in spiritual causes,
usury in temporal and secular matters. Of Symony I will not speak, either
because the matter is not so hard, or intricate, and therefore is not lightly
committed but upon malice, which commonly is incurable: or else because those of
the clergy, who most commonly are the me^ that fall into that horrible vice,
are them selves, or at the least should be so far learned, Act. 8.
as to know that Symo^ Magus (unless he repented) had the sentence of
damnation pronounced by S. Peter upon him, because he went about to bie the
gifts of the holy Ghost with money. And he that bieth or sells a benefice,
or any thing whereunto the administration of the gifts of the holy Ghost is
annexed, is in the same case for his degree with Symo^ Magus, except he so
repent as he ought to do, and be absolved according as the Church has ever
used to absolve such crimes. But the matter of usury is not so easy to
understand, as that of Symony, and therefore it needs a longer discourse to
declare the iniquity thereof, which being one of the very greatest, yet
through the ignorance or blyndnesse of men, is now grown out of knowledge, and
is taken to be either none at al, or suerly no very great fault. But how can
that be a small fault, which is contrary to so great a virtue as almosdeedes
is? Truth must be heard with patience, good Reader. Prove. 27.
The wounds of him that loves, are better then the deceitful kysses of him
that hates. Usury of it self is more contrary to almosdeedes, then commonly
robbery or theft is: because theft is most times committed of them that lack,
but usury is committed only of them who are rich. The thief as nighe as he
can, will never rob a poor man: the usurer does commonly rob poor men most
of al. Theft is punished by open laws, usury is winked at, because it is a
ge^till manly theft. Al men are ashamed of theft, but many men profess usury,
and blush not much at yt, for that evil custom has so long time borne with
it. I speak not this of al kind of usurers, but of the worst sort of them,
whereas yet there is none at al good. But there is great odds between open
bargaining for usury, and privy expecting of some reward. That is done
without the fear of God, and therefore it is harder for to obtain pardon, and
neadeth the greater penance: this is done with remorse of conscience, and
therefore it may the more easily be forgeuen, if upon better information the
grace of God be called for, who would all men to come to the knowledge of the
truth, and so by his mercy and Sacraments to come to salvation. 1. Tim. 2.


But you will say perhaps, that some men set out their money to usury, to
the end they may be able to do good deeds with that gain with arises to them
by usury. But as well might he say, that he would rob one man, to give almose
to another. For to such the Apostle says: Romans 2.
Evil things are not to be don, that good things may follow thereon. God in
deed uses to turn evil into good. But that is able to be don of him only, who
can of nothing make somewhat. For an evil thing in that respect as it is evil,
is nothing at al, but is only a defect and fayli^g from some goodness or other.
But man, who is not able to turn nothing into somewhat, or evil into good, may
not presume to do evil upon hope of a good thing to follow, since it is Gods
only choice, whether any good shall follow thereof, or no. And who so presumes
that upon his evil fact God will work a good effect, he presumes of God.

And least I might seem to write so weighty a matter upon my own head: In
Decres. 14. q. 4. c. si quis.
S. Ambrose says without any exception: Si quis vsura^ accipit, rapina^ facit,
vita no^ viuit. If a man receive usury, he commits violent robbery, he
lives not everlastingly. And S. Augustine says, Nolite eleemosynas facere de
foenore and vsuris, (and post) Dona iniquorum no^ probat Altissimus. Be ye not
of the will to give almose of that which is gotten by multiplieng your stock,
or by usury. The most high god allows not their gifts, who get the goods
which they give unjustly. And S. Gregory says: Ep. 110.
That Almose pleases God, which is given of goods, rightly gotten. Thus we
see, that it is not the giving of almose which can make good the usurers fault:
but when he has rendered his own to him whom he unjustly has oppressed, then
let him follow Zacheus, in giving away his own goods (and not other men's)
unto the poor.

Of giving to lone or of lending, which are naturally free contractes. The
fourth Chapter.
THe first degree then of worthiness in any kind of external trafique
appertains to almose deeds, as I showed before, because they come nighest to
the great goodness of God, who freely, Romans 8
and without any recompense hoped for, gave us his own son, and al things
beside with him.

The next degree of worthiness after free gifts, belongs to that liberal
contract, which in Latin is called Mutuum, in English it is named, giving to
lone, or lending. The Latin name is compounded of two words, meum and tuum
mine, and thine, as if we might say in english Mynethine: whereby is me^t, that
the thing which before was mine, is by lending made thine, to the end thou
may use it, being thine own, and the value thereof must again of thine be
made mine when it is restored back unto me: so that giving to lone for the time
that it dureth, differreth not from a free gift, but is as much to say as a
gift for so long, whereas a free gift is a gift for ever, without any
restitution at al. But whiles the thing it self is in thy hands, it is not
now mine, nor in it self never shall be, but I have only a right to so much in
quantity, and to so good a thing in quality, as that was which I lent. In a
free gift then I can not ask again neither the thing it self, nor such an
other thing: but in lone, I may require such an other thing, but not the self
same which I lent.

The better to understand this kind of bargain, it to be known, that there are
two kinds of lending* for whereas every lending is to thend the thing lent
may be used of another man without my loss: the use of a thing may be after
two sorts.

And first to begin with one, I may lend such a thing as without alienating
or perishing maybe used of another man, as it chances when I lend him my
house, my horse, my plate or vessel. He then that takes my house to dwell in,
may use my house this day, and again to morrow and so for many months or
years together, and yet my house shall still remain unperished, although it
may wast more and more. And the like does chance in my horse, or any such
thing as is not spent with the first use thereof. On the other side, I may
lend such a thing as ca^ not be employed to his natural and proper use, except
either the propriety of the same be alienated, or the thing it self do
perish: for example, if I lend you a barrel of beer, you can not use that
beer to such a purpose as beer is ordained unto, except you drink it, or
bestow it where it may be drunke^. Now when it is once drunke^, yt ca^ be
drunken no more, but it perishes and cease to be any longer beer. The like
is seen in corn, in oil, in wine, and in such other things as we use to
number, weigh, or measure: the chief use of all which is to be spent with the
first use of them, and not to remain still his, whose they were before they
were used.

Whereas then some things may be used of him to whom they are lent, without
spending of them, as howses and horses, but other things can not be used,
except they be alienated and spent, as corn, and wine: these two diverse uses
have caused and made two diverse contractes and bargains. For that contract
wherein the thing does perish together with the use, is called in latin
Mutuum. The other wherein the thing lent remains still in his use to whom it
is lent, is called in Latin Commodatum. In english both contractes have
commonly one name, and are each of them called Lone. But the natures of the
things being diverse, do require a diverse handling of them, albeit both have
one name in our tongue, which may chance either through the barraines of the
tongue, or else through the ignorance of the common people, who use not to name
that diversely, wherein they perceive not an evident difference. But we may
reasonably english Mutuum, a giving to lone: and Commodatum, a lending without
any gift. For Mutuum is more then a lending, since the thing is both given
and lent: given from me concerning the propriety, and lent to another
concerning that I bind him to restore the like quantity of the same kind of
things. This first is common to both kinds of lending, that the thing lent,
must be lent freely and without bargayning for any certain hyer or wages. For
if I lend my horse upon a daily pensio^, it is the contract of Locatio^ or of
setting out to hyer: and not the contract of lending, or of giving to lone
whose nature is to be always free and francke.

The difference then between the two kinds of lending, is, that when I lend
such a thing as is not spent ordinarily with the first use, the thing lent
remains still mine own. For when I lend my book to my frind (which is a
common thing among scholars) I do not alienate the book from me, but I
remain still the lord and proprietarie of it, lending my frind the use
thereof. But when I give to lone such a thing, as is straight spent with the
first use thereof: then not only the use, but also the propriety and dominion
thereof passes from me to him who boroweth yt* and good reason why. For all
such things are so principally made of God for one certain use (as bread to
be eaten, wine to be drunken) that the use differs not from the thing it
self. Because they can not dure any longer when they are once used, but
straight do perish, and become either another thing, or at the least another
man's goods.

In consideration whereof, he that lends me such things, by the very
lending, leeseth the propriety and dominion of them* for else I should spend
another ma^s goods to his injury, which is both against reason and also
against his will or intent. For as he would have me take commodity of his
goods by using them: so would he not hinder him self therewithal. But if I
should borow a bushel of wheat of another man, and yet the same bushel of wheat
should still be his, I should either not use the wheat at al in making bread
thereof, or occupieng it otherwise (and then it does me no service) or else I
should spend yt being his, and thereby he should sustain farther loss, then
himself would agree unto. For if I do spend another man's goods by his
consent, I am not answerable to him for them: no more then I should answer him
his oil again, who should bid me throw it into the fire.

So that if he that boroweth corn, should not straight become lord and master
of the corn, either he should never spend yt (and then yt serves him not) or
he should spend yt with the lords own consent, and then he were bound to
restore nothing at al, since the lord consented wittingly to the spending of
his own corn. Which if it were so, no man would ever lend such things as be
spent with the first use of them, except he were disposed to give them away.
And seeing few men are prone to give much, many poor men should perish for
lack of sustenance.

God therefore has more sweetly provided, that in such things as are spent
and alienated from us when we once use them, the dominion and propriety should
be in the borower and spender of them, to the^d he might boldly spend his own*
and yet he should be bound to restore so much again in number, or weight, or
measure, as they came unto. Whereby the lender and also the borower is well
provided for.

Hereupon yt insueth, that who so boroweth those things which are given to
lone, and are spent with the first use, must bear all manner of peril* because
every thing is always at the loss of him, who is lord and master thereof.

If then you borowe of me a pype of wine, and immediately the wine be taken from
you by thieves, or be otherwise lost: I am not bound to bear any of the loss,
but he only that boroweth it, because it is his wine, and not mine. But it is
otherwise when I lend my horse to a man. For if the horse perish, without any
manner of his fault who borrowed it: I loose the horse, and not he (except some
express covenant be made to the contrary) because the horse tarrieth still
mine, and was not his at al. Whereupon Justinian says: Qui mutuu^ accepit,
Institut. Quib^ des re cotrabitur obligatio.
si quolibet fortuito casu amiserit quod accepit, veluti incendio, ruina,
naufragio, aut latronum hostiumue incursu, nihilominus obligatus remanet. At is
qui vtendum accepit, sane quidem exactam diligentiam custodiendae rei praestare
iubetur: sed propter maiore^ vim, maioresue casus non tenetur, si modo non
ipsius culpa is casus interuenerit. He that has taken to lone, if he shall lose
that which he took, by whatsoever casualtie or chance, as by fire, by
falling, by shipwreck, or by incursion of thieves or of enemies, he remains
nevertheless bound. But he that took a thing to use, he is in deed commanded
to use exact diligence in keeping yt: but he is not bound against greater force
or mischance then he is able to resist, except the same happened by his own
default. This verily is the law of nature, and the rule of reason, that every
thing should be at his peril, who is the lord and owner of yt, except some
other man's fault or some express covenant come between.

These things being so, it is to be known, that al coin and money, whether
it be of gold, of silver, of brass, or of leather, is to be reputed and
numbered among such things as are spent with the first proper use of them. For
money is not like a book, or a horse, which being used to day, may be used
again of the same man to morrow, and so one day after another: but money is
like to wheat, and to wine which as soon as it is used to that end whereunto it
was chiefly ordained, is spent and alienated from him that borrowed it. For if I
borowe ten pounds of money, I can not use those ten pounds (in spending
them, so as money is commonly used) except I give yt, pay it out, or bye
somewhat therewith. And in all those cases the money goes from my hands, so
that I have no more power upon it: neither can I use it again, as upon the
former lone, except I come by it again by a new bargain.

For this cause all the lawiers and Philosophers, as well those that were before
Christ, as those that were after, and likewise all the Christian Doctors,
Bishopes, and learned men have with one accord rekoned al money and coin, yea
al mettalles which serve to bie or to pay withal, among those things which
are spent when they are first used. These are the words of Justinian
The Emperor: Mutui datio in ijs rebus consistit, Institut. ibidem.
quae pondere, numero, mensuraue constant: veluti, vino, oleo frumento, pecunia
numerata, aere, argento, auro, quas res aut numerando, aut metiendo, aut
appendendo in hoc damus, vt accipientium fiant. Giving to lone does consist in
those things, which stand by weight, number, or measure, as in wine, oil,
corn, numbered money, brass, silver, gold, which things we give either by
nu^bring, by measuri^g, or by weighing, for this purpose, that they may be made
theirs, who receive them.

Here we have not only a plain authority, that money is one of the things which
is given to lone: but also we have a reason joined therewith. For if al things
that consist in measure or weight, or number, be of those things which are
given to lone: seeing it is evident, that money may be both weighed and numbered,
yea sometimes also measured: it is clear, that money is among those things,
which being given to lone, are spent with the first use, and not among those,
which being lent, do still remain safe with him who uses them. Now the reason
why giving to lone does consist in such things as are weighed, nu^bered, or
measured, is, for that those things, which can not be them selves restored
again to the former lord and master of them, ought to be brought to an exact
certainty, to the end it may be evidently known, what he owes who boroweth
them. For no reason would, that he who lends me his goods freely should
thereby take any loss. Verily an exact certainty is known by numbering,
measuring, and weighing. For these trials never fail. If then I lend a quart
of old french wine, although I can not ask the self same quart again: yet
the measure of a quart makes it certain, how much he must pay who boroweth
the wine of me. And he must pay not only a quart, but a quart of that kind of
wine, and of that goodness whereof it was.

Hitherto we have learned, first, that giving to lone is a contract in nature
next unto almose deeds, or to a free gift, not differing at al from it, for
the time that it dureth.

Secondly, that yt ought allwaies to be free: otherwise it is no lone at al,
but a selling or setting to hyer.

Thirdly, that yt differs from simple lending, because the propriety of the
thing given to lone, becomes his own who boroweth yt, which is not so in
simple lending.

Fourthly, it insueth hereupon, that in giving to lone, the danger and loss is
his only who boroweth, and not at al his who gives to lone: because the lord
of every thing always bears the loss, and not he who had nothing to do
withal.

Fifthly, things given to lone be such as consist of weight, number and
measure: as wine, oil, corn or grain.

Last of all, money is of those things which are given to lone, and
consequently he is not lord of yt who lent yt, but he only who boroweth it. And
therefore if the money lent, be stolen, or do perish by what soever mischance,
without any default in the world of him who does borowe yt: yet he that gave it
to lone, may with safe conscience ask so much again as he lent, and the
borower (if he be able) is bound to repaie yt.

How much it imports, that the bounds and limits of every contract
belonging to the law of nations, should be inuiolably kept and maintained. The
v. Chapter.
WHereas al good and honest laws ought to be duly kept and obeyed, as by which
the common weal does chiefly stand: yet specially those laws are above al
other to be every where mayntayned, which belong not only to particular cities
or states, but even to the whole society of all nations, and to the universal
fellowship of all mankind. For as the particular law is made upon the
particular reason and consent of some one people: so the general ordinances of
all countries are made, upon the general reason and consent of al men in the
whole world.

Any one people may be sometimes either blinded with affection, or deceived for
lack of good instruction. And therefore their law being sometime unjust, may
in that case be justly neglected. But that which pleases al me^ of al
religions, of al studies, educatio^s, and sorts, can not suerly be erroneouse
or wrongful, since the common discourse and consent of al me^ comes only of
God, who is the maker and governor of al. And consequently that wherein all
men agree, must needs be such a thing, as either nature it self taught them
al, or else great necessity, public profit, and long experience forced al men
to agree upon. And therefore who so breaks that general decree and law of al
nations, he is an enemy to the peace of mankind, and is unworthy to live in
any part of that fellowship, whose unity, concord and consent he goes about to
set at division, discord, and variance. He is proud, seditiouse, foolish,
unkind, and to say all in one word, unreasonable.

If no man shall at al have to do with another, then is there battle bid to
God him self, who made man in such sort, that he should be cumpanable and
inclined to live in society with other of his own kind. And seeing so many
kinds of birds and beasts keep company together accordingly as their nature
provoke them: shall only man, who is made lord over them all, be yet behind
them all in this condition? To what purpose seems the gift of our speech, if
we should not live with them who may hear and understand us? But if one man
must and shall keep company with another, is yt not reason, that such order be
taken in common for all, that every one may without injury to him self, or
to his neighbor, provide for him self, and follow that vocation wherein he
is called?

And whereas every country has not every thing, but one country has that
which another lacks: nature, reason, experience, and common profit has
caused such orders generally to be agreed upon, that every man of what soever
nation or tongue he be, may bargain or exchange his wares with another in such
sort, that althinges shall be done to each parties commodity, without loss or
injury to either of both. For seeing every man for his part is a member of the
whole fellowship of mankind, he must so keep his own place in the body where
he lives, that he neither put an other out of his room, nor fail to supply
his own* so that al things must be don in such sort to our neighbors, as we
would have them to do toward our selves.

Which rule of nature is (...) true, so necessary, and so profitable to al
men, that when Christ gave to his disciples the precepts not only of this
mortal and transitory life, but also of life everlasting, yet he said unto
them: Prout vultis vt faciant vobis homines, Luc. 6.
and vos facite illis similiter. Even as you would that men should do unto
you, do ye also likewise toward them. And S. Paul teaches, 1. Thessa. 4
that if any man deceive his brother in any matter, God will revenge yt. In
so much that yt were better not only to suffer hurt and wrong then to do yt: but
also when he has suffered it, rather to forgive yt, 1. Cor. 6.
then to pursue the injury in open court and judgment. How be it this later
point in deed is of counsel and perfection: but, not to do any wrong to an
other, yt is a commandment, which of necessity must be kept and observed.
Neither is yt hard to know, by what means we may avoyde to do wrong, for
as much as all manner of contractes and bargaynes, that can chance in man's
life, have been so exactly debated, limited and distinguished certain
thowsande years past according to natural reason: that whereas there are many
kinds of couenantes and bargaynes, no one of them al can be broken by men, but
they shall perceive, that they do therein against the judgment of reason, and
so their own conscience ought to control their deed. And he is not worthy
to be named a man, who having the gift of reason, will behave him self as if he
were a beast. Mat. 5.
Or why is it accounted of our Savior Christ so great a fault, without cause
to call our broother fool: but because in deed it is a great fault if any man
play the fool, or does become as though he were not partaker of wit and
reason?

For as yt is a great reproach and slander to call him traitor, who is not
known so to be: and as the reproach is so great, because the fault of treason
is most great: even so is it a great reproach for a man endued with reason, to
be called a fool, because it is a great fault in him to do otherwise then
reason would have him do. For when S. Paul called the Galatians foolish: Gal.
3.
did he not then signify, that they were extremely to be blamed for their
gross understanding and opinion.

He that comes to bargayne with another man, either he has a good intent, or
an evil. If it be evil, he is rather malitiouse; then foolish: if yt be good,
seeing the kinds of bargayning are known, let him use some one of them. He
may lawfully bye or sell, lend or borrowe, set or take to hyer, trafique in
merchandise, or join in fellowship, as he thinks best for him self. But if
he will after five thousand years wherein the world has stood, and has by
common consent ordered and disposed al covenants which belong to man's life: If
now he will upon his own head devise a new kind of bargain, or else will change
the former nature of the old bargaynes: doubtless (whether yt be for lack of
wit, or of virtue) he is no meet man to live in any common weal, or to be
admitted to the society of reasonable men.

My talk goes to this purpose, that the usurer may understand, the first
point of his injustice to be, in that he uses a contracte unknown to mankind,
such as breaks many other contractes, and is a monsterouse devise, more like
to an Idol, that is, to an idle imagination of his own couetouse heart, then to
any kind of covenant that men have hitherto invented, as yt shall more plainly
appear by that which follows. And surely when S. Paul does call covetousness
the bondage or servitude of Idols, he there paynteth out no man so much, as he
does the usurer, to whom most properly that name does belong, for many causes
which shall appear by that time this discourse be ended.

In the mean season if I prove the usurer to break the contract of giving to
lone, which yet he does and necessarily must use: I doubt not but any
reasonable man will confess, that he does against the law of nations, which
assigned certain limits and bounds to that contract. And consequently that
he is a great offender: as who does injury to his neighbor, and does not keep
the rule of reason which God gave, as to this end, that we should live
togethers, as yt becomes reasonable creatures to live. And surely he that
breaks the sweet and gentill ordinance of God: shall be sure in the end to
be brought under the rule of his severe righteousness, and judgments, for that
before he refused to live under his merciful order* and so he that would not
do to another that which he would wish to be done unto him self: shall suffer
in him self justly that, which he unjustly laid upon another.

That the usurer in setting out his money for gain, does, and can not but give
his money to lone. The vi. Chapter.
IT may be, that some man reading this my declaration of the nature of giving
to lone, will grant in deed, that if the usurer intended to give his money to
lone, he did amysse. But (says he) perhaps the usurer is not of the mind,
to give his money to lone: but to make some other kind of bargayne. For he is
not bound, when he does give out his money, only to intend to give his money to
lone: seeing there are other kinds of bargayning made by consent of both
parties, some of the which the usurer may and does embrace.

To answer this objection, it is nedeful to show, how the usurer, (will he, nil
he) only myndeth and does give his money to lone. And yet seeing he breaks the
whole nature and every point belonging to lone, it will follow thereof, that he
must and does use that contract of nations, which yet he does not keep in any
point, but utterly breaks and abuses the same. To give to lone by the law of
al people and countries is, to deliver presently to another man such stuff as
is spent with the first natural and proper use thereof, with bond to have him
repay so much and so good again of the same kind. Thus the Greeks, the Latins,
the Jews, the Philosophers, the Lawyers, the Divines, and generally all the
heathens and Christians take to be the nature and true definition or
description of giving to lone. Now the usurer delivers his money or corn
presently to another man, the proper use of the which money, and the natural use
of the which corn, is, to be spent and alienated from the borower when soever
he uses them. And the borower is bound to repay the stock again, to wit, the
money and the corn, as good, and as much as he received. Therefore the usurer
does and must needs use the contract of geui^g to lone. For his very fact and
deed necessarily importes so much. And if we go by name through all the other
co^tractes that ever have been devised among me^: it shall well appear, that the
said fact of the usurer ca^ be taken to be no other contract, but only the
contract of geui^g to lone. If it were any other contract in all the world, it
should be the contract of putting out to hyer. For it seems that the vser
would set out his money to hyer from month to month, or year to year, as
some men do their horses from day to day. But the usurers deed can not be that
contract. For in putting out to hyer, the thing which is set forth, remains
his own, and he only is lord and owner thereof who sets it out: and the
self same substance which was delivered, is restored again to him without any
change: As, he is lord and owner of the horse who sets out his horse to
hyer. For he lets out only the use of his horse to another man, reserving
the propriety and lordship to him self, and the very same horse is restored
to him again.

But now when money is delivered to be used of an other man, it is not
possible that the deliverer should remain still lord and owner of the said
self money, in such sort that the borrower should restore those very pieces
which he had taken* for then he should not use the money at all: seeing that by
using yt, he changes yt, and puts yt away from him: so that he can not have
the same money again to restore yt to the first delyuerer thereof. Wherefore
when money is delivered to be used, yt can not possibly be the contract of
setting to hyer.

Moreover the usurer is not of this mind him self, to have the money tarry his
own still. For then the danger of leesing yt should be his also. But now yt
is the greatest ground of usury, in that men will not hasard at al their
principal sum of money (otherwise perchance they might have more gain, and
that lawfully to, in the trade of merchandise, either by them selves alone, or
in fellowship together with others. But whiles they will by all means be sure
of their principal, and will adventure nothing: they are doutlesse of this
mind, not to have it perish to their loss. If they will not have it perish
from them, they must needs have it made his own money, who boroweth it, and to
have him dettor, not of the very self same again, but of so much in quantity.
For whiles the hundred pounds which I lend, is his to whom I lend it, and
whiles he owes me not the self same hundred pounds, nor any one thing that
ca^ be pointed to, but another hundred in a general sum: thereby my hundred
pou^des are still safe, and ca^ never perish. For no general quantity does ever
perish, but only the particular things with are within some certain place or
circumstance. If then above al other things the lender will be sure of his
pri^cipal: consequently his chief will and intent is necessarily to alienate the
principal sum from him self, and to bring it to a general debt of a like
sum in what so ever other money or thing. So that come what chance shall to
the borower, the hundred pounds lent, may not perish, because they are limited
no where, and thereby they are subject neither to fire, nor to water, nor to
enemies, nor to thieves.

If then the lender will have his principal safe in all event, and yet it can not
certainly be safe, except it be of a particular thing made a general debt:
yt must needs be, that the lender desires to have his money to be
transferred and alienated from him self, and to be made his who boroweth it,
to thend all the loss that shall happen, may come to the borower, and not to the
lender. Which being so, he that boroweth my money, does not use now my money,
but his own: for the money which is mine, is a general some of a hundred
pounds and not that which I delivered. Otherwise if it self tarry mine: as I
may challenge my own horse or coat, whersoeuer I find it: so might I challenge
my own hundred pounds. And then though it had passed through a hundred men's
hands, I might claim it of him who presently had it in possession, which is
ridiculouse to imagine: not only because I can not know my own money from
other men's, but albeit I had a coin by my self (al which had been only lent
by me, and had been none otherways alienated) yet al trafique would be much
hindered, or clean taken away, if he that sells his wares with a good
conscience for ready money, should be a feared, least he that lent the money to
the byer, might lay hands on it again, whilst it were in the sellers
possession.

By all these reasons it plainly appears, that both the usurer would have his
money to be made his own who boroweth it, and yet if he would wish it otherwise,
the very deed and the nature of the contract imports so much, whereas in the
contract of setting out to hyer he still remains lord of the thing, who does
set it out. Therefore the usurer does not, nor can not set out his money to
hyer, but he only does give it to lone. Moreover that which is set out to hier,
is used a long time together, as a house for many years, a horse for many
days. But the use of money dureth no longer, then whiles it is a delivering to
another man. That which is set to hyer bri^geth either fruit to the borower, as
lands do, or service, as houses do: but money serves for nothing, but to be
spent, and that service it ca^ do but once. That which is set forth to hyer,
comes home most times the worse for the wering: but money is not the worse to
the geuer out thereof, because it has the same weight and number and value when
it is repaied, which it had when it was delivered. For all which causes money ca^
not be set out to hier, but only is paid as det, or given in almose, or given
for exchange, or given to lone, and whensoever it is properly used, it is made
his, to whom it is delivered.

How heynouse, and how much against the nature of giving to lone, and against
the law of al Nations the vice of usury is. The vij. Chapter.
THat the Reader may the better inform himself concerning the whole state of
the matter, I will first set forth severally, what belongs to the contract of
lending, and afterward I will show, how usury does break all those points
which were provided by God, for the commodity of mankind.

First of al by an usurer I mean him, who bargaineth or greedily expects for
some advantage to arise above the principal corn, wine, or money which he did
lend. This much presupposed, I say:

otherwise if the thing be not delivered, it may be a promise of lending, but a
lending it ca^ not be.





weight, or measure.









Now I say: all these former points of natural honesty and commodity are
broken, or at the least defaced by the usurer, be the usury which he takes, or
which he looks for, never so small.

Concerning the first point of al, it is proved before, that every usurer is
necessarily a geuer to lone: and therefore he should keep the nature of giving
to lone: but he has broken yt diverse ways.

It is thoroughly agreed upon between al men, that he who boroweth ten
pounds of me, is bound to repay it again. Let us then consider, how and why
he is bound thereunto? Surely natural reason shows, that he is bound to
repaie the ten pounds, because he took yt of me with this intent and
condition of mine, that he should restore as much in value again. But were
not this intent of mine joined with the delivery of the money it self, he
were not bound to repaye yt. For if yt were delivered with this intent, to
give yt him, or else that he should only carry yt to another man: then he
should not be bound to repay it.

Again, if I delivered not the ten pounds, but only intended to make an
other man the dettor thereof, without, delivering it to him at all: likewise no
reason would, that he should be bound upon my only intent, to pay that which
he took not. Two things then must concur to make the borower owe me ten
pounds: the delivery of the money: and the intent to make him dettor of it.
If any one of these two fail, he is no dettor.

How say we then in usury? Admit that I deliver ten pounds unto my
neighbor with this intent, that he shall repaie the value of the same ten
pounds, and also ten shillinges more by the year so long as he keeps it:
I say this intent of mine can not make him owe me the ten shillinges by the
year. For the contract of giving to lone is a real contract* that is to say,
the obligation thereof depends only upon the thing which is delivered in the
way of lone. So Much then and no more is naturally owed, by the way of giving to
lone, as is delivered from hand to hand. But the ten shillinges whereof we
speak, was not at al delivered to my neighbor: therefore he can not owe yt at
al upon the ground of taking my ten pounds to lone. So that if I either
take, or in my heart look for the ten shillinges as my debt: I do injury,
and do sin against the commandment of God, who forbids me not only to
steal, but also to covet an other man's goods. Exodus 20.


If you say, that the other man co^senteth to give me the said ten shillinges,
and therefore that it is no injury to take yt: I answer, that he consents
not freely unto yt, but as he does, who gives his purse unto a thief upon the
high way for fear of a worse turn. For the borower is only therefore content
to give the ten shillinges above the principal debt, because the naughty
manners of men have now brought matters to pass in such sort, that without
payeng the usury, he should not have had the money. But if every thing were as
it ought to be: that is, if giving to lone were always free as it should be,
then should no usurer require, neither any merchant customably offer, a yearly
rent for the lone of money. But now although the borower seem willing to pay
it, and therefore is thought to have no injury: yet in deed he pays it no
more willingly, then he that is in a tempest, does willingly cast out his
goods into the sea: that is to say, he chooses to pay it, because it would be
worse with him, if he paid it not. For he fears, that otherwise the money
should be taken out of his hands. And as the these, to whom for safeguard of my
life, I deliver my purse, has yet no right unto my money, but wrongfully
withholdeth that which is not his: even so the usurer that extorteth a yearly
rent of the money, does therein unjustly, and is bound in conscience to restore
it again: except the borower without all color or cloaking do franckely and
freely give it him, which surely in this respect is seldom to be seen.

But Christ came into the world to undo the works of the devil, 1. Joan. 3.
and to set men again at liberty, that al false pretenses (of giving
rewards for money borrowed) being taken away: he that boroweth may in deed have
the use of the money so freely, as God and natural reason has ordained yt
should be. Whereupon Christ said Date mutuum nihil inde sperantes. Luc. 6.
Give ye to lone, hoapi^g for nothing thereof: that is to say, of, In Psalm.
36. Concio. 3.
or above the lone. And in that meani^g S. Augustine says: Si foener aueris
hoi^, id est, mutuam pecuniam tuam dederis, a quo aliquid plus quam dedisti
expectes accipere: no^ pecuniam solam, sed aliquid plus quam dedisti, sieve
illud triticum sit, sieve vinum, sieve oleum, sieve quodlibet aliud, si plus quam
dedisti expectas accipere: foenerator es, and in hoc improbandus, non
laudandus. If thou set forth thy goods for usury, that is to say, if thou
give him thy money to lone, of whom thou look to receive any thing more
then thou gave, I say not only money, but any thing more then thou gave,
whether that be wheat, or wine, or oil, or what soever thing else: if thou
look to receive more then thou gave, thou art an usurer, and in that
behalf thou art to be reproved, and not to be praised. This much concerning
the first point of giving to lone, which was, that by the nature of that
contract no more could be owghed, then was given and delivered by him that did
give to lone.

it: and he paieth right well for it, in as much as he takes it upon his own
adventure, and binds him self generally to repay so much, whatsoever
becomes of the particular money which he takes.

If then the money which is used be not mine, but only a like general sum is
owing to me in the stead thereof (as it was showed before) why should the
borower pay me for the use of that, which now belongs not unto me? The sum
which he owes unto me, is general: the sum which he occupies is particular.
If he pay usury for the general sum which is mine: it is injury, because he
does not occupy it. If he pay usury for the particular sum which he
occupies: it is also injury, for that sum he owes not.

Therefore if in right and truth we will make any man dettor unto us for the use
of our money, we must provide, that the money do tarry still ours* that is to
say, we must let the merchant occupy yt as our baylie or factor: and so if it
be lost, to bear the loss: and if yt be saved, to partake of the gain. But
as that is far from the usurers purpose: so is it far out of the way, that
the merchant who occupies not the usurers money, but his own, should yet
reward the usurer for that which is now no more his. Again, admit the
mercha^t did use the usurers money: yet no reason would bear, that he should
pay a yearly rent for that, which being once used, is for ever alienated from
him. If the borower alienate but a piece of the money which he took, he uses
but a piece. If he use it all, he does alienate all. If then he pay rent for the
money before the alienation thereof, he paieth rent for it, before he does use
it. If he pay rent after the alienation, he paieth rent for it after that it is
out of his use. If he pay rent for the time whiles he is a using of it, seeing
that is no longer then whiles he is a delivering of it: by what justice ca^ a
yearly rent be due for a fact which dureth but a small moment? Thus in all cases
it is utterly unjust, to pay any rent or pension for money, or any other like
thing which was taken to lone.

breaks this point also. And yet this point of al other pleases God most, in
so much that Christ exhorted men to this contract, bidding them give to lone,
Luc. 6.
without hoping for any thing thereof.

We read not surely, that Christ exhorted men to by and to sell, or to follow
the trade of merchandise. For he knew right well, that al men are ready enough
to make such exchanges as seem to be for their commodity. But because giving
to lone is a free and liberal contract, whereunto few men are prone: therefore
as he exhorted us to give almose, even so did he exhort us to give to lone.

And the vain glorious man offends God most grievously, who pretending to
give almose, does in deed rather bye vain glory with his penny dole, then
exercise any charitable act: eue^ so does he much more grievously offend God,
who pretending to give to lone, does rather sell then give his money, there
seeking for most filthy lucre, where even the heathens confessed no lucre could
have place, as I showed before out of the civil law.



It is notable to see, how the goodness of God has defenced and warded the
contracte of giving to lone, as who foresaw, that it being the best and highest
contract of al next unto almosededes, yet shall be of all other most horribly
abused.

Al equality of excha^ges and the value of al things is most exactly known by
number, weight, and measure. And giving to lone consists only of such things
as are numbered, weighed, and measured. So that no other contract is so
certain, and so precisely bounded, or limited, as this of giving to lone.

Therefore the more strong defense and guard God has provided to keep
aequalitie and justice in this contracte, the more unjust and the greater
breakers of Gods ordinances they are, who notwithstanding require or hope for
more in number, weight, or measure, then they did deliver.



Is to be known, that money was invented by the common consent of men,
specially to serve ma^s necessity and commodity, in chopping and changing
things to and fro. Aristoteles in Politicis.
For in the beginning he that lacked any thing, as for ensample, a payer of
shoes, he went to an other man that had shoes enough, and brought him such
stuff whereof him self had store, as cloth perhaps, or skins, or some like
matter to make an equal exchange between them both. So that thing for thing was
exchanged: and that was the most simple and natural kind of trafique between
men. But experience declared, that this way at length was incommodiouse, and
would not serve every man's turn. For some times he that had shoes which I
lacked, had also cloth and skins as well as I, and then he was loath to take my
cloth for his shoes, seeing that he had cloth enough of his own. For which
cause wise men devised, that some certain metal should serve the turn of al
men* so that who so needed any stuff, he should take such a kind of metal or
coin (to wit, lead, or lether, and at the length brass) and for that he
should receive of another man whatsoever he neaded.

Thus metal was at the first esteemed by consent, and delivered by weight: so
that a pound of brass should be (for example) the price of a payer of shoes.
And when it was found troublesome also, specially for them that went abroad, to
carry such weight of metal about them, and to stand long in weighing it: in
stead of a great deal of brass, a little silver, and less gold was at the
length inverted. Yea then also it was farther devised, that a certain coin or
print should be set upon the silver or gold: so that we should not need
always to weigh yt, but that the very form should straight show the value
thereof.

Money then was made to serve all exchanges, and to be alone the price of al
other things* and therefore it ought to be used none otherwise, then that thing
was used, in whose place yt came. But never was any covenant or exchange made
for this end, that the thing which was thoroughly alienated, should be
increased to his advantage, who did alienate the same. For either a man gives
away some of his goods freely, and then nothing at all thereof is due to him
again in this world: or else he changes some of his goods for other things,
and then the thing that he delivers what so ever comes of it, is only
fruitful to him that receaueth it. But never was there yet such a gift or such
an exchange heard of, wherein the thing which I delivered out of my lordship
and propriety, should thereby render the more fruit or profit to me again.
For that whereof men will take profitte, they use to keep in their own
propriety, and so either to use it them selves, or to set it out to be used
for a pension, and not to give it or exchange it utterly away from them.

But the usurer gives away his money to an other man, as it was proved before:
and so does it for this end, that his money may thereby bring him the more
fruit and gain. Which is utterly against the end, for which either any
other exchange, or money it self was made. For it was made to bring all things
to an equallitie, and to be as it were a rule and measure, whereby the value of
all other things might quickly be known and easily counterpeised. But now the
usurer makes money to serve for the greatest inequality that ca^ be devised
of man. For where the borower did receive but ten, or some such certain
number of crowns, he makes him a dettor not only of so many, but no man is
able to tell of how many: since if the borower pay but two crowns over by
the year, in one hundred years he shall pay for ten crowns two hundred
crowns: and yet shall he still remain dettor of the ten crowns, also. And all this is done of the usurer by those ten crowns which he did put away from
him self, and made them another man's. Was ever any such thing heard of? that
by making my goods to be another man's, I should thereby be the greater gayner:
yea so far greater, that the gain should be without al measure or end? For
those ten crowns may from age to age be only said to continue in the bancke
(as in some places it chances) and so within a thousand years they make
increase of two thousand crowns.

Add hereunto, that in case the poor man, who borrowed the ten crowns, do not
pay his usury in ten years, he is then dettor of twenty crowns: of ten for
the principal and of other ten for the usury, which the usurer begets and
engenders (as it were) to the intolerable loss of the borower, and the
excessive gain of him self: and yet these ten crowns be not his own all this
while, although he pick out so great advantage of them. Yea all this while they
be no where at al. For in one moment they were consumed and spent by him that
borrowed them, and in place of them an Idol is conceived, which Idol does
remain confusely, not any where in nature and truth, but in name and
imagination. For it is feyned, that the ten crowns lie still in a certain
bancke, and there do begette little ones, which again have other little ones.
And whereas all other things die and perish, and many beasts which nature
made apt to increase, by casualties prove barren: yet these ten crowns,
which by nature were barren, and in truth are spent: remain still so
fruitful in the usurers vain imagination, and in the borowers most greuouse
pension, that if the world should stand for ever, they also should be immortal,
and should neither die, nor ever become barren.

See ye not this Idol, which the Devil has consecrated in the world? And he
has consecrated yt against the nature of money, which was inverted for other
uses, and not at al for this.





But you will say, shall no man then lend any thing to him that is rich? I say
not so* But a man may be rich in ^thing, and poor in another. A man may be
rich in gold and sylu^^ (...) he may abou^d in victuals, in wine, and beer:
yet perhaps he is without a cup of small ale, which the Physicia^ says to be
better for him, then any other kind of drink. If then I lend this rich man a
quart of my ale, I lend it to him as needing it, and as being poor in that
behalf. But it were far otherwise, if whereas he occupies certain thousand
pou^des by the year, I would offer him my forty or fifty pounds in the way of
lone. For here, seeing I offer that unto him, which would serve to set up
another poor man, and seeing I do it not for his sake, but for hoape of gaynes
to my self, as trusting my stock to be sure in his hands, and looking for
yearly rent thereof: in this case (which is the case of usurers) it may well
appear, that my intention is only to reise gains of that contract: and by such
a one, to whom of al other I should least have lent my money.

gain him self, which he gives yearly to the usurer for his money: then by
little and little he leeseth his creditte, until at the last he become plain
Banckrupt, and so he not only leeseth his principal who looks for gain: but
also many other men, who made lawful bargains with the said merchant, are
defrauded of their right and thereby made unable to keep towche with others,
whereupon arises from man to man, an infinite confusion and loss both of
credit and of goods.

Farthermore, how many idle men does usury cause to be in a realm? For
whereas no gains is either more easy then that which is gotten with another
man's travail, or else more certain then that which is without hazard of the
principal (as at the least men think) he that can get once never so mean a
stock of money, makes account to live upon the fruits thereof, and so
spends his time in sportinge and playenge: whereas if the said hoape of
usury were taken from him, he should be constrained to take some other trade
of life, which might be more to his own honesty, and to the profitte of the
common weal.

To be short, where usury is licensed openly, there God must needs be
offended, because an unjust law contrary to his word and will, is suffered to
prevail. And consequently as no private man's offense is leaft unpunished at
Gods hand, so must the common weal, which permits so great an offense,
look also for a common punishment to fall upon yt, since God is infinitely
just, and lets nothing grow so far out of order, but that if it will not
abide under the order of his merciful government, it shall fall into the
order of his severe punishment: least any thing that reasonably ought to be
done, might be left undone by his infinite wisdom and power.

Thus have we seen many causes, why usury is unjust: but none at all, why
the lender may take any pension for his lone. If you say you lacked your money
a long time: I answer, that in case you had any known and certain loss
thereby, which was not foreseen of you when you lent yt, you may ask the
sauinge of your self harmless: because that was presupposed from the
beginning, that you would not give out your money to lone, to your own
hindrance. For as this contract of giving to lone can abide no gain: so
needs it not to sustain any loss.

But if the money would have lain idely by you all that time (as commonly it
should have done, because they are either rich, or sl^wthfull, who give to
lone) then you do an injury unto God, in selling the time which is none of
yours. For if you will have wages only because your money has been a year in
another man's hand, whereas if it had been in your own hands, it had been either
locked up in a chest, or else committed to some hasard or peril: there is no
cause why you should ask the said wages or pensio^, but because so much time
has passed over, wherein he was your dettor, and the measure of the said time
was not of your gift unto your neighbor, but of Gods gift unto you both. For
selling of the which, you are like to give an account unto God.

Yea (but say you) my money had been safer in mine own coffer. I can not tell
you that. For then a thief might have stolen yt, or fire might have consumed
it. But now it is put out of all peril in his hands, who owes a general
sum of so much in quantity. Yea but perhaps he will not be able to repaye
yt. If you thought so, you would not lend yt. For he that gives his money to
usury, seeks not the commodity of the borower, but only, or principally,
his own.

Now if in the end it chance, that the borower is not able to repay yt: that
is not any excuse to the usurer, who can not ask money for that casualtie,
which he might utterly avoid by not lending his money at all* or if he will
needs lend his money, he may either take suerties or pledges for the
principal, without requiering any usury of the borower: for the more usury
the borower pays, the less he is able to repay the principal, in so much
as he is made the poorer by payeng the usury. But if he paid no usury at
all, he should be better able to repay that which he first borrowed.

That the Heathens condemned usury, The viij. Chapter.
BY the reasons before named the very Heathens were induced and persuaded,
that usury was against nature, and consequently that it was a foul crime, and
a great sin. In so much that the great Philosopher Aristotel speaks thereof
in this wise: Lib. 1. Politicorum.
Optimo iure laborat odio negotiatio foeneratorum, quia ab ipso numo quaestum
petit, non id propter quod inuentus est, quippe qui gratia mutandi fuerat
inductus. Etenim foenus auget numum, vnde etiam coepit hoc nomen. Similia porro
sunt ea quae pariuntur gigne^tibus: in foenore numus paritur a numo. Quamobrem
vel maxim praeter naturam est illa quaestus faciendi ratio. The trafique of
usurers is worthily hated, because it seeks gaynes upon the penny: and it
seeks not that for the which money was invented. For money was invented to
make exchange withal: but usury (exchangeth not, but) increases the penny,
whereof also it took his name (in Greek) Now those things which are begotten,
are like to them by which they are begotten. In usury money brings forth
money: wherefore that kind of gayning is specially against nature.

The very same thing says Plutarch in a Treatise which he wrote, exhorting
men not to have to do with usurers: Quid, Plutarch. quod non oporteat foenerari.
quod foeneratores naturalia quoque derident, quae asserunt, ex nihilo nil
gigni posse: quandoquidem apud illos ex eo quod non est, neque vnquam fuit,
vsura generatur. (Et post:) Long plus foeneratores in suis ephemeridibus
imponunt, scribentes misero illi tantum mutuasse, cum tamen multo minus
acceperit. Siquidem mendacium causa lucri, non necessitate, neque ob
indigentiam, ab illis fieri solet, sed propter insatiabilitatem. The usurers do
also mock at those rules of nature, which affirm, that of nothing, nothing
can be begotten. But yet among them, usury is begotten of that, which is not,
nor never was. The usurers put in much more in their count books, writing
that they have lent such a poor man this much, whereas he yet has taken
much less. For they use to lie for gains sake, not for necessity, or
poouertie (which were the less evil) but for insatiable greediness.

Thus are three great abuses by the wisemen of the very heathens reproved in
usurers. The first is, in that they against nature will make a barre^ thing (as
money is) to bring forth as it were children, that is to say, pence and
shillinges: and this fault is common to all usurers. But the other two are only
committed by extreme practices of usury. The foremost is, in that they exact
usury so long, that at the last the dettor pays usury, not only for the
principal sum, but also for the very usury it self. As thus: Let him
borowe one hundred pou^des, payeng after the rate of four pounds in twenty
pounds every year for the usury. If the first year he mysse to repay his
twenty pounds for the hundred, the second year he is dettor of six score
pounds* and that year his usury is twenty four pounds: wherein he pays
four pounds for the twenty which he never received, but only became dettor
thereof by usury* and so every year after, if he omit to pay the usury,
he shall pay not only for the rate of the hundred pounds: but also as if he
had received all that, which he cease to pay. So that whereas in all usury a
barren thing does bring forth: in this later kind, that also does bring
forth, which is not only barren, but is nothing at al, nor never was in the
natural truth of things.

The third fault in great usurers is, when to avoyde the pain of the law,
they color the matter so, that they write in the bills of debte, him to have
borrowed of them a hundred pounds, who had but four score. When Cato the
grave Senator of Room considered these great vices: he being asked, Cicero.
2* Offic.
what yt was, to lend out money upon usury: answered, it is no better then
to kill a man. The which saying of his Tullie rehearses both for Catos praise,
and in the dispraise of usury.

That the Civil law does not acknovvledge usury to spring or arise of the
nature of such things as are given to lone, but rather to be contrary
thereunto. The ix. Chapter.
Forasmuch as some men pretend the defense of their usury by the Civil law,
which they say to be a sure defender of the law of nature: yt is also
requisite, that we declare, what the Civil law thinks in this behalf.

Usury has his name of using, and thereby is meant the price or estimation of
the use of a thing. And because we may use certain things, the substance of
them remaining safe, as when we hyer another man's ground, or dwell in an other
man's house: in that case yt is lawefull to pay usury for the use of the said
house or lands. But when there is no use of a thing without the loss and
putting away thereof, or when the thing is diminished in substance by the daily
using of yt: that is not properly Vsus, the use, but rather, as Cicero and
Vlpian call yt, Abusus, Cicero in Topicis.
the abuse* as if we should say in english, it is rather a wasting, then an
using.

Those things that may be used and yet remain safe, may also render yearly
rentes or fruits* and the lord of them may give or bequeath the propriety and
ownorship of them to one, and the use and fruit or profit to an other. Which
thing can not be done in those goods, which are wasted and spent by the use
of them, because the use does diminish the substance yt self. Whereupon
Justinian says: Institut. de vsufruct. Constituit.
Constituitur vsusfructus in fundo, and aedibus, and caeteris rebus, exceptis
his quae ipso vsu consumuntur. Nam hae res neque naturali ratione, neque civilly
recipient vsumfructum, quo in numero sunt vinum, oleum, frumentum, vestimenta,
quibus proxima est pecunia numerata* namque ipso vsu assidua permutatione
quodammodo extinguitur. Ergo Senatus non fecit quidem earum rerum vsumfructum
(nec enim poterat) sed per cautione^ quasi vsumfructu^ co^stituit. Use and
fruit is assigned in lands, howses, and other things, saving those which are
wasted with the very use. For those things receive no use and fruit neither
by natural, nor by civil means: of the which sort wine, oil, corn, and
garments are, to whose nature nu^bered (or, ready) money approaches next,
because yt is in manner worn in the very using of yt by continual exchange.
Therefore the Senate (of Rome which decreed concerning these matters) made not
use and fruit of these things (for yt was not able so to do) but it assigned
as it were after a sort, how to use and to take profit of them with a prouiso,
that who had the use and fruit of any such things left or given him, should
receive the things, and should bynd him self to restore so much money again
at his death (if it were money) or else the value of them, if they were wine,
oil, or corn.

To our purpose it is to be noted, that the lawyers confessed these things not
to have properly any use and fruit, which might be separated from their
propriety. In so much that it was not possible to assign use and fruit upon
them: verily because it was against nature so to do. And Caius says in this
very case whereof we speak: In Pandectis de vsufruct earu^ rerum quae vsu
consu. lib. 2.
Senatusconsulto non id effectum est, vt pecuniae vsusfructus proprius esset.
Nec enim naturalis ratio authoritate Senatus commutari potuit* sed remedio
introducto coepit quasi vsusfructus haberi. It is not brought to pass by the
decree of the Senate, that there be a proper use and fruit of money. For
natural reason could not be changed by the authority of the Senate. But a
shift being found, there began as it were a certain use and fruit of money
to be taken and accounted.

Thus, that which by wit of man might be devised in a worldly common weal,
was done for profitte and commodities sake against nature it self. But that
devise which The Emperor speaks of, does not properly apperteine to usury:
for there the question was only, whether it might be brought to pass, that a
man not being lord and owner of them, might yet take fruit and profitte of
those things which are wasted with the using. And when the lawyers had
devised, that it should be done, as it might be done: that is, with a prouiso,
to restore again the value of the thing after a certain time: they did then
devise no more, but how he that had the use of the thing, might in the mean
time be dettor of yt for the lords safeguard, to whom the propriety belonged:
not adding, that he should pay any thing for the use of that whereof he was
dettor: for that is an other question, and we shall see hereafter how yt may be
determined.

First let us agree hereupon, that it is in truth and in nature impossible,
to divide the use of those things which are given to lone from the propriety
and ownorship of them. But the civil law devised a shift, that the lord and
ownor receiving a caution for the value, should suffer him to whom the profit
was assigned, to enjoy the thing fra^ckly and freely in the mean season. Now
this Caution which was given to the lord and ownor of those things, did stand
to him in stead of his propriety. But if we look to the truth it self, the
lord has for the time lost the propriety of the oil, corn, wine, or money,
which he delivered to the vsufructuarie: for the use and propriety of them
can not be separated.

If the Civil law saw and confessed this much, what so ever shifte or
prouiso yt made to frame the matter otherwise: once yt was not done according
to truth, but by witty means and counterpeyses, which were not unlawful, so
long as no man had injury by them. For the name only being changed, yt might
have been said thus: If any man will bequeath the use and fruit of wine,
oil, or money: the heyer or executour shall be bound, to lend the legatarie so
much upon an obligation, to have the same quantity restored at his death or
otherwise as the thing requires. And seeing this were an honest legacy, the
other also may have an honest meaning, if yt be said: I bequeathe the use and
fruit of twenty pounds to such a man during his life. Neither does this
prove any whit, that usury was allowed by the civil law, but rather that yt
was judged for an impossible thing, if none other thing be done besides that,
which the law of nature and of nations has determined.

What say we then? Does not the Civil law permit usury? I answer, that yt
permits yt not as a thing that can arise of the contract of giving to lone:
but expressly teaches, that usury must be set about by an other way, or
else yt can not be brought to pass at al* and that other way whereof the civil
law speaks, is not able to discharge any man's conscience who shall take upon
him to follow yt.

In Pandectis de pactis lib. 5. Si ti dece^.
Proculus the lawyer writes thus: If I give or deliver thee ten thousand,
and bargain that thou shall owe me twenty thousand: there arises no
obligation in any more then in ten thousand. Re enim non potest obligatio
contrahi, nisi quatenus datu^ sit. For an obligation can not be made, touching
a thing, but so far forth as it is delivered. For when a man is bound by the
delyuerie of the thing yt self (as yt comes to pass in giving to lone) the
obligation can be none other, then as far as the thing was given or delivered.

Likewise Vlpian writes: Lib. 11. in Pandectis de rebus creditis.
Si december dedero, vt vndecim debeas, Proculus putat, amplius quam december co^
dici non posse. If I give or deliver ten, for this end, to make thee dettor
of eleue^: Proculus thinks, that no more can be certainly demanded but ten.

Mark, in what sort these men speak. There can be no obligation of debt
above the sum that is delivered. Which thing since yt is so, doubtless there
ca^ be no obligation of usury, no, not so much as by the civil law in the
contract of ge^ to lone. For in usury the dettor is bound (at the least in the
expectation of the usurer) to restore more then he took Yea farther I say,
that any such obligation, whereby more then was delivered should be looked for,
is not only not contained in the contract of giving to lone: but it is also
against the nature of that contract.

For if it were not against the nature thereof by a bargain made at the time
of the contracte, it would be so annexed and incorporated to the contracte,
that yt should be accounted a part thereof. For the lawyers confess, that what
soever bargains (not contrary to that which is in hand) are made at the time
of couenanting or of delivery, shall stand for good, and the performance of
them may be required by the proper action of the same contract. But seeing when
I deliver ten to lone, and bargayne for twenty, I can not demand twenty by
the same action, whereby I demand the ten which I delivered: yt is clear,
that the bargain for twenty was such, as could never be graffed in the former
contracte of giving to lone. What then? shall not usury be couenaunted for,
and also be demanded in judgment by the Civil law? Yeas. But that must not
be done by the force of giving to lone, nor by any bargayne depending
thereupon, or adjoined unto yt. How then? forsooth there must be a form of
words conceived besides the contract of giving to lone, in the which form of
words the borower shall answer and by promise bind him self, to give for such
a sum thus much by the month, or by the year. ^^ecta, in Pandectis si
certum petatur.
And then by the civil law an action shall be given against him that promised
such usury: An action, I say, not of lone, but of the solemn obligation or
bond of words.

Thus the matter was patched up between the infidels in the old time. But if we
shall be as men ruled by reason, what other thing in natural truth was that
solemn form of words, then a mere bargain? What skilleth it, whether at the
delyuerie of the ten pounds, I say, (well sir, here are ten, but if you
keep them this whole year, you shall render me twelve pounds for them: and so
every year, after the rate, forty shillinges for them, and he says, he is
content) Or else, how say you sir, will you give me forty shillinges for every
year, wherein this ten pou^des is not restored? He answers yea. In truth and
natural honesty the former bargain differs not from the later* and yet by
the former I had not been bound, and by the later I am. Why so? Because yt so
pleased the Citizens of Rome: who would no man to be bound by his bare words,
except they were conceived in a solemn form of asking and answeringe. And by
that form usury might be couenanted for, and was made due. Whereby we gain no
farther, but that the wisemen and lawiers cenfessing usury to be against
nature, yet would have yt to be lawful, not by the law of nature, whence al
good and right law is derived, but only by the law of Rome, which when yt is
not deduced from the law of nature, is no law, but only an Idol or false
pretense of law.

And yet those Infidel Romans were so wise, and so naturally honest, as to
confess that usury could not stand by nature, although being otherwise
ouercomed by covetousness, they sought how to make yt lawefull among them. And
so is yt fulfilled which S. Paul said of them: Romans 1.
Whereas they had known God by his creatures, they did not glorify him as
God: but vanished away in their own foolish devises, Romans 2.
doing those things which them selves condemned as unlawful.

But touching that which we had principally to prove, the civil wisemen of Rome
did not allow usury, as a thing that either did naturally belong to the
contracte of giving to lone, or else that might be annexed thereunto: but they
permitted it otherwise, as also they did permit fornication and diuorses. And
yet the state of an usurer is so much worse then the state of a fornicator or
of a harlot, because although the fornicatour or harlot happen to make any
filthy gain by setting their bodies out to hyer: yet they are bound to
penance only, and to the recompense of such slander as they have fallen
into. But they are not bound to restore that money which they took for their
vile service. For as the lawyer says: Turpiter fecit quod sit meretrix, De
co^dict. ob turpem causam lib. 4.
sed non turpiter accipit cum sit meretrix. The harlot does filthyly in being
an harlot: but seeing she is an harlot, she takes not her wagies filthiely*
that is to say, by a filthy trade she yet makes the money her own, as the
which is due to her, when once she has played the harlot.

But the usurer does not make the usury his own at al, but he is bound to
restore yt to him, of whom he took yt, as if he had stolen so much from him.

But now the men with whom we dispute, will needs have usury to be a
reasonable contract by the law of nature, because they think that their own
money is used, and therefore that rent is due to them for yt. Wherein they
being Christians are more grossly deceived, then ever the philosophers or
civil lawyers were, both which well saw, that no such contract could stand in
nature.

Exodus 13.
But as God giving the two tables unto Moses upon the mount Sinay, did in manner
nothing else, but renew again the law of nature, which was in manner worn
out of the Isralites hearts through evil education and custom: even so Christ
came into the world, to give us grace, whereby the said law of nature might be
both exactly known, and sufficiently observed of his members and servants:
That law of nature, I say, which was at the beginning, and which was not
corrupted by particular customs or laws of evil men: that law which
forbids fornication, many wives, diuorses, usury, Simonie, and such like
abuses, as are now grown in use among corrupted men.

He therefore, that either takes or hoapeth for usury upon that which is
given to lone, is not of Abels common weal, or a member of Christ (except he
reconcile him self by doing due pennaunce) but he is a member of the common
weal of Caine, whence the invention of all perverse laws and earthly customs
came.

If thou will be wise in God, make him thy dettor: put thy money into his
hands, who will lay it up in heaven for thee, and will give thee usury and
overplus for it. Prou. c. 19
Foeneratur Domino, qui miseretur pauperis, and vicissitudinem sua^ reddet ei.
He that takes pity of the poor, gives his money to God upon usury, and God
will give him his recompense.

Certain examples of usury, whereby yt may the better be known, what is
usury, and what is not and of the restitution which the usurer is bound to
make. The x. Chapter.
IF usury be so contrary (as yt has been showed) to the most excellent
virtue of almosdedes, and to the most charitable contract of giving to lone:
what remains but that those who are hitherto free from that vice, should now
the more detest it: and those who by ignorance or frailty are fallen into yt,
should repent and make restitution of that which was unlawfully gotten.

But for so much as every man is not able to understand the general doctrine
of usury, unless it be most evidently opened unto him: I thought good, to make
the matter yet more plain by certain examples and cases as follows.









certain times, to give always one certain thing, and that also in money:
yt worthily makes the receauer to be suspected as an usurer. And therefore yt
were not good so to do, if yt were but for the saving of a man's good name, and
for the avoiding of slanders and offenses. But yet whether the receauer be in
deed an usurer or no before God, it depends altogethers upon his conscience:
which if it look not for the brybe, and likewise if he lent not his money for
that end, or leave not the money therefore in the others hands: he may be free
from the vice of usury.

out a merchaunt of his own accord by whom yt may be used: and takes what so
ever the merchaunt offers him yearly. For his deed seems to importe a
mental usury: except he seek him out only for charities sake, because he
would not have his money lie by him idle, whereas yt may do an other man good.

since it is straight his money who receaueth yt, and yt stands at his peril.
And therefore he pays me for the use of his own, which is unjust.



certain day, do pay ten pounds the less, only because I pay it before
the day. For the money which at the day should be due, is as it were lent for
so long upon ten pounds in the hundred.



howses, and afterward receive my principal again, yt is usury. For I ought
to take the fruits no longer, then til I have my own principal* and in that
case not to receive any other money* the rest is unjustly taken. But those are
only to be accounted fruits which remain, al just burde^s excepted and
debated.

because his bargain groundeth upon the gains of that time wherein the money is
none of his own.

forgiven him: then would I exhort him also, rather to let the honest
merchant freely to use his money, then that it should lie idle by him.

Thus have I briefly given (as it were) a taste of the matter of usury: As
minding to provoke him that before thought little thereof, to be hereafter the
more careful and fearful least he abuse the contract of giving to lone, which
God provided for the great benefit of our poor neighbors. And by these few
examples (but specially by the reasons whereby usury was reproved in the vij.
chapter) the reader may conjecture, when he is in danger of usury, and when he
is free from it. And when al other knowledge fails, he may ask counsel of
some learned and discreet man, who is hable to show him that, which lacks
in this Treatise. For my chief purpose herein was only to show, how great a
vice usury is even according to the law of nature, and how wary and careful
men ought to be in avoiding and eschewing the same.

Scriptum hoc de vsura lectum and approbatum est a viris sacrae Theologiae and
Anglici idiomatis peritissimis. quare tuto euulgari and imprimi posse Iudico.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri Louanij,
8. April. An. 1568. stylo communi seu Romano.
THE CHAPITERS, and Contents of this Treatise.
The first Chapter.THE occasion of this Treatise, and the arguments which are
commonly made for the defense of usury, and what is usury. fol. 1. 2. That
usury is forbidden by Gods law under the pain of everlasting damnation. fol.
3. b. 3. Whence bargains proceed, and why Almosdeedes are so acceptable to
God. fol. 8. a. 4. Of geuinge to lone, or of lendinge, which are naturally free
contractes. fol. 13. b. 5. How much it imports, that the bounds and limits
of every contract belonging to the law of nations, should be inuiolably kept
and maintained. fol. 22. b. 6. That the usurer in setting out his money for
gain, does, and can not but give his money to lone. fol. 28. a 7. How heynouse,
and how much against the nature of giving to lone, and against the law of al
Nations the vice of usury is. fol. 33. a. 8. That the Heathens condemned
usury. fo. 50. b. 9. That the Civil law does not acknowledge usury to spring
or arise of the nature of such things as are given to lone, but rather to be
contrary thereunto. fol. 53 a 10. Certain examples of usury, whereby yt may
the better be known, what is usury, and what is not: and of the restitution
which the usurer is bound to make. fol. 62. b
FAVLTES ESCAPED in printing.
Faults Page Lin. Corrections. it to 14. b. 7. it is to. seems the 24. a. 5.
serves the And the 40. a. 19. And as the Is to 41. b. 13. It is to of ge-to
50. a. 18. of giving to

printer's or publisher's device RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM




