BABYLON, A PART OF THE SECOND WEEK OF GVILLAVME DE SALVSTE SEIGNEVR DV
BARTAS, With the Commentary, and marginall Notes of S. G. S.

Englished by WILLIAM L'ISLE.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.

Imprinted at London by Ed. Bollifant, for Richard Watkins. 1595

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES LORD HOWARD, BARON OF Effingham, Knight of
the most renowned order of the Garter, one of her Majesty's privy Council,
and Lord high Admiral of England, etc.
WAying how near it concerns your Honorable Charge, what strangers pass
the Seas into England, I was thereby, and otherwise in humble duty, moved, to
give your Lordship first intelligence of this Gentilman, whom I have newly
transported out of France: and also thought it necessary to crave your
favorable protection of him in this his travel. A worthy man is he (my Lord)
in his own country, howsoever here disguised, and one of the sons of that
noble and divine Poet LE SIEVR DV BARTAS; in my simple judgment the properest,
and best learned of them all, I am sure the best affected to England, and the
gracious Emperesse thereof: for which cause I made special choice of him, and
do therefore the rather hope to find favor on his behalf with your
honorable Lordship; whose loyalty to the Crown, the Prince by trust of so
high an office, whose love to the land, the people by ioint-consent of
daily-felt virtues, have so fully witnessed, that the fame thereof has spread
it self far beyond that your admirable Regiment. In so much as this gentle
stranger, though he were at the first unwilling, Vlisses-like, to leave his
native soil, especially now in this dangerous seafaring time, while all the
world is in a manner troubled with Spanish Fleetes; yet after he called to mind
what he had heard and written of the mighty Goddess of the English Ocean, and
who there swaied the Trident under her, trusting upon such a Neptune, he went
aboard with a good courage, and doubting not at al but that the proud Spanish
Caracks, if they be not yet sufficiently dismayed by the wrack they suffered in
their former adventure, but dare again attempt the like, be they never so many
more or greater than they were (if more and greater they can be) shall again,
by the grace of God, directing (as before) the courage and wisdom of Englands
renoumed Admiral, be dispersed over the frowning face of our disdainful Seas,
and dronken with salt waves regorge the bodies of their presumptuous Pilots.
And so (my Lord) with a favorable wind, breathing directly from the French
Helicon, by the safe conduit of your Honorable name, and help of the Muses,
at length I landed my stranger in England. Where since his arrival he has
gladly encountered diverse of his elder brethren, that were come over before,
some in a princely Scottish attire, others in fair English habits; and to the
intent he might the better enjoy their company, who by this time had almost
forgotten their French, he was desirous to learn English of me: therefore I
kept him a while about me, was his teacher at home, and enterpreter abroad; and
now that he has gotten such a smattering of the tongue, as he can (so as he
can) speak for himself, may it please your good L. to talk with him at your
leisure: though I know you understand very well his natural speech, I am of
opinion it will much delight you to hear him utter such counterfeit English, as
in so little time I was able to teach him. He can say somewhat of the godly
government of good princes, and the wicked practices of Tyrants, as well in
compassing as maintaining a Scepter; both worthy your L. hearing for the
manner sake, though the matter be not unknown to your wisdom. But some other
things he does report very strange, as of NIMROD, that was the first Tyrant of
the world, after the time of Noah, the first Admiral of the world: his
aspiring mind and practices in seeking the peoples favor, his proud and
subtle attempt in building the Tower of Babel, and Gods just punishment thereof
in confounding the language of the builders. Very truly reckons he (that
which few do consider) the great and manifold inconveniences that are befallen
mankind by the diversity o^ tongs. Further he can tell of speech in general,
whether man speak by nature, or have but only an aptnes to speak by use,
and whether any other creature have the like: as for several speeches, he can
prove, with many goodly reasons, which is the best and most ancient of them
all; what alters each tongue, what continues each in account, what languages
are in greatest regard now-adaies, and what Authors have most excelled in them.
And upon occasion of the English tongue, my Lord, he sets out in such manner
the Queens princely majesty, her learning, wisdom, eloquence, and other
excellent virtues, that I know your noble and loyal heart will greatly rejoice
to hear it, at the mouth of such a stranger. The rest, if it be more curious,
then, for the states weighty affairs, your L. may intend to hear, I wish
referred unto those goodly young gentlemen, your noble and fatherlike-minded
Sons, who^ after your L.I do most of all honor: there shall they find profit so
blended with pleasure, learning with delight, as it may easily win their
hearts, already virtuously aspiring, from the wanton and faining Cantoes of
other Syren-Poets (wherewith many young gentlemen, and chiefly those of
greatest hope, are long and dangerously misled) unto a further acquaintance
with this heauenly-poeticall writer of the truth: who is now grown into such a
liking of this country, chiefly for the peaceable government thereof (blessed
be that Governor) and free course of the Gospel (God continue it, and send
the like into France) that he is desirous to become a Freedenizen; and hoping
further to to be an eie-witnes of Gods wonderful mercies toward this Land,
whereof in France he spoke but by heare-saie, to behold that precious Northren
Pearl, and kiss her Scepter-bearing hand, whose worthy praise he has soong
so sweetly, he humbly beseech your gracious favor to be enfranchised, which
if it may please you to grant (my Lord) vouchsafing also the patronage of
him; that under seal of your honorable name he may escape the carping
censures of curious fault-finders, and enjoy all honors, privileges,
liberties and laws, that belong even to the natural inhabitants of this noble
Isle, my self will undertake to Fine for him, at least hearty prayers for your
daily increase of honor, and all such obedience, as it shall please your L. to
impose:

Whose I rest ever at command. William L'isle.

The Argument of the two first days of the second week of Guil. de SALVSTE
Seigneur Du Bartas.
MOses says, that in six days God created the heaven and the earth, the sea,
and all in them contained, then rested the seventh day, etc. Which the Poet
has at large expounded in his first week. The whole second week.
And having with so luckie hand begun, he determines (by the grace of God) to
follow forth so excellent a work, and in a second week to set out the state
of the world from Adam to the latter day, adjoining thereunto even a lively
description of the everlasting Saboth: so now he gives us the two first days,
to each of them allotting four books. The first day may be called Adam, and
represents the state of the first man, before and after the fall, even to his
death, and of his posterity to the flood. The second day may be called Noe,
and contains the state of the world after the flood to the time of Abraham:
so that here we have a learned and holy paraphrase upon a part of the first
book of Moses: to wit, from the middle of the second chapter of Genesis unto
the end of the eleventh: his style is enriched with all manner of beauties and
graces meet for a poem, perfect and worthy to be honored of all men of good
judgment: so much of the work in general. Four books of the first day.
Now let us see what the books of these two first days contain in
particular. After his meet prefaces and entrance proper to his matter, he
places the first man in the garden of Eden, painteth out the garden, 1. Eden.
answers diverse questions commonly thereabout arising, as of the tree of life
and th'excellencie thereof, likewise of the tree of knowledge of good and evil;
and here he shows what was the knowledge of man before sin, wherefore he
was placed in Paradise, what was his exercise there, what was his happiness
before the fall: as namely, that he had familiar communication with God:
whereunto is properly adjoined the discourse of Visions, traunces, and
Revelations: this done he touches the commandment of GOD to Adam concerning
the forbidden fruit, the promise of our first father, the great pleasures he
enioied so long as he continued obedient: and upon this occasion he describes
point devise the beauties of this garden: yet with such a stay of himself,
that he cutteth off many curious demands, and having answered certain
objections, ends his first book. In the beginning of the second he sets
down the envy and drift of the devil against man, 2. L'imposture.
why he tempted outwardly, what moved him to take a body rather than present
himself: the body of a serpent, rather than to change himself into an Angel
of light. Hereout are handled opinions diverse, the conclusion of all is this:
that the serpent was the devils instrument to misleade our first mother. This
draws the Poet to speak of the power of Satan. So he returning to his former
intent, discovers all the wiles and assaults of the enemy: how he brought
Eve to destruction, and Adam by means of her: whence have ensued effects most
grievous to behold. These miserable sinners examined, charged with sin, and
condemned therefore, as well by remorse of their own conscience, as by the
fearful voice of their creator, who pronounces doom against the serpent and
them. Whereunto is added a sound and full answer to all such wicked and profane
spirits as murmur against the fall of Man, as it is set down in holy
scripture: to shut up the book, Adam and Eve are chased out of Paradise, and
an Angel with a fiery sword there placed to keep them out. Now the better to
set forth the misery of man, 3. Furies.
and the confusions which sin has brought in among us, the Poet having in
the beginning of his third book mentioned again, and set before our eyes the
blessed estate of the whole world, and the perfect union that was among all
creatures before the backsliding of Adam, the cause (as he shows by diverse
examples) of all their disunion, he mustereth and leads forth an army of all
other creatures to war against man: then coming to the evils that afflict this
poor guilty creature both within and without, he brings in the furies
called out of hell to come and torment mankind. These then are the plagues
wherewith they chastise the body: to wit, famine, war, infinite sort of
diseases, whereof the chief are named and ranged into four squadrons: The
first lays siege to the head: the second encountreth the chief instruments
of life: the third assaulteth the natural powers: the fourth sets on the
outward parts of Man. They are distinguished again into maladies particularly
belonging unto certain peoples and climats, proper to the several ages of
man, special to diverse seasons of the year, contagious, hereditarie, new,
obstinate, and incurable. To increase the more this heap of misery, he
proves that beasts are in this regard in better case than man. Then enters
into consideration of the most dangerous diseases of all, which are those of
the mind: and namely four principal kinds, which under them contain all
other, sadness, joy, fear, and fond desire: these with their train and
effects, are without comparison more to be feared than all the most cruel
diseases of the body, as by fit examples is proved: and so the Poet concludes
with an holy wish and profitable exhortation to the Frenchmen. 4. Artifices.
Hereupon having in the entry of the fourth book saluted peace, and showed
the commodities thereof, he falls fitly to his purpose, and decifereth unto
us the miserable estate of Adam and Eve, being now forth of the garden, what
hard shift they made to live, whereon they fed, how they were clothed, and what
pains Eve took to weaue a garment for her husband: their furniture against
the cold, their place of abode and first buildings, the invention of fire, the
beginning of households, and how the land was peopled: the exercise of Caine and
Abel, their sacrifices, the wicked mind of Caine, who slew his brother, and
after thinking somewhat to ease his soul of the gnawing torments of
conscience, built a town, and began to ride horses; which the Poet handles in
kind, and from thence falls into discourse of the invention and use of Iron
and instruments of Music. But as Caine and his followers busy themselves with
affairs of the world, meanewhile Adam and his true children take after
godliness and justice, and search out the sacrets of nature. Among other Seth is
supposed to ask his father concerning the estate of the world from the
beginning unto the end, which Adam, excusing himself, at first refuses to do,
but suddenly moved with the holy spirit (here distinguished from the furies
of men possessed of the devil) he speaks of all the worlds ages, and shows
what shall befall even to the flood: the discourse and consideration whereof
overcomes his heart with grief, depriueth him of speech, and ends the
fourth book, and so by consequent the first days history. Four books of
the second day. 1. L' Arche.
Beginning the first book of the second day with a new invocation, he enters
into the Arch, recounteth the holy exercises of Noe, which Cham gainsaieth,
and diverse ways strives against the providence of God: but Noe with many
lively and forcible arguments withstandeth him: meanewhile the flood is abated,
the Arch stayed, the Raven and the Dove are sent forth, Noe comes out of the
Arch, the measure and burden whereof is in a few words plainly proved. Then
this good Patriarch having sacrificed, receives diverse laws and promises of
God, especially that there shall be never more any universal flood, for token
whereof the Rainbow is ordained: then Noe betaketh himself to till the earth,
planteth a vine, is droonke with the wine thereof, and sleeps on the ground
in a shameful manner, Cham makes a jest of it, but Sem and Iaphet cover
modestly the shame of their father, who now awakened out of his dronkennes, and
much grieved thereat, curses Cham and his posterity: 2. BABYLON
so the Poet ends his first book. And to make way to the life of Nimrod he
begins the second, with consideration of the peoples happiness that are
governed by good and wise princes, and the bad estate of such as are slaves to
tyrants, beseeching God to withhold from us such confusions as he lively
painteth out, in the discovering of Nimrods policies, who from his childhood
sets himself a work to get the sovereignty over men, shows his natural
bent among his play-fellowes, and for that behoof spares not his own body:
he begins to deal with wild beasts, and mastereth some particulars, by
reason whereof he wins the peoples hearts and is made governor: then he
lays himself open; and to maintain his tyranny, puts into the peoples
heads to build a town and a mighty tower, to withstand the force of another
Deluge: This obtains so good liking with the people, that they presently set
themselves on work. But the Lord, provoked to anger with their bold attempt,
confounds the language of the builders, so as they are constrained to let all
alone, not understanding one another by reason of their different speech, the
root of many inconveniences, whose contrary commodities are declared: and so
the Poet falls into discourse of the beginning of toongs, and of the advantage
that herein mankind has above all other creatures: and proves by many reasons
that the Hebrew tongue is the most ancient, that it continued by descent from
Adam unto Nimrod, and remained last in the family of Heber. Concerning other
toongs, parted as they are sundry ways, mention is made of their alterations,
as also of their force and vigor, much relying upon use, which has brought
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin into request. Here the Poet breathing awhile,
casts into a new treatise, where he faineth a vision, and in the same the
dwelling place and image of Eloquence represented unto him, and about this
image, the toongs: Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Arabian, Dutch, Spanish,
English, and French, together with the names of certain personages, that in
some one of them have excelled: and after due reverence done unto them, he
closes up his vision and book withal. Then in his third book, 3. Colonies.
taking again in hand the astonished builders of Babel, after he has given a
reason why God would not have them stay in the plain of Sennaar, he leads
the children of Sem toward the east, of Cham to the south, of Iaphet to the
north and west: but he chooses rather to stay himself, than enter into the
dark corners of Antiquity, showing how much they deceive themselves and
others, who venture too far that way: then describes he the diverse remooues of
sundry nations, as of the Bretons, Lumbards, Alans and Vandals: reckons the
causes why they shifted their abode: and baulking the unknown iourneyes of
some nations, treats of the voyages of certain warlike people, chiefly of
the Goths, Lumbards and Gauls. There again staying, he says, to be short,
that the posterity of Noes three children peopled the world, not all at once,
but by little and little, and as it were year after year with increase of
children: which also was the occasion why the first Monarchy was planted in
Assyria, near to the plain of Sennaar, rather than elsewhere in any country
not so soon inhabited: so the Hebrews and other neighbor peoples have had the
Arts, riches and ornaments of delight, before those of the north and west knew
what the world meant. Herupon is noted, first how Sem in the east, then how
Iaphet in the west, and lastly how Cham in the south, replenished the world
with people: it rested that he should speak of the new world discovered in our
time: concerning the same he shows how so huge a country was first
inhabited, why not so soon as other parts of the world, and whereby it
appears to have bin yet a long time possessed: he propounds here certain
of his own conjectures touching the process of this new worlds inhabitants,
names diverse parts, and reckons up certain wonders thereof: then answers
fitly to this objection; How it could be that Noe and his children should have
so much increased: and there takes occasion to entreat of the wonderful works
of God in the diverse temper and complexion of nations, showing how the northren
differ from the southren people, and even those of Europe among themselves,
especially the French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish. Further he shows why God
would have the children of Noe be so disparkled over the face of the earth:
which is compared unto a great city, where men have much to do one with
another: then refuteth he the godless crew, proving (to their confusion) that
whatsoever they suppose created in vain, and to serve to no use, stands us
oftentimes in greatest stead, as witness the wilderness, the mountains, and the
sea. But now being weerie (as it were) with so long sailing, he landeth in
France, and sings sweetly the praise thereof, co^cluding that it wants
nothing save only a sound peace, which he craves at the hands of him that is
able to give it. 4. Colonnies.
In the beginning of the fourth and last book, he calls on God again, being
to enter into discourse of a new matter, hautie, and very hard to handle, to
wit, the Mathematikes; and the better to perform his drift, he supposes
Phaleg to have found two ancient pillars, and to ask of his father Heber what
they mean: whereunto Heber answers, and opens the door of one of them,
and shows his son four images there enclosed: the first of them is
Arithmetike, set out in her proper attire with numbers: the second is
Geometry, with her tools, works, and excellent crafts, particularly set
down: the third is Astronomy, holding in her right hand the Earth-globe,
whereon the land, the sea, and the ten circles of heaven are painted: and in
her left hand the sphere of heaven, bedecked with figures and images, noting
forth all the principal stars that are seen betwixt the two Poles. In this
place is yielded a reason of the names that are given to the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, and Heber himself is made to hold opinion that the chief stars
of the globe, which he numbreth, contain many mysteries of the church: but, as
he endeuoreth to prove the same, the Poet applies a notable correction; and so
goes on to discover the secrets of Astronomy: an art sprung from the Hebrews
to the Chaldeans, from them conveyed to the Egyptians, and so to the Greeks,
Arabians, Italians, and Almaines: to end that discourse he praises the learned
Astronomers, and having declared the commodities of their skill, comes to view
the fourth image, which is Music: her he lively pourtraieth in all her
bravery, declares her perfection, and what power she has over beasts,
fowls, men of understanding, and God himself: this done, as Heber was about
to go forward, Canan breaks of their talk, by occasion whereof the Poet
rests himself, and so makes an end of the second day of his second week.

BABYLON.
O How great good it is to live under a 1 Prince, A preface representing the
felicity of commonwealths governed by good and wise princes, and the distress
of people subject to a Tyrant. Fitly foreplaced of the Poet to lead him to the
life and deeds of Nimrod.

That counts more tha^ his weal, the weal of his province!
Still hark'ning to the wise, no ear to gloser lending,
The wicked punishing, and honest man defending:
That sovereign of himself, does all vice ouer-awe,
More by his honest life, than punishment, or law:
That being inward meek, outward maiesticall,
Has, for his persons guard, love of his subjects all.
That makes no idol of his bright imperled Mace;
And knowing himself set on stages highest place,
Where to control his works, a world has him in sight,
Does not what ere him list, but rather what is right.
But sure a hell it is to live in servitude,
A man's whole course of life, under a 2 Tyrant rude:
Such one as Dionyse, that with hot coals him shau'd,
Or Nero, that his house with incest all deprau'd:
Or as an owl, that hates the light of government,
Of parliament and peers, that fears the prattlement
Of every private tongue, that for his best delight,
His subjects sets at ods, and still maintains their spite.
Never sets before his eyes faith, honor or justice,
But raises eurie day office upon office:
Nor would his subjects were the best learned, wisest, strongest,
But every day crops off, that ear whose stalk is longest
Throughout his harvest field: and worse than Tigre wood,
Will not his kindred spare, no not his brothers blood.
Who though environed with sword and halberds aid,
Yet fears much people, more than he does make afraid:
Rejoices to invent, new taxes general,
And his own to the bones, eats like a Caniball.
Imprint (O king of heaven) within our princes breasts, A prayer to God, fitly
arising of the words and matter aforegoing, and making way to the sequel.

Love to their people-ward, and reu'rence of thine hests.
And incase any courtiers poisoned language,
Or these enormities familiar in our age,
Shall leave there any taint of Nimrods property,
Draw thereupon thy quill, and raze it speedily:
That for proud Babels tower they may thy Sion rear,
And my Muse under them may chaunt it every where.
1.
Prince. Here is the lively image of a good Prince set down unto us in a few
lines, borrowed of a many good Auctors both divine and humane, that teach in
their writings rules and examples notable for this purpose. Moses in the law,
David in the 101. Psalm, do declare unto us, the rules of duty belonging unto
governors: and they themselves, with all those the good judges and kings that
were among the people of God, serve for sure patterns and examples to all such
as mean faithfully to discharge the like duties. Also Plato, Aristotle,
Xenophon, and Plutarch, with diverse others, for the instruction of those that
came after them, have set forth many godly precepts and examples. The
commodities that arise out of every one of these virtues here described (each
one whereof requires a large commentary) are infinite: and where there are
now adays such princes in the world, their subjects may think themselves
exceeding happy. For next after the sincere knowledge and worship of the true
God, there is no greater happiness in the world for us to enjoy, than to be
governed by such virtuous personages as are here described: mark then the
perfect image of the good Prince.

2.
Tyrant. To give the better gloss to the former picture, another clean
contrary, and marvelous fearful to behold, he sets here before our eyes
the picture of a Tyrant that lives in mistrust of the whole world, as did
Dionysius the elder tyrant of Sicilie, of whom we read among the lives of
Plutarch. He was so mistrustfull, that for fear of his barbers, he made his
daughters bring him a burning cole to sindge his hair withal. More than this,
a Tyrant defiles himself with incests, whooredomes, adulteries, and the sin
of Sodom, and therewith infecteth his whole court and country: as that filthy
Nero did, whose life is written by Suetonius, Tacitus, and others, reciting
therein many horrible and shameful cases. Again, the Tyrant will be subject
unto no law, nor order whatsoever; he overthrows the ground-lawes and pillars
of the state: or if he seem willing to submit himself thereunto, it is to
further himself so much the more in the undermining, by diverse hid practices,
and destroying all such as might any way resist, or make head against him.
Hence comes it to pass, that he may in no wise abide any inquisition or
examination to be made of his unworthy and vile outrages, but vaunteth of the
injury that private men suffer, and discredit they are driven unto by means
of his oppression. To maintain his state the better, he entertaineth and
vpholdeth all manner of hurlyburlies, factions, quarrels, and civil wars: he
favors ruffians, bawdes, flatterers, liers, light and loose persons,
murderers, impoysoners, Epicures, Atheists, and such as are defiled with all
manner of vice and wickedness. He promises mountains, performs nothing:
glories to break oath and promise, and to deceive and surprise both small and
great by fair words, sweet speech, humble and courteous countenance, when his
heart imagines villainy and treason to his country. He never forbeareth any
thing, never pardons any man, nourishes and fatteth himself with blood and
fire: all peaceable and virtuous persons he disgraceth and overthrows,
supporting and advancing all peace-breakers, robbers, and wicked livers: he
takes bribes for all offices, and oppresses the people with the unbridled
number of catchpole-officers, that maintain themselves only by grating upon
others: his subjects he would have live all days of their life in ignorance:
painful, wise, and learned men, and those that have well to take unto, because
they need the less to depend on him, or sell themselves for his favor, he
chaseth far from him, and makes beholding unto him none but fools, idiots,
iesters, anticks, wranglers, and such copes-mates as of naught-worth are
suddenly start up, that wholly depend upon him, and revel in his cofers, not
giving him (as they cannot) any good counsel for the commonwealth; they care
not which end thereof go forward: but all their care and counsel is for their
private gain, which serves to no better use, than to entice and draw them on
daily to careless and wicked living. Further yet, so far is he from regarding
or placing near about him men of worth and good qualities, that on the
contrary, to the imitation of Tarquinius, surnamed the proud (whose story
Liuie writes in the first book of his second Decade, concerning the Poppie
heads that he broke down with his staff, to teach his son by a domb show,
that he should rid out of the way all the peers of the city, and forsake (as
another says) fifty frogs to catch one Sammon) he breaks down the highest
ears of corn: that is, he causes al those to be put to death, that might any
ways hinder his wicked intents. What should I say more? Such a cursed
creature, without God, without conscience, worse than any wild beast, spares
neither kiffe nor kin, but either by sword or poison makes away the very
nearest of all his blood, that he may reign alone, if it were possible. But
notwithstanding the many bands of his guard, he stands in fear of every man,
and is despised, mocked, and detested of all. For why? Besides that is
aforesaid, he glories and takes delight to devise new subsidies, imposts, and
tributes, whereby the comminaltie may be impouerished, and held in bondage, and
so in steed of Homers people-feeder, he becomes a people-eater. Of this
image of a Tyrant, there are examples above number found, both in ancient and
late writers of Church histories, and others: So I return to the Poet.

Nimrods first study and exercise, to get the sovereignty of the people,
furthered by nature.
3. Nimrod scarce yet in age to twelve years did arise,
But over all his peers, he sets to tyrannise:
He ouergrowes them all, and of his might future,
The groundwork planteth he upon so good Augure:
And bearing in his hand, in steed of scepters reeds,
Among the shepheard-swaines begins his prentise-deedes.
Then knowing that the man, whose courage does aspire,
Unto the deemed bliss of an awful empire,
Must pass in brave exploits the doltish vulgar sort,
Or else by seeming good, obtain a good report:
He passed not the night drowned in a feather bed,
Nor yet the day in shade: but young accustomed
Himself to good and ill, making ambitiously
His boulster of a rock, his curtains of the sky.
Sweat is his sweet delight, his games are bow and arrows,
His Ganimeads the lists, his hawks the little sparrowes.
His most delicious meat, the flesh of tender kid,
Which trembles yet, and scarce is from the skin vnhid.
Sometime he sports himself, to conquer with one breath, The continuance of his
labors to obtain the peoples favor.

Some craggie rocks asscent that ouer-peeres the heath:
Or else some raging flood, against the stream divide,
That swollen with rain, has drou'n a hundred brigs aside,
And with a bounding course, vnbrid'led gallops fast,
All overthwart the stones, in some strait vallie cast:
Or else after his cast, to catch again his dart,
Or in plain field on foot, to take the Hind or Heart.
But now once ouerpast twenty five years of age,
And feeling with high mind, his sinews and courage
Worthy a fiercer Mars, if he know any where
A Lion, a Leopard, a Tigre, or a Bear,
He fearlesse sets thereon, kills, conquereth, and foiles,
And plants in highest place of those the bloody spoils.
The people then that see, by his hands martial frayes,
From those boot-hailers wild, each-where set free the ways,
The fearful cattels heardes, and all the waste forests
Rid of their hideous cries, loves this tamer of beasts,
This chase-ill Hercules, and shows him special favor,
And calls him evermore their father and their savior.
Nimrod now by the hair hand-fasting this good fortune, He leaves his former
chase for a better pray.

And striking the iron hot, does flatter, press, importune,
Sometime some, sometime others, and hasting to his bliss,
Before that hunted beasts, now of men hunter is.
For as he did employ, in his hunting before,
The grins, hare-pipes, and traps, and all the limie store:
And further at his need, against the most haggarts,
The heavy clubs, the shafts, the sharp swords, and the darts:
So some men's hearts he gains, by fair hopes closely stealing,
Others he wins by gifts, and others by hard dealing,
And breaking furiously the bonds of equity,
Of that respringing world, usurps the Royalty.
Whereas in time before the chief of each household
The same did rule apart, nor did the yoong-man bold,
Boyst'rous, ambitious, upon a wanton brave,
His sickle thrust (as now) in harvest of the grave.
3.
Nimrod scarce yet. The posterity of Noe being much increased, as Moses
reckons in the 10. chapter of Genesis, they began to spread abroad and take
several habitations, but not far one from another so soon after the flood.
Among other the sons of Cham, is numbered Cus the father of Nimrod, of whom
the history makes mention, that he began to be great on the earth, and was a
mighty hunter before the almighty, and that the beginning of his reign was
Babel, Erech, Archad, and Calneh, in the land of Sennaar. Upon this place are
given two diverse expositions: The first is, of some that hold that Nimrod was
the first after the flood that gave any meet form of public government, and
by the consent of many families, considering his wisdom and valor, was
accepted for master and governor, to rule and order many households together:
by reason whereof, (say they) he is called a strong hunter before the Lord: and
namely, for that he repressed, by maine force, the wicked and unruly, who, like
savage beasts, prayed upon the life of man. But the greater part of Expositors
take this otherwise, and hold, that Nimrod by force and diverse subtilties (here
finely set down by the Poet) got the supremacy; and that this power ascribed
unto him, was not truly Royal and lawful, but a power usurped by force, a
hunters power, wherewith he surprised men, and reigning over them cruelly,
handled them as if they were beasts, yea, and that before the Lord, which is as
much to say, as in despite of God, who had established a gentle rule and
government among the families. This second exposition is the more certain;
whether we consider the race of Nimrod, or the proper meaning and sequel of
the words of the text, or the buildings of Nimrod, or what success his proud
attempt had. The Poet relying on this opinion, has further followed in the
description of the youth, and exercises of this first Tyrant that was in the
second world, such things as were likely to be, and that with such a grace, as
in a discourse is requisite, that out of the holy Scripture has so narrow
foundation, and in other books is, with many fables and names uncertain,
darkened.

4 Now he enthroned is, The tyrannous government of Nimrod, and his proud
attempt.
by force he will have wrought
A thousand cruelties, carelessely sets at naught
Laws both of God and man, out-braues the almighty king,
And reares up to his nose the scepter flourishing.
And least the people at length (ease puffing up their pride)
Should think to cast his yoke, he keeps them occupide.
He powers forth his coin, and makes them labor still,
In building of a Tower, more like an Atlas hill.
We live too long (quoth he) thus like beasts wandering:
Let Us leave these gadding tents, these houses wayfaring:
A palace let us build, that stately may be joint,
In Base unto the deep, and unto heaven in Point.
A Sanctuary safe, and priuiledg'd refuge,
Against the swelling rage of a ravenous Deluge.
Come let us build a Town, and there incorporate,
Pass the rest of our days under a royal state:
Least that we sundered in tents with many princes,
Be scattered abroad throughout all the provinces,
That with bright shining course are viewd by Phoebes brother,
Not able then to help, or counsel one another:
And in case burning coals of at-home-breed sedition,
Or what mishap so e're, shall drive us to division,
Yet brothers, let us leave for lasting monument
Our names grau'n on these walls, high as the firmament.
5 Like as the Vulcan weak, that some chill company, A fit comparison to show
what force have the plots of tyrants, to bring the vengeance of God upon the
people.

Of shepherds in the leaffie verges have let lie
Of some one forest wide, a while it self keeps in,
Yet vomiting smoke-waues, dark'neth the bright welkin:
Then by soft Zephyrs help, whiles in low bush it lurks,
Makes a red flaming way to his fierce angers works;
Up to the blooming Thorn, fro the humble bush it stirs,
From thorn to oak, from oak up to the tallest firs,
And still it gains ground, by running force it finds,
No Dryades it leaves within their native rindes:
Right so this pleasant speech soon as his tongue had placed,
Of some few Favorites with praise it was embraced:
And straight with giddie-braines it goes from hand to hand,
Even to the baser sort of people through the land,
Who greatly bent to see the great Tower perfect made,
Themselves toil day and night, every chone in his trade.
Some trip great Ashes down, with sharp-edg'd axes strokes,
Some fell the sailing Elmes, and some th'enduring oaks.
So they degrade the woods, and show unto the Sun
The ground where his bright eye before had never shun.
Have thou at any time, an army seen to sack
A city vanquished? there is grief and joy no lack,
Together hurly burl'd, one carteth, one takes hold,
One draws, another leads, and there the soldiour bold
Can find no place too sure, nor yet no lock too strong,
The whole town in one day forth at the gates does throng:
So do these carpenters pill off in one moment,
From those Assyrian hills, the shaking ornament
Of their shadie Deserts, despoyle they the mountains,
And boiling hot mow down the trembling branched plains.
The waines and teemes of Mules, scarce one by other wend:
The groaning axeltrees, o'rcharg'd with loades do bend.
A lively description of a people busied about a great work.
Here to make mortar hard, one day and night is bruing,
Of some thick slimy poole the water flatly gluing:
Here the brick-burner bakes within his smokie kell
Claie into stone, and here some hollow down to hell
So deep foundations, that many a damned spright
Gazeth on once again the suns unhoped light.
All heaven replies the sound of their maules clitter clatters,
And Tigris feels his fish all trembling vnd'r his waters.
The ruddie colored walls in length and height do grow,
Far do they cast a shade, far do they make a show.
With workmen all is turmoyl'd, the feeble and mortal fry,
Think at the first days work, their hand shall reach the sky.
God being angry with the bold enterprise of Nimrod and his followers,
determines to break of their enterprise, by confounding their language.
6 God seeing this, to wrath inclined his countenance,
And with a thundering sound, that does like tempest glance,
Down through the clowdy plain, that does hills overthrow,
And makes heavens steadfast gates flash often too and fro,
See, see (quoth he) these dwarfes, see this same rascal people!
These children of the dust, O what a goodly steeple,
What mighty walls they build! O th'impregnable castle,
Of strength to bear my shot, and with my wroth to wrestle!
I swear an oath to them, henceforth the fruitful ground
Should never stand in fear of waters breaking bound:
They doubting, sense themselves: I would by their extent
Have peopled all the world, they by themselves here pent
Are prisner-like emparkt: I would have bin for ever
Their master, their defense, their shepherd, their lawgiver;
And they have chose for king a savage liue-by-spoyle,
A tyrant seeking gain by their great loss and toil:
Who does my force despise, and with vainglory swo'ne,
Attempts to scale the walls, of my most holy throne.
Come, let us break off their drift, and since by speeches unity,
As by will, as by law, and as by consanguinitie,
They hart'ned are to ill, and with a saucie tongue,
Wax mad upon this work all night and all day long;
Let Us set a pulbacke on their hastie-pac'd intention,
And strike them quickly with the spirit of dissension.
Their language let us confound, and make both one and other,
Sire barbarous to his son, and brother deaf to brother.
7 Thus had he said, and straight confusedly there went
I know not what a noise throughout the battlement. The execution of Gods
sentence.

Right such a iangling sound as one hears in a band
Of slaves, who^ drunkards God does with his lance command.
One does his language toothe, another noze his note,
Another frames his words unseemly through the throat,
One howles, and one does hiss, another sluttereth;
Each has his babble, and each in vain endeuoreth
To find those loved terms those tunes before expressed,
That in their rolling cradle they drew from mothers breast.
Go get thee up betimes, A fit comparison.
and whiles the morning gay
With Rainbow-glosse bedecks the portail of the day,
Give ear awhile and mark the disagreeing moodes
Of those trim quiristers that sing amidst the woods
Goodmorrow to their loves: where each one in his fashion,
Pearched upon a bough, pronounces his oration:
Then shall thou understand what mingle-mangle of sounds
Confusedly was heard among those mason-lounds:
A Trowell ho says one, his mate a Beetle heaues;
Cut me says he this stone, and he some timber cleaues;
Come ho, come ho, says one, and wind me up this rope:
Then one vnwinding strives to give it all the scope;
This scaffold bourd, says one, one makes it down too fare:
Give me the line says one, and one gives him the square.
He shoutes, he signs in vain, and he with anger boyles,
And look what one has made, forthwith another spoils.
With those confused cries they windles chafe in vain:
Each one the more he strives the less appeeres his pain.
Another excellent comparison declaring how neither counsel, art, force,
diligence, nor multitude, is able to resist God.
And shortly as the men that altogether stood
To build in channel deep of some great rau'ning flood
High arches of a bridge, marking from hills descend
A hundred sudden streams, and now far to extend
The mountaine-hating waves, leave off without advise,
Scudding some here, some there, their goodly enterprise:
Right so these Architects, feeling the stormy smart
Of Gods displeasure rise, had neither strength nor heart.
But there they left their work, and with hands malcontent,
Rules, mallets, plummets, lines, all down the Tower they sent.
4.
Now he enthroned is. This is the exposition of the words, mighty hunter before
the Lord: to wit, that Nimrod Chams nephew, did proudly lift himself up
against God and man. His buildings and the beginning of his reign could not
have been such, without offering violence to the peace and liberty of diverse
families over whom he bare rule: and there is no show to the contrary, but
that by diverse practices from time to time he got the sovereignty. The holy
Scripture oftentimes by the names of hunters and chasers, means Gods enemies,
and the persecutors of his church. Psalm 91. and 124. Ezech. 32. Lamentations
3. The seauentie Interpreters translate the Hebrew text after this manner: This
Nimrod began to be a Giant on the earth, and a huntesman, or leader of hounds
before the Lord God. By the hounds of Nimrod may be understood his guardes,
and the favorers of his tyranny. Moses calls him (...) Gibor tsaid, that is,
lusty, strong, or great and mighty chaser. Which notes not only the stature
and height of body, but also might and authority joined with violence, in all
those that want the fear of God. Now although Moses in the 11. Chapter of
Genesis, where he speaks of the city and tower of Babel, make no mention of
Nimrod, yet has the Poet aptly gathered out of the chapter aforegoing, that
Nimrod was the author and promoter of those buildings; in as much as Babel is
called the beginning of his reign, who could not any ways reign without some
habitations for himself and his subjects, and considering that Moses in the
self same place affirms, that the cities founded by Nimrod were in the
country of Sennaar, and that in the 12. verse of the 11. chapter he says,
that these builders of Babel dwelt on a plain in the country of Sennaar: by
good reason the invention and beginning thereof is here ascribed to Nimrod,
who by this means sought to set his state on foot. Also this Monarchy of
Babylon, was one of the first, and with it that of Niniuie, as may be gathered
out of the words of Moses. But the more particular discourse of these matters,
and diverse other questions concerning Nimrod and his outrages, require a
larger commentary.

5.
Like as the Vulcan weak. The Poet says, that as a small deal of fire let
fall by some shepherds among the dry leaves of a great forest, setting it
self, and hatching (as it were) the heat awhile, at length with help of the
wind, grows to so great a flame, that it takes the whole forest, and
leaves not a Driad, that is, not a tree in his proper or natural bark: So
the words first uttered by Nimrod, the blown with the bellows of his mynions
and favorites, set so the hearts of the people on fire, that he soon obtained
his purpose. This is it that Moses notes in the 11. chap. of Genesis the 3. and
4. verse. They said one to another (the chief men having put it in their
heads) Come, let us make brick, and burn it well in the fire: so had they
brick instead of stone, and slime had they in stead of mortar. Then said
they, go let us build us a city, and a tower, whose top may reach unto the
heavens, that we may get us a name, least we be scattered upon the whole earth.
The Poet in his verse discourses upon this devise. It is thought that this
proud building was begun about a hundred and fifty years after the flood. The
good patriarch Noe, that lived yet long time after, saw his posterity
confounded and scattered: for so it was the Lords will to exercise the patient
faith of his servant, to whom in recompense he showed the effect of his
blessings in the family of Sem, where still remained the Hebrew tongue,
together with the doctrine and discipline of the true church. Now out of this
history of Moses touching the building of the town, and the confusion of the
builders, is sprung (as it seems) the fabulous discourse of the Poets, set
down by Quid in his first book of Metamorphosis, touching the Giants that
heaped hills one upon another to scale heaven, and dispossess Jupiter of his
throne. Thus has Satan endeavored to falsify the truth of sacred histories.
Well, this arrogant building shows us how vain are the imaginations of
worldly men, namely, to set at naught the true renown of heavenly life, and
seek after the false on earth. Carnal men have no care at all to worship and
reverence the name of the true God, they regard only to be accounted of
themselves, and so to write their names in the dust. Against the attempts of
the men of Babel, and all their successors, let us oppose these sentences, the
18. and 21. of Proverbs. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, thither shall
the just repair and be exalted. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
force, can prevail against the Lord: and that which is written Psalm. the 127.
Except the Lord do build the house, the builders labor but in vain.

6.
God seeing this: Moses in the 5. and 6. verses of the 11. chapter says: Then
the Lord came down to see the city, and Tower, which the sons of men had
built. And the Lord said, Behold the people is one, and they all have one
language, and this they begin to do, neither can they now be stopped from
whatsoever they have imagined to do: come on, let us go down and there
confound their language, that they understand not one another. Then he adds
the execution of the sentence, saying; So the Lord scattered them from thence
upon all the earth, and they left off to build the city. Therefore the name of
it was called Babel, because the Lord did there confound the language of all
the earth, and scattered them from thence over all the world. God, that is all
in all, never changes his place, he goes neither upward nor downwarde, but
the Scripture says, he goes down then when he works any thing on earth,
which falling out beyond and against the ordinary course of nature, witnesses
his particular presence. Under these few words of Moses, a many things are to
be considered: chiefly, he notes the great sins of the builders, in that he
brings in the Lord, judge of the whole world, vouchsaufing to bow down his
eyes particularly upon that foolish people. For it is not without cause that
the great God of heaven and earth should arise from his throne, and (if I
durst so say) leave the palace of his glory to come and view the durt-dawbers
or morter-makers. By this manner of speech Moses shows, and gives us to
understand, that long time before these Babylonians had built in their hearts
most wonderful high and stately towers, and that long ago they had baked in
the fire of their concupiscence some marvelous brickes: to wit, they had much
counseled one with an other, and discoursed of means to get renown, and
found no better way to attain their purpose, than to raise a tower up to the
heavens, to ravish with astonishment all those that should behold it. So
Moses says that this pride and froward selfe-trust deserved a grievous
punishment: but as God is parfaitly just, so lays he upon the builders a
chastisement proportionable unto their offense.

7.
Thus had he said and straight. In God it is all one to will and to do: And
further, he sends not lightning, wind, nor tempest against the tower: but
contenteth himself to strike the proud and puffed up brains of the builders:
and so the building founded upon their folly was overthrown by their foolish
iangling that God mingled with their language; and the vainglorious masons in
steed of their imagined renown, have gotten themselves everlasting shame. Who
would have thought that God had had so ready such kind of rods to punish
mankind withal? But let the Reader consider whether the world at this day be
not full of Babel-towers. Mark what a number of men do in every kind of
vocation. Since I do not take upon me but to write bare Annotations, I leave it
to the Readers consideration, who may see, now more then ever, that the world
continues the building of Babel: that is, men madly gainset their own
wisdom and power against the wisdom and power of God; who treading as it
were with woollen feet, and stealing on softly, is able with an arm of Iron
to surprise and seize upon these builders, and turn by diverse means their
vain purposes and weak endeavors to naught. The Poet has used many very fit
comparisons to represent the confusion of these workmen. The first is taken
from that which we see fall out in a great rabblement of Pesants, ouerruled by
the Lance or Mace of Bacchus: that is, such as have the Wine in their heads,
and are dronken: for among such people is commonly heard a strange confused
noise and iangling, as the Churhales and Wakes, and other such passe-times do
now and then declare. The second is taken from the chirping of Birds, in voice
and song diverse. The third from Masons, constrained by the sudden rage of a
land-flood, to leave off the begun work of a Bridge. And here is a lively
description of Gods judgments, together with their degrees and consequences:
namely, in the confusion of understandings first, then of speech, and lastly of
the whole company; which being unable longer to continue, was quickly so
scattered, that (as Moses says) they ceased to build the City.

The harms that men suffer by the confusion of speech.
O proud rebellion, O traitorous impiety!
Mark in what manner sort by thy speeches variety
God has thee punished, alas that pleasant tongue,
That holy bond of towns, of anger bridle strong,
Strong glue of amity, once one, now does wayfare
In hundred rivers dry; this gould so richly rare,
Wroth-taming, charming-care, men-drawing, hart-inta^gling,
Both color, weight, and sound, has lost by mingle-mangling.
This gift corrupted is, and from the North to South
Babels confused fall sounds yet in every mouth.
The cold Finlanders once might visit Africans,
The Spanish Indians, the English Americans,
Without interpreters; but now the compass small
That does our cities bound, our language bounds withal:
And if we from our home but never so little went,
Dombe should we be, and rest of reasons instrument.
Or if we speak at least unto our neybour nations,
It Is by a borrowed tongue, or by strange animations.
Without school, without pains, sucking our mothers breast,
We might have learned the tongue that all men's minds expressed;
And after seven years old, upon small glistring sand
Begun to draw with skill the shape of sea and land,
To part and multiply; and so from skill to skill
We might have climbed soon the ridge of that high hill,
Where Arts perfection, in sign of their victory,
Crowns her Favorites with everlasting glory.
Now, infants we always, soon as we learn to sound
The Latin, Hebrew, Greek, are going to the ground.
We learn but prittle-prattle, and for the deep inseeing
Of natures secresies, and of that only Being
That makes all things to be, we labor, never staying,
Well to decline a Verb, or find some pretty saying:
Of letters and syllabs to way the quantity,
Old knowing naught without masters authority:
Who teach us how to read, and put into our paws
Some little Chriscrosrow, in stead of civil laws,
And for Hippocrates, and for that holy wrighting
Where God himself reueales to Readers there delighting.
8.
O proud rebellion. A fine description of evils ensuing this confusion of
speech. First, the acquaintance of all mankind together, the knot and
loue-bond of nations, is so loosened and broke, that scarre is there found any
remedy for it, some of them not thinking on, or not at all caring for others.
Secondly, that only one language which decked and embellished the acquaintance
and fellowship of men, that kept them in peace and temper, such as it was, that
made them all well appaide, that moved each one to his duty, and was much
regarded of all, has lost all this by this change, and in a word has neither
show nor grace of a language: insomuch as even at this day the fall of the
Tower of Babel is heard from North to South, from East to West. That is to say,
in the diverse languages of so many nations we may observe almost nothing else
but a kind of chattering and confused sound, neither fit, nor comely, nor
expressing at all the nature of things: At least one people so judges of
another tongue. For I pray you what pleasure takes a Frenchman to hear a
Moscouite or a Mexican speak? And even the toongs that we understand, and
speak (as we think) reasonable well, what are they unto us in respect of our
mother tongue, or the principal toongs? Thirdly, whereas the nations dwelling
farthest asunder, might easily have come together, been acquainted and
traffiked one with another: Now a man is no sooner gone out of his own doors,
but he has much adoo to understand those that he meets withal; and if he
set foot in any far country, he needs interpretours, or must have spent a
long time before to learn the tongue, or else must speak by signs, or always
hold his peace, and live like a domb creature. Fourthly, to amplify further
this misery, the Poet shows that if this disorder had not happened, a man
might have learned in short time all the Liberal sciences, and gained the top
of that hill where Encyclopaedia, (that is, the full compass of all Arts)
crowns all such lawful aspiring minds: and in a word, obtained the parfait
knowledge of all things; whereas now we spend our whole life in the learning
words of th'Hebrue, Greek and Latin toongs, and that is nothing else but
babbling: and in stead of being well seen in the heavenly Philosophy, and that
of this lower world, we must take pains in syllables and words, circuits of
speech, and other like exercises, until we be gray headed and white-bearded,
and so end our lives scarce having yet attained any sufficient knowledge of
Law, Physic or Divinity, that are the chief professions. The learned know
how hard a matter it is to have a good style, which is called (...), the
measure of learning; and that Aristotle, who has so excellently well set it
down, in that wonderful work of his, commonly called the Organ, is
understood but of a few. What may a man say then of the most part of the
discourses and speech of men now adays living? It is nothing but babble, it is
Babel it self. I speak not here of the substance of things, but of the
fashion, order, and manner that is used to make them be conceived of those to
whom we speak, be they never so cunning in the tongue themselves. Then of
Barbarism and ignorance, what shall a man think?

9 What shall I tell you more? The Hebrew tongue generally spoken before the
confusion of toongs.
Men spoke in every place
That holy Dialect, the language of Gods grace,
A parfit tongue, that has no Letter, no small tyttle,
But is embellished with mysteries not little.
Now since this proud revolt seu'rally people prate,
Depraved bibble-babbles, bastard, effeminate,
That every day do change, and loosing all their light,
Scarce utter any sound of that first language right.
10 Long since the Phrygians and those by Nilus dwelling,
Nilus that nourishes, and fats the ground by swelling,
Desirous to have tri'de which was of more antiquity
Of their two languages, trusted against all equity
The right of eloquence to tender stammering,
And those that judgment lackt made judges of the thing:
To wit, two sucking Babes whom their two Mothers dombe
In Hermitages kept, where go man else did come:
No humain charming voice was heard sound near the place
Of their toong-ty'de abode, for whole three twelmonth space.
Then being called forth and set between the people
Of Xanthus and of Nile, they cry with voices feoble,
And often cry they, Bec; bec bec is all the ground
That either tongue can frame or else their mouth will sound.
Whereat the Phrygians that knew bec signify'de
In their own language Bread, their countenances died
With joy their heart conceived, because they were so blessed,
To have on their behalf obtained natures arrest.
11 O fools, that little thought how those bec-bleating flocks,
That shore the tender flowers from off the neybour rocks,
Had schooled them to this term, and that the words Roomish,
French, Latin, Hebrew, Greek, Egyptian or English,
Are not brought-forth with us; but well may be discerned
That each language by haunt and by long use is learned.
Only remains a power, this or that sound to place,
Gift natural to men; as eeke that other grace,
To speak diverse languages. Men only speak. An answer to the objection taken
from the vndistinct voice of beasts.
Which variably rich, and richly variable,
Us renders most unlike herds brute and miserable.
And if thou list oppose how that the Bull does bellow,
The slothful Ass does bray, the Lion cruel fellow,
Now treble rores, now base, and by those tunes we find,
They seem right eloquent to make us know their mind;
Surely those are no words, they are but declarations
Of their disquiet stur, by means of some few passions;
Confused signs of grief, and tokens of their sadness,
Of ioyfulnes, of love, of hunger, thirst, and madness.
An answer to a second objection taken from the chirping of birds.
The like may well be said of that light winged quier
That to the verdaunt boughs of bushes does retier,
Chirping before the sun: for though against fair weather
Two by two, three by three, they seem to talk together,
Though their voice bends it self a hundred thousand ways,
Though they can descant bold a hundred wanton lays,
Though great Apolloes self within their school was taught,
It Is but a groundless tune of notes intending naught:
A thousand times a day the selfsame song repeated,
A dombe discourse amids the trembling trees defeated.
But only man has power to preach of modesty,
Of honor, of wisdom, of force, of equity,
Of God, of heaven, of earth, of water and of air,
With words of good import, diverse and chosen fair,
Unfolding all his thoughts not by some one language:
But like to Scaliger the wonder of our age,
The lamp of learned men, can wisely speak, and much,
In Latin, Hebrew, Greek, English, Italian, Dutch,
Spanish, Arabian, French, and Slauonian,
Chaldean, Syrian, and Ethiopian:
Who like Chameleon makes his transformation
(O rich, O pliant wit!) to any auctors facion.
Great Iulies worthy son, great Siluies younger brother
In Gasconie renowmd more than was ever other.
Now as for Popinjayes that passing all their ages
Within the pierced grates of thorow-aired cages, An answer to the third
objection touching Parrets.

Doubt not in eloquence to plead with us for chief;
Pronounce all thorowout the Christian belief;
Repeat the praire devout that from our Savior came,
And all the household call together name by name;
They like to th'eccho be, our sounding voices daughter,
That through the vaulted Vales importune bableth after,
Not weening what she says: in vain this air they break,
And speaking without sense, they speak, and nothing speak:
Not hearing their own voice; because the right language,
Naught is but of the mind the right sounding image:
Chiefly when it is short, when it is sweet and painted,
As that wherewith All were, ere Nimrods time, acquainted.
9.
What shall I tell you more? Moses says, in the beginning of the 11. Chapter,
that then (that is, many years after the flood, and about the same time when
Chams posterity left the East parts to come and dwell in the plain of
Sennaar) the whole earth was one language and one speech, to wit, Noe and his
children: and all the families from them issued, though they dwelt not
together, yet spoke they all the same language. All of them parted not from the
East to the foresaid plain of Sennaar: but likely enough is their opinion,
that hold that Noe and Sem parted not so soon so far a sunder, and
especially that they accompanied not these builders of Babel, who sought
renown, and set up their rest in this world. A man may ask now what was that
only language they spoke in the world before the flood, and after, until the
building of Babel. The Poet answers, it was the language of God himself.
Hereupon arises two opinions: The first is, of those that to honor their
country, after the example of some ancient Heathens, would make us believe
they are sprung of the earth, or fallen from the Moon, and think their speech
the most excellent of all other. The Egyptians and Phrygians have long sithence
debated this matter, as shall be said more at large in the next Section. A few
years ago a Physician of Brabant named I. Goropius, set forth a great book
entitled Origines Antuerpianae, wherein he aymeth especially at this mark, to
prove the Cymbrike tongue (which in his opinion is the base Almaine) to be the
first speech of the world. Since his death a certain writer of Liege, has set
out many other books of his about the same matter: and in one of them, that is
called Hermathena, this Cymbrike tongue or low Dutch, is preferred far above
the Roman, Greek and Hebrew. It asks a long discourse to answer his
reasons: for this time I will answer but in a word: Namely, that all that
which he alleges for the pre-eminence of his own tongue, is a mere cavil,
that is called in the Schools, Petitio principij: when a Sophyster takes for
granted that which is expressly denied him, and he knows not how to prove.
Goropius groundeth al his discourse on this: that the Cymbrike tongue has
borrowed nothing of any other, and that the Hebrew is comen of it, and even
borrows of the Cymbrike. This a man will deny Goropius and his disciples:
and whereas they show some Hebrew words or Phrases that resemble the words and
terms of the base Almaine, and so conclude that Adam spoke low Dutch, and that
the language of Moses and the Prophets is hard, ambiguous, poor, and borrowed
of the Cymbrike, which they were not well able to follow: I answer, that they
are deceived, and that on the contrary they ought to say, the Hebrew was
before all other toongs; who were begun in Babel, and have sithence brought
forth infinite others, as the high and low Dutch, and other like, now used in
the world. I would the learned professors of principal toongs, would find
some time to refute th'allegations of Goropius: Especially those that make
against the Hebrew, which he has too saucily disgraced in the second book of
his Hermath, Page 25. 26. etc. The second opinion, which I hold with the Poet,
is, that the Hebrew tongue, enclosed chiefly in the Canonical books of the old
Testament (which have been woonderfully preserved until our time) is the
first speech of the world, and the same that Moses meant, when he said, the
whole earth had one mouth or language, before the building of Babel. The
reasons thereof are touched in a word by the Poet, who does hereafter treat of
them more at large, as we have also noted in the margent, and mean to speak
somewhat thereof in the 12. Annotation. Now whereas this first language has at
this day no letter nor word, but is full of maimes and myseries, it may be
said of every tongue since the confusion: that it is nothing but corrupt
iangling, weak, uncertain, and changing ever from time to time, as many have
already showed heretofore. The Greek and Latin toongs have changed five or
six times: and the learned know what wrangling there has been about the
writing, pronouncing, and disposing of their terms and phrases. Then what is
to be said of the Greekish and Latinish toongs, those that are but apes of the
other? What of the barbarous, strange, and new toongs? or of those whose
foolish pronunciation only no man can abide, or of others that by use, time,
and force of people, are waxen current? but this I leave to such as list to
comment hereupon at large.

10.
Long since the Phrygians. The Egyptians, being ever great braggers, vaunted
long ago that they were the most ancient people of the world: a certain king
of theirs named Psammetichus attempted to search out the truth; and for that
end thought meet by some means to discover what was the first language of the
world: Thus, he took two newborn babes, and delivered them unto shepherds
to be noursed, commanding they should be brought up in a secret staule, there
to suck the milk of goats, and straightly forbidding, that none should come
there to pronounce any word before them: then after a certain time when they
were of age, they should be left alone, and made to fast a while. Now so soon
as they were past two years old, their governor having in all points
accomplished the kings commandment, came to open the staule, and then the two
children began to cry Bec, bec: the shepherd said not a word: they repeat
still the words: and he let his master understand thereof, who caused the
children to be brought secretly unto him, and heard them speak. So when the
meaning of the word was asked, and The Egyptians understood it signified bread
in the Phrygian tongue, they granted the pre-eminence of antiquity unto the
Phrygians. Herodotus writes that the priests of Vulcan, in the city of
Memphis, told him the same tale. There are some others that think these babes
were brought up of dombe nourses: howsoever it be, sure it is that the pride of
the Egyptians was by some such devise daunted. Suidas, touching the very point,
says that babes nourished of a goat, must needs cry something like a goat,
and such was the sound of the word Bec; a meet reward for his wisdom that
made such a trial. The Grecians in old time were wont to call an old dotard
(...), a word composed of Bec and (...), the moon: the same is turned into a
proverb which Erasmus expounds. But Goropius in the 5. and 9. book of his
Origines plaieth the subtle Sophister, as his manner is, and uses his beak
upon the word Bec: concluding, since bec in low Dutch signifies bread, and
Psammetichus his babes called for bec, that so long ago they spoke low Dutch;
whereupon it follows, that his tongue is the most ancient of the world. He
calls also his discourses upon the same Becceselanea, offering the subject of
a comedy to some new Aristophanes. But let us consider the answers of the Poet
to the Phrygians and to Goropius.

11.
O fools, that little thought. The first answer is, that this word Bec that
the children spoke, was a co^fused sound coming near the cry of goats: And
how could they ask bread, seeing that they understood it not, never heard it
spoken by any body, never heard the meaning of it? The second is, that words
are not borne with us, but that we learn them by haunt and long usage. If they
were borne with us, doubtless these infants would have spoken as well other
words: for the understanding being moved, the belly pinched with hunger, would
not content it self to express his passion in one syllable. The third is,
that men are only the right and proper speakers, yet if they be not taught it,
and thereto fashioned, but are brought up among beasts, in stead of a right and
framed speech, they shall make but a sound and cry confused like unto beasts.
In a word, I take this discourse of Herodotus, touching the two infants and
their Bec, to be but a tale made upon pleasure, and a very heard-say; and there
against I oppose the antiquity of the Hebrew tongue. Yet if I were bound to
believe Herodotus, I would say the Phrygians Bec was drawn from the Hebrews
(...) Lechem. The disciples of Goropius will confess that the Phrygians are
come from the successors of Noe: so can it not seem strange unto them, that I
say the Phrygians retaining some tokens of their grandfathers language, have
(like infinite others) lengthened and shortened the most part of the words:
some whereof yet remain whole, to witness the antiquity and principality of
the Hebrew tongue. After this the Poet answers those that build upon the
vnframed noise of beasts, the chirping and chattering of birds, and the
babbling of Parrets, to prove the birth of speech with us, and cast a cloud
over that perfection he granted only to the first language; and so he says
that man only endued with reason, is the only creature on earth capable of
distinct, ordered, important, and proper speech, and further speaks many
several toongs: whereof he brings in for example the learned Scaliger. Hence
it ensues that a man cannot learn to speak, if he be brought up among beasts
that have no reason whereby to deserve the name of a speech, or to use the same
aright: or if he be brought up with such as are dombe, of whom he can learn
nothing but signs and confused sounds, he will never speak treatably, nor
understand any thing, except another do speak first unto him, and make him
understand the speech with often repeating: As appears not only in young
children, but in the oldest men also, who learn as long as they live the words
and names of those very things which they have oftentimes seen before. It
follows then, that all the discourse of the Phrygians Bec is a devised tale,
and therefore unworthy for them to buyld upon, that go about to prove the
Phrygian tongue, or theirs that would draw their pedigree from the Phrygians, to
be the first language of the world. Another man may find in his own tongue a
many like words, and draw thence as good conclusions as Goropius does. But a
strange thing it is, that the heathen authors have said nothing, nor made any
mention in their books of the beginnings and occasions of diversity of
toongs: especially that the Grecians, and other such learned people that have
professed the knowledge of all things, knew not the beginning of their own
language. Moses only has set us down this notable history, and opened unto
the Heathen the spring of their toongs. And this further is to be woondered at
in the history of Babel, that the Hebrew tongue alone, as being the first of
the world, has remained among that people that were the Church of God, where
the Messiah was borne, and from whence arose the preaching of the Gospel,
touching the appearance of the promised Savior: which Gospel has sithence by
the gift of toongs and ministry of the Apostles ouerspread all the parts of
the world. Thus Moses handling the beginning of toongs, proves his history
to have long fore-gone all others, and therewithal engraueth upon the gates
and walls of the city and Tower of Babel, a godly warning to all men, to fly
and avoid Atheism, and all vainglorious folly, which builds Towers
against heaven, and rebelleth against God: who suffers the wicked to advance
and hoyse up themselves the space of some few months or years, to the end he
may give them a fearful overthrow at length. What would the presumption of
man have done (says Saint Augustine) when algate the top of this Tower had
raught unto the clouds? It is humility that lifts up the heart on high, to
the Lord, not against the Lord: she it is that leads us the true, right,
and sure way to heaven. These few words I thought good to add unto the rest,
because the proud aspiring mind of man can not be sufficiently discovered, nor
to much cried out on. Whereas these builders busily forecast in their mind, and
labored to make themselves renowned among their posterity, and thought men of
some worth, let us remember that the true praise consists not in works of
goodly outward show, but in such as are good indeed, and approved of God. So
let us return to the text of the Poet, who having touched in a word the
beginning of toongs, and refuted some contrary objections, shows now which
of all the toongs that have been, are, or shall be in the world, ought to be
accounted the chief and most ancient, and whereof a man may truly say, it is
the most excellent of all other.

Now when I duly way how 12 the Ebrue tongue does show The Hebrew tongue most
ancient.

And readily express in words a very few
Most combersome conceits, and through each secret plight
Of reasons laberynth affoords the Reader light,
Much better than the Greek with her Synonymons, The first reason.

Hit lofty Metaphors, her bold Epithetons,
Her compounding of words, her tenses and her cases,
And of so great request a thousand other graces:
When I consider well how that the school Rabine The second reason.

Finds in the letter-row of that language divine
All we believe with heart, all that with eye we see,
And that within the law all Arts comprised be:
Be it that with much ado one curiously assaies
The letters of each word to turn a hundred ways;
(For in Arithmetike as ciphers changing room
Does either much enhaunse or much abate the sum,
So the Anagramme straight knits or else vndoth the grace
Of words whose letters take right enterchange of place)
Or beit to put together thou rightly do devise
The numbers mystical that from the letters rise
Of some one Hebrew word, and under that one name
Another find hid in number like the same;
Or that some word is known by some one element,
Or by some only word a parfit speech is meant,
As in an Emblem short the Egyptian silence
Was mystically wont to press a long sentnce.
When I consider well that from the East-Indian sand
Unto the flaming mount that borders Ireland, the third reason.

From cold Tartarian seas to schorched Tambuts shore,
Thou Sun no people see so void of gentle lore,
No men so ignorant of Gods most holy law,
But they retain as yet some words of Hebrew Saw;
And but their letters do (though out of order set)
Come near the holy names of Moses Alphabet;
The fourth reason.
When with my self I way the sacred counterpawn
Of Gods old Testament was in those letters draw'n;
That VRIM, that the DREAM, and that the VISION wise
But in the Hebrew tongue spoke not their Prophesies;
And that the Eternals self would with his finger deigne
To grave in Hebrew words his Law on Marbles twain;
And that since many years the messengers Divine
Did preach the joyful Word in language Palestine;
The fifth reason.
And when I farther way, that the ancient Patriarchs
Had not their names imposed without some reasons marks,
Yea such as fully showed (and that with great moment)
Of their whole course of life some famous accident,
And that a man may see that every ancient name
Both by sound and by sense from Hebrew language came,
(...)
As Eve, is consterd life; Cain, first of all begot;
(...)
Adam, create of clay; Abel, that profits not;
Seth, set in others place; and he surnamed Rest,
That saw th'all-stroying flood below the ground suppressed;
I cannot choose but grant, though Greece do fret and foam,
The sacred elder right to the Ebrewes Idiome.
Great commendation of the Hebrew tongue.
13 Then do I thee salute, O euer-running Spring
Of reasons portraiture, Phrase of the eternal king,
Thou brightly-shining Pearl, Queene-mother of languages,
That spotles have escaped the Dungeon of all ages,
That have no word but wai'th, whose very elements
Are full of hidden sense, whose points have Sacraments,
O holy Dialect, in thee the proper names
Of men, towns, countries, are the abridgments of their fames
And memorable deeds: the names of winged bands,
Of water-habitants, of armies of the lands,
Are open treatises, whereout each one might gather
Their natures histories, before the heau'n-rowling father
By raging anger moved with flaming Symeteer
The way to Eden karu'd from these base cuntries here.
Adam gave Hebrew names to all
14 For when Adam, in sign of his pre-eminence,
Names did in true Elyse to all creatures dispense creatures according to their
nature.

Then when before his eyes in muster general
Two by two, side by side, in rank they marched all,
He chose them all so fit, that every learned ear
Bearing the sound to mind, the maruailes might eke bear
Wherewith th'al-fourming word did richly beautify
Both those that live in wet, and those that live in dry. He enriched the
tongue with Verbes and clauses.

15 And for each Body must suffer some thing, or do,
When he the Nounes had framed, the Verbes he joined thereto;
Then, more to beautify this goodly ground of pleading,
Many a tittle made, that serves to grace the reading,
The parts of most account to sow together fit;
As does a little glue two mighty planchers knit:
And farther serves as does the wauing plume of feathers
That on the chamfred top of glistring helmet weathers:
To marble Images, as footstals do and bases
To silver cups their ears, to velvet robes their laces.
16 This tongue that Adam spoke, The Hebrew tongue continued generally spoken,
from Adam to Nimrod, then it remained only in the family of Heber: whence it
was called Hebrew.
till in bad time arrived
That heau'n-assaulting prince, sincerely was derived
From father unto son, the worlds circumference
Did thoroughly sound the tunes of her rich eloquence:
But then as partial full quickly was she gone
To Hebers family, or because he was none
Of that rebellious band, or wisely did abide
Far from the Sennar plain in that unhappy tide;
Or if he thither were among the rest constrained
In corners worshipped God and secretly complained,
And so with slavish arms help them to build those walls
Which in despite he vowed unto the deep entrals
Of darksom Tartarus: as gally-slaue in gives,
That combating the sea most miserably strives
Against his liberty, and curses in his heart
Those for whom night and day he practices his art:
Or beit the eternal God with his hands euer-giuing
Preventing as it were the works of men well living,
For his own honors sake, and of his only grace,
This treasure left in trust with Hebers holy race;
When as of Masons proud the rest full ill bested
A hundred thousand ways the same disfigured,
And every one dispersed where destiny them tarried
Into a newfound land a new-made language carried.
12.
Th'Ebrue tongue. He propounds five reasons, whereby he is induced to believe
that the Hebrew is the first tongue of all, whatsoever the Greek and others do
allege for themselves.

The first is, that this tongue compriseth much matter in few words, is very
significant, briefly and plainly expresses whatsoever a man can think, and
when it is requisite to discover the most secret and hidden plights of the
heart, she slippeth none, but for all things has words lively, pleasant,
weighty and of great import: and for her circuits of speech and long
discourses, they are more woonderful then the best and sweetest the Greek
has: which not withstanding her store of selfe-meaning words, her bold and
far-fetcht Epithites, her cunning Metaphores, her words compounded, her tenses
and other fine devises, is no more comparable to the other, than the chirping
of a Goldfinch is to the song of the Nightingall. Proof hereof may be made by
the earnest and diligent consideration, and waying the words, sentences, and
discourses of the Hebrew with those of the Greek, and all others: not only in
Grammars and Dictionaries, but even in whole books and volumes. It shall
suffice me to wage and lay the book of Psalms only, or the works of
Solomon, or Job, or of Esaias, against all other auctours: and I dare bouldly
avouch, that in one of these a man shall find almost in every chapter, more
elegance, state and majesty, more figures, and more of all kind of ornaments
for a discourse, than in all the tedious works of those that man's wisdom
setteth-by so much. I speak not now of the matter and substance of things,
which nevertheless is in this tongue as happily expressed as in any other; let
them strain themselves never so much, they are not able but very grossly and
a-farre-off to make a show of that which this other painteth out in orient
colors, what matter soever it has occasion to utter.

The second reason is, that the Rabbines or Hebrew Doctors (men woondrous
careful to preserve the whole body of the old Testament, so as the least
letter, point, and accent, they have counted over and again often times) have
noted in the 22. letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, either apart or together
considered, all the secrets of Divinity and of Philosophy, both natural and
moral. This is a notable thing in the Hebrew tongue, that all the letters have
their proper signification: and that the letters of most of the principal
toongs in the world have taken their beginning from them: as also that the
primitive words, and those of whom infinite others are derived in diverse
principal toongs, are drawn from the letters, syllables and words of the
Hebrew. To say nothing of the excellency of her accents, and the property of
her vowels: the Rabbines have further found out many secrets by diverse
way-turning and alter-placing the letters of Hebrew words: and that which the
Greeks and others have after their example invented, is nothing in comparison.
For there is scarce any word in the Hebrew, but being inuerted (as may easily
be done, and sometimes two, three, or four ways, as the number of the letters
are) offers to our consideration another word, either of like sense, or
contrary: or making relation to the first, gives thereto such light, beauty
and liuelihood, that it is wonderful to behold. Again, oftentimes a Nowne or
other word, yea a letter, imports a whole sentence, like unto the Egyptians
Hieroglyphikes, invented of them to the imitation of the Hebrew letters and
words, yet nothing in comparison of them. This matter would require a whole
volume, to be written according to Art, by the hand of some one that were well
seen in the toongs: and I could name three pair yet living that are well able
to do it. In the mean season, whosoever is desirous to search further herein,
let him read the Harmony of the World, written by Franciscus Georgius, and
Guido Faber: the Heptap. of Ioannes Picus, Earl of Mirandula, the
Hieroglyphickes of I. Goropius, from the beginning of the seventh book, to the
end of the sixteenth: three books of I. Reuclinus De art Cabaiistica, and
other three books of his De Verbo mirabili, the Cabala of Picus, with the
interpretations of Angelus Burgoneuensis thereupon. Further, much good matter
to this purpose a man may find in Thesauro linguae sanctae, set out by S.
Pagninus, and after augmented by many other learned professors of this tongue.
See further the Syriac Institut, etc. of Caninius: the Mithridates of C.
Gesnerus: the Alphabet in 12. toongs of Postella, and his book, De antiquitate
linguae Hebraica, there are many such Treatises set forth by diverse learned
men: whereout, and of the books aforenamed, may be gathered infinite proofs
of that which the Poet has touched in this second reason.

The third is, that there lives no nation under the cope of heaven, but
keeps still some words of Hebrew in their speech; First, the Caldean, Syrian,
Arabian, Egyptian, Persian, Ethiopian, and many other, as the Gotthicke,
Troglodytick, Punick, are so derived thence, that they come as near it as
Italian to Latin, some more, some less. Secondly, the Greek, Latin, and
those others, that are farther off, have yet here and there some words that we
must needs grant, are sprung from the same fountain: a man may set down a
many of them, but it were too long here to coat the examples. Thirdly, the
roots of many words that are taken to be Greek or some other tongue, are
found to be Hebrew, as Franciscus Iunius has plainly showed in his learned
oration De linguae Hebraeae antiquitate and praestantia.

The fourth reason is, that the doctrine of the old Testament, which is the
doctrine of the first and most ancient people of the world, was not written but
in Hebrew. No man denies that the people that came of Sem the son of Noe, is
the most ancient: among these remained the Church of God and the Hebrew tongue.
God spoke not but in the Hebrew tongue by the high priest that wore the sacred
Ephod, and the breast plate of judgment, whereon was set (...) Vrim and
Thummim (words signifying lights and perfectio^s) which some think was the
(...) or four-letered name Iehoua, contained within the breast plate: others say
it was the ranks of those twelve precious stones there enchased, that on them
had engraven the names of the twelve tribes of Israel: as if it were a
repetition of that which Moses says in the 17.18.19. and 20. verses of the 28.
chapter of Exodus, where he speaks of (...) Vrim and Thummim in the 30.
verse: others hold they were certain names: others are of diverse other
opinions. Some late writers think those words were engraven in the
breast plate: This is a secret, the search whereof (whether one dispute of the
words, or what they meant, or what is become of them, etc.) is very painful and
needless; for that now sithence the coming of Christ we ought to follow the
truth it self, and not stay upon shadows. These words doubtless gave to
understand, that all light and perfection comes of our Savior, in whom all
the fulness of the Godhead bodily dwells, in whom are hid all the treasures of
understanding and knowledge, who is the light of his Church, that is made unto
us of God his father wisdom, justice, redemption, and holiness. In all
judgments, demands, oracles, and revelations that were made by Vrim and
Thummim (as may be gathered out of the 27. chapter of Numbers, the first book
of Samuel the 13. and 30. chapters, and other places where advise and counsel
was asked of God, and answer was made by the mouth of the high priest) there
appeered a clear light, a sure truth and perfection: all which in Christ is
accomplished. Now these demands and answers were propounded and rendered in the
Hebrew tongue, long time before any other language was used in ye world. For so
soon after their scattering at Babel they could not well be incorporated into
a commonwealth: and as for religion, that was not kept but in the race of Sem,
as Moses plainly declares all through the history of Abraham. Concerning the
Prophets, their dreams and visions, God spoke not, they understood not,
neither answered or taught they the Church but in the Hebrew; that significant,
unmingled, holy, chaste and heavenly tongue; whereas others lispe and stammer out
uncertain sounds, and are infinite ways defiled through the dishonest,
foolish, erroneous, and ungodly discourses of their inuentours: I except the
books of the new Testament, and all writings drawn from the clear fountains
of holy Scripture, besides the which there is nothing but vanity, filth,
wickedness, and ungodliness in the world. Moreover, the Lord himself setting
down his law to his people, and writing it twice with his own finger, and
speaking with his own mouth to Moses and his other servants in the Mount, used
the Hebrew tongue. So did the Angels and Prophets, and Jesus Christ spoke the
Syriacke, a tongue so derived of the Hebrew, that they are very like; as their
Grammars declare. The Apostles spoke diverse toongs, and wrote also according to
the people and persons with whom they had to do: yet for all that in their
books may be noted an infinite many of phrases borrowed of the Hebrew: as the
learned interpreters of the new Testament have exactly showed.

The fifth and last reason set down by the Poet is, that the Hebrew words,
especially the proper names (some are alleged for example, and many other may
be added) are of great weight and importance: for sometimes they lay open unto
us the chief things that do befall the person so named. Nay further, if a man
would take the pains to change the order of letters, he may find in them many
goodly mysteries. The Greeks have found the way, and followed it in the
interpretation of their proper names: but they come far short of the liuelyhood
and majesty of the Hebrews, who begun the thing before them many hundred
years. As for other toongs the most part of their proper names have no
meaning; they are devised at-all auentures; so are they right tokens of
barbarism. Some toongs there are more happy and plentious than others in this
behalf: but their interpretations are for the most part uncertain, especially
if the Root thereof come not from or near the Hebrew. Heerehence again the
curious reader may take occasion of a large commentary: I leave it unto him.

13.
Then do I thee salute. It is not without cause, that the Poet straight upon
the former discourse, uses these words: considering the excellency of the
Hebrew tongue, and that he sets out in so few verses her wonderful
perfections, each one of them requiring a large treatise, and himself being
unable to shut up so great matters in so few words. For example sake let us
consider but very briefly those three points that the Poet here touches: to
wit, that the 22. Hebrew letters are full of hidden sense; that the proper
names of persons, countries, and cities in this tongue are as much as
abridgements of their life and deeds, that the names of birds, beasts and
fishes, contain the history of their natures, howbeit since the fall of Adam
the knowledge thereof is greatly darkened. To make the Reader somewhat more
desirous to enter meditation hereon, I will set him down some examples.
Concerning the mysteries of th'Hebrue Letterrow Eusebius and S. Ierom in his
Epistle ad Paul. vrbic. which is the 155. expounds them, as I shall show you
in our own tongue. The first letter (...) Aleph signifies doctrine, (...) Beth
a house, (...) Ghimel Fulness, (...) Daleth Tables, (...) He This, (...) Vau and
(...) Zain That or she there, (...) Cheth Life, (...) Teth Good, (...) Ioth
Beginning, (...) Chaph a Hand, (...) Lamed Discipline, or the Heart, (...) Mem
Theirs, or of these, (...) Nun Continual, (...) Samech Aid or succor, (...)
Ain a Spring, or an Eye, (...) Phe a Mouth, (...) Sade Justice, (...) Coph
Calling, (...) Resch a Head, (...) Schin Teeth, (...) Tau Signs. All which may
be thus put together and expounded. The doctrine of the Church, which is the
house of God, is found in the fulness of the Tables: that is, the holy
Scriptures. This doctrine and that fulness of the tables is the life; for what
life can we have without the knowledge of holy Scripture? Out of these we
learn Jesus Christ, who is the life of them that believe. And although this
knowledge be excellent and parfit in God, yet as for us, we know not but in
part, we see as it were by a glass in darkness: But when we shall ascend up into
heaven, and become like unto the Angels, then the doctrine of the house, and
the fulness of the tables of Gods truth, shall be accomplished: then shall we
see face to face the Good prince (to wit, God himself the Soueraign Good, who
is the Beginning of all things) even as he is in his own nature. In the
mean-time we must lay Hand to ye work of our Calling, by the means of a right
Discipline or a true Heart, assuring our selves that we shall find Continual
Succor in this heavenly truth, which is the Spring or Eye of the Mouth of
Justice, namely Christ our Head, whose Calling is in Signs, or marks of Teeth
or framed voice of the Scripture. I desire the ^ader to take in good part this
short Allegory that I am bo^d make upon the Hebrew letters; and if he desire
more in this kind; let him repair to the Roots of the essential words of
these letters, there may he view the matter more at large. For this time it
shall suffice to have shot this arrow at ye mark our Poet aimed at.

Now for the second point touching the names of several men, of nations and
cities, I will note you a couple of examples of each: (...) Abraham signifies
A father of many, so was his household much increased temporally and
spiritually, he is the father of all the Believers, whose number is
vncountable. (...) Moses signifies Taken out of the waters, so was he by
Pharoes daughter, when his mother, loath to have him slain according to the
kings cruel commandment, had laid him forth in a pitched flasket by the
rivers brinke, Exodus 2. By him also God guided his people through the waters of
the red sea, and wrought many miracles. The Arabians are a people who even at
this day have no certain place of abode, they wander still up and down the
champion countries and wilderness, they are famous thieves, and lurking in
secret places make often sallies out upon their neighbors, and set upon all
passengers unawares. Their name comes of the Verb (...) Arab, by Ain in the
first conjugation (...) Hearib, which signifies to mingle day and night
together: and because that in a desert and waste place all things are confused,
as if day and night were mingled together, therefore the country for the
situation is called Arabia. This Verb agrees right with another (...) Arab,
written by Aleph, which signifies to lie in ambush, or to lurk in dens as
thieves and ravening beasts do. The Egyptians in the Scripture are called
(...) Mitsraim because of their strong holds and places of defense, that have
been long amongst them: the primitive word is (...) Tsor that signifies to
Trusse close together: In some places of Scripture Egypt is called (...) Rahab,
that signifies Proud: so ind^^d they have always been high-minded and greater
braggers than any other people. Now for cities (...) Jerusalem signifies The
vision of peace, and just according to the truth: for the peace and grace of
God has been seen and continued vp^ (...) place many hundred years, and
chiefly because it has (...) figure of the Church militant and triumphant; as
often mention is made of the new and heavenly Jerusalem. Babylon comes of the
word (...) Babel, which is derived of the Verb (...) Balal to confound,
mingle, or trouble, as water when it is mudded. For so indeed the earthy Babel,
that was in Chaldaea, has made a hotchpotch of the world: and that Babel, the
spiritual, that is spoken of in the Revelation, has made so many confusions,
that it is impossible to name them all.

There remains the third point, touching Birds, foure-footed beasts, and
fishes, whereof and every of them I will name two only, for a pattern, least
I seem too long in the annotations. The Storke, so commended for her love
toward those by whom she received life, is called (...) Chasida, that is to
say, dutiful, loving, and religious. The Eagle is called Nescher that comes
near to Shor and (...) Iashar, the one signifies to look, the other to be
rightful: and this bird of all other has the sharpest sight, and looks
against the sun. There is further a lively description of this bird in the
39. chapter of Job, as also of the Austrich, and many other in diverse places of
Scripture. The horse, called (...) Sus, is thought to come of the Verb (...)
Nasas, if rather this Verb be not thence derived, which signifies to advance
himself: for it is the brauest and fiercest of all other foure-footed beasts:
as Job finely describes him in the 39. chapter. The Hebrews have three names
for a Lion; (...) Arieh, (...) Labi and Laijsch: the first comes of a Verb
that signifies to snatch, and tear in sunder: the second of the word (...)
Leb, that signifies the Heart, and (...) Laab, to be in solitary and desert
places: the third is commonly interpreted a great and roaring Lion, not unlike
the Verb (...) Losh, that signifies to surprise or devour, for tha^ ^his
beast rampeth-vpon and swalloweth up his pray. The ^hales and great fishes are
called (...) Thannim, Snakes, Ser^nts, or Dragons, because they are of a great
length, and turn and fould themselves every way, and are no less dangerous in
the sea than serpents and dragons on the land. In the 40. chapter of Job that
great fish is called (...) Leuiathan, which some de^ of the Verb (...) Lauah,
which signifies to borrow or take (...) ^or his recreation: because the Whale
seems to play up (...) down the sea, as in a place borrowed for recreation.
The C^^codile, that lives both on land and water, is called (...) Hatsa^ and
seems to come of the word (...) Tsab, which signifies the covering of a
Chariot, because this mighty creature has so long and so thick a skin.
Moreover, th'Hebrues of the whole kind of fishes speak commonly as if they
were of another world, because they are so far parted and severed from the
sight and conversation of men: they make three sorts of them, which they
express by the words (...) Dagh, (...) Thannim, and (...) Leuiathan. This have
I added the more to show the liuelihood and natural importance of this tongue,
and heerewith I will content my self at this time, desiring that some other,
stirred up by my example, would take this matter in hand, and discourse of it
better and more at large.

14
For when Adam. Moses says plainly, in the 19. and 20. verses of the second
Chapter of Genesis: That God made all the beasts of the field, and fowls of
the heaven come before Adam, to see how he would name them, and that howsoever
he named every thing living, so was the name thereof. The Man therefore gave
names unto all Cattaile, and to the Fowls of heaven, and to every Beast of the
field. The wisdom, wherewith our first father was endued before his fall,
imports thus much, that he should give meet and couenable names unto all
creatures under his dominion: and although the knowledge and search of birds
and beasts names be hard, because of the weakness of man's judgment now since
his fall, yet is it not impossible, as men well seen in the Hebrew tongue have
already showed.

15
15 And for each Body. Adam a man parfitly wise before he sinned, gave not
only meet names to all creatures, that were (in a manner) the moouables and
instruments of his house, and of this great shop of the world, whereof the Lord
had made him master; but further enriched his language with all manner of
ornaments that might be required to make it parfit: So that before his fall he
spoke more eloquently than any mortal man since. After he had sinned, entered
ignorance into his understanding, and frowardnes into his affections: which
have made the speech of him and his posterity unfitting, vnparfit, deceiuable,
and often false, even in humane and indifferent things, yea such sometime as we
most curiously study upon: But the grace of God, the long life of this
Patriarch, and his fresh remembrance of the woondrous things that he had seen
in the Garden of Eden, have brought to pass doubtless, that the conversation,
instruction, reports and authority of so great a personage, had a marvelous
force to persuade and teach all those that were in his school. For from him
had we first our Arts and Sciences derived, and especially the knowledge of the
true God. And although since his time the things have been more and more
illightened and parfited, yet must we needs confess that Adam was the first
teacher of them. Who so desires to know the depth of his wisdom, let him at
his leisure meditate upon the four first Chapters of Genesis, and he will
confess there is contained the sum of all that all men have known, or shall
unto the worlds end. Now out of all doubt it is, that Adam taught his children
and their posterity all these things exactly. But Moses, by the direction of
the spirit of God, thought it sufficient to represent only the ground of
things: otherwise the world neither had nor would ever be able to contain the
books that might be made upon these four first Chapters.

16
This tongue that Adam spoke. The first world continued 1656. years. Adam lived
930. years, his posterity kept his language, and although they possessed with
their tents and dwellings a large piece of ground, yet is there no place of
Scripture to be found, whereout may be gathered any proof of the diversity of
toongs before the flood. There being then but one, it must needs be the same
that Adam taught his children: as may also appear by this, that all proper
names until the flood are Hebrew. Noe the true son of Adam retained and
spoke this tongue, and taught it his children. And although three or four score
years before the flood they began to spread abroad themselves, and corruption
grew more and more among them (as by that may be gathered, that is written of
Nimrod and Asshur, and the children of Cham, Genesis the 10.) yet in the
beginning of the eleventh Chapter Moses witnesses that at what time they, that
came to dwell in the plain of Sennaar, spoke of building the City and Tower
afterward called Babel, all the earth was one language and one speech: which I
understand not only of those that dwelt in the plain of Sennaar, but of all
people then living in the world. It is likely that they that came out of the
East countries, and settled themselves in Sennaar were a great number. They
spoke Hebrew, but when confusion befell their tongue, some drew one way, others
another way, and by continuance of time their Hebrew varying by means of their
separation was embased, and every several people had their language apart. As
for such as were not mingled in this disorder, namely the families of Sem, or
the most part of them, they kept the original and primitive tongue, whereof
Heber was the chief professor at the confusion of Babel; and thence it
comes (as it is thought) that the tongue was called Hebrew, and the people
Hebrews; as Abraham in whose family that speech remained, is surnamed an
Hebrew. The Poet, with some interpretours, leaves it in doubt whether Heber was
among the builders of Babel, or dwelt apart. I think with some others, that he
was not of the number, but hearing how the Tower-builders were scattered, he
gave the name of Peleg (that is, Division) to his son that then was borne:
because (says Moses, Genes. 10.25.) that in his time the earth was divided.
Thus much of the Hebrew tongue, which was after preserved by Moses and the high
Priests, the Judges, Kings and Prophets. Now let us consider what the Poet
says further as touching those other toongs, that first arising of the Hebrew,
were after the confusion a hundred thousand ways altered and disguised by the
nations living asunder, who themselves invented, and carried new words and
language, each to the place of their abode.

The first languages derived from the Hebrew are each of them again divided
into diverse others.
17 But softly-sliding Age, that envious all does wast,
Those ancient languages soon every one defaced
That in the thundering sound of masons clattring hands,
By Tygris banks devised, had ouerspred the lands:
And, that the world might be more out of order left,
Into a many toongs the least of them has cleft.
Whence comes the alteration of a tongue.
18 Each language alters, beit for that merchandise
Imparting unto us the treasures of great prise
From azur'd Amphitrite, and sending ours aboard,
Bold with a good success, often changes word for word:
Or that the learned man ingenuously endighting
With guilt and curled words tricks up his wanton writing.
And hunting after praise some stamp nere seen before
Sets both on deeds and things, or does at least restore
Disclaimed words to use, and makes again be borne
Those that with ouer-age, with rot and mould were worn.
With them it falls out, as with leaves in a wood,
One falls, another grows; the words that once were good,
And, like fair Lilly flowers in greenest meadow strewn,
Quite through the learned speech their glittring beuty showed,
Now are not in request; but since Court them exiles,
Ashamed they shroud themselves under base cottage tiles:
And those that long-ago were censured curiously
For base and counterfeit, now pass on currantly.
19 A courage bold led with discretion fortunate
May license words to pass, although they but of late
Were forged in his shop, among plants natural
May graffe some foreign imps, his language therewithal
Enriching more and more, and with a diverse gloss
Enameling his talk, his Muses task, or prose.
Some language has no law, but Use headstrong and blind,
That runs wheresoere the people light as wind
Goes headlong driving it: another closely running
Within the bounds of Art, her phrases frames with cunning:
Some one straight waxing old as soon as it is borne
The cradle has to grave, another is not worn
With file of many years; some lives ill bested
Within a straight precinct for ever prisoned,
Another bouldly does from Alexanders altar
Among the learned stretch unto the mount Gibraltar.
Such now the Hebrew tongue, the Greek and Latin be; Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin the best of all toongs.

Hebrew, for still she holds, and by her hand hold we,
The Word, the sacred Word of God thrise-eternall,
And was of Laws divine the true original:
The Greek, as one that has within her learned writ
Plainly comprised all the knowledge of man's wit.
And valiant Latin eke, because her eloquence
By sword was planted through the worlds circumference.
17.
But softly-sliding Age. The Poet here enters into consideration of other
toongs beside the Hebrew: and says these first toongs that begun in Babel,
being all (as it were) Meslins of Hebrew, by tract of time are so worn out,
that each one of them has engendered a many others, as a man may quickly
understand, if he consider the great variety of ancient people that were
before the Greeks and Latins. It shall suffice at this present thus to have
pointed hereat in a word. Who-so is desirous of more, let him cast his eye upon
the three first and principal Monarchies, and all the diverse nations subject
unto them, and mentioned in the Chronicles of the world: the Abridgement of
all is to be found in the first Volume of the Historical library of N.
Vignier.

18.
Each language alters. He shows by diverse reasons whence comes the change
of toongs. First, the traffic that one country people has with another, as
well by sea (which he calls, Th'azur'd Amphitrite) as also by land, is cause
why we learn some new words, as if we made no less exchange of words than of
wares. Secondly, a writer that dares venture, and is desirous to enrich his
mother-toong, decketh it boldly with that which he borrows of others, sets
forgotten words on foot again, inuenteth new words, coloring and fashioning
them according. Thirdly, time alters a speech; as we see it does all things
else, that we might be forced thereby daily more and more to see and confess,
that nothing is sure and steadfast under heaven; and to beat down also the
vanity of man's conceit, who commonly vaunteth himself and takes pride in
such things as have nothing constant in them but their own inconstancy.

19.
A courage bold. This comes too near the second reason to be counted a
fourth. The French Commentar must pardon me; I think rather the Poet having
spoken of Writers, Merchandise and Time, the right and only means whereby new
words and phrases are first brought into a language: here he shows us how
they are accepted, for as before he touched in a word that the Courts dislike
of old words bred their disuse; so here he tells us plainly that the
authority of him, that deuiseth or uses new words, is cause of their
acceptance: which is afterward confirmed by use, Quem penes arbitrium est, and
vis and norma loquendi: as Horace writes. But forasmuch as use without Art
draws a language headlong into Barbarism, and so out of request, and Art
without authority of Empire, shuts it up in a narrow compass, he says,
that the Hebrew, Latin, and Greek, had all these maintaining means, whereby
they have continued so long, and spread so far abroad. So begins he cunningly
to make his passage from words and phrases unto entire languages, the better to
come at length to that excellent discourse, that follows in the next Section,
upon all the principal toongs now spoken or known in the world. As for the
Hebrew, besides the perfections above mentioned, he says, in it God has
revealed his will, and that it is the original of the divine Law: both of
great force to make the tongue far known, and continue long: it had further
the Art and knowledge of high Priests and Prophets, the wisdom and state of
Solomon, and was a long time used and accustomed to be spoke in the famous
co^monwelth of the Jews. But these because they belong not unto that tongue
only, but as well to the other two, the Poet here leaves out. The Greek he
says, in her books contains at large all the liberal Sciences: a great
cause and most proper to the Greek: the rest as common to the others are let
pass. The Latin more grave and forcible than the Greek (that was a more neat
and wanton tongue) was advanced and continued in request by the Romans force of
arms: whose Empire was the greatest and most warlike of all the rest; and
therefore is this cause here only mentioned, as most proper to the Latin
tongue, and the rest omitted. These three toongs do at this day far surpass
all others; but ungodliness and contempt of the true Divinity, is cause why
the Hebrew is not esteemed as it deserves: the more is it regarded of the^
that know it. As for the Greek, that which is now commonly spoken is very
gross. The pure and good Greek is contained within the books of Plato,
Aristotle, Zenophon, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Homer, Euripides, Sophocles,
Plutarch, Basil, Nasianzen, Chrysostom, and many others. The Latin, after
some ignorant and unlearned men had greatly embased it, was restned and set on
foot again within these foure-score years, at what time there flourished
many great and learned personages in Europe, as Melancthon, Erasmus, Picus
Myrand. and others: but they come short of that grace and liuelihood that the
ancient Latin writers have: Cicero, Caesar, Liuie, Virgill, Horace, and a
number of others well enough known: of whom (as also of the most excellent
authors in other toongs) the Poet here goes about to entreat.

The Poets takes breath to enter afresh into the next discourse, where by way
of a Vision, he cunningly describes the principal toongs, with their best
authors.
20 Tracing these latter lines, half tired as I were
With this entising pain of heavenly Pallas Lere,
Still now and then I strike my chin upon my breast,
And softly both mine eyes begin to close to rest,
Moist with Ambrosian dew; knit is my senses band,
And fairly slides my pen forth of my fainting hand.
Upon my flattring couch I spread my self again,
And plunge in Lethe-streame all troubles of my brain:
There drown I all my cares, save one, that with no trance
Is discontinued, to please and profit France.
The sacred Forge of Love, that me enflamed keeps,
Will not let sleep my soul although my body sleeps.
21 And golden-winged Dream rising in th'Easterne shore
Forth at his Christ all gate, a little while before
The Day-gate opened, into a Valley fair
Me led fantastical, where day and nights fresh air,
The north winds and the south, the drought and th'Ises mother
The fair days and the foul, came not one after other:
There May did always reign, and Zephirus bedight
With Rosy coronets, blew nicely day and night
A woods soft-rustling boughs, that blossoms sweet did yield
A description of the seat and image of eloquence.
And Oualwise bewall'd the flowr-embroidred field.
22 Just in the midst of all this Ammel-blooming glade
Raisd was a mighty Rock, in footstall manner made:
Upon the top thereof a brasfe Colosse did stand,
That in the left hand held a flaming fierbrand,
An Ewer in the right; out from her golden tongue
A thousand little chains all ore the meadow sprung,
That worlds of hearers drew, fine wrought by subtle art,
Some linked by the ears, and some fast by the Heart.
The Boar lay at her feet, nor foming, nor enraged,
There slept the Tigre charmed, and Bears their fume assuaged:
The neighbor Hillocks leapt, the Woods reioiced round,
Even daunsing as it were at her sweet voices sound.
A double circled row of pillars high and dight
By cunning workmans hand after the Carian right,
With bases vnderpinn'd for their more sure foundation,
Beset this rauishing Image of sweet Oration:
And four by four bore up amid them one language
Of those that flourish most in this our learned age.
23 Among the blessed wits, 6. The Hebrew.
to whom heaven gave the grace
That they should underprop the Hebrew in this place
The man whose face did shine like to a blasing star
Heau'n-decking, fraying-men; that for a Scepter bar
A scare, yet budding rod, and in his fingers hent
The ten-fold register of Gods Commandment;
He guides Israel, he left authority
First both of prose and verse to his posterity.
Such holy writings as not only long fore-run
The writings of the Greeks, but all that they have done.
The second David is, whose touch right cunningly
Combined with his voice draws down sweet harmony
From th'organized heavens, on Harp that still shall sound
As long as days great star shall ore our heads go round.
Nay farther who can tell, after these heavenly Lights
Their Measures ended have, but that the blessed Sprights,
Christ's holy champions, at sound of his accords
Shall dance in honor of the Almighty Lord of Lords:
When many legions of Angels, winged ghosts,
Shall sing holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts.
The third is Solomon, whose goodly monuments
Are wisely powdered with more store of documents
And golden sentences, than does his diadem
With Diamondes and Pearls, and fiery Rubies beam.
The fourth is Amos son, that has the Graces all,
Devout and full of threats, grave and Rhetorical.
2. The Greek.
24 The Greek Homer vpholds, that sweetly versifies,
Whose learned School brought forth a many companies
Of old Philosophers, that made his cunning plea
The world to ouerflow like some great Ocean sea.
And Plato all Divine, who like the Bird we call
The Bird of Paradise, soyles not himself at all
With earth or waters touch; but, more than Hels descent
Surmounted is by Heaven, surmounts the firmament.
And smooth Herodotus; and he of pleaders Arts
The Law, Demosthenes; gold-mouthed, king of hearts.
3. The Latin.
25 Then he of Anthony and Catiline great foe
That lightneth and thundreth, and from whose breast does flow
A thousand streaming floods, wherein the rarest wits
Daily torment themselves, surprised with maruaile-fits.
And Caesar, that can do as well as he can plead;
And Salust full of force; and he that Troy does lead
Again to Tybers banks, a writer sent from heaven,
That never shuts his eyes to sleep morning nor even,
That ever treads sure, always plain, always grave,
Shamefac'dly venterous and temperately brave,
That still is like himself, and unlike others all:
These bear the sweete-graue tongue was last imperial.
4. The Italian.
The Italian founded is on Boccace pleasurous;
On Petrarch finely dight, bold and sententious;
On Ariosto smoothe, diverse, in passions feirce;
And Tasso, worthy man to write heroic verse,
Sharp, short, fyl'd, figured, with language flowing fast,
The first to be esteemed albeet he wrote the last.
5. The Arabian.
27 The language Arabic is mightily sustained
By Auerroes great, deepe-reaching subtill-brained:
By faire-spoke Auicen, and Eldebag satyricall;
By smooth Ibnu-farid, pleasant and allegorical.
28 The Dutch depends on the famous Michell Buther, 6. The Dutch.

That Sleidan turned to Dutch; and next on Martin Luther.
Witbergs and Islebe's fame, and on my Butrick next,
And last of Peucer sweet, that dooble-guilds his text.
29 Then Gueuare, and Boscan, Grenade, and Gracilas, 7. The Spanish.

With Nectar all distaind, that mantleth in the glass
Of honny-powring pyth, uphold the Castillan,
And had not the ancient grace of speaking Catallan,
Osias ravished, his learning might have bore
The Spanish Laurel from one of the foresaid four.
30 The speech of Englishmen has for her strong pillars
Three Knights, Bacon and More, they two Lord Chancellers, 8. The English.

Who knitting close their tongue raised it from infancy,
And coupled eloquence with skill in policy:
Sir Philip Sydney third, who like a Cignet sings
Fair Tham'ses swelling waves beating with silver wings:
This stream with honor filled his eloquence does bear
Into dame Thetis lap, and Thetis eu'ry-where.
31 But what new Sun is this that beameth on mine eyes?
What? am I wrapped amongst the heavenly companies? For the fourth pillar of the
English tongue he names our gracious Queen Elizabeth, duly and truly praising
her for wisdom, maintenance of peace, learning, and eloquence.

O what a princely grace! what state imperial!
What pleasant lightning eyes! what face Angelical!
Ye learned daughters of him that all governs,
Is It not that Pallas wise, the great Elizabeth:
That makes the sturdie men of England nothing bent
For man's empire to change a woman's government?
Who whiles Erynnis, loath to tarry long in Hell,
Her neighbor kingdoms all with fire and sword does quell,
And whiles the dark affright of tempest roring-great
Does to the worlds Carack a fearful shipwreck threat,
Holds in happy peace her Isle, where true belief,
And honorable laws are reck'ned of in chief:
That has not only gift of plenty delectable
To speak her mother-toong, but readily is able
In Latin, Spanish, French, without premeditation,
In Greek, Italian, Dutch, to make as good oration,
As Greece can, as can France, as Rome imperial,
As Rhine, as Arne can, plead in their natural.
O bright pearl of the North, martial, Mars-conquering,
Love still and cherish Arts, and hear the Muses sing:
And incase any time my verses winged-light
Shall over the Ocean sea to thine Isle take their flight,
And by some happy chance into that fair hand slide,
That does so many men with lawful scepter guide:
View them with gracious eye and favorable thought,
I want thine eloquence to praise thee as I ought.
9. The French.
32 But what are these of France? this countenance is vnshap'd
Hence has the bungler hand of idle Mason scraped
Only the harder scales of every rugged knot;
It Is Clement Marot sure that labors so hot
Artist like without art, and pricked with Phoebus lance
Transporteth Helicon from Italy to France.
Marot I honor thee like as an old Colosse
All soiled, all-to-broke, all ouergrow'n with moss,
Worn pictures, tombs defaced, not so for their beauty
As in devour regard of their antiquity.
What one this other is I scarce remember me;
A cunning one he seems what one so ere he be.
Still rest I in suspense, sometime he does appear
To be James Amiot, sometime Blase Viginiere.
Great Ronsard is the next, that does of graces wrong
The Greek and Latin both, to grace his mother-toong,
And with a courage bold does manage happily
All kind of argument in prose and poetry.
De Mornay this man is, that combats Atheism,
Jews stubborn unbelief, and foolish Paganism,
With weapons of their own, he godly, grave, settled,
Stifneth so well his style, plain eke and flourished,
That pregnant reasons of his winged words, like darts,
Deeply instrike themselves into all gentle hearts.
Then thus I spoke to them. O bright, O goodly wits,
The Poets desire considering the learned writers of France.
Who in most happy case have consecrate your writs
To immortality! since that my feeble shoulders
May not among-ye be the French glories vphoulders;
Alas! since I can scarce look after you so hie
As is the double mount approaching to the sky,
Yet suffer me at least here prostrate to embrace
Your honorable knees, grant me at-least the grace
On your bright-shining heads to guirlond Aprils spring;
Grant of your gentleness that these base tunes I sing
May in your glory get an everlasting glory,
And that always my verse may register your story.
They granting my request made semblance with their head, The end of the Vision.

So vanished the vale, and all the pillars fled:
So likewise had the Dream with them together hasted,
But that I with mine ink his nimble feathers pasted.
20.
Tracing these latter lines. Before he ends this Book or discourse, having
begun to speak of toongs, and their comparison one with another; he takes
thence occasion to set before our eyes the three principal toongs, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, accompanied with six other greatly now-a-daies esteemed
throughout all Europe. For this purpose, and to enrich his poem with some new
ornament, worthy the things he treats of; he declares, how being weary
with ouer-watching himself in these his former studies, he cast him on his bed
and slept; yet so as the earnest desire he had to delight and profit his
countrymen, kept still his soul awake; which caused him to see in his Dream
the Vision here following. A fine invention and framed to the imitation of the
best ancient Poets both Greek and Latin, who, being to handle matters of
great importance, are wont by such devises cunningly to provoke the readers to
mark and give ear unto them.

21.
And golden-winged Dream. Of Dreams and their causes has been spoken
sufficiently in the first day of this second Week, entitled Eden, Page the
46. 47. 48. etc. having here to speak of a Dream clear and easy to be
conceived, he distinguishes it from such as are darksome and deceiuable,
saying it was about the dawning of the day when the golden-winged (that is, the
sweet, pleasant, and untroubled) Dream came forth at the Crystal gate in
the East: as much to say, as when the day star arises, or the morning
draws on, we feel (if we were awake before) sleep gently seazing on us, and
our spirits coming and going as it were through crystal gates: for then be
dreams and visions cleerest and best distinguished; whereas before our meat
be fully digested, our brain ouerloden with vapors, receives but troublesome
impressions, waued so to and fro, and so enterlaced one with another, that in
the twinkling of an eye, it frames a thousand shapes, that presently vanishes
away and are no more remembered. Now the Poet says, he was guided (as he
thought) into a place most delightful, which he describes in few verses, and
it is very fit for the matter following.

22.
Just in the middle point. First he describes the dwelling of Eloquence: to
wit, on a great Rock, wrought and fashioned in manner of a footestall, or base
for an Image to stand on: to show how steadfast and certain a thing this
excellent gift of God is. Secondly, the resemblance or Image of Eloquence, he
calls a Colosse, that is, of stature surpassing all others: which betokens
thus much, that eloquent and fair spoken men go many degrees beyond others,
whom they use at their pleasure, and draw whither they list, as the examples of
Pericles and Cicero declare, and many proofs thereof are found in the holy
Scripture. He makes this Image of Brass, which implies the fair gloss, the
sweet sound and strong force of Eloquence; he places in the left hand a
firebrand, to signify that learned, true, and fair vttrance makes men see
and touch (as it were) the right nature of things: in the right hand an Ewer,
because the speech of the wise dampeth and puts out the flame of passions. I
might note hereof many examples, but I leave them for the diligent Reader to
search: meaning here to offer him but Annotations, which I fear already are
grown too long. The little chains that come forth from the Images golden
tongue, and draw such a number of hearers by the ears and heart, signify the
great power of a well framed speech: the truth whereof appears chiefly in
preaching the word, in counsels of grave common wealths-men, and orations of
good Magistrates and valiant Captains. In this manner did the ancient Frenchmen
paint and set out their Hercules surnamed Ognius: whereupon Alciat has made a
pretty Emblem) it is the 180. expounded at large by Cl. Minos. The sum of al
is, that Eloquence is to be preferred before force. Our Poet aims at that
description. Further concerning the Bore, the Tygre, and the Bear lying tame
at the feet of this Image, it signifies that a pleasant and learned speech
appeaseth all angry, cruel, and savage men; and even the maddest and most
brutish people in the world: it makes the woods and hills to dance and leap:
that is to say, it moves, bends and instructs very block-heads, and such
as are most hard of understanding; and this may be the meaning of those fained
tales of Amphion, Orpheus, Arion, and other like. Lastly, this Image is
environed with a double rank of pillars, well and strongly grounded and
vnder-pinned, that bear up in due proportion the nine languages following,
each by her own chief authors and maintainers. For every pillar was wrought
in fashion of a man, and framed to the countenance of one of their best writers
in a long gown, or stole. And that is the meaning of the French a la
Cariatide: After the Carian right: as Vitruuius writes at large in this first
Chapter of his first book of Architecture. This I note because the French
Commentar lets it pass and it troubled my self to understand it at the first.

23.
Among the blessed wits. For chief props of the Hebrew tongue (which he places
in the fore front of Eloquence, as in every regard it was meet, whether we
consider the sweet gravity, the natural impliance, the shortness, hautines,
liuelyhood of it, or the sincerity, holiness, light, and heavenly majesty) he
names first Moses, because he is the most ancient of those whose writings in
this tongue are extant. As for the book of the Prophecy of Henoch, it was lost
a long time ago. He describes this holy Law-writer after an excellent manner,
as was requisite in a discourse of Eloquence. His face shines like a blasing
Star: alluding to that in the Scripture that Moses coming down from the
mount where he had talked with God, his face so shined, that none was able to
behold his countenance; insomuch as he was feign to wear a veil over it: the
rest is very easy to be understood, especially of such as have never so
lightly turned over the History. Now for the books of Moses, they were
written many hundred years before the Greeks were known: who were not heard
of in the world but a little before the reign of Saul, and had but few works
in writing, or none at all, till after the time of Solomon, as their own
Histories witness, whosoever will take pains to turn them over. Naie further,
all their knowledge came from the Egyptians, Phenicians and others, who had
learned somewhat by conuersing with the Hebrews. And to come again to Moses,
he has been in marvelous account with infinite Heathen writers. If any have
lightly regarded, or found fault with him, it was either because they
understood him not at all, or maliced him exceedingly, which a man may easily
find in their writings. The second author of the Hebrew he counts David,
whose Psalms he speaks much of in few lines, but little it is in comparison
of their excellency, whereof many ancient and late writers have spoken notable
things: I will not heap them up here, assuring my self that all true
Christians will grant me that the Book of David's Psalms is (as Saint Basil
says) the Storehouse and treasury of all good learning, for all men to come
at; and will confess with Saint Jerome and S. Chrysostom, that nothing better
becomes a man, be he Peasant or Craftes-man, great or small, than to sing
unto the Lord the praises and thanksgiving in these excellent songs contained:
the very lively and true Anatomies of a believing soul. O how cursed and
abominable before God and his Church are those wicked ones, that have forbidden
Christians the understanding and use of them, and banished them out of
Christendom: that have suffered, allowed, maintained, commanded and commended
unto the people these shameful and wanton Poesies, these books of vanity,
error, and leasings, which with their authors deserve the fire: and not the
quiet and peaceable persons, that call upon Jesus Christ, and believe
steadfastly the life everlasting. The soul that fears God will not take this
my digression ill, nor think it needless: As for the ungodly, let them spit
at it, if they will, I regard them not. The third author and ornament of the
Hebrew is reckoned Solomon in his Proverbs, the book of the Preacher, and the
Song of Songs, books more besprinckled with golden words and notable
sentences, than his crown was with precious stones and pearls embossed.
Happy is the man that takes delight to mark and daily think upon so
profitable and necessary instructions. The fourth is the Prophet Esaias the
son of Amos, right such a one as the Poet has described. These four he
thought sufficient to name, because they have most writings extant, and are
withal exceeding eloquent, as might easily be proved by particulars, if I
were to write a Commentary, or a whole discourse thereof.

24.
The Greek. Homer, his Illias and Odyssea containing 48. books, is the most
ancient Greek Auctor we have: his inventions are wonderful, his vain
natural, his verses smoothe, and full of Art, and the more they are
considered, the greater grace they have. There is also in them a hidden sense,
and the very welspring of all humane knowledge; as may appear by that infinite
pieces of his poesies are cited in the books of ancient and late Philosophers,
Geographers, Historiographers and Orators, as Plutarch and others witness. The
next to Homer is Plato, not in time but in worthiness: he is called the divine
Philosopher, because he is so marvelous pure, so high and lofty in all his
discourses; the true scholar of him that professing himself to know but one
thing, namely that he knew nothing, declared that he knew all things that might
be learned in the world, as touching the world. For concerning the knowledge
of salvation, Plato and his master both were ignorant: and since all other
knowledge is nothing in comparison of that, (the more are we bound to God that
have it) he said most truly, that he knew nothing. The third is Herodotus, who
writes in the Ionick Dialect, that is a kind of Greek differing a little in
phrases and pronuntiation from the common-spoken, as some far situate shires
do from the Court or mother City of their Country: in diverse points it
agrees with the French. Plutarch deals somewhat too roughly with this
worthy Historiographer, in whose defense I will oppose the authority of a
learned man of our time: who in a certain Preface of his, says of Herodotus:
Narrationes eius sunt disertae, indicationes expressae, speciosae,
explicationes accuratae and euidentes, collectiones certa atque plenae, in his
rerum gestarum, hominum, temporum fides, accurata compertorum relatio, dubiorum
coniectura sagax, fabulosorum verecunda commemoratio, mira vbique simplicitas,
and eximius quidam candor. See the great praises, and perfections of a grave
Historiographer. The fourth is Demosthenes, the prince of Greek Orators, the
very rule and square of all that endeavor to speak eloquently, a man that
leads other men's minds as he list, excellent in all his discourses: which
are extant, the most of them, and read to the great use and profit of those
that know how to apply them.

25.
Then he of Anthony and Catiline great foe. That is Cicero, surnamed the
father of Eloquence: he is the first and chief of those that grace and
maintain the Latin tongue. He was extremely hated of Mark Anthony and
Catiline, both whom he has also bitterly pursued and touched to the quick, as
his Catilinarie and Philippick Orations declare: the often printing of his
works, and learned men's continual reading of them, and borrowing thence the
best graces of their writings, do prove his learning, eloquence and plenty of
speech to be such as the Poet here describes. The second is Caesar, the most
valiant of eloquent men, and most eloquent of valiant men, as may well appear
by his life in Plutarch, and his Commentaries de bello Gallico: by which work
he has wrung the pen out of learned men's hands, and in a manner discouraged
them al from writing Histories, because they see such perfection therein, as
they are not able to come near. The third is the Historiographer Salust: we
have of his works, besides diverse Orations, two Histories remaining, Coniuratio
Catilinae: and bellum Iugurthinum, short they are, but full of sentence and
sinews, witnessing the ancient force and vigor of the Roman tongue. The Reader
may hereto add the commendations of these three authors, as they are in many
learned books of late writers here and there scattered. As for those that
think Cicero bableth without learning, and that Caesar the Dictatour and first
Emperor wrote not these Commentaries that bear his name, and that Salust
writes a hard and forced style: because their accusations are false, and they
so far out of the way, I think them worthy none other answer, than our
Poets few verses here. Of the fourth, which is the Poet Virgil: too much cannot
be spoken: his books of Georgickes and Aeneidos, being such marvelous works,
and so far exceeding all other books of humanity: I speak not only for
the excellence of his verse; but sure in the depth of his inventions, his
judgment, his decence, his modesty, his gravity, and his state, how much he
does outstrip and go beyond al others, may be seen not only in every book of
his, but even in every verse; wherein is contained a thousand thousand secrets,
and as it were the abridgement of all kind of Arts and knowledge; besides his
proper terms, his Epythites always fit, his metaphors and figures sow'n and
sprinkled in their right places, and his speech quite throughout eloquent and
pure, without any bodging or dawberie whatsoever. The learned Caesar Scaliger
among many others, has plainly and at large declared in his Art of Poetry,
the excellency of this Author.

26.
The Italian. For ornament of the Italian, a language risen of the Roman or
Latin, he names three Poets and one Orator, slipping diverse writers of
history and Secretaries, that have left diverse excellent works, Orations, and
Epistles among us. The reason is (I think) because these four contain in
them all the graces of the others. He names also the Tuscan tongue, because of
all the diverse Dialects of Italy the Luquish, Milanish, Geneuish, and
Venetian, none are so pure and fine as the Florentine or Tuscan. John Boccace
has written long time ago, but a very fine and pure style; as his Decameron,
his Fiametta, the Philocope, The Laberinth, and his other books witness, that
with the world are in so great request. Frauncis Petrarch has written since,
and invented goodly words, and partly by his own pregnant wit, partly by
imitation of all the best Auctors, has enriched the tongue with many graces: he
has ventured also far and made Sonets, Chapters, and Cantoes wonderful
curious. Then Ludouico Ariosto of Ferara has set forth a legend of Love,
entitled Orlando furioso, in verses sweet and meet, famous throughout all
Italy, he is full of affections in his discourse, and as delightful as is
possible, by reason of the variety of that fabulous matter he writes of,
which he shadoweth so cunningly, that the reader is therewith often affected
and moved, as if it were a true story, or at least not altogether false.
Torquato Tasso is last of the four in time of writing, but in account (as the
Poet says) the first and chief: he was the son of Bernardo Tasso that
eloquent man, whose excellent Epistles are in print. This his son has
written in twenty books or Cantoes, of stately verse a poem, the best of all
Italians, entitled Gierusalemme liberata, all the graces and riches of the
Greeks and Latins are there gathered together, and wrought into it after the
best manner, so grave, so short, so learned, so comely, so lively, so stately,
as if it were the work of another Virgil. There are also Printed at Ferrara,
three volumes of his works, containing other kinds of verse, and all sorts of
fine inventions, a Comedy, a Tragedy, diverse Dialogues and discourses in
prose, all are worth reading, and all make good the judgment that our Poet
has given of the Author.

27.
The language Arabike. This language is comen of the Hebrew: among other
learned men's books that have made this tongue of account, we have the works of
Aben Rois, that is, the son of kings: for Ben signifies a son, in Hebrew;
and the Arabians add to the beginning this preposition A, and sometime Al. This
Aben Rois is the same that we commonly call Auerroes, the Commentar, a very
excellent Philosopher. He has commented upon most of Aristotle, and is
translated into Latin, printed at Venice; the work does show the deep reach
and subtle brain of the man. Auicen was a great Philosopher and Physician, as
his writings also declare. Gesner says Auerroes was of Cordway, and Auicen of
Seuill, and so I think: but it appears by their works that they were both
Arabians, and professed the superstition of Mahomet. As for Eldebag, Johannes
Leo writes of him in the fifth book of his description of Affrike. This poet
borne at Malaga in Grenade, of great name thorough all the parts of Buggie and
Thunes, was very eloquent in the Arabian tongue, and wonderful sharp in
railing on those that did him hurt: he made the men of Tebesse feel it in a
Satyr he wrote against them, the effect whereof is this: that Nature knowing
the Tebessians should be men of little worth and very swine, would make no
good thing grow about their city but nuts. The last, to wit, Ibnu-farid, the
French Commentar knows not what he was, and I can not learn.

28.
The Dutch. For the Dutch or Almaine tongue he sets us down Mychaell
Beuther, who very well has translated the Latin Commentaries of Sleidan: the
next is Luther borne at Islebe, as learned and eloquent a man as any was among
the Divines and Preachers of Germany, as all will confess, that have read his
works in Dutch: he Preached and read Divinity the space of many years at
Wytteberg in Saxony. Then Gasper Peucer son in law to Phillip Melancthon, an
excellent Philosopher, Mathematician, and Physician, as his works declare. And
lastly Peter Beutrick, Counselor to Duke John Casimer, and chief dealer for
him with diverse Princes; lately deceased. I could name you many more, but I
content my self, as the Poet has done, with these four.

29.
Then Gueuare. The books of Anthony de Gueuare, du Boscan, de Grenade, de
Gracylace, have been for the most part, translated into Latin, Italian and
French: but they are far better in their Castilian: which is the most pure
Dialect of the Spanish tongue, and wherein the men of learning and good
nourriture are wont ordinarily to write and speak. And these four the Poet
has chosen for the most eloquent writers in this tongue: yet nothing
foredeeming diverse others that have written well both in verse and prose; as
namely Osias, whom but for his old Dialect, he judges as good an author as the
other.

30.
The speech of English. For ornament of the English tongue he names sir Thomas
Moore and sir Nicholas Bacon both Lord Chauncellors: the first of them was very
learned in the Arts and toongs: the second exceeding well seen in the common
laws of England: and both very eloquent in their mother language. As for sir
Philip Sidney he deserves no less commendation than the Poet has given him.
Chaucer deserves the like commendation here that Osias did among the Spanish
Auctors.

31.
But what new Sun is this. He makes a digression in praise of the Queen of
England, who the space of seven and thirty years has governed her Realm in
great prosperity; so as, during the troubles and overthrows of other
kingdoms about her, her self and her people have been preserved from
infinite dangers. This famous Queen has also the toongs here mentioned by
the Poet, very parfit, and at this day by the singular grace of God she is
accounted the precious pearl of the North, and very fortunate in all the wars
she takes in hand: her happy success and victories are every way so
memorable, that they deserve to be written in a large history, and reverenced
of all posterity.

32.
But what are these of France? Clement Marot worthy to be admired for his
time, in regard of the ignorance and barbarism that reigned in Europe many
years before him, has led the Muses over the Alps, and araied them after the
French fashion: as witnesses, among other his works, the translation of nine
and forty Psalms of David, a work that will continue in account as long as
Yea and Nay are spoken, even to the worlds end. Indeed he wants that Art and
those fine devises that some later writers have; but even in this want and
these imperfections he has done woonderous well; and shows in his natural
vain that if he had sist he could have been excellent: yea in some points and
places he has so done already, as the best of them all could have done no
better. For translations we have Iacques Amiot, who has turned into French the
Ethiopian History of Heliodorus, seven books of Diodorus Siculus, and all
Plutarch, wherein he has labored to very good purpose, and with happy
success: I would to God he had set his hand also to Thucidides, Xenophon, and
Seneca: his style is pure, and natural, not affected, not forced; right good
and true French. Blase Viginere has also translated many books, as the
Polonian history, a part of Liuie, Caesar, Chalcondylas, Philostratus, three
Dialogs of Friendship, and the Psalms in free verse, all which I have read
over and again, yet do I prefer Amiot before him. Indeed I find in Viginere
a very ready style and matter well chosen, but the other (I know not how) me
thinks has a better carriage of himself. The Seiour de Vaupriuas in his
French Library says, of all the foster-children of the Muses that were bred
in France Viginere has so written, that, as well for learning as for
eloquence of speech, he has prevented all that shall come after him, and as it
were shut the gate against them. See what a commendation here is: I leave the
Reader to judge of our opinions. Our Poet staieth in doubt, but I have been
bold to go further; I trust without any great offense: in this consists not
the good or bad state of France. Concerning Poets, he names Peter Ronsard,
who has made himself rich with Greek and Latin spoils, as his Treatises of
Love, his diverse Poemes, his Odes, Elegies, and Hymns do witness: wherein a
man may read all sort of verses, and all kind of matter, sometimes in a low
style, sometimes in a mean, sometimes in a lofty style: For which cause the
Poet calls him Great Ronsard. I will note here a notable speech of his:
after our Poets first Week was come forth in print, being asked his opinion
of the work, he answered, alluding to the title, Mounseiur du Bartas has done
more in one week than I have done in all my life time. As for Philip de
Mornay, Lord of Plessie Marly, his learned work of the truth of Christian
religion, honored thus by the true title, and written in good French, with
lively reasons there gathered together, moves and draws to his purpose,
that is, to acknowledge the truth, all that read it with a heart desirous of
peace and good. The like may be said of his Discourse of life and death, of his
Treatise of the Church, his Meditations, and some Epistles and Demonstrations
of his. For all his writings are strengthened with arguments, inductions, and
proofs invincible, and all in a style with gravity and sweetness mixed, well
knit, and well sounding, and easy enough to those that are never so little
acquainted with it. The Poet having so lively represented his Vision, ends
his discourse of Eloquence, and her most renowned favorers in every language,
and so shuts up his sixth Book: Which is the second of the second day of his
second Week.

FINIS.

