THE TRVE IMAGE OF CHRISTIAN LOVE.

An excellent, learned, and very comfortable Treatise, meet and necessary for
these dangerous days: wherein men are grown so disobedient to God, so
undutiful to their Prince, and so uncharitable to their neighbors.

Written in Latin by Adrian Sauorine a Dominican Friar, and translated 50.
years ago by an English Obseruant Friar named Richard Rikes, and now truly
conferred with the ancient copies, and published by A. M. one of the
messengers of her Majesty's chamber.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbican. An. 1587.

To the Worshipful M. Richard Young, Esquire, one of the Collectors of her
Majesty's Custom in the Port of London, and one of her Highness Justices of
Peace and Quorum in the County of Middlesex.
I Neither have, or can forget (Worshipful and my very good Friend) the
courteous entertainment you gave to my Book, entitled A Godly exercise for
Christian Families, neither may I (without injury to your good nature, and
impeach to my poor credit) let slip opportunity, wherein I may show my self
thankful for so great and undeserved favor. But wading into the very bottom
of all my ability, and finding nothing sufficient to counteruaile such
kindness: I am like the poor Persian, who desirous to show him self thankful
to Alexander for sparing his life, and finding nothing worthy to be given to so
great a Monarch, died with very conceit of sorrow. Even so worshipful Sir, the
very conceit of my want, though not able to stay me as it did this Persian, yet
strikes me with such a confounded impression, as closes up the ^^^wes and
arteries of my present judgment, did not hope encourage me with some better
hap to come.

Until which time my Worshipful good friend, let this small argument of a
far greater good will, excuse my insufficiency, and win acceptance in your
woonted affable nature: persuading your self, that I live, in heart and
unfeigned affection, next under God and the Queen my gracious Mistres, to do
you the utmost deuoire and service I can.

Now a little to inform you as concerning this small Treatise, in the
judgment of the learned, it has been commended for a very godly and
comfortable labor: in that it discourses of the most high argument that may
be handled in writing, even Love, the beginning and end whereof, no humane wit
can comprehend. And one thing shall not be amiss for your worship to mark,
that this Book being written by Friars, men of no small reckoning among the
Papists: yet how they write against their own idolatry, superstition and
trumperie, and inueigh at the great follies and disorders among themselves, is
to be noted, which was some cause why I published it at this instant, when men
of that coat and cognizance, grow to so many wicked and rebellious attempts. If
they will read this Book, I think they may find matter enough to fall out of
Love with their blind ignorance, and unite themselves to the true and lively
image of Love, ever God and his Church, which I desire they may, if God have
not altogether given the^ over: or else to confound them and what they intend,
to the hurt of his truth, and our most gracious Queen. Thus leauyng further
to trouble your Worship, I remain devoted to you and yours in all hearty and
humble affection.

Your Worships at command, A. Monday.

The intent of the Author, and what he purposes in the discourse following.
Chapter. 1.
IN all our actions either private or public, we determine an end or purpose
before we begin: which ser^^^^ as a line or rule to direct us, both in the
continuance of the work, and in the just limit and ending thereof. My
determination then being already digested, and the full issue of my enterprise
duly considered, it shall suffice in three or four words to make you
acquainted there with, and so to proceed to every circumstance.

The matter whereof I am to speak, The matter intended is Divine Love.
is Love, not that fond and lascivious Love, whereof the Poets are inuenters:
but of that holy and divine Love, whereof God himself is the only
foundation, according as it is written, Deus est charitas: And in this occasion
of so high and excellent consequence, albeit no tongue can sufficiently speak
of it, nor wit or judgment of man sound the depth also sacred a mystery: yet
according to that poor Talent which God has given me, I will labor to find
out that true and perfect Image of Christian Love, which is the beauty and
glory of Heaven, and makes wretched sinners like Gods on the earth. And to
this only end is all the matter following intended, The purpose of the
discourse.
to distinguish all extraordinary loves and affections by themselves, with
brief discriptions of every one in their colors, that that Love of so great
majesty may be the more cleerelie discerned, and embraced of every one, as so
rare a Jewel ought.

Of natural Love. Chapter. 2.
WHen I entered into consideration of the very word it self, Love, Love is
first sought for by Nature
and that I would gladly find the true form or portrait thereof, yet
ignorant how or where to come by it: I went first unto Nature, as one
desirous to see how I could be furthered by her in so serious a search. She
showed me many goodly platformes and figures, which she received (as she
said) from her Predecessors, and for that cause she was the more charie and
choice of them. Yet notwithstanding, I had no great liking to the^, because not
only their colors decayed, but their virtues were grown of no account or
reputation: yet were they esteemed among wise men, fools and Heathen men, yea
amongst beasts and unreasonable, but for so little profit was to be looked for
by them in my present intent, I could not entertain any opinion of them, and
yet it shall not be greatly out of square, for me to tell you what things
they were which Nature showed me.

The first figure which she brought me, The first Image of Natural Love.
terming it by the name of the Image of Love, was the Love among Kindred and
Parents, which I did very well remember could be of no value, except the holy
Ghost set helping hand too: by reason it is sometime very hurtful, it makes
men blind, peruerteth the true order of Justice, and fools* (very often)
before wise men* It takes away right judgment, contrary unto S. Paul's
doctrine and example, for he says, 2, Cor, 5, 16,
Neminem nouimus secundum carnem. We know no man after kindred or carnal
affection. It caused Hely to be reproved of God, when as he himself rebuked
him thus. 1, Reg, 2, 11
Why have thou made more of thy children then of me? Wherefore, as it follows
in the Bible, he died an evil death and his children likewise. It hinders us
also from finding our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, as we have an example or
figure left in the holy Gospel after Saint Luke, Lu^^44. 45
that when Christ was sought among his kinsefolke and acquaintance, he could
not be found: which made S. Barnard to say: Lord I can not find thee, but in
thy Cross.

The second Image of Love, which Nature showed me, The second Image of natural
Love.
was between the body and the soul. The soul loves the body so dearly,
that it suffers great pain and sorrow to be parted from it, but when it is
ordered by the holy Ghost: Rom, 8,
so that the soul use the body under the Law of God, to be repentant to give
thanks, to profitte other, and to choose rather the want of all earthly
pleasure, yea, to die, rather than to commit such sin as shall offend her
maker. If these colors had (...) laid on this Image, then would I have said
Nature had done like a perfect work woman. But her love being tied to this
life, desiring to joy and delight here in this world, to hide long in lusts
and wanton pleasures, and for the maintaining of them* not to care for the
displeasure of God: I must needs say the devil was too near when this
counterfeit was drawn, and has infected it so much with his mischeuous
presence, as he draws all (that so lead their lives) to hell headlong after
him, justly agreeing with the saying of Saint Augustine. By such as these are,
the City of the devil is builded.

The third Image of Love shown by Nature, The third Image of Natural Love.
was between the five wits and their objects. As when the sight is presented
with beautiful things, or devises of variable and arteficiall colors. Or
when the hearing is delighted with the sound of sweet voices, or dainty
musical harmony. Or when the tasting is (...) with delitious meats and
drinks. Or the smelling of sweet (...) and perfumes. Or the feeling and
^^^^hching of such things as is mo^^^ lyking to the same. Three other Images
of Natural Love.
And heerewith she presented three other portraits or figures of Love, the
first was between a man and his wife. The second, an ordinary kind of love
between m^n and man. And the last was the Love between friends, and such as
are mutuallie brought up together in company from their youth. And al these
being not governed by the divine spirit of direction, it is easy to know what
harm comes by them, therefore I had good reason to persuade my self, that
none of these was the special Image of Love I looked for, neither that Nature
could bring me to the sight thereof indeed, and therefore. I thought it best
for me to dispose my thoughts to a further search:

But then on a soddaine came to my remembrance, The description of an Image in
old time had in great account among the Romans*
how the Romans in old time had an Image among them, which they greatly
praised, and made no small estimation thereof. This Image (as I have read) was
portrayed like a young man, standing dare headed, having written on his
forehead, Estas et Hie^s, Summer and Winter, and he was clothed in a short
thin coat, on the hem whereof they had written, Mors et Vita. Death and Life.
His fide was open, that his heart might be seen, and his army was bowed,
poynting with his finger to his heart, where might be seen written Long et
prope, far and near. When I had well viewed this counterfeite, and persuading
my self there was some secret meaning shadowed in this devise: I was
immediately made acquainted with y^ whole conceit thereof, and every
circumstance declared unto me as follows.

The ca^^e why he was painted like a young Men, The meaning of this Roman
Image.
signified, that true Love and loyal freendship is always fresh, cheerful
and amiable, never fading or failing for any extremity whatsoever. He was
bare headed, not ashamed to show himself unto all men, and likewise that he
was not afraid to show himself a friend at all occasions. His rude and
thin vesture, declared, that a very freende indeed, will not refuse to
suffer hard exigents, and extreme necessity, for the love of his friend. The
cause why Mors et Vita was written on the hemme of his garment, was, that h^e
which loves truly his friend, continues so all his life unto death, and
after death likewise, so far as the bonds of freendship may stretch Ectas et.
Hiems on his forehead, signified, that unfeigned freendship endures as well in
adversity as in prosperity. His heart was open to be seen, meaning he would
not hide or conceal any thing from his freende and Lover.

And poynting his finger toward his heart, be declared that his deeds (...)
accord to his heart, and his heart likewise consented to his words. The (...)
there written. Long^ (...), (...) that true and inui^lable Love can not be
imp^ached by distaunce of place, or long continuance of time: but evermore
continues in one permanent estate, flourishing, faithful, entire, and
perpetual.

The devise of this Image me thought was to be commended, and accounted
necessary to this present life, and (...), Aristotle, Cato, with many other,
praise it above all the things that (...) Nature Beside the Wise men says*
Eccl. 6. 15
Ami^^ fideli nulla ^st comp^^^^^, (...) fides illi^* A faithful freende has
no peer ^he ^eight of gold and silver is not to be compared ^ward^ the
goodness of h^s faith. Ye. was there one special^ (...) to be (...) in this
goodly Image, which (...), that be always looked downewarde upon earthly
things, and very sternelie and bitterly upon his enemies. If he had looked
upward toward heauen^^ having respect to God and heauenl^^ things, I would
have commended it for the most worthy ornament amongst all Natures
inventions. But Saint Paul for that very cause wylled me to despise it, saying
to the^ that were the inuenters thereof. Quia cum cogn^nissent Deum, non sicut
Deum glorificauerunt, To. 1. 21. 22.
aut gratias egerant:sed e^anuerunt in cogitationibus suis, et obscuratum est
insipicui (...) ^orum, dicontes enim se esse sapientes. stulti facti sunt:
Although they knews God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful:
but wexed full of vanities in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
blinded: when they counted themselves wife, they became fools, and fell to
Idolatry, and to many great inconveniences.

Our Savior also refuses this Image and such other, both for this cause, and
for that it looked so cruelly upon his enemies, Lu, 6. 32, 33
saying: If ye love only them that love you, what reward look ye to have?
truly ye shall have none of me, for you have received your reward already.
And thus leaving Nature I was glad to seek further.

Of worldly Love. Chapter. 3.
THe World then called me, Love sought in the world.
and showed me a portrait, that a far off appeared very fair and goodly,
al burnished with gold and silver, and jewels that were both rich and costly,
set out likewise with very fresh and orient colors: offering it to me for a
small value, which made me draw (...) little nearer it, and on the border
thereof were figured fools, beasts, flies, serpents, worms, and flowers of
diverse kinds, so marvelous and so ingeniouslie ^ra^ed, like unto Nature, as
though they had been the self same things indeed. The fowls seemed so
ravenous, the beasts so cruelly devouring, the flies so defiling herbs and
flowers, and taking away their sweet* and pleasant savor, the serpents so
stinging, and the worms so gnawing and biting, that I stood in doubt whether
I might touch them with my hand or not. And above all the rest, one little
worm did greatly affright, and amaze me, which I took for a living thing
indeed, and judged it to be called the worm of conscience. As I stood
cheapning this Image with: my Bible in my hand, I cast mine eye into my book,
where I espied in the first Epistle of Saint John these words to be written:
N^lite dilig^re mundum, neque (...) in mundo sunt* 1. Ioh, 2. 16
S^quis diligit mandum, (...) est char patris in (...) Whereby I understood,
that he meant thus. Buy not this Image the love of the World, for if ye^^^,
and look much upon it, it shall bewitch you and make you blind. And if you
set you love upon the world (says he) the love of our Savior Christ, who is
the very Image of love indeed, can not be in you. The Prophet David showed me
likewise, that these reuenous fowls, beast and serpents, were living men,
bewitched and transformed by reason of this false Image, and showed the cause
why, saying Hom^ cum in honor esset. etc. Man Lord of all creatures, having in
himself the lively Image of God (from whence he ought to draw forth she very
Image of Love) to his high honor: knew not his degree and hie estate that God
had made him for, but set his mind more on these vain and outward
transitorye things, where through he is transformed and compared to beasts
most unreasonable, and so is made like unto them.

O false Image, I am right sure thy colors be full of mischief, and repleat
with all the deceyts that may be devised. Thus Saint John had me look
circumspectly upon it, for the matter that it was made of was very brittle,
venomous and naught: therefore I took it up in my hand, and looked the more
warily upon it, when I perceived that Saint John said truth, where he says:
2, Ioh, 2, 16
Quoniam omne quod est in Mundo, concupiscentia carnis est, et concupiscentia
oculorum, et superbia vitae, quae none est ex patre* sed ex mundo est. For all
that is in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life: is not of the father, but of the world. I remembered also, that
the fruit which seems to the eye most beautiful and fair, is soonest
rotten, and of least continuance. 1, Cor, 7, 31
And Saint Paul says, Praeterit enim figura huius mundi. The fashion of the
world passes soon away. In time of tribulation it melts away as snow
before the sun. Est enim amicus secundum tempus suum, Eccl, 6, 8
et non permanebit in die tribulatioins. Therefore it is a freende for his own
turn, and will not abide in the time of trouble. Such freendship is hollow and
empty, as though it were blown full of wind, and so light that it will be
moved with every blast, so brittle that it will break with the very (...), and
defiling them as pitch, and sauouring very ill, it has some time so mad a
countenance, that it will make fools to joy and laugh so exceedingly, as
they laugh themselves to death. Therefore the Wiseman says. Risum (...) etc.
Eccl. (...).
I (...) this laughter for a great error and deceit, saying unto them that so
joy in the Image of this world: Pro, 10, 24
Why will ye be deceived for a thing of naught? Quasi per (...) ^tultur
operatur s^^lus. A fool does wickedly, and makes but a laughter of it:
Therefore they that so seorne and laugh at their own folly, may be right sure
their laughter shall be myxt with great pain: And the last ending of their
joy shall be ouerlayd with sorrow and lamentation. Pro, 14, 13,


This Image of the World takes away the memory of man, making him clean to
forget God, and all that belongs to him: being so confederate, and in such
league with the devil, that it cannot do any service to almighty God. Luk,
16, 13
For Christ says. Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. No man can serve two
Masters. And this Image of the world is it that wretched covetous men use as
their God, putting all their trust and affection in it, and yet it is as
traiterous to them as Judas was to Christ, and says to the devil as Judas
said to them that came with him to take Christ. Math. (...)
(...) etc. Who soever (...), he is for thee, hold him fast, and lead him
warily, that he escape not thy hands. And so at the length, for the great
pleasure he has taken in this world, so much the more sorrow and torments
shall the devil reward him with again.

Thus perceiving these and many more evil properties in this worldly Love.
Nahum. 3, 7
I said with the Prophet Nahum, Omnis qui viderit te, resiliet, ate. Every wise
man that looks upon thee, will be afraid, and leap quiclie from thee:
therefore I left this Image of Worldly Love, and would none of it.

Of carnal Love. Chapter. 4.
THen I saw the flesh stand hard by^^^, calling young persons into her shop,
The allurings of fleshly love
with flattering words, saying: Come to me (...) young Gentleman, I have (...)
portraites and (...) of Love (...): you shall have one of me for your love, it
shall cost you nothing. Wherewith she brought forth a meruaylous goodly
picture, in my judgment: far surpassing Nature whose fore head was high
smoo-thed (...) glittering as glass, the yellowe locks of hair was finely
tressed (...) silken laces of diverse colors having on a ^^^ple of ^^^ngled
gold, (...) of pearls* and a frontlet imbroidered with silk and gold heryn
thick set with precious stones, and a (...) brooche of Gold right before the
(...) ^olling in ye head the countenance daintye and amiable, the skyn as
(...) as a Lilly mixed with lively rednes, the neck and breasts bare, the
apparel all disguised of the new fasion, with a great round (...), cut and
slased, and a long train where under I might discern the tail of a venomous
serpent. The countenance of the Image of flesly Love.
But most of all I maruayled at the gesture and countenance of it, for when I
stood in one place, it would show it self (...) and (...) the arms (...) to
embrace: when I changed my place it appeared as though it had wept, and
beckening with ye hand as though she called one to her: and in another place,
she showed a ^^ring and distayning countenance, pretending (...), or violent
outrage and displeasure. Thus like a fool I gazed to long upon the Image, that
I (...) almost (...): but God be thanked I had warning betimes. For (...) man
called me, gave me good (...) and bad me in any (...) not to behold it, least I
should happen to perrish, and be lost by the false dissembling show of it,
Eccl, 9, 10,
for Spiritus (...) (...), reprobi facti (...) enim (...). Many a man wondering
at the beauty of a strange woman, has, been cast out: for her words kindle
as fire, Eccl, 19. 7*
And Propter speciem mulieris multi (...). Through the beauty of women, many
have perished.

When I considered this good admonition, I found that he told me truth in
very (...), remembering (...) Sampson, holy David, wise Solomon, and many other
how they were deceived. Psalm. 118, 9
Therefore David asked help of God, to turn away his eyes from the vanities
of this fleshly Image, for it was so pleasant and delighting to the outward
light, that he could not refrain himself from it. Pro, 31, 3^
And Solomon could say, That outward beautye is a vain and deceiuable grace.
Therefore he says in his Proverbs. Pro, 5, 3
Fallax gratia, et vana est pulchritudo. Favor, is deceitful, and beauty is
a vain thing. Fa^i^s enim distillans labia mer^tric^s, et (...) guttur eius.
For this harlots lyps are dropping as a honny comb, and her throat is more
glistering the^ oil but the last end of her is very bitter, and stingeth more
venimously then the tail of a serpent.

He showed me also that which I perceived not (I was so blinded with only
looking upon her) a little from her was death, and hell mouth wyd^ gaping to
receive her, Pro. 5, 5
and all y^ were with her. Pedes eius, descendunt in (...), Prou. 5. 8,
et ad infer^s grossus (...). Her feet go down unto death, and her step^
pearce through to hell. Therefore he had me Long fac ab ea vian^ tuam, et ne
appropinques foribus domus (...). Keep thy way far from her, and come not
(...) the doors of her house. For though it be differed freely, yet at the
last it puts both fame, goods and soul to great ieopardy. According as S.
Paul says Si enim secundum carnem vixeritis, moriemini. If ye live after
fleshly pleasure, ye shall surely dye a very evil death. Therefore we ought
not so much as to think thereon, but also it is necessary for us to fly fair
(...) it, and all that belongs thereto, because it infecteth and polluteth
the soul with all wickedness and sin, and wounds the body with i^^^merable
sicknesses and deadly diseases, to that both soul and body is in great danger
to perish thereby, if they have not help and succor speedily at Gods hands:
so the flesh and I parted, because her Image was so hurtful, and an enemy to
that Image of Love which I sought for.

Of such Images as are made by Artificers, as Painters, Car^ers, Engrauers, and
such like: whether the right Image of Love may be found amongst them or no.
Chapter. 5.
WHen I saw that neither Nature, Of Arteficiall Images of love, if the true
Image be amongst them.
the world nor the flesh could deliver me the true and perfect Image of Love,
which I sought for: I went to the Shoppes of the Artezans, such as make goodly
Images of diverse matters, as in metal, stone, timber, cloth and painting: yet
my conceit on the sudden did persuade me, that the very Image of Love indeed
was not amongst them. Nevertheless, there were many special figures of
dainty workmanshipp, as of God the Father, Christ Crucified on the Cross, his
miraculous works in sundry Tables, the deeds of the Apostles, and many like
portraitures out of the Scripture, which in my frail judgment might stir
up a man to devotion, and make him mindful of God. Beside, I had bestowed
great travail and industrious labor, to find the very true Image, yet all
was to no purpose, and I was never the nearer of my intent: whervppon I
determined with my self to buy one of these, and as I was choosing one of the
goodliest, there came to me a reverend holy Doctor of yt Church, who very
much reproouing me for my folly, S. Ierom. deferend.
said. Why do thou cast away thy money upon these vain and corruptible
things? thy goods were not given to that end, thou art very much to blame, A
notable lesson for the Papists, the vain worshippers of stocks and stones.
see thou not the goodly living Image of God, I mean thy Christian brother
and neighbor, most lamentably every day to perish and decay by great
multitudes, and yet wile thou bestow thy money upon these dead and senseless
stocks? If God has endued thee with worldly substance, and given thee the
riches which is accounted human happiness, not as thine own, but to use them
like a good and faithful Steward, to his glory, and thine own souls health:
thou seeing thy poor and needy Christian brother in great want and pennury,
sparest the treasure of mercy and pity in thine heart, which might greatly
relieve him, and manifest thy godly love: how may it be said, that godly
charity is in thee? Why Syrre, said I, may not I spend mine own goods as I
will, so as I do not carelessly waste them away in sin?* If (...) people
were in extreme necessity* I confess I should offend indeed if I should
suffer them to be lost having wherewithal to help them, and (...) then in
necessary for mine own self. The common speech of the world now adays.
But I know none such, and there be many that may, and who are better able
then I, to relieve the^, neither am I bound to seek where such are, as live
in such extreme necessity. Thus we fell into a long disputation, till at the
last he concluded thus, that not only extreme necessity does bind us to
give alms: but also when we have more then is necessary for the (...) of
(...) estate and for proof hereof, (...) unto me ye Gospel of Christ, where he
says: Verant^^^^^ quod sui (...). Luke 11, 41
Give alms of that which is superfluous. It is then to be thought* that there
shall be no (...) on the left (...) of Christ, when he shall give sentence of
^ their (...) of charity and (...)of (...), as principal cause in manner of
their (...) overthrow. Distincti. 42 S, Jerome. S. Augustin^ S. Thomas secunda.
S. Ambrose.
(...) in Saint Jerome (...) Augustine upon the (...) thus, I break not (...)
away other men's goods* but keep that which is mine own. S. Ambrose. Distinct.
47
Against whom Saint Ambrose replyeth. Oh foolish man, what is thine? what
broughtest thou into this world with thee? Is God unjust, for that he gives
more to one man then to another? or is he unrighteous, because he suffers
thee to abound in wealth, and many other to, (...)? It is rather to show thee
experience of his great gentleness, and that thou should est have the great
thanks at his hands, for well bestowing thy goods upon the poor and needye,
and that the poor might be as well rewarded for their (...) suffering, And
(...) he said. It is the bread and (...) for the hungry that thou (...) with
thee. It is the old thing of naked men that thou (...) up in thy p^esses. It is
the redemption and relief of them (...), that thou (...) the ground, and
suffer to (...). He Ambrose distinct. 47.
and (...) in corners. As great (...) is it not (...) unto the needy, when thou
have superfluous, as it is to (...) wrongfully from them that have (...) thing;
therefore take good heed (...) are thou sp^edest thy goods. Why Sir, said I,
may I spend my good^ none other ways, but in giving of alms? Riches ( said
he) is not to be loved for it private self, but for the necessary maintenance
of this present life. That which is not convenient, either to the sustentation
of the body, or to honests and reasonable maintayning of our degree or estate,
cannot but be employed to some very evil end, except it be (as I have said)
bestowed upon our poor brethren, or to the necessities of Christ's Church, as
to the maintayning and defending of the faith, to the magnifying of Gods
honor, and to the increase of virtue and good life. And for these fond
pictures and Images, which thou think do make for thy purpose, because it
is said in the Popes Law, these Images are lay (...) Books, who are
imperfect in ghostly life, and therefore these serve to (...) their minds to
devotion: but this has been proved, that they have brought into the mind
vanity or euagation, rather then devotion or contemplation, and peradventure
some private affection or spice of propriety amongst religious persons, and
therefore see thy conversation be holy and meek, and thy doctrine sound and
good, and let that be the thing to move men's minds to devotion. Thus almost
confounded, I said to him, beware Sir what ye say, your opinion condemns
the dooinges of many good men in elder time, who honored the Temples of God
with many goodly Images of great cost, of silver and gold, set with pearls
and stones, great plenty of Copes and Vestiments of Tissue and cloth of Gold,
and marvelous riches in plate, as Crosses, Candlestickes, Censours, Chalices,
with many other things, which have been thought greatly to the honor of God.
Alas, said he, I see it is but vain to preach and teach men, to learn and
take example of Saint Ambrose, Let the Papists mark this place well.
Augustine, Gregory, Exuperii, Nicholas, Martin, with diverse other holy
Bishops and such like, in whose time were little or none at all used of these
things, for they would have all things that belonged to the church, (and
specially to the Sacraments) honest, decent, pure and clean, but not costly
or curious. Then were treene Chalices, and golden Priests, but now are golden
Chalices and treene Priests, or rather earthen Priests. Then were holy and
religious men, clad in hair and sa^^^loth, and now they grudg^ and disdain
to were good woollen cloth. Then were religious houses hostries for poor men,
now: they be stored with lurdens and idle loyterers. Then they were
apparelled with ^eekenes, poverty, chastity, and charity, now with st^kes,
pomp^ and (...). Yet if ther^ were no poor people, I could (...) what hold
withal: Math, 26, 11,
but Christ says, Semper pa^ pere^h abetis vobiscum.Ye shall always have the
poor amongst ye. 1, Cor, 3, 17
Also S. Paul says. Templum Dei sanctum est quod estis vos. The Temple of God
is holy, which Temple ye are. The Temple of stone is not holy, but by reason
of the living Temple, therefore that is far more holy, and needs much more
to be relieved, maintained and adorned. Should we then go lay up, or spend our
riches on the stony Temple, and suffer the living Temple, the members of
Christ's precious body and blood, to perish either (...) or ghostly? We find
not that Christ commanded to have such costly ornaments in his Church, but
very many times commanded to nourish his poor members: and now men leave
the commandments of God, for their own traditions and ceremonies, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, and fall so far into their own Idolatrous
inventions as they altogether forget their christian (...).

But some say against me, how Moses made the Tabernacle of God with great
sumptuousnes of Silver, Gold, and precious Stones, and likewise how Solomon
built the Temple: but this makes not with them, but rather against them. 1,
Cor, 10, 11
For all such things were but signs and shadows, as Saint Paul says, unto
us under Christ's Law. which is the spiritual and perfect law: therefore we
should leave the shaddowe and follow the truth, avoiding that which is
imperfect, and cleave to that which is perfect. Also in the time of Moses,
there was no need to give alms to the poor people: for they were fed with
(...) in desert, and their clothings decayed not of all the time that they were
there, as it is read in Deutronomy. Vestimentum tuum quo eperiebaris, Deuteronomy, 8, 4
nequaquam vetustate defecia, et pes tuus non est subtritus, en quad ragesimus
annus est. Thy raiment wexed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell
these forty years, In the time of Solomon there was so great abundance of
gold and silver, 3, To, 10, 20
that it was not set by (...) we read in the third book of the Kings. But
why do I labor in vain, and to get nothing but hatred for recompense. Yet I
condmne no man particularly but it we look well into the holy Scriptures,
and remember the living of our ancient predeckssor^, if hooks be true:
doubtless we may see and know that we are overmuch to blame, far unlike them
that should be Christians in deed as well as in (...), I pray God that many
be not only unlike, but also too far wide and contrary in their living. But
as for thee good Brother, that are so destrous to (...).

Where the true Image of Love is found, and what it is. Chapter. 6.
THen as I stood (...) with my self, what I were best to do, the holy
Scripture spoke to me and said. O foolish man, Quid quaeritis (...). Luk, 24, 5
Why seek thou the living among the dead? Light in darkness, a heavenly
among earthly things, incorruptible among corruptible, it is not there, for it
is meruaylous goodly, and wonderful to behold.

(...) Sapi. 7. 27
(...) that I beheld a shadow thereof in a Glass (...) without making any
stay and yet not with standing deligh^ed me so much, as ever since I had such
an-enterest desire to it, as I could be right gladly contented (...) Prophet
David showed me, that I ought not to give corruptible figures of love to such
persons. Quia omnis gloria eius filiae regis abintus. Psalm. 44. 14.
For all the glory and pleasure of a Kings daughter, is invard, ghostly in the
soul, Ye be the daughter of y^ heavenly King, espoused to his dearly belooued
son Christ Jesus: your father I suppose did give you this lively Image, when
he spoke to you by grace, and said, Audi filia, Psalm. 44. 12,
et vide, et incline aurem tuam, et obliniscere populum tuum, et domum patris
tui. Harken O my daughter, and see incline thine ear: forgette also thine own
people, and thy Fathers house. That is as much to say, as forsake thy natural
love, thy worldly love, thy fleshly love, forsake all vanities, and make thee
naked of all earthly things by poverty and chastity. Psalm. 44. 13
Et c^^cupiscet rex decorem tuum: quoniam ipse est Dominus Deus tuus, et
adorabunt cum. And then the King my son shall covet thy beauty, and apparel
thee with clothes of virtue. etc.

Thus I doubt not, 1, Pet, 2, 9
He that has called you from darkness into so great light of grace, and has
now taken you unto his spouses: has now showen you this glorious Image, and
has given it to you much more goodly then I can discribe it as it is, for it
is infinite and incomprehensible: yet it pleases him to show it unto all
meek souls after their capacity, calling them his daughters, saying: Audi
filia, Here my daughter in true says and obedience, Et vide, and see what I
have done, and daily do for you: see what you do again, or have done for
me, see also what I do prepare for you. The beholding of these three things,
I think should leave some print of this heavenly Image in our souls: but much
more in you who are his special and chosen spouses.

And of this worthy and divine Image of Love, I would gladly show you some
what, in part to perform mine intent, and yet I fear me of presumption, in
enterprysing to show that I never knew, or that you know much better then I:
yet a blind man may show that he cannot see, especially when it is put into
his hands.

Saint Paul put a Glass into my hand, I mean pure, reverend and holy
Scripture, and had me come forth of darkness into the light, for if thou
desire to see this perfect Image, thou must look devoutly and earnest he in
this glass, for it can be showed no other wise here in this life, but by a
glass, or in a dark similitude, which does not show the thing expresslie as
it is: but the time shall come I hope, that we shall see the very self same
thing indeed, to our great comfort and everlasting salvation. I looked in this
glass, and I could see nothing, but mine own face fowlye deformed with many
filthye spots. I was bidden to go wash me and make me clean, and get me
to the light, and so I did: yet mine eyes were so dymme with dust and humor,
of vanity and carnalitie, that I could not perceive this glorious Image. See
here how frailty makes him fall again, after the manner and custom of the
papists
I went then to a place of religion, and took a ghostly Father, showing him
mine intent, how I came to make cleeere my sight, that I might once at the
least get a syghte of this Image.

There me thought it should be, for there were the most goodly apparelled
Altars, with Tabernacles subtillie caruen, and guilt very costly, there was the
most sweet harmonye of songs and Organs, and the goodliest devout obseruances
that ever I saw or heard, in so much as I was moved for a time unto Religion
there. Wherein I asked counsel of my ghostly Father, but he persuaded me to
the contrary, saying: all is not gold, that shines as gold, for there is
one thing that destroys much goodness, that is, our own inordinate self
love, we is cause of great evil, as Saint Paul prophesied to his Disciple
Timothy, 2 Timothy 3, 1. 2 3, 4, 5,
saying. Hoc autem site quod in nouissimis dicbus instabunt te^pora
periculosa. Et erunt homines seipsos amantes, cupidi, elati, superbi,
blasphemi, parentibus non obedientes, ingrati, scelesti. Sine affectione, sine
pace, criminato, res, incontinentes, immites, sine benignitate. Proditores
pr^terui, tumidi, caeci, et voluptatum amatores magis quam Dei. Habeutes
speciem quidem pietatis, virtutem autem eius abnegantes. Et hos deuita. This
know, that in the last days perilous seasons shall be at hand For men shall be
inordinate lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, ungodly. Without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, fierce, dispisers of the^ which are good. Traitors,
headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. Mark this
well,
Having a cloked Image, a similitude of piety, that is of honor and love to
God, but the very virtue and effect thereof they renounce and have it not.
Beware of such (says Saint Paul) and eschew their company.

Thus I perceive that charity may lack, A special note for the Papists.
notwithstanding all these gay outward matters and obseruaunces, all their gay
singing and playing on Organs, or multiplying of prayers upon their Books and
beads, neither can they be evident signs and proves of love and charity,
but many times some of them greatly hinder devotion and contemplation,
stirring up the mind to elevation and vain glory. For Charity (says S. Paul)
is to edify our neighbor, 1, Cor, 12, 25
to think our selves members of one body, and so to use our selves one to
another, as the members naturally do in the body, considering our selves are
as one body in Christ. We should be as glad of our neighbors profitt, as of
our own, and to help them in their distress, as we would be helped in our
own need: lovingly to reform and correct them that do amiss, to help and
relieve them that be fallen in decay either bodily or ghostly, to cherish the
sick, and house the harbourlesse, and in sewe words to knit up the rest.
Col, 3, 13,
To refer all our riches, labor, study and care to this end, that we may
profit and do good to many in our Savior Christ. That as he was not borne
for his own profit, nor lived here for his own pleasure, nor dyed to do
himself good, or to come the sooner to joy, but gave himself wholly and
every way to our use and benefit: even so we should apply our selves to the
profitte and commodity of our christian brethren who^ the more we relieve and
comfort, the more singular joy shall it be to our souls, and the more
acceptable shall we be before ye majesty of God. If our love were employed to
this end, S. Ambrose distinct. 25
(said a holy religious Father to me) the lives of the religious persons
should be much more joyful, pleasant and easy then they are: where now we
see them very contrary, heavy, painful, laborious, A very necessary note for
the time present.
full of superstitious obseruaunces and vain customs, leaving aside the true
way of life, the following of Christ, the old manner of living, that was
taught, used, and shown by our holy forefathers S. Augustine S. Jerome, S.
Benet, with many other, so that now there is little difference between lay
people, and priests, and religious persons, both in worldly living and
criminal offenses. Yet is it said unto them by S. Paul. Nolite co^formari huic
seculo. Romans 12,
Be not ye fashioned like unto this world. And though their outward habit
differ in color, yet is it like ye world for excess price and value. So if S.
Augustine or S. Jerome were alive again (whom they take as fathers and authors
of their ru^^ orders of living) I think they should not knew them, but would
rather say, there was never any thing that they more reproved, then such
living as is now a days in many places of the world. I would this might be
considered according as it ought to be.
They would say, that they ordained the manner of living after the rule of
Christ and his blessed Apostles, and not after the superstitious manners of the
Jews: who made gay and fair all things outwardly, and were inwardly full of
rauine, venom, sin and malice.

The Image of Love that Saint Paul drew, and which these holy Fathers had
set forth openly in their houses of Religion, warning their disciples and
successors before all other things, to look dilligently thereon, under great
excommunications and pain of punishment: is now portrayed with dispensations,
deceiues with vain customs and ceremonies, The Church of Rome abusing the
true and ancient Image of Love.
with false, forged and deceiuable colors, so that it is clean altered and
changed from the true old form and similitude, and being nothing else but a
mere fraudulent and feigned thing. And they that thus do faith S. Paul, 1,
Tim. 6, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
do not agree with the holy doctrine of Christ: but are proud, and can do
nothing but multiply words, whereof comes contention, blasphemy, evil
surmisings, and many other evils. Thinking it great honor to God, and a deed
of charity to gather riches, and to increase the temporal patrimony: but the
very riches in deed, is to use the deeds of christian charity, being content
with meat, drink and cloth or what else pleases God to send.

The properties and effects of this noble Image of Love. Chapter. 7.
THis Image of Love, 1, Cor, 13, 4, 5, 6,
as S. Paul describes it, The conditions of the true and perfect Image of
Love.
is very patient, meek, and gentle of countenance, charitable without envy to
any person: it does no wrong: it is not rigorous nor blown full of pride: it
prete^deth no ambition: neither looks for honor or dignity, it requires not
profit for it self, but only to profitt other: it has no angry countenance.
etc.

Impossible is it for this divine Image to imagine any ill, for it is greatly
displeased with evil doing, and cheerfully reioyseth in truth and goodness, it
is very strong to endure all trobles and adversities, it believes all truth,
tought it be above reason, it has good hope in all things that God promises,
it is steadfast and perseuerant, bearing patient all manner of crosses and
calamities, til better may be, it never vadeth or fails, but the longer it
endures, the more orient and goodly are the colors thereof, and the more
strength and virtue it has, and the more pleasant it is to behold. S. Gregorye.
S. Gregory says, it is so goodly a thing, that no creature can praise it
sufficiently as it deserves, nor have the full knowledge of it in this life, to
discribe it as it is, it works maruailous things, great, weighty and
substantial in effect. 1. Cor, 13, 10.
It has this mighty operation, y^ whatsoever is done or wrought where it is
present, it is sufficient and good, though sometime it seem evil to some men,
and contrariwise, all things yt are done, where it is not present, although
it ap never so good, yet is it stark: naught, and of no value. Collo. 3, 15
It unites and makes many men all one body, and knitteth them so fast
together, that nothing can sunder the^. 1, Pet, 4, 8
It covers the multitude of sins: 1, Ioh, 4, 18,
and redeemeth our forfaits and transgressions. Whosoever has this virtuous
Image lively engraven in his heart, No harm can happen to any man that
entertayneth this true Image of Love.
shall not need to fear any perrill whatsoever, neither may any judgment
go against him, or any thing do him harm: for it gives light in darkness,
causes joy in heaviness, mirth in sadness, in pain it provoke glad patience,
there can be no wrong or injury offered where it dwells, it asswageth
hunger and thirst, it makes bond men free, poor men rich, Osee, 11, 4
sick men whole and sound, yea and sometime it raises the dead to life, it is
so attractiue, ye it draws al good things unto it, and then makes all
things common. Sometime it has a sharp and rigorous countenance upon
sinners, but never is it mallicious or envious: for it morneth with morners, it
reioiseth with them y^ be glad in God, it greeueth with penitent and sorrowful
offenders, it takes away all suspicious and misiudging from the heart of man,
it abhors all strife, eurye, murmr and contention, it hates all ill, and
loves all that is good, there is nothing that pleases God more then this
divine Image of love, Nothing that the devil is more desirous to destroy the^
this Image of Love.
and without it nothing can please him, there is nothing whereof the devil is
more destrous, then the destruction of it, and to that intent he applies all
his labor, craft and subtilty, with most extreme malice, in seeking both
night and day to injury and supplant this glorious love, or rather divine and
immortal charity.

But now looking in the Glass of holy Scripture, for this Image of so high and
worthy excellency, perceiving my blindness, mine ignorance, mine unkindness,
mine unworthiness, wretchedness and presumption: I greatly fear rather to get
shame and reproof, then thanks for mine enterprise, seeing this Image so
excellent, so beautiful, so full of virtue and grace, so far exceeding the
praises and commendations of all men, and yet I wretch most simple, and without
learning, presume thus to show this heavenly Image, that am most unskillful,
and least able to speak of the very smallest praise which is due unto it.

Nevertheless, as I said before, a blind man may bold forth a picture for
other to behold, if it be put into his hand, albeit he handle it groslye, and
show it very rudely, his dishability is to be borne withal. In like manner,
though blindly and ignorant lie I presume to borrowe of other holy Doctors
this golden Image, only to show it unto you, who I verily think can better
discern it then I, and therefore the more able to show it me. Notwithstanding
you may happen to receive small pleasure here in, by reason of my
unskillfulness in handling so great a matter: I trust yet at the least you will
be content to see the simple Image of mine own love toward you, and to cover
the rudenes and small value thereof, under my christian and zealous intent,
which wants no good will to do it better if I could.

That this Image of love is a living thing, exampled and taking form the
invisible Image of God. Chapter. 8.
I Said before that this Image is a living thing, and cannot be sound among
these dead and superstitious relics and figures. There is one which S. Paul
speaks of. Col, 3, 11*
Qui est Imago Dei inuisibilis, An Image of God invisible and incomprehensible,
the Son of God, by whom he has made all creatures, How God showed us this
Image of Love,
and man most singularly unto his Image and similitude, and because he was
invisible, and inco^prehensible, he took a glass, meaning our nature which
well may be compared to a brittle glass, wherein he showed us this Image of
love, which is himself: in whom though there appeared infinite power and
wisdom, yet charity surpassed all, cheefely to our behole. Col, 3, 10
For that puts away the old Image of death in our souls, and renews his
Image again in us, and made it quick through his Image of love, without which
we are but dead. as s. John says. 1, Ioh, 4, 14
Qui no^ diligit mants in morte. He that loves not abides in death. Thus we
may see in part an Image of love, yt is charitable, wc is god himself, and the
life of our souls, whom we cannot well see, but by the glass of his humanity.
A glass shows not ye Image so much as it is, no more can we consider his
love so great as it is. A glass can represent nothing but when somewhat is
present to it, so in man can be no charity but if God be present unto his
soul, 1, Ioh, 4, 16
for Deus charitas est, et qui manet in charitate, in Deo manet, et De us in
eo, God is charity, and he that dwells in charity dwells in God, This is
to be understood of such, as give themselves over to serve sin.
and God in him. In who^ soever God is, be does no sin: if he do sin, God is
gone from him, if God be gone, this Image is lost and gone from him, as in the
material glass, the person that was present to it going away, the Image in
the glass cease, and has no being. And the^ forthwith the devil is ready
to present himself in the glass, placing his contagious person therein:
which so infecteth the glass, that it is hard to purge it, and to pollishe it
clear again, to make it apt and able to receive the glorious Image of God
again, except it he done speedily and in due time, yet very often the glass
is spoyld and broken, before it can be made clean and pure again. Remember
therefore that God is always present in every place, Heb, 4. 13
and never withdraws his love from man: Math, 5, 24
But many ways provoke them, yea his enemies to love and makes his Sun of
grace and righteousness to shine upon every person good and ill. The grace of
Christ and his doctrine is the light, keep the glass of our souls toward
this light, turn it not away toward darkness, and this heavenly Image shall
always continue in the glass. Saint John says. Qui diliget fratrem suum, 1,
Io. 2, 10, 11
in (...) manet, et scandulum in ^o non est. He that loves his brother abides
in the light, and there is no occasion of evil in him. Qui autem edit fratrem
suum, in tenebris est, et in t^ nobris ambulat, et nescit quo eat, quia tenebra
obc^cauerunt oculos eius. But he that hates his brother, is in darkness and
walks in darkness, and cannot tell whether he goes. Thus turning his glass
clean from the light he falls sometime into the mire of other men's sins,
by suspecting, judging or talking of their defaultes: sometime among the
serpents of slander, detraction and envy: sometime among the thorns, briars
and wild beasts of covetousness, malice, and wrath: sometime stumbling among
swyne, in the foul trough and stinking gore of gluttony, and beastly lusts
of the body, with many other perilous ways, wandering with great ieopardie
into the depth of the soul, because that darkness has blinded his eyes: The
cause why this evil inconvenience happens to man.
which is not in default of the light of grace, nor for the charity of God is
not present: but because the glass of the soul is turned from the light of
heaven, which makes it so infected and defiled with this horrible darkness, that
it is altogether unapt to receive the light of grace, and the true Image of
charity, as I said before, for it is hard to remove ye foul deadly Image of
sin, and impossible for any to do it, but only he that is the author of
life, and maker of this incomprehensible glass.

If we will turn our selves again unto the light, and faithfully renew our
love toward him and our neighbors: then shall we receive this Image of
eternal life again, and say with S. John. 1, Ioh, 3, 14
Nos scimus quonicum translati sumus de morte ad vitam, quoniam diligimus
fratres. We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love
the brethren. And this love must be to every person as to our own proper
selves, with out fraud or dissimulation. 1, Ioh, 4, 20
Qui enim non diligit fratrem suum quem videt: Deum quem non videt, quomodo
potest diligere? For how can he that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, love God whom he has not seen. Et hoc mandatum habemus a Deo: Vt qui
diligit Deum, diligat et fratrem suum. 1, Ioh, 4, 21,
And this commandment have we of God: that he which loves him, should love
his brother also.

Therefore I may say that Love is a living Image, and the spyrite of life,
that only gives life to the body. And as the body has five wits, whereby he
orders all his works: even so has the soul five spiritual wits, whereby
she works all things that are pleasing and acceptable in y^ sight of God.

That this living Image of Love has five ghostly wits, and the operations of
them. Chapter. 9.
OF these five wits, S. Bernard in Sermo.
Saint Bernard speaks in one of his Sermons showing that there are five manner
of Loves. The first is a reverend and lively love of parents and kinsfolks.
The second is the affecting love of our neighbors, and they that dwell
together. The third is rightwise love, that we ought to have to every
reasonable person. The fourth is violent love of our enemies. The fifth is holy
and devout love of God above all.

These five Loves may well be compared to the five bodily wits or senses, A
comparison between the bodily wits and the five loves.
and great resemblaunce may be discerned between them, if we mark what
agreement they have together.

The Love of Parents and kindred, 1. The love of kindred, with sense of touching
accords well with the sense of touching, for this sense pertains most and
only to the flesh: so y^ Love is showed to none, but such as are near allied
together, touching carnal consanguinitie. And as the sense of touching is in
the flesh, and in every part of the body: so this love is in every thing that
has life, as well the Jews and Pagans love their kin, as Christian men do,
yea beasts and Serpents also love their kin and offspring.

The second love of Neighbors, 2. The love of neighbors, with the sense of
tasting.
agrees properly with the sense of tasting, because of the great sweetness and
pleasure that is therein, and because it is most needful and appertayning to
man's life. For I cannot see by reason, how a man should live well, either
bodily or ghostly in this world, except he love those persons that he lives
among, and he again he likewise loved of them, which makes the best harmony
and lovely hearing, that can be devised among Christians.

The general Love, 3. The love of all men with the sense of smelling.
whereby of right we must love every man, may be compared with the sense of
smelling, in so much as this sense perceyueth things somewhat further of, then
the sense of tasting does or can, and it has in it self not so great pleasure
and delectation, yet notwithstanding it is very pleasant and necessary. So this
love extends not only to our Neighbors, but to them that be somewhat
further off, which in brief stretches to all mankind.

The sense of hearing discerns things a great deal further off, 4. The love
of our enemies, with the sense of hearing.
then does the other inferior senses, so like wise among men in this world,
there is none further a sunder, then he that loves one who loves not him
again, but rewards him with malice and hatred, for in other senses there is
always some delectation, and some neerenes in working to the flesh: but the
hearing in manner goes out from the flesh, as not having any pleasure and
delectation in the flesh. And therefore it may be very well resembled to the
violent love, that is only caused by the obedience of Gods commandment,
which bids us to love our enemies, which obedience appears evidently to
appertain to the sense of hearing, where the great occasion and cause of other
loves, that I have spoken of, are taken of the flesh, that is of nature and
kind.

But the sight above all other, 5. The love of god, with the sense of seeing.
chalengeth to it self the similitude of the divine and holy love of God, in
that it is most excellent, of a singular nature, more clear and spiritual
then all other senses, and discerns things most far off, and knows the
difference of many things.

For though the smelling and hearing do perceive things somewhat far off:
yet it is more by drawing to of the air, that comes from the object or thing
that smells or sounds well or ill. But the sight does not so, but it
seems rather to go forth and proceed to things very far off, as it may
be figured in these manners of loving. Hereby we do in manner draw unto us
our neighbors, whom we love as our lives, receiving profit and pleasure by
them We draw to us also our enemies, whom we love for this cause, that they
might be as we be, The manner how we ought to love God
that is to say, our friends. But if we love God, as it is our duties we
should do, namely, with all our soul, with all our strength, with all our
mind, we go from our selves unto him, we bye us fast and most swiftly, as the
eye does to the most delectable object, we cast all our love to him, who is
the most unspeakable high goodness, above us and all creatures, having no
respect to our own profit or pleasure no more then the eye can reflect the
sight to see it self.

But to take it for the most high perfection and delight, only to behold and
love him, in whom we may perfectly and absolutely behold our selves and all
creatures.

This is perfection enough, and pleasure largely suffising, what need we to
look for other, since there is none but this witness Christ Jesus himself in
the Gospel of Saint John. Haec est autem vlta aterna, Ioh, 17, 3
vt cognoscant te solum Deum verum, et quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is the
very cause and beginning of life everlasting, to know and love thee the only
true God, and him that thou have sent Jesus Christ thy son, one God with thee.

And as by the sight is gotten the greatest cunning and knowledge, even so by
this love is obtained ye most perfect perseverance, and sure knowledge of all
things good and necessary to be known. As the sight is the cheifest sense, so
the love of God is above all other loves.
Likewise as ye behold in the bodily senses, the sight does principally excel
all the other, the hearing exceeding the other three, and so one is better in
dignitye, and more noble then another, after the order and disposition of the
organes and members that they be in: So in like manner the love of God is most
high, most excellent of all loves, and of greatest worthiness. The love of our
enemy next unto this former, is best in reward. The just love of every person
one to another, the more it is extended and showed, the more worthy and
acceptable is it in yt sight of God. The love of our neighbors, kindred,
friends, and companions, is very necessary, as those other senses are, whichif
they failed, the life were maimed and impeached, and all the other senses of
love should decay. If a man lack tasting and feeling, how can he hear, see,
or yet live: if he cannot love his kindred; his neighbors and companions that
he is daily among, 1, Ioh, 4, 20
ho we can he love. God or his enemy, or love in the state of grace? truly it
cannot be.

Therefore these two loves be very necessary, and except they be grounded in a
better respect then of nature, they be but little worth: and yet the lacks of
them, or hatred contrary to them, is more unworthy then the contrary of the
other two Loves next above, that is, the love toward strangers, and to our
enemies. And because that these two, the love to our neighbors, kindred and
companions, may be readily and unawares disordered (as we may see daily by
common experience) it is as hard to order discreetly the tasting of our
meats and drinks, as also the motions and appetites of the flesh: therefore it
is necessary to look advisedly, that they be not inordinate, carnal, or for
pride and ambition, least they diminish or destroy the other senses of love,
provoking to more excess of sin and intemperancie.

Abraham by the commandment of God, Genesis 12. 4*
forsook his goods, his kindred, and his country, for that he would not be
deceived by this love, and so did many other holy fathers, as we have in the
examples and doctrines of our Savior: Christ, and which you may read in
diverse places of Scripture. The Prophet David also, being stirred up by the
holy ghost said. Psalm. 44, 12
Obliuiscere populam tuum, et domum patrit tui* Forget thy carnal love, thy
country folks, and thy fathers household. Et concupiscet Rex decorem tuum. And
the King of all kings shall be in love with the beauty of thy soul. Therefore
it is necessary, to love discreetlie, so that we love every creature in God,
and for God, after the goodness of it, not for profitte and pleasure, for so the
Catte loves the Mouse. And not to love the thing too much, which is least of
all to be esteemed, nor to make light regard of that, which we ought to love
most effectually, for in true love is no diversity, or exception of persons,
or any craft or deceit, but according as S. Paul says. 1. Ioh, 3, 18
Non diligamus verbo, neque lingua, sed opere et veritate. Let us not love in
word, neither in tongue: but indeed and in verity, every person according to
their goodness and virtue.

Of the habit, vesture, and ornaments of this glorious Image, and the place
where is ought to be set. Chapter. 10.
THus have I showed you, that this glorious and divine Image of love is a
living Image, by reason of the ghostly and spiritual senses it has, If
charity leave the soul, all the senses of love do decay.
for as the soul, if it depart from the body, all the senses and powers fail
and decay: even so, if charity depart from the soul, all these senses of love
must needs perrish and come to nothing, and then remains ye foul dead.
This is the Image all godly persons delight in, and have great pleasure and
felicity to be hold it. This is the living Image, portrayed in the Scripture
like a Queen, and is in deed the dery Queen of all virtues, upon whom all
faithful Christians ought daily to fix their eyes, and never to leave looking
on her. This is the Queen that stands always on the right hand of God, as
the prophett David says. Psalm. 44, 11
In vestitu de aurato, circundata varietate. In apparel goodly guilt, set
about with diversity of orient colors, and precious stones of virtues and
gifts of grace, with borders and hemmes of gold. In this Image should all
zealous affected souls, that be the true and faithful spouses of Christ, have
their glory and delyght, and not in painted clothes, The Papists reverence to
their paltry Images, but a counterfeit devotion, and mere superstition.
or carved and graven Images, set about with diversity of birds, beasts and
fowls, which is but a gross and colored devotion, or more aptly to speak, a
mere, fond, and foolish superstition: and let them have such delight, who
feel no taste of glory and comfort inwardly in their souls, by testimonye of
a good conscience, such as have no zeal to perfect meekenes, and fervent love
of God, and cannot joy or delight themselves, but only in earthly and
transitory things.

But you that be Kings, and Noble men's sons and daughters, yea, all we that
profess the glorious and triumphant name of Christ Jesus, should principally
have our glory inwardly, and from the very heart. Psalm. 44. 15
In fimbriis aureis, circumamicta varietatibus. In hemmes and borders of gold,
that is to say, godly and continual perseueraunce in true love and patience,
which is true gold indeed, surely approved and tried in the fire of trouble
and adversity: apparelled and clothed round about with colors of diverse
virtues, so conveniently, and so religiously set in order in the heart, as one
sets forth another marvelous gloriously, and the beauty of one increases
by the noble virtue of the other, and that beauty which nature it self
affoordeth it, is of so little splendor and orient appearaunce in sight, as
being placed among the other rich virtues, it seems a thousand times more
goodly and precious. Put diligence to obedience, An example well worthy the
noting, touching the apparel of this goodly Image.
and nothing can be more pleasant: let meekenes be joined with chastity, and
nothing is more splendaunt: unite patience with poverty, and nothing can be
more delectable: running coupled with lowlines and gentleness, what is more
beautiful? set Justice and mercy together, and what better company? benignity
placed with magnyficence, is a royal pearl in the eye of the beholder: sadness
or gravity does meruailously well, and discretion mixed among all these,
makes the whole vesture goodly, sure and profitable. And above all these is
the rich gylt garment that I did speak of, namely, godly wisdom, which is
not in gesting riches, pleasure and honors: but in setting them at naught, and
despysing both them and all other earthly things. It is in compunction of
heart, and zealous contrition for our sins and offenses, in daily exercise of
godly and charitable works, and in continual meditation and contemplation of
immortal and heavenly things, in study of holy Scripture, the law of God,
and to frame our life and conversation thereafter. The hemme of this vesture is
perseuerant love, according as Saint Paul says: Finis praecepti, est charitas
de cord puro, 1. Tim. 1, 5.
et conscientia bona, et fide non ficta. The end of the commandments of God,
is charity or perseueraunt love, coming from a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and from a faith unfeigned, this is the extreme part of godly
wisdom, wherein is set great plenty of precious stones and Jewels, the
xii. articles of ye faith, the seven gifts of grace, and many other
inestimable treasures. The white kercher upon the head, is sure hope, made by
the works of cleannes and deeds of pyttie, and whited with the dew of grace
from Heaven above.

Lo thus have I here discoursed the habit and ornaments of this Image of
Love, A good admonition how to behave our selves toward this Image of love.
occupy the eyes of our minds in beholding these varieties, and you that be
the very Temples of God, set up therein the Altar of your hearts, and there
make your sacrifice and prayers: for even now is the time that Christ spoke of
to the Woman of Samaria, saying: Mulier creed mihi, John, 4, 21, 22, 23.
quia veniet hora, quando neque in monte hoc, neque in Ierosolimis adorabitis
Patrem. Vos adoratis quod ^^scitis: nos adoramus quod scimus, quia salus ex
Judaeis est. Sed venit hora, et nunc est, quando very adoratores adorabunt
Patrem in spiritu et veritate. Nam et pater tales quaerit, qui adorent eum.
Woman believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. Ye worship ye wot not what, we
know what we worship, for salvation comes of the Jews. But the hour
comes, and now it is, when the true worshipper^ shall worship the father in
spirit and truth: for such the father also requires to worship him, that is,
not after the outward obseruaunces as the Jews did, that kept the outward
obseruaunces of their law, in sacrifices and prayers with their mouths, but
their heart and love was far from God: therefore he lothed and despised their
sacrifice, saying:

(...) mihi multitudinem vict^^arum vest^^rum pl^^us sum. etc. Esaias. 29
What shall I do with your diverse sacrifices? I am full of them, I require
them not of yours but a loving and a contrite heart he never despises, and that
is the sacrifice which he requires.

How this Image of Love is to be honored. Chapter. 11.
We have delivered us in many and sundry places of Scripture, that God
regards not the outward appearaunce of man, but looks earnestly on his
inward behaui^r, whereupon it is said in the Prophet Samuel. Nec iuxta i^^uitum
(...) ego indica, 1, Sam, 16, 7
(...) enim vidit as quae parem, (...) cor. For God see^th not as man sees:
God looks upon the heart of man, not upon his outward behavior.
for man lookketh on the outward appearaunce, but the Lord beholds the heart
and judges thereafter. Again, Non secundum visionem indicabit, neque secundum
auditum aurium argu^^ etc. And he shall judge not after the outward seeing of
man's eyes, nor after the hearing of the ears: but after the very right, and
after the thought and intent of man: Therefore if a man take heed, and be wary
what he does in the sight of man, much more ought he to be careful what he does
in ye sight and presence of almighty God. It is not the garment that makes men
holy, but the intent of the heart within
When the body is clothed in a religious vesture we think it well, and as
beseems: but what does it help or avail if ye mind bear still a secular and
sinful habit, after the manner and fashion of the world? such keep silence
outwardly, and seem in the eyes of men as saints but let them look that the
mind with in be at rest from vain thoughts, and not cloyd or choked with
worldly imaginations, else all their holiness is to small purpose. In the material
Temple, we kneel and stoop low to the ground: but what does that profit us,
if in y^ inward temple of our soul we stand sturdily and irreverently against
God and our superiors, in disobeying his or their commandments? An excellent
note for fasting and abstine^ce
Some fast and abstain from many things, which are good, and of themselves
do not defile man: but should they not rather refrain from suspicion,
detraction, and from all evil speaking one of another? which indeed polluteth
and defiles both other men's consciences, and their own also. Many do make
gaye and adorn the material temple or Church, and show great reverence and
devotion in it: but to what end is that, Ezech, 8, 10,
says y^ prophet Ezechiel, When the temple of their soul is full of serpents,
Idols and abominations of Egypt? that is, evil and unclean thoughts, well
worthy to be avoided and suspended.

We sing and praise God with our tongue, let us look that we do so likewise
with our heart and mind. We speak fair and devoutly with our mouth: let us
mean as well in our souls, or else it is not well. The body is kept and
contained within a little house or Cell: let not the mind then be wandering
about y^ huge wide world. It is much better to confess our sins before God
then before a ghostly father.
We account it well done of us, if we use oftentimes to accuse our selves of
our sins, before a Priest our ghostly father: but it is much better done,
and more auayling to our souls health, when we do secretelie and earnestly
accuse and confess our sins to God, with a true, penitent and vnfeygned
hatred of them, and with a zealous and laboring intent to forsake them, for
the true love and fear of God: for an inward wound must have an inward
medicine, and none is able to forgive sin, but he that with the breath of
his mouth confounds sin, and treads triumphantly upon death, hell and
damnation.

If ye come to hear the word of God, which is the most necessary and only
food of the soul: Math, 13, 14
hear it inwardly, least it be said Audientes no^ ^^diunt. They hear and
hear not. But hear Gods word so outwardly, that you may say with the Prophet
David. Psalm, 84, 8,
Audiam quid loquatur in me Dominus Deus. I will hearken what the Lord God
speaks in me, with fervent desire to accomplish in deed, that which is
showed in word, that it may be said unto you, Luk, 11, 28
Blessed are they which hear the word of God, and keep it. that is as much
to say, as we should hear it with the ear of obedience, Psalm. 44, 15
which ear David exhorts the Kings daughter to incline, she whose beauty
was inwardly in hemmes of Gold, as I spoke before.

This have I said, that we should not lean or trust too much to outward
obseruaunces and ceremonies, otherwise then the word of truth does assign:
whereto I add, that they be also little or nothing acceptable, without the
inward and devout workyng go therewith. We may not leave of the honorable and
devout customs and holy ordinances of the Church. Haec oportuit facere,
Math, 23, 23
et illa non omittere, These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone, as the outward must not be left off, so the other, being the holy
and inward obseruaunces, are much more necessary, and they must needs be
done, if we will have any profit of them. S. John therefore says in his
Gospel. Spiritus est Deus, Ioh, 4. 24
et eos qui adorant eum, in spiritu et veritate oportet adorare. God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spyrit, Math, 25, 12,
and in truth. Remember we not the foolish Virgins, who had Lamps of goodly
works outwardly, but they wanted that they should have had inwardly, I mean
the Oil of divine grace: which was the cause the bride groom knew them not,
and so they were excluded from the marriage.

Therefore rear up an altar in your inward temples, even in the very bottom and
depth of your hearts, you that be the living temples of God, there set up lights
of heavenly knowledge, get you learning both by doctrine and grace, whereby
you may work, teach and show examples of light: make there your oblations of
a meek and contrite heart: there make a sweet savor to God, with y^ burning
coals of unspotted love, and sweet incense of devotion: there kneel meekely
with reverent inclinations: there make your protestations, with lowly fear
and earnest compunction of heart: there erect up your glorious Image of love:
there use your meditations and contemplations, and there behold those two
Images whereof I showed you before.

The one is a goodly great Image, increat and incomprehensible, that is GOD
himself, 1, Ioh, 4, 4
Deus charitas est, God is love. The other our own little Image, our little
love, created and caused by the Image of God, as a little Image in a glass:
but yet it is very precious and good, by means whereof the soul has life,
and the ghostly senses yT I spoke of. And though our love be very little, and
nothing in comparison of y^ other divine Image, which is infinite, and not to
be equalled, in that it exceeds all things whatsoever. Yet he will have
ours unto the likeness of his love, saying: Hoc mand^ vobis, vt diligatis in
Uicem sicut dilexi vos. Ioh, 15, 17,
This I command you, that you love together, as I have loved you. And many
times he inciteth to love one another, and teaches how, saying: Sicut dilexit
me pater, et ego dilexi vos. Manete in dilectione mea. Ioh. 15, 9 13, 14,
As the father has loved me, even so have I loved you. Continue you in my
love. Again. Greater love then this has no man, that a man bestow his life
for his friends, ye are my friends if you do what soever I command you. And
a number like examples has he left us of his everlasting love, that we might
frame ours thereby toward our neighbors: which because it is of so great
valewe and estimation, let us yet speak somewhat more thereof, and hold our
labor well spent in discoursing on so special a matter. Love is the whole
perfection of a christian man.
If we will consider what is the fountain, life and soul of man's virtue, and
the very root of all his christian actions: you shall see that it is only the
true love of Gods. And whosoever has his mind inwardly and through lie
inflamed with the love, of GOD: he is the blessed man that keeps Gods word,
that fulfilleth al his law, that never wills the doing of evil, and ever
delights in doing well. This love of God that causes such perfections in
man, What the perfect love of God is, and the state thereof
is likewise called charity, and he loves not God perfectly that is without
this charity. The perfect love of GOD cannot stand with any care or study for
this life: the perfect love of God abides not the coupling with any other
love: the perfect love of God knows no affection to kindred: it knows no
difference between poor and rich: it knows not what means thine and mine,
it can not distinguish a foe from a freende. For he that truly and perfectly
loves God, must love God alone, nothing beside God, nor with God: but love all
indifferently in God, and for God. We that say we love God, when we scant
once a day remember him, and yet never remember we God in such manner, but
that more often and more earnestly we remember other things: in saying then
that we love God, and doing thus, we are not able to prove true what we say.
The description of a true and perfect lover of God.
For the perfect lover of God is so wedded to God, that nothing abides in his
thought but the quick and lively remembrance of God. As for our spirits and
senses, they be occupied with so many other matters, that we can want ^^nd and
leisure to think on God: so far (...) we from this perfect love, which is a
virtue of that dignity, power and majesty, that in it self contains all
the precepts of the (...), all the Laws of the Prophets, all the doctrine of
Christ, and all the rules of the Apostles: yea, more then all this, love has
that pre-eminence, as it is under no rule, but is Lord above all Laws, all
inventions, all precepts, and all commandments that GOD has given to man: For
love has no bond. But you must always remember, that love is not perfect,
unless it vee burning.

It is not a quenched love, a cold love, or love growing in the teeth or
lips which I now speak of: but the hot burning hearts affection toward
God, this you must understand to be perfect love.

The end of all the course and walking of the son of God in this world, The
whole time of Christ here on earth, was to plant this love among men.
was to leave here among men this love. The mark whereat our Savior in all
his preaching and teaching aimed, was to have men endued with this love. For
our divine Schoolmaster saw, that there needed no rehearsal of sins which
were to be eschewed, nor yet of virtues that were to be followed, if men could
lay sure hold on this love: which of it self is sufficient to keep men from
stumbling in the way, from wandering out of the way, and finally to conduct men
to the blessed ways end, so that the compass and circuit of it is so wide,
as it comprehends al y^ can be spoken either against vice or with virtue. Yet
some think y^ love is nothing but to keep patience, and not to be displeased
or angry, indeed this is one part of love: but not all, for whatsoever the love
of God provoke us to, or the fear of God drives us from, all is concluded
in this perfect love. Beside, Saint Augustine says. S. Augustine his words
concerning this divine love
Love is a good and gracious effect of the soul, whereby man's heart has no
fantasy to esteem, value or ponder any thing in this wide world, beside or
before the care and study to know God. For whosoever is inclined to love
these earthly things, so long as he so does, it is not possible for him ever
to attain to the assured, constant and perfect use of love, because his mind
has so many and so diverse hinderaunces, that withdraw him from taking the
possession of this great treasure, wherein is couched the heaps of all other
virtues. And a little more to speak of these impediments and lettes, it shall
much appertain to my purpose: for we shall the more easily come to love, if
we know and can escape all the blocks that lie in our way to let us, not
only to keep us from this virtue, but also to drive and chase it so far
from us, that neither we can come to it, nor it to us.

Of the impediments and lets, that keep us from this true Image of divine
love, and of diverse necessary rules to be remembered. Chapter. 12.
THe perfect love of God, has in it a marvelous quietness and rest, The love
of God has in it perfect quietness and rest.
it is never moved, shrred or carried away by any storm of worldly ^^^bles:
but sits fast and sure in a continual calmenes, against all (...) all
wethers, and all storms whatsoever. No rock is more still then the mind of a
charitable man, when the world tumbleth, rolleth and tosseth it with the fierce
waves of temptations which drowneth the minds of all that are weak and sick
in love: yet sits this man safe and sound from al these disturbances, and
triumphs over them with great tranquilitye. You must understand, that there
are certain motions called passions, which very so^^ assault our soul, and
brings our spirit into great disquietnes: The impediments and lets of true
love.
as to be moved with (...) to nourish, rancor and malice, to be mindful of
any injury, to be studious for auenging, to be grieved with evil speaking, to
^ume at backbyting, to grudge at complaints, and to freate with chyding. These
are the things that suffer no mind to rest, and the very least of these
passions will permit no quietness to be had. Again, to studdy for promotion, to
care for marriage, to thirst for riches, to be greedy of honor, and to gape
after praises: these (...) also sharp spurs in y^ sides of a quiet mind,
that at no time it can enjoy any rest or ease. Likewise to ensue a delight of
deintie and choice feeding, to be overcome with pleasures of the body, to fall
down in sorrow, to perch up with gladness, to hold ^p the head to high in
prosperity, to hold it down to low in adversity, and to be in bondage under y^
fierce rules of sensual lusts, whose cruelty over man has no pity, measure
or end: these and such like so vex and trouble the mind, that no love or
charity can harbor there. For look a little vp^^ the unmerciful man that can
not (...), Examples of these great impedime^ts to love.
see how he boyleth in his (...) to be avenged. Look upon the (...) stomach,
how he without (...), in destring to see his hurt (...) he enuieth. Look upon
the glutton, how beastly he puruayeth his belly cheer. Look upon the Lether,
how busy he is in his vngrations (...). Look upon the coueto^s in (...),
how without reason he pincheth and scrapeth for gaynes, and look upon the
ambitions fellow, how (...) him self to get worship and (...). These men
through their (...), are no less grea^^^ to satisfy their desires: then the
hungry and thirsty bodies, through natural necessity seek to be refreshed,
whereby it follows, that sleeping or waking, these men's minds keep ever one
state of disquietnes. Such wrestling fantasies and inordinate appetites are
these passions, which move and stir the soul contrary to her nature:
either by love without reason, or hatred without measure, when we wyllingly
consent to the wind of these sensible things. (...) lover to ourselves, the
mother of these passions.
The mother of all these passions, in a ^^^tiall love that we bear to (...)
selves, that is to say, the love of this (...), and of this life: to kill in us
his ^^^ther of all mischief, our master Christ teaches us to hate this life,
and to set our body at naught. Math, 10. 39*
(...) animam suam (says He) (...) Mark, 8, 35
et qui perdider it (...) propter me, Luk, 9, 24
inueniet eam. Ioh. 12, 24
He (...) finds his life shall loose it, Math, 6, 26
and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it, so that the next way
to (...) life, is if we set nothing by (...) the caring for this body,
^^porteth and brings with it a (...) of Gods providence: as though GOD had
better provided for the (...) of of the air, then for man, whom he has
created after his own Image. Now then to get this rest, that thereby we may
obtain love, we must cast away the love of this life, which procures all the
aforenamed boisterous passions, whereby our soul stands in great per^^ll of
death. For learn you, that to the soul it is a sore ^^ath to be separated
from God, and these passions are they that only pluck the soul from God, and
causes it to forget: The world is full of dead souls, that trauail in the
works of darkness.
heaven in the busye occupatio^s of this world, which swarmeth full of dead
souls, that night and day travail and sweat in the works of darkness, from
whence they shall depart into another darkness, which is endless, never to see
the face of GOD their creator.

And this is the conclusion of this passionate soul, that lies in the fetters
of filthy lusts without rest, drawn now hither, now thither, in a
continual wavering of vain ^an^asies: But on the other side, the quick
living soul, that quietly rests in the love of God, drives from her (by the
power of grace, wherewith she is endued)* all these unquiet passions, and if at
any time she stand in fear to be moved with sinful appetites, she
fasteth, watches and prays: the man or woman (I say) does thus, in who^
such a blessed soul bears rule.

Likewise against anger, wrath and vain glory, be sets at naught both
honor and dishonor, yea, ^^ame, slander and worship in this world, are
nothing in his reputation: against remembrance of displeasures, he prays
for his evil willers, such a lesson love teaches, What love teaches.
and encourages this blessed soul, to be continually occupied, in mayntayning
and defending the minds quietness, a thing above all other in this world to be
warily kept, in that it differs not from the Angels state in heaven, being
not moved with these vexations, which skurge and whip man's mind, by reason of
the corrupt affection and love, that he bears in his itching body: a love
most contrary to this blessed love, which has ten times more ease, then the
other has trouble.

Let us here remember the lesson of our Master Christ, the very author and
preacher of love, Math, 5, 39 40, 41,
he says. Ego autem dico vobis, non resistere malo: sed siquis to percusserit
in dexteram maxillam tuam, praebe illi et alteram, Et ei qui vult tecum in
iudicio (...) tollere, (...) ei et (...). Et quicunque et angaria^^^it milla
pass^^ vade cum ille et alia (...) I say unto you, that you resistant evil:
but whosoever will give thee a blow on thy right cheek, turn to him the (...)
also. And if a (...) will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coate^, let
him have thy (...) also. And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile, go
with him (...). The form of this lesson that Christ here gives, into
instruct and (...) that will be his Disciples, to regard nothing of the body
or of the world, above the rest and quietness of the mind* but that we should
suffer the loss of (...) goods, with the heart, yea, (...) the death of our
(...), rather their we should ^oole any small portion of our (...), or to be
moved with any passion, whereby our love toward God might decay. No hurt can
be so great to the body, as the least disquietnes in the mind


It is not possible (after Christ his doctrine) to take in this world, by any
kind of violence; so great damage or hurt in body or goods, as is the least
drop of trouble in the mind, where no tyrant, nor the devil him self has
any dominion: (...) therefore believe our Master Christ, and to the death let
us never break (...) with God, for if we do, (...) well (...) rest and happy
tranquillity.

The way (...) this dangerous evil, that threate to pull us thus violently
from this sweet content of mind, is only y^ perfect love of God, which makes
the spirit strong, to withstand the (...) shouldering (...) which the (...)
life (...) Hope in God.
of the (...) and to us (...) hope is (...) patience, tht is (...) which (...)
enduring is obtained with (...) that is a (...) causes courage of fly and
(...) Fear of God.
the which f^are grows by an undoubted beleef^ in Christ our Master his
teaching. Thus from faith we come to fear, from fear to flying from sin,
and in flying from sin, we take a patient mind to suffer, whereby we catch
hold on hope and trust in God: through which hope, our soul sits in a sure
chair of a certain expectation, of that which is laid up in store for us
in heaven. And hereof finally comes this perfect love in us, which causes
us to love God, for his infinite goodness in the same promise making, whereof
now we wait for the fulfilling: the which is also the thing, that enforces
and orders all our thoughts in such a due rule, that our life thereby
renders (in all our actions) a sweet savor both to God and man.

But let us once repeat the effect of this lesson. Belief in Christ, with the
repetition of the former lesson.
Whosoever believes steadfastly in our Master Christ, he fears his
punishment, and he that fears his punishment, refrayneth himself from
sensual lusts, which be the causes of punishment: he that auoydeth such causes
abides well, and contentedly endures tribulation, he that patiently
suffers tribulation, has a blessed hope and trust in God, which draws and
plucketh ye mind from worldly affections: and ye mind once freely discharged
of all love to this world, strayte way takes pure burning love toward God,
and that makes quietness, rest and peace in our conscience. Thus every way we
must resolve our selves to rest finally in the possession of love, else we can
neither believe or fear God as we ought to do, nor refrain evil lusts, nor
suffer tribulation, nor hope in God, nor leave the love of these worldly
dregs as we ought to do: but in these we shall be drowned both night and day,
during the time of this life, from whence we shall pass into miserable
condition of body and soul, to endure without end the indignation of God,
whom after this life we shall never see, unless we can now for his sake
despise this world, which exceeds the power of man's feeblenes to do, except
he use the puissant might of love, which brings so fervent a desire toward
God, as nothing beside him is once thought on or regarded: and such a sweetness
feels the charitable mind in his desire, that he will not forgo or diminish
any part thereof, although he should suffer a thousand hurtes and injuries.
Here may we remember the loving Disciple of Christ, Acts. 7, 60
Saint Stephen, how he enflamed with love to God, prays aloude for his
tormenters, and craves of God remission for their sins, saying: Domine ne
statuas illis hoc peccatum. Lord lay not this sin to their charge, alleging
their ignorance for their excuse. The bearing of Christ's Cross, is made by
this love a sweet yoke, and an easy burden, for he that is united with God in
perfect love, says in all tribulations with the prophet Ieremye. Iere, 17, 16
Non sum turbatus Domine sequens te pastorem. Oh Lord, in following thee my
ruler, I cannot be discomforted.

How we should know when we have this true and perfect Image of love, and how
to use it. Chapter. 13.
ALbertus says, That a faithful and humble soul (in manner) abhors to love
God in respect of reward or profit, The saying of Albertus of an humble and
faith full soul.
but as God gave him self freely to man's soul, looking for no reward, but
wylling and desirous to make man partaker of his bliss: even so a perfect
loving soul should give himself fervently and freely to God in love, with
all his strength and power, seeking no profit either transitorye or
everlasting: but only to set all his affection and love upon God, for his
high majesty, goodness, power, wisdom, holiness, perfection and bliss, that he
is of by nature. He that loves God, because he is good and profitable to him,
and because that principally he should make him partaker of his joy and
happiness: he; may be convinced, that he has but natural and imperfect love.
A very proof of love and charity: Christ puts himself in the Gospel
after S. John, Ioh, 14, 21
saying: Qui habet mandata mea et seruat ^a: ille est qui dilagis me. He that
has my commandments, and keeps them: the same is he that loves me.
Whereupon* says Saint Augustine: S. Augustine in ciuit, dei.
He loves God that keeps his commandments, not that he is compelled for
fear of great pain, or for covetousness of joy: but because the thing that is
commanded is most good and holy.

The love of our neighbor likewise, The love of our neighbor must be without
hope of reward.
must be without any respect of profit and reward, especially if it be true
love, like unto his that commands us, saying: Hoc est praceptum meum, John.
15, 12
Vt diligatis inuicem, sicut dilexi vos. Thus is my commandment, That ye
love together as I have looued you.

There be two evident signs of love toward God in us. The first is, when we
joy and gladly praise God in all things that pleases him, what soever they
be, whenever, of whomsoever, and wheresoever they be don. The other sign is:
when a man is sorye in God for all things that be displeasant unto him,
whatsoever they be* whenever, of whomsoever, or wheresoever they be done.

An other rule of love, our Savior Christ puts in the Gospel after S.
Mathewe saying: Math, 22, 37
Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, et in tota anima tua, et in tota
mente tua. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind. With all thy heart.
Thou shall love God with all thy reason, with all thy will, and with all thy
mind and memory. With all thy reason without any error, subduing the wit and
understanding unto the meek service of God: applying our study toward him,
and enforcing our whole desire to the knowledge and sight of him. With all thy
soul.
With all thy soul and obedient will, that is, when the fear of no
transitorye evil drives us from his obedience, or love of any worldly matters
draws us from his service. With all thy mind and memory, With all thy mind.
forgetting al things that displease God, and setting our mind from all
things that let and hinder his love: as injuries done unto us, which, when
they he called to remembrance, are as iron left in a wound, which festereth
and lets the healing of the wound.

If we will obtain perfect love, Four manner of ways to subdue our reason
to the obedience of God.
we must subdue our reason and understanding under the obedience of God, and
after his mind and will four manner of ways.

First, in all things that pertayne to the Faith: we must obey GOD and
believe him. Whereof Hilarious says: S. Hilarious,
Soli Deo de secredendum est, qui se solus nouit. etc We must believe only
GOD, of those things that belong to himself, for he only knows himself.

The second way, is to consider and judge evil of our own selves, and well
of all other.

The third, is to prefer y^ mind and sentence of our betters and
superiors, before our own minds, and that most specially is to be done in
matters of religion concerning the soul. The fourth way, is to bethink our
selves of our own actions, and all that belongs to us, and to turn away our
eyes from judging and beholding of other folks manners and behavior.
Whereupon says Saint Bernard: Keep diligently thy self, and that thou may
so do, turn away thy eyes from other men's deeds.

The rule of charity toward our neighbor is, Math, 22, 39
Diligis proximum tuum sicut teipsum. Mark. 12, 31
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, that is after the opinion of Saint
Augustine. Thy friend as thy self, thine enemy as thy friend. And as every
man looueth goods and honor, that is good to himself in body and soul, and
escheweth or hates his own hurt and damage in any of these four: so ought we
to love and be glad of all that is good any of these ways in our neighbor,
both freende and foe, and to hate and be sorrye for their hurt and hinderance.

Notwithstanding there is an order in charity, whereof the spouse of cHRIst
speaks in the (...). Cant. 2. 4,
He has set charity in me in an order. Which S. Augustine declares thus,
Prima diligendum es (...) supra nos est (...). First we must love God? above
all, next our own souls, then our neighbor, then our bodies etc the bodies of
our neighbors? (...) for (...) goods, he speaks not of the, for they should
not be (...) but used as (...) bitter pill or (...) men declare that we (...)
our neighbor as our self, (...), A notable example, how we should love our
neighbor.
and for God. (...) purchased for him in the kingdom of heaven, neither with
silver nor gold, but with the shedding of his most precious blood. Therefore
to honor God very devoutly in time of prosperitye, and forgette him again
when he lays any cross upon us, declares that we know not what true
charity means, neither is it well proved in us by love of friends only:
for to love other because they love us, belongs to nature, and is without
reward, but is love them that love not us; comes of grace, and to draw our
(...) to love, by showing benefitte; pleasures, and gyfts, appertains (...)
and is acceptable in (...).

I think there is nothing that makes us so like unto Christ our master (who
is the very Image of love) as to love our enemies, Nothing makes us so like
unto Christ as to love our emies.
and to be well pleased with them that revile and speak evil of us, Matthew, 5, 44
yea such as (...) us with continual molestations and (...) for this I am
sure, that we should receive more grace and glory in their persecuting us,
then in their dissembling falshoode and favor, if we could use our selves in
so good and discrete order, and apply it well for the love of God.

Thus did enemies and tyrants much more advance holy and religious martyrs,
toward obtaining their everlasting joy and glory, then all their friends and
favorers could do, and the more they inflicted torture and punishment on
their bodies, the more sweet and heavenly comfort they received in their
souls: agreeing with his words, who is the very author and fountain of all
truth, where he says.

Beati qui persecutionem patiantur, Matthew, 5, 10, 11, 12,
propter iustitiam: quoniam ipsorum est Regnum calorum. Beati estis quum male
dicerint vobis homines, et persecuti vos fuerint, et dixerixt omne malum
aduersum vos mentientes, propter me. Gaudete et occultate: quoniam mercer
vestra copiasa est in calis. Sit enim persecuti sunt prophetas qui fuerunt ante
vos. Blessed are they which have been persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theyrs is the kingdom of Heaven.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and lying, shall
say all manner of evil against you or my sake. Rejoice ye and be glad: for
great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you.

The very tokens of love to our neighbors, The true tokens of love and hatred.
are when we be sorrye for their hurt, pain and aduersitye, as well our
friends as our enemies: and be as glad with all our hurt of their profit,
health and prosperity, which I may say to you are two dainty birds, and very
hard and scant to be found. Now on the contrary, the very tokens of hatred,
malice, (...) envy are, when it greeueth a man to think well of his neighbor,
or to speak to him, when it is painful to heir good of him, and when he is
desirous to let and hinder that thing which should do him profit, pleasure
and help, and diligent to seek his injury and harm, detracting his good
name, Chrisosto^es words of envy and malice.
and slaundering his honest actions. S. Chrysostom says: That when malice
has once gotten entrance into a man's heart al things that are spoken, heard
or done, in such sort are taken and understood, that they always increase the
more malice and longer enmity. If there be any thing said of the enemy that
is good, it is not believed, or else it is perverted. If any evil be spoken,
that is forthwith credited, confirmed and multiplied. Thus did not Christ to
Judas that betrayed him.

A brief description of the portraite of Envy and malice. Chapter. 14.
I Had not thought to have spoken of this deadly and deuillish Image of Envy
and malice, that is so ouglie, pale and wan, because in no wise it may stand
by this glorious Image of love, except it be trodden under y^ feet thereof, as
we see the pictures of the devil and persecuting tyrants under the feet of
Saints, to their utter confusion, rebuke and damnation: but because
Chrysostom bewrayed some part thereof, I thought it not amiss to add to the
rest, that all men may see what a cruel monster it is, and what a sweet
comfort divine love is. If I should portrayte it like the devil it is worse
then be: Malice worse then the devil
for through it the devil fell from heaven horriblye deformed and daily his
malice increases through the same. If I should make it like Nero, Worse then
Nero.
yet is envy much worse then he: for Nero burnt but a part of Rome, but this
envy has set all the whole world on fire, that it can hardlye be quenched
again.

Compare it unto Death, and it is a great deal worse then he: Worse then
Death.
for it brought Death into the world, and banished man from glorious Paradise.
It flew Abell, and has wrought most of all the mischief since the beginning
of the world. It was the worker of Christ's death, and yet it continues daily
more and more against all his members. It was the cruel beast that was
supposed to have devoured innocent Joseph. Ouids description of malice.
The Poet Ovid discribed it like an old Trot, with a lean face, pale and wan,
the teeth black, a fiery tongue, the mouth full of venom, the eyes hollow,
never looking right forth, grim and cruel of countenance, the breast swollen
full of poison, cruel nails, with bloody hands and many other evil
proportions: but yet he could not describe it so ill as it is indeed. And
because I would all men should have it in great contempt and despite I will
cast it under the feet of this mine Image of glorious love; as a monster made
of all mischief and wickedness.

It has the tail of the Serpent detraction, backbyting and slander, which is
the same Serpent that the Wise man speaks of: Eccle. 10. 10
Qui mordet in silentio. That styngeth priuilye, with the teeth and pricks of
detraction, slander and backbyting.

It has the feet and subtimes of a Fox, through hypocrisy, for a Fox in
the wood never goes forth right: but sometime on the one side, then on ye
other, and will feign himself dead: to deceive what he seeks for his pray.

Quasi vulpes in deserto, propheta tui Israel erant. Ezec. 13, 4
O Israel, thy prophets are like Foxes in desert places. In like manner these
envious hypocrites are like Foxes in the wilderness, that walk by subtle ways
least they should be espied, and feign themselves holy and religious to
deceive the well meaning, yet weak in knowledge. It has the belly of a
Dragon, which is idleness, full of stinking thoughts and false imaginations:
the breast of a Lion, proud and disdainful: the head, partly like death, and
partly like the devil: it has holes in steed of eyes like unto death, for it
has neither love nor fear of God. It has the left ear like Nero, ready to
hear all evil, and ye right ear chopped away like Malchus, and stopped or
closed, that it can hear no goodness. The mouth is wide, Psalm. 5. 10.
like an open sepulcher or grave, full of filthy bones and carrion, and the
tongue sharp as a sword, and all on fire as hell: Iam, 3, 6,
the least spark whereof, is able to set a whole City on fire, and all is
venom as a Cockatrice. But the prophet David wills; that my glorious Image
of divine love, Psalm, 91, 13
should confound and tread upon this ougly monster, saying: Super aspidem et
basiliscum ambulabis, et conculcabis Leonem et draconem. Thou shall go upon
this Adder and Cockatrice, and this Lion and dragon shall thou tread under thy
feet. We read that Moses, Verbis suis monstra placauit. Eccl. 45, 2.
With his words he pacified the monsters of Egypt: but this monster could
never be contented and appeased. Example hereof we have in Pharao, Exo, 7, 13,
who after he was infected with this deuillish monster: no manner of thing
either of love or frare could pacify his mind, or make him contented with the
children of Israel. Beware of this false mo^ster, and for this intent I have
thus discribed him, that every man should be wary of him, and utterly despise
him. Notwithstanding many times he will trans-forme him self into an Angel of
light, 1, Cor, 11, 31
by flattering and dissimulation, and thereof specially beware: but yet may he
be known easily, if we will not give hasty credence to him. Thus have I painted
this ougly fiende in his colloures, that mine Image might seem the more
goodly: which I pray you to accept, albeit I most unworthy and unable, have
taken upon me to show forth a thing of so great and mighty consequence

The commendations which Hugo de sancto Victore, uses of this worthy Image of
divine love: and the conclusion. Chapter. 15.
YEt ere we part, it shall not be much from my purpose, to show you what
estimation the holy man Hygo de sancto Victore made of this glorious Image of
divine love: Hugo de sancto victore, his words of love.
says he. O charitas, quid dicam de te? quomodo laudabo te? si saperemte,
appreciarer te. etc. O Love, what shall I say of thee, how shall I praise
thee? if I felt thee or perceived thee: I should some what judge in my mind
what thou art worth. If I knew thy value, I could esteem some price of thee.
But perchance thou exceedest my poor ability, thy price cannot be found by
me, it passes my small power: and yet will I give all that I have, and all
that I can get, for thee, all the substance of my house will I change for
thee, all that is in the poor lodging of my body will I give for thee: and yet
when I shall give all, I may well repute it as nothing. All the delectation of
my flesh, all the delights, joys and pleasures of my heart: I will gladly
bestow, that I might have thee only in my possessyon. Thou only art to me
more dear, thou only art to me more profitable, thou only art to me more
sweet, more pleasant and more delectable, then any creature beside in the
whole world: satisfying me most plentiouslie, saving and defending me most
surely, Whether the heart will choose to live with the world, or with God.
and preserving me most prosperously, so that I will speak and show to all
men of thy praise. O thou heart of man, which of these will thou choose: to joy
always with this world, or to be always with god? The thing that thou love most
that do thou rather and sonest choose, take good heed therefore thou faint
heart, that either thou redres thy love, or else delay thy better election. Is
there any thing in the world to be loved? what is there then where the maker
of the world dwells? love therefore that better place, and thou may make the
better choice. Choose then love, for who so has love, has God: he that has
love when he goes or rests (...) whatsoever he does, his heart goes not
from God. They that have charity, in exhorting other to charity, they inflame
themselves with with love: and they show not only inwardly, but also indeed
to every man, how sweet the love of God is, and how sour and bitter is the
vnpure and deceiuable love of the world. The nature and properties of love.
Charity scorneth the glory of this world, it disdaineth and reprooueth the
toyling and business thereof, and shows what foolishnes it is, to have
confidence and trust in these things that pass away so lightly: it meruaileth
at the blindness of men, that love so much these earthly things, and wondereth
why they do not utterly condemn and despise them. Charity thinks that thing
to be sweet to all men, that sauoureth well and pleasant to her self: and
well may that thing please them which she loves, in that she thinks nothing
but what ought to be manifest to all. And thus it discoureth it self where it
is, for it will not abide secretly within: but will needs declare her self by
outward conversation: O charity, I have praised thee so far as I can, and
still I cast in my mind, if there may be said any more excellent praise to
thy laud. I cannot say whether it be more to call thee God, or to say that
thou did overcome God: He Hugo.
that is more if any be more, and that gladly and bodily will I say of thee.

Thus prayseth Hugo this divine Image of love, The marvelous effects of love
take it therefore, and set it fast upon the Altar of your heart: and
always looking upon it, consider the goodness of it, remember the virtue and
power of it, and see the manifold meruaylous effects of it.

It caused God to make man, it drew him from heaven to earth to redeem him
again from servitude of the devil. It joined the most high and pure nature to
the most low and vile nature, wherein it wrought most marvelous things, in
raising dead men, healing Leapers and al manner of diseases. And at the last
it wounded Christ full bitterly, and slew him full pittiously, that our dead
souls might be quickened to eternal life. It raised him again gloriously for
our justification and redemption. It lifted him to heaven triumphantly, to
glorify mankind in his kingdom. It drew up Stephen victoriously, and crowned
him with the garlande of everlasting happiness. It converted suddenly Saint
Paul. and fixed him so fast to his Master Christ Jesus: that neither
tribulation, Rom, 8, 35
anguish, persecution, hunger, poverty, nakedness, sword, or any other
perrilles* could separate him from the love of Christ. Yea, and it made Paul
so strong, that he said more of himself and his followers.

That neither death, neither life, neither Angels in heaven, To, 8, 38, 39*
nor rule, neither power, neither good things present, neither any things to
come, neither height nor depth, neither any creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And after them, this love made innumerable people to reject and cast away all
worldly things, and to run after Christ, not sparing nor fearing fire, sword,
pain, or any manner of torments whatsoever: but gladlye took them with great
joy and earnest desire, yea, it was but a small thing to them, to forsake
their best friends for the love of Christ Jesus.

And thus not only in strong men, but also in women and children weak and
frail, and in young tender virgins, who were made by this love more strong
then all the Tyrants: so that they feared neither king nor Emperor, but
overcame them both in wisdom and strength, in enduring more pains then their
tormenters could put them to, and so utterly confounded them.

O immortal and divine love, if I unworthy and sinful wretch, have presumed
to praise and show thy glorious Image thus rudely, seeing so many worthy and
holy men have praised and commended thee, yet nothing so much as thou art
worthy, as themselves witness: pardon my want, and enter into my soul I
beseech thee, to kindle it in love, to lighten it with grace to dilate my heart,
to stretch out my desire, to open the bosom of my mind, and to establish thy
dwelling place in the chamber of my soul, that it may receive thee O my GOD,
Father, Son and holy ghost, who art most high and only love, into my
reason, will and memory, for a continual dweller in me for evermore. Amen. ()


