A true Description and brief Discourse, Of a most lamentable Voyage, made
lately to Tripolie in Barbary, in a Ship named the JESUS: wherein is not only
showed the great misery, that then happened the Aucthor hereof and his whole
company, as well the Merchants as the Mariners in that Voyage, according to
the curssed custom of those barbarous and cruel Tyrants, in their terrible
usage of Christian captives: but also, the great unfaithfulness of those
heathnish Infidels, in not regarding their promise.

Together, with the most wonderful judgment of God, upon the king of
Tripolie and his son, and a great number of his people, being all the
Tormentors of those English Captives.

Set forth by THOMAS SAVNDERS, one of those Captives there at the same time.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones, for Edward White, dwelling at the Sign
of the Gun, by the little North door of Paul's, the 15. of April. 1587.

To the Right worshipful Master Julius Caesar, doctor of the civil law, and
Judge of the Admiraltie: Thomas Saunders wishes all health, wealth, and
worldly happiness.
INgratitude or unthankfulness for benefits received (right worshipful) is,
and ever has been a thing so lothsom and vile to men of good minds, that
(among some nations) they have set down laws and ordinances to punish the
offenders therein, so hard and sharp, that those that have been found within
the compass of the same, have suffered no less then loss of life: yea more
then this, the very brute beasts have so much loathed this horrible vice, that
they according to the instinction of nature, have showed themselves (in this
respect) more indifferent then some men: as it is reported in Gueuarra his
works, of a Lion, who finding in his den a fugitive bondsman that was fled from
his master, a Roman Proconsul, dwelling in the confines of the deserts of
Aegipt, having hurt his foot with a thorn which he had gotten roming up and
down seeking his pray, suffered the same to be lanced, cut, and cured by this
fugitive, so that within short space it was thoroughly whole and well. This
poor man although he dwelt quietly with his new found host, and might also
use and take such as he got in the wilderness, yet loving liberty, on a time
g^t forth of the den, and being seen of the espials which his master had
laid for him, was by them taken and brought to him, who caused him to be sent
to Rome, to be tormented among other condemned men, at such time as the
Emperor should make any solemn feast or triumph. It fortuned afterward, this
same Lion to be taken and sent also to Rome, to be there kept among other
sauadge and wild beasts. Not long after this, the same condemned bondsman, was
amongst others appointed also to the slaughter, and brought into the field
called Campus Circulus, to try his fortune with some wild beast, and to
conclude, it was his good hap to encounter with that Lion which he before had
cured: As Soon as this hungry ramping Lion had espied that man, as one
desirous of his pray, he ran toward him to have devoured him, but when he
perceived well that he was the very man that had lodged with him in his den,
and done him good, he straightwaie stood over the man, defending him from the
cruelty of any other beast. When the man who exspected nothing but death, had
well considered the humanity of the beast, and thoroughly regarded him, he was
then assured that it was his quondam host in the deserts, and thereupon made
the bolder to touch him, and so stroked and cherished him. The Emperor and the
whole state of Rome stood still, abashed at this strange and rare sight, and
after a little stay made, caused to be inquired of the man, whether he were a
Nigromancer, or whether he had enchanted the Lion, seeing that he was
hunger-prickt, and yet had no power to hurt him: to this he answered, that his
safety came by the gentleness of the beast, and not of any power of his
own, and reported at large the cause of that clemency, as before is
expressed. To be short, the man had his life, and license to beg up and down
the streets of Rome, leading the Lion in his hand, upon whose breast was
written as follows. Hic Leo est hospes, huius hominis. and in the forepart of
his coat was set down, Hic homo est medicus huius Leonis. To avoid this
horrible sin, I have (Right worshipful) presumed to dedicate unto your
worship, the true reports of my troubles, and of certain others in Turkey,
which although they be not set out with brave terms, yet is in them set down
nothing but plain troth, easy to be told, but hard to be tolerated:
beseeching your worship, as fre^dlie to accept of the same, as I willingly
present it, which if it were answerable to my desires, should then signify
what heart I carry to your worship, unto whom I confess my self most wholly
bounden, and least my rude speeches should savor of flattery. I here leave
your worship to the Almighty, who send you health and heaven.

Your worships most dutiful to command, THOMAS SAVNDERS.

To the gentle Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have here presented to thy view, (although of my self
altogether unwilling, yet won with the earnestness of such (my friends) as
I might not withstand) the true report of my troubles and of diverse others my
Companions and fellows in Tripolie, under the Turks dominion, which I had
thought at the first setting down in paper, should never have bin put in
print, but notwithstanding now, I commit it to thy favorable consideration,
and (I hope) to thy benefit and good liking. Beseeching thee to pardon me for
such faults as I have grossly ouerslipped, considering always that truth
needs no filed terms: If there be any thing that delights thee I have my
desire, if otherwise, friendly control, and then will I rest content, and so
farewell.

Yours to use, Thomas Saunders.

OF A MOST LAMENtable voyage made into Trypolie in Barbary, in a Ship called
the JESUS, etc.
THis voyage was set forth by the right worshipful, sir Edward Osburne knight,
chief merchant of all the Turkish company, and one master Richard Stapers,
the ship being of the burden of one hundred tun, called the Jesus, she was
builded at Farmne a river by Portsmoth, The owners were M. Thomas Thomson,
Nicholas Carnabie, and John Gilman. The Master (under God) was one Aches
Hellier of Blackwall, and hi^ Mate was one Richard Morris of that place: their
Pilot was one Anthony Ierado a French man, of the Province of Massillins: the
Purser was one William Thomson our owners son, the merchants factors were
Roman Sonnings a Frenchman, and Richard Skegs, servant unto the said master
Stapers: ye owners were bound unto ye mercha^ts by charter party thereupon, in
one thousand marks, yt the said ship by Gods permission should go for Tripoly
in Barbary: that is to say, first from Portsmouth to Newhauen in Normandy:
from thence to saint Lukar, otherwise called S. Lucas in Andeloseer, and from
thence to Tripolie, which is in the east part of Africa, and so to return
unto London. Man does purpose, and God does dispose.
But here ought every Christian to note and consider the works of our God
(that many times) what man does determine God does disappoint. The said
master having some occasion to go to Farmne, took with him the Pilot and the
Purser and returning again, by means of a perrie of wind, the boat wherein
they were, was drowned: the said Master, The Master and the Purser with all
the rest except the Pilot drowned.
the Pursser, and all the company, only the said Pilot by experience in
swimming saved himself: these were the beginning of our sorrows. After which
the said Masters mate would not proceed in that voyage: and the owners hearing
of this misfortune, and the unwillingness of the Masters mate, did send down
one Richard Deimound, and shipped him for Master, A new Master chosen.
who did choose for his Mate one Andrew Dier, and so the said ship departed on
her voyage accordingly: that is to say, about the sixteenth day of October,
in anno 1584, she made sail from Portsmouth, and the eighteenth day then next
following, The new m^ister died. The Jesus arrived into Newhauen. Another
Master chose^.
she arrived into Newhauen, where our said last master Richard Deimound by a
surfeit died. The factors then appointed the said Andrew Dier, being then
Masters mate, to be their Master for that voyage, who did choose to be his
Mates, the two quarter masters of the same Ship, to wit, Peter Austine and
Giles Shillabey, and for Purser was shipped ane Richard Burges, afterward about
the eight day of November, we made sail foorthward, and by force of weather
we were driven back again into Portsmouth, The Jesus driven back ag^ine into
Portsmouth.
where we refreshed our victuals and other necessaries, and then the wind came
fair. About the nine and twentieth day then next following, we departed
thence: and the first day of December, by means of a contrary wind, After set
forward and driven back ag^ine into Plimmouth. After that driven back to
Falmouth.
we were driven to Plimmouth: the xviii. day then next following, we made
foorthward again, and by force of wether we were driven into Falmouth, where
we remained until ye first day of January: at which time the wind came fair,
we departed thence, and about the xx. day of the said month, we arrived safely
at S. Lucas, and about the ix. day of March next following, we made sail from
thence, and about the xviii. day of the same month we came to Tripolie The
Jesus arrived into Tripolie.
in Barbary, where we were very well interteined by ye king of ye country,
and also of the commons. The commodities of ye place is sweet oiles: ye king
there is a marcha^t and the rather willing to prefer himself before his
commons, requested our said factors to trafike with him, The king of Tripolie a
merchant.
and promised them that if they would take his oiles at his own price, they
should pay no manner of custom, and they took of him certain Tuns of Oil:
and afterward perceiving that they might have far better cheap,
notwithstanding the custom free, they desired the King to license them to take
the Oiles at the pleasure of his commons, for that his price did exceed theirs:
whereunto the king would not agree, but was rather contented to abate his
price: insomuch that the factors bought all their Oiles of the Kings custom
free, and so laded the same aboard.

In the mean time there came to that place one Miles Dickenson, in a Ship of
Bristow, Another ship of Bristowe came to Tripolie.
who together with our said factors, took a house to themselves there Our
French factor Roman Sonnings, desirous to buie a commodity in the market,
and wanting money, desired the said Miles Dickenson to lend him a hundred
Chikinoes until he came to his lodging, which he did, A French factor beguiled
an English factor.
and afterward the same Sonnings met with Miles Dickenson in the street, and
delivered him money bound up in a napkin: saying, master Dickenson there is
the money that I borrowed of you, and so thanked him for the same: he doubting
nothing less then falsehood, which is sildome known among merchants, and
specially being together in one house, and is the more detestable between
Christians, then being in Turkey among the heathen: the said Dickenson did not
tell the money presently, until he came to his lodging, and then finding nine
Chikinoes lacking of his hundred, which was above three pounds* for that every
Chikinoe is worth seven shillings of English money: he came to the said
Roman Sonnings and delivered him his handkercher, and asked him how many
Chikinoes he had delivered him, Sonnings answered, a hundred: Dickenson said
no: and so they protested and swore on both parts: but in the end the said
Roman Sonnings did swear deeply with detestable oaths* The French factor
desired vengeance to light on ^imselfe, which God brought to pass for an
example to bla^phemous swearers.
and cursses, and prayed God that he might show his works on him, that other
might take ensample thereby, and that he might be hanged like a Dog, and never
come into England again, if he did not deliver unto the said Dickenson an
hundred Chekinoes. And here behold a notable example for all blasphemers,
curssers, and swearers, how GOD rewarded him accordingly, for many times it
comes to pass, that GOD shows his miracles upon such monstrous
blasphemers, to the insample of others, as now hereafter you shall here what
befell to this Roman Sonnings.

There was a man in the said Town a pledge, whose name was Patron Norado, who
the year before had done this Sonnings some pleasure there. The foresaid
Patron Norado was indebted unto a Turk of that Town, in the sum of four
hundred and fifty crowns, for certain goods sent by him into Christendom in
a Ship of his own, and by his own brother, and himself remained in Tripolie
as pledge, until his said brothers return: and as the report went there,
that after his brothers arrival into Christendom, he came among lewd
company, A conspiracy practiced by the French Factor, to deceive a Turkish
merchant of 450 crowns.
and lost his brothers said Ship and goods at dice, and never returned unto
him again. The said Patron Norado being void of all hope, and finding now
opportunity, consulted with the said Sonnings for to swim a seaboord the
Islands, and the Ship being then out of danger, should take him in, as after was
confessed, and so to go to Tallowne in the province of Massillins, with this
Patron Norado, and there to take in the rest of his lading. The Ship being
ready the first day of May, and having her Sails all abroad, our said
Factors did take their leave of the King, who very courteously bid them
farewell, and when they came aboard, they commanded the Master and the
company hastily to get out the Ship: the Master answered that it was
impossible, for that the wind was contrary and ouerblowed. And he required
us upon forfeiture of our bands, that we should do our endeavor to get her
forth, then went we to warpe out the Ship, and presently the king sent a boat
aboard of us, with three men in her, commanding the said Sonnings to come a
shore: at whose coming, the King demanded of him custom for the Oiles, The
king of Tripolie swarueth from his promise, through covetousness.
Sonnings answered him that his highness had promised to deliver them custom
free: but notwithstanding the king weighed not his said promise, and as an
Infidel that has not the fear of GOD before his eyes, nor regard of his
word, albeit he was a King: he caused the said Sonnings to pay the custom to
the uttermost penny. And afterward willed him to make haste away, saying,
that the Ienizaries would have the Oil a shore again. These Ienizaries are
soldiers there under the Great Turk, and their power is above the Kings. And
so the said Factor departed from the King, and came to the water side, and
called for a boat to come a boorde, and he brought with him the foresaid
Patron Norado. The company inquisitiue to know what man that was, The
beginning of their troubles, and occasion of all their misery.
Sonnings answered, that he was his countriman, a passenger: I pray GOD said
the Company, that we come not into trouble by this man. Then said Sonnings
angerlie, what have you to do with any matters of mine, if any thing chance
otherwise then well, I must answer for all.

Now the Turk unto whom this Patron Norado was indebted, missing him,
supposed him to be aboard of our Ship, and presently went unto the King, and
told him that he thought that his pledge Patron Norado was aboard of the
English Ship, whereupon the King presently sent a boat aboard of us, with
three men in her, commanding the said Sonnings to come a shore, and not
speaking any thing as touching the man, he said that he would come presently
in his own bote, but as soon as they were gone, he willed us to warpe forth
the Ship, and said that he would see the knaves hanged before he would go a
shore. And when the King saw that he came not a shore, but still continued
warping away the Ship, he straight commanded the Gunner of the Bulwark next
unto us, to shoot three shootes without ball. Then we came all to the said
Sonnings, and asked of him what the matter was, that we were shot at, he said
that it was the Ienezaries would have the oil a shore again, and willed us to
make have away, All the Turk^^h gunners in T^rpo^ie commanded to do their
best to sink the JESUS, but could n^^ once hit her.
and after that he had discharged three shots without ball, he command^d all
the gunners in the town to do their endeavor to sink us, but the Turkish
gunners could not once strike us, wherefore the king sent presently to the
Baneo: this Baneo is the prison whereas all the captives lay at night, and
promised if that there were any that could either sink us, or else cause us
to come in again, he should have a hundred crowns and his liberty. With that
came forth a Spaniard called Sebastian, A proclam^tion m^^e, that whosoever
could sink her, or bring her in should have a C. crowns, and if he were a
captive he should have his liberty. How a Spaniard took it in hand, and
brought it to pass, and made the Ship to yield.
which had been an old seruitor in Flanders, and he said, that upon
performance of that promise, he would undertake either to sink us, or to cause
us to come in again, and thereto he would gage his life, and at the first shot
he splyt our Rothers head in pieces, and the second shot he struck us under
water, and the third shot he shot us through our foremast with a Coluerlyn
shot, and thus he having rent both our Rother and Mast, and shot us under
water, we were enforced to go in again. This Sebastian for all his diligence
herein, had neither his liberty nor an hundred crowns, so promised by the
said king, but after his service done, was committed again to prison, whereby
may appear the regard that a Turk or Infidel has of his word, although he
be able to perform it, yea more, though he be a King.

Then our merchants seeing no remedy, they together with five of our company
went a shore, and then they ceased shooting, they shot unto us in the whole
nine and thirty shootes, without the hurt of any man. And when our merchants
came a shore, the king commanded presently that they with the rest of our
company, that were with them should be cheined four and four, to a hundred
weight of iron, The English men cheined by four and four.
and when we came in with the ship, there came presently above an hundred
Turks aboard of us, and they searched us, and stripped our very clothes from
our backs, and brake open our chests and made a spoil of all that we had: and
the Christian caitifes likewise that same a board of us, made spoil of our
goods, and used us as ill as the Turks did. And our Masters mate having a
Geneua Bible in his hand, The Christian captives as greedy of the Englishmens
spoil as the Turks.
there came the kings chaefe gunner, and took it out from him, who showed me
of it, and I having the language, went presently to the kings treasurer, and
told him of it: saying, that since it was the will of God that we should fall
into their hands, yet that they should grant us to use our consciences to our
own discretion, as they suffered the Spaniards and other nations to use
theirs, and he granted us, then I told him that the master gunner had taken
away a Bible from one of our men, the Treasurer went presently and commanded
him to deliver up the Bible again, which he did: and within a little after he
took it from the man again, and I showed the Treasuror of it, and presently
he commanded him to deliver it again: saying, thou villeine, will thou turn
to christianity again, for he was a Renegoi, A Turks took a Geneua Bible for
his sh^re of the spoil.
which was one that first was a Christian, and afterward became a Turk, and
so be delivered me the Bible the second time. And then I having it in my hand,
the gunner came to me, and spoke these words, saying: thou Dog I will have the
book in despite of thee, and took it from me, saying: if thou tell the Kings
Treasurer of it any more, by Mahummet I will be revenged of thee.
Notwithstanding I went the third time unto the Kings Treasurer, and told him of
it, and he came with me, saying this unto the gunner: by the head of the great
Turk, if thou take it from him again, thou shall have an hundred Bastanadoes.
And forthwith he delivered me the book, saying, he had not the value of a pin
of the spoil of the Ship, All that had share of the spoil (shortly after) by
Gods judgment perished.
which was the better for him, as hereafter you shall here, for there was
none, neither Christian nor Turk that took the value of a penniworth of our
goods from us, but perished both body and goods within seauenteene months
following, as hereafter shall plainly appear. Then came the Gwardian Bashee
which is the keeper of the Kings captives, to fetch us all a shore, and then I
remembering the miserable estate of poor distressed captives, in the time of
their bondage to those Infidels: went to mine own chest, and took out thereof
a jar of Oil, and filled a basket full of white Ruske to carry a shore with
me, but before I came to the Banio, the Turkish boys had taken away almost
all my bread, and the keeper said, deliver me the jar of Oil, and when thou
come to the Banio thou shalt have it again, The lamentation of the
merchants and mariners being all cheined in prison.
but I never had it of him any more. But when I came to the Banio, and saw
our merchants and all the rest of our company in Cheines, and we all ready to
receive the some reward, what heart in the world is there so hard, but would
have pitied our cause, hearing or seeing the lamentable greeting there was
betwixt us: all this happened the first of May.

And the second day of the same month, the King with all his counsel sat in
judgment upon us. The first that were had forth to be reigned, The Englishmen
arraigned.
were the Factors, and the Masters, and the King asked them wherefore they came
not a shore when he sent for them: and Roman Sonnings answered, that though
he were King a shore, and might command there, so was he as touching those
that were under him: Roman Sonnings condemned to be hanged over one of the
Bulwarks. The Master Andrew Dier, condemned to be hanged over the other
Bulwark. Rich. Skegs procured master Diers pardon and his own.
and therefore said, if any offense be, the fault is wholly in my self, and
in no other. Then forthwith the King gave judgment, that the said Roman
Sonnings should be hanged over the Northenest Bulwark, from whence he
conveyed the forenamed Patron Norado, and then he called for our Master
Andrew Dier, and used few words to him, and so condemned him to be hanged
over the walls of the Westermost Bulwark.

Then fell our other Factor (named Richard Skegs) upon his knees before the
King, and said, I beseech your highness either to pardon our Master, or else
suffer me to die for him, for he is ignorant of this cause. And then the
people of that country favoring the said Richard Skegs, besought the King to
pardon them both. So then the King spoke these words: Behold for thy sake I
pardon the Master. Then presently the Turks shouted, and cried, saying:
Away with the Master from the presence of the King. And then he came into
the Banio where as we were, and told us what had happened, and we all
reioised at the good hap of master Skegges, that he was saved, and our
Master for his sake. But afterward our joy was turned to double sorrow, for
in the mean time the Kings mind was altered, for that one of his Counsel had
advised him, that unless the Master died also, by the law they could not
confiscate the Ship nor goods, neither captive any of the men, whereupon the
King sent for our Master again, Master Dier afterward condemned to be
hanged over another Bulwark.
and gave him another judgment after his pardon for one cause, which was that
he should be hanged. Here all true Christians may see what trust a
Christian man may put in an Infidels promise, who being a King, and pardoned a
man now, as you have heard, and within an hour after hanged him for the same
cause before a whole multitude: and also promised our Factors their Oiles
custom free, and at their going away made them pay the uttermost penny for
the custom thereof.

And when that Roman Sonnings saw no remedy but that he should dye, be
protested to turn Turk, Roman Sonnings the French man turned Turk in hope
of his life, and died in the profession of a Turk.
hoping thereby to have saved his life. Then said the Turk, if thou will turn
Turk, speak the words that thereunto belong, and he did so. Then said they
unto him, now thou shall die in the faith of a Turk, and so he did as the
Turks reported that were at his execution. And the forenamed Patron Norado,
whereas before he had liberty, and did nothing, he then was condemned slave
perpetual, except there were payment made of the foresaid sum of money. Then
the King condemned all us, who were in number six and twenty, of the which,
two were hanged as you have heard, XXIII. Englishmen condemned to perpetual
prison.
and one died the first day we come a shore, by the visitation of almighty
God, and the other three and twenty he condemned slaves perpetually unto the
Great Turk, and the Ship and goods was confiscated to the cse of the great
Turk: and then we all f^ll down upon our knees, giving God thanks for this
sorrowful visitation and giving our selves wholly to the almighty power of
GOD, unto whom all secrets are known, that he of his goodness would
vouchsafe to look upon us. Here may all true Christian hearts see the
wonderful works of God showed upon such Infidels blasphemers,
whooremaisters, and runnagate Christians, and so shall you read in the end of
this book, of the like upon the unfaithful king and all his children, and of
as many as took any portion of the said goods. But first to show our
miserable bondage and flauerie, Every five men allowed but two pe^ce of bread
in a day.
and unto what small pittance and allowance we were tide, for every five men
had allowance but five Osperes of bread in a day, which is but two pence
English: and our lodging was to lie on the bare boords, with a very simple
cape to cover us, we were also forcibly and most violently shaven, head and
beard, and within three days after, The Englishmens heads and beards
forcibly shaven.
I and six more of my fellows together with four score of Italians and
Spaniards, were sent forth in a Galeat to take a Greekish Carmosal, which came
into Arrabia to steal Negroes, and went out of Tripolie unto that place, which
was two hundred and forty leagues thence, The Christians cheined, three and
three to an Oar in the Galley, and rowed all naked above the girdle, and
pitti^ullie beaten with a Ox pissell,
but we were cheaned three and three to an oar, and we rowed naked above the
girdle, and the Boteswaine of the Galley walked abast the Mast and his Mate
before the Maste, and each of them a Bulls pissell dried in their hands, and
when their devilish choler rose, they would strike the Christians for no
cause: and they allowed us but half a pound of bread a man in a day without
other kind of sustenance, water excepted: And when we came to the place
whereas we saw the Carmosall, we were not suffered to have neither needle,
bodkin, knife, or any other instrument about us, nor at any other time in the
night up on pain of one hundredth bastinadoes, we were then also vildely
manackled in such sort, that we could not put our hands the length of a foot
asunder the one from the other, and every night they searched our chains three
times, to see if they were fast reaueted: We continued fight with the
Carmosall three hours, and then we took it, The Gallie of Tripolie took a
Greekish Carmosall.

The Turks build a church The Englishmen put to all kind of slavery. Some to
hew stones. Some to draw stores. Some to draw timber. Some to draw Ordinance.
The country rebelled against the king.


and lost but two of our men in that fight, but there were slain of the
Greeks five, and fourteen were cruelly hurt, and they that were sound, were
presently made slaves, and cheined to the oars: and within fifteen days
after we returned again into Tripolie, and then we were put to all manner of
slavery, I was put to hew stones, and other to carry stones, and some to draw
the Carte with earth, and some to make mortar, and some to draw stones (for at
that time the Turks builded a Church:) and thus we were put to al kind of
slavery that was to be done, and in the time of our being there, the Moors
that are the Husbandmen of the country rebelled against the King, because he
would have constrained them to pay greater tribute then heretofore they had
done, so that the soldiers of Tripolie marched forth of the town to have
joined battle against the Moors for their rebellion, and the King sent with
them four pieces of ordinance, which were drawn by the captives twenty miles
into the country after them, and at the sight thereof the Moors fled, and
then the captains returned back again. Then I and nineteen Christians more,
were sent twelve miles into the country with a cart to lode timber, and we
returned again the same day. The Christians sent three times a week thirty
miles to fetch wood
Now the King had eighteen captives, which three times a week went to fetch
wood thirty miles from the town, and on a time he appointed me for one of the
eighteen, and we departed at eight of the clock in the night: and upon the
way as we rode upon the Cammels, I demanded of one of our company? who did
direct us the way, he said that there was a Moore in our company which was
our guide, and I demanded of them how Tripolie and the wood bore one of the
other, and he said, East Northeast, and Weast Southweast. And at midnight or
near thereabouts, as I was riding upon my Cammell, I sell a sleep, and the
guide and all the rest rode away from me, not thinking but I had been among
them. When I awooke, and finding my self alone, durst not call nor hallow, for
fear least the wild Moors should hear me, because they hold this opinion
that in killing a Christian they do God good service: and musing with my self
what were best for me to do, and if I should go forth and the wild Moors
should hap to meet with me, they would kill me: and on the other side, if I
should return back to Tripolie without any wood or company, I should be
most miserably used therefore: of two evils, rather I had to go forth to the
losing of my life, then to turn back and trust to their mercy, fearing to be
used as before I had seen others: for understanding by some of my company
before, how Tripolie and the said wood did lie one of another, by the North
star. I went forth at adventure, and as God would have it, I came right to
the place where they were, even about an hour before day: there altogether we
rested and gave our Cammels prouender, and as soon as the day appeared, The
Christians plucked up the wood by the roots to load their Cammels.
we rode all into the wood: and I seeing no wood there, but a stick here and
a stick there, about the bigness of a man's arm, growing in the sand, caused
me to marvel how so many Cammels should be laden in that place. The wood was
Iiniper, we needed no axe nor other edge tool to cut it, but plucked it up by
strength of hands, roots and all, which a man might easily do, and so
gathered it together, a little at one place and so at another; and laded our
Cammels, and came home about seven of the clock that night following: because
I fell lame and my Cammell was tired, I left my wood in the way.

Eighteen captives run away from Tripolie.
There was in Tripolie that time a Venecian, whose name was Benadetta
Venissiano, and seauenteene captives more of his company, which ran away from
Tripolie in a boat, and came in sight of an Island called Malta, which lies
forty leagues from Tripolie right North, and being within a mile of the shore,
and very fair weather, one of their company said, In dispeto de diu a desse
a venio de pilliar tarra, The judgment of God upon wicked blasphemers.
which is as much to say: In the despite of God we shall now fetch the shore,
and presently there arose a mighty storm, with thunder and rain, and the
wind at North, their bote being very small, so that they were enforced to
bear up rome, and to sheare right before the wind oueragainst the coast of
Barbary from whence they came, and rowing up and down the coast, their
vittels being spent, the xxi. day after their departure, they were enforced
through the want of food to come a shore, thinking to have stolen some sheep:
but the Moors of the country very craftily, perceiving their intent
gathered together a threescore horsemen, and hid themselves behind a sandy
hill, and when the christians were come all a shore, The Moors took the
xviii. christians that ran away from Tripolie.
and past up half a mile into she country, the Moors rode betwixt them and
their bote, and some of them pursued the christians, and so they were all taken
and brought to Tripolie, from whence they had before escaped: and presently
the king commanded that the foresaid Benedicta with one more of his company
should lose their ears, and the rest to be most cruelly beaten, which was
presently done. The king of Tripolie had a son which was ruler in the Island
of Ierbbye.
This king had a son which was a ruler in an Island called Ierbby, whereunto
arrived an English ship called the Green Dragon, of the which was master, one
M. Blonket, who having a very unhappy boie in that ship, and understanding yt
whosoever would turn Turk should be well enterteined of the kings son, this
boy did run a shore, and voluntarily turned Turk. Shortly after ye kings
sone came to Tripolie to visit his father, and seeing our company, he greatly
fancied Rich. Burges our pursser, and James Smith, they were both young me^,
therefore he was very desirous to have the^ to turn Turk, but they would not
yield to his desire, saying: we are your fathers slaves, and as slaves we will
serve him: then his father the king sent for them, and asked them if they would
turn Turk, and they said: If it please your highness, christians we were
borne, and so we will remain, and beseeched the king that they might not be
enforced thereunto. The king had there before in his house, a son of a yeoman of
our Queens guard, The kings son had a Captive that was son to one of the
Queens majesty's guard, that was forced to turn Turk.
whom ye kings son had inforsed to turn Turk, his name was John Nelson, him
the king caused to be brought to these young men, and then said unto them: will
not you bear this your countriman company, and be Turk as he is, and they
said, that they would not yield thereunto during life: but it sell out, that
within a month after, the Kings son went home to Ierbbie again, being six
score miles from Tripolie, and carried our two foresaid young men with him,
which were Richard Burges and James Smith: and after their departure from us,
they sent us a letter, signifieng that there was no violence showed unto them
as not, but within three days after they were violently used, for that the
kings son demanded of them again if that they would turn Turk: Richard
Burges made a Turk by force.
then answered Richard Burges, a Christian I am, and so I will remain. Then
the Kings son very angerlie said unto him: by Mahommet thou shall
presently be made Turk. Then called he for his men, and commanded them to
make him Turk, and they did so, and circumcised him, and would have had him
speak the words that thereunto belonged, but he answered them stoutly that
he would not: and although they had put on him the habit of a Turk, yet said
he, Christian I was borne and so I will remain, though you force me to do
otherwise. And then he called for the other, and commanded him to be made Turk
perforce also: James Smith made Turk, and circumcised by force.
but he was very strong, for it was so much as eight of the Kings sons men
could do to hold him, so in the end they circumcised him, and made him Turk.
Now to pass over a little, and so to show the manner of our delivery out of
that miserable captivity.

The first motion for those Englishmens delivery.
In May aforesaid, shortly after our apprehension, I wrote a letter into
England unto my Father dwelling in Eauistoke in Devonshire, signifieng unto him
the whole estate of our calamities: and I wrote also to Constantinople to the
English ambassador, both which letters were faithfully delivered. But when my
Father had received my letter, and understood the truth of our mishap; and the
occasion thereof, and what had happened to the offenders: he certified the
Right honorable the earl of Bedford thereof, who in short space acquainted
her Highness with the whole cause thereof, and her Majesty like a most
merciful Princess, tendering her subjects, presently took order for our
deliverance. Whereupon the right worshipful sir Edward Osburne, knight,
directed his letters with all speed to the English ambassador in
Constantinople, to procure our delivery, and he obtained the great Turks
commission, and sent it forth with to Tripolie, by one master Edward Barton,
together with a Justice of the great Turks, and one souldior, and another
Turk, and a Greek which was his interpretor, which could speak besides
Greek, Turkish, Italia^, Spanish, and English. And when they came to Tripolie,
they were well interteined. A Commission come from the great Turk for the
Englishmens delivery.
And the first night they did lie in a captains house in the town, all our
company that were in Tripolie, came that night for joy to master Barton and
the other commissioners to see them. Then master Barton said unto us, welcome
my good countrymen, and lovingly interteined us, and at our departure from
him, he gave us two shillings, and said, serve God, for to morrow I hope you
shall be as free as ever you were, we all give him thanks, and so departed.
The next day in the morning very early, the king had intelligence of their
coming, sent word to the keeper, yt none of the Englismen (meaning our
company) should go to work. Then he sent for master Barton and the other
commissioners, and demanded of the said M Barton his message: the Justice
answered, that the Great Turk his Sovereign had sent the^ unto him, The sum
of the great Turks commission, pronoun^ed by a a Turkish Justice.
signifieng that he was informed that a certain English ship called the Jesus
was by him the said King confiscated, about twelve months since, and now my
said Sovereign has here sent his especial commission by us unto you for the
delivery of the said ship and goods, and also the free liberty and
deliverance of the Englishmen of the same ship, whom you have taken and kept in
captivity and farther the same Justice said, I am authorized by my said
sovereign the great Turk to see it done: and therefore I command you by
virtue of this commission, presently to make restitution of the premises or
the value thereof, and so did the Justices deliver unto the King the great
Turks commission to the effect aforesaid, which commission the king with all
obedience received: and after the perusing of the same, The Englishmen released
by the king of Tripolie, and delivered to M Barton, the 28 day of April, 1585.
he forthwith commanded all the English captives to be brought before him, and
then willed the keeper to strike of all our irons, which done, the king said.
You Englishmen for that you did offend the laws of this place, by the same
laws therefore some of your company were condemned to die as you know and you
to be perpetual captives during your lives: notwithstanding seeing it has
pleased my sovereign lord the great Turk to pardon your said offenses, and to
give you your freedom and liberty, behold here I make delivery of you to
this English gentleman: so he delivered us all that were there, being thirteen
in number, to master Barton, who required also those two young men which the
kings son had taken with him. Then the king answered that it was against
their law to deliver them, for that they were turned Turks: and touching the
ship and goods, the king said, that he had sold her, but would make restitution
of the value, and as much of the goods as came unto his hands, and so the King
arose and went to dinner, and commanded a Jew to go with master Barton and the
other commissioners, to show them their lodging, which was a house provided
and appointed them by the said king. And because I had the Italian and Spanish
toongs, by which their most trafike in that country is, Master Barton made me
his Cater to buie his victuals for him and his company, and delivered me money
needful for the same. Thus were we set at liberty, the xxviii. day of April,
1585.

The plagues and punishments that happened to the king and his people.
Now to return to the kings plagues and punishments which Almighty God at his
will and pleasure sends upon men in the sight of the world, and likewise of
the plagues that befell his children and others aforesaid. First when we were
made bondmen, being the second day of May, 1584, the king had 300 captives, and
before the month was expired there died of them of the plague 150, 150
captives died of the plague in one month. Nine of the company of the Jesus
died of the pl^gue. The king lost 150 Camels, taken by the wild Moors. A
captive of Malta ran away with a Brigandine, and xii. captives more. The kings
fairest M^re di^^ under him, which he made to be burried in her skin, shoes
and all.
and whereas there were xxvi. men of our company, of whom two were hanged, and
one died the same day that we were made bondslaues, and that present month
there died nine more of our company of the plague, and other two were forced
to turn Turks as before is rehearsed: and on the fourth day of June next
following, the king lost 150 Cammels, which were taken from him by the wild
Moors: and on the xxviii. day of the said month of June, one Geffrey Maltees
a Runnagado of Malta, ran away to his country, and stole a Brigandine which
the king had builded for to take christians withal, and carried with him
twelve christians more which were the kings captives. Afterward about the tenth
day of Iulye next following, the king rode forth upon the greatest and fairest
Mare that might be seen, as white as any Swan, he had not ridden forty paces
from his house, but on a sudden the same Mare fell down under him stark dead,
and I with six more was commanded to bury her skin, shoes and all, which we
did. And about three months after our delivery, M. Barton with all the
residue of his company departed from Tripolie to Oezant in a vessel called a
Settea of one Marcus Segoorus, who dwelt in Oeza^t, and after our ariuall at
Oeza^t, we remained xv. days there aboard our vessel before we could have
Platego (that is, leave to come a shore) because the plague was in that place
from whence we came: and about three days after we came a shore, Two
Englishmen shipped to Constantinople with M. Barton. N^ne of the Englishmen
shipped to England. The Soldiors of Tripolie kill the king. The kings son
goes to Constantinople with his fathers captives, who skirmish in the Galley
with him and his Turks, in which conflict, two Englishmen were slain.
thither came another Settea of Massilins bound for Constantinople. Then did M.
Barton and his company, with two more of our company, ship themselves as
passengers in the same Settea, and went to Constantinople. But the other nine
of us that remained in Oeza^t, about three months after shipped our selves in a
Ship of the said Mareus Segoorus, which came to Oezant, and was bound for
England. In which three months the Soldiers of Tripolie killed the said King.
And then the kings son according to the custom there, went to
Constantinople, to surrender up all his fathers treasure, goods, Captives, and
Concubines, unto the Great Turk, and took with him our said Pursser Richard
Burges, and James Smith, and also the other two Englishmen, which he the said
kings son had enforced to become Turks as is aforesaid. And they the said
Englishmen, finding now some opportunity, concluded with the Christian
captives which were going with them unto Constantinople, being in number about
one hundred and fifty, to kill the kings son, and all the Turks which were
aboard of the Galley, and privily the said Englishmen conveyed unto the said
Christian captives weapons for that purpose. And when they came into the maine
sea towa^ds Constantinople (upon the faithful promise of the said Christian
captives) these four Englishmen lept suddenly into the Croossia, that is,
into the midst of the Galley where the Cannon lies, and with their swords
drawn, did fight against all the foresaid Turks, and for want of help of
the said Christian captives, who falsely brake the^ ^^emises, the said M.
Blonkets boy was killed, and the sa^^ I^mes Smith and our Pursser Richard
Burges, and the other Englishman, were taken and bound into chains to be
han^^^ ^^ there arrival into Constantinoples and as the Lords w^^ (...) about
two days after, passing through the gulf of V(...) an Island called
Saffalonea, they met with two of the doke of Venis his Galleis, Two Galleis of
Venice took the king of Tripolie hi^ Galley and killed the kings son and all
the Turks in it, and released all the Christians, being in number 150.
which took that Gallie, and killed ye kings son, and his mother, and all the
Turks that were there, in number ^50, and they saved the Christian captives,
and would have killed the two Englishmen, because they were circumcised and
become Turks, had not the other Christian captives excused them, saying, that
they were enforsed to be Turks by the kings son, and showed the Venecians
also, how they did enterprise at sea to fight against all the Turks and that
their two fellows were slain in that fight. The^ the Venecians saved them,
and they with all the residue of the said captives had their liberty, which
were in number 150 or thereabouts, and the said Gallie and all the Turks
treasure, was confiscated to the use of the duke of Venice, and from thence our
two Englishmen traveled homeward by land, and in this mean time we had one
more of our company which died in Oezante, and afterward the other eight
shipped themselves at Oezante, in a ship of the said Marcus Segorius which was
bound for England: and before we departed thence, there arrived the Assencio^
and the George Bonauenture of London into Saffalonea, in a harbor there called
Arrogostoria, whose merchants agreed with the merchants of our ship, and so
loded all the merchandise of our ship into the said ships of London, who took
us eight also in as passengers, and so we came home, and within two months
after our ariuall at London our said pursser Richard Burges and his fellow came
home also, for the which we are bound to praise almighty God during our life,
and as duty binds us, to pray for the preservation of our most gracious
Queen, for the great care her Majesty had over us her poor subjects, in
seeking and procuring of our deliverance aforesaid, and also for her honorable
privy council, and I especially for the prosperity and good estate of the
house of the late deceased the Right honorable the earl of Bedford, whose honor
I must confess, most diligently at the suit of my father now departed,
traveled herein: for yt which Arest continually bounden to his, whose soul I
doubt not but is already in ye heavens in joy with the Almighty, unto which
place he vouchsafe to bring us all, yt for our sins suffered most vile and
shameful death upon the cross, there to live perpetually world without end:
Amen.

Thom Sanders.

FINIS.

