VINDICIAE SACRAE. A TREATISE OF THE Honor and Maintenance due to
Ecclesiastical Persons.

Done out of the Latin, of that famous Divine of Holland, H. SARAVIA, sometime
Prebend of Canterbury.

ECCLESIAST. 7.31. Fear the Lord, and honor the Priest: and give him his
Portion, as it is commanded thee.

L. COKE Reports. B. Winchest. Case. Le decay des revenues de homes de Saint
Esglise, in le fine serra subversion del service de Dieu, and de son Religion.

That is,

The decay of the Reueneues of men of the holy Church; will, in the end, be the
subversion of Gods Service and Religion. In the same Case.

Dismes sont chooses spiritual, and due de iure Diuino. Tithes are spiritual
things, and due by the Law of God, LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes and R. Cotes for
James Boler, 1629.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS, THE DVCHESSE OF BVCKINGHAM: WHOM GOD PRESERVE.
May it please your GRACE:
YOUR most Noble and pious Disposition (to omit other Motives and Obligements)
has emboldened me to present You this Treatise, (writ in behalf of the
Clergy:) which in all prostrate humility is here tendered to your Gracious
Acceptance. Great is the Honor and Eminence, to which God has exalted you; and
will be yet much greater, if you honor him (again) in his Prophets and
Ambassadors; who are (as S. Paul teaches) worthy of double honor; Tim. 5.7.
and are honored by our blessed Savior, and his Holy Spirit, with these
glorious Titles, The Light of the World. Mat. 5.14 Reu. 1.20.
The Stars and Angels of the Church. The Charrets and Horsemen of Israel.
(...) Kin. 2.12
Which the Devil well knowing, sometime endeauours to eclipse their Splendour,
and poison their Reputation, by the venomous Tongues of wicked Miscreants:
otherwhile, totally to extinguish and ruinate them, by the cursed plots and
persecutions of bloody Tyrants: by whom, he commonly uses to discharge his
great Artillery against them; who being once cut off, it must needs exceedingly
enlarge his Kingdom of Darkness. Thus in ancient time, that BASILISKE,
Dioclesian, being mounted on the Imperial Throne, most cruelly massacred the
Priests and Pastors of the Church. Yet this Murthering-piece (in the just
censure of a famous learned Lawyer) was not so prejudicial to Christianity, L.
Coke, (...) Winch. ca^
as that SERPENTINE, Julian the Apostate, who (as Ecclesiastical Histories
report) slew and martyred the very Priesthood it self: for he robbed the
Church, and stripped Spiritual persons of their Revenues. Whereupon ensued great
Ignorance, and extreme decay of Christian Religion; there being none that would
apply themselves, or Children, or any they had in charge, to the study of
Divinity, when they saw that after long and painful study, they should have
nothing to live on. (Thus far, that Oracle and Miracle of the Law.) And hence
it was, that in the last Age and Centenarie, that great red Dragon, Reu. 12.3.
whose name, is a Destroyer (Revel. 9.11.) was so busy in alienating the
Churches Patrimony, in demolishing her goodly Mansions, and Monuments, and in
converting the Houses of God into Stables, (or worse:) and all under a fair
color of Non rem, ^ed modum (...) mno.)
REFORMATION (which certainly, is a good word; but it has served to gild many a
rotten post.) And this still is the Devils Method and manner of proceeding,
where he gets to be predominant, and finds fit and active Instruments for his
purpose. It was well observed by a 5 Ben Ru^.
Noble Knight in his Speech to the Honorable House of Commons, the last
Session: That although the Calling of Ministers, were never so glorious within,
yet outward poverty would bring contempt upon them; especially among those who
measure men by the acre, and weigh them by the pound (as most do.) Which (he
said) he found by experience in Germany, where he saw the stipendarie
Ministers of the Reformed Churches despised and neglected by reason of their
poverty, being (otherwise) very grave and learned men. And there is no doubt
(MADAM) but it is the maine drift and masterpeece of Satan, and his Infernal
Engines, and Emissaries (at this day) to reduce the Preachers of Gods sacred
Word here in England, to the like penurious and despicable Estate, thereby to
euacuate the Dignity of their Calling, and utterly to annihilate their persons
and Doctrine, (For David himself, a man of admired graces, a divine Prophet,
and mighty Warrior, yet (in King Readiness time) professed, that being a poor man,
he was but lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 18.23.) To prevent therefore this
dangerous stratagem, and cunning sleight of the old Serpent; it is the duty of
all good Christians respectively, especially of those whom God has blessed
with Honor, Wealth, and Authority, to give all due Honor, Aid, and Support to
the chosen Messengers and Ambassadors of the King of Heaven; whose sacred and
honorable Function was once in better esteem with the World, when a Priest
married a Kings Daughter (For so it is recorded, 2 Chronic. 22.11. viz.
Iehoshabeth the Daughter of King Iehoram, the Wife of Iehoiada the Priest.) As
for those proud Pharisaicall Peacockes, Tit.
which profess that they know God, but in works deny him, and in a pretended
zeal to the Gospel, make Stales and Pack-horses of their Preachers, and yet
rob them of their Maintenance; (scarce affording them, the crummes that fall
from their Worships Tables) they shall (without due Repentance, and
Restitution) one day know and feel, that the profane contempt, and base
entertainment of them, rebounds upon Christ which sent them: for so himself
proclaims, Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises me. Undoubtedly,
these self-conceited Humorists, and Solifidian-Nullifidians of our Time, have
by their sacrilegious dealing, and irreligious demeanor toward their
spiritual Guides, made themselves worse then Heathens and Barbarians: For how
careful was Pharaoh (a Heathen King) in the extremity of Famine, to provide
for his Priests, and preserve their Lands from Sale or Alienation? Genesis 47.22.
And what wonderful kind, yea Honorable Entertainment did the Barbarians show
to S. Paul, and his distressed Company? (See Acts 28. verse. 2, 7, 10.) Which
memorable Examples, the Spirit of God has not registered in vain; but for our
Instruction, and the Conviction of their execrable Impiety, which in their
hungry zeal, gape after the spoil and ruin of the Church. Yet (to give these
Hypocrites their due) they are content that the Kings Daughter (the Church
Representative) be all glorious within; but, Ps. 45.14
that her Clothing should be of wrought Gold; fie, they hold it very
unfitting: It were (say they) far more decent and commendable for the
Ecclesiastical State to conform and suit it self to the Apostles Poverty,
and to that pure and primitive Time. This, they think, is a Seraphicall
Speculation, and worthy our best Attention: And J doubt not, but the Church
will be content to admit this Conformity, upon condition, that (according to
the same Rule, and Example of the devout Christians of that Age) these
Pretenders to Religion, and all other Professors of Christianity will
instantly sell all they have, and lay down the price at the Churches feet,
Act. 4.34. Surely (MADAM) were these People in truth the Children of God (as
they strongly fancy themselves; Narcissus-like, being in love with their own
supposed Beauty) they would be better affected to the Church (the Mistress of
heavenly Truth) and not go about (like pernicious Furies) to cloathe Her in
Rags; that so fervently and frequently endeavors (by the dispensation of Gods
holy Word and Sacraments) to adorn their Souls with the precious Pearls, and
inestimable Jewels of all Christian Virtues; and to inuest them ( Luke
prima stola) with the Richembrodered Robes, and Royal Ornaments of a true,
justifying, and saving Faith. But they well show of what Spirit they are: even
of such a one, as would fright the whole Pack of them, if he should appear
and bristle among them at their Conuenticles, or Night-Assemblies.

The GOD of Heaven assist and comfort your GRACE with his Holy Spirit; make you
a happy Jnstrument of much Good to his Church; and crown you (in the end) with
a Diadem of eternal GLORY.

Your GRACES most humbly devoted, JAMES MARTIN.

TO ALL NOBLE AND RELIGIOUS Patrons and Patronesses of the CHVRCH.
Most Noble and Religious:
LET it not seem strange to join you all in one Inscription, whom God has
linked (as those ancient Worthies and Act. 4.32.
primitive Saints) by the Golden Chain of a blessed Society and Communion,
for the comfort and support of his despised and distressed Ambassadors; whom,
though the Devil, and his Ethiopian Angels, Reu. 2.10.
strive continually (by their Agents, and Vnder-minisbers) to bring into
Egyptian servitude and contempt, by oppressing, deprauing, and impouerishing
them; yet has the Spirit of GRACE stirred up your excellent Spirits, to
relieve, encourage, and sustain them. In which Noble Actions (among other
famous Precedents) you have that thrice-Glorious Emperor THEODOSIUS, your
Predecessor; who even on his Deathbed, and in extremity of Sickness, expressed
his Royal Charity, ardent Zeal, and fervent Devotion to the State
Ecclesiastical: as (to his eternal honor) S. Ambrose has recorded. And
surely, if some Tim. 3.5.
selfe-deceauing Christians of our Time (which make Religion a very Mummerie
and Disguise for their sinister ends, and give small or no 2 Timothy 4.3
Regard to the Divine Ordinance in the Ministry of their own Pastors) would
vn-maske a while, and enter into a strict consideration of their Mortality,
and the infiniteness of Eternity; with the succeeding interminable Joys or
Torments they must shortly endure; how highly would they esteem and reverence
their 'Rectors, and Spiritual Guides, (Heb. 13.17.) whom God has so
singularly honored with that Evangelical, yea Angelical Office of conducting
Souls to Heaven? Would they not (in a sacred Rapture) cry out with the
Prophetical Esaias 52.^
Evangelist; How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that
declares and publishes Peace: that declares good tidings; and publishes
Salvation, saying unto Zion, Thy God reigns. Undoubtedly, they would
(notwithstanding their humane frailties, and ^ Cor. 4.7.
infirmities) receive them as the Gal. 4.13, 14, 15.
Galatians did S. Paul: and think nothing too good, or too precious for them.
But (alas!) we have too just cause to subioine that of the same Apostle, Romans
10.16. All have not obeyed the Gospel. For many (says S. Bernard) will go
with the Wisemen from the East, Act. 2.11.
to seek Christ, yea they will fall down and worship him, but they are grown
too wise to open their Treasures. Blessed therefore are YOU (thrice-Noble
Christians) that spare neither your Gold, Frankincense, nor Myrrh, but make
your Riches (as Abraham did his Servants) to help to entertain the Angels of
God. And thrice-blessed shall you be at that GREAT DAY, when you shall jointly
receive your GREAT REWARD in Heaven. March on therefore (like the Stars in
their Orbs, Judge. 5.20.) in your Seraphicall Zeal to the House of God, and
the Officers thereof; that by such Heavenly Acts of Piety, laying up in store
for your selves a good 1 Timothy 6.19.
Foundation against the time to come, you may lay hold on Eternal Life.

The God of Heaven multiply the Glorious Graces of his Holy Spirit upon you;
that being faithful unto Death, Reu. 2.10.
He may give you a Crown of Life.

Vester humilis and deuotus; IACOBVS MARTINIVS. Facultatis Artium Mr Oxon.

DE Authore and Jnterprete CARMEN.
QVae prius in Latio
latuerunt, abdita vulgo,
Dogmata Semonis
sancta and celebranda Bataui,
Haec sacer Interpres
pulcre transfundit, and ornat.
At qui sacrata
and gemmata monilia Libro
Explicat aureolo,
Gemmam proponit in illo.
E. Gemmam. Ne sis
Aesopi (Lector) (...).
RICHARDVS CRVXONIVS Theologus.

To the AVTHOR.
AS some rare Flower;
whose silken Leaves have been
Concealed long
from their desired View,
Displayes (at last)
his bright-sweet-smiling hew,
Fit to adorn
the Bosom of a Queen:
Or as a Diamond
of rich esteem,
In doubtful shadow
of the darkesome Night;
Darts forth his beams,
and gives a cheerful light;
Whose Luster may
a Royal Crown beseem:
So shine thy Glories;
so this Work shall be
An Arch-Triumphall
to thy Memory.
R. B. LONDINAS.

A Treatise of the honor and maintenance due to the CLERGY.
CHAP. I. Donaries given to Churches, are firm by the same Laws, by which
others of the Laity possess their estates.
THE zeal and bounty of our fore Fathers in enriching the Church are known to
all: and it were strange to imagine that an universal error, or (as some would
have it) a madness, should so long transport them in that point; and that
their Posterity going a quite contrary way, without Warrant from God, and
Example of former Ages, should be wiser then they. As to follow the bad
examples of our Ancestors is a fond Absurdity; so to contemn their examples
rashly and without just cause, is mere Impiety. It is true, both fathers and
children, are all prone to evil; but whether are men, more apt to take from
others, or to give of their own? Our fathers gave (as none can deny) with no
ill intent: their children take away what they gave; with what mind, is
apparent enough. They gave, according to the Laws; these take, contrary to
Law. Those things which have been given to the Church, have their strength and
validity from the selfsame Laws whereby other men possess what they have:
and there is none, but would think it a Tyrannical act in a Magistrate, to
thurst him out of his Possessions, without hearing him first speak for
himself.

It had been fit therefore that Ecclesiastical persons should have been
permitted to have had audience; and that sufficient reasons should have been
alleged to them why they ought not any longer to be suffered in a Christian
Common wealth, nor to enjoy the possessions of the Church. They also which
succeeded them in their Pastoral Charge, should have been heard: for it
concerned them to know how the goods of the Church were disposed. But to
confiscate and sweep all away, without any legal proceeding, or hearing of
the parties, was against all right and reason. If Bishops and Priests were
willing to renounce Popery and embrace the Truth, there was no cause to expel
them; unless perhaps Church-Liuings were to be numbered among the Heresies
and Idolatries of the Romish Church: as some good fellows would have them.

And here, I know not whether the Ignorance of Ministers, or the Avarice of
Magistrates, be more blameworthy: Both, without question were very faulty. But
those subtle and crafty Politiques which hypocritically made a fair show to
favor the preaching of the Gospel, for their own base and wicked ends, were
the Authors and Abettors of all this mischief: So that, what in others was
Error or Ignorance, in them was pure Malice and Villainy. For who can excuse
them of sacrilege which under color of reforming the Church in many places of
High and Low Germany, made a prey of all that was given to the Church? I
confess, the supreme Magistrate ought to be the Patron of the Church, and may
by his authority enact Laws concerning Church-liuings, but in no case,
appropriate them to himself. For the Patron ought not to dispoyle his Clyent:
And it was never heard of before these Times, that any Christian Magistrate did
confiscate all Ecclesiastical Possessions without exception. All Histories
have branded them with Infamy which in Extremities of the Commonwealth have
taken away but a part: What then shall we think of those which have played at
sweepe-stake with Church-Liuings? I name none, but I mean them, which by their
lewd Examples have taught their Neighbors to commit Sacrilege: Wherein they
imitate Julian the Apostate, and the great Turk (which make no difference
betwixt sacred and profane) and not any Christian Magistrate either of these
or former times, that I know. To such, it is a shame that Sacrilege may justly
be objected: But a far greater shame that by such it should be unjustly
committed.

CHAP. II. The definition of Sacrilege.
SOme there are that think no Sacrilege can be now committed, because
(forsooth) the difference betwixt sacred and profane, in external things, is
by our Saviors death extinguished. But this is not the opinion of a Divine, but
of an Atheist rather. For though to the holy, all things be holy; and all
things profane to the profane; yet the distinction of Things which they have
in their use and end, is not to be abolisht. Among all Nations, there was ever
a maine difference set betwixt that which was dedicated to Divine worship, and
that which was for vulgar use. It is the End, which (for the most part)
denominates all things. Private men have their Treasure: and the Commonwealth
hers: If you regard the stuff, both are of the same nature (to wit, Gold and
Silver, and whatsoever else is of value) But if you respect the End, and
Possessor; it is far otherwise: For the end of private wealth, is the profit
of one only Family: But the end of the public, is the benefit of the Prince
and People. In like sort, the Treasure or Wealth which is given or collected
for the Worship of God, has a far different end from the other: and being
consecrated to a holy use, is therefore sacred.

Furthermore, as the Wrong against the Prince or State is more heinous, then
that against a private man: And therefore the stealing from a private man is
but Theft; but from the public Treasury, Pecula^
Robbery in the highest degree: So by how much more it is a greater crime to
sin against GOD then Man, the expilation of the sacred Portion is far more
damnable then any other Theft or Robbery whatsoever: And therefore it is
properly termed Sacrilege; and is defined, The stealing of a thing sacred. The
turpitude of which Theft is so execrable, that God himself and all Nations
have punished it with exquisite Torments. But the former definition comprises
not only things destinate to the service of the true GOD, but also of false
Gods. For the Knowledge and Contempt of any Deity, is of the Essence of
Sacrilege: Now that all, or the most which Popish Clergy possessed either by
the Poor, or Churches interest, has been purloyned, sold, confiscate, or
converted to private men's uses; it is so clear, that I need not stand further
upon it.

CHAP. III. Reasons or Pretenses wherewith some would palliate their
Sacrilege.
BUT sacrilegious Persons and their Proctors contend, that whatsoever was done
in this case, was lawfully done, both for the abolishing of the Popes Tyranny;
and for the establishing of the Gospel. Their Reasons are these.
Ecclesiastical possessions were employed to idolatrous and profane uses,
which being abrogated, they cannot by the Laws descend to any, but only to
the public Treasury; the government whereof belongs to the Christian
Magistrate. And as the godly Emperors Constantin, Theodosius, Honorius, and
Arcadius, having banished the Idolatry of the Gentiles, took into their hands
(without any note of Sacrilege) the Revenues and Possessions of their Priests
and Temples, to dispose, as pleased them: So also the Christian Magistrate
having cashierd Popery, may by the same Right challenge the Wealth and
Substance which belonged to Priests, Monks, Nuns, and the like; and
confiscate them, as Escheats usually are; according to Law. For no Bishop ever
thought that the Church had any Right or Title to those Goods or Revenues
which were destinated to Idolatry: Strange therefore it were that any Minister
of the Gospel should claim the Riches of the Popish Church as due to the
Reformed. Besides, there is extant an Imperial Decree in the Court, in the
first Book De Paganis and Sacrificijs, tit. 14. in these words: Omnia loca,
etc. that is: We command that all places which the Error of the Ancients
assigned to Sacrifices, be appropriated to our Estate. But that which We or the
Princes our Predecessors have (by that Right) bestowed on particular persons,
We will that it be perpetually confirmed to them, as their Patrimony. And
those things, which We are pleased by many Edicts to allot to the Church, let
the Christian Religion challenge as her own. Dated at Rauenna 3 Call. Sept.
Honorius the 10, and Theodosius the 6, Emperors. By which Decree, it is
manifest, that the Emperors had right to dispose to whom they pleased, those
Goods which after the abrogation of the Idolatry of Pagans, had no owners. And
in the Digest. Lib. 33. tit. 2. De vsu and vsu fructu legatis leg. 16. Legatum,
etc. We read of Legacies bestowed upon Shows or Plays which were not lawful
to be acted: And if the word Mass be put in stead of the word Plays, the
case will be alike. The words of the Law are thus: Legatum Ciuitati relictum,
etc. that is: A Legacy being bequeathed to a City, to the end that out of the
yearly Revenues a Show be exhibited in the City in memory of the defunct,
which is unlawful to be done; I demand what your opinion is of such a Legacy?
Modestinus answers thus: Whereas the Testator would have a public Show in the
City, but such a one as is not lawful to be celebrated, it were unjust that
so great a sum of Money which the defunct had destined to that end, should
fall to his heirs. Wherefore his heirs and the chiese of the City being
called together, let them advise to what other use the Legacy may be
converted; that the Testators memory may by some other lawful means be
preserved. Thus Modestinus Lib. 9. Responsorum.

By which Law it is easy to judge what we are to think of those Legacies
which are left for saying of Masses.

Moreover, the Covetousness of Clergymen was so insatiable, that they
procured infinite superstitious Gifts and Legacies beyond all stint and measure.

And when the peoples Liberality began to fail, they bought Lands, Manors,
and sometimes whole Countries: Insomuch, that at last they would have gotten
the whole Christian World into their possession, had not Kings and Emperors
(seeing the damage which their States were like to sustain) limited and
restrained them by their Laws. It concerns therefore wise Magistrates to
look about them, lest they stumble at the same Stone.

CHAP. IIII. An Answer to the Reasons laid down in the former Chapter.
IN Answer whereof, We are to take heed, least avoiding one extreme we run
(like Fools) into the other. If we judge, our Forefathers were too profuse,
ought not their Error admonish us that we also are Men, and that it is easier
to fall into the contrary vice, then to keep a mean? And that the stream of
Avarice and base niggardise may transport us too far? For admit, that the
Clergy (if the Laws of Christian Princes had not bridled them) would have
heaped up infinite wealth, to the great derriment of the Land, and that many
things given them were partly superstitiously bestowed, partly more then
needed: It follows not, that therefore none of those Donations made to the
Church, were lawful, pious, well-pleasing to God, consonant to his Word, and
profitable and necessary for his Church. If there were in those things any
thing superfluous, it might be pared away: And what was consigned to
Superstition and Idolatry, might (with them) be abrogated, or put to better
uses. But whereas they say, that what was done in that kind, was wholly for the
abolishing of Popish Tyranny, and establishing of the Gospel; it is a mere
pretext. For the truth is, a sort of crafty Knaves, grossly abusing the
Gospel, and the Preachers thereof (whom they easily persuaded) made havoc of
the Churches Estate, which I will not further speak of: For if I stir this
Dunghill, the sent will be intolerable. Let us now examine what has been
alleged in defense of Sacrilege. First, it is said, that the Revenues of the
Church did maintain Superstition and Idolatry: which being banished, they could
not by the Laws come to any, but to the public Treasury. But to discover the
fallacy of this Assertion, I affirm that there is great difference betwixt
Things destinated to Impious and Idolatrous uses, and those Things which Men
abuse to Luxury or Impiety. There is nothing so sacred which wicked Men will
not abuse. The Abuse of a good thing alters not its Nature: neither were all
the Riches of the Church of Rome given her to bad and unlawful Ends. For much
was given heretofore for the support of Church-Ministers, and the Poor: which
though it were abused by the Romish Clergy, yet the property of those
Donaries was not quite changed thereby. Of Donations made to Churches, some
praeceded the corrupt times of the Church; others, followed after. For it is
certain that the Faithful began to contribute to the Church even at the first
planting thereof, in the Apostles times. Now those which praeceded the
corruption of the Church, none can deny but were consecrated to God. The Bishop
of Rome, and other Heretics found the Church planted by the Apostles, and
endowed with a competent estate (considering the times) whereto though they did
by unlawful means add much more: yet is not all that to be utterly
condemned: but the End thereof, to be regarded. For in the Romish, and other
Heretical Churches, are many things, which, considered aright in their kind,
are truly Christian and commanded by God: such as are, the sacred Ministry of
the Church: and Provision for the Poor. Now whatsoever was given to either or
both of these, was undoubtedly given to a pious end, and might have a
sanctified use. We ought therefore not so much to look to the profanation of
them, as to the Quality of the Things themselves, to which, no man, either by
prescription, or continued abuse, can purchase any Right. But if it chance that
the profane or Idolatrous use be abolisht, they ought to return to their
primitive and lawful use. The Ark of God was taken and abused by the
Philistims, yet it did not therefore cease to be consecrated to God: and being
afterward sent home by the Philistims, it was as much to be respected, as
before. The Vessels and Ornaments of Salomons Temple, were carried by
Nebuchadnezzer to Babylon: where he put them into the Temple of his Gods: and
(in his manner) did religioussy esteem of them. Now when Cyrus had taken
Babylon, he might by the right of Conquest, have made claim to them: but
understanding that they did sometime appertain to the Divine Worship in
Salomons Temple, he durst not meddle with them, but commanded them to be
restored to their former use: lest he should fall into the same sin of
Sacrilege, for which God had punished Balthazar. Those things therefore which
in a pious intent, were once given to the Church, are consecrated to God: and
may not lawfully be transferred to other uses.

CHAP. V. A Triple difference of Ecclesiastical Revenues possessed by the
Roman Church at this day.
But whereas all the Endowments of the Church of Rome, are not of the same
kind, we ought not to judge of them all alike. There is a threefold
difference of them. In the first Rank I put those things which our Ancestors
gave for the maintenance of Church-Ministers, and the Poor: Next, what was
given superstitiously, as for Massing for the Quick and Dead, and whatsoever
was bequeathed to Monks, Nuns, and Soule-Priests: Lastly, I reckon those
infinite Donaries, pernicious to the State of Christendom, which were
unadvisedly given by Kings and Emperors, or by force or fraud extorted from
them: of which sort are Inuestitures of Ecclesiastical Feudes, given by
Princes to the Church, and in that regard, belonging thereto; which
nevertheless the Pope claymes as his Right: As also those Kingdoms which are
made tributarie to the Pope: wherein he challenges a perpetuity. I speak not
of the Monarchy of the whole World, which he likewise makes claim to. These
things since by divine and humane Right they pertain to Kings, the things
which are Caesar's ought to be restored to Caesar. For our Lord has forbidden
the Ministers of his Church, to be Kings, Luke 22.25. where he thus corrects
the Error of his Apostles: Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them,
and they that are in authority over them are called Benefactors; But ye shall
not be so: That is, You shall not be Kings: whom, those that are under their
cruel government, are feign to flatter with the magnificall Titles of
Clemency and Beneficence. Justly therefore may Kings resume whatsoever the
Roman Prelate has fraudulently or violently appropriated to himself. But in
this point there is both Prudence and Moderation to be used, lest Caesar take
not (with his own due) those things which belong to God. The Roman Clergy
seized on both: And it were a great dishonor for the Christian Magistrate to
imitate them; and to punish Rapine with Sacrilege. I grant, thar the
Magistrate may by his Authority dispose at his pleasure those things which
were given to merely superstitious and Idolatrous uses, and that the Church
has no Right to them. Notwithstanding, if the Law before recited, or the
Advice of most learned Augustine may take place, the Legacies bequeathed to the
saying of Masses, or the sustayning of Friars and Nuns, may be converted to
better uses, whereby, the Testators memory may be lawfully perpetuated. In the
16 chap. of Numbers, the Censers (wherewith 250 Rebels, impiously usurping
upon the Priesthood, would needs offer Incense to God) were hallowed: And
therefore God would not have them afterward employed to common uses, but
commanded that they should be made into broad Plates for a covering of the
Altar, that so the Brass which they had wickedly abused might be put to a
sacred use. Which Command, though it be not general, yet it teaches us what
to do in the like case. Augustine in his 154 Epistle to Publicola, concerning
the Euersion of Idols, and their Groves, and Temples; judges that they were to
be converted not to private uses (lest it should seem to have been done
rather by Covetousness, then Devotion) but to public; and namely, to the
Service of the true God: That so, they might be in the same state with Men,
that from profane Impiety were converted to Christianity.

Since the Law of God prescribes nothing herein to the Magistrate in express
terms; and whatsoever Moses has written hereof, concerns the Israelites in
particular; for my part, I am of opinion that he may use his own Discretion in
the managing of these things: Nor do I contradict the Decree of the Emperors
Honorius and Theodosius: Yet I would desire that Princes and other Sovereign
Magistrates which have reformed the Church would consider, that Abbyes and
Monasteries did rob her of her Right when they impropriated to themselves the
Tithes and Offerings which Christian Princes and People did in times past
consecrate to their Pastor and the Poor. For contrary to the custom of the
ancient Church, they took upon them the government of Churches; and under
color of professed Poverty, they snatched away those things which ought to have
been distributed to the Poor indeed.

CHAP. VI. The possessions of Monks are not all of like nature.
AS I have showed the great difference of the Estate of the Pastors and
Rectorsof the Church: so also are the Possessions of Monks not all alike. It
were tedious to recount how they came to so great Wealth: This chiefly would I
have observed, that whatsoever was possessed by Monks, that was indeed due to the
Poor, and Church-Pastors, does appertain to the first sort of Ecclesiastical
goods, which after the Overthrow of Monkerie, are not to be held as escheated,
while the Church has Pastors and Poor to provide for. Wherefore after the
Eiection of Popery, those things only were to be confiscate, which did only
serve to support the Popes Superstition or Tyranny. The remainder, which had
no impious Ground or End, should have been restored to the Church. Wheresoever
therefore all that belonged to Monks and Monasteries was confiscate by the
consent or counsel of those whom it more nearly concerned to look to it, they
were the more too blame, that did not intercede therein; and better inform the
Magistrate: for surely, the profanation and abuse of the Churches Patrimonic,
could not be so great, as to change the nature of it, and utterly destroy the
first Donation. The Ark of God among the Philistims, was still the same: and
the Vessels of the Temple, lost not their sanctity in Babylon. What though the
Pope and his Clergy foully and impiously abused the true and lawful Goods of
the Church? Ought theresore the true Ministers of the Church to be cheated and
defrauded of them? Their Possessors, are not Lords or Owners of them; but
Stewards only, having the use, fruit and administration of the Churches
Estate, but no propriety therein. Neither makes it any thing against me, that
Bishops in times past thought that the Revenues dedicated to Pagan Gods, did
not belong (of right) to the Church; for I say not, that the Church has any
Title to those Things which were immediately dedicated to Impiety: such, I
have already confessed to be in the power, and at the donation of the
Magistrate: and that the Edict of Honorius and Theodosius, and other pious
Emperors and Christian Kings displeases not me: Whose Examples, if they,
whose Errors moved me to write this Treatise, would have vouchsafed to have
followed; there had been no need of this Disputation.

CHAP. VII. It is one thing for People to be converted from Paganism to
Christianity: another thing, from Popery, or any other Heresy.
WE may not forget, that it is a far other matter for any People to pass
from the Pagan Religion to the Christian; then from the Papisticall Heresy to
the same. The Difference betwixt Paganism and Christianisme is not the same as
between Papisme and Christianisme. For Paganism has in it nothing at all of
Christianity: but Popery is Christianity contaminated with Superstition and
Idolatry, and (as I may say) a Mungrell and impure Christianisme. For the holy
Scripture of the old and new Testament, the Covenant of God, the Baptism of
Christ, the Remission of Sins, the Name of Christian, and many other things
there are in it that are proper to the Church, and Marks of Christianity;
which out of the Church are not to be found, either in Paganism, Iudaisme, or
Mahometisme. Were Heresies and Superstitions weeded out of the Church of Rome,
the Remainder would be Christianisme. For Popery, is the disease of the
Church, not the Church it self: and as the Leprosy, or other deadly Contagion
is to the Body of a Man, such is Popery to the Body of the Catholic Church:
so that to forsake Popery, is not to forsake the Church but the Plague of the
Church. When an Ethnike is made a Christian, an Alien and Forreyner is
endenized and ingraffed into a new People, and begins to be a Member of the
Church: In the Reformation; an adulterous Church becomes a chaste Spouse, and is
reconciled to Christ her Husband: and spurious and bastard Christians are
legitimated: wherefore, whatsoever Goods of her Husbands, the Adulteress
usurped; the lawful Church (as the true Wife) may justly claim. In the Code
of Theodosius, Lib. 16. tit. 44. Contra Donatistas; it is thus. Let those
Possessions where direful Superstition has hither to reigned, be annexed to
the Venerable Catholic Church: and let the Bishops, Priests, and all the
Prelates, and Ministers [of the Donatists] be stripped of all their Revenues,
and banished to several Islands, and Provinces. In the same place (in the 4
Book) we find a Decree of the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, against the
Montanists, in these words. If there be now any of their Edifices standing,
which are rather to be termed the Dens of wild Beasts, then Churches, let
them with their Revenues be appropriated to the sacred Churches of the
Orthodox Faith.

Before our time there fell out many Alterations in the Church: but when godly
Emperors expelled the heretical party; they spoiled not their Churches of
their Possessions, but restored them to the true Professors: as Augustine
witnesses in his 50 Epistle to Bonefacius a Soldier. Quicquid ergo, nomine
Ecclesiarum partis Donati possidebatur, Christiani Imperatores legibus
religiosis cum ipsis Ecclesiis ad Catholicam transire iusserunt: That is,
Whatsoever the Donatists possessed in Right of their Churches; the Christian
Emperors, by religious Laws commanded to pass (together with the Churches) to
the Catholic Church. Thus Austin. I need not produce any more witnesses to
prove so evident a Thing, and well known. To capitulate therefore what has
been said: Ecclesiastical Possessions gotten by fraud or force, and usurped
against all Right, or given at first to a mere superstitious end, are in the
power of the chief Magistrate. But what has lawfully been given to the
Church, and receaned, is consecrated to God, nor may without Sacrilege be
otherwise trans-ferred. St Augustine in his 50 Tract upon John, the 12 Chapter
and 9 Tome, says thus. Ecce inter Sanctos est Judas, etc. Behold Judas among
the Saints, and slight it not: not an ordinary, but a sacrilegious Thief: a
picker of purses: but they were the Lords: of purses, but such as were sacred.
As Crimes are adjudged in the Civil Court, simple Theft (from private persons)
is not so penal, as to rob the Commonwealth: How much more then is that
sacrilegious Thief to be condemned, which dare steal from the Church? Such a
one may well be compared to Judas, the son of Perdition.

CHAP. VIII. What a heinous and incurable Sin is Sacrilege.
PLATO being about to make a Law against Sacrilege, De Leg. Dial. 9.
begins with a great Preface, judging it to be an incurable Crime, and the
Actor thereof not to be ordinarily evil, but a creature composed of inexpiable
Villainies: wherefore he exhorts such as are led with that hellish fury, to
expiate themselves, to frequent the Temples, to propitiate the Gods, to use the
Company of good Men, to give ear to them, and to endeavor to speak and
practice honest and just things. And if none of these can rid them of their
disease, he holds, that Death were better for such, then Life. The Tenor of
his Law follows. Quicunque in Sacrilegio, etc. Whosoever shall be found
guilty of Sacrilege, if he be a Servant or Stranger, let his Crime be branded
in his face and hands, and being well scourged, according as the Judges shall
think meet, let him be stripped naked, and so banished the Country. For
peradventure he may become somewhat the better by this punishment. For no
punishment that is inflicted, is hurtful to the party; but either makes him
better; or less evil then he was. But if he be a Native or Citizen that shall
be convict of such a Crime against the Gods, or shall do some heinous injury
to his Parents, or City, let the Judge resolve, that such a one is incurable,
since having had (from a Child) all Institution and Education, he has not
contained himself from the execution of such execrable Acts. Let him therefore
suffer Death; which is the least of Evils. The other; being disgraced and
banished, may happily do good to others, by his Exemplarie penalty.

The Roman Laws of the twelve Tables, thus Decree concerning Sacrilege.
Sacrum, sacroue commendatum, qui clepserit rapseritque parricido esto. That is,
He that steals or takes away that which is sacred; or dedicated to a sacred
use, let him be guilty of Parricide. What should I stand to repeat the
severity of Laws in this case? It is well known to all.

As for those Sacrilegious persons, which escape the Judgment of Men, either
because they are Great, or Powerful; or so concealed, as the Laws cannot be
executed upon them, they shall not be able to euade the Judgment of God. For
it is one of the most Capital Crimes that is pursued with Divine Revenge: and
both sacred and profane Stories yield us innumerable Examples thereof: of
which, I will propound a few.

CHAP. IX. Examples of Gods Vengeance upon sacrilegious Persons.
THE first Example, shall be that of Achan (Joshua 7) who from the consecrated
Stuff of Jericho, took 200 shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold Ios. 6.19.
(beside the accursed Babylonish Garment) for whose only sin, all Israel
suffered the Wrath of God, till the sacrilegious Delinquent and all his Family;
his Sons and Daughters, Oxen, Asses, and Sheep were stoned to death by all
the People; and afterward (together with his Tent and all that he had) burned
with fire. The next, shall be another sacrilegious Fact committed by Priests,
and punished by God, as severely as that of Achan. In 1 Samuel 2. we read, That a
Man of God came to Eli the High Priest, and said unto him, Thus says the Lord,
Did I plainly appear unto the House of thy Father, when they were in Agypt in
Pharaohs House? And did I choose him out of all the Tribes of Israel, to be my
Priest to offer upon my Altar, to burn Incense, to wear an Ephod before me?
And did I give unto the House of thy Father all the Offerings made by fire of
the Children of Israel? Wherefore kick ye at my Sacrifice, and at my offerings
which I have commanded in my Habitation, and honor thy Sons above me, to
make your selves fat with the obiefest of all the Offerings of Israel my
People? Wherefore the Lord God of Israeh says, I said indeed, that thy House,
and the House of thy Father should walk before me for ever: But now the Lord
says, Be it far from me: For them that honor Me, I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Behold, the days come, that I will cut
off thine arm and the arm of thy Fathers House, that there shall not be an
old Man in thine House. And thou shall see an Enemy in my Habitation, in all
the Wealth which God shall give Israel, and there shall not be an old Man in
thine House for ever. And the Man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine
Altar, shall be to consume thine Eyes, and to grieve thine Heart; and all the
increase of thine House shall dye in the flower of their age. And this shall be
a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two Sons, on Hophni and Phinehas:
in one day they shall dye both of them. And I will raise me up a faithful
Priest, that shall do according to that which is in mine Heart, and in my
mind, and I will build him a sure House, and he shall walk before mine
Anointed for ever. And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in
thine House, shall come and crouch to him for a piece of Silver, and a morsel
of Bread, and shall say, Put me (I pray thee) into one of the Priests offices,
that I may eat a piece of Bread. Thus the Man of God: All which things, as he
foretold them, soon after came to pass. For the Sons of Eli were slain in
Battle: The Arc of the Covenant was taken by profane Men: Eli having heard
the message thereof, fell from his Seat, and brake his neck, and dyed: His
Daughter-in-law (Ph^nehas Wife) dyed in the pangs of Childbirth: The holy place
of Shiloh was forsaken of God, nor was the Ark of God ever brought thither
again: Lastly by Saul's appointment, 85 Priests (of Eli's Family) were put to
the sword. I omit to speak of other calamities which that House suffered, for
the Sacrilege of those two Persons. And although the Philistims did (after a
sort) honorably entertain the sacred Arc, yet did God severely punish their
Impiety, nor did they escape scotfree for handling so divine a thing. I pass
by the Sacriledges committed, from that time, to the Captivity of Babylon.
Balthusar King of Babylon, is a memorable Example of Divine Justice against the
Sacrilegious. For he commanded that the sacred Vessels which his grand father
Nebuchadnezzer had taken out of the Temple at Jerusalem, should be should be
brought to the Feast which he had made, that Himself and his Guests might
drink therein in contempt of God. But the Wrath of God seized upon the
sacrilegious Prince, in the very Act, and denounced to him present Destruction
by the Prodigy of a Handwriting on the Wall of his Palace. Whereupon Daniel
the Servant of God being called to read and interpret that divine Writ, did
gravely rebuke him for his Impiety; saying to him (among other things) thus:
Thou have lifted up thy self against the God of Heaven, and they have brought
the Vessels of his House before thee, and Thou and thy Lords, thy wives and thy
Concubines have drunk Wine in them, and thou have praised the Gods of Silver
and Gold, of Brass, Iron, Wood, and Stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know:
and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou
not glorified. Then was the part of the Hand sent from him, and this Writing
was written: Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin. This is the Interpretation of the
thing, Mean, God has aumbred thy Kingdom, and finished it. Tekel, Thou are
weighed in the Balances, and art found wanting. Vpharsin, Thy Kingdom is
divided, and given to the Meedes and Persians. Thus Daniel. And that very night
was Balthazar slain, and the Empire of the Assirians and Chaldaeans, which had
flourished 130 years, ended, and was given by God to the Meedes and Persians.

I come now to the Greeks, under whom the Jews suffered many grievous
calamities, both from their own Nation, and the Greeks themselves. The
execrable Fact of Altimus the High Priest, which sought to overthrow the Temple
of God, was not unpunished: for being strucked with a Palsy, he dyed in great
torment. Heliodorus, being sent to Jerusalem by King Seleucus, to rob the
Temple, of the sacred Treasure (which he understood, was exceeding much) felt
the hand of God upon him; together with his Companions which came with him: nor
had he escaped Death, if Onias the Priest had not prayed to God for him.
Whereupon, being delivered, he returned to his King, and professed, that God was
the Keeper of that Temple, and Defender of the Treasure: and if the King were
displeased with any, and wished his destruction, he should send him thither.
The robbing of that Temple, cost that great Roman Commander M. Crassus dear:
for God, by the Persians, revenged the Sacrilege: who put him, and his Army to
the Sword; and thrust molten Gold (which in his lifetime he so thirsted after)
into his head and mouth and in insulting manner, exprobrated his insatiable
Avarice. Judas the Traitor, deserves the first place among sacrilegious
Wretches; for he, for couerousnesse of Gold, spared not his Lord and Master,
whom he knew to be innocent. But he became his own Accuser, Judge, and
Hangman; and so miserably perished. Admirable also is the Example of Ananias
and Saphyra; whom God chastened with corporal Death, because they presumed to
retain to their own use, part of that Money which themselves had voluntarily
dedicated to God. Which Fact of theirs, though it were more excusable, then if
they had done so with others Money; yet we see the severity of Gods Judgment
upon them; to the Terror of all other Christians.

All Histories relate the Plagues which fell upon Julian the Emperor, for his
Apostacy and Sacrilege: who in derision of Christ and Christians: when he had
stripped the Church and Bishops of all they had, told them, that in so doing, he
had a special care of their Souls health; because the Gospel commended
Poverty unto them.

To this Julian, I will add another Julian; his Uncle; as sacrilegious a
miscreant, as himself: who at Antioch in Syria, having gotten together a great
number of most precious Vessels and lewels of the Church, to carry them into
the Emperors Treasury; he threw them on the Ground, and began to scorn and
blaspeme Christ at his pleasure; at last, he sat down (in great contempt) upon
the sacred Vessels. But see the hand of God! Straight after, his
Priuie-members, and secret-parts consumed away, and the Flesh about them
rotting by peece-meale, turned into Vermin: and his Disease so increased, that
no Physic could help him: for the Vermin, being hid in his Inward-parts,
crept to his sound and live flesh, and never ceased gnawing, till they had
quite made an end of him.

I omit others, whom the Wrath of God has punished in like sort.

Many Histories of Christian Kings might be added, whom God justly plagued for
their Sacriledges: but that it were too tedious a work: and some things are
reputed by Historians, for sacriledgious; which if they were done in no
contempt of God, may be excusable. It had been sacrilege in David, to have
eaten the Shewbread, if Necessity had not excused it. But sacrilege is to be
measured by Impiety; which consists as well in the Contempt of a false God, as
of the true; to wit, whenever, that, which othersworship (for God) is
contemned with a kind of Irreligion; rather; then out of a true Faith, and
devotion to the true God. And so much, is the mind and intent, in this case, to
be considered; that as it may be an Act of piety in the Worshippers of the
true God, to demolish the Temples of false Gods; and to break their Images:
so, if the Worshippers of false Gods; or Atheists, which scorn all Gods;
should do the like, it were Sacrilege, and Impiety.

If any ask, how he can be said to contemn God, which believes there is no
God?

I answer, His very believing that there is none, proceeds from Contempt.

No marvel therefore, if the wrath of God fell upon Idolaters that were
sacriledgious. Whereof profane Stories have innumerable examples, of which I
will select a few.

The Temple of Delphos was famous in the World; and neither Xerxes, nor Brennus
that profaned it could escape the visible vengeance of God. The Proverb of
the Gold of Tholouze; whence it had its original, is commonly known.

Cambyses Soldiers which he sent to rob the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, were
swallowed up quick of great heaps of Sand: and Cambyses himself a derider of
the Egyptian sacrifices, because he did it, out of an Impions mind
(notwithstanding they were defiled with superstition) not long after that he
had killed their Oxe-God Apis, perished of a wound given him with his own
Dagger.

And the Wrath of God (in all men's Judgment) lighted on Pyrrhus, who having
robbed the Treasury of Proserpina the Locrensian Goddess, and having conveyed
that wicked Prize to his Ships, himself and all his Fleet with a sudden storm
were drowned near to the bordering shore; where the Treasure was all taken up,
and restored to the Goddesses Treasury.

I will add one more Example of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa (though of
contrary Event) for their sakes that among their Companions think it such
good sport to laugh at God, and all Religion, to the end that they which scorn
the Doctrine of Christianity, may be instructed by Pagans themselus. Valerius
Maximus in his first Book and second Chapter, Of the neglect of Religion;
relates these words of Tully concerning Dionysius.

Dionysius borne at Syracusa, did take great pleasure in jesting at his
sacrilegious prankes, which we now rehearse.

Having robbed the Temple of the Locrensian Proserpina, and sailing afterward
with a very prosperous wind, he smiled and said to his Friends: See ye not with
what a fair gale of wind the Gods themselves bless them at Sea, which rob
them? Another time, having stripped the Statue of Jupiter Olympius of a goodly
Garment of massy Gold, which King Hiero having taken from the Carthaginians
did adorn it with; he put on (in stead thereof) a Cloath-cloke, saying, that a
Golden-Mantle was too heavy for Summer, and too cold for Winter; but that of
Cloth would serve very fitly for both seasons. He commanded also to take away
the golden Beard of Asculapius at Epidaurus; saying, that it was indecent to
see the Son have a Beard, and Apollo, the Father to have none. He took also
the Golden and Silver Tables out of the Temples; and because it was written in
them (after the Greek fashion) that they were the Tables of the good Gods, he
said, he would make use of their Goodness. He also took away the golden
Plates, Crowns, and Images of Victory, which were held with outstretched
hands of Images of the Gods; saying, that he did not take them away, but
receive what was offered him: arguing, that it was a senseless thing, to pray
to the Gods for good things, and refuse them when they so readily tendered them.
This man, though in his own person he suffered according to his deserts, yet
being dead, he had that penalty, by the ignominy of his Son, which he
escaped when he was alive. For God proceeds many times but slowly to revenge:
yet at last, that slownesse is recompensed with a greater weight of punishment.
Thus far Valerius; who though he say much, yet much more is said by Tully, to
wit, that Tyrants are ever vexed with the Sting of Conscience; Lib. 3. De Not.
Deo.
and that their wicked Acts never let them rest, but inwardly torment their
Minds, even as Hangmen torture Malefactors on the Wheel or Rack, And
certainly Dionysius his laughter was but Sardonian (as they say) and from the
teeth outward: for being conscious of so much Villainy, he could not possibly
be without fear. And though the Vulgar might think him a happy man, yet he
knew himself, how wretched he was, and how far from his supposed Felicity.
Cic. lib. 4. Tuse.
His friend Damocles being desirous to have a Taste of his happy Estate; he was
content: and commanded him to be placed in a Golden Bed, and all kind of
Delicates to be ministered to him: so that Damocles thought himself most happy.
But as soon as he perceived a glittering Sword over his head, hanging from the
Roof but by a Horsehayre, instantly the pleasure he took in all those sweet
things, vanished: and being loath to enjoy a happiness accompanied with such
fearful perplexity, he craved leave of the Tyrant to be gone. And has not
Dionysius now sufficiently showed in what fearful pangs the Sacrilegious are?

But what shall we say to that of the Satyrist?

Dicite Pontifices,
in Templo quid facit aurum?
Tell me, you Highpriests,
what makes Gold here in the Temple?
It is no reason that I should reply in behalf of those Pagan-Priests: Yet
thus much I dare say; That Gold, such as it was, to the impious Idolaters, was
sacred. What use that served for, which was kept in the Temple of God, we may
know by the words of Onias the High Priest to Heliodorus: to wit, for the
relief of Widows and Orphans. As for the Treasure and Gold which once the
Church had, it was not, in the best times, vnemployed; but was used for the
supply of poor necessitated Christians, and people that were in misery. The
Church (says St Ambrose) has Gold, which it hoords not, but bestows, as
occasion serves.

It was ever the chiefest Commendation of a Bishop, to feed the poor, and
help the afflicted: and because Christians in times past would have their
Bishops to be bountiful, they did endow them with large Revenues. But now Men
seek to undo them, and to reduce them to such a poor pittance, as they can
very hardly support their estates. So, they may teach Charity, and preach
Liberality, but not be able to practice it. I well wot, that some will object
the Covetousness, and Pomp of Bishops, and that they spend all the Churches
wealth on themselves, without any Care or Conscience to relieve the Poor with
any part of it: which Sacrilege, if it be found in Men of their Rank, is a
great deal the more heinous. But one Sacrilege cannot excuse another: and
least the Pastors of Churches should commit Sacrilege, they which have
impropriated Church-Liuing, had rather do it themselves.

For most certain it is, that whatsoever (under that color) has been taken
from the Church, has not been given to the Poor: who are now in worse case,
then ever before: yea they were far better relieved by Ecclesiastical
persons, heretofore; then now by Laymen (of what quality soever) that have
gotten the Lands of the Church into their possession: And when the Tyranny of
the Bishop of Rome was first abolished, the Poor might with more ease have
obtained their due portion from the Pastors of the Church, then ever they could
from them which unjustly succeeded them, and still usurp the Churches
Patrimony. But to conclude, whosoever they be that either make a prey of the
Church, or wickedly abuse the Revenues thereof, cannot be excused from the
Crime of Sacrilege, and therefore (without Restitution) shall not escape the
Vengeance of GOD.

* Reasons against the Maintenance of Ministers by arbitrarie Stipends.
SEeing the Apostolic Rule commands, that good Order be kept in the Church,
and that all things therein be done to Edification; it is not amiss to
consider, whether it may better be observed, by putting Ministers to Pensions,
or by the ancient manner of paying Tithes and Offerings to the Pastors,
delivered by the Apostles to the People of God, and practiced by the Fathers of
the Church. I suppose, that Wisdom was not borne with us, that we should
order things better, then the Ancients did: and I hold that we ought to
innouate nothing in the Church, without the approved pattern of former times,
to the end we give no just cause to our Adversaries to calumniate. But this
new found way of honoring the Clergy with Stipendarie Contributions, is
unknown to the Scriptures, and Fathers: for it was never heard of before our
time, that the Church had stipendarie Ministers. Yet I would not be so
mistaken, as if I held it utterly unlawful for the Magistrate to allow
Pensions to the Clergy for their better maintenance: but this I say, that
Christian People are bound to their Pastors in a more strickt and religious
Bond of Observance; and therefore it is their duty, by the best Expressions of
a grateful mind, to honor them: which when they do not, it is a sign, their
Charity is but cold. ^al. 6.6.
St Paul commands that he which is taught in the Word, communicate unto his
Teacher in all his Goods: From which Duty no stipends can free the Rich and
Wealthy hearers. For that Communication of good things is not always done for
the releeuing of necessity, but also for the Testification of our thankful
and honorable Regard. Our poor Christian Brother is honored with a reward,
for his necessity: but, the Pastor, for his Office and Dignity. Again, the
Will of Magistrate is mutable; whom if Ministers chance to displease, they are
sure to have but slow payment, and perhaps none at all. And if their Pensions
come from the public Treasury; whenever that is at an Ebb (as many times
it happens) they are like to be in a pitiful case. For the People being not
wont to pay any thing (of due Right) to their Pastor, will think that his
Necessity is nothing to them; and will not therefore be persuaded, to do as
Duty binds them: yea, the most will rather utterly forsake their Preacher,
then contribute any thing to him: who being so deserted, will be forced to
leave his Flock: as in many places of Holland, it has come to pass. And how
miserable the estate of Ministers is in Holland; both for smalnesse of Stipend,
and difficulty of payment, they know who have experience of it; being enforced
to go a long and tedious way to beg their Pay of the Officers; who often
welcomming them with base reproaches, send them away empty: so that they bring
home naught, beside the troublesomnesse of their Journey, but loss of Time and
Expense. Moreover, the Magistrates that are accustomed to pay such Stipends,
begin to esteem their Pastors, but as Civil Officers: insomuch, that men of
base condition (setting their Office aside) as Shoomakers, Smithes, Woodmongers
and Pedling Merchants dare many times presume to insult most rudely over their
Preachers: saying, you are our Servants; we pay you Wages, etc. I should be
ashamed to speak so contemptuously, to a Drudge, or Scullian.

Being at a solemn Feast at Gaunt, where the Prince of Orange was entertained,
I sat over against two Scabines, or Burgomasters, who when they had well warmed
themselves with Wine, and of Mutes, were become Vowels, thinking (belike) that
I heard not what they said, being busy in talk with him that sat next me,
they fell (as I well remember) into this Discourse.

We must (said they) take heed lest these Ministers do not sometime put us to
as much trouble, as the Popes did. We must therefore keep them under, that
they grow not into too much favor and authority with the People, to the
prejudice of the Magistrate: and especially we must see that their Stipends
be not great; for he that daintily feeds his Servant, shall find him
refractarie.

These Men made a show to be Patrous (forsooth) of the Church, and Defenders
thereof, but afterward they discovered themselves what they were, proving
indeed Traitors to the Church and Country. Whether Holland have any more such,
I know not: From like effects, it is lawful to argue to the like causes.

Thus we see, that the Temporalties of the Church being confiscate, or
sacrilegiously alienated, there can accrue nothing to the Clergy, from their
new supercilious Pay-Masters, but Contempt.

Let none therefore wonder, if I dislike this new fangled way of honoring and
maintayning the Ministers of the Gospel: for it is no honor, which is joined
with Disgrace. And let that Order which was prescribed by God himself out of
his Divine Wisdom, in the Old and New Testament, for the honorable maintenance
of his Servants, as it was understood and practiced by the ancient Fathers, be
inuiolably observed: nor let self-conceit flatter us, that we are able to
find out a better way. Let Abuses be so corrected, that the lawful use be
restored: and let not their Impiety which with their wicked Acts defiled
sacred and profane things, so far transport us, as to confound sacred and
profane together; and utterly abolish that difference in Things, which Nature
and Reason have constituted.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO SARAVIA; ANSWERING FOUR MAINE Arguments which Usurpers of the
Churches Right usually allege.

POST TENEBRAS LVX

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes and R. Cotes for James Boler, 1629.

An Appendix to SARAVIA; Answering four maine Arguments which Usurpers of the
Churches Rights usually allege.
First, Abbey-Land.
OUR Land is Abbey-Land, belonging to such a Monastery before the Dissolution:
and consequently exempted from Tithes, as was the Abbey.

Answer.
This Land they may enjoy, unless it were once consecrated to the Church: and
if so, let them take heed: for what is once dedicated to the service of God,
may not be alienated therefrom: (some few cases excepted) whereof this (of
Lay-impropriators) is none.

Their Reply.
It is descended to us by Inheritance, and therefore we may without scruple
enjoy it.

Answer.
1 It is very disputable whether their Title be clear, unless it can be
evidently proved by them, that the Land was never consecrated to God, (as
aforesaid,) which if it be not apparent, they cannot without much doubting, and
scruple of Conscience, enjoy it.

2 Admit, their Title be clear, and themselves void of perplexity concerning
it; yet was the Tithe of those Lands originally consecrated to the maintenance
of Gods Service: Why then deny they the payment of that Tithe? For it is not a
contemptible Pension (in lieu thereof) that will maintain a sufficient
Preacher, or will excuse them for detayning it.

Their Reioynder.
The same Parliamentarie Authority which gives Ministers Tithe in Places not
exempted, has exempted our lands from payment of Tithe.

Answer.
But what if the Law (in that point) be not so clear as they imagine? It is
well-knowne, that the alienation of these Tithes (deuolued to the King at the
dissolution of Abbeys, together with the Lands) was at first, an Act of the
Pope, by injurious usurpation upon the Churches Right, and against the Laws of
God and Man then in force. Now it is not to be thought, that the Statute (in
that case) intended the ratification of that sacrilegious Act, or to make that
just which is originally unjust, or utterly to abolish Tithes; but only to
change the possession, for the present, till the Churches claim might more
evidently appear. But suppose the Law were clear for non-payment of these
Tithes, how does it accord with the pattern of the Divine Law? For if God have
ordained that Preachers of the Gospel should live of the Gospel, and that their
Hearers are to communicate unto them Gal. 6.6.
in all good things; then surely, seeing their Ministry is much more
excellent then that of the Law, either Tithes (at lest) or some better thing is
due to them by Divine Ordinance. It is therefore hard dealing, to bar them of
the ancient Ordinance of Tithe, unless there can be produced out of Scripture
some other Law of Provision, to disanull it.

Second, Composition.
WE have Compositions from former Incumbents which free us from Tithes.

Answer.
Though such Compositions be seldom produced, lest the present Minister may
pick somewhat out thereof, for his own advantage and relief, yet admit the
Composition be never so strong, how can it stand with Conscience, that the Act
of one Incumbent should prejudice his Successors in a great Charge, to their
utter impoue, ishment and undoing? Or how can it be reputea a lawful Contract,
which so deeply trenches on the Churches Right, to the extreme decay and
hinderance of Gods Service? Can the buyer or seller (in this case) have any
hope to be a member of the Church Triumphant, that lives and dies a betrayer
and spoyler of the Church militant, in that sort? Better therefore, that such
Compositions be renounced, then their Souls be so manifestly endangered.

Third, Praescription.
WE can prove Praescription (for diners Descents) exempting us from Tithes.

Answer.
It is observed, that few great rich-men can endure with patience to pay Tithe
in kind: whereupon they take their opportunities to agree with the Incumbents
for their Tithe at an undervalue; pretending, that if they agree not, they
will make the Tithe little worth to them: this done, they are willing, out of
their (exceeding) Zeal to the Church, to allow a poor yearly Pension to the
Preacher. Which Praescription having once got footing for some good term of
years; if any succeeding Incumbent dare presume to question it, they will make
him know, that he has rowzed a Lion, and scourge him through all the Courts
of the Kingdom. Yea, if the Prescribers add, by purchase, or enclosure, to
their Demaines in the same Parish; they will by virtue of the same vicious
Prescription, detain all the Tithe of the Portion so annexed. The answer
therefore is, Non firmatur tractu temporis, quod de iure ab initio non
subsistit: That which was of no validity at the beginning, never becomes
lawful by any tract of Time. This therefore is nothing but a plain robbing of
the Churches due.

Fourth, Customs.
BY the Custom of our Parish, continued by long consent, and practice time out
of mind, we pay not such and such Tithes.

Answer.
Consent and Practice make not a Custom lawful, unless it be grounded upon
evident reasonable cause: Nisi enim, consuetudo ratione munita sit, non est
consuetudo, sed corruptela: If Custom be not fortified by Reason, it is rather
Corruption, then Custom. By which Rule, if the pretended Customs be examined;
they will (for the most part,) appear both vnreasoable and unconscionable: for
if the greatest part of the Parish be Wood-ground, is it not reason that
Tithe-Wood be paid? And if Sheep feed on the Common for eight the most
profitable months in the year, though they be not wintered in the Field, is
there any Reason to detain the Tithe, upon pretense of Custom?

Their Reply.
Notwithstanding, we pay to the Minister, a proportionable Rate.

Answer.
True: if a few scraps, not worth taking up, may be so termed: which how it
may stand, with Right or Reason, Justice or Equity, let all men (that are not
partial) judge.

Seeing therefore, that these Exemptions, Compositions, Praescriptions, and
Customs, are the very Cankers of the Church, and bring infinite penury, and
misery upon the Clergy, to the extreme decay, and detriment of Gods true
Religion; I see not how they can be said to have any sense or feeling of God,
or Godliness, that shall, against the Evidence of Truth, and recoyling of
their Conscience, continue them.

The LORD turn the Hearts of ^he Spoylers of his Inheritance; an^ remember in
mercy those which have compassion on his distressed Servants.
FINIS.
Additionals.
X
EXprimit antiquis
haec Christu^s littera scriptis,
Exprimit and partem
quam petit ille sacram.
Ergo citus, Christi quae suut,
dato munera Christo:
Caesaris accipiat Caesar:
vterque suum.
H. S. Eques Auratus.

Thus Englished.
THis X (of old)
expressed Christ's holy Name,
And eke the sacred Tenth,
which he does claim:
Give then to CHRIST,
what is CHRIST's, without delay:
Give Caesar, Caesar's due:
and Both, their Pay.
I. A. Oxon.

In modernos (...), and Numularios; (...).
SOme say, since Peter
cut off Malchus ear
The Clergy and the Lay
have scarce been friends:
But why should they
such causlesse grudges bear?
Was there not instantly
made full amends?
Yet All (though strong
and ponderous Proofs they see
Pressed on Church-Pirates)
will not yet agree.
For Simon Magus
in a sacred thirst
After Church-Liuings
(taking Malchus part)
With his Bore-speare
(O Caitife most accursed!)
Runs Peter, James,
and John into the heart:
Yea, all their Successors
seeking to quell,
Or beggar quite,
rides post amain to Hell.
After him marches
hungry Sacrilege
(Ye lad with mighty Arms,
and massy Shield)
Against the poor Church;
and proudly can allege
CUSTOM and LAW;
then challenges the Field.
But soft (Sr DAGONET)
a word (I pray')
Ere that our Tithes
you harry quite away.
Is not our GOSPEL
better then your LAW?
(Yea, or the Law
which Moses self did utter:)
Is not that, Gold;
and Caninum litigand studium dixit Columella. Lib. 1 In Procem.
yours (to it) but Straw?
How dare you than
against Preachers portions stutter?
Your Clownish CUSTOM
thus away we kick;
Hoc, ab initio
non fuit sic.
If all this cannot
yet reclaim your Error
(Which does the Tenth
to Jewish Temple bind,
Leaving the Christian, free:)
then (to your terror)
A heavy Doom
you in this Book shall find.
Acknowledge then,
our Tithes divinely Iure divine.
due:
To circumcise us thus,
you play the Jew.
S. N. Theol. Oxon.

A Prophetical Complaint to God, against Church-Pirates and Usurpers.
PSALM. 80.13, 14. The wild Bore out of the Wood, does root it up: and the wild
Beast of the Field does devour it.

Turn thee again thou GOD of Hosts, look down from Heaven; behold, and
visit this Vine.

The Churches Tears.
LAMENTAT. 1.16. For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with
water, because the Comforter that should relieve my Soul is far from me: my
Children are desolate, because the Enemy prevailed.

VIVAT CHRISTVS: PEREAT BARABBAS.
Operarum Errata.
Page 2. l. 23. read thrust. p. 10. l. 18. r. Code. p. 23. l. 17. r. Pastors. p
27. l. 17. f. a Mungrel and r. an ( dele reliqua) p 33. l. 18. r. all good
Institution. p. 34. l. 4. r. parricida p. 44. l. 10. r. God. p. 45 l. 7. r.
throughout the World. p. 48. l. 10. r. suffered not. p. 55. l 9. r. Magistrates.

Lectori male-feriato and Nugipolyloquidi.
Rode caper vites; tamen hic cum flabis ad aras,
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.

