De Numeris Geometricis. OF THE NATVRE AND PROPRIETIES OF GEOMETRICAL NVMBERS.

First written by Lazarus Schonerus, and now Englished, enlarged and
illustrated with diverse and sundry Tables and observations concerning the
measuring of Plains and Solids:

All teaching the fabric, demonstration and use of a singular Instrument, or
Rular, long since invented and perfitted by THOMAS BEDWELL Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD. 1614.

TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHT, Sir Robert Coke.
HONORABLE SIR,
HIstorians report, that the Scythians were so far out of love with learning,
that it was a shame and disgrace for any man amongst them to be esteemed a
scholar. The name of a Scythian, all Christians cannot choose but detest and
abhor. And yet is this their opinion, as we hear, maintained by the
Nobility of some Nations. An argument, as I think, sufficient alone, if
historians were silent, to show from what race such men are descended.
Barbarous, I am sure it is, and no way consonant to the nature of man. For as
the Philosopher says, Omnes homines naturascire desiderant. And, Prudentia
(says the Orator) quae in vericognitione consistit, maxim naturam attingit
humanam. The Nobility therefore of England, are in this most highly to be
commended, who do generally so much esteem of learning, that they think
nothing more honorable then either to be accounted learned, or great pa trons
of learning: Knowing indeed that, as the Poet says, In prudentia Nobilitas
sita est. This generallitie first: and then next, your honorable affection and
favor to me in particular, has emboldened me to offer this small Pamphlet
unto your patronage, vt aliquod saltem extaret meae inte obseruantiae and
gratitudinis monumentum. Vale, V. O. ac nos tibi iampridem deuinctissimos,
deuinctiores, si fieri potest, reddito. Londini Anglorum viij Kalend. Martias,
an. MDCXIIII.

Your H. in all true affection, Wilham Bedwell.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
IT is now, as far as I remember, well near forty years since a Rular, for
the measuring of Plains and Solids, was first devised by mine uncle M. Thomas
Bedwell. The use of this, himself has taught in a little Treatise, which I
have seen long ago in his study amongst other his writings of like nature and
argument. The fabric or manner of making it, he did not, to my knowledge,
impart to any. That I suppose be reserved for a larger volume of diverse other
such inventions of his, which he bad purposed to have published, if God had
spared him longer life. But these all being suppressed by some, who have, as it
seems, more respected their own private gain, then either his honor or the
common good; I did, about a dozen years ago, as some learned lovers of these
studies can testify, labor to shadow out that work of his. And at last
having finished a Treatise, both of the construction and use of the same, I
offered it unto some to have it imprinted: But they seeing in the copy diverse
figures and diagrammes, refused to meddle with it, except my self would bear
a great part of the charge of that first impression. That I being unwilling to
do, I was forced to defer the publishing of it until I might meet with some
one that would of himself undertake the business. In this interim, I found
yet another scruple, which I thought necessary first to be removed. For as the
construction of the first Author was merely Geometrical, so that of ours was
wholly Arithmeticall, and could not be done without the help of numbers: and
therefore was such as might not easily be taught or conceived, except first the
nature and proprieties of such like numbers were well understood. Whereupon,
before that Treatise of the Rular, this of GEOMETRICAL NVMBERS was first to be
published. Geometrical numbers I call them; not Figurate or Cossicke numbers,
as commonly they are called: For of those infinite sorts of this kind of
numbers, we have to do with none but such as do represent and express some
true Geometrical figure, such as the Quadrate, Parallelogramoblong, Prisma,
and the Cubicke are. Now whereas happily some man may object and say, that these
things have been often handled and sufficiently taught by others; let him know,
that although in general we do confess it to be true, yet no man, to our
knowledge, has applied those rules to that use that we have done: And
therefore those Treatises of theirs, do in no ways fit our purpose. For first
out of these rules, as afterward shall appear, we have framed certain Tables
for sundry uses in measuring of Plains and Solids. One of these, called
TRIGONVM ARCHITECTONICVM, The Carpenters Squire, we caused for the public
good, more then a twelue-moneth since, to be imprinted at our own cost and
charges. Moreover, sundry practices and works of these rules more plain and
easy then commonly are used, are here showed and discovered. Lastly, we have
here given thee a taste or sample of a form and manner of resolving any
intricate demonstration mathematical, whereby it shall be made so plain and
easy, that it may be conceived of the simplest. This we have used these seven
or eight and twenty years; and because we see it to be approved of the most
learned Mathematicians of this kingdom, we shall ere long, God willing, more
fully manifest it by many examples.

OF A RATIONAL FIGVRATE NVMBER.
CHAP. I. Of the Extraction of a Quadrate root, or side.
1. A rational figur ate number is, a number that is made by the
multiplication of numbers between themselves.

SVch a combination and affinity there is between Arithmeticke and Geometry,
that the whole nature and property of the one cannot well be taught and
conceived without the other. For so Ramus says, Geometria sui and generis and
iuris magnam quidem partem est, neque aliter quam geometrice tractabilis.
Attamen part quadam numeris associatur, and eis explicatur, numerique,
geometricaru^ affectionum interpretes, geometricis vocabulis appellantur, vt
Planus, Quadratus, Solidus, and Cubus, a geometrico Plano, Quadrato, Solido,
Cubo; quorum vmbr ae quoedam tales numers sunt. Ite^, Aristoteles affirmat
gener aliser arithmetica^ demonstrationem magnitudinum accidentibus conucnire,
cu^ magnitadines numerifiunt: Et Proclus ait, Quicquid in Geometria (...)
explicabile and cognobile sit, numeris explicari and cognosci. And indeed a
great part of Euclides Elements are wholly arithmeticall, that is, that book
of Euclide, whose purpose is to teach the general grounds of Geometry, has
notwithstanding many arithmeticall conclusions here and there intermedled
among; and to speak the truth, the vij, viij, ix, and x books of that his
work, are in a manner wholly arithmeticall. All this, I say, does teath us that
Geometry connot be understood without the knowledge and use of Arithmeticke. Of
this kind most properly are those figurate numbers, which do participate of
both natures. And therefore one defines a figurate number thus; Figuratus
numerus est numerus qui per siguras and appellationes geometricas exprimitur, A
figurate number is a number which is expressed by geometrical names and
terms. Whereupon some have called it a Geometrical number. Now a Figure, as
Euclide says, is that which is contained on every side with one or more
bounds, 14 dj. Such an one is a circle, contained with one line, which they
call a Peripherie. Item, a Triangle, which is bounded with three lines: or a
Quadrate, with four lines. Such in bodies is a Cube, bounded with six equal
surfaces, and a Prisma, bounded with six unequal surfaces, etc. Now a
Rational figure is a sigure that is comprehended of the Base and Height
rational between themselves, 9 e iiij R: And the Base and Height are said to
be rational one to another, when as the rate or reason of both may be expressed
by a number of the same measure given; by the 8 e j R. As for example, if the
length of a quadrangle given be 14 inches, and the breadth 12, it is said that
that quadrangle is a rational figure; because the length, that is, the Base,
and again the breadth, or Height are both expressed by a number of the measure
given, that is, by a certain number of inches, to wit, that by 14 inches, this
by 12. Now to be comprehended of the Base and Height, is when the length is
multiplied by the breadth. For this geometrical comprehensio^, which here is
understood, is as it were a multiplication by numbers. So in the former example
the Quadrangle before named is comprehended of the Base 14, and of the Height
12. Therefore if thou ^ shall grant that the Base and Height are rational
between themselves, or that their rate may be expressed by a number of the
measure assigned: then I affirm, that the numbers of those sides being
multiplied the one by the other, shall show the content of that figure. Item
that the product of them, that is, 168, is the figurate number expressing that
content, as here thou see.

2 The numbers thus multiplied, or the numbers which make the figurate number,
are called Sides or Roots: and the art whereby the Sides of a figurate number
given are found, is called The extraction of a root.

That number which expresses the area, or content of a rational figure, is
called, as we have showed before, a Figurate number: and the numbers
representing or expressing the Height and Base, that is, the numbers thus
multiplied, or making this figurate, are by the geometrical term called
Latera, Sides: but vulgarly of the Arithmeticians they are called Roots. For
as plants and tres do spring from their roots: so these figurate numbers,
whether plains or solides, do arise and have their beginning from their
roots. If then the sides be given, the figurate is easily found by
multiplication. But to find the sides, roots, or numbers whereof any figurate
number was made, is a matter not so easy: That art or rule that teaches to
perform this, is called, The extraction of a root; of the Latins it is
called, Analysis Lateris: as the multiplication aforesaid or manner of making a
figurate number, is called of them Genesis figurati.

3 A figurate number is made by one multiplication, or by many: And either of
them is equilater, or vnequilater.

4 An equilater figurate is made of equal numbers, or of one number multiplied
by it self; which multiplier is also specially called the Side or Root: An
vnequilater is that which is made of numbers which are unequal between
themselves.

As for example, the figurate 4, is made by one multiplication of one number by
it self, to wit, of the side 2 by it self; Therefore 4 is a figurate
equilater, and the side or root of it is 2: So 9 is an equilater, whose side
is 3. This side of the equilater by the Arabians is called Radix, that is, The
Root, as Schoner testifies. Item 6 is a figurate of unequal sides, made, I
say, of the multiplication of 2 by 3, and therefore 6 is an vnequilater
figurate.

Here observe that an unity does imitate every kind of equilater: For 1, by
multiplication increases not, neither yet does it diminish any whit at all. It
remains therefore that an unity multiplying an unity, makes but an unity,
that is, it takes upon it the nature of an equilater.

5 Moreover, an equilater figurate is twofold: either it is that whose true
side is to be expressed by a number; or such whose true side may not be
expressed by any number.

6 The equilater whose side is to be expressed by a number, is that whose rate
or reason unto an 1, may be showed.

This division although it be not altogether proper to this place, yet because
it is commonly used by the vulgar sort of Artists in this case, we would not
omit it. The first sort they call (...), effabile, that is, such as may truly
be pronounced or spoken by some arithmeticall number: As for example, 16 is an
equilater, or a figurate of equal sides, and the true side is 4, that is, a
number which may be spoken, uttered and set down by arithmeticall figures; I
mean whose quantity may be conceived by the reason of it unto 1. For in the
quadrate or plain equilater, as the reason of the number given is unto the
root thereof: so is the same root unto an unity. For the root or side is
the mean proportional between the figurate given, and 1. As in our example;
as 16 is unto 4, so is 4 unto 1. And indeed al absolute numbers are conceived
and understood by the reason they bear unto an unity; and whatsoever they are,
that they are said to be in respect and comparison of an unity.

7 The equilater whose true side cannot be expressed, is a figurate, the reason
of whose side unto 1, cannot be told or declared.

As for example, 3 may be conceived to be an Eequilater, that is, to be a
product made of two equal numbers, or of one and the same number multiplied by
it self, which number thus multiplied is, by the former, the side of the said
Figurate made. Now this side or number multiplied, is greater then 1. For 1,
multiplied by it self, by the 4 e, does make the Equilater 1; which is lesser
then 3. Again the same side is lesser then 2. For 2 multiplied by 2, does make
4, which is an Equilater greater then 3. Therefore the root or side of 3, does
fall to be some mean quantity between 1, and 2. And yet what that number or
difference is, or how specially it is to be understood or conceived, no man may
possibly tell. Therefore such a like side is called arrheton, inexplicabile,
irrationale, Surde, irrational, or not to be uttered, as the Arithmeticians do
call it.

8 A figurate made by one multiplication, is called a Plain: which is a
figurate number made by the multiplication of two sides equal one to the
other.

A figurate made by multiplication, as before is declared, is a number
representing a parallelogram, and yet not any indifferently, but that only
which is right-angled. Now A Parallelogram is a Quadrangle whose opposite sides
are parallel, 6 e x R. And A right-angled parallelogram is a parallelogram all
whose angles are right-tangles, 2 e x j R. And because that all parallelograms
are plains; and for that plains have but two dime^sio^s, to wit Length and
Breadth: therefore, by the 1 e, a plain figurate is made by one multiplicatio^
only; that is, by multiplying of the length by the breadth. As for example, 9
is a figurate made of two sides, to wit, of 3 multiplied by 3; and therefore 9
is a plain figurate. Item 12 is a figurate made of two sides; to wit, of 3
multiplied by 4. Therefore 12 is plain figurate, representing a right-angled
prarallelogramme surface.

Therefore

9 If thou shall divide an inequilater parallelogramme by one side given, the
quotient shall be the other side desired.

As for example, Suppose the figurate plains were 12, and the one side thereof
given were 3: here I say that the other side shall be 4, to wit, the quotient of
12, divided by the same 3. This is plain by the 1 e 6 j lib. Arithmet.
Salignaci. The argument is thus concluded:

If a number be made of two numbers given, the one of the numbers given shall
divide the product by the other: and contrariwise. But a figurate plain is
made by the multiplication of two sides one by the other: 8 e. Ergo, The one
side shall divide the figurate plain by the other.
This rule only has place in those examples where the one side of the
vnequilater plain is given: that which follows is more general.

10 All the rotes of the squares contained in a Figurate plain given, which
shall measure the said figurate, with their quotients, shall be all the sides of
the said plain given.

As for example; Let the figurate plain given, al whose sides are to be found,
be 20: the squares contained in the same, whose sides 1, 2, 4, do measure 20,
let the^ be 1, 4, 16: And the quotients by the same sides, let the^ be 20, 10
and, 5: I say that 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, are all the sides measuring 20, the
figurate plain given. For although 9, be a quadrate also contained in the said
figurate; yet because that 3, the side of the same, does not measure the same
figurate given, it is neglected as nothing pertaining to this our purpose. By
this rule, as you see, may be performed that which the 2 verse of the 13
Chapter of the first book of Salignacus his Arithmeticke, does teach; to wit,
How to find out all the measures of many, of any compound number given.

Let the compound number given, all whose measures of many are to be found, be
60: Here all the squares contained in 60, whose sides may measure the same, are
1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36: And the quotients of 60, by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, the sides of
the said squares, are 60, 30, 20, 15, 12, 10: Therefore these twelve numbers 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30, 60, are all the measures of 60, the compound
number given.

11 Like-plaines have a doubled reason of their correspondent sides; and one
mean proportional comprehended of the extreme, or mean proportional sides.
20 p. v j: Item 11 and 18 p. viij E.

Figurates have their denomination of Figures, (as we have showed at the 1 e:)
And therefore their nature cannot otherwise be concelued and taught but from
the same. Like figures therefore, as Ramus at the 14 e iiij, teaches, are
figures whose corners are equal and proportional to the shankes of the equal
angles. Now plains have but two dimensions, and solides three. Wherefore they
shall have a doubled reason, these a trebled reason of the correspondent sides.
Again here, as Salignacus at the 2 e of the 14 Chap. of the ij book of his
Arithmeticke, teaches, to double, treble, or quaduple a reason, is not to add
the same reason unto it self twice, thrice, or foure-times: But to multiply it
by it self, twice, thrice, or four times. For example, let 8 and 18 be the
two figurates given: And let their correspondent sides be 2 and 3: Item 4 and
6: those the Bases, these the Heights. I say, that the reason of 8 unto 18, is
the reason of 2 unto 3, or of 4 to 6, doubled: The reason is thus doubled, ^:
or thus, ^. The reason then of the first figurate unto the second, is the
reason of 4 unto 9: or of 16 unto 36, that is, the reason of the first figurate
unto the second, is Subdupla-sesquiquarta. For the consequent being divided by
the antecedent, the quotient is 2. Therefore in Plains, where the dimensions
are but two, to wit, Length and Breadth, the reason is only doubled. This then
is the reason of rightangled parallelogrammes, to which Plain numbers do
answer. And thus much of the first part of this proposition: The second part,
of the mean proportional, follows. Like Plains therefore, says our
Author, have but one mean proportional, comprehended of the proportional
sides. The cause is understood out of the grounds of Arithmeticke: For if the
reason of a number unto a number be but doubled, then by the rule and nature of
numbers continually proportional, there can possibly be but one mean
proportional between them. The rule of this invention, is thus, laid down by
Salignacus, at the 2 e 12 c ij book of his Arithmeticke: If having two reasons
given, the second bound of the first reason, do multiply both the bounds of the
first reason: and the first bound of the second, do multiply the first bound of
the first reason, the products shall be continually proportional to the four
numbers given. In the two plains before mentioned, 8 and 18, the proportional
sides, or the two reasons given, were 2, 3: 4, 6: The mean continually
proportional, according to this rule, is thus: ^ The mean plain then
continually proportional, between the plains given, is 12: that is, as 2 is
unto 3, so is 8 unto 12: and as 4 is unto 6, so is the same 12 unto 18. This
mean proportional therefore now found, is made or comprehended of 4, the
length of the first figurate, and of 3, the height of the second: or
contrariwise of 2, the height of the first figurate, and of 6, the length of
the second: For the product, is still the same: Therefore

12 If the sides of the two like Plains be given, the mean proportional of
the same Plains is also given.

This is manifest by the former: For there the mean proportional was made
either of the middle proportionals, or of the two extremes of the four
numbers given. As for example, let the two Plains given be 12 and 48: the
length of the first, let it be 4; of the second, let it be 8: The height or
breadth of the first, 3; of the second, 6: The product of 3 by 8; or of 4 by 6,
that is, 24, is the mean proportional desired. The example is thus: ^ I say,
as 12 is unto 24, so is the same 24 unto 48. For the reason in both is
subdupla. Thus much in general of Figurate rational numbers, or Figurate
plains: it follows now in particular of their several kinds.

CHAP. II. Of the Quadrate.
1 An equilater or equal-sided plain is called a Quadrate, 18 d vij, and 3 e
xij R. The vnequal-sided plain is called an Oblong.

OF the diverse sorts of Plains, handled by the Geometers, that only is a
Rational plain, all whose corners are equal, and opposite sides parallel.
Such an one is the Right-angled parallelogramme, which alone of all the
Geometticall plains is comprehended of the base and height, as before is
showed. Now the figurate of a rational right-angled parallelogramme, is called
a Plain. Admit for examples sake, that the Height of a right-angled
parallelogramme were 3, and the Base were 4: Here if thou shall multiply 4 by
3, the product 12, shall be the figurate, or content of the right-angled
parallelogramme assigned. This product 12, is called a Plain; and 3 and 4, the
numbers whereof it was made, are called Sides, by a Geometrical name. And
indeed this manner of multiplication, as we have taught before, is merely
Geometrical. Place 12 unities, (or, in stead of ^ them, 12 ciphers) in equal
distances one from another, as here thou see; and it shall represent the
figure, that is made of two right lines, whereof the one is 3 inches, the other
4. For if thou shall first divide thelines given into equal parts; the one
into 3 parts, the other into 4: and again shall suppose, the Height to be
erected perpendicularly upon the end of the Length: And lastly, conceive first
the Height to be carried or moved all along from the one end of the Length unto
the other: And in like manner, the Length to be moved upward, for all that
whole plumme-line: The traces that are to be supposed those divisions will make
upon the plain, shall make 12 squares, within the Oblong thus: This kind of
multiplication, I say, is geometrical: ^ For here by this means, of lines are
not made lines, (as there of unities do arise unities only,) but a magnitude
or bigness, exceeding a line by one dimension, to wit, a surface. Before it
was observed, that the figure thus made, is a Right-angled parallelogramme. Now
a right-angled parallelogramme, is either an Oblong, or a Quadrate. An Oblong
is a right-angled parallelogramme of unequal sides: A Quadrate or Square is a
right-angled parallelogramme of equal sides: 1 and 2 e xij: The figurate of a
Quadrate is called also a Quadrate: which is a figurate made of two equal
numbers multiplied between themselves. This figurate above all other is to be
accounted a Rational: and yet every Quadrate is not a Rational number: For
that only is a Rational, whose number is a true Quadrate; that is, such a
number is a rational quadrate, whose side is to be expressed by a number. Of
this kind is that number only that is made by the multiplication of one
number by it self: c 3 e xij: Such are these nine following, made by the
multiplication of the nine single figures, or digittes, as they call them,
between themselves:

The Quadrates: 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 The Sides, or Roots: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
The Quadrate or Square number, is called of the Arabians, Zensus: of the
Greeks Dynamis a power or valor, as Euclide, Diophantus, and Barlaam do
testify. Wherefore wheresoever, in these arts, thou shall meet with these
phrases, Potentia rectae est quadratum, The power of a right line is a square,
or, Potentia numeri est quadratus, The power of a number is a Quadrate: there
understand that any number given, multiplied in it self, does make a Quadrate.
Item, Si basis trianguli subtendit rectum, aeque potest cruribus: 5 e xij R. If
the base of a tria^gle be over against a right-corner, then the power of it is
as much, as the power of both the other sides: that is, if of the three sides
of a right-angled triangle thou shall make three several squares, the square
of that side shall be equal to the other two squares, made of those sides
which do enclose or contain the right-angle. Thus in Arithmeticke one number
is said to be able to do as much as two other numbers, when as that number
multiplied by it self, shall make as much as those two shall make, multiplied by
themselves: thus 10 multiplied by 10 makes 100. Item 6 by 6, gives for the
product 36: And 8 by 8, yields 64. Now because that 36 x 64, that is, 36
added to 64, do make for the sum 100: And that 100, are equal to 100;
Therefore I say that the power of 10 is as much as the powers, or possibilities
of 6, and of 8.

This kind of multiplication of a number by it self, is called Quadratura
numeri, or Genesis quadrati, the squaring of a number, or the making of a
Quadrate: And contrariwise, the division of such a like square or quadrate, by
the side whereof it was made, is called Analysis lateris quadrati, The
extraction or invention of a square root. Now as every Multiplication, and
Division, so also this squaring of a number, and division or extraction of a
square root, is done either jointly by the whole, or severally by parts, at
many operations. The first is to be done and performed by Pythagoras table,
which is set down a little before: The second is to be done by the prescript
of the Rule next following. But first that Table is to be learned by heart.

2 If a number be divided into two parts, the Square of the whole number shall
be equal unto the squares of the parts, with a double plain made of them
both.

This in Geometry, spoken of a right-line, is the 8 e xij R: and is thus laid
down by Ramus: Si recta est secta in duo segmenta, quadratum totius aequatur
quadratis segmentorum, cum duplici rectangulo vtriusque; If a right line be cut
into two portions, the square of the whole line, is equal to the squares of
the portios, with two right-angled parallelogrammes made of both the said
portions. It is a consectarie drawn out of the 3 c II e x book of Ramus his
Geometry. Suppose the right-line ^ given were a c: let it be in b, divided
into two parts, a b, and b c. Now let the quadrate made of the whole line a c,
be a c l d: and from the division b, drawn a line parallel to the side c l:
Item, at the same distance, draw another parallel to a c; and thou shall
divide the quadrate a c l d, into two sorts of right-angled parallelogrammes,
to wit, into c i, and d i, two diagonals: Item, into a i, and l i, two
complements, as the Geometers call them. Now that these two diagonals, with the
two complements, are equal unto a c l d, the quadrate made of the whole line a
c, it is most manifest. For the whole is equal to all his parts jointly taken.
But the two Diagonals, and two Complements aforesaid, are all the parts of the
Quadrate a c l d, as here thou see. Therefore if a right-line be divided etc.
This rule the Arithmeticians, speaking of numbers, do set down in these
terms: If a number, etc. Which Barlaam has arithmetically demonstrated; to
whom I refer thee. Out of this rule is framed the Quadrature or Fabric of
the whole square, by the two segments or portions of the side; and that in this
manner: As for example, let the number given be 7, and the quadrate of the whole
number let it be 49. Then divide the same into two portions, to wit, into 4 and
3. And let these two numbers multiply one another, the four products 9, 12,
12, and 16 added, shall make 49, equal unto the former product, made of 7, the
whole number. Again, let the number given be 13; and the square of this whole
number let it be 169. Now let 13 the whole line, be divided into two parts, to
wit, into 10 and 3: let these multiply one another, and the several products
shall be four, the sum of which added together, shall be equal unto the
quadrate or product made of the whole line 13: the example is thus: ^ Therefore

3 The side of the greater Quadrate, is the side of one of the Plains; and
being doubled, it is the side of them both together: The other side of both the
Plains jointly taken, is the side of the lesser Quadrate.

It follows necessarily of the former. This rule teaches how to resolve a
Quadrate given, or the manner of Extraction of a square or quadrate root. The
former rule taught that the true squaring of a number, divided into parts,
consisted of two squares and two plains. So that the true resolution of a
Quadrate so made, must be the invention of the several sides of the said
particular squares and plains, whereof the whole Quadrate given consists.
For it is the same way from Cambridge to London, that it is from London to
Cambridge. By the former, the side of the square 169, was 13: which side or
number consists of two several numbers, to wit, of the article 10, and the
digit 3. Here, by the former rule, the greater square is 100, and the side
thereof is 10: The one Complement or Plain is 30, made of two sides, where of
the one is 10, the side of the former square: Therefore 30, is the side of 60,
the sum of both the plains. The other side of the Plain (single or double)
is 3, which is also the side of 9, the lesser square. These grounds thus laid,
the practice is to be performed according to the direction of this rule next
following.

4 If the side of some greater square be sought, first beginning at the
right hand, distinguish the number given continually by paires, for so many
particular squares: Then setting down the side of the first particular square
found within the Quotient, shall double the side found, for the base of the
first Complement. Lastly, the Complement divided by the Base, the Quotient
shall be the side of the next succeeding Square.

As in 144, the example so often mentioned, first beginning at the right hand, or
first figures, I distinguish it thus, I, 44; whereby I understand that the
particular squares, whereof the whole side is comprehended, are two. This done,
I seek amongst the squares of the single figures, at the 1 e, for the side of
1, the first square, and I find the side to be also 1: This side I place in
the quotient. This square I subtract from 1, the last period, and there
remains nothing. Secondarily, I double the same quotient, or side found, and
I make 20 (for indeed the first diagonall's side is 10; and the side of both
together jointly taken is 20; as we saw at the 3e.) By this I divide 44, the
whole period, or number remaining, and I find the quotient to be 2, for the
other side of the Complements, and the root of the lesser Diagonall: Therefore
I multiply first this quotient last found by itself, and I make 4, for the
lesser Diagonall or square. Again I multiply the same quotient by 20 the
Deuisor, and I make 40, for the doubled Complement. Lastly, I subtract 44, the
sum of the said doubled complement, and lesser diagonall, from 44, the number
remaining, and there remains nothing: Therefore I say that, 144 the figurate
given, is a true Quadrate; And the side or Root thereof is 12, which was
desired.

Item, Let the side of the Quadrate 9604 be sought. First, beginning at the
right hand, I distinguish the quadrate given continually into payres of
degrees, thus 96, 04; and I find the number to contain two such paires: And
therefore I conclude that the whole side of the quadrate given does consist of
two single figures. This done, I first seek amongst the squares of the single
figures, at the 1 e, for the square 96; which number, because I find it not
amongst them, I say is no true square. Now the greatest square contained in 96
I find to be 81, and the side or Root of it to be 9. This side I place within
the quotient. Then multiplying 9 by it self, I make 81, for the greatest
Diagonall, which placed under 96, and subtracted from the same, there do
remain over the head thereof 15: Now cancelling 04, I place them also over the
head, as high as the said 15. Secondarily, doubling 9 my quotient now found, I
make 18 (or, for the reason before recited, 180) for the Base of the
Complement: Then by this base I divide 1504, the number remaining, and I find
the quotient 8. This therefore I likewise set down by 9, for the other side of
the Plains, as also for the side of the lesser Quadrate. For the proof of
this later work, I multiply first the said quotient by it self: Then I
multiply the same quotient by the doubled Complement, that is, by the Deuisor:
Lastly I subtract the sum of these two products from the number remaining. As
in this our example, I multiply 8, the quotient, by it self, and I make 64, for
the second or lesser quadrate: Then I multiply 180, my deuisour, or base of the
complements, by the same quotient 8, and I make 1440, for the said double
Complement: Now 1440 x 64, or the sum of 1440 and 64, is 1504. This I subduct
from 1504, the number remaining, and there is left nothing: Therefore I say
that 9604, the number given, is a true Quadrate, and the side or Root thereof
is 98, which was desired. The example is thus: ^ ^ Therefore if thou shall
multiply 98 in it self, thou shall make 9604, the number given. For the
Quadrates of the Segments 90, and 8, with their Plains or Complements, are the
parts of the Quadrate of the whole number 98. The genesis or making of this
Quadrate, after our prescript, is thus: ^

5 Having found the Quotient of two, or more figures, if yet the whole side of
the Quadrate given be not found, thou shall double the whole quotient already
found: And then shall in all things else whatsoever, observe the same order as
was prescribed in the former.

And in this example: The side of 15129 is desired: First, having divided it,
as in the former we have taught, continually into paires, thus, 1, 51, 29, I
find 1 to be a Quadrate; and 1 also to be the side thereof. This side I write
in the Quotient. The quadrate of this quotient I subtract from 1, and there
remains nothing. Then I double the said quotient 1, and I make 2, (which in
respect of the next period I call 20) for the base of the doubled Complement: By
this I divide 51, the next period, and I find the quotient 2, for the height of
the said Complement, and side of the lesser quadrate. This latter quotient
therefore I multiply first in it self, and I make the quadrate 4: Then again by
the same quotient I multiply my deuisor 20, and I make 40, for the doubled
complement: Now 40 x 4, are 44, which I subtract from 51, and there remain 7:
Therefore the doubled Complement, with the second Quadrate, is 729. Lastly by
this rule, I double the whole quotient 12, and I make 24, or in respect of the
period following 240, for the base of the doubled Co^plement: now the quotient
of 729, by 240, is 3, for the side of the lesser quadrate, and height of the
said Complements. This done I multiply 3, the last quotient found by it self,
and I make 9, for the lesser quadrate. Item I multiply by the same quotient 3,
the deuisour 240, and I make 720, for the doubled Complement. Now 720 x 9, that
is, 729, I subtract from 729, and there remains nothing. Therefore I conclude
that 15129 the number given, is a quadrate: And the side thereof is 123,
consisting of three figures. The whole work is thus: ^ In greater examples
there is yet greater variety to be observed. Let therefore the practioner
resolve this one great Quadrate, 61929672906515252224, such as are often to be
resolved in the making of those tables of Sines, Secants, and Tangents, of so
great and wonderful use in many businesses, where the use of these Arts are
required.

From hence do follow many particular Consectaries, First the Single figures of
any Quadrate given cannot exceed the double of the number of the single figures
of the side thereof. The reason is from the 1 e ij: to wit, because the product
of the greatest single figure by it self, consists not of more then two
figures.

And 2 If the number given beginning at an unity, and so increasing according
to the natural order of numbers unto the middlemost, shall from the same, in
the same manner decrease unto an unity, the side of the said quadrate shall
consist of unities: And the same middle number shall show the number of them.
As for example: Suppose the number given were 1234321, here because it
begins at an unity, and so increases unto the middlemost, and from the
same middlemost decreaseth in like manner continually unto an unity: And for
that the same middlemost number is 4: I say that the side or root of the
quadrate given consists altogether of unities: And that the number of them is
but 4, thus 1111. Item, the side of this quadrate following, 12345678987654321,
is 111111111. Therefore on the contrary, If a number to be multiplied by it
self, do consist altogether of unities, under the number of ten, the product
shall from an unity increase and decrease, as aforesaid.

6 The difference of two unequal quadrates given, is the quadrate of the
difference of their sides, with a double plain made of the same difference,
and the lesser side. This is called the Gnomon, or squire, 2 d xij; or 12 e x R.

As for example, Let the two Quadrates given be 144, and 100; And their
Difference let it be 44. Again, Let their Sides be 12 and 10; And their
difference let it be 2. Now let the Quadrate of 2, the Difference of the sides
be 4. Again, Let the Plain made of 10, the lesser side, and of 2, the
Difference of the sides, be 20. Now 20 x 20, are 40. And 40 x 4, are 44, the
Gnomon or difference, whereby the two Quadrates 144, and 100, do differ one
from another.

Therefore

7 If the number given be not a true Quadrate, the remain (to be added unto
the side of the greatest Quadrate contained in the said number given) shall be
denominated of the Gnomon, or difference of that said greatest Quadrate, and
that which is next above it.

Let the number given be 148, which by the 5 e, is no true Quadrate: and
therefore the true side thereof can never be found. But the side, somewhat
near unto the true side, is thus found. The greatest Quadrate contained in
148, the number given, 144, whose side by the said 5 e, is 12. Item, the
Remain or difference of 144, and 148, is 4, for the Numerator of the parts
sought. Again, the Quadrate next greater then 144, is 169, and the side
thereof is 13. Lastly, the Gnomon or Difference between 169, and 144, is 25,
the denominator sought. Therefore 4/25, are the parts desired. The side then of
148, near unto the true side, is 12 4/25. Briefly,1 The Denominator of the
parts sought, is the difference of the greatest square contained in the number
given, and the next greater above it. Let the number given be 11: the greater
Quadrate contained in it is 9, whose side is 3. Now 11 -- 9, is 2, for the
Nummerator desired. Item, the next Square greater then 9, or 11, is 16, and the
side thereof is 4. Now 16 -- 9, is 7, for the Denominator of the said parts.
The side of 11, near unto the true side, is, 3 2/7. Ite^,2 The said
Denominator is the double of the side of the greatest Quadrate increased by an
unity. In the last example, the side of the greatest quadrate contained in 11,
is 3; whose double is 6. Therefore 6 + 1, that is 7, is the Denominator sought,
and the parts are 2/7. Again,3 The denominator of such like parts shall be the
sum of the side found, and of the side of the next greater quadrate above it.
In the former example, the side of 9, the greatest Quadrate contained in 11, is
3: and the side of 16, the quadrate next above 9, is 4. Now 4 x 3, that is 7,
is the Denominator desired: and the side sought is 3 2/7.

8 The product made of two like-plaines, is a Quadrate: and the side thereof is
the product of the base of the one, by the height of the other.

Like-plaines, are plains whose sides are proportional, 20 d vij. Let the
Like-plaines given be 6, and 24: whose sides, 3, 2, 6, 4, are proportional:
that is, as 3, the base of 6, is unto 2, the height of the same: so let 6, the
base of 24, be unto 4, the height thereof. Here first I say, that 144, the
product of 24, by 6, is a quadrate. Again I say, that 12, the product of 3,
the base of 6, the first plain, by 4, the height of 24, the second plain: or
contrariwise, the product of 2, the height of 6, the first plain; by 6, the
base of 24, the second plain, shall be the root or side of the said Quadrate.
The example is thus: ^ The Quadrate. ^ The side or root thereof.

9 If three numbers be continually proportional, the product of the first and
the last shall be equal to the quadrate of the middle numbers; And contrariwise,
If the quadrate of the middle number be equal to the product of the first and
the last, the three numbers given shall be continually proportional.

Let the three numbers given continually proportional, be 4, 6, 9, the product
of 4, by 9, the first and the last, shall be 36: Item the square or the product
of 6 by it self shall also be 36: On the contrary, if the quadrate, square, or
product of the middlemost be equal unto the product of the first and the last,
the three numbers given are continually proportional: As Euclid does
demonstrate and teach at the 16 p vj, and 20 p vij, of his Elements. Item,
Ramus handles this proposition in three several places; to wit at the 15 eij
of his Arithmeticke: At the ij consect. of the 14 ex, and again more specially
at the 4 e x ij, of his Geom. Yet in deed, says Schoner, there is something in
this more then may be performed by that 15 chap. of the second book of his
Arithmeticke. For division cannot always find out the mean proportional:
But in diverse cases there is required, to the performance of this, the
extraction of a square root (of which we have spoken before at the 4 and 5 e:)
by the which also the Deuisour is sought. As for example, suppose the mean
proportional between 16, and 64, the extremes given, were to be sought. Here
the product of 64 by 16, is 1024; and the side of 1024, by the 4 e, is 32, the
mean proportional desired.

A proportion requires four bounds or numbers. If the second and third bound
be the same, as in this our example, it is called a Continual proportion: If
they be diverse, it is named a Disioyned proportion. Now generally, whether the
proportion be disioyned or continual, this rule is true: If four numbers be
proportional, the product of two middle numbers shall be equal to the product of
the first and the last. As for example, As 12 is to 4, so let 6 be to 2. I say
the product of 6 by 4, shall be equal to the product of 12 by 2. For let the
product of 12 by 6, be 72. Here therefore the product of 6 by 12, shall be also
72, by the 3 c iiij c j Saligna.

If two numbers be proportional to one and the same number, they are equal
between themselves: 16 e v c j Salig. But 72 is proportional unto the product
of 12 by 2: and again, to the product of 6 by 4 10 If one number do multiply
many numbers, the products shall be proportional unto the numbers multiplied: 5
e vj. But 12 does multiply 6 (and makes 72 by the construction:) Item it
multiplieth 2. Therefore as 72 is unto the product of 12 by 2: so is 6 unto 2:
and so, by the grant, is 12 unto 4.

20 If one number do multiply many, etc. 5 e vj c j Salign. But 6 does multiply
12, and 4. Therefore as 72 (which is the product of 6 by 12, as before was
manifest) is unto the product of 6 by 4, so is 12 unto 4.


Therefore the products of 12 by 2, and of 6 by 4, are equal. q. e. d.
This proposition is commonly called the Golden rule: and indeed truth it is
that the Mathematical arts do daily reap from hence fruits in value more
worth then gold.

10 If the three numbers continually proportional given, be simple between
themselves, the first and the last shall be quadrate or square numbers: Item, If
of three numbers continually proportional given, the first be a quadrate, the
third also shall be a quadrate.

As for example, Let the three numbers continually proportional, and simple
between themselves given, be 4, 6, 9; the first and the last, to wit 4 and 9,
are quadrate numbers.

Again, if 16, 32, 64, be continually proportional, and 16, the first bound be
a quadrate; 64 also, the third bound shall be a quadrate. These both are
demo^strated by Euclid, and his Expositours at the 2, and again at the 22
prop. of his viij book.

11 If a quadrate do multiply a quadrate (or one many continually) the product
shall be a quadrate; and the side of the quadrate so made, shall be the product
made by a continual multiplication of the sever all sides of the particular
quadrates given.

As for example; Let the quadrate 4, multiply the quadrate 9, and let the
product thus made be 36: Here first I say, the product of 36 is also a
quadrate. Item I say, that 6, the product of 2 by 3, the sides of 4 and 9, the
particular quadrates given, shall be the side of 36, the compound quadrate.

Ite^, 25401600, the product continually made of 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, is a
compound quadrate: And the side thereof is 5040, which is the product made of
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, continually multiplied between themselves.

12 If a Quadrate do divide a number assigned by a Quadrate, the assigned
shall be a Quadrate.

This also arises from the same fountain. As for example, Let 4, a quadrate
divide 64, the number assigned by 16, a quadrate. I say that 64, the number
assigned is likewise a quadrate.

13 If the product of two numbers assigned be a quadrate, the side of that
quadrate shall be the mean proportional between the assigned.

As for example, Let the nuumber assigned, between which we desire the mean
proportional, be the quadrates 144, and 64; and let the product of them be
9216: I say that 96, the side of the said compound quadrate made, shall be the
mean proportional desired, that is, as 144 is unto 96: So 96 is unto 64. The
demonstration is built upon the 9 evj cj Salign. which is a special consectary
drawn from the 2 c 14 e, of the x book of Ramus his Geometry: The argument is
thus framed

If the product of the two middlemost numbers be equal to the product of the
first and the last, the four numbers given are proportional between
themselves: 9 e vj cj Sal. But the product of 144 by 64, is 9216 by the grant:
And the product of 96 by 96, the 2 middle numbers, is also 9216. The side is a
number, which multiplied in it self, does make a quadratc. But 96 is the side
of 9216, by the construction and grant. Therefore 9216 is made of 96,
multiplied by it self.

Therefore 144,96,96,64, the four numbers given, are proportional between
themselves: and so the mean proportional between 144, and 64, the two
numbers given, is found, q. e. f.
Therefore

14 If a number shall by it self divide a number made of any two numbers
given, the quotient shall be the mean proportional between the two assigned: 10
e v j c i Salig.

The rule is general thus: If one number shall divide the product of two
assigned, the deuisour and the quotient shallbe the mean continually
proportional, betweexe the assigned. As for example, let 6, multiplying 4,
make 24: And let 8 divide 24 by 3: I say, as 6 is to 8, so is 3 to 4. But the
special consectarie is more fitter for our purpose. Therefore for example, Let
the product 144 by 64, be 9216, and let 96 divide 9216, the said product, by
96: I say, that 96 is the mean proportional between 144, and 64, the two
numbers given: that is, as 144 is unto 96, so is 96 unto 64.

CHAP. III. Of the making and use of certain Tables and Instruments, devised
for the more exact and speedy measuring of all sorts of Plains.
1 Plains, according to their diverse nature and quality, are measured by
diverse and sundry kinds of measures: For some are measured by the Foot,
others by the Yard or Elne, othersome by the Rod or Perch, and such like. Now
these measures being defined by Act of Parliament, it shall not be amiss to
set down the words of the Statute, so far forth as it shall concern this
argument. It is ordained, says the Statute, that three grains of barley dry
and round, do make an Inch; twelues inches do make a Foot; three foot do
make a Yard; five yards and an half, do make a Perch; and forty Perches in
length, and four in breadth, do make an Akre. 33. Edw. I, De terris
mensurandis. Item, De compositione Vlnarum and Perticarum. See also more of
this hereafter.

By the Foot we measure Board and Glass. A Foot therefore of flat measure,
is a right-angled square, 12 inches long, and 12 inches broad, that is, a
foot of board is a plain, containing 144 square inches: For such is the
product of 12 by 12. Here, as also in the other which follow, observe, That the
Breadth is always given; the Length is desired. If therefore the breadth given
be 12 inches, it is plain by the former definition, that 12 inches of length
does make a foot of flat measure. But if the breadth given, be either greater
or lesser then 12, the length desired is not so easily found. For here some art
is often times required. This then is to be conceived and done by the 14 c of the
former Chapter: For there we learned how to equal plains of diverse breadths.
Admit now a board to be measured were but 9 inches broad; here, as those rules
did teach us, I divide 144, by 9 the breadth given, and I find in the quotient
16, for the length desired. For as 12 is to 9, so is 16 to 12; that is, 16
inches in length, of the breadth of 9, are equal to 12 inches of length, of
the breadth of 12. Thus you may make a Table or Instrument to serve readily at
all times, for the more speedy and exact measuring of all sorts of plains by
the foot square. For, If you shall divide 144, by the sever all breadths
given, the quotients shall show the length desired, answering to their sever
all diuisors or breadths given. Now where you do begin (I mean whether at
the greater breadth, and so descending shall end at the lesser, or
contrariwise) the matter is not great. Again, the Carpenters or workemens
instrument which they use in this case, being but two foot in length, it shall
not be necessary to begin at any breadth greater then 24, as shall be
manifest hereafter, when we come to show the use of this Instrument or Rular.
Beginning then at 24, and so descending to the lesser, the Table is thus: ^ The
use of this Table, to him that understands the former, is plain and easy.
For having any breadth given, between 24 and 1, I seek it amongst the
breadths in that column upon the left hand, and in the other column upon the
right hand oueragainst it, I find the length desired.

1 As for example; A board to be measured is 18 inches broad, I desire to know
what length of that breadth shall make a foot. R In the second column,
oueragainst 18, in the first column, I find 8. Therefore I say, every 8
inches in length, of that board that is 18 inches broad, shall make a foot of
flat measure.

2 Again, suppose the breadth of a piece of Glass to be measured, were 5
inches broad. Here I find, that every 28 inches, and of one inch, does make a
foot of that kind of measure.

3 But what if the breadth given be greater, or lesser then any breadth between
24 and 1? I answer, the question is answered with as great facility. For first
admit the breadth given were 36, which is greater then any breadth in our
Table, here if I take some such known part of 36 ( partem aliquotam, a known
part, the Arithmeticians call it) as may be found in our Table, the length
desired shall answer unto it in the like proportion: As for example, if I
take 18 the of 36: then it is manifest, the length desired shall be but 4
inches, the one half of 8, which is the length answering to the breadth 18.
Or, if I shall amongst the Breadths take 12, which is but the third part of 36,
my breadth given: then also shall 4, which is the of 12, the length found, be
the length desired, answerable to 36 the breadth given: Or which is all one,
every X2 inches in length, of that board that is 36 inches broad, shall
contain three foot of flat measure.

4 Again, suppose the breadth given were an 100 inches. R Here 20, is but the
part of 100. Therefore I say that 7 ^ in length, of that plain that is 100
inches broad, shall contain five foot of flat measure.

5 Lastly, Admit that the breadth given were but inch, which is lesser then
any one of those set down in our Table. R, Here I double, treble, or quadruple
the number given, until I may find it in the Table, and then it is manifest,
that the length found shall be answearable to the breadth given in the like
proportion. As for example, If I double, I make 1. Now to the breadth of 1
inch, in the Table there answeareth 144 inches of length: Therefore the double
of 144, that is, 288 shall be the length desired answearing to inch of breadth.
Or, which is all one, 144 inches of length of that breadth, that is but inch
broad, shall be but foot of flat measure. The reason of this is manifest, out
of the 14 element of the tenth book of Ramus his Geometry.

By this Table you may make a Ruler or instrument, whereby the same may be
performed yet with greater speed and more facility. For this instrument is
none other then that which Attificers do use in this case. It is, I say, no
other but a Rule, as they call it, of two foot long (more or less, as you
shall think most convenient for your use) and of what breadth you please,
divided, as the manner is, into inches and parts of inches, with a thwarting or
beuelling line drawn from side to side, beating the several lengths above
mentioned in our Table. That, for thy better understanding, we do more
particularly thus describe. First with the iage I strike two parallel lines,
the one as near unto the one edge, the other unto the other, as shall be
thought most convenient: These are the breadths, 24 and 6. Now to the breadth
24, in the Table, there answers 6 inches for the length: Therefore in the
upper line beginning at the right hand, I account toward the left, 6 inches:
There I make a mark. Again, to the breadth 6, in the same Table, there
answers 24 inches for the length: Therefore in the nether line counting as
before, I make a mark at the 24 inch. From these two marks I draw a line
overthwart the Rular. In this beuelling or thwarting line, by the help of a
squire, I note all the lengths noted in my Table, between 24 and 6. As for
example, To the breadth 23, in the Table, there answers for the length 6
inches, and 6/23 parts of one inch. This length, I note, beginning mine
account as before, in one of the parallel lines. Then by the help of the squire
I note the same upon the beuelling line. In like manner I set all the rest of
the breadths from this, unto 6. This being done the Rular is perfected, and fit
for use in all cases, as before is prescribed in the use of the Table.

The use of this Rular is plain and easy, if either that of the table, or the
manner of making this be well understood. For, If you shall seek out the breadth
given in the beuelling line, the inches and parts of inches from thence unto
the end of the Rular toward the right hand, shall be the length desired. I. As
for example, Suppose the breadth given were 12 inches: Here I find the breadth
12 noted at the twelfth inch from the beginning of the Rular: Therefore I say,
Every 12 inches in length, of that plain that is 12 inches broad, shall be a
foot of flat measure. II. Again, Admit the Breadth were 9 inches. This is
noted in the thwarting line at 16 inches from the said end. Therefore I say,
That 16 in length of this breadth, shall make a foot of flat measure. III.
Admit the breadth given were 64 inches. Here because I have none so great, I
take 16, the of it. Now the breadth 16, is noted on the beuelling line, 9
inches from the said end. Therefore I say that every 9 inches in length, of
that plain that is 64 inches broad, does contain 4 foot of flat measure. IV.
If the breadth given beleffer then any upon the beuelling line, then double,
treble, or quadruple, etc. the same, as before is taught; and the length found
shall be but the half, third part, or fourth part etc. of the length desired.
As for example, Admit the breadth given were 2 inches: Here because upon the
beuelling line I find no number less then 6: Therefore I treble 2, and I make
6. Now 6 being placed upon the line of breadths, or beuelling line, 24 inches
from the said foreend, I say, That 24 inches of length, of that plain that is
but 2 inches broad, is but part of a foot of flat measure. V. If the breadth
given, besides the whole inches, do contain also some part or parts of an
inch, then that is to be proportioned out between the whole number given, and
the next greater above it. As for example, Admit the breadth given were 9
inches and: Here the length desired will fall out proportionally between 9
inches of breadth and 10, about 15 inches and 3/19, from the said end.

Of the measuring of Cloth, Wainscot, Painting, Pauing etc. by the yard.
2 By the Yard we do measure Cloth, Wainscot, Painting, Pauing, etc. The yard,
as is aforesaid, does contain in length 3 foot, or 36 inches. Therefore the
yardsquare, or a yard of flat measure does contain 9 foot, or 1296 inches.
This kind of measure they commonly divide into 4 quarters: And every quarter
into 4 nails.

Upon the former grounds the like Table and instrument for this kind of
measure, may be framed as was for that of board, if any man shall think it
worth the while. But it shall not be much loss of time or labor, to show in a
word or two how it may be done. In a yard-square there is 16 quarters of a
yard; or 64 nails: Therefore if you shall divide 16, or 64, by the breadth
given, the quotient shall be the length desired. The Table then for this kind
of measure is thus: ^

The use is plain. I. Admit a piece of Wainscotte were three quarters of a
yard broad, what length of that breadth shall make a yard of flat measure?
R. one yard, one quarter, one nail and half, or thereabout. The proportion,
as before, is thus: As 4 is to 3, so is 5 unto 4.

2 A piece of painting is 2 quarters, that is, half a yard broad; what length
shall make a yard square? R. two yards in length.

3 But the use of this is better seen in buying and selling of cloth: For here
often times the skillful Taylour, although he do well know how much cloth or
stuff of this or that breadth will serve to make such a garment, is clean to
seek how much shall make the like garment of stuff of any other kind of
breadth: Only this advantage he has, that he will be sure to ask enough,
which shall be no loss to himself.

1 Admit 4 yards of cloth of 1 yard broad did make a garment: how much stuff
of broad shall make the like? R. The Table for the breadth 1 y, gives 1 y,
for the length of 1 yard square: Therefore 4 yards of this breadth, do make 4
yards square. Secondarily, the same Table for breadth, gives the length 1 y 1
q 1n. Therefore four times 1 y 1 q 1n, that is, 5 y 1 q 1 n shall make the
same garment.

2 Again, 12 yards of stuff of broad, did make a gown; how much cloth of 1
y 3 q broad shall make the like? R. The Table for breath, does give the length
1 y 1 q 1n: This length I seek how many times I may find in 12 yards: that
is, I seek how many square yards 12 yards of broad does contain. Again, the
same Table for 1 y 3 q breadth, gives 2 q n. This length so many times taken
as you found the former length in 12, is the number of yards required.

Of measuring of Land by the Aker.
3 BY the Rod we measure Land, Mcdowes, Wood, Grass, Corn, etc. The Rod,
Lugge, Perch, or Pole does contain, as we have heard, 16 foot, or 5 yards. This
kind of measure did vary according to their customs with the country: But now
by Act of Parliament that variety is taken away. The words of which Statute,
entitled, An Act for restrains of new buildings, etc. in and near to the
cities of London and Westminster, made in the xxv year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, are these: Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that a Mile
shall be taken and reckoned in this manner, and no otherwise: that is to say, a
Mile to contain eight Furlongs; and every Furlong to contain forty Lugges or
Poles; and every Lugge or Pole to contain sixteen foot and an half. Thus
far that Statute. Now an Aker of land, as we have showed before, is a plot of
ground containing 40 Rods in length, and 4 in breadth; or, which is all one,
an Aker of land contains 160 square Rods or Poles of ground. If therefore
you shall divide 160 by all the sever all breadths between 40 and 1, the
products shall show the lengths desired, answering to those sever all breadths
given. The Table then of Land-measure is thus: ^ The use of this Table is in
all respects like unto that of boord-measure: Therefore one or two examples
shall be sufficient to make it known unto the simplest.

I Suppose a piece of ground to be measured were 32 pole in Length: I demand
how much in breadth is required to make an Aker. R. To 32, the length in the
first column answers in the next column 5: Therefore I say, every 5 rods in
breadth, shall be equal to that field or plot which is 40 pole long, and 4
pole broad.

II Admit the field to be measured were 23 pole long. R. To 23 in the first
column I find answering in the second column 6 22/33, that is, 6 pole, and
22 parts of a pole divided into 23 parts. Therefore I say every 6 22/33 poles,
or 7 pole fere, is equal unto that which is 40 long, and 4 broad, that is, to
160 square poles.

III But what if the length be greater then any number found in the first
column? R. Here as before, I take some parte^ aliquota^, as one half, one
third, one fourth etc. As for example, suppose the field to be measured were
100 poles in length, here because I find no number so great as 100, therefore
I take 20, the fifth part of 100: To which 20 I find 8 pole for the breadth.
Wherefore the fifth part of 8 rods, that is, 1 rod and parts of one rod
of that length shall be equal to that plot which is 40 long, and 4 pole
broad. Or, which is the same in effect, Every 8 pole in breadth, of that field
which is 100 pole in length shall contain 5 Akers of land.

IV Admit it were 84 pole in length. R. Here the fourth part is 21. Now to 21
pole of length, there do answer 7 poles and 13/21 parts of one pole in breadth.
Therefore every 7 poles, and about two third parts of a pole in breadth, of
that length, shall make 4 Akers. For if it were but 21 pole long, then every 7
pole and 13/21 of breadth, shall make one Aker. But 84 contains the length
21, four times: Therefore 7 13/21 of the whole length 84, shall contain 4
Akers.

Having finished this Treatise, and it being altogether ready for the Press,
turning over the Statutes, to see what I might find more for this our purpose,
I light upon the very like Table, made many years since, by Act of Parliament,
in the time, as I take it, of Edward the first, entitled De terris
mensurandis. See the latter Abridgement of the Statutes of Rastall or Poulton,
in the title of Weights and Measures.

A very speedy and ready way or manner of Division in this case of surueying.
4 SVrueyours, which are often employed in measuring of whole Farms, Lordships
and Towns, are at last to give an estimate of the gross sum or number of
Akers contained in some very great sum or number of Rods, after
multiplication of the sides, and addition of many several parts, etc. This
usually they perform and find by dividing of the product or sum by 160, the
number of poles that one Aker does contain. Now here because the Divisor
consists of many several or single figures, if especially the product or
dividend be any thing great, the work, as every one meanly practiced in
Arishmeticke does know, must needs be long, and peradventure (except great heed
be taken) not without some error. And again because, Facilius and expeditius
numer amus numeros paruos, quam magnos, we do more readily, and with greater
facility number small numbers, then great: If any man shall teach how this
Divisor may be reduced to a small number, consisting of one single figure, he
shall much shorten the work, and deserve much thank of all Surueyors or
others delighted in these studies. Ingenui pudoris est, says Pliny, fateri
per quos profeceris. I confess the invention is not mine: but I am the first,
if I be not deceived, that has made it publici iuris, common to all. Thus then
this matter is to be done. If you shall divide the number given, and likewise
the quotient now found, continually by 20 four times, the last quotlent (with
the parts, if any do remain) shall show the Akens, and parts of an Aker
contained in the number given: or, if you shall like better, shall divide the
number given, by 40 twice. Let the examples be those following.

I. Suppose a field being measured and cast up by multiplication, the product
or number of perches were 1280, I would know how many Akers it does contain.
Here note out of an abridgement of division, because my Divisor 20, has for
his last figure a cipher or naught: therefore I cut off the last figure of my
Dividend, thus 128(0. ^ Or thus, ^

R. I answer by the last quotient of both forms, that that field which
contains 1280 square perches, does contain 8 Akres.

II. Item, Suppose the product or gross sum of some piece of land surueyed
were 102400 perches. ^ Or thus, ^ Here I say, that 102400 perches, do make 640
akers of la^d.

These examples may suffice in such cases where no fraction shall remain: but
if in any of the works of division, any parts shall remain, the value of
those parts shall be esteemed by these rules following.

1 If the first figure (the last, some peradventure would call it) of the
number given be a significant figure, then it is manifest, that over and above
certain akers, etc. there are some odd perches.

2 Secondarily, if dividing by 20, there do remain ought in the first
division, that remainder shall be of 2 Roode or 10 perches: if in the second,
Roode or 20 perches: if in the third,, of an Aker, or 40 perches: if in the
fourth, of an aker, or 80 perches.

3 Lastly, if dividing by 40, there shall ought remain at the first division,
those parts shall be parts of a Roode: if at the second, they shall be parts of
an aker. The examples following, shall make all plain and easy. ^ Or thus by
40: ^ Therefore that field that contains 939 perches, does contain 5 Akers,
3 Roodes, and 19 Perches.

II ^ Or thus: ^ The number 13593, contains in land-measure, 84A, 3R, 33P. or
84 Akers, 3 Roodes, and 33 Perches. The like may be done in Boord-measure, and
Timber-measure, if any man shall find it of any such use, as it is in this
kind.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Extraction of a Cubicke root.
1 A Cube is a right-angled solid, comprehended of equal sides: 25 d xj E.

HItherto we have spoken of the Quadrate, and of such proprieties and
corrollaries as did belong unto this our purpose. Now it remains that we in
like manner do handle the Cube and Cubicke number, and that with as few words,
and as briefly as we may. For as the uses of the Quadrate, and of the
extraction of his Root were many: So the Cube, being of a more excellent
nature, cannot yield fewer, if not more, and those also of more and greater
worth. For as Vitruuius, in the preface to his fifth book of Architecture,
writes, Pythagoras was so much delighted with the Cube, that he wrote all his
precepts in cubicall numbers. His words are these: Etiamque Pythagora, hisque
qui eius haeresim fuerunt secuti, placuit Cubisis rationibus pracepta in
voluminibus scribere, constitueruntque Cubum 216 versuum, cosque non plus quam
tres in vna conscriptione oportere esse pusarunt, etc. Moreover also
Pythagoras, and those which followed his faction, were much delighted to write
their precepts and rules of Philosophy in a kind of cubicall proportion,
making a Cube of 216 verses; deeming that there ought not to be above three in
one staff. Now a Cube is a square body, consisting of six sides, plain and
equal one to another. This kind of body, when it is cast at an adventure out
of the hand, upon which side soever it pitcheth, no man touching it, stands
firm and constant. Such are the dice, which gamesters that play at Tables do
use. The Greek comicall Poets also, which in the midst of their plays do
cause the Quiristers to sing a song, have so divided the pauses of their
comedies, that making the parts in a kind of Cubicall proportion, they much,
by such rest, do ease and help the pronunciation of their actors. Thus far
Vitruuius. This Cube or Cubicall number of 216, has for his side 6. For 6
times 6, do make 36, for the one side, or square plain including the Cube. And
6 times 36, are 216, the Cubicke number of the Cube here mentioned. The
mystery hereof conceived by Pythagoras and his scholars, I leave to others to
unfold. That pertains not to the Mathematician: that other also belongs to
the Poets, whereof our age does afford plenty. That which the same author in
another place has, of the answer of the oracle of Apollo: Item, that of
Eratosthenes unto Ptolomey king of Egypt, of Glaucus his tomb, do more
concern our business: And therefore hereafter, in their place, we shall
handle them at full, if God permit.

Hereyou see how the definition of the Cube does answer to the definition of
the Quadrate: for each of them is a right-angled and straight-bounded figure:
And as the general differences of bodies or solids, were drawn from the
general differences of surfaces, plain and oblique: So here the particular
differences are taken from the special differences of the same surfaces. A
plain solid is that which is comprehended of plain surfaces: this is general
of what kind soever those plains are of: but a Cube, or cubicall body, is
that which is comprehended of square or quadrate surfaces. The nature then of
those surfaces which do comprehend them, is that they must be plain, not
oblique or uneven: Secondarily, they must be squares or Quadrata, that is,
Right-angled, and of equal sides. This is Euclids definition, and meaning. The
number of these surfaces Vitruuius does tell: Cubus est corpus ex sex lateribus
aequali letitudine planitierum quadratum: that is, A Cube is a square body
comprehended of six plain sides of equal breadth. Item, Martianus Capella in
these words: Solida figura Quadrati sex superficies habet: The solid square (so
he calls the Cube) has six surfaces. From hence is it that they attribute
stabilitie or constancy unto this kind of body. For (...), corpus quadratum,
is such a body, if I mistake not, that consists of such an equal
temperature of the humors, ( eucrasia,) that it is not subject to that
alteration and change that others are. And Aristotle calls a good man (...),
virum quadratum, that is, Cubicum, as I understand him, meaning such a man as
is constant, and not easily moved upon every chance and misfortune, that in
this world does happen to mortal men. Such an one'as they report Bias, one of
the seven wise men of Greece to have been. For Cubus cum est iactus, says
Vitruuius, quam in partem incubuit, dum est intactus, immotam habet
stabilitatem: vti sunt etiam tessera, quas in aluso ludentes iaciunt. A Cube
when it is cast out of the hand at an adventure, look upon what side soever it
lights, it stands fast and stable; like as those dice also do, which
gamesters use that play at Tables. Therefore, If six equal squares be joined
with solid corners, they shall comprehend a Cube. Item, the sides of a Cube (
hedrae) are six: the edges ( latera) are twelve: the plaine-angles, twenty
four: the solid-angles are eight; as the author of the Scholium upon the xv
book of Euclids elements, has taught.

2 The power of the Diagonall line of the Cube, is thrice so much as the power
of the side of the Square comprehending it.

Harmonia, says our Author, est musica literaetura obscura and difficilis;
maxim quidem quibus Graecae literae non sunt notae, quam si volumus
explicare-necesse est etiam Graecis verbis vti, quod nonnulla eorum Latinas non
habent adpellationes: that is, The theory of Music is very hard and
difficult: especially to those which are ignorant of the Greek toongue: For
whosoever shall take upon him to write of this argument, in what language
soever, he shall be forced to use many Greek words, because many of them have
no terms answerable to them in other languages. The same may I say of
Geometry, where the most terms or words of art are merely Greek, or at
leastwise fained in imitation ofthem, and that often times not very fitly. For
surely I doubt not but at the first those words seemed harsh enough, even to
the first inuentors of them: but time and use have made them familiar and
pleasing. Of this sort is (...), and (...), Potentia, power, we call it: and
posse, to be able, to be of value and power. Both which do signify in this
place or this art, naught else but a Geometrical multiplication, as they are
often used by Euclid the great Geometer, and Diophantus the ancient Algebraist,
and that by the testimony of Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers. For of this
rule, Potentia rectae est quadratum; or as Diophantus speaks, Appellatur
quadratus Facultas, that is, the power of a right-line is a square: the meaning
is, that if a right line be multipled in it self geometrically, it shall make
a Quadratum or square surface. Likewise then in this place this proposition,
Diagonius Cubi potest triplum lateris, The power of a Diagonall line of a Cube,
is thrice so much as is the power of the side; is thus to be understood: If the
Diagonall of a Cube be multiplied by it self geometrically; and the side of
that square which comprehends the same Cube, be also multiplied by it self,
the square that is made of the Diagonall line, shall be three times so great as
is that which is made of the quadrate including the same Cube.

Item, again here observe, that that right line which crossing a plain from
side to side by the center, is called the Diameter: in a solid, the Axis or
axeltree; in both, if it pass from corner to corner, is properly termed the
Diagonius, or the Diagonall line. The power of this line, says our author, is
thrice so great as is the power of the said side or edge, as I call it. That we
thus demonstrate:

The power of the Diagonius of a Cube, is three times so much as the power of
the side. That, whose power is as much as is the power of any thing single, and
of that whose power is doubled to the power of the same single, jointly: is of
treble power unto the single. Axio. Logicum. But the power of the Diagonall
line in a Cube, is as much as is the power of the single side of the square:
and the Diagonall of the same square, which is by the 365e xij R, double to the
side. The power of that side in a right-angled triangle, which is opposite to
the right-angle, is equal to the single powers of the two other sides. 5 e xij
R. But the Diagonall in the Cube, the side of the square, with the Diagonal of
the same square, do make a rightangled triangle; and this Diagonall of the
Cube, is opposite to the rightangle, ex thesi. Therefore the power of the
Diagonall of the Cube, is as much as is the power of the side, and diagonall of
the square.

Therefore the power of the Diagonall line of the Cube, is thrice so much as is
the power of the side of the square. q. e. d.

3 If of four right-lines continually proportional, the First be the half of
the Fourth; the Cube of the first, shall be the half of the Cube of the second.

This proposition is a consequent or corrollary drawn out of the 15 e iiij R,
which teaches that, if certain rightlines be proportional (to wit, more in
number by one then are the dimensions of the like figures, alike situated unto
the First and Second) it shall be as the First right-line is unto the Last, so
the First figure shall be unto the Second: and contrariwise. Now a Cube, by the
I e xxj R, is a figure of three dimensions; because it is a body, which has
length, breadth and thickness. Therefore here the lines compared in the
proportion must be four. The truth of this rule will easily appear by an
example in numbers. But here observe, that you must not expect that our example
shall altogether directly answer to this rule of doubling the Cube; but to some
other. For truth it is, that Arithmeticke, as hereafter shall more plainly
appear, cannot double the Cube; that is, Arithmeticke although it can tell
what shall be the double of the Cube given, yet it can by no means tell thee
in numbers, what the Latus or side of that Cube shall be. Let the four numbers
continually proportional given, be 2, 4, 8, 16: that is, as 2 is unto 4, so
let 4 be to 8: and as 4 is to 8, so let 8 be to 16. Here I say by that 15 e
iiij R, as 2 the first number is unto 16 the last: so shall the Cube of 2 the
first number, be unto the Cube of 4 the second. But 2 is but the eighth part of
16: Therefore the Cube of 2 shall be but the eighth part of the Cube of 4. ^
The Cube of 2, is 8. ^ The Cube of 4 is 64. Now ^ and ^

Here you see, that the quotient of 16, the last number, by 2, the first: Item,
the quotient of 64, the Cube of the second, by 8, the Cube of the first, to be
alike, or the same: And therefore the proportion is the same. q. e. o.

By this rule an answer was made unto that great and strange question, moved by
the oracle of Apollo at Delphos. The invention of this proposition, that is, of
the first answer to that problem, by some is attributed to Plato the divine
Philosopher, a though certain it is, that Eratosthenes, in an epistle of this
argument written to Ptolomey king of Egypt, does ascribe it to Hippocrates
Chius. The history is briefly touched by Vitruuius in these words: Alius enim
alia ratione explicare curauit, quod Delo imperauerat responsis Apollo, vti
arae eius quantum haberet quadratorum id duplicaretur, and it a fore, vt hi qui
essent in ea insula tunc religione liber arentur. For each of them (meaning
Architas Tarentinus, and Eratosthenes Cyrenaeus) labored by sundry ways to
perform that which Apollo at Delos had given in charge in his answer, whereby
he commanded, that look how much soever the altar that was before him should
contain in square feet, it should be doubled, and so it should come to pass,
that those in that Island, which were sick of the plague, should be freed from
that curse. But Eratosthenes before mentioned, lays down the history more
largely and plainly, thus: To king Ptolomaeus, Eratosthenes sends greeting;
It is reported that one of the ancient tragedians brings in Minos, purposing
to reedifie Glaucus his tomb. And being given to understand, that it was every
way an hundred foot, said, That is too little for the sepulcher of so great a
king. Let it be therefore doubled. It seems that Minos understood not what he
said: For if you shall double the sides, the plain shall be four times so
great, and the solid eight times. It was demanded therefore of the
Geometricians, How the solid given, might be made just as big again as it was
at the first, and yet the form and nature of the figure to remain the same
still. This proposition is called, The doubling of the Cube. For making the
question of the Cube, they labored to make that double or as big again. All
men therefore doubting and studying a long time how this should be done, at
length Hippocrates Chius found that, If unto two right-lines given, whereof the
greater should be double unto the lesser, two mean proportionals might be
found, then the Cube might be doubled. But thus this doubt was to be resolved
by another thing, as difficult and as hard to be done as that other. Within a
while after, they report that the citizens of Delos being commanded by the
Oracle to double a certain altar, and falling into the same doubt and
difficulty, were constrained to seek unto the Geometricians which were with
Plato in the University, that they would at their request, find out some way
how to perform the same. Now these students diligently conferring upon the
matter, and laying their heads together to find out how, unto two right-lines
given, two mean proportionals might be found, it is said that Architas
Tarentinus found them by semicylinders, and Eudoxus by those lines that are
called crooked lines, (...), curuae, etc. Thus far Eratosthenes. How then to
satisfy the demand of the citizens of Delos, to perform, I say, the command
of Apollo and Minos, was demonstrated by Plato, or Hippocrates Chius, to wit,
by the finding out of two mean proportionals, between two right-lines given,
whereof the one is double unto the other. But now again here arises there
question, or as Eratosthenes says, (...), that this doubt of Apollo was to be
resolved by another doubt, no less difficult then it self. For how this was
to be done, had not as then by any before that time been taught. But upon these
occasions given (moved also partly with glory) many fine wits in sundry ages
have found out diverse and sundry ways how to perform the same, as Eutocius
Askalonita, Archimedes his learned interpreter, has at large set down in his
commentary upon his second book De cylindro. These authors, as there you
shall sinde, are thus and in this order named by him: Plato, Heron, Philo
Bizantius, Apollonius, Diocles, Pappus, Sporus, Menechmus, Architas Tarentinus,
Eratosthenes, Nicomedes, and Eudoxus Cnidius, whose invention he rejects, as
not answering to the purpose of his own proposition. Of all these P. Ramus, at
the 8 e xiij of his Geometry, describes that of Heron only, neglecting all
the rest. Hinc existit, faith he, Mesographus Heronis Mechanici seu Mesolabus,
dictus ab inuentione duarum continue mediarum proportionalium inter duas datas:
vnde existit problema Deliacum quod Apollinem ipsum exercuit. Mesographus autem
Heronis est infinita regula, quae sistitur cochleato vnco per cauum mobili. Est
vero, vt Pappus ait initio libritertij, Mesographus iste architectis
aptissimus, multoque promptior Platonis Mesographo. Mesographi mechanica est
apud Eutocium secundt de sphaera, sed paulo facilius a nobis ita proponctur: Si
duas dat as rect as comprehendentes rectangulum, and infinite continuat as,
mesographus tangens oppositum angulum angulo datarum intersecet aequidistanter
a centro, intersegmenta erunt media continue proportionalia datis: that is,
From hence (he means out of the 7 e of that book) arises the Mesographus of
Heron the inginer, which otherwise is called a Mesolabus: For the use of it is
to find out two lines continually proportional between two other lines
given. By this means was found how to answer that problem of Delos, which did
much trouble Apollo himself. Now this Mesographus of Heron, is an infinite
tight-line which is fastened with a screw-pin, that is to be slid up and down
in a riddie. This Mesographus, as Pappus Alexandrinus in the beginning of his
third book writes, is a marvelous commodious instrument for Architects and
Carpenters, and is much more convenient and ready then the Mesographus of
Plato. A mechanical description and use of this Mesographus, is set down by
Eutocius in his commentary upon the ij book of Archimedes De sphaera and
cylindro, but is somewhat more plainly set out by us in this manner: 8 If (a
right-angled parallelogramme being made of the two lines given, the same also
being continued as sarre as need shall require) the Mesographus touching the
angle, that is opposite unto the angle contained of the lines given, shall cut
those continued lines equally distant from the center, the portions of those
continuations thus cut, shall be the middle lines continually proportional
between the two lines given. Thus far Ramus, unto whom I refer thee for
further satisfaction. But whereas P. Ramus, as we have showed before, does
affirm that the Mesographus of Heron, as Pappus Alexandrinus writes in the
beginning of his third book, is a marvelous commodious instrument for
architects, and is much more ready and convenient then the Mesographus of
Plato; it is so to be understood, that those words, Multoque promptior Platonis
mesographe, be not supposed to be spoken by Pappus: For indeed in that place he
does not once name Platoes mesographus. His words at the 4 p iij, as
Commandinus, his interpreter has expressed them, are these: Exponemus igitur
quatuor eius constructiones, vna cum quadam nostra tractatione; quarum prima
quidem est Eratosthenis, secunda Nicomedis, tertia Heronis maxim ad manuum
operationem accommodata, ijs qui architecti esse volunt. Of those many and
sundry instruments, that have been found out by diverse men for the invention of
two proportionals, etc. we will describe the use and making of four, adding
thereto a certain treatise of our own. The first is Eratosthenes his way, the
second is Nicomedes, the third is Herons, most commodious for all handy-crafts,
or mechanics, and such as are desirous to be architects. Here you see is no
mention of Platoes invention. But howsoever, that of Platoes, in mine opinion,
is more proper to this place and purpose of ours; because it is to be done with
the Carpenters tools, which are always at his hand: And therefore we will here
also, out of the same Eutocius, describe that more fully. This Mesographus, or
instrument devised by Plato, is described by Eutocius to have been a
right-angled parallelogramme, consisting of four straight rulars, so contrived
and put together, that they might be put nearer or farther off, as occasion
should require. We have used two Carpenters squires, so placing the side of the
one squire upon the side of the other, that the other two sides might
continually be parallel, and contain right-angles between them. Or if any
man so please, one squire may serve the turn with the rule which they use in
measuring. The instrument now according to these directions, is thus to be
used: If (the two lines given comprchending a right-angle, and from the angle
infinitely continued) the instrument be so applied, that when in each corner
the infinite (...) do fall, the sides of the same instrument do touch the ends
of the lines given; the portions of the continued lines intercepted between the
said corner, and the corners of the instrument, shall be the two middle lines
continually proportional between the two lines given. Concerning the
Diagramme, I must refer thee either to Eutocius upon Archimedes, or Daniel
Barbarus upon Vitruuius: Let the instrument be f m, the squire: The ruler to be
moved up and down, let it be n o. The use according to our rule is thus: Let
the two lines, whereof the one is double to the other, be e b, and b g; the one
falling upon the other perpendicularly, that is, they both containing the
right-angle e b g. Again, let e b, be drawn out infinitely toward c: and g b,
in like manner toward d. Now apply the instrument to this figure in this manner,
that when by moving n o, the moveable side, up and down, the two continued
lines falling precisely in the corners m, n; the two parallels sides m, and n
o, may at the same instant touch e and g, the ends of the lines given. I say
that b d, and b e, the portions of the continued lines, cut or intercepted
between the corner b, and n, m, the corners of the instrument, are the two
middle lines continually proportional between e b, and b g, the two lines
given. The words of Daniel Barbarus at the 3 chap. of the ix book, are these:
Coniungantur in b, ad rectum angulum duae rectae, inter quas duae comparabiles,
ac ratione pendentes medias vis inuenire. Esto b g, mayor: e b, minor: vtrag,
vero extra angulum b producatur: Mayor, ad d: minor, ad c: and ad duos rectos
angulos, vnum in c; alterum in d: in suis respondentibus lineis. Estoque
angulus vnus, g c d; alter c de: Aio inter duas datas c b, and b g, esse duas
medias comparabiles inuentas: bd, scilicet, and b c. Quoniam posuimus angulum e
d c rectum: etc d aequedistantem ipsi c g; Ideo sequitur, ex 29 e j, angulum g
c d, rectum esse: and aequalem angulo c d e, quem similiter rectum esse
posuimus. Sed a b, ex constructione supra c b e, ad rectos cadit, similiter c b
perpendicularis est ipsid bg. Ex corollario itaque 8 e vj, b d est comparabilis
illi quae cadit inter c b, and b c: Pari quoque ratione b e, est media inter b
d, and bg. etc. Vide page 276 and 277.

That d b, and b e, are continually proportional to c b, and b g. Continua
proportio est, in qua idem terminus pro secundo and tertio sumitur. A
continual proportion is that where the same bound, is taken for the second and
third: 8 e 2 c ij Salig. But here d b: and c b, the several mean bounds, are
each of them taken for two: 10 A plum-line falling from a right-angle upon the
base, is the mean proportional between the portions so made: 1 c 4 c viij R.
But e d c, being a right-angle (ex thesi and fabrica) and d b falling plum upon
e c, cutteth the portions e b, and b c. Therefore d b is the mean
proportional between e b, and b c: that is, as e b, is to db, so is bd, to
bc.

20 A plum-line falling, etc. 1 c 4 e viij R. But d c g being a right-angle;
and c b falling upon d g, does make the portions d b, and b g. Therefore c b,
is the mean proportional between d b, and b g: that is, as d b, is to b e:
so is b e, unto b g.



Therefore d b, and b e, are continually proportional between c b, and b g,
the two lines given. That is, as c b, is to d b; so is d b, unto b e: And as b
d, is unto b c; so is b c, unto b g. quod erat demonstrandum.

Thus you see, that that which was then so difficult, how easily it is now to
be done, and that by many and sundry manner of ways; and yet neither of these
do satisfy the Geometrician: The reason is, for that, as Pappus Alexandrinus
says, those authors quod natura solidum est, Geometrica ratione innixi,
construere non potuerunt. Instrumentis enim tantum ipsum in operationem
manualem, and commodam, aptamque constructionem mirabiliter traduxerunt.
Because, says he, those authors, although they have all showed how to do this
wonderfully fitly and well; yet all of them have done it but mechanically
only, by the help of certain instruments, none of them yet having found how
it may be done geometrically.

4 The Solid number of a Cube, is called a Cubicke.

5 A Cubicke number is that which is made by multiplying of any number given
into his quadrate.

A Quadrate number is a number that is made by the multiplication of a number
in it self. Therefore a Cube is a number which is made by the multiplication of
three equal numbers; or, a Cubicke number is that which is made by the
multiplication of any number by it self, and again, by the multiplication of
himself into the said product. As for example, 2 by 2, do make the quadrate 4:
Now 2 by the said 4, do make 8, a Cubicke. Of this number, Martianus Capella
thus writes: Octonarius numerus, primus cubus est, and perfectus, Vulcano
dicatus: Nam ex primo motu, id est, Diade, quae Iuro est, constat. Nam dias per
diadem, facit tetradem: At bis ducta, facit octadem. Perfectus item, quod a
septenario tegitur. Omnis enim Cubus sex superficies habet. Item, Ex imparibus
consecutis impletur. Nam primus imparium trias, fecundum pentas, ambo octadem
faciunt. Item, Cubum, qui a triade venit, id est, 27, sequentes impares
reddunt, id est, heptas, enneas, and 11: qui omnes faciunt 27. Item, Tertius
Cubus, qui a tetrade venit, id est, 64. Nam quater quaterni sunt sedecim. Hoc
quater, 64 fit. Et hic ex imparibus quatuor, qui supcriores sequuntur, id est,
13, 15, 17, 19, fiu^t simul 64. Et sic omnes Cubi per imparium incrementa
inueniuntur, sui duntaxat numeri. Sane hic octonarius Cubus, it a omnium
Cuborum primus est, vt monas omnium numerorum. Cubus autem omnis etiam matri
Deum tribuitur: Nam ideo Cybele nominatur. Thus far Capella. This rule is
conceived in few words thus: Digestis a ternario imparibus, si duo priores;
postea tres; deinde quatuor, etc. coniungantur, Cubos proferunt: that is, If
odd numbers digested according to their natural order, be added, (an unity
only, which is of it self a Cube, excepted) first two; then three; then
four, etc. they shall make the Cubes naturally following one another, thus: ^
1 Therefore look of how many unities the radix or side of any Cube does
consist, of so many odd numbers is the same Cube composed and made. Item,2 If
the first figure (I mean that on the right hand) of a Cube given, be an odd
number, the number of odd numbers whereof it was made, is odd: If it be an
even number, the number of odd numbers whereof it consists, is even. Item,3
If a Cube do multiply a Cube, the product shall be a Cube; and the side of that
Cube shall be the product made by the multiplication of the sides of the Cubes
given. As for example, Let the two Cubes given be 8 and 27; whose sides let
them be 2 and 3: Now let 8 multiply 27, and let the product be 216: I say the
side of the Cube 216, is 6, which is the product of 2 by 3. Thus have you an
easy way, by the help of the xiiij Chapter of the second book of Salignacus
his Arithmetic, how to find out the cube of any place, and the fide thereof,
without any farther ado, only by the help of one multiplication. Now the
sides of cubes less then 1000, being single figures, to wit, what cube is made
of every single figure multiplied in it self cubically, and what the side of
every such cube is, must first be known before we go any farther: That is done
by this table: ^

6 If a right-line be cut into two portions, the Cube of the whole line shall be
equal to the Cubes of the segments, and a double solid thrice comprehended of
the quadrate of his portion, and the other portion.

The general invention of a Cube, both Geometrical and Arithmeticall, was
showed at the former proposition: The special or particular invention of the
same is diverse and manifold by numbers continually proportional and out of the
cubes themselves, as Euclid teaches, of whom thou may learn, if thou shall
think the fruit of that knowledge may counteruaile thy travel. Analysis
quadrati lateris, The extraction of a square root, as they call it, has in
Euclids Geometry a proper element, theoreme, or rule, teaching how to perform
it; but the extraction of a cubicke root has not any at all: Notwithstanding
according to that of the square by him laid down, it is not difficult by
analogy to make one, whereby the root also of the Cube may be found. The
proposition therefore according to that analogy, teaching this skill, is thus
laid down by Ramus: If a right-line be cut into, etc.

As for example, Let the side or root 12, be cut into two portions, 10 and 2:
I say the Cube 1728, made of 12, the whole line, is equal to 1000, and 8, the
cubes made of 10 and 2, the said portions: and two diverse solids, whereof the
first is 600, comprehended thrice of 100, the square of 10, his segment; and of
2, the other segment: The second, 120, which is thrice comprehended of 4, the
square of his segment 2, and of 10 the other segment. But the frame and making
of the whole cube, will make the matter more plain and easy in one example,
to wit, how the outter and mean solids are made. Let therefore a cube be made
of 12, 12, and 12, three equal sides: and first let the second side be
multiplied by the first, thus: ^

Let not the products 24, and 120, be added together; but let the other side
multiply them severally, and then add the several degrees by themselves,
thus: ^ Or thus, ^

This is the making the Cube of the whole line: Now the making of the same
according to the former division of the said line, is thus: ^

But in this manner which follows, of our invention, the particular solids, in
this kind of making the cube of the several segments, do more plainly
appear, then in that practiced by Ramus: as these examples do show. ^

Now that we may apply this example unto our rule, add the solids of the same
kind and quality together, that is, 40, 40 and 40, together: Item, 200, 200
and 200 together, and add the sums of them, 120, and 600, unto 1000, and 8,
the cubes of the segments, and the sum 1728, shall be equal unto 1728, the
cube of the whole line. ^

If any man shall think this rule to be true only in this case where the line
is divided according to the nature of the number, thus consisting of two
digits, as they call them, he is deceived: For the same effect will fall out,
howsoever the line shall be divided. Let therefore the same number first be
divided into two other segments unequal between themselves, to wit, into 8
and 4. ^

Secondarily let the fame line be cut into two equal segments, to wit, 6, amd
6. ^ Therefore, if the right-line given be cut into two equal segments, the
several solids of the segments shall be equal unto the Cubes that are also
equal between themselves, that is, there shall be eight solids all equal one
unto another: or, that which is all one, the solids are the same with the cubes.

Therefore

7 The side of the first particular Cube, is the one side of the second solid,
and the square of the same side is the other side of the first solid, whose
other side is the side of the scond Cube; and the square of the same other
side, is the other side of the second solid.

In this equalling then of four solids with one solid, there is to be observed
a singular kind of frame and composition: First, that the last cube be made of
2, the last segment: Then, that the second solid made of 4, the square of 2 his
segment, and of 10, the other segment, be thrice taken. Again, that the first
solid made of 100, the square of 10 his own segment, and of 2 the other
segment, be also thrice taken. Lastly, that the cube 1000, be made of 10, the
greater segment. Out of this frame or making of a Cube, the contrary Analysis
or resolution of the same is derived, out of the mutual combination of the
Cubes with the solids, such as we have before showed in the Analysis of a
square. For here, although a solid be named only, yet there are two sides to
be considered: because that the one is compound and plain. Therefore 10, the
side of 1000, the first cube, is the key for the opening of the two solids and
cube following. For it is the one side of the second solid, to wit, thrice
comprehended of it and of the square of the second segment. Again, 100, the
square of the same side 10, is the one side of 600, the first solid, to wit,
thrice comprehended of this quadrate 100, and the other segment 2. Item 2, the
other side of the first solid, is the side of the next cube. And lastly, the
square of 2, the same side, is the other side of the second solid. By this
means then, the great variety and difficulty of this business is unfolded,
like as was done in the square. For when you have found the sides of the
several cubes, then have you withal also found the side of the whole cube:
For although the whole Cube be greater then the cubes of the parts; yet the
whole side is equal to the sides of the several cubes: For we use the solids
that are considered between the cubes, only as a means to find out the side
of the following cube. Thus much concerning the true form of analyzing or
resolving of a Cube: But because this may seem somewhat difficult and hard
unto a learner, out of this proposition we have framed another, which does as
it were more distinctly express and point at every particular in this practice.

8 If the side of any greater Cube shall be sought, thou shall from the
right hand toward the left distinguish the number given into perfect periods,
for so many particular Cubes: Then having found the side of the first
particular Cube, thou shall set it down within the quotient: Again, having
squared this side now found, thou shall treble the product for the base of the
first solid; but for the height or other side of the second solid, thou shall
only square it. Lastly, the first solid divided by his base, the quotient
shall be the side of the next following Cube.

As for example; Let the side of the cube 1728, be sought. I. Here first
beginning at the right hand, I distinguish it into perfect periods, that is,
into three degrees thus: 1, 728. Now because after this distinction it
appears, that our number given is a compound period, composed of two single
periods; therefore by the former rule I say that the whole consists of two
particular cubes. II. Secondarily, the first particular cube being 1, I seek
his side amongst the cubes of single figures, at the 5 e, and I find the side
to be 1: that I set down therefore in my quotient. Now, as the manner is in
division, I set down 1, the cube of this quotient or side, underneath the
first figure of the number given: Item, subtracting the one out of the other, I
cancel all the figures of the number given, setting the remain, or the whole
next period, above the head right over their degrees. III. Thirdly, I square 1,
the side found, and I make 1, which I treble for the base of the first solid,
and I make 3: by this base, or treble 3, I divide 7, the first solid or first
complement; the quotient 2, I place in the quotient for the side of the
succedent cube: By this quotient 2, I multiply 3, the Diuisour, and I make 6
for the first solid: Then by 4, the square of the same quotient, I multiply 3,
the treble before reserved; and I make 12 for the second solid: Thirdly, I
multiply 2, the quotient cubically, and I make 8: Fourthly, placing all these
products in their true places, just one degree behind another, so that the
first solid be placed in the first degree; the second solid one degree farther
toward the right hand: the cube one degree farther then that, or next of all to
the right hand, in this manner:

Again, they being thus placed, I add them, and I find the sum 728: Now this
sum I subtract from the remain 728: Lastly, because after subtraction there
remains nothing, I say, that 1728, the number given, is a cubicke, and the
side of it is 12. The example of this practice is thus: ^ But here observe, for
that the first solid (or complement) is the third degree from the second cube;
and the second solid, the second or next unto the same; therefore unto the
first solid I add two siphers, and unto the second but one: For these figures
do so guide the practitioner, that he cannot easily err in the addition of
them. Or thus, as Salignacus an excellent artist, sets it down. Let the
side of the cubicke 389017, be found. Here first, because that 389 is not found
amongst the cubes at the 5 e, that is, because that 389 is not a cubick number,
therefore I take 343, the next lesser cubicke before it, whose side 7 I place
within the quotient. II. Then taking 343 out of 389, there do remain 46:
Therefore here the two complements with the second cube, are 46017. III. This
done, I square 7 the side found, and I make it 49. IV. This square I treble,
and I make 147, for the base of the first complement. V. Again, I treble the
side found, and I make 21 for the height of the second complement. VI. Lastly,
dividing 460, the first complement by 147 his base, I find the quotient 3,
which I set down in the quotient, for the side of the second cubicke.

For the proof of this work or practice, First we multiply the quotient in it
self cubically: Secondly, we multiply the height of the cube by the base of
the first complement: Thirdly, we multiply the base of the same cube, by the
height of the second complement: Fourthly, we add all these products together:
Lastly, we subtract the sum found, out of the upper number. As for example: I
cube 3, or multiply it in it self cubically, and I make 27. Now the height of
this cube is 3; the base is 9: Therefore I multiply 3, this height of the cube,
by 147, the base of the first complement, and I make 441. Again, I multiply 9,
the base of the said cube, by 21, the height of the second complement, and I
make 189. Now I add all these products, and the sum is 46017: which sum
subtracted out of 46017, the upper number, nothing remains. Therefore if you
shall square 73, the quotient; and then shall multiply this square by the same
73, thou shall make the cubick 389017. For the cubes of the segments 70, and 3,
with the two complements now found, are the parts of the cube that is made of
the whole 73; as may easily be tried by that which we have taught in the
former. Briefly then, and in this order is this whole work to be done. Let the
example be the cube 1728. I. By the 5 e, I find the side of the cubick 1, to
be also 1, which I set down in the quotient. II. This quotient now found, I
treble, and I make 3. III. Again, this treble I multiply by the said quotient,
and I find 3 also for the Divisor. By this Divisor 3, I divide 7, the first
complement or solid: and I find the quotient 2 for the side. IV. Now by this
quotient I multiply the Divisor 3, and I make 6, for the first complement:
Therefore to it I add two ciphers, and I make 600. V. Again, I square the
quotient 2, that is, I multiply it by it self, and I make 4: This 4, I
multiply by the treble 3, and I make 12, for the second complement: Therefore I
add to it one cipher, and I make 120. VI. This done, I multiply the same
quotient 2, in it self cubically, and I make 8. VII. Lastly, placing all these
orderly one under another, I add them, and I find the sum 728, which
subtracted from 728 the number remaining, nothing is left: Therefore I say that
1728 is a cubicke.

9 If, having found the quotient of two or more figures, as yet the whole side
of the Cubicke given be not found, then for the finding out of the quotient
following, thou shall square the whole quotient now found for the base of the
next complement; and shall treble the same square; and then shall in all things
follow the prescript of the former rule, the whole side shall be found.

Suppose the side of 34, 012, 224, were to be sought: Item of 320, 013, 504:
The examples would be thus: ^ ^

Sometimes after that you have found the cubicall side, I mean, having
subtracted the cube of the first period, there will remain in the next places
neither solid nor cube. Therefore in this case unto the side found, you shall
adioyne a cipher, as in this cube 8120601(201.

If the second side of the first complement be greater then the side of the
cube following, then the solid divided did contain a part of the second
complement: And therefore that side must be diminished, as in the cube 17, 576,
the first side shall be 2; then if thou shall make the second side 7, as it
seems at the first view it should be, thou shall make the second side of the
first complement greater then the side of the cube following. Therefore that
side must be taken less, and for 7 I take 6, and so thou shall find the true
side of the cubicke given to be 26. The example is thus: ^

This is the general and common way of finding of the side of any cubick
whatsoever, though never so great. Thus also parts, whose bounds are cubicall
numbers, may be resolved into lesser bounds, by finding out of the sides of the
same bounds; As 8/27 by this means are resolved into, And 1782/2197, into
12/13.

In parts (fractions they commonly call them) there is also a kind of cube.
For if fo be the number given be not a cubick, then it has no side that may be
expressed in numbers; and yet the true side of the greatest cube contained in
any number given, may be found: As in this number 17, 616, which is not a
cubicke, the greatest cubicke is 17, 576, and the side of it is 26, and there
do remain, over and above the cubicke, 40. Therefore, there cannot possibly
any side of a number that is not a cubicke, be found so near, but it is
possible to find one more near; as is also before taught of the Quadrate.
There are also here two manner of ways of finding out a cubicall side in such
like numbers very near to the true side, such as were before showed in the
quadrate. The first subducteth the two complements and the last cubick,
contained in the next greater cubicke above it; whereby may be understood the
difference of two continual cubickes, like as before the difference of two
quadrates was understood. For here there is to be understood a certain
cubicall Gnomon or squire, which you may conceive to be made of three plains
or sides of the cube, as before you conceived the squire or gnomon of the
quadrate to be made of two sides of the quadrate. So in this example 17, 616,
where the side is 26, and there do remain 40, of the cube next following, thou
shall divide 27, the next greater cubicke, into 26 and 1, and, as before thou
have learned, thou shall make two complements and one solid of them. The first
complement 676, made of the square of 26, the one segment; and of 1 the other
segment; which being thrice taken, shall be 2028. The second complement is 26,
comprehended of the square of 1, the one segment; and of 26, the other segment:
which being thrice taken, do make 78. Now the cube of 1, is 1. This done, add
all these, and the sum 2107, shall be the denominator of the fraction sought.
The parts therefore to be added unto 26, the former side, shall be 40/2107. So
that the whole side of 17, 616, the number given, somewhat near unto the true
side, is 26 40/2107. Whereby it is to be understood as above in the quadrate,
that look how much the numerator 40, does want of 2107, so much the cubicke
given does differ from the next cubick above it. And therefore if you subtract
40 the numerator, from 2107 the denominator; and shall add the remain 2067,
unto 17,616, the cubicke given, the whole shall be 19,686, the cubicke of the
side 27.

The second way is by parts of some great denomination, so as it be understood
that they be cubicall parts, that their side may be certainly known before. As
for example, the same number 17,616, reduced unto one hundred cubicall parts,
that is, unto 1,000,000, do make 17,616,000,000, for the numerator. The parts
then are thus; 17,616,000,000/1,000000. Now the side of the numerator is 2,601,
for the numerator of the one hundred parts given: (For the former denominator
being made by the multiplication of 100, by it self cubically; the root or
side of it must needs be 100, for the denominator of the parts sought.)
Therefore the parts desired are 2,601/100, that is, by reduction 26 1/100, and
besides that, there do remain 19,712,199, which cannot add so much as 1/100
part unto the side found; because that the difference of this cubicke from the
next greater above it, is greater then this remain: And therefore that remain
is neglected, as not of any moment. Thus far of the extraction or finding out
of a cubicke side or root.

10 The two complements are the two means continually proportional between
the two cubes: that is, as the greater cube is unto the greater complement; so
is the greater complement unto the lesser: and so is the lesser complement unto
the lesser cube.

As for example, Let the whole cubicke be 1728. Here the two several cubes,
let them be 1000, and 8. The greater complement let it be 200, and the lesser
40, as we have showed at the 6. p. Here I say 200 and 40 are the mean
proportionals between the two cubes 1000 and 8: That is, as 1000 are to 200,
so are 200 to 40; and so are 40 to 8. The cause of this is manifest by the 5 e
xxij R, which teaches, that, Solids that are alike, have a trebled reason of
their correspondent sides; And also they have two mean proportionals
comprehended of the cross multiplication of the base and height of the
extremes: 19 p viij E. But the two complements here are contained of the base
and height of the extremes crossely multiplied. Therefore the two complements
are the mean proportionals between the two cubes, that is, the two extremes.

11 If four numbers be continually proportional, the products of the extremes
by the each other squares, shall be the cubes of the middle numbers: to wit,
the greater of the greater; and the lesser of the lesser. Iordanus 57 p 6, of
his Arithmeticke.

Let 16, 24, 36, and 54, be four numbers continually proportional: And let
the quadrate of 16, be 256; of 54, be 2916. Again, let the product of 16, the
lesser extreme, by 2916, the square of 54, the greater number, be 46,656. Item,
let the product of 54 the greater extreme, by 256, the square of 16 the lesser
extreme, be 13,824. Here I say, the side of 46,656, the greater cubicke, shall
be 36: and the side of 13,824, the lesser, shall be 24, as may be proved for
experience, by the former. The example is thus: The product of the greaters
square by the lesser extreme, ^ The product of the lessers square by the
greater extreme: ^

Now the side of 46, 656, the greater, is 36; of 13, 824, the lesser, it is 24.
But 24, and 36, are the middle numbers of the four number: Therefore, If four
numbers be continually proportional, the products of the extremes by their each
other squares, are the cubes of the mean.

This rule then, as you see, is a kind of Mesolabium, that is, a way to find
out the middle numbers, or mean proportionals: whereby I mean, the extremes
being given, the mean proportionals are easily found.

Any two numbers are thus in the manner of solids alike between themselves,
conceived, as often as between them two mean continually proportional, are
sought. But many times these middle numbers, the cubicall sides of the products
of the extremes by the each other quadrates or squares, are surd numbers, as
they call them, that is, such as cannot be expressed by arithmeticall numbers,
but by such characters as are devised by the Algebraists.

Many other rules might hither be added, but we especially in this place regard
such as may any kind of way help, either to the understanding of this present
argument of extraction of the square and cubicke root; or may be of use for
the making of our Mesolabium architectonicum, or Carpenters rular.

12 The product made continual of three numbers continually proportional,
shall be the cube of the mean or middlemost number. 36 p 11 E.

Let 4, 6, 9, be three numbers continually proportional: And let them be
multiplied continually between themselves: 216, the product so made, shall be
the cube of 6, the middle number. This proposition, says Schoner, is a kind
of golden rule in solids, by which having the one of the extremes of the three
proportionals given, with the solid made of them all multiplied between
themselves continually, the rest are also given. As for example, Let 216 be the
solid given, made after this order of three proportional numbers, and let 4 be
the one extreme given. Here I say, the middle number by this rule shall be 6.
For the Cubicke root of 216, is 6. Now the product of 4 by 6, is 24; and the
quotient of 216, by 24, is 9, the third or greatest extreme. Or, the product
of 6 by it self, is 36. Now 36 divided by 4, does yield 9, for the other
extreme. For, if three numbers be continually proportional, the product of
the middlemost by it self, shall be equal to the product of the two extremes
by themselves, by the rule of proportion. Therefore, if one of the extremes
given shall divide the product of the middlemost by it self, the quotient
shall be the other extreme that was desired.

13 Having found the one of the mean proportionals, the other also shall be
found, if the mean proportional given be multiplied by the extreme that is
farthest from it, the root of the product shall be the mean proportional
desired.

As for example, Let 32, 16, 8, 4, be four proportionals given; and suppose
that the third bound were not known. Here therefore I multiply 16 by 4, the
extreme that is farthest from it, and I make 64: Now the square side of 64, by
the 5 ej, is 8, the third proportional sought. Item, suppose that 16, the
first of the two mean proportionals were unknown; Here 8 shall multiply 32,
the first bound; not 4, the last; because that is farthest off from it: The
root of 256, the product, by the ej, is 16. This root is the first mean
proportional of the two, between 32 and 4, the extremes given.

CHAP. V. Of the measuring of Timber by the Foot.
BY the Foot we do also measure Timber: but Timber being a solid body of three
dimensions, to wit, length, thickness and breadth; by a foot of timber we
understand here a cube of 12 inches square, as they call it: (For here they
abuse the word, as also some even of the learned have done, as before we have
showed:) That is, a foot of timber does contain 1728 square inches. Here
therefore commonly two dimensions are given, to wit, breadth and thickness:
the length is sought. If then the square timber to be measured be 12 inches
thick, and 12 inches broad; there is no question of the length: For every 12
inches of that piece shall make a foot of timber. But if the breadth and
thickness do vary never so little from these two cases nominated by the
statute, although they vary no whit one from another, that is, although the
breadth be equal to the thickness, here presently rises a question, what the
length should be (according to that breadth and thickness) that must make a
foot square, or that must be equal to that piece which is 12 in length, 12 in
breadth, and 12 in thickness. Yet this every one can do, that knows ought
in this business: For the Carpenters have upon their Rulars, or upon some
piece of paper or parchment, all the square measures set down, from 1 inch
square, unto 24, 36, or 40 inches square. But if the breadth and thickness be
different one from another whether little or much, this is not only
troublesome and unready, as the former, but very false and erroneous, as some
of their own company have truly noted. For that of the squares, was made, as
seems, by some skillful in the Mathematics; but their practice in the latter
case, is deceitful, false, and wholly against the rules of Geometry, and can
no way be justified Now because that all men that have occasion to use this
skill of measuring, do not understand how these tables or rules are made: as
also for that the same being copied out often times by unskillful men; I think
it not amiss here to set down by the former grounds, as we have done before
for boord-measure and others, the manner of calculating and making of the same:
and that especially because that these tables tend directly to the making of
our Rular, which is the chief cause that first moved me to undertake this
labor, or to write of this argument. The Rule therefore whereby this is
performed, is thus: If by the product of the breadth and thickness given, thou
shall divide the cube of 12, (that is, 1728) the quotient shall show the length
required to make a foot of timber. The forms of timber which commonly are to
be measured of Carpenters, are long squares (such as the Geometers call
Parallellepipida oblonga) or Rounds, otherwise called by them Cylinders, which
the vulgar sort of carpenters do also account, as we have showed, amongst the
number of squares, whose breadth and thickness are the same. A foot square (a
cubicall foot I mean) says our statute, as we have before taught, must
contain 1728 square inches. If therefore the breadth and thickness be greater
or less then 12, the length shall be found by the prescript of the former
rule. Suppose, for example, that a piece of squared timber were to be measured,
whose breadth and thickness are equal, yet greater then 12 as namely 16
inches: Here I multiply the breadth by the thickness, that is, 16 by 16; and I
make 256. By this product I divide 1728, and I find the quotient 6: Therefore I
say, that every 6 inches, and three quarters of one inch, shall, of that
breadth and thickness, make a foot of timber, according to the intention of
that Statute.

Item, suppose the piece to be measured, whose breadth and thickness is
equal, were 6 inches square, and it were demanded, how much of that in length
would make a foot of timber? R. The product of 6 by 6, is 36: Now the quotient
of 1728 by 36, is 48. Therefore I say, that 48 inches of that stick are
required to make a foot of timber.

Now suppose the breadth and thickness were unequal; as for example, first
let the breadth be 18, and the thickness 12: here the product of 18 by 12, is
216; and the quotient of 1728 by 216, is 8: Therefore I say, every 8 inches of
that piece of timber shall be equal to a foot of solid measure.

Admit a planke or table were to be measured after the manner of timber measure,
whose breadth is 36 inches, and thickness 4: how much in length fhall make a
foot of solid timber? R. The product of 36 by 4, is 144. And the quotient of
1728, by 144, is 12, the desired length. Thus then a Table for solid or timber
measure is to be made, like unto those which we have before showed for board
and land-measure. Only this is to be observed, that this table is only of
such pieces as are square, that is, of such whose breadth and thickness are
equal; although it may also be extended and made for all, if need so require.

If beginning at an unity, and so ascending upward unto the greatest, thou
shall divide 1728 by the square of any number asigned, and so forth, the
several quotients placed against the number given, shall make the table of
timber measure. As for example, The square of 1 is 13 and the quotient of 1728
by 1, is 1728. Item, the square of 2 is 4; and the quotient of 1728 by 4, is
432. Lastly, the square of 12 is 144, and the quotient of 1728 by 144, is 12,
for the length desired. The Table then for square measure, that is, for the
measuring of such timber where the breadth and thickness are equal, is thus. ^

The use of this Table is easy out of the former: only this difference is to
be observed, that because plains have but two dimensions, therefore one
dimension given there was sufficient for the finding out of the other unknown.
But here, for that solids have three dimensions, two (to wit, breadth and
thickness) are required for the finding out of the third desired. Yet now
again, seeing that here the said two dimensions given, are equal one to
another; if you shall with either of the dimensions given, enter the first
column of the Table, the column on the right hand shall yield the length
desired. As for example, Admit a timber stick to be measured were 4 inches
square, that is, were 4 inches thick, and 4 inches broad; I demand, how much
of that stick in length, shall be required to make a foot of solid measure.
R. Here because 4 is equal unto 4, that is, for that the breadth and
thickness are equal, I enter the column on the left hand with 4, and I find
answering to it, in the column on the right hand, 9f: Therefore I say, every 9
foot in length, of that breadth and thickness, shall make a foot of solid
measure; The product, I say, made continually of 4, 4, and 108, shall be equal
to the product continually made of 12, 12, and 12; that is, the product
continually made of 4, 4, and 108, shall be 1728, thus: ^

Item, suppose a timber stick to be measured were 16 inches square. The
column on the right hand answering to 16, gives 6i: Therefore I say, every 6
inches, and 3 quarters of an inch in length, of that breadth and thickness,
shall make a foot of solid measure.

Again, admit it were 48 inches square: what length shall be required to make
a foot of solid measure: R. Here 48 is greater then any number contained in the
column of breadth, on the left hand: Therefore I take 24, the half of 48, and
with that entering the Table, I find 3j to answer for the length desired. But
here observe, 24 as it is but the half of 48i, the breadth: so is it also but
the half of the thicknes, which is supposed likewise to be 48i. Therefore 24
is but the one quarter of both the assigned: Wherefore I say that 3i in length,
of that breadth and thicknes, shall contain 4 foot of solid measure.

Lastly, admit a pillar were but half an inch square: Here I find no number
amongst the breadths of the left hand so little as: Therefore I enter the Table
with 1i, the double of, and I find for the length desired 144f. But here
because 1i, the breadth, is twice so much as i, the breadth given; and is also
twice so great as the thickness, which is supposed to be equal to the
breadth. Therefore 144f, or 1728i in length, shall contain but of a foot of
solid measure: or every 576f in length, of that breadth and thicknes, shall be
equal to the cube of 12i.

Having finished the former Table for timber-measure, and knowing it to be
serviceable in those cases only where the two dimensions given are equal one
to another, I bethought me of a Table more general, for the measuring of all
sorts of squared timber whatsoever. That this might be done, I doubted not; but
that it might be done in few words, or within so little a compass as here thou
see, I knew not until I had made trial: And having contrived it, in the
manner of Pythagoras tables, into a triangular form, like unto that musical
instrument which Swidas, as I remember, calls Trigonum musicum, I thought
good to name it of the form and use, Trigonum architectonicum, The Carpenters
squire. Now that by this Table all those foul and gross errors are avoided,
which in measuring of timber are by the common sort of workmen committed, that
is, that by this our Table the Carpenter may not only measure all sorts of
squared timber most exactly and truly, but also more easily and speedily then
by any way commonly practiced or published; besides that, it is demonstrable
out of the grounds of these arts, every man of mean understanding, that shall
please to compare them, shall be able to testify with me.

The making of this Table is in a manner the same with that of the former: the
difference only is this, that there 1728, the cube of 12, was divided only by
the square of every several number given: Here the same cube is to be divided,
not only by the square, that is, by the product of every such number by it
self, but also by the products of every such several number by any other
assigned whatsoever. Now it is manifest, that the quotient thus found (which
answers unto the third dimension sought) is to be placed in the common angle
or meeting of the columns of the two dimensions given, that is, of those two
numbers, by whose product this quotient was found.

First therefore having made a right-angled triangle, I place the numbers given
upon the sides without the same: These two ranks of numbers answering (as we
have said) unto the two dimensions given, the one of them at the top begins
with the greatest of the numbers given, and ends at the right-corner with an
unity: The other running along underneath the triangle, begins at the same
right corner with the greatest, and ends with the least. These numbers also,
for the better help and guide unto the eye, may also be placed upon the
hypotenusa, or slanting side of the triangle which is opposite unto the said
right-corner. This being done, I begin either at the greatest or least numbers,
it skilleth not whether, and I find the numbers for the third dimension, as
before is taught, which I place within the triangle in their several columns,
as the factors shall appoint. As for example, beginning at the greatest, I
multiply 24 by 24; and with 576 the product, I divide 1728, and I find 3,
which I place within the triangle in the first column against 24, etc. Again,
I multiply the same 24 by 23, and with the product 552, I divide 1728, and the
quotient 3 72/552 (or 3 3/13, being reduced unto parts of the least
denomination) I set in the same first column against 23. In like manner I
multiply 23 by 23; and by the product 519, I divide 1728, and I find 3 ^,
which I place in the second column from the right hand, against the same 23 on
the outside. Item, thus I multiply 22, first by 24; then by 23; and lastly by
22; by the products still dividing the same 1728, I set the quotients in their
several places. Thus dealing with all the numbers on the right hand of the
Triangle, until thou come unto 1, the lowest on that side, the Table shall
be made.

The use of the Table in Timber-measure.
This Table, as the Title shows, serves generally for the measuring both of
Plains and Solids by the foot. Now Solids, such as Timber and Stone are, have
three dimensions, to wit, breadth, thickness and length. Of these, two,
breadth and thickness, are given: The third, I mean length, is sought. Here
therefore, Seek the one of the dimensions given amongst those numbers on the
outside of the Triangle, which at the top begin at 24, and so descend to 1: The
other seek amongst those at the base underneath the same: The space within the
Triangle, to which these two do point, shall show the length desired. As for
example, Suppose a piece of squared timber were 12 inches broad, and 12 inches
thick: In the common angle, or meeting of these two numbers, next to the
beuelling or slanting line of the Triangle, I find 12 for the length desired.
Again, suppose the breadth of some stone to be measured were 18 inches, and
the thickness 6. These numbers do show the length desired to be 16 inches: Not
12, as the vulgar rules do teach.

In Boord-measure.
In board: measure, only breadth and length are considered: Therefore here,
The breadth given, is sought sometimes amongst those numbers on the outside
upon the righthand: Sometimes amongst those underneath the same, as occasion
shall serve: For it must so be taken, that it may meet continually with 12. An
example or two shall-make all plain: Suppose a board were 9 inches broad;
here I seek 9 amongst those numbers on the right hand: The common angle or
meeting of this with 12, of those numbers at the bottom, does show that 16
inches is the length desired. Again, suppose it were 18 inches broad; here no
number on the right hand, greater then 12, can meet with 12, in the
vnder-ranke: Therefore I seek 18 amongst those of the lower rank; And I find
the common angle of 18 of this rank, and of 12, of the numbers amongst those on
the right hand, to give 18 inches for the length desired.

If any man shall desire that the fractions should be made more serviceable for
the use of practitioners, it may easily be done if any man will take the pains.

FINIS.
TRIGONVM ARCHITECTONICVM: OR, THE CARPENTERS SQVIRE:
that is, A Table serving for the measuring of Board, Glass, Stone, Timber,
and such like Plains and Solids by the Foot.

^ ^ ^
