Faults escaped in the Printing.
PAge 3. line 6. for these read those. p. 5. l. 3. for cerul read serui. l. 2^
(...) read that. p. 9. l. 30. for each read those. p. 10. l. 22. for
illustrissime (...) p. 13. l. 1. read, and Blanch^. p. 14. l. 3. leave out (for
that cause,) ^ 15. for sins read sin. l. 9. read: as Caietan in that place.
p. 1^. l. 31. for motion mention. p. 18. ^^. for the read no. p. ^2. l. 26.
for. The read* That p. 23. l. (...) say read says p. 24 l. 20. f^ (...) l. 22.
for i^ ^ead in. p. 2^. l. 15. read: (...) turn. l. 35. for his r. this. p. 30.
(...) do because. l. 23. (...) out (then.)

AN APOLOGY OR APOpologiticall answer, made by father Paul a Venetian, of the
order of SERVI unto the Exceptions and Objections of Cardinal BELLARMINE,
against certain Treatises and Resolutions of John Gerson, concerning the force
and validity of Excommunication. Printed in Venice by Robert Meietti. 1606
IT being necessary (as I conceive) to answer the obictions made against the
two Treatises, Friar Pa^^^
concerning the validity of excommunication, written by John Gerson, a man
famous both for holiness of life and learning, and that, not so much to uphold
the reputation and credit of the author, as to deliver the true understanding,
justifiable both in Law and Divinity, of a matter of this nature and moment,
and to maintain the lawful power and authority which God has given to
sovereign Princes; I have resolved to do it, but with all modesty and
reverence, avoiding all biting and reproachful speeches; which I hold very
unseemly in all occasions that occur between Christians, and especially
between Religious or Ecelesiasticall persons, in matters concerning the
salvation of souls. And herein I will not trouble my self, to repel or
retorte any injurious speeches, uttered against so famous a Doctor as Gerson
was, knowing, that himself if he were alive, would, according to his own
Doctrine and instruction to other men, be ready to follow the example of our
Savior, * Qui cum malediceretur, non maledicebat. Neither intend I to propose
or set on foot any other doctrine, then the same which was first taught by the
holy Apostles, and after them, by the holy Fathers, and other Catholic
Doctors, which have from time to time until our age, expounded the divine
Scriptures, and instructed Gods people: which, notwithstanding I will ever
submit, to the judgment of our holy mother Church that cannot err. And
proceeding in this manner; I am verily persuaded, that I shall be able to
satisfy, not only mine own conscience (which is the chiefest respect that
mooues me) but all other men likewise, that shall see and read this my
Apology: who I am sure would as much dislike impertinent raylings and
cauelling speeches, as they will now be well pleased, that I do with all
sincerity of heart, and singlenes of speech, undertake a defense of this kind,
for the glory of God and the edification of my neighbor. And to avoid that
tediousness, which commonly grows by the repetition of titles, though due
and justly belonging: I that intend to bend my self and my discourse, chiefly
to the substance of the matter I handle, resolve to forbear to name the
opponent, with his attributes of honor that were fit to be used unto him, and
to deal with him in all this Treatise, by the only name of the author:
reserving nevertheless unto his most honorable and reverend Lordship that due
and humble respect, that at all times belongs unto him, and which I have long
ago professed to bear him, when I had occasion to treat with him, even before
he was made a Cardinal.

The proeme of Bellarmine whom he calls the Author.
How true that saying is of our Savior Christ. Qui male agit, odit lucem.
John. 3. May evidently appear in this man, that has translated into Italian,
and published in print, two little Treatises of John Gerson. For knowing in his
own conscience, how many untruths he had heaped together in one preface of
his, though a very short one, and that in the two little Treatises themselves
which he translated, there were errors of no small importance. And withal to
how litte purpose those Treatises served him, for the end which he pretended,
he was ashamed to make either his own name known or the Printers. And which
is more, the better to cover and disguise it, he faines that he wrote it from
Paris: Whereas it is but too well known, that it was both written and printed
in Venice. Now therefore, least this man should abuse the simple readers with
his hypocrisy, we will proceed to examine, first the words of his preface, and
after the words of Gerson, which he has translated, though not so faithfully
as he pretends.

Certainly the translator had no cause at all to be ashamed, as if Gersons
considerations were impertinent to the business that is now in question:
Answer. Friar Paulo.
For if his whole works had not been extant, printed above a hundred years
ago, I for my part should easily have believed, that these two treatises had
been compiled at this time, and upon this occasion. So directly and
particularly do they touch all those points, that are material to be touched
and handled in this question. And indeed it was commonly so believed in this
country, when they came first out, until many men had compared them, with the
Ancient copies printed in Paris. 1494. But now these old impressions give us
cause rather to think that there was in Gerson some prophetical spirit, joined
with that extraordinary portion of learning and piety, wherewith he was endued.
And of this every man that reads him shall easily judge. But in sooth, if
Gersons treatises be nothing to the purpose now in hand, why does the Author
take so much pains, and trouble himself so much about them? Why does he
labor so much to confute them? Evermore he contradicts his doctrine, but no
where he goes about to prove, that it is not pertinent to the present case and
question.

Whether the considerations of Gerson contain error or not, we shall see
hereafter, when the objections that are made against them, shall be examined:
all which objections (or oppositions) do either presuppose things that by the
book it self appear to be false, as that Gerson wrote those considerations
in time of scisme, or they presuppose and assume that which is in controversy,
and the very question it self, as namely that the Popes commandment to the
Venetians is just and lawful, or else taking some ambiguous and doubtful
term, that may have a double understanding, and accordingly settling a position
in the one sense, which is true, and so purchasing it some credyt and assent in
the readers mind, in the end the objection concludes in the other sense, which
is false.

The preface of the translator of Gerson, contains no other doctrine then is
contained in the Books themselves: Therefore I see no reason, why of necessity
he was to put his name to it; unless it be taken for a rule, that every
translator is bound to do the like. But neither is there any commandment to
that effect, in any of the holy counsels, or elsewhere, neither does the common
use and practice require or exact it: We do rather use commonly to blame those
men, that think to win themselves credyt, by making a preface, or a table to
some book, or by translating some little Phamphlet. And there are diverse
works extant of the greek Fathers, translated into Latin, that carry not the
names of the translators, although I confess some do. Christ approved not
the advice of his kinsfolks. Transi hinc and vade in Iucinam, vt discipuli tui
videant opera qua tu facis, nemo quippe in occulto quicquam facit, sed quaerit
ipse palam esse: Si haec facis, manifestate ipsum mu^do. But he answered that
which in many cases his servants may answer. Tempus meum n^ndum aduenit,
tempus autem vestrum semper est paratum.

God be thanked, the world is long since come out of his infancy, and begins
now to relish and judge of meats, not by the quality or condition of them
which serve it to the Table: but by the sauory taste it has of it self. And
surely the glorious luster of the Authors titles, is not a matter of such
prejudice, as should overthrow the cause of one, who proposed it without
manifesting his own name; according to the course holden in the counsel of the
Areopagites: That the printer did not put his name to it; I will give no
reason, because I have not undertaken his defense, but this I will say, that by
occasion of these present controversies, there came forth a writing or phamphet
from Milan, without name of Author or Printer, and without mention of place or
time, containing withal certain doctrine, which how dangerous and pestilent
it is, time will discover; and hereunto no other answer can be made, but this:
We will have one law for our selves, and another for other men.

Whether the translation be faithfully performed or not, we will consider as we
proceed, when we shall come to any exceptions that are taken against it. But
now let us see what the Author says further.

The first words of the translators preface are these.
A common report being spread throughout this City, that upon Christmas day
last there were censures and excommunications publicly denounced, against the
most glorious renowned and religious common wealth of Venice, because they
refused to submit unto the will and discretion of an other, that liberty which
God had given them.

If we shall carefully examine all the kinds of liberty, which a private
person or a common wealth is capable of, we shall find no more but these six
following: Liberty, or fredome of will, opposite to natural necessity:
Christian Liberty, opposite to the bondage of sin: Civil liberty, opposite to
slavish bondage, liberty of a common wealth or free state, opposite to the
subjection of a King or Monarch: Liberty of an absolute Prince, which
acknowledges no superior in temporal matters, opposite to the rightful
subjection of an inferior Prince, to a greater or superior: And lastly,
Liberty to do evil, opposite to the service or subjection of righteousness,
which liberty to do evil, Saint Paul affirms to be all one with the
bondage of sin. Cum cerui essetis peccati, liberi fuistes iustitiae. Romans 6.
I do not think that the Author of this preface meant to speak of the freedom
of will, which is natural, and cannot be lost by any means, but in the
erroneous conceit and fancy of Lutherans, and other such heritickes: Neither
can he with any reason mean Christian liberty, which is opposite to the
bondage of sin: for that is not lost by obeying Christ's vicar, but rather by
not obeying him: Nor can we think that he intends to speak of civil liberty,
whereof all slaves are deprived; nor of the liberty of an Aristocracie, or
Democracy, (that is where some few of the better sort or the generality of the
people bear the rule) which kind of liberty those people do lack, that are
subject to a kingely power, or as we may call it a monarchy: for neither the
present Pope, nor yet any of his predecessors, has ever attempted to change
the form of government of the City of Venice, as knowing very well, that
there is noe form of regiment, be it of a Monarch, or of some few principal
personss, or of the whole people, but may well stand with Christian religion,
whereof the Pope has the principal care and charge. Nay rather this variety,
does not a little adorn and beautify the Cittye of god, which is the
universal Church.

I know not to what purpose, the author makes such a flourish of six kinds of
liberty, seeing it is apparent to every man, of what kind of liberty the
question is now between us. But if he will needs set forth all kinds of
liberty, that are incident either to a private person, or a common wealth, why
does he not as well mention the Ecclesiastical liberty, and tell us clearly
what this is? being a matter so much debated and doubted of among the
Canonists, as to this day it is not determined? The ecclesiastical Hierarchy
is surely a common wealth: yet I see not under which of those six kinds, that
liberty may be reduced, which is commonly attributed unto it. And therefore in
saying, that there are no more kinds of liberty, but those six, he makes us
wonder, as if he meant to exclude or renounce that, whereof notwithstanding
there could not be a fitter place to speak, nay, to treat fully and at large,
then this we have now in hand. But forasmuch as in this discourse of the six
kinds of liberty, the Author uses an ambiguous proposition, it is necessary
before we go any further, to restrain and limit it to the true sense, least
any man be deceived by it.

Speaking of christian liberty, he says, that well a man may loose it by not
obeying Christ's vicar, but never by obeying him: this must be thus limited,
when Christ's vicar commands according to Christ's institution. But when he
commandes, according to his own private opinion and passions, whereunto as
being a man he is subject, and may be more subject then many other, as Caietan
says 2. 2 quaest. 39. art. 2. then christian liberty is not lost by disobeying
him, but indeed by obeing him.

As for example, that man should no doubt have lost his lyberty, that had
obeyed Honorius the first, commanding that no man should affirm, that in
Christ there was either on will or two, or he that should have obeyed Gregory
the 3. ordeyning that it should be lawful for a man that had a wife, unfit by
reason of any infirmity for the use or act of matrimony, to take an other
besides her. And likewise, that should have obeyed the several censures of
Stephen. 6. against Formosus, and of John. 9. against Stephen. And of Sergius
the 3. against John. 9. And in like sort if he had obeyed Celestin. 3. when he
taught this doctrine, that marriage might be dissolved for heresye: nay he had
undoubtedly sinned, that had obeyed John. 22. and believed for obedience sake,
that the souls of the saints deceased, did not see gods face. All which I
have here briefly touched, to let the reader see, that this assersion, that
Christian liberty may be lost by disobeying the Pope, but not by obeying him,
may very well carry a good show, but that it is with all deceiptfull and
captious, being delivered in such a generality; and unless it be limited
with this restriction, when he commandes according to gods law.

fourthly where he says, that no Pope did ever attempt to change the form of
government in the City of Venice. I will be bold to put the auctor in mind,
that it is very much that he undertakes, to pronounce an absolute negative, in
a point of ecclesiastical history, for the space of nine hundred years;
during which time, there have been about nine hundred and forty Popes since
the first began to intermedle with temporal matters: of which number, as it is
true that the most part have favored that state, so yet can it not be truly
said of them all: although it has pleased the divine providence (almost)
miraculously to protect and preserve the liberty thereof, even when it was
apparent, that some did labor mightily to overthrow it utterly.

And further it may be well replied unto him: that it seems strange and not to
be endured. That noe Pope having ever before this time, according to the
authors own saying, attempted or pretended to desire, to alter the government
of that common wealth. This Pope should be now so peremptory, and confident
that he may do it, by offering (as he does) to intermedle with the making of
their laws, which is the very life and soul of civil government.

At last the author passing over that which made not much to the purpose, is
contented to acknowledge that the translator speaks here of the liberty of a
sovereign Prince, which among other things consists in making laws
necessary for the good government of his state, and punishing offenders. And
thus he goes on.

There remains only that liberty which belongs to an absolute Prince, that
acknowledges no superior in temporal matters: and of this kind of liberty,
it is likely that the author of the preface speaks: But out of all question
he is deceived, in saying, that the Popes holiness sends out excommunications
against the state of Venice, for refusing to subject the liberty which God has
given them to the will of another. And if any man object, that to make laws
and punish offenders, is the proper right of absolute Princes, and yet Pope
Paul the fifth, excommunicates the heads and principal officers of the common
wealth of Venice, because they will not obey him, in disanulling and recalling
some laws they have made in temporal matters, and in setting at liberty
certain offenders which they had put in prison: I answer, that Pope Paul the
fifth, excommucates the heads of that common wealth, for refusing to obey him,
in disanulling not all laws, or any law, concerning temporal matters, but
unjust and wicked laws, made in prejudice of the Church, and with great
offense to God and their neighbor. And who can or will deny, if he be a true
Catholic that the Pope has authority, as universal pastor, to rebuke and
reprove any Prince or state for their sins, and if they refuse to obey, to
compel them unto it by ecclesiastical censures. For accordingly we see, that
S. Gregory did very sharply reprove tht Emperor Mauritius, for a law which he
had made, that was prejudicial to Gods service. And Innocent: the third, as
we may read in the chapter. Nouit de iudicijs, does plainly determine, that
it belongs to the Pope, to censure the sins and offenses of all the Princes
of the world. Non intendimus says he iudicare de feodo cuius ad ipsum (regem
viz.) spectat iudicium, sed decernere de peccato, cuius ad nos pertinet sine
dubitatione censura, quam in quemlibet exercere possumus and debemus. And a
little after, Cum non humanae constitutioni* sed diuinae potius innitamur, quia
potestas nostra non est ex homine, sed ex deo, nullus, qui sit sanae mentis
ignorant, quin ad officium nostrum spectet, de quocunque mortali peccato
corripere quemlibet Christianum, and si correptionem contempserit, per
districtionem ecclesiasticam coercere. Sea forsitan dicetur, quod aliter cum
regibus and aliter cum alijs est agendum. Caterum scriptum legimus in lege
diuina, ita magnum iudicabis vt paruum: nec erit apud te except to personarum.
Hitherto are the very words of Pope Innocent. And Pope Boniface in the
extrauagant vnam sanctam, de maiorit, and obedient: Says very well, that the
temporal authority, when it erreth; ought to be ^^formed and rectified by the
spiritual power. For although a temporal prince that is absolute,
acknowledges no other temporal Prince for his superior, yet if he be a
Christian, he must of force acknowledge the head of all Christendom, which is
the Pope, Christ's vicar in earth, to be his Superior: which Sovereign Bishop
or Pope, because his chief end and care is the spiritual good of men's souls,
does not therefore intermedle in the government of temporal princes, as long
as they use not their authority, to the hurt of their own souls and their
subjects, or to the prejudice of Christian religion. But when they do the
contrary, he both may and ought to put to his hand, and to bring them into the
right way again. And he that believes not this, is no true Catholic: and if
any man shall object, that those laws of the Venetians, contain in them
neither sin nor hurt to the Church, I will answer him, that to determine,
whether any law do contain sin or prejudice to the Church, or not, belongs
likewise to the Pope, who is the supreme and highest Judge of all; even as to
judge, whether a civil contract offend in the sin of usury, belongs properly
to the same ecclesiastical Judge, to whom the cognizance of sins (generally)
appertains. So the Popes Holiness blames not the Venetians for punishing their
subjects that offend, but because they presume to lay hands upon
ecclesiastical persons, which are subject to no superior, but spiritual: and
make no reckoning of the sacred Canons, and of the grievous censures denounced
against all such, as lay hands upon persons consecrated to God. Therefore
whosoever will rightly consider of this point without passion, shall find that
the Pope goes not about to bereave the State of Venice, of any other liberty,
but the liberty to do evil, which is not given of God, but of the devil and
our own corrupt nature, and is the self same thing with the bondage of sin,
opposite to true Christian liberty. And as temporal Princes will not give
liberty to their subjects to rob or kill, or commit any such heinous
offenses; because they are repugnant to the peace and good government of their
states, so ought not the Pope, who is head of all Christendom, to give any
liberty or permission to Christian Princes, to make laws that shall be
injurious to the Church, or prejudicial to the salvation of souls. And as the
good sheapherd ought not to give his flock free liberty to wander where it
lists, and to feed upon herbs that be ven^mous, and drink of corrupt and
unwholesome waters; nor the good Pilot to give free scope to his Ship, to be
carried with every wind upon shelfes and rocks, so ought not the Pope chief
sheapherd of Christ's sheep, and principal pilot of Saint Peter's ship, to
give any such liberty unto Christians, as may both deprive themselves, and make
other to be deprived, of eternal salvation. Lastly, as the Venetians, upon
just caus^, refuse to admit that liberty of conscience, which all the
heretics of these times so much affect, because they know it is nothing but
a liberty to adhere to all kind of errors, and therefore they are contented to
countenance and assist the proceedings of the holy inquisition: so ought they
as little to covet this liberty, to make laws repugnant to the honor of God,
and displeasing to their spiritual mother, which is the holy Church, and be
rather glad to be admonished of their error, and corrected by their spiritual
Father, which is Gods vicar on earth.

This whole discourse deserves to be particularly examined, for neither are all
things true that he presupposes in it, neither can that conclusion be in any
sort deduced from them, that he would gather. After he has alleged the
translators words, which are these: his holiness excommunicates the common
wealth of Venice, for refusing to subject the liberty that God has given them,
to the command or will of an other: he turns them another way, saying, that
the Pope excommunicates the heads of the common wealth. But if he will
vouchsafe to look upon it, he shall find that the translator has spoken
truly, and that he has cunningly and skilfully changed the names and persons,
to excuse a notable error. The Popes brief presented upon Christmas day, is
thus superscribed and directed. Marino Grimanno duci and reipublicae venetorum,
To Marino Grimanno Duke of Venice, and to the common wealth of the same. In
this brief, he commands them to whom he writes, that under pain of
excommunication latae sententia, they do disannull and repeal each two laws.
The translator therefore has said truly, that he excommunicates the common
wealth; and the Author, to defend and cover a notorious error, committed in
excommunicating a community or corporation, contrary to the doctrine of all
divines and Canonists, and the papal constitutions themselves; cunningly
affirms: that he excommunicateth the heads of that common wealth. And he
observes the same art throughout, although the Pope not only in this breife,
but in that also which was presented the five and twenteth of February,
excommunicates in express terms, the common wealth. And in the last breife of
the seventeenth of April, excommunicateth also the Duke and the Senate or
Council, which is likewise a College or community: Therefore we will desire
the Author henceforth, to speak clearly and plainly, and confess, that the
Pope excommunicates the common wealth, and the Senate or Counsel, and tell us
no more of the heads or principal magistrates, for such excuses can not be
admitted, especially before they be required. The error was committed indeed
in exco^municating a community, But let it be defended by some other means,
rather then by trusting upon our grosenesse and dullness in discovering his
cunning. It is also worthy to be observed, with what modesty he speaks of a
common wealth, whereunto the Sea of Rome has been so much beholden and
obliged; and not only of the men that are alive now, whereof the present State
is constituted and compounded, but of all those which have lived since the
year 1300. until this time; taxing the laws that were made by them to be
unjust and impious, though with some contradiction to his own Doctrine: for a
little after; he says that it belongs to the Pope to judge of Princes laws,
and the Pope has never yet pronounced that these laws are unjust and impious;
whence then shall we say that the Author has fetched those epithetes modesty
becomes all men well: unless peradventure great persons and such as carry the
title of illustrissime, be out of the rule.

Two things he proposes: the one, that these laws of the Venetians, are
unjust and wicked; the other, that it belongs to the Pope, to reprove them for
it, and if they obey not, to compel them unto it by his censures. The former
which is the Principal, and wherein he ought chiefly to have insisted, and to
have proved it to be so, he is contented to bawke altogether; peradventure
because he saw he was not able to make it good. The second, which is of
little moment, unless he had proved the former, he goes about to confirm
at large, by three authorities and other reasons. But let us follow his own
order, and see how well he has proved his purpose; and first by the authority
of Saint Gregory, who (as he says) did sharply reprove the Emperor
Mauritius. In the threescore and first epistle of the second book, there is
contained, a very humble advertisement or remonstrance of Saint Gregory's to
Mauritius the Emperor, upon occasion of a law he had made, that no man, that
was tied to serve in the war, or in any public charge, might become a
monk, until he had given up his account, and finished his time of service in
the wars. Saint Gregory shows, that their accounts might be as well made,
when they were entered into the monastery; and that a souldior becoming a
Convert, might profit the common wealth more by his prayers, then by his
souldiorye, and that this law in general, was a hinderance to the service of
God. But let us see how sharp his reproof is, first he says. Ego autem
indignus vestrae pictatis famulus in hac suggestione, neque vt Episcopus neque
vt seruus, iure reipublicae, sed iure priuato loquor. And a little after. Ego
vero haec dominis meis loquens, quis sum, nisi puluis and vermis? Sed tamen
quia contra autorem omnium deum hanc intendere constitutionem sentio, dominis
tacere non possum. And after that, bringing in God as it were speaking to the
Emperor, he says. Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi, and tu a meo seruitio
milites tuos subtrahis? And a little after requirat ergo dominus meus, quis
prior imperatorum, talem legem dederit, and subtilius extimet si debuit dari.
And concluding in the end what it is that he desires of the Emperor, he says:
vnde per eundem tremendum iudicem deprecor, ne illae tantae lachrimae, tantae
orationes, tanta ieiunia, tantaeque elemosnae domini mei, ex qualibet occasion
apud omnipotentis dei oculos fusce^tur. Sed aut temperando, pietas vestra aut
mutando, rigorem eiusdem legis inflectat. This humble and decent remonstrance,
worthy indeed of a Pope or supreme Bishop, deserves not to be termed by the
Author a sharp reprehension. But those other words that follow, are yet more
worthy to be considered. Ego quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per
diuersas parts terrarum transmitto, and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime
concordat, ecce per suggestionis meae paginam, dominis nunciaui: Vtrobique ergo
quae debui, exolui, qui and imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo, quod
sensi, minime tacui. I would not have produced these words of Pope Gregory, if
I had not been forced unto it by the Author, to let him see, that it was not a
sharp reprehension, but rather an humble and respective remonstrance, which
Saint Gregory used to the Emperor: But seeing he has drawn me thus far,
I must entreat him to answer me, whether Saint Gregory's calling him self so
often the Emperors unworthy servant, and his saying, that as one that
acknowledged himself subject to his commandment, he had sent abroad into
diverse parts of the world, a law which in his conscience he held not to be
just; and that other saying of his, that in so doing, he rendered unto the
Emperor that obedience that was due unto him, whether I say these speeches do
agree, with the doctrine which the author now, publishes: wherein he makes the
Pope supreme temporal Monarch, and the Princes of the world less then his
vassals; as I will show him (before we part out of this argument) that his
words do necessarily infer, although they dare not yet auow it in express
terms. But before we go from this point, it will not be vnpertinent for me
to let the Author know, in what Court of Chauncery, or campo di sancto fiore it
was, that Saint Gregory caused this his sharp reprehension or admonition to
be published, and set up to be read. In this 64. Epistle he writes to one
Theodorus Physician to Mauritius, that he had made a remonstrance unto the
Emperor (for so I will be bold to interpret suggestionem, yet with the
Authors leave, least he tax me as he does the Translator) but that he was
not willing that his Agent should present it unto him publicly, but prayed
that Theodorus rather to deliver it unto him privately, at some convenient
time, when it might not divert him from greater business. I must also crave
pardon, if whiles we talk of the mayor proposition, by occasion of Saint
Gregory's words, I shall incidentally touch a point belonging to the minor. To
show the iniquity of that law of Mauritius, that holy man prays him to
inquire and search, whether any Prince before him had made any law of that
nature. So I would have wished, that our holy father the Pope, had in like sort
required the Venetians to consider, whether any king of Portugal, Castile,
Arragon, Poland, France, Sicilie, or any count of Burgandy, or the state of
Genoa, had ever made any laws like unto theirs. For so he should have truly
imitated Saint Gregory. And surely I cannot but admire the authors great
wisdom, in that he forbeares to quote the place it self of Saint Gregory,
being so precise and subtle in his allegation of other places, throughout this
whole Treatise. But let us go on to the second argument, drawn from the
Chapter nouit, of Innocent. 3.

After long wars between Philip Augustus King of France, and Richard King of
England, about the year 1199. Richard died, and his brother John, surnamed
Lackeland, succeeded him in that Kingdom, either by the nomination and
appointment of his brother as some affirm, or by usurpation upon Arthur, who
was son to another Elder brother of his. But those territories which the Kings
of England possessed in France, submitted themselves to the Dominion of Arthur.
Whereupon there ensued great wars between Philip and John, because Arthur
followed the faction of the French King, and was supported by him. But at
length, in the year 1200: by means of a marriage between Lewis son and
heir, and successor of the French king, Blanch of Castille, king John's
sisters daughter (of which marriage issued afterward S. Lewis) a peace was
concluded between Philip and John; wherein Arthur was likewise comprised: upon
this condition; that John should do homage to Philip, for the Dominions of
Brittany and Normandy, and Arthur should do homage to John for the same. After
this, upon some occasion that fell out, Arthur was put in prison by his uncle
the King of England, and there died, in the year 1203. And the common opinion
was, that he was murdered by his Uncles commandment. Whereupon Philip
Augustus, as chief Lord of the Fee, caused John to be cited to Paris: and upon
default of his appearance, condemned him, and confiscated those territories
which he held of him, and went afterward with an army, to seize them into his
hands by force. John pretended, that this was directly against the peace and
treaties between them, and made his complaint unto Pope Innocent: the third,
who commanded both the Kings, upon pain of excommunication, to keep peace,
and to surcease from war, and sent also a Legate unto them for that purpose.
John, for whose advantage this commandment was, did gladly embrace it. But
Philip found himself much grieved, and took great exceptions against it, and
so did the Prelates of France in this behalf: unto whom Innnocent the third,
made that answer contained in the Chapter nouit. Philip, for all that,
desisted not from his former purpose, but went on, and conquered by the sword,,
all the territories that the English men at that time possessed in France:
neither could the Pope prevail any thing by his commandment. In the year
1208. Pope Innocent 3. excommunicated the aforesaid John, and interdicted his
whole kingdom, which interdict continued six years and three months: Yet did
not John yield to obey the Pope, in that he required of him. Therefore the Pope
sent Pandolphus his Legate into France to Philip, to persuade him to make war
upon John. Philip made his preparations accordingly, and many Barons of England
combined themselves with him. But in the mean time, Pandolphus coming into
England, and letting John see the danger wherein he stood, advised him to
become the Popes Feodatary: John enforced by the present peril, accepted the advice, and made his kingdom tributary to the Pope, to pay him yearly 1000
marks of gold. Pandolphus hereupon returned into France, and commanded
Philip, upon pain of excommunication, that he should molest John no longer, as
being now become the Feodatary of the Church. But Philip refused to obey, and
the war continued. Whereupon in the year 1215. in the Counsel of Lateran,
Pope Innocent. Sent out an Excommunication against all those that molested John
King of England for th^^ cause, and for that cause in the year 1216. another
Legate called Guallo went to Paris, who by virtue of that sentence of
Excommunication, commanded Philip and Lewis his son, to forbear to pass
with an Army into England, which they were then prepared to do. But all this
notwithstanding Lewis desisted not, but entered John's kingdom with a great
power. Although the same Guallo were gone over into England, and there ceased
not daily to thunder out his Excommunications. This war continued until the
death of John; after which, Lewis of France who had gotten many places of that
kingdom into his hands, made truce for five years with Henry the son of
John, who succeeded his father. Now to apply this story to our purpose: The
Lawyers hold, that to show that you have commanded, is not sufficient to
prove a Jurisdiction, unless the commandment have been obeyed. I will
leave it therefore to the authors exquisite judgment, to make the conclusion
that follows of this, seeing that so many commandments, and so many Censures
of the Pope, were not able to withhold or hinder these two Kings, Philip and
Lewis, from prosecuting these pretensions which they took to be just, although
the Pope judged them unjust. I will say thus much more: That Cardinal
Hostiensis, who lived shortly after, writing upon this Chapter nouit, takes
much pains to defend it, and proposes many conjectures of his own, how and
with what limitations the matter must be carried, to make that rule or precept
of the Popes, delivered in that chapter, to appear just; But it suffices that
in France it was not so esteemed nor obeyed. Therefore from the authority of
that chapter nouit, there can be no such thing concluded, as our author would
infer.

The proposition of Pope Innocent. 3. alleged by the author, Intendimus
decernere de peccato cuius ad nos pertinet sine dubitatione censura: and the
other which follows: nullus qui sit sanae mentis ignoart, quin ad officium
nostrum spectet, de quocunque peccato mortali corripere quemlibet christianum:
were not meant by him, in that generality wherein some do vouch them. First
because there must be excepted, according to the doctrine of saint Thomas, all
internal motions of the mind whereof the Pope has no power at all to judge,
unless it be in foro paenitentiae. And of this sort, are the greatest number
of sins. And all divines and Canonists do agree, that in the excommunications
granted against heretics, those are not comprised which err only mentally.
And that any Canon that should be made to comprehend them, were of no validity.
So as here will be a general proposition framed: That the Pope may judge of
all sins, which when we come to defend, we must be forced to except the greater
part of particular sins. Besides, a prince may sin by breaking his own laws
without just cause; as saint Thomas proves 1.2. quaest. 96. art. 5. And yet of
this sin a he cnnot be judged of any, but god alone: Caietan in that place,
declares, showing that in foro poenitentiae, and in the sight of God is all
one in sense. Certainly, to affirm that a prince doing against his own laws,
should be therein subject to the censures of the Pope, were wholly to take away
the power and authority of princes. And one the other side, to affirm that he
should be subject to them in other crimes, and not in that, were to ouerhrow
the very ground of the reason presupposed in that chapter nouit. Namely, that
it belongs to the Pope, to take care of the souls and salvation of men, and to
remove all things that be adverse or repugnant thereunto. But a Prince may
incur damnation by the sins he committes against his own laws, therefore
as well of these sins, as other, it belonges to the Pope to judge: which as I
said before, is directly contrary to the doctrine of Saint Thomas. Moreover it
is necessary, well to observe the very words of Innocent: where he says, that
the censure of every mortal sin belongs unto him; quam censuram in que^libet
exercere possumus and debemus. And a little after, ad officium nostrum spectat
de quocunque peccato mortali corripere que^libet christianum. Now if he be
bound (by the duty of his place) to denounce censures against every mortal
sin, and against every christian so offending, surely if he do it not, he
sins himself: But we do not see that the Pope sends out any censures against
the courtisans and professed harlots, who yet persist and abide notoriously in
their sins. Therefore either he must needs sin grievously, or it will
behooue him to do nothing else but thunder out censures, so as those words, de
omni peccato mortali, are not to be understood generally of sins, seeing we
have already showed so many instances of particulars to be excepted. And
therefore Gabriell Biell: upon the Can. Lec. 75. Labors much to give some
tolerable interpretation to this place, but can find none but this, that this
decretall and all other of the same tenor, must be understood in foro
poenitentiae only. I will not trouble my self to prove that the words of the
decretall are to be understood as Gabriell interprets them. I will only say
this, that whosoever will affirm, that they are to be understood in foro
exteriori, shall have much to do to avoid the absurdities, and the utter
overthrow of the seculer power ordained of god, and the confution of the world,
which will arise out of this doctrine; besides the state of damnation,
whereinto he plungeth all Popes by the same. In which point some canonists, and
Nauarro among the rest have taken much pains, but with no good success,
neither need we travel much to reconcile and fit the words of this Pope to the
true doctrine, which distinguishes the seculer power, from the spiritual
authority; especially seeing the same decretall conteyneth some other things,
which had need to be well expounded: as namely this, that K. Philip Augustus
was of the offspring ( e genere as he says) of Charles the great, which is not
true unless he suppose and imagine some marriage, and so derive the descent by
the way of some woman; a thing never used in France.

A certain french Historiographer deriues the howses of Charlemaigne and
Capet, from Merone, by linial descent of several women. But to show that the
house of Capet, comes of Charlemaigne will be very hard, without devising some
thing without the compase of al stories.

It is time to get out of this chapter nouit, which the author in reason,
should have bin careful rather to have expounded, then to enlarge it, and
extend it as he has done, for contrary to the meaning of Innocent: who says,
that to him did belong the correction of every christian, our author has
interpreted these words, quemlibet christianum, all the Princes of the world. So
as now it shall belong to him to excommunicate the Turk the King of Persia,
the King of Samarcanda, the Tartar: And diverse others of whom we have yet no
knowledge. And Saint Paul may no longe^ say, Quid mihi de his qui foris sunt
iudicare.

But of private Christians, which Pope Innocent intended to comprehend, the
author; thought not good to make any motion: as if it were sufficient to have
command and rule over Princes, and an Indignity and an abasement to intermedle
with other. To interpret quemlibet Christianum all the the princes of the
world, is both at once, to enlarge and restrain the true sense of the
decretall. It is restrained, by excluding private Christians, and it is
enlarged, by extending it to Princes, that be no Christians.

Concerning the Authority cited out of the extrauagant, vnam sa^ctam I would be
glad the Author would resolve us of a doubt, which grows by the reading and
comparing of this extrauagant, with an other of Pope Clement the fifth, who came
not long after him, which begins thus: Meruit de Priuilegiis: Where Clement
says, that he determines and declares, that by the aforesaid extrauagant,
Vnam sanctam, there shall be no prejudice or injury done to the King and
Kingdom of France, nor that the said king and kingdom, shall be any more or
otherwise subject to the Church of Rome, then they were before; but that all
things shall continue, in the state they were in before that extrauagant. And
this he professes to do, to show favor to that King, who was worthy of it,
both for his own good affection, and for the merits of his ancestors, and in
respect the whole nation of the French had deserved it by their true piety and
sincere devotion. Hereupon I ask this question: Whether Boniface, in this
extrauagant, Vnam sanctam, did make a declaration of Ius diuinum, in this point
(that is expound and declare the jurisdiction which the Pope has, De iure
diuino, over Princes: or whether he did thereby impose a new subjection over
Princes, in some matters, wherein God had not made them subject before unto the
Popes. If any man shall answer it was the latter, I may then reply, that is
was an innovation after 1250. years, a void act, an usurpation, an
incrochment, and an abuse of the power given them by God. Besides in this case,
it was not fit that Clement should declare or mean, that France alone should
be exempted from that constitution, but it behooued him to declare and
determine the same; for all other Princes and Kingdoms. Neither was it a
matter of favor, to be yielded as in recompense of the good deserts of that
King or Kingdom, but a thing due unto them of right and Justice. But if it be
answered: That it was a declaration of ius diuinum, I would feign know then,
how Clement could free the King and Kingdom of France, from that subjection
which God had appointed them unto; the case being very clear, that the Pope
cannot exempt any man, from his own power and Jurisdiction which he holds de
iure diuino. But to come to the very point of that extrauagant, which the
Author alleges: if that which Boniface says, to wit: That the authority
temporal, when it erreth, ought to be corrected and rectified by the
spiritual: be a declaration of the law of God, I say that it ought to be
understood only for so much as concerns the salvation of their Souls, and in
foro Dei, and without any temporal power of that kind which the Lawyers term
Coactiue, and that all the Ecclesiastical power over Princes is therefore
only spiritual. And herein we shall not need to go so far as to the Pope
of Rome: for this kind of authority is as well in every Prelate; though
between him and them there be this difference, that other Prelates have no
such general power and command over all, as the Pope has; and that their
authority is subordinate unto his. But whereas, out of those three authorities
before mentioned he concludes, that a temporal absolute Prince, although he
recognize the other temporal Prince for his superior, yet of necessity he
must recognize the head of all Christendom; I would not that any man should be
deceived, by the Equivocation and ambiguitie which rests in these two words,
Recognize and Superior: for in one sense, to recognize him, is as much to say,
as to be subject to his laws, and do homage unto him, and to acknowledge that
you hold your state by his favor: In an other sense, to recognize him, is no
more but to account him the Minister of God, in matters which concerns the
kingdom of heaven. In which sense, I say and affirm, that Princes do not
only acknowledge or recognize the Pope, but the Bishop also. The word
Superior likewise in the former sense, signifies that which in our common
speech, we term Lord of the fee or Superior of Dominium directum. But in the
latter sense, Superior signifies no more, but one that teaches the Law of God,
ministers the Sacraments, and generally directs men the right way to
eternal salvation. In which sense, I say, that even the Bishop also is
Superior to a Prince, although the Pope be Superior in a higher and greater
measure. It is not fit therefore that the Author should, without distinguishing
these two significations affirm in gross and in one breath as it were, that
an absolute Temporal Prince, although he acknowledge the superiority of no
other Temporal Prince, ought yet to recognize the Pope for his superior, and
so confound the two superiorities. For if it should be thus proposed, that an
absolute Temporal Prince, though he acknowledge no other Temporal Prince for
his superior, yet must acknowledge the Bishop to be his superior, no man
would allow of it, because the fallacy would be apparent to all men. Therefore
if Recognizing be understood in the former sense (in case) of Dominium
directum, I say, that it is not true, that a Prince ought so to recognize the
Pope. For the Pope is not such unto him; but that in the same manner that he
recognizeth no other Prince, he ought as little or less to recognize the Pope
himself. But if superior be understood in the second sense, for a Spiritual
superior, it is not true that any Temporal Prince, though otherwise a
Feodatary or Homager, does or can acknowledge any other Temporal Prince for
such a superior. For in this sense, to acknowledge one for a superior, is as
much as to account or accept him for a spiritual Father. And for such a one,
the homager ought not to acknowledge his Lord. How ought we therefore to
beware of delivering such divinity, whereby both the kingdom of God, and the
kingdoms of the world are disordered and confounded, and the simple people
abused, and made to believe, that in all things they are bound to obey the Pope?

Neither is the manner or Phrase of speech absolutely to be allowed, that that
Pope is head of all Christendom, by reason of the Equivocation of the word
Christendom. Among the ancient writers we find him thus styled, The Bishop of
Rome, the successor of Saint Peter; by some, Saint Peter's Vicar; and in the
latter times, Christ's Vicar, Gods Vicar, head of the Church: fashions of
speech, which begets no ill meaning: But it is otherwise, in the use of the
word Christendom in this place, by reason of the ambiguitie and double sense
which it has. For it signifies not only the Christian Church, but the
Christian states and kingdoms: and this latter signification is the more
usual; as when we say, that Asia or Egypt are not within Christendom, we
do not mean, that there is no Christian Church in them, but that they are not
within the compass of the Temporal states of the Christians. So it is
apparent, that under this new form of speech the fallacy is hidden. For his
purpose is to conclude, that the Pope is head, that is, has the government and
command in temporal matters, over all Christian States and Princes. Let us
therefore keep our ancient forms, and let us call him head of the Christian
Church. But seeing the Authors drift is, out of this whole discourse to draw
this conclusion, that where Princes use their power to the hurt of their own
souls, or their peoples, and to the prejudice of Christian religion, the Pope
may take the matter in hand to redress it: although we have spoken much of
this point before in the exposition of the Chapter Nouit; it will not be
impertinent to our present purpose, to consider what notable inconveniences
will follow in this Doctrine, thus generally delivered. There is no action of a
man in indiuiduo, but either it is a good work, or a sin. Now if it belong
to the Pope, to exercise jurisdiction ouerall sins, and withal to take upon
him to determine, what is sin, and what not, I say, there is no longer any
Prince but the Pope, nay further, that there is no place left for any private
government. For suppose the Prince make a law to exact some contribution, for
the extraordinary relief of the state, by occasion of some war that he is
forced to undertake, this law is not just, but a sin, unless the end and
ground of it be lawful, and unless the subjects do submit and bind
themselves to contributions, according to the rules of iustitia distributiua,
hereupon the Pope may say, I will know the end why this tax is imposed, and so
he may diue into the secrets of that estate: he may also examine the
distribution, whether it be equally and proportionably made, and thereby come
to the knowledge of the secret of the forces, and wealth of that state: And
being a temporal Prince himself, who in that right and quality, may have
occasion of war with an other Prince, by this course, it will be an easy
matter for him to infeable his enemy, and to get the maistery of him at an
easy rate. In sum, the Pope may (by this Doctrine) examine all laws, all
edicts, all conuentions, all successions, and all translations of Princes, what
shall I say? he may call in question, and examine all inheritances and
contracts of private men; because it belongs to the sheepherd, (as the Author
says) to have a care, of what his sheep do feed, of what waters they
drink, and where they have their walk: and this inference does not only
necessarily follow of this supposition, but is also allowed by all the
Canonists that write upon that chapter Nouit: and yet nevertheless, have the
wisest men and of most understanding, noted and taxed it to be full of
absurdities. Which to avoid, some men have out of that Chapter Nouit, framed a
distinction: That it is one thing to judge of the matter, or of the action, or
of the contract, and an other to judge of the sin. But they make a division
where there can be none: for if it be the Popes right to judge of all things
as they are sins, and to forbid them, and enforce all men to obey his
determinations therein; what is there more left then for the Prince to do? for
example, if there should be any bargain and sale made wherein there were
Iniquity and Injustice, and the Pope should determine it to be sin, and
cause it to be revoked; I would gladly know, what there remains for the
Prince to intermedle in, or to determine further touching that contract? And I
will hold my self satisfied, if any man can show me that there is left for the
Prince as much as one of Democritus motes. Surely by this Doctrine, either all
authority of Princes must be abolished, or Christendom must be holden in
perpetual combustion. And here I use not the word in any ambiguous sense: but
I understand by Christendom* all Christian states and Kingdoms. And because
the Author has taught us a very general doctrine; that, to judge whether any
law contain in it sin or not; It belongs to the Pope: as it belongs to the
ecclesiastical Judge, to determine whether a civil contract contains in it
the sin of usury: I must be bold to tell him, that from hence it will
follow, that not only the Pope, but every ecclesiastical Judge, shall have
power to determine of all matrers; for it can belong no more to him, to judge
whether a contract offend in usury, then whether it carry with it, any other
wrong or hurt to a man's neighbor: for all that do so, are sins, as well as
the other. And by the same reason, it will belong to the ecclesiastical Judge,
to determine of all manner of murder, or killing of a man, because it may be
so done as it shall be a sin, and it may be otherwise. And to them it shall
likewise belong, to judge of the price set upon Corn, and other merchandise,
whether there be sin in it or not, and to appoint that it shall either stand
or be altered: and whether a morgage contain extortion or not, or a warrant
for the apprehending and imprisoning of a man, contain violence or Injustice;
(for even in these matters there may be sin) and whether the women's attire
be scandalous, or the men be too superfluous or too sparing in the expense of
their table: for even all these are sins. And as they may by this means
intrude themselves into the government of all kingdoms, so may they likewise,
into the government of particular families, and examine how the father gouernes
his children, or the husband uses his wife. And in conclusion, because there
is no action or affair, other public or private, whereunto sin is not
incident, if it shall be in the power of the ecclesiastical Judge to determine
and judge of it, and either to allow it, or forbid it, and to enforce obedience
unto his own determination: All Courts of justice, all places of contracts,
and all private families, may well be transferred into the Bishops palace. And
as these consequences are necessarily deduced from this doctrine, so it were
well, that they should be thoroughly and with good insight considered of by
them, to whom indeed they belong. But the true Christian doctrine and the
common practice which we daily see* auoids all these absurdities, subiecting
all Crimes and offenses unto the temporal Jurisdiction in foro mundano, and to
the ecclesiastical in foro animae: wherein how men ought to proceed, we can
not be better taught, then by the example of Christ and his holy Apostles, who
never pretended, to have or exercise any temporal coertion or coactiue
authority over (men's) sins. But the Author goes on, and inueyeth against the
translator, not only in the point concerning the laws, but adds further,
that his holiness is not offended with the common wealth of Venice, for
punishing their subjects that offend, but for presuming to lay hands upon
ecclesiastical persons, who are not subject to any superior, but the
ecclesiastical: and he concludes, that whosoever will consider of the matter
without passion shall find, that the Pope goes not about to deprive that
common wealth of any other liberty, but the liberty to do evil, which is not
given of God, but of the Devil. Here first he lays to the translators
charge, that, wherein he is not faulty at all: yet has he truly cited the
words of the translator: namely, that the Popes censure was denounced upon
Christmas day. But upon that day, there was no brief of the Popes presented,
but that which concerned only the two laws; That neither Churches should be
built, nor lands conveyed by laymen to ecclesiastical persons, without leave
of the State. And that other censure, for judging and punishing of certain
Churchmen delinquents, came not out till February: And therefore could not be
mentioned by the translator, writing as he does concerning a report which was
spread abroad of the censures denounced upon Christmas day. Surely a person of
gravity ought not to stir envy against an other man, but upon true grounds.
But to the matter it self. The ecclesiastical persons offending against a
law, are not subject to punishment, he only says it, but proves it not. If
we find hereafter that he goes about to prove it, we will answer him, as
shall be meet for the defense of the truth. But in the mean time, I may not
defer to say, what is fit to be said, concerning that proposition of his:
Ecclesiastical persons (says he) are not subject to any, but their spiritual
superior. This very proposition is produced as a special objection against
Cardinal Bellarmine, by a certain Frenchman who condems it, as tending only
to sedition. And Jews Richehomme the provincial of the Jesuits, in an
Apology of his directed unto the King of France; answers in the Cardinals
behalf, in the 33. Chapter, that he does not affirm this position, but only
in causes merely sacred, as of faith, religion, Sacraments etc. and that it
was not his meaning to tax or reprove the custom of France, where the
secular magistrate uses to judge of crimes, which are specially reserved to
the ecclesiastical courts. And the same provincial, turning his speech
afterward to the King, say thus. Episcopi Archiepiscopi, Cardinales,
generalesque praepositi Religiosorum ordinum, in toto sacr^ ordine excelsissimi
omnium atque immunissimi primas tenent: Propterea ne tamen, aut tuae maiestati
subiecti, vel esse vel dici, aspernantur, quod fiat immune^, subiectique
pontifici Romano. And a little after, having said that they acknowledge him for
their King, he goes on. Quod quomodo sane praestandum (...) constituerent,
nisi se pari iure cum alijs, atque sub tuo imperio esse faterentur? Parentemne
potest Dauidem suus Solomon compellare, nec se eius tamen filium ea
compellatione dicere?

And certainly Cardinal Bellarmine in his first Book de Clericis Cap. 28. And
the second conclusion with the reason he renders for it, says, not by way of
argument or question, but definitiuely, that ecclesiastical persons, are
subject to secular Princes.

But because this word subditi is not there (so) formally expressed, I thought
better to allege one of his own company, that in express and direct terms
has said it: and not only in that place before cited, but repeats it also in
the 36. chapter. I forbear to vouch S. Gregory in his epistle mentioned
before, where he calls himself the subject and slave, or servant of the
Emperor: And brings in God speaking thus unto him. Sacerdotes meos tuae manui
co^miisi: which manner of speech, I find to be ordinary with the holy Fathers,
and frequent in the Epistles of the Ancient Popes. And here me thinks a man
might well reply upon the Author, that this saying of his, (that the Pope went
not about to debar the state of Venice of any other liberty, but to do evil)
may more truly be applied to them: and it may be said, that the state of Venice
in punishing Churchmen that offend, do not any thing against the
ecclesiastical liberty, nor go about to take any other liberty from them, but
liberty to do evil: for we be all agreed in this; That ecclesiastical
persons breaking a law, do therein sin: But in the other point we do not
agree, that the common wealth has sinned in correcting them.

I am prone to believe, that the Author being so exceedingly well learned as
he is, had a good meaning, when he said, that the liberty to do evil, is
not given by GOD, but by the Devil. Yet those words so delivered are not
Catholic: for by liberty to do evil, is understood free will, which is
natural and of God: and this will be denied by none but Manicheus, who makes
the Devil Author of it. But I do not deny, as I said, but the Author might
have a good meaning in it. Yet a good meaning is scarce to be allowed for an
excuse unto him, that is so severe and rigorous a Censor of other men:
Especially considering what Saint Hierome says, ex verbis male prolatis
incurritur haeresis. The Author proceeds, and by a comparison drawn from
secular Princes, from a shepherd and a Pilot; he concludes, that the Pope,
Head of Christendom, ought not to allow any liberty unto Princes, to make
laws that be prejudicial to the Church and the salvation of men's souls, and
whereby they procure damnation both to themselves and others. These are goodly
words at the first sight, and such as are able to stagger a simple man by and
by, and to make him think, that the author has all right and reason on his
side. But when we shall examine and sift them, we shall find them to contain
nothing but ambiguities, and to conclude with the like Paralogisme that the
rest have done. For first, what means he by the Church? If the same which the
holy Scripture means, and which the word it self does properly signify, to
wit, the company of the faithful; it is very true that he says: But in this
sense, no Prince can make laws hurtful to the Church, but withal they must
be hurtful to himself also (who i^ a principal member of it) and he must
needs sin in so doing: Likewise if by the Church he understand the ministers
thereof, i^ as much as they be ministers, I am of the same opinion: But I add
this withal, that these laws of Venice, are not any way hurtful or
prejudicial to them, but rather, as may easily be proved, they tend in some
sort to the favor and benefit of their calling. But if by the Church, he
understand some temporal power or state, I deny that the Pope has any right
to hinder, or prohibit laws to be made, to the prejudice of the Church in
that sense. The ambiguitie of the word does deceive us. It is true, that no man
ought to make laws that are hurtful to the Church: but this must be
understood of the Church in the first or second signification. But if a Law be
made against carrying of corn to Ancona (a Town of the Popes Dominions) this
must needs be understood in the third signification And therefore, to say that
such a Law is against the Church, is an Equivocation. In like sort where he
says, that the Pope ought not to suffer Christian Princes to make laws that
may hurt or hinder the salvation of men's souls, we will put him in
remembrance, that it is Cardinal Bellarmines own doctrine, That
ecclesiastical persons have their exemption in criminal causes, only iure
humane: be it either by the grant of Princes, or by the constitutions of
Popes, or by both together. Hereupon I would ask this question; whether before
such graunts and constitutions were made, secular magistrates which punished
the offenses of Clergy men, committed any sin, or did any wrong to the Church?
If it be said they did, it cannot be maintained: for they neither brake any
law of God, as both himself, and other truly hold: nor any law of man; for
there was then no such law made, et vbi non est lex, nec preuaricatio therefore
it was no sin: It was not against the salvation of men's souls, it was no wrong
or prejudice to any man, why then could not the Popes suffer it so to continue?
But the Author will say, it was so then (Perhaps) for there was no law yet to
the contrary. But now the law is made, it is so no longer. Then say I, they
have stopped and straightned the way to heaven, without them it would have
been more easy, and therefore this they have done, is not to edification. If
it were once lawful for Princes, by punishing such ecclesiastical persons as
did offend, to maintain the public peace of their states, and to give
satisfaction to the parties grieved, without committing any sin themselves:
what need was it, or to what purpose; to invent this devise, so contrary to
the common good, and so likely to breed confusion in all estates, whereby the
punishing of malefactors, which is agreeable to the law of God, shall now
become sin to them that do it? Can this avail any thing to make the way of
eternal salvation more easy? Can it be for the good of wicked clergymen
themselves, who take the more liberty and boldness hereby to do evil? Can it
be of any use in respect of them that are injured? or do they not rather by
this occasion conceive the deeper malice, and practice private revenge? Do the
Princes reap any good by it, whose states and governments are disordered and
disturbed thereby? Or can it be any credyt or reputation to such Clergy men,
as are good and virtuous, that the lewd should continue amongst them? Is God
honored and glorified by any but such as be obedient to his laws? But here I
foresee an objection. that by this opinion, I seem to dislike all those
immunities and exemptions, which so many Princes, worthy of everlasting
memory, have granted to the Clergy in Criminal causes. No, I am so far
from disliking them, as I do much commend them, and propose them as worthy
patterns to be followed by all Princes present and to come. But this is that
which I say. That if we begin at Constantine the great, and go along to
Constantine the son of Irene, and from him, through all the greek Emperors,
until the final destruction of that Empire, and among the Latins, from
Charles the great, to Fridericke the second, inclusiue, we shall not find,
that any Prince did ever exempt the Clergy from his own authority. But all
the exemptions they granted, were from their inferior offiicers and
Magistrates; some from all, and other from some only. And some, in certain
kinds of offenses, and other in all respectively. But there remained still
unto the Princes themselves that supreme authority which could not be severed
from them. Now so as offenses be punished, to what Magistrate it shall belong
to do it, and to what not, and over what persons he shall have authority, and
over whom he shall not, it belongs to the Prince to appoint, according to the
congruety and fitness of times, places, and matters. And accordingly we see,
that when the state of their affairs so requires it, Princes do sometimes
grant privileges and exemptions unto soldiers, and sometimes to men of other
conditions. In like sort, when it is requisite for the planting or propagating
of religion in their dominions, they are content to give convenient privileges
and exemptions to ecclesiastical persons: and therein they deserve to be much
commended, as I do highly commend all tha forenamed Princes, and likewise the
common wealth of Venice, which though not by a written law, yet by a laudable
use and practice, has exempted Ecclesiastical persons from the ordinary
Magistrate in ordinary crimes, and such as carry no enormity with them. But for
such a Law, as shall take away from a Prince all authority to punish offenses,
even when the necessity and peace of his state does require it, I do not see
how any man can either allow it, or account it agreeable to the law of GOD or
nature. It follows not therefore. that because we commend many holy
privileges which Princes have granted in this kind, we must of necessity
commend also an exorbitant exemption, which tends so directly to the confusion
and general disturbance of the state. Therefore let us conclude, that it is
true, that the Pope neither can, nor ought to give permission or allowance of
any of those things, which in their own nature are evil and opposite to the
salvation of men's souls, and which, though he should permit them, would
nevertheless continue to be sins, and exclude him that does them from
attaining salvation. And surely those Popes are worthy of exceeding praise,
that have indeauored to remove such abuses, and other things forbidden by God,
which remaining, make it impossible for men to be saved: These many years,
the world has sighed and groaned for such a reformation: and so many a time
have they been deceived and disappointed of their hopes. But in those things
which are not repugnant unto the will of God, the Princes liberty ought to be
reserved unto him; to do that which the good and weal of his state requires.
And if the Pope go about to debar him of this, he shall usurp temporal
authority, contrary to Christ's commandment, hitherto the Author has
maintained this dispute in some friendly manner, but in the second place, by
occasion of these words of the translators, where he says, that he had bent
his study and endeavor, to find out, what force and validity
excommunications carry, when they are denounced upon so unjust causes, he
falls very fiercely and violently upon him, as follows.

The Author proceeds to another untruth saying. Bellarmine.
I have bent my endeavor to search in approved Authors, of what force and
validity they are, when they are denounced upon so unjust causes. This is the
second untruth, coupled with incredible rashness and intolerable pride, in
this, that the Author of the preface dares pronounce, that the causes of the
Popes excommunication denounced against the common wealth of Venice are unjust.
And peradventure if he that writes this, might be spoken with, he would be
found not to be well informed of the matter, nor acquainted with the causes,
why it was ^enounced: especially since him self confesses, that he was moved
to write only upon a fame or report spread in Paris: so as he must needs be
one of those of whom the Apostle speak^th. Non intelligentes neque quae
loquntur, neque de quibus affirmant. 1. Timoth. 1. Is it possible that thou
should be ^orash, as without perfect information of the matter, without any
great labor bestowed in studying the point, wtthout conference or consultation
with men of learning, thou should presume to pronounce so absolute a
sentence against Gods Vicar? And if thou had stu^yed it thoroughly, and
conferd with other, and were fully informed of every point, did it become thee
to be so saw^y as to condemn the highest judge of the world of injustice, and
to publish this thy presumptuous sentence in print to the sight of all men.

But seeing that all the reason which moves thee to judge the cause of the
Popes Censure to be unjust, is groun^ed upon nothing else but report and fame
spread abroad: that the State of Venice was excommunicated, for refusing to
subject unto the will of an other, that liberty which God had given the^, and I
have clearly proved that this reason is false: And for that the justice of the
Popes proceeding in this excommunication is apparent to the whole world, and
approved of all men, but of the parties interessed, who are rather transported
with passion, then guided by reason, we will spend no more words to confute this
untruth.

Surely in reading well over again the translators words I cannot find that
he does absolutely define that the Popes sentence is unjust, Friar Paulo,
for in a Parenthesis he has these wodrs (which seems to me neither
reasonable nor credible) which parenthesis the Author has purposely omitted.
But admit that there were no such parenthesis, and let us take his bare words
without it. A report being spread, that the Common wealth was excommunicated
for refusing to yield or give away her liberty, I have labored to find out
in approved auctors etc. Here the translator presupposes one thing as
certain: That an excommunication denounced against those that shall refuse to
subject their lawful liberty, is unjust: and two other things remain
doubtful, the one in law, to wit, what force such an excommunication carries,
the other in fact, whether this excommunication now spoken of be such a one, as
common fame had delivered it to be. The latter point he could not gather by his
study out of books, therefore he bent himself to study the former. So it
seems that he does not definitiuely pronounce any thing as the Author
affirms. If a man should use such a speech as this: A common report being
spread in Venice, that Demetrius Prince of Muscouia with many of his followers
was murdered, for suffering himself to be led by the Jesuits (and persuaded)
to attempt diverse things against the laws and orders of the state: I have bent
my self to search in approved Authors, what punishment (those) religious
persons are worthy of, which intermedle in matters of state with the loss of
many men's lives, and extreme danger to the common peace and quietness of the
states they live in: Could any man justly say here: This man pronounces that
the Jesuits are disturbers of the common peace? No truly. But in this sentence,
the point which is certain and out of doubt, is this. That whosoever does
disturb the common peace sins: the two points in doubt, are, the one in
law, which may be studied out of books, to wit, what punishment a religious
person merits that does so, the other in fact, what indeed fell out in
Muscouia: the certainetie whereof may be known in time. Such for all the world
is this point, that we have in hand. And I am verily persuaded, that the Author
in his judgment thinks the same. But to take the better occasion and fitter
scope to inuey against any man, that should affirm this excommunication of the
Popes to be unjust, he makes a show to believe that the translator had said so.
The Author is wont to reprove very sharply, such as draw and wrest to a
sense of their own framing, another man's words, to the end to confute them.
But in this particular, it fitted his purpose very well, thus under a color
of confuting a person unknown, to rail upon all them that withstand the Popes
Excommunication. Now if a man should take occasion of that which the Author
has said in the Text before alleged, to wit, that the laws of Venice are
unjust and impious: return upon him his own very words, and tell him, that
it is an untruth coupled with etc. to determine that the laws of so great and
worthy a Commonwealth, agreeing with the laws of all Christian Kingdoms,
are unjust and impious; and that if a man might confer with him, he would be
found peradventure to have but little understanding of the matter, and should
by way of Interpellation or Apostrophe direct his speech thus unto him: is it
possible that you should be so, etc. as to presume to pronounce the laws to be
unjust, of so wise and religious state, which has mainetained and governed it
self these 1200 years, to the great admiration and notable pattern of the
whole world? especially those laws not being singular and peculiar only to
that state, but received and admitted in all Christian states, and also
accounted just and so approved by all, (but such as are interessed) who are
rather transported with passion, then guided by reason. The Author could not
much complain, being but fettered with his own gieues, and reproved with his
own proper terms. But we will forbear to use any such forms of writing. Yet
this I will be bold to add: That if any man writing of the present occurrents
and affairs of the world, should deliver his opinion that his Excommunication
of the Pope were unjust, it were not so heinous or damnable a matter. For in
reading the Christian Historiographers, we shall find infinite example of
writers, that have delivered their minds freely of the decrees,
commandments, and actions of the Popes of their time, and of those that lived
before them. And Indeed go no further then to that which all modern writers
have reported of Alexander the sixth, and Julius the second, and of some other,
both of their successors and predecessors; only God has this perfection, that
he cannot err, and to be unreprovable. All other ought to be very careful
and heedfull of that which they, because the good conceit and persuasion that
the world may have of their goodness and wisdom, may serve for a bridle, to
restrain such, as by the check of their own conscience will not be
contained within the limits of their duty. But let us go on to the third
objection, where he says thus.

Bellarmine.
Now follows the third untruth. And reading in the sacred Council of Trent
those words, worthy indeed to be written in letters of Gold. Although the
weapons of Excommunication, etc. I could have wished, that as those holy
Fathers have prescribed unto all Prelates, a Rule which they are to observe, to
make the use of that medicine profitable, where it is applied; so they would
have likewise instructed religious and devout consciences what their duty is,
in case that their Prelates shall denounce censures against them, contrary to
the form prescribed by our Savior Christ, by Saint Paul, and by the ancient
sacred Canons. The translator not contented to have vtteted an untruth against
the Pope, adds here an other against the general Counceil, and so wrongeth
at once both the head and principal members of holy Church, he condemns then
the holy Council of Trent of insufficiency, in that, having giving a rule unto
Prelates, not to use Excommunication in slight and frivolous causes; It did
not also instruct lay men, how they should carry themselves, when their
Prelates observe not that rule being agreeable unto the rule of Christ, of
Saint Paul, and of the ancient holy Canons. But if he would have read out the
whole decree of that holy Council, and not the first words only, he should
have found that which he makes show to desire, and he would have easily
perceived, how falsely and wrongfully he does attribute unto that Council,
insufficiency of doctrine. The decree which he alleges, is the third of the
last Lesson concerning matter of reformation. And as in the beginning of the
decree, Prelates are admonished not to use the sword of Excommunication, Temere
and leuibus de causis, that is, rashly and for slight and frivolous causes, so
in the end, a caveat is given to Lay men even such as are placed in public
offices of civil government, that it belongs not unto them, to judge, whether
the Prelate in his Excommunication, observe the due form and course prescribed
or not. And therefore the Counsel commands all seculer Magistrates, that
they presume not to forbid or hinder the prelate from denouncing any
excommunication, much less command him to revoke it, under color that it is
not done, orderly and according to the rule appointed. Nefas autem sit
saeculari cuilibet magistratui prohibere ecclesiastico iudici, ne quem
excommunicet, aut mandare vt latam excommunicationem reuocet, sub praetextu,
quod contenta in praesenti decreto nun sint obseruata* cum non ad seculares,
sed ad ecclesiasticos haec cognitio pertineat: these are the words of the holy
council, which has therein provided for every thing, and taught us, that the
duty of seculer magistrates is, not to resist with force and violence the
publishing of excommunications, as the magistrates of the state of Venice do at
this day, abused and misled by some men that are more ready, to flatter then to
teach the truth: of which number this fellow is one, whom we are about to
answer.

Here he accuses Gersons translator of too things, the one that he charge
the council with insufficiency, the other that if he had read the rest of the
decree, and not only the beginning, he should have found that he sought. To the
first objection I will answer briefly, because the second, carries me away
from insisting upon any other consideration. This is the very same argument
that heretics use against us, for when we say, that traditions are necessary,
because every thing is not found expressly in holy scripture; as for example:
The crossing with the sign of the cross, the adoration of Images, the
inferior orders, the consecration of Churches, and altars; they tell us by and
by that we make the scripture to be insufficient. But indeed the scripture for
all that can not be said to be insufficient, because it contaynes all that
which was convenient and needful to be written, and leaves the rest to
traditions, which it gives good allowa^ce of. Thus does Cardinal Bellarmine
answer very often the objections of the heretics. And so in this question we
must say: That the council is not therefore to be holden insufficient because
it delivers not all that ought to be known, touching excommunication, if it
have omitted some particularities and referred them to be taught by catholic
writers. And it is well known to every man, with how many necessary
declarations, Pius Quintus has supplied some defects of that council* in the
point of spiritual consanguinity, of affinity, by reason of fornication, and
of public honesty. And the congregation of Cardinals does daily supply in ome
other points, under the title of declarations. The council is no to be
accounted among Canonical writers. But we are to think, that if it had
continued longer, it would have declared much more then it did, and the author
ought not to speak as he does, being so directly against the new constitution.
De quesito de auxilijs.

But here perhaps some man will object, that Gersons translator has then
committed an error, in wishing that which the holy council thought not
expedient to do. But it is not true, that it is always evil, to wish that
which one incapable of sinning even by nature, has determined otherwise: I
wish that it had pleased god to have permitted Pope Clement, the eight, to have
lived till these times: and I do not sin in so wishing, and yet god thought
it not expedient. But I know very well, that there be some, that will not be
satisfied, with the asscribing of such a sufficiency only unto the Council,
as we have spoken of; but they would gladly have it to be such and so great, as
should be without any defect or imperfection: to the end that no man might say
hereafter, that there is any more need of a Council. And in this point
concerning the sufficiency of the decree, made touching censures, we should
have been freed of much labor, if as well the acts as the decrees of the
council had been printed. To this day, if any acts of the Council of Ephesus
be found, which was at least. 1200. years ago, or of the Council of Nice;
which is more ancient: they are embraced and received with all greadinesse.
The acts of the holy Council of Trent, are extant, and I leave it to the
authors great wisedo^e to judge, whether it were not good they were published.
Sure I am that they would resolve and clear this doubt we have in hand. To the
second objection, I could have wished, that he which is so curious to find
faults in the translation of Gerson, would have been more exact and faithful
in translating the words of the Council. The Council says: Nefas sit
seculaeri cuilibet magistratus. The author interprets it thus, let lay men take
heed, eue^ those which are placed in public authoryty. I suppose that any
grammar scoller will expound, Saeculari cuilibet magistratui, for any secular
magistrate, and not for lay men, even those which are placed in public office;
so that of private persons there is nothing spoken: but the translator of Gerson
desired instruction, for devout and religious consciences, and not for
magistrates: and the author has added these words, lay men to include private
persons, contrary to the meaning of the Council. Those other words likewise.
Sub praetextu quod contenta in praesenti decreto non sunt obseruata, are not
truly rendered by him in these words, upon pretense that it is not done orderly
and according to the due form: he should have said thus, upon pretense that
the things are not observed, which are contained in this present decree, for
there are many other due forms and rules in Saint Matthew, Saint Paul^, and S.
Augustine: which are not contained in the decrees of that Council. The Council
forbids lay magistrates, that they shall not by their authority, command
any excommunication that is denounced, to be revoked, upon pretense that all
things were not therein observed, that are contained in that decree. But if
some other things be omitted, which ought to be observed, the council does not
determine, whether in such cases, lay magistrates may command the censure to
be revoked. And peradventure in some case they may, according as they use to
do in the Parliaments of France. It is evident therefore that the council
has given no instruction to devout and religious consciences, that is, to
such as are unjustly excommunicated, and to them which live among them, who are
to converse and communicate with them, what their duty is in that case, which
is the point that Gersons translator desired. But after the Author has
alleged the words of the council. Nefas autem sit saeculari cuilibet
magistratui prohibere ecclesiastico Iudici ne quem excommunicet, aut mandare vt
latam excommunicationem reuocet, sub praetextu quod contenta in praesenti
decreto non sint obseruata, cum non ad seculares sed ecclesiasticos haec
cognitio pertineat, thus he goes on. These are the words of the holy council:
which has provided for every thing, and has taught us, that the office and
duty of secular magistrates is, not to resist with force and violence the
publishing of excommunications, as the magistrates of the common wealth of
Venice do at this time. Here I cannot choose but be much amassed. The council
says that the magistrate ought not either to forbid ecclesiastical Judges to
excommunicate, or to command them to revoke their excommunication when it is
denounced. The Author says that it commands them not to resist the
publication of an excommunication with force. These things are as different as
heaven and earth, for the publication may be hindered, without either forbidding
the sentence of excommunication to be pronounced, or commanding it to be
revoked when it is pronounced. The one is an act of power and jurisdiction over
him that does excommunicate, the other an act of natural defense, which
requires no jurisdiction at all, and does not only appertain to magistrates,
but to private men also: as we may see in Caitan, Soto, and Victoria, who do
all entreat at large, of the resistance that both private men and secular
magistrates, ought to make, against all unlawful commandments, and especially
the Popes. And with them agrees also Cardinal Bellarmine in his treatise de
Romano Pontifice, written in a time, when, this controversy not being as yet
begun, he judged without all passion and parciality, where then does there
appear, or whence is there proved any such untruth, as the Author affirms
that Gersons translator has uttered against the counsel; and that other
point, that if he had read out the whole decree, he should have found etc. So
in conclusion, the objection that is made against the translator in this point,
is grounded only upon three untrue and improper interpretations made by the
Author, contrary to the true sense and words of the Council. But let us pass
to the fourth point, where he says.

But the Author of this translation proceeds and says. And whiles not
finding that which I sought for, Bellarmine,
I turned over many Authors, I chanced among the rest to light upon John
Gerson, a most Christian Doctor, worthy of eternal memory ^tc. It cannot be
denied, but John Gerson was a Doctor of very great learning and piety, but the
unhappiness of those times, by reason of the long continuance of the scisme in
the Church of Rome, gave occasion to that Doctor, as well as to some other of
that age, to think somewhat underfoot of the authority of the Apostolic
seat. Because that while they sought by means of the general Council to
remedy the scisme, and to induce the Popes of several obediences to submit
their claims and pretensions to the Councels declaration; hereupon they set
themselves to intrance the authority of Cou^cells beyond mesure, and as much to
debase that of the supreme Bishop. And hereupon it grew that they fell into
manifest errors, contrary to the holy Scriptures, and to the general judgment
of the divines that have been before and since* so that Gersons Authority in
those matters which concern the Popes power, is not of any moment: and there
were enough other writers more sound, which might have been quoted, to give us
to understand how far the force of an excommunication extends; as are Saint.
Thomas, S. Bonauenture, S. Antonine, and infinite others; without bringing in an
Author suspected, yea and apparently erroneous, in the point that is now in
question.

It had been good dealing in the Author, since he has reported some of the
honorable titles, which the Interpreter gives to Gerson, to have put them
down all, that so the objection which he makes against him, of being a
debaser of the supreme Bishops authority, might happily have been refuted. For
if he had adjoined the opinion which that age held of him, stiling him the most
Christian Doctor, and his so long continued exercise in teaching sacred
divinity, and the things he effected by his teaching, his example, and his
public authority withal, he could hardly have persuaded his reader, that
Gerson was a man likely to be stirred by indiscreet affections. But so
powerful is the will of contradiction, that it transporteth him to detract not
from Gerson alone, but from the rest of the Doctors of that age, and to tax
them as manifestly erroneous, and suspected, and contrary to the Scriptures.
We cannot deny the unhappiness of those times, and the long durance of that
scisme in the Roman Church; but withal we must needs acknowledge a much
greater infelicitie in these of ours, wherein so great Kingdoms have made a
total separation from the same Church: whereupon there is bred an appetite in
some, to supply and make up by an intensiue way of improuement within those few
regions that remain, all that was so lost in extent and territory abroad: yea
an infelicitie indeed may we rightly term that of our times, when there is
not that father of the ancient Church that is not censured, and when they dare
take upon them to say, that if they had lived in these days, they would not
have spoken as they have spoken. Neither is it to be believed, that the
occasions of those times did transporte men more to favor the authority of
Counsels, more I say, nay or any thing so much, as the present occasions
transport some to depresse them: since it is evident, that all the Kingdoms
that are sequestered from the Church, do desire and groan after a Council.

Forasmuch as in very deed to speak in favor of a Council can not touch any
one man's proper interest, since no one person can aspire to become a Council,
whereof he must be content to be but a five hundredth part: so as it is more
to be misdoubted, the unhappiness of the present times caries on an
affectation of excess, then that of the ages past, did of any diminution. A
good zeal to cure scisme, such as was that of Gerson, and the rest of that age
by the Authors own confession, it is not wont to transport to any perverse
opinion, specially such as are no way interessed; but this catiue zeal of
enlarging ones own greatness, is a perilous motive to seduce into blindness. Here
I must not omit to note, that it is a kind of taxing of Gods providence, to
say, that he suffered an age to fall into a manifest error and contrary to the
divine scriptures, an age that was moved out of a Godly zeal, to reduce the
holy Church to unity. Men of much knowledge and godliness, such as the Author
confesses, that Gerson and the other most excellent Doctors of that age were,
are not suffered to fall into such errors; since to fall into open errors,
repugnant to the Scriptures, it is a defect so enormeous and exhorbitant, that
by the Authors good leave, I will auerre it, that who so falls into it, has
no spark of either godliness or knowledge. To err manifestly against the
Scriptures is the greatest blindness that can happen to any Christian, and the
greatest chasticement that God can impose in punishment of him whosoever shall
make use of the divine authority, to serve his own turn in mondaine
interests. It is too to gross, and express a contradicton, to be forced to
confess the great learning and piety of Gerson, and to say withal, that he
fell into open errors, contrary to the Scriptures.

It is not as yet decided, who holds the better opinion touching the authority
of the sea apostolic, whether Gerson, or our Author: that he should presume to
pronounce it so absolutely, that Gersons authority in the question of the Popes
power is of no moment. Moment is a term relative, and that which is of no
moment with him, is nevertheless of moment with others: and if the Authors
opinion be of value in any place, then that of Gersons is esteemed of in many
more.

But to leave this apart; in all these twelve considerations the Author could
find no fault, but at one only point, and that propounded incide^tly: the rest
of the doctrine he must needs allow, and howsoever he streines him self, what
by limitations, what by extensions, to make a show of the contrary, yet in
fine he approues all: so that in direct dealing, he ought not to have made
this point of the superiority of general councels for his principal question;
since that is not the point now in question, nor any man affects to make any
such use of that point, to draw in his holiness purposely for his object;
that it might bear any such construction, that the defense of Gerson, were in
offense of his holiness.

There wa^ted not (says the Author) other writers more sound, which might have
been alleged, and he names Saint Thomas, S. Bonauentura, S. Antonine in
particular. But Gersons doctrine, That excommunications abusiue and nulle are
not to be feared; That we ought not to obey them, but defend our selves against
them; That in cases doubtful we ought to take advise, and that all ought to be
united to the common good, it is the doctrine of both S. Thomas, and of S.
Bonauentura, and of S. Antonine, and of infinite others more; but it is not
indeed co^pacted all into one place, so as it may be seen under one view in
one small tractat, as it is in this of Gersons. He that will collect places out
of these and out of their scholars, he shall find their doctrine (I speak
not here of that head, touching the superiority of the Council, but of the
rest to be in all, and through all points conform to that of Gersons. Here I
will add this, that if the author shall protest unto me, that he will admit of
all S. Bonauentures doctrine, (who was a man of so great sanctity and
knowledge) I will undertake to produce him places, that shall give him much more
trauerse, then Gerson and those other of his time have done* and well he might
have forborne these terms of suspected and erroneous, and not have ascribed the^
to one, who^ himself acknowledges for one of great learning and religion. But
let us now hear another greater reprehension.

But the cause, Bellarmine.
which induced the Author of the praeface to translate and publish Gersons two
treatises, is most blameworthy of all the rest; To the end (says he) that
every godly and religious conscience in reading them may take comfort, and not
incur that great judgment which God sends upon the reprobate, to conceive a
fear of those things, which are not to be feared. Trepidauerunt timore vbi non
erat timor. Behold how far man's blindness aspires to abuse and misapply the
word of God, to take away the fear of God. The holy Prophet in the 13, and in
the 52 Psalm, he says, The ungodly fear not the true God, who is most worthy
to be feared: Non est timor dei ante oculos eorum and on the contrary they
fear their false Cods which have no power all, Illic trepidauerant timore, vbi
non erat timor. And now this new Doctor takes the words of the Psalm in a
clean contrary sense going about to persuade by them, that Gods Vicar is not
to be feared, and consequently that we should not fear the true God himself,
since he has said it to his Vicars, Qui vos audit, me audit: qui vos spernit;
me spernit. Luc. 10. Very repugnant are the words of Saint Gregory, to these
of our new divine. For he in his 26 Homily speaking of excommunication says,
that the sentence of the Pastor is to be feared, be it just, or unjust; and
this man says, that who so fears the Pastors sentence which he holds to be
unjust, falls into that judgment of the reprobate, which fear where no cause
is. And the mischief that grows out of this doctrine it cease not here,
but goes on, and spreads out further, even to the utter ruin of souls: for he
that fears not the censures of the supreme Pastor, much less will he fear
that of the Bishops: and he that begins once to despise the orders of the head
of the Church, will make small conscience of disregarding any other order
whatsoever. By this cunning, Martin Luther has persuaded many men, that
Christian liberty consists in having a large conscience, and in not fearing
to transgress all the orders of the Church: and hereupon have we seen so many
Monks, and Nuns without any scruple at all to abandon their Monasteries,
cast away their sacred habits, and take husbands and wives; and so many nations
to trample upon the holy Images, to forget the feasts, and feast event, not to
know any longer what is meant by Lent, Confessions, vespers, and Mass: and
finally we may see from this beginning of not fearing the authority of Christ's
vicar in earth, how some whole Provinces are brought to that pass, that they
have no note or mark at all of any Christian religion left.

In conformity with the Author we may here begin by exclamation, always
provided it be not slanderous. Behold how far the confidence of the great
ones aspires, and attributes that to a defect in others, which proceeded indeed
from their own greatness. It is manifest of old to the whole world, and the
stories are full of it, that the very beginning of the separation that fell out
some hundred years since in Germany, took not it original from any
disobedience of the subjects, but out of an abuse of power and greatness in the
Prelates. It is well known that it grew out of in discreet extorsions, and out
of extrauagant fashions of granting Indulgences: I trust in God that these
present alterations shall be determined with the health and safety of the body
that remains intyre, and not with the ruin and perdition of it; and tell me
for Gods sake, whence began these alterations, but because they could not be
contented that a few persons in number (who if a man survey the^ well, will
hardly make up 1000) should enjoy a fourth part of the riches of the whole
state, which contains four millions of persons; and because they would
in-fine have stripped all the Laity out of their goods? And even as they
began, so have they proceeded on, because they would have brought it to that
pass, that some which have nothing else but the bare name of Churchmen, might
without fear of Justice, uncontrolled offend other men both in their lives and
honor. Admit now so^me great mischief had befallen us, who should have been
in fault? but they that would have innouated and changed the courses of
judicature that have been used and established these 1200. years past, and
the laws that took their beginning above 300 years since? It was not greatly
to the purpose when the question is made between Catholics of the validity,
or nullitie of a Censure: to enter into Monasteries, Matrimonies, Images,
Feasts and Feast-euens, Lents, Consessions, Vespers, Masses, and all to enforce
other men to answer them, and lay open whence the mischief grows: it had
been much better to have stood upon the matter, and treated of it as it comes
to hand with charity, and not to bear themselves in hand, that the world is so
simple, as not to understand, whether this present difference be about a
temporal matter, or a spiritual. Now to leave these digressions, into which
the Author has withdrawn me, happily beside the question, let us consider of
the strength of the opposition he makes against the interpreter touching the
meaning of the words in the Psalm. And to begin with the very exposition which
the author himself gives them, which I will not note for false, but I will grant
him, that for that short verse alone it may pass, being peradventure quoted
from some other exposition: but he that will read over the whole Psalm shall
see that it suts not with the letter, and that the Interpretor has cited it
indeed in it own true and literal sense according to the clear light of Gods
word. For the argument of the Psalm, it is an affectionate complaint against
the ungodly, or if you will so call him, the Atheist, together with the
consolation he receives from seeing him punished: and not against him that
fears false gods. This is cleared by the very beginning: Dixit insipiens in
cord suo, non est Deus. Now to understand the fifth verse, Deum non
inuocarunt, illiuc trepidauerunt timore, vbi non erat timor, we must know that,
Dei inuocatio, in the divine Scripture is often taken by a Senecdoche for the
recognition and acknowledgement of God: whereupon the literal sense is, they
acknowledged not the true God, and yet nevertheless they feared things that
were not to be feared: for as much as that is the special chastisement which
God lays upon the wicked, that though he seem free from all fear, yet he of
himself frames in his own apprehension diverse and contradictory conceits,
which cause and work in him an apparent fear: so may we see some in antiquity,
that denied the immortality of the soul, and yet were infinitely troubled with
fear of infamy after death: and others that denied providence, no less
apprehe^siue of coniecturall diuinatio^s, and other fancies. This is the very
literal sense: let us now see whether it was alleged to this purpose. There are
some (says S. Paul) which co^fes in words that they know god, but deny him in
their deeds. These are they, that living at rando^ care not at al for Gods law;
they will not stick to murder many men, to violate many marriage beds, and of
these wickednesses they will never repent, they will rob as much as they can
finger, and consume all their own goods, and other men's: but when they are
cited to the Ecclesiastical Court to pay a tieth, and there excommunicated,
being now become unable to pay it; they are more trauersed and grieved at this,
then at all their offenses committed against God. Here we are to conceive that
Christ our Lord he instituted excommunication for a medicine, and for a
punishment; and that if it be inflicted on a man without his guilt, it is a
less evil or mischief to him, then any the least venial sin: and there is no
divine which holds not thus; and I note further that an excommunication
thundered out for any other cause, then for sin, and without his sin against
whom it is passed, does not prejudice a Christian soul at all. Therefore of
him that shall have no respect to offend against the commandments of God, and
shall yet stand in fear of such an excommunication, it may be rightly said
according to the Psalms literal sense, Trepidauerunt timore vbi no^ erat timor.
He that has a serious intent to live Christianly, he will be careful to observe
the commandments of God, and of them whom God has commanded that they should
be obeyed after himself, in the things appertaining to their superiority; to
the Pope and Prelates in things spiritual, to the Prince in civil, to the
father or master in things Domestical (for so much as he obeys them all,
because God commands him, and for no cause else) but where this order is not
preserved, and Gods own commandments not preferred before all the rest, there
God permits it for their punishment, that intolerable precepts shall be
imposed upon their shoulders, to which indeed they are not bound, and menaceth
them with vain punishments which they in like sort are more afraid of, then of
the true punishments threatened them by God himself, much like a child that
cries at his mothers threatening him with a skaring and no real chastisement.
But if lively reasons shall find no ouerture nor way in the Authors conceit, to
persuade him that the place of the Psalm, Trepidauerunt timore, is rightly
alleged: yet me thinks he should suffer himself to be ouer-ruled by Nauarra his
authority, who alleages the same Text against such as fear void
excommunications. Super cap. Cum contigat: Rem. 2. Numero 14. and Numero 13. He
says, that to fear the Censures that are void and nulle, it is Deum falsum
pro vero colere. But our Author he says, that who so fears not Gods Vicar,
fears not God himself, because he says to his vicars, Qui vos audit me
audit. Lu. 10. As is to say that indiscreet excommunications are not to be
feared, were as much as to say, that God is not to be feared, nor his vicar:
and that he that will fear God, must stand bound to subject himself, even to
the indiscretion of the Prelates to whom God has given no power at all, further
then it shall be accompanied with discretion. And me thinks it stands not with
the wisdom and learning of so great a man to allege scriptures in a most
strange, yea in a contrary sense to it own, albeit I am persuaded that he has
not only read the place it self, but the whole chapter. There is no speech
there of any vicars, nor of the supreme Bishops, but of the Preachers of Gods
word, who if they shall preach the doctrine of Christ who so hears them,
hears Christ, and he that despises them, despises Christ. So says S. Luke
in his tenth alleged by the Author, that Christ appointed other 72, and sent
them two and two that they should go before him into all places whither he was
to go; and he teaches them how they should go, and what they should preach,
and what they should do when they were not received nor heard; and in the
conclusion of all this he ads, Qui vos audit, me audit. Here I would request
not them of judgment only, but every man of ordinary understanding but to
view the place. It is commonly received of old in all the expounders of the
scripture, that the Pope he succeeds S. Peter, the Bishops the Apostles, and
the Priests to the 72, whereof we have not now to treat, further then this, that
where Christ says, to the 72. Qui vos audit, he speaks as a Preacher to all
Preachers. here the Author may object, the^ among these the Pope is likewise
comprehended. I admit no less, touching the preaching of Christ's doctrine: but
I will not allow him that impropriety of speech, as to say, Christ says to his
vicars, Qui vos audit, me audit. For the^ to hold that the Preacher ought not
to have a coactiue jurisdiction, if the place, Qui vos audit, had stood alone
by it self, and not been conjoined with the antecedents and consequents (which
demonstate it to have been spoken to the 72 as Preachers) would have good show
for it, and so it has if we will read it apart; but the holy scripture is to
be read entire, and not by peecemeale. Neither is that saying of S. Gregory,
That the sentence of the Pastor is to be feared, though it be unjust, contrary
to that which Gersons interpreter follows. For when S. Gregory's words are,
The sentence of the Pastor, though it be unjust. etc. he presupposes that it
is a sentence; because if it be not a sentence, it cannot be an unjust
sentence, but a non sentence. Such must that be that a lay man shall take upon
him to give in causes ecclesiastical, and an ecclesiastical person in lay
causes: but that sentence which is unjust, and yet to be feared, is when there
is either of a good intention, or when there are false informations in fact
brought in, in which cases it is both to be feared and observed: but when it
does contain an intolerable error, then it ought not indeed (as we will show
in place) to be proudly despised, but yet with a kind of reverence vnreceiued.
This, which is the common received doctrine the Author has past over in
silence, and to him it would be but needles to say any more: but some other
body to whose hands this discourse may come, I will allege two Canons, the one
of Saint Leo the first, a Pope of great sanctity, who praeceded S. Gregory some
20 Popes in rank, there remains then (says he) S. Peter's privilege,
whersoeuer judgment is pronounced according to his equity, and where there is
neither to much severity, nor too much indulgence, where nothing shall be
bound, nothing loosed, but what blessed Peter, Aut soluerit, aut liga uerit:
which last words I have put down in Latin, as loath to restrain the^ to either
of their two significations, in which respect I hold it yet better to recite it
all in Latin: Manet ergo Petri priuilegium, vbicunque ex ipsius fertur
aequitate iudiciu^, nec nimia est vel seueritas, vel remissio, vbi nihil erit
ligatum, nihil solutu^, nisi quod beatus Petrus aut soluerit, aut ligauerit.
And S. Gelasius a predecessor of S. Gregory some 15 Papanties, says (I will
quote his own words in Latin, that no exception may be taken to their
translation,) Cui est illata sententia, deponat errorem, and vacua est: sed si
iniusta est, tanto eam curare non debet, quanto apud deum, and Ecclesiam eius,
neminem potest iniqua grauare sententia, ita rigo ea se non absolui desideret,
qua se nullatenus perspicit obligatum. The Authors words which next follow,
that this doctrine extends and spreads it self further, to the disparaging of
Masses and Vespers, Confessions, Feasts, and Feast-euens. Vigiles etc. they
require no further answer, sithence the resistance which the state of Venice
makes against the foresaid precept, is not made, but merely to preserve the
Masses, and Vespers, the Feasts, and their Vigiles which some would take away,
and put the state in hazard to inebriate, and fill it self with some
pernicious opinion. Some other men might here say, that such and such a
kingdom in the age last past has lost the sound religion by reason of
scandales given them from Churchmen; and indeed the famousest and truest
Historians affirm no less. And if this state did not at this present out of
it own piety use all diligence to preserve the religion, but should be earnest
to put the Popes words in execution (I will not say his meaning, sot I hope it
is exceeding good) it would for truth be utterly overthrown with an extreme
downfall. These me^ have not yet sound by experience, what the taking away of
the exercise of holy religion from the people, it may import in these times.
All the Hebrews that have sprung up since the year 1300, and are grown to the
height of this day, they had no other beginning but out of those innumerable
excommunications and interdictions which began to be put in use in the year
1200, and so continued on all that age through. He that shall read over the
stories of all those years, will have much ado to abstain from tears, in reading
such a spirtual hauock and fall of souls. Thus are we come by the grace of God
to the 6. and last opposition, where the Author says.

In the end the writer of this preface not satisfied, with having abused a
place of the old Testament, he serves his turn all out as badly out of the new
Testament, saying, but according to the Apostle; Bellarmine
being strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, they will take the
shield of faith, oppose it against indiscreet excommunications, and the arms
of the spirit, which is the word of God. Luther nor Calvin could not more
apparently have employed the word of God against God. The Apostle in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, the last chapter speaks of the resistance which the
faithful are to make against the infernal devil: Vt possitis stare contra
incidias diaboli, And a little after; In omnibus iumentis scutu^ fidei, in quo
possitis omnia tela nequissimi ignea extinguere. As also says S. Peter, Cui
resistite fortes in fide. and S. James, Resistite Diabolo and fugiet a vobis.
And this new divine applies this resistance to the censures of the supreme
Bishop, as if the Apostle in stead of saying, Arm your self with faith, and
with the word of God to resist the devil, had said, Arm your selves with
faith, and with the word of God to resist god in his vicar. And what faith is
that, or what word of God, that teaches to resist Gods vicar? Nay what manner
of faith is it, or what word of God, which does not teach us to be subject and
to obey the Prelates of the holy Church: says not S. Paul in the 13 chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews: Obedite praepositis vestris, and subiacete eis?
Says not Christ himself, Mat. 18. Si ecclesia^ non audierit, sit tibi sicut
Ethnicus and publicanus?

Indeed the Author alleges S. Paul's text in it right sense, but yet not in a
contrary sense to that to which Gersons interpreter did apply it. S. Paul
spoke in general against the assaults of the devil; Friar Paulo.
and the interpreter understands it, that indiscreet excommunications are one
kind of the assaults of the devil: and it should be a contradiction to term
them indiscreet excommunications, and not to hold withal that they proceed
from the devil. S. John says, Omnis qui facit peccatumex diabolo est: And I
believe this to be a most Catholic and holy positio^, that an excommunication
thundered forth against him that does well, and that obeys Gods commandments,
has it original from the devils persuasion: and it is one sort of those
insidiations which he practices against the faithful. The Author knows it,
that we have not to combat with the devil in flesh and bones. All that
whatsoever tends to the destruction of the spiritual state of the Church, which
is the kingdom of christ, it is the work of the devil; and if it be secret, it
is an insidiatio^, and of all works that are wrought to the Churches detrime^t,
whose doing soever they be, the scripture makes the devil the author, as indeed
he is, though he do not put the^ in execution by himself: the destruction of
many Churches, and the deformatio^ of others by reason of these indiscret
exco^munications make proof, yt the devil lies in wait to suppla^t christ's
flock eue^ with the same means, which Christ instituted to preserve it. When
S. Paul says to the Thessalonians that the devil had often hindered him from
coming to them, he does not mean that this was otherwise done, then by the
actions of men. The devil he practices and imployeth all sorts of persons to
this end, and then not always out of malice, but out of error; and who
thinking to do well with an indifferent zeal do but execute his wicked
inte^tions, and the holy scriptures tell us expressly, that these and such like
are the devils own deeds. We may read it in S. Matthew, how after S. Peter had
confessed our Lord to be the son of God, and that he had promised him the keys
of the kingdom of heaven; how he commanded his disciples not to make it known
to any that he was the Christ, for that it behooved him to suffer and to die in
Jerusalem. Then S. Peter reproved him saying, Absit a te domine, non erit hoc
tibi. But our Lord turned back and said to Peter, Vade post me satanae
scandalum es mihi, quia non sapis ea quae dei sunt sed ea quae hominum. Who will
make any doubt, that S. Peter's zeal had not a good meaning, and that it sprang
not from a good affection? Yet because he went about to hinder, as much as in
him lay, the work of our redemption, and the edification of the Church, which
was to issue forth of the side of Christ opened upon the cross, Christ calls
him Satan. Now it is no inconvenience to hold, that if S. Peter, through want
of foresight, and well deserning what he did, dealt in a matter with a good
intent, yet to the destruction of the Church; that, I say, it may yet also fall
out that a successor of his, not being so well advised as were fit, may attempt
that thing, bearing himself in hand that he does right well, which another man
that is nearer concerned in the fact, and therefore can judge better what it
imports than he, may see clearly that it must needs sort to the Churches
undoing. The Author is (I confess) a man most excellent in learning, and of
singular efficacy in persuading, yet for all this, he shall never make me
believe, nor happily any other that shall read, how that every mortal man of
what place or dignity soever, may not sometimes either through his own will,
or through humane infirmity, give an aid and furtherance, yet without any
wicked intent in himself, to some subtle design of the devils: and from this
escape let him never strain himself to exempt any one man, until he shall have
exempted me him first from praying, Et ne nos inducas in tentationem. The
Author demands, what faith is that, which teaches to resist Gods vicar? I
answer him, it is the very faith of my L. Cardinal Bellarmine, who says in
formal terms thus. Itaque scilicet resistere Pontifici inuadenti corpus, ita
licet resissere in vade^ti animas, vel turbanti remp. and multo magis si
Ecclesiam destruere interit, licet, inquam, ei resissere, non faciendo quod
iubet, and impediendo ne exequatur voluntatem suam. So then here, the word of
God in the last to the Ephesians, entreats of the resistance we have to make
against the devil whom God permits, through his most hidden, and just and
secret judgments, to plot and devise against the peace and quiet of the holy
Church.

The Author alleges that of S. Paul to the Hebrews, Obedite praepositis
vestris, and subiacete eis, and it likes me very well; first because it is not
meant of the Pope in special, but of the Bishops, yea and of all Curats, so
that it makes nothing for the Pope in particular; but he should indeed have
produced the whole place of S. Paul, Obedite praepositis vestris, et subiacete
eis: ipsi enim peruigila^; quasi ratione^ pro animabus vestris reddituri, or as
he says in the Greek, Obey them that are set over you, and be subject unto
them for they ward over your souls, as they that must render an account of
them. So far forth as those that are set over our souls, so far it
appertains us to obey them; which is as if he should have said, we must obey
them in things Spiritual, which appertain to our souls health; and because
the Author brings in that si ecclesiam non audie^t, sit tibi sicut ethnicus and
publicanus; we must know that the Church is, as S. Paul styles it, the pillar
and basis of the truth, and that it will never teach any thing but the Doctrine
of Christ, nor command any thing but what shall be conform to that; but we
have not yet perceived that the Church commands that which the Author says:
Se here our paralogisme, which answers from our taking the name of Church, in
diverse significations. In this very place, many writers do understand dic
Ecclesiae, id est Praelatis Ecclesiae, but no one understands it of the Pope
alone; we will understand it then of him indifferently as of all other
Prelates, and not in any manner of speciallity, reserving notwithstanding to
every one his own degree and place. And this, si ecclesia^ non audierit, shall
be understood, when they shall speak in the ministry of excommunication,
according to the doctrine of the Church. Now it is notorious that the
proceedings of the Venetian state, are according to the Churches doctrine,
since the custom and use througout all Christian Kingdoms are just after the
same manner.

Here I would feign learn, why in that Gospel, which is read upon the tuesday
after the third sunday in Lent, where it was written in the Mass book,
Respiciens Jesus in discipulos suos, dixit Simoni Petro si peccauerit etc. why
they have in all the Massebookes that have been printed of late years taken
away these words? I know they are not in the books of the new Testament; but of
many other words, which are found in the Massebooke, and not in the books of
the new Testament, it is said they come ex traditione Apostolica; and so one
will tell us, that howsoever the Evangelist does not affirm it, yet it comes
by tradition, that these words were directed to Peter. Here then must needs
grow some distinction by which there may appear a difference between this
tradition and the others; which when it is made, yet all will be to little to
take order, that for many hundred years it was not so read, and consequently
so believed of all the faithful for so many ages, that it was spoken
particularly to Peter, dic ecclesiae. So that we must needs aequiuocate in the
noune Church, and interpret it, dic tibi ipsi ye and yet further it will be a
sense too to wrested, to understand by (the Church) one sole person, and that
not so much because the nowne it self brooks it not, as for that Christ
himself interpreting it in the words immediately following says, vbi fuerint
duo vel tres, etc. So that it is apparently cleared, that he understood by the
Church, a congregation of two or three at the least, assembled in his name: but
of this, because it is borne out by Saint Chrysostom exposition, we will speak
hereafter, where the Aut. also treats the matter more at large, and show him
how S. Chriso. is not for him, but is opposite.

Bellarmine.
But it is now time, we come to consider of Gersons considerations, and to make
it clear that either they make nothing to the purpose, or that they are
erroneus

Friar Paulo.
Here before I proceed, to the particular defense of Gersons considerations, I
must not ouerslip to admonish the godly reader, that it is a trick of art, or
a desseine of the Author, for some of his own ends, that he never leaves
repeating and iterating (as well in the matters we have already surueyed, as in
those that follow) and charging the Venitian state, that it will not
acknowledge, it will not obey, that it despises the supreme Bishop, the vicar
of Christ, and with other like terms apt to raise envy, and engender hatred
in so many as cannot be rightly informed touching the controversy now a foot,
and of the justice of the sttates cause; which end that it may more easily be
obtained, we may observe how they hinder it all they can that the reasons of
the State may not be seen; a practice directly against all reason, divine and
human. To which I will say once for all, the so many inculcatio^s ingeminated
by the Author, that this is not to handle the matter in question with
syncerity. For that the Venetia^ state does acknowledge and obey (as it has
always done) the holy Apostolic sea neither does it introduce any nouelty,
but conserues and defends with all godliness and religion, the holy Apostolic
faith, which it prefers before all humane respects whatsoever; but only in
causes temporal, where the Pope, either for not being well informed, or
through other bodies counsels, or for some other cause does thunder out his
censures notoriously against all justice, they inte^d within the bounds of the
Catholic religion to maintain their own liberty, and the authority given
them from God, it being conform to the laws of God, and nature, and
according to the doctrine of the godly and catholic doctors. But now whether
Gersons considerations make or make not to the purpose, and whether they be
erroneous or not, let us peruse them every one a part, as the Author shall
present occasion.

The first consideration is, that excommunication and irregularitie are founded
principally upon a contempt of the keys of the Church, that is to say, Gerson.
of the Ecclesiastical authority. This consideration is true, so you
understand by contempt, disobedience; or if you will so term it, contumacie,
Bellarmine.
and it is not contrary to our Lords practice.

2 The second consideration is, that the contempt of the keys may be in three
sorts, directly, or indirectly, or appearingly, as the interpreter
mistranslates it. For Gerson expresses not his third sort, with the word
apparenter, Gerson.
but with the word interpretatiue, which two words are in a manner quite
contrary For Apparens is that which appears or seems to be, and is not; and
interpretatiuum is that which seems not, and yet is. But this escape little
imports the matter in hand. For the first consideration since he allows it for
true, I shall not need to defend it, or add any thing else unto it.

The second consideration he admits likewise for true and reproues not Gerson,
but only the traslation. And in deed the interpreter should have stood greatly
bound to him for his instruction, if he had not troubled and confounded all
with an aequiuocation. True it is, that sometimes Interpretatiue signifies that
which is, and appears not; and some times it signifies as much as tacit and
implies that which is not manifest but needs interpretation and is not opposite
to the word (vere) but to the word expressly: in this sense we call it licentia
interpretatiua, that is to say, tacita non expressa. But otherwhiles it
signifies also that which seems, and is not; as when we say, not to salute a
man, is interpretatiue a kind of disdain; that is as much as it seems a
disdenie, but peradventure it is not: and here interpretatiue, is opposite to
vere. I can not tell what edition of Gerson the Author has, but in mine which
was printed in the year 494; in the very end of this consideration, his formal
words are; Et isto modo reperit contemptus in omni peccato, praesertim mortali,
directive, vel indirecte; vere, vel interpretatiue, If then vere be opposed to
interpretatiue; then cannot interpretatinum be that which appears not but yet
is; because that which appears not, but is in it self, is verum. And if this
suffice to clear the Translators integrity; I will yet add that Gerson in his
third consideration says, that a contempt of the third sort, which is
contemptus interpretatiuus, does not always deserve the Churches
excommunication: if it deserves not excommunication always; ergo it deserves
it sometimes; but that which is, and appears not, can not be subject in any
sort to the Churches censures, as all the divines and Canonists affirm;
therefore interpretatiuum is not that, which appears not, and yet is. I hope
well that the Author will now rest satisfied for this point, and co^seque^tly
that his objection of mistranslating made against the Interpretor is avoided;
which when I first read in the Authors proeme, I expected that in further
reading I should have found many more places taxed for infidility and
misinterpretation; but when I had done reading over all, I found no one word so
noted but this alone, and that with this addition. But this escape little
imports the matter in hand. Me thought it strange, that a man should be noted
as an unfaithful one, for one poor word, and that of little importance, and
that in the very noting and taxing it, the Author should, serve his turn with
an aequiuocall word, which in the very same place is explaned by Gerson.

Bellarmine.
3 The third consideration is, That the contempt of the keys in the first and
second kinds do justly deserve excommunication, and by consequence
irregularitie: but that of the third kind, does not always deserve
excommunication from the Church, but from God because he that sins mortally
is excommunicated by God. In this consideration there is nothing much amiss,
saving the last words; for if a man will speak properly of excommunication, it
is not true, that every one that committs a mortal sin is excommunicated by
God. For then sinners might not come to Mass, nor to divine office without
committing new sin, which is false, as every man knows.

Friar Paolo.
In the third consideration it is apparent, that an inordinate affection to
find fault, does transport a man no less then any other affection whatsoever;
Since he does not reprehend Gerson, for that which is here concluded, which he
allows all for true; but fastening upon one word spoken immediately, he charges
him to have spoken amiss, for saying that who so sins mortally is
excommunicated of God, and his reason is that this cannot be true if we speak
properly of excommunication, because that then sinners could not come to Mass,
without sinning anew Now I affirm against him, that it is a proper speech to
say that every sinner is excommunicated of god, because excommunication is a
general word, which imports all separation from the communion of Saints; but
there be two communions of Christians, one internal in caritie with God and
with the Saints, and this is properly the communion of Saints, either for a
separation or privation, for this is the true and proper excommunication;
another communion there is betwixt the members of the Church militant, which
does not so necessarily exact charity; and to this communion we oppose that
excommunication, which is the censure ecclesiastical; and avoiding to this
kind of excommunication, every sinner is not excommunicate, and may therefore
repair to the Mass, it being a matter which does not so necessarily require
charity. Now Gerson never said that he was excommunicated by the
excommunication, which is the churches censure. S. Augustine. 12, de Genesis ad
literam. cap. 40 uses the same fashion of speech, Adam ab esu ligni vitae
exco^municatus fuit. and Gratianus, causa 11. Quaestione 3. after the Chap. Ad
mensam, says thus, scilicet and Adam ab esu ligni vitae excommunicatus est:
and after the Chapter Non solum, he says, quia ex natu adulterij ia^diu apud
deum excommunicatus fuerat, which is just according to Gersons words. And
again how will you term excommunication in Greek but Anathema? yea our
Divines make no difference between Excommunication mayor, and Anathma. And S.
Paul says, cupiebam Anathema esse a Christo and in annother place, si quis non
amat dominum nostrum Iesum Christum sit Anathema. Now let him on that lists, to
find fault with S. Paul, and say he spoke improperly, sithence every sinner
Non amat dominum Iesum, and therefore is Anathema to favor such; and after let
him proceed to blame Gerson for mistaking. It needed not, iwis, admit there
had been some improprietie, when he understood Gersons true sense, who spoke
not of that excommunication, which is the Church censure, when he accorded with
him in substance, to strain and force his words in matters of no moment. And
this might have sufficed me, but that my desire was to show by alleging S.
Augustine, Gratian and S. Paul, how the Author reprehends that, for which
indeed Gerson deserves to be commended.

4 The fourth consideration is, Gerson.
that a man is not to be said to contemn the keys in any of the three kinds,
when a Prelate does manifestly, and notoriously abuse the power of the keys.
This consideration is true, if it speak of the abuse of the keys in points
essential; as if the Prelate should exceed his commission, or should
excommunicate a man, without giving him any warning before; Bellarmine:
or should command under pain of excommunication, things contrary to gods
commandment, in which case we say with S. Peter, Obediendum est magis deo quam
hominibus. Act. 5. But howsoever Gersons Doctrine be true, yet the Interpretors
intention, may be very infectious and full of poison, for that happily his
drift is that the world should conceive, that the excommunication which our
Lord the Pope has published, were a notorious abuse of the keys, whereas it
is indeed their lawful and most ancient use, as we could most clearly
demonstrate, if we were to insist upon that point. Bellarmine


This consideration might even as well have been passed over by the Author,
since he finds nothing to reprehend in it. The limitation he brings in, that
the manifest and notorious abuse of the keys excuses the faithful from
contempt; where he says that this is true if the abuse be in points
essential, it is superfluous. Who makes any doubt that it is so meant? The
very word abuse imports no less in it own signification. But when the Author
adds, that howsoever Gersons doctrine is true, yet the interpretors inte^tion
may be full of poison. This is nothing else but to fight against shadows, to
oppose against that which may be, and to wra^gle with ones own co^iectures.
Is this S. Paul's precept, not to judge our neighbor, till our Lord himself
shall come to reveal the secret of hearts. Is this that charity, quae non
cogitat malu^? Gersons doctrine is good, the interpreter has not so much as
applied it, he speaks not a word; but Ger. he puts too nothing of his own, and
yet it is objected for all this that the interpretors inte^tion may be very
venomous. Admit there had been some word which might have been turned either
to the right hand or to the left, yet it had been the part of Christian
charity to have interpreted it to the best: but to come to what may be, and
that purposely to accuse, and to give a brand, this exceeds the bounds of that
we ought to do. This poisonous intention which may be in the interpretor, he
explains saying, peradventure his meaning is to bear the world in hand, that
this excommunication thundered by nostro signore, is a notorious abuse of the
keys, which indeed is contrarily a lawful and most holy use of them, as might
clearly be demonstrated, if that were the point to be handled. I for my part
cannot tell what is meant to be handled, but sure I am this is the very
question should be handled, because this is it, which is in co^trouersy, and
which would determine the strife, and without which it can not be determined.
And of this I would feign the Author he had entreated, and laid aside all other
by-matters as little pertine^t to the purpose.

Gerson.
5 The fifth consideration is, that when a prelate abuses the power of the
keys, he does more disparage the keys, and offends more grievously then does
any man subject to his jurisdiction, when he obeyes not his prelate: and hence
it is gathered that it is a meritorious work in such like cases, to resist the
prelate to his face as S. Paul did to S. Peter. Bellarmine:
In this consideration much might be said, but because it makes little to our
purpose, we will only say two things. First that Gersons doctrine seems
scarsely safe, and less grounded. For to lay by comparisons, which may vary
according to their diversity of circumstances, whereupon it may fall out, that
sometime the prelate that abuses his authority offends the more, and sometimes
the subject that obaies it not: if we shall simply consider the misusing of
this power, and the disobeying of this power, it is a greater sin wilfully
not to obey, then it is to use this power amiss: for he that abuses this
power, commits but a sin of injustice, and offends a man subject to him; but
he that will not obey the prelate that commands justly, and despises his
excommunication, commits a sin of rebellion, and offends Gods divine Ma. in
his Vicar: and so says Christ, Qui vos spernit, me spernit. Luck. 10. and the
Apostle in the first to the Thessalonians the fourth chapter, Qui haec spernit,
non hominem spernit sed Deum. And this despising God in his Vicar, is called by
the Prophet Samuel, the first book of Kings the 15. Chap.) a kind of
Idolatry.

To that which were here to be said, and is not said by the Author, I can make
no answer, neither ought I to divine, and sin in rash iudgmet. Two things he
opposes. First that Gersons doctrine seems scarcely sound, and less
grounded, because that in respect of the circumstances it may so fall out, that
sometime the prelate shall offend more in abusing his power, and sometimes the
subject in not obaying it. The Author shall never find any Divine, that when he
is to compare two sins, to find out the greater, that will do it ex
circumstantijs, but only ex genere. The consideration, ex circumstantijs is
infinite, and no wise man will pitch and insist upon that which may vary in
infinitum. And S. Thomas 2. 2. quaest. 39. art. 2. says expressly. dicendum que
grauitae peccati dupliciter potest considerari. vno modo secundum suam speciem,
alio modo secundum circumstantias. Et quia circumstantiae particulares sunt
infinitae, ita and infinitis modis variari possunt; cu^ quaeriter in co^muni de
duobus peccatis quod sit grauius, intelligenda est quaestio de grauitate quae
attenditur secundum genus peccati. This proposition is most true and most
expressly formal. Manslaughter is worse then theft: yet a manslaughter may have
such circumstances to extenuate it, and a thief, such to agrauate it, that the
theft shall be the greater sin. He that shall hold this Authors doctrine for
sound, shall never be able to make comparison betwixt two sins. And yet for
all this Gerson has declared himself, that he meant not to compare them ex
circumstantijs, but ex genere, since he says it, making the comparison only
in the abuse. Surely the Author marked not these words, for then he would never
have made this objection. Hereupon out he, comes, and affirms the contrary,
saying that if we shall simply consider the misusing of this power, and the
dissobaying of this power, it is the greater sin not to obey it, then it is to
use it amiss. And he brings his reason, because he that abuses this power,
offends but a man subject to him, but he that will not obey the Prelate that
commands justly, and despises his excommunication, commits a sin of
rebellion, and offends Gods Ma. in his Vicar, because of qui vos spernit, me
spernit etc. Et qui haec spernit non hominem spernit, sed Deum; and Samuel
terms this despising of God in his Vicar, a kind of Idolatre. Here we have
two Authors, one in co^tradictio^ to the other, one void of passion, having
slept in the Lord now boue 150 years; the other a man yet living, and a party
sided in the controversy. Let us therefore examine both their reasons, and 1.
these of this Author. The words qui vos spernit, me spernit, we have showed
before that they were spoken to the Preachers, which publish Christ's doctrine.
It may please the reader to peruse what we wrote in that place, and he will
rest sufficiently informed of their meaning. But let him ad this withal, that
at the day of judgment, Christ will say to the reprobate, Quandiu non fecistis
vni de minoribus his, nec mihi fecistis. So that there is as well authority of
Scripture to show, that Christ takes it for an injury done to himself, that is
done to any of his faithful: and this saying of our Savior in the Gospel,
Quandiu non fecistis, is not alleged forth of it own literal sense, for that
admonition and correction is indeed a work of charity; as on the contrary,
cum autoritate imperare, and cum potentia, is against charity. That of S. Paul,
Qui haec spernit non hominem spernit, sed deum, I cannot see how it is cited
any thing to the purpose, when S. Paul says, qui haec spernit, he speaks of
the things there spoken by himself, and how then can it now be applied to the
commandments of the Prelate? S. Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to labor and
proceed according to the lessons of God; ye know, says he, what commandments
we have given you from the Lord Jesus, and he names them, viz. that they should
be clean, they should fly fornication and deceiving their neighbors, and he
concludes, Qui haec spernit, non homine^ spernit, sed deu^, qui etia^ dedit
spiritum sanctu^ in nobis. Every man will plainly understand out of S. Paul's
own words, that his meaning was this God has commanded such and such things,
and I have intimated you his co^mandeme^ts, he that despises you despises
god, who has given me the holy spirit, to intimat his preceps unto you. Let us
now make the application to our matters in hand, though it be not here written
down, and concluded withal, that when the Pepe shall intimate Gods own
precepts, he may subioyne, Qui haec spernit, no^ hominem spernit, sed deum. But
surely to equal any one man of this age, to S. Paul, and a decree of what
person soever to a canonical scripture, I doubt how reasonable it will be
thought by any godly conscience. S. Paul penning a canonical Scripture, and
having an assured faith, that God assisted him in that very particular, to the
end he should not commit any the least error, he might freely say, Qui haec
spernit, no^ homine^ spernit, sed deum; but a man that will not say, he has
the assistance of the holy Ghost for certain, saving only when he does
determine a matter de fide ex cathedra, he cannot freely in a decree, which is
not in a matter of faith, say, Qui haec spernit non homine^ spernit sed deum.
It is again a presumptuousnesse as great as the former, to cite for this
purpose the saying of Samuel. 1. Regum. 15. Quasi Peccatu^ ariolandi est
repugnare and quasi scelus idololatriae nolle acquiescere; Samuel as a prophet
had commanded Saul by Gods express precept, that he should not leave an
Amalechite alive, ye and that he should slay all their beasts. Saul saved King
Agag, and the herds of cattle to sacrifice, Samuel tells him, how god would
rather his precepts should be obeyed, the^ that sacrifices should be offered to
him and that it was as the sin of Idolatry, not to rest upon his
commandment. And will our Author now put a humane precept subject to errors,
into the same balance with an express precept from God- which is of
canonical authority? Were there any man here that had, the authority of a
Prophet, and of a Canonical writer, that should denounce any thing in the name
of god, Esset quasi scelus Idololatria nolle acquiescere; but religious ears
cannot hear it with patience, that humane things should in this fashion be
equalled with divine. It is a dangerous matter to match any man with God. It is
a godly office to persuade due obeisance and reverence unto Prelates; but to
extend it beyond it own bounds, and to value it equally with the Canonical
scriptures, this does rather depresse it, then advance it. Who can here
contain himself from extreme meruailing at the least? Samuel 1100 years and
better before there was any Pope, says that not to obey Gods express precept
deuered by the mouth of his Prophet, is as it were Idolatry: our Author says,
To despise God in his vicar, is called by the Prophet Samuel 1. Reg. 15.) a
kind of Idolotarie? Now I hope our Author will not deny that S. Peter was Gods
first vicar; that in the old Testament God had no vicar; that the authority of
a Prophet in the old Testament, was infallible, yea even in the least things;
that Christ's vicar in the new Testament he may err, having in matters of of
faith and of manners in universal ex Cathedra. How can the Author then,
unless it be his pleasure to dally and jest with us, say, that the Prophet
Samuel terms this dispising of God in his vicar a kind of Idolatry? Among so
many weighty matters I am drawn a little aside to one lighter. Our Author
translateth here: Quasi scoelus Idololatriae, a kind of Idolatry, as if he
should translate Nonaginta nouem sunt quasi centum, Nintie and nine are a kind
of hundredth. And this I had not noted, if he himself had not played the toto
harsh Censor against Gersons translator, where he deserved it not: but to
return to the sense and meaning. Reader, behold his cunning; all sins are
against God; but some touch his divine Majesty immediately, as the blaspheming
of his name, Idolatry, and such like; other are against our neighbor
immediately; and for this cause against God, as are adultery, murder, and
theft: now of this latter sort are both those sins we fear of. Disobedience of
the subject toward his superior, immediately is against a man, and in the end
it reaches unto God. The tyrannical government of the superior bends
immediately against the subject, but mediately against God. Our Author to delude
our simplicity, when he is to speak of the abuse of authority, says it is but
against a subject: when he speaks of disobedience, he says it offends Gods
Majesty in his vicar. If a man to encounter him should say, The Prelate that
abuses his authority, offends God in his Creature; he that contemnes
excommuninication offends a man: what could he reply? But let us proceed
syncerely, and lay these things together euenly. Disobedience offends God in
the superior; he that abuses the authority given by god, offends God in the
subject. Now let us see if these two offenses made to God, whether is greater.
S. Thomas, who often makes the comparison of sins between themselves, says
always, that sin is a privation of that which is good, and therefore that a
sin is so much the greater, the greater that the good is, which is deprived
by it. The reader may see for this in 2. a 2. a quaestione. 150. art. 154. art.
3. 39. art. 2. and in many other places. Now the good which disobedience
depriues a man of, is the private good of a subject, which is the virtue of his
obodience; the good which the abusing of authority depriues us of, is the good
governance of the Church. This is a far greater good, as well for that a
public good is greater then a private; as also for that to command well is a
greater virtue, then to obey well: and this is the reason upon which Gerson is
grounded, which is found, and stands not upon authorities forced from their
proper states. He that would yet further consider of the grieuousnesse of a
sin, by the mischief that insues upon it, or by the person that commits
it; howsoever these be but accidental considerations, and we ought therefore
to ground upon the former, and not on them; yet nevertheless one abuse of
power and authority gives a greater scandal to the world, and is a cause of
greater mischief, then a hundredth disobediences; and the person of the
superior, as the more eminent, is much more bound by his greater obligation to
God to do his duty.

Secondly, Bellarmine.
I say that although in some case it may be meritorious to resist a Prelate to
his face; yet for the most part it is a thing of much scandal, and of most
grievous excess. And to apply this consideration to the present purpose, to
incite the^ that are subject, to despise the commandments of Christ's vicar, it
is a thing not to be endured. For Saint Paul made no resistance against Saint
Peter in matter of obedience, but in matter of a certain observation legal;
and it pleased God to show the world S. Peter's humility, to permit that in a
certain article of legal observance S. Paul should be illuminated beyond S.
Peter: and to S. Peter willingly accepted, S. Paul's brotherly correction,
specially for that S. Paul was an Apostle, and no less full of the holy ghost
then S. Peter himself; but in matter of obedience and reverence, we are to
know that S. Paul always exhorts those that are subject, to obey their
Prelates; and he himself came in person to Jerusalem to visit S. Peter, and to
confer with him touching the gospel he preached, notwithstanding that he had
it by revelation, as himself testifies in the first chapter of the Epistle to
the Galathians. Now what consequence were this, Saint Paul an Apostle, and an
elect vessel took upon him to admonish S. Peter: Ergo, the people shall do a
meritorious work to resist the supreme Bishop to his face, though he command
them under pain of Excommunication. This should not be the consequence of a
good Logician, but of a perverse scismaticke.

I see not why it should be here laid in for a second opposition against
Gerson, Gerson.
that although it be sometimes meritorious to resist a Prelate, yet it is
ordinarily a thing of much scandal; and since Gersons words be, that sometimes
it is a thing meritorious, and turns to the honor of the power
Ecclesiastical, that resistance be made to such a Prelate with such a
moderation, as extends not the bounds of a lawful defense, as S. Paul opposed
himself to S. Peter. The Author to my understanding has said in effect the
same with Gerson, but that Gerson has with all integrity expressed all that
was to be said in this point, having added the limitation of such a defense as
was not to be reproved, for some thinks Gersons Latin phrase is more clearly
expressed; Cum oppositione inculpatae tutilae. If the defense be unreprovable,
what would the Author have more? who will be so rash to say, that in an
unreprovable defense, there may be scandal or excess? Let not the Author come
in here with his, (ordinarily or for the most part) it is a scandal: for we
will maintain it universally by his favor, that whenever there shall be a
notorious abuse of jurisdiction in the Prelate, and an irreproueable defense in
the subject, it shall always hold true, that it is a meritorious deed to
resist. And this is the very case, which Gerson understands when he says
(sometimes) and limits it besides (as we see) with those goulden words; so that
where the Author says, that in some case it may be meritorious, it sounds to
me, that here is put in by way of opposing against Gerson, a flat confirmation
of Gersons own opinion. But the Author follows it further. To apply this
consideration to the matter in question, that is a thing not to be endured.
This makes nothing against Gerson, but against the Interpretor; as though when
he had translated the twelve Considerations, he had said with all, that all the
twelve made expressly for the case in hand. He should have done well to have set
down the whole book intier as it lies, and then it had been the Readers part
to apply that which is to be aplied. By the same manner of dealing, because
Gerson says in his ninth consideration, If the Pope would seize upon the
Churches treasure, or vsurp upon it inheritance, or reduce all the Clergy and
their goods into servitude, or spoil them of their rights without cause, the
Author may object it against the Interpretor, that he has applied all this to
the point in question, and that his meaning is indeed; that the Pope does
snatch at the Churches treasures etc. No, it is no such matter, but
peradventure the Author who says full well the reasons, why this present fifth
consideration makes for the present purpose, he lays it courageously all at
once upon the Interpretor. Now whether S. Paul's example be well alleged by
Gerson or no, I will say but this, that yet Cardinal Cajetan has alleged it
to this self same purpose in his Opuscula; and Cardinal Bellarmine alleges
Cajetan in his second book de Romano Pontifice to the very same purpose, and
directs us to see the place; yea and this example has been yet further
alleged to the same purpose, by Dominicus Solus, and by Franciscus Victoria,
and by other most renowned Doctors. It is true which the Author says that S.
Paul resisted not S. Peter for any excommunication matter (because it was not
then the use to thunder it out as now it is) and that S. Paul proceeded against
the incestuous Corinthian precisely according to Christ's institution: but it is
also true withal, that S. Peter at Antiochia in the fact we speak of, did by
his example as it were silently command all them that were present in that
place, and Saint Paul affirms it. Et simulationi eius consenserunt caeteri
Iudaei, ita vt and Barnabas duceretur ab eis in illam simulationem. To this
silent precept S. Paul made resistancie; and let not the Author tell us, that
there was no question or meaning there of any precept, and obedience. For in
deed it was intended and meant, but overmuch: but further the consequence of it
self is very strong, that if we may resist a Superior in a precept which he
makes out silently by his own examples; much more may we do it against a
precept express and fulminatory.

I see not to what end the Author after this brings in the story how S. Paul
went to visit S. Peter, and to confer with him of the Gospel which he
preached; sure I am the scripture says not so, the words are these: Deinde
post annos tres veni Hierosolymam videre Petrum, and mansi apud eum diebus
quindecim. Alium autem Apostolorum vidi neminem, nisi Iacobum fratrem Domini.
Quae autem scribo vobis, ecce coram Deo quia non mentior: deinde veni in parts
Syriae, etc. There is indeed in the next Chapter. Deinde post annos
quatuordecim iterum ascendi Hierosolymam cum Barnabo assumpto and Tito; ascendi
autem secundum reuelationem, and contuli cum illis Euangelium, quod praedico in
gentibus. In his first voyage he speaks of his visiting S. Peter but not a
word of any conferring with him; in the second not a word of visiting, but he
speaks indeed of conferring, not with S. Peter, but cum illis, howsoever true
it is, that S. Peter was among them. Here the Author has put for one only
vyage, two of S. Paul's several voyages, the one more then 14. years distant
from the other. And that same Contuli cum illis, which is meant, with the whole
Church of Jerusalem, or if you will not take it so, then at least with the
three Apostles, James, Caefas and John (for S. Paul names them in this order)
the Author understands it, he conferred with Peter. But I would feign know why
when he treats of this conferring, he does not here add, Mihi enim, qui
videbantur, esse aliquid nihil contulerunt. Sed e contra cum vidissent, quod
creditum est mihi Euangelium praeputij, sicut Petro circumcisionis. Qui enim
operatus est Petro in Apostolatum circumcisionis operatus est, and mihi inter
gentes; and cum cognouissent gratiam quae data est mihi, Iacobus and Caefas and
Ioannes, qui videbantur columnae esse, dextras dederunt mihi and Barnabae
societatis, vt not in gentes, ipsi autem incircumcisionem, tantum vt pauperum
memores essemus: for it may be that out of these words he would have drawn
the deduction of the consequence. The scripture recounts us two of S. Peter's
actions for which he was reprehended after he had received the holy Ghost; one
in the Epistle to the Galathians, the second in the 11. of the Acts, when the
Jews that were converted contended against Saint Peter, for having received
the Gentiles into the Church. (...) In the first there was a fault on Peter's
part; in the second he was blamed without cause. Saint Paul said it of the old
Testament, Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt; and we
may say the same of both old and new. For in this second example a superior is
taught with what charity, and with what manner of doctrine he ought to inform
his subjects capacity and understanding, in case he do contend with him, yea
though it be against reason. Saint Peter he did not excommunicate those Jews,
but instructed them with the authority of divine revelations: and if there
ought to have been used any other manner of proceeding with the State of
Venice, let the Author show me but one example in the scripture, that we may
rest upon it. In that other example of the Epistle to the Galathians, since he
does not repeat that which Saint Peter answered, but only what S. Paul
opposed, there is no instruction given the Prelate, but to the inferior, how
he ought to carry himself when the superior abuses his authority. And this
selfsame note shows how far of it is from this scriptures true sense, that
God should thus dispose that that then fell out to show Peter's humility, for
that it would have been pertinent to have set down the humble answer of that
Saint; but contrariwise the scripture omits what S. Peter said, and sets down
only S. Paul's grave rebuke, to demonstrate it that the example was given not
for S. Peter's humility, but to instruct inferiors how they ought to bear
themselves toward their superiors; and in that there is no mention made of any
scandal at all that grew after upon it, we may likewise hope that if now there
shall grow any, it shall be but an offense taken, and not given. If the Author
have yet any other place of scripture, where any superior has exceeded his
bounds, and the inferior has not made convenient opposition, let him produce
it, and we will in like sort rest upon it. We do conceive this consequence for
formal and strong. Saint Peter erred, Ergo every Pope may err. Saint Paul a
most humble man made him resistance, Ergo, resistance will not misbeseeme one
of less humility. Now to let him know how sound this consequence it is, I
will tell him that Caietan in his tractat de authoritate papae and Consilii:
where he affirms, that he ought to resist the Pope to his face, when he abuses
his authority, after a long discourse he says thus. Abusui namque potestatis,
qui destruit, obuiam eam congruis remediis, non obediendo in malis, non
adulando, non tacendo, arguendo, ^uocando, illustres ad increp^ndum, exemplo
Pauli etc. Therefore Cardinal Cayetan, who made this consequence was no good
Logician, but a perverse Scismatique. But for this other consequence S. Paul
exhorts inferiors to obey their Prelates, and came to visit S. Peter. Ergo, we
must obey, yea though they abuse their power: we refer it to the Author to
style it with what name please him; and if he shall say that he speaks not of
the abuse, but of the lawful use of power; why Gerson spoke only of the
abuse, and not of the use of it; and we condemn all them that obey not their
superiors, when they command according to his prescript that gave them their
authority as well as we condemn the superiors that abuse it.

6 The sixth consideration is, that such a case may be put, Gerson
that one in not obeying his Prelate, shall be a contemner of his keys, and
another likewise in not obeying shall be in no contempt: as where the first
shall believe the Prelates sentence to be just, or shall believe for some other
reason that he is bound to obey it, and where the second shall know for
certain, or shall have sufficient probability, that his Prelate misuseth the
power of the keys.

To this consideration there is little to say, but that every probability,
Bellarmine
or a probabity of every abuse whatsoever, is not sufficient to exempt a man
from obeisance to his Prelate. But that a man should be freed from such
obeisance, it must be certain and notorious (avoiding to the common received
learning) that the Prelate do abuse this power in some essential point; for
it is a general rule given by S. Augustine, libro. 22. contra Faustum. cap.
75. and followed by the rest, that the subject stands bound to obey, not only
when it is certain that the superior does not command any thing against God,
but also when he is not certain, whether he commands any thing against God, or
no; because that in a doubtful case, he is to follow his superior judgment,
and not his own; and then only he must not obey, when he is assured, that he
commands against God; for that, as it was said before, Obediendum est Deo magis
quam hominibus.

I know not what to say in this sixth Consideration, Friar Paul
but to merueile at it, that the Author out of a desire of contradiction, gives
it a limitation, which Gerson himself gave in like sort, in fewer and playner
terms. For where Gerson says: It may fall so out, that in the same case, one
may become disobedient in contempt, and another without contempt, when the one
shall repute the sentence for just, or that he is bound to obey it for some
other respect; and this other shall not so think of it, but either knows it of
certainty, or has sufficient probability that his Prelate uses his authority
amiss in prejudice of the keys; the Author limits it that for sooth every
probability is not sufficient. Gerson says not every probability whatsoever,
but a sufficient probability; and I say, and affirm and warrant it, that a
sufficient probability is enough, and in matters humane and moral it is as
great assurance and certainty as can be said; neither can I believe that any
man will say, that which is sufficient is not enough, unless he will
contradict himself. So that all the Author says in many words, is comprised
in one short and plain term by Gerson, and they are agreed. But I would not
now have any man deceived by that which the Author adds, Viz. That in a
doubtful case a man is to follow the judgment of the superior, and not his
own. For a case may be said to be doubtful in two senses: either doubtful,
wherein a man has not endeavored to resolve himself; or doubtful, wherein
after his due diligence employed, he cannnot yet resolve himself. In the first
case, he that stands in doubt, whether the thing commanded be against God, is
bound to put in practice all possible means both by himself, and with the
help of others to clear his own judgment, or else he sins against God by
exposing himself to hazard the breaking of his law. He that after all his
diligence remains still in doubt, the Doctors allow him to follow the
judgment of his superior. I think well that the Author has this very same
meaning, but it behooues us to stand upon our guard against ambiguities, because
all false doctrines make their first entrance masked with the name of good.
And he does so often inculcate it here, That the subject is bound to obey, not
only when he is assured that the superior does not command any thing against
God, but also when he is uncertain whether he commands any thing against God,
or not; because that in a doubtful case he is to follow his superiors
judgment, and not his own; and then only he must not obey, when he is
assured that he commands against God: that we are enforced to reply jointly
withal, that his assertion is not true, saving only where the subject is not
resolved that the Superior commands ought against God after he shall have
consulted sufficiently of it; and in a case still doubtful after consultation
he has to follow the judgment of his Superior; and then he is not to obey,
when he is assured, that he commands against God: but if he stand in doubt,
because he has not well thought of it, then is he bound to bethink himself
seriously of it first, before he yield obedience. Yet my meaning is not, that
from hence there should be drawn this conclusion, that as the subject is bound
to obey in a case inuincibly doubtful (for so I will term it to avoid
Aequiuocation) so that the Superior may in like manner command in such a
case; for he sins always whenever he commands that with himself is not
assured to be obligatorie. So does Adrian prove and conclude. Quodl. 1. For
the authority of the Superior, does not extend to things doubtful, and it is
against the law of nature (says Adrian) to affirm, that the authority of the
keys is extended to that which is doubtful; but the subject is bound in a
case inuincibly doubtful to obey, because he ought to believe, that howsoever
it be doubtful to him, yet it is not doubtful to his Superior. But in case
he were assured, that it were a like doubtful to his Superior, then he is not
bound at all to obey him. So that when the Superior commands in a doubtful
case, and the subject knows, that the Superior himself holds it for
doubtful, and yet commands it to advantage him self, here he is not bound to
obey him. It shall not be superfluous to repeat it over again, that the doubt
which binds a subject to obedience, must of necessity have twoe conditions.
First that it be a doubt invincible to himself; and the other that he come
not to know, that the Superior himself holds it doubtful, as well as he.

7 The seventh consideration is, Gerson.
that to discover aright the contempt of the keys, we must observe the lawful
power, and withal the lawful use of this power; and therefore that same
common saying, that the sentence of the Pastor, or of the Judge, it ought to be
feared, yea though it be unjust, it needs a good gloss. This is a good
consideration, Bellarmine:
and the gloss of that common saying, it is extant in the sacred cannons,
among which also is the very same saying, viz. in Gratians decreetum, causa
11. quaestione tertia, and that in sundry Chapters. And the sum of all is,
that the Pastors sentence is to be feared, when it is unjust, so it be of
force, and good in Law, as when there wants not any one essential part, but
only some accidental matter; for example, a lawful Prelate excommunicates
one that is under his jurisdiction for a just cause, having before admonished
and advised him, but he does not excommunicate him for pure zeal of justice,
but for some particular grudge he bears him, or he does not warn him three
times, or he does not put down the sentence in scriptis; this excommunication
is unjust, but it is strong in law, and therefore ought to be feared. Yea and
admit yet further, that it were indeed void, but the inualiditie were not
known, here it ought likewise to be feared, at least in respect of the
scandal. I do not strain my self to prove these things, for that they are
clear, and such as Gerson himself would not deny them. And from this
consideration, any man may gather, that the sentence of of our Lord Paulus
Quintus published against the heads of the State of Venice, has all the
requisites as well essential, as accidental, and ought therefore to be feared,
it being not only of validity, but most just withal. For if you look into
the lawfulness of authority, you shall find, that there is a supreme power
given him from God, and most universal over all them which pretend to be
sheep of Christ's flock, and members of the mystical body of the Church, and
citisens of Gods city, and domestiques in the house of the same God. That the
power is universal, it is clearly seen in those words, Quodcunque ligaueris,
and quodounque Solueris, Math. 16. And that it is ouerall, it is seen in those
other words, pasce oxes meas. John. 21. Where it is not restrained to these or
those sheep, but includes all those that are his: and he that believes not
this, is no Catholic. If you look into the lawful use of this power, you
shall find that there wanted not diverse admonitions, nor any of those things
which the order of judgment requires. Finally if you look into the cause you
shall find that it was in defense of the Churches immunitie, which the sacred
council of Trent. Sess. 25. Cap. 20. affirms to be founded upon divine
ordination, and upon the constitutions of the holy canons, and for which we
know that many holy prelates have combated even to the death. God has
honored Saint. Thomas of Canterbury with infinite miracles, and has declared
him to be his own true Martyr, as the Church also declared him to be
afterward, for having spilt his blood for the liberty of the same Church.

Friar Paulo.
In this seventh consideration it pleased the Author to bring in the Gloss upon
that common saying, That the sentence of the Pastor, or of the judge it is to
be feared, yea though it be unjust, which Gerson thought good to let pass, as
a gloss most known and handled of all the Doctors. Yea further I for my part
do not only subscribe to that which the Author says, but I add this more,
that even such a sentence as is notoriously void in law, ought
notwithstanding to be feared after a sort, that is to say, we ought not
proudly to disdain and contemn it, but with modesty and reverence to hinder
the execution of it. But howsoever the gloss he brings in contain good
Doctrine, yet is not the consequence for all that current which he would
collect thereupon, that therefore the Popes sentence, which is now in question,
has all the due requisites as well essential as accidental, and that it is
not only in force, but withal most just. This he proves thus. If you inquire
into the lawfulnes of the authority, you shall find that there is a supreme,
yea and that a most universal authority given him from God, which is proved
by, Quod cu^que ligaueris and by Pasce oues meas, John. 21. If it be taken in
the right sense, such as be Catholics make no difficulty to admit of this
(proposition; but this same new termed Vniuersalium (most universal) is one of
those ambiguous words, which though it be first brought in in a good sense, that
is to say, bounded and limited in things only belonging to the kingdom heaven,
and to the edification of the Church according to the Evangelical rules; yet
in tract of time it will after extend and strain it self further even to
mundane and worldly matters. S. Gregory. lib. 7. epist 30. held this very word
for suspicious, and in exceeding jealousy, when he was styled Papa
vniuersalis, and he said, it was a proud title, and imported as much, as if he
were the only Bishop, and no other man were Bishop but he. And so to have
authority most universal, is after a sort to say (if Saint Gregory's
discourse may be allowed) that there is no other authority but it. For if the
style of universal Bishop take away other Bishops; Ergo, a most universal
authority must needs take away all other authorities. But we will not contend
about the word, so that they will give it it own true meaning. Let us consider
now how this most universal authority is proved: It is said to Peter, and in
his person to all Popes: Quodcunque ligauereis. etc. Quodcunque solueris, etc.
Ergo, their authority is universal. But in the 18. of Matthew it is said to
all the Disciples, and in their person to their successors, Quaecunque
ligaueritis, etc. Quaecunque solueritis etc. Ergo, there shall be sundry most
universal authorities, which implies a flat co^tradiction. Indeed the
Quodcunque is universal, but it is bounded and restrained by the words before
Claues regni coelorum. All that perteins to the kingdom of heaven is subject
to Peter, who doubts it? but that which appertains to the kingdoms of the
earth, Christ committed it not to him. The other proof by Pasce oues meas, it
is indeed universal in respect of Oues meas: but god denies by Ezechiel in
his 34. that to cloth our selves with the wool of his sheep, is to feed them;
he denies that to dominier over the^ cum austeritate and cum potentia, is to
feed them; he denies that to drink the clear water by our selus, and the^ to
troble that that remains with our feet, is to feed the^: the author pursues it
yet further, to show the justice of the sentence, that not only the authority
in it self is lawful, which we also grant him, but also that the use of it was
lawful to, when he says that there wanted not sundry admonitio^s, no nor any
one of those things which the reach of judgment requires. It was not enough
barely to affirm this point, he should have proved it, as his offer bare us in
hand. And who soever shall see the state of Venices reasons, he shall perceive it
clearly that many, and those of the most necessary and essential points in
law were wanting, and it will appear unto him, that the cause is not for
defense of the Ecclesiastical communities, as thy Author affirms without
proof; And if matters lie so clear as he professes, why do they not publish
to the world their rights and proceedings Ecclesiastical in facto, and in
iure? And why do they not lay open to the world to see the proceedings and
reasons of the Venetian State, and so make them rest convict? It bears no
show, that forbidding men to write, tends to any such end, but in very deed to
the end to conceal the truth, and to show the cause to the world, under a
mask, as our Author himself does in this very place, when he says that
Paulus Quintus his sentence published against the heads of the Venetian State
has all it requisites, and yet the two sentences which were intimated, one on
the day of the nativity, and the other on the five and twentieth of February,
do both excommunicate the State it self, and not the heads, as in place it
shall appear. I cannot now pass over here the consideration of a great skill
of the Authors, who citing the place of the Council, Sessione 25. Cap, 20.
makes the Council say, that the Ecclesiastical immunitie is founded upon
divine ordination, and upon the constitutions of the sacred Canons; This was no
place to enter into treaty of that matter; neither was it so convenient, with a
few ambiguous terms to plant a Doctrine, that needs much extension, or else
will be very subject to be converted to pervert the peaceable State of the holy
Church. But to say no more at this time, but only so much as may suffice for
an Antidot to the Reader, it may please him to be advertised that my Lord
Cardinal Bellarmine lib. 1. de Clericis, cap. 28. sets down certain
conclusions of this very point. The first is, that in causes Ecclesiastical,
the Clergy are free, de iure diuino, from any secular Princes authority. The
fifth is, that the exemption of the Clergy in matters political, as well in
respect of their persons, as of their goods, was brought in by the law of man,
and not of God. See then how the Council intends it, when it says that
Ecclesiastical exemption is instituted iure diuino, that is, in causes
ecclesiastical. And the Author he should have translated constitutam
ordinatione diuiua, instituted by divine ordination, and not have made it
(founded): for that his first word seems to importe, that the Canons had
authority from GOD to institute it, and that it is established upon this
foundation; but it is nothing so. Their exemption in causes spiritual is
totally and expressly, de iure diuino, in other matters is is totally and
expressly de iure humano. To his example of Saint Thomas, I will allow him
well, that he dyed for the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but for that which
was truly Ecclesiastical indeed; and not for indeuouring to bring to pass,
that delinquents should not be punished, or that Churchmen should have so much
more possessions, then their own part, and place. But if a man should here
insteede of the consequence drawn hence by the Author, draw the quite
contrary in his own form and say; And from this consideration any man may
gather that Pope Paulus Quintus his sentences thundered out against the Duke,
the Senate, and the State of Venice, and all their dominion do want many
essenall requisits, to omit those that are accidental, and therefore are not
to be feared, as being not only void in form, but unjust; the contrary
consequence would be never a whit better proved by the Author, then this is
proved in this place. But it is not pertinent to do it here, where we have
nothing else to maintain, but Gersons defense. Only this we must auowe and
say, that every man is one of Christ's sheep, but God has given them a
natural defense, if the shephearde shall not follow the institution of the
supreme Pastor.

The eight consideration is, Gerson.
that the abuse of the keys in the Pope, is more dangerous then in inferior
prelates, because in case they be abused by inferiors. It is lawful to
appeal to the Pope, but from the Pope, no appeal is admitted, save only too
a general counsel, which is not so easily assembled. And howsoever before the
Counsel of Constance, it was the opinion of many, that it was unlawful to
appeal from the Pope to the Council, yet in that counsel it was expressly
declared heresy, to deny that the council was superior to the Pope.
Bellarmine.
This consideration contains a great and manifest error, and he which did
produce it, with a purpose to apply it to the business now in hand,
discovers himself not to be catholiqulie affected.

It is requisite that I insist somewhat longer upon this eight consideration,
not that the matter it self does so require, Friar Paulo.
but the Author having made a long and artificial discourse upon it, it is
necessary that I discover the secrets and subtilties thereof, in such sort,
as the reader may not thereby be carried away from the truth. Gerson in this
consideration affirms that the contempt of the keys toward the person of
the Pope is more dangerous then toward an inferior, the Author inuerts his
words, and makes him say that the abuse of the keys in the Pope is more
dangerous then in inferiors: is this faithfully to report the opinion, which
we undertake to confute? Gerson speaks of the contempt of the Popes
commandment, in those that are subject unto him, and says, that that
contempt is more dangerous then any toward the commandments of inferior
Prelates.

The Author charge him to say, that the Pope in abusing the keys, does
offend more daungerously then an inferior prelate so as that which one
speaks, of the action of a subject toward a superior.

The other speaks of the action of a superior toward those that are subject
unto him; one speaks of contempt, and that of a subject; the other speaks
of the abuse of the keys, and that in a superior; this consideration of
Gerson is in favor of the Sea Apostolic, and shows that our proceeding
toward it, ought to be accompanied with greater reverence; saying, that the
contempt thereof is more dangerous, then the contempt of others.

The Author makes him say the contrary, that the abuses of the keys in the
Pope are more dangerous then the abuses of inferiors, from whence it may be
gathered, that less respect is due to that Sea, then to the Seas of other
Prelates. Is this to dispute? or is it to enforce men to hold opinions to be
sure of something to contradict? How can the Author answer it? Gersons
principal scope in this consideration, is nothing else but to make it appear,
that in opposing against the commandments and censures of prelates, we must
also have a further regard, that we oppose not against those of the Pope; and
tells the reason of it, because from inferiors, we may have recourse to the
Pope. And makes an objection against himself; if any man should say that we
may appeal in like sort, from the Pope to a Council, he answers that this
allegation has sometime been held of no force, namely when the Popes have
been said to be above the Council.

But howsoever this cannot be said (says he) at this instant for those
reasons which he alleges, nevertheless even acknowledging that this is
true, yet for another reason, it is more dangerous to resist him, because
Counsels cannot easily be sollemnized, nor ought not upon so small
occasions as the hearing of appeals; Lo here the true sense of this
consideration, from which if you remove that point of Superiority, you shall
find nothing which even in the Authors opinion can be worthy of reprehension.

And this is spoken by the way. But the Author mindeing only his own ends,
and looking no further, has taken this for a principal part of the
consideration, saying, it contains a very great and manifest error, and that
he which did produce it with a purpose to apply it to the business now in
hand, discovers himself not to be Catholiquely affected, he knows very
well, that his Commonwealth never thought it convenient to take the benifit of
an appeal, for both the Prince, and Senate have made public declaration,
whereupon they intend to insiste; this then cannot be produced with a purpose
for the present affairs.

What intention he had which did interpret Gerson, before the publishing this
declaration, no man can conjecture, neither is it charitable to judge: But
whereas he says, that he is not catholiquely affected, it may be, he does
not remember the Doctrine of the Cardinal Bellarmine, who in his second book
of the authority of a Counsel, and thirteenth chapter, entitled. An
consilium sit supra Papam says, and quamuis postea in concilio Florentino, and
Lateranensi vltimo videatur question diffinita, tamen quia Florentinum Concilium
non ita express hoc diffimuit, and de Concilio Lateranensi, quod expressissime
rem diffiniuit, non nulli dubitant, an fuerit vere generale. Ideo vsque ad hanc
diem quastio superest etiam inter Catholices. Let him reuiew this doctrine
written before this passion, wherewithal the present affairs are accompanied,
because to free himself from this contradiction, I see not what he can allege
save only that in the 17. chapter he speaks otherwise, saying as follows of
the Lateran Council. Quod vero Conciliu^ hoc rem istam non diffinirit proprie,
vt decretum de Fide Catholica tenendum, dubium est, and ideo non sunt proprie
haeretici, qui contrarium sentiuut, sed a temeritate magna excusari non
possunt. Certainly there seems to be little agreement between these two so
near neighboring places, for to charge them with rashness whom himself
cannot deny to be Catholics, seems to proceed from no great abundance of
Charity, but this last place will not enable him to prove that the
interpreter is not Catholickely affected; for an opinion may sometimes be rash,
and yet more true then the contrary. In times past, the common opinion was
that the Angels were corporal, and it was then accounted rashness to affirm
that they are incorporall, at this time the common opinion is that they are in
corporeal, and it is no longer rashness to maintain it, and so for our
purpose: But Martin Nauara upon the Chapter, Nouit de iudiciis, alleging the
words of John Mayor does very well declare that the question is in
controversy, and that in Rome it is not permitted to hold the doctrine of
Panormitan which vpholdeth the Souerainety of the Counsel, neither does the
university of Paris allow that any man should hold the contrary.

4 What shall we say of John Mariana, a modern Jesuit, who in his book de
Rege, approved by the public examination of the Jesuits: as also by another
examination made by the authority Royal of Spain says plainly, that great
Authors are of contrary opinions in this question, but certainly this cannot
be called a rash opinion, because rash opinion according to Melchior Canus, who
has exactly handled the definition of it,) is such a one, as has lney there
reason nor authority to approve it; or otherwise is over bold y maintained,
but an opinion which has the consent of as many and (...) if not a greater
number of Universities, Countries, and Kingdoms, cannot be said to be
mayntained without reason and authority; nor yet audaciously. It is not a
charitable course, so hastily to condemn men of rashness; but if the Author
would needs Discover his affection, he should have expressed his meaning in
three or four words, and saved the labor of so long a Discourse; to show
that Gerson held a false opinion, and enforce men to think of so great an
Author, that he affirms that which has no affinity with his words; for he
makes a solemn entrance to the handling of the question, and says thus.

And to begin with the Council of Constance, Bellarmine.
three things are to be observed in it: The first, that that Council did
never declare it heresy, to deny that the Council was superior to the Pope
let him ouerlooke that Council again and again, and nothing shall be found
in it tending to that purpose. The second, that the abouementioned Council in
the 4. Sess. makes a decree, wherein it does declare that that Council of
Constance does represent the Church universal, and has authority immediately
from Christ, whereunto every one is bound to yield obedience, even the Pope
himself: which decree (as by men of most learning it is interpreted) is not to
be extended to all Popes, but only to those, of whom men are not certain,
whether they be Popes or not: which was the case at that time, when three
several persons took upon them the Papasie, and had their several followers.
And in this case it is most certain, that the Church has power to declare to
whom the Papacy does appertain; and that they which in time of Scisme do
contend for it, are subject to the determination of the Church, and of the
general Council: But when once the Pope is canonically chosen, and
undoubtedly accepted for Pope, it cannot be gathered out of that decree, that
he is bound to submit himself either to the Church, or to the Council. The
third, that this decree can have no force, save only for the redressing of
that Schism; for there being at that time no Pope in the Council, the
Council was a body without a head, and consequently had no authority to
determine any thing in matters of Faith, or in other matters of like
importance. And though Pope Martin the fifth, did ratify that Council, yet
did he ratify it only so far forth, as the decrees were made
Conciliariter, as those were which were decreed against the heresies of John
Wickliffe, and John Husse but that decree of the Superiority of the Council
above the Pope, was not decreed Conciliariter; that is to say, upon
deliberation, and disputations preceding, and by an orderly collection of the
voices of the Fathers; but it was a decree simply intended for the redressing
of that Schism: whereupon afterward, Pius the second, in the Council of
Mantua, did excommunicate whomsoever should appeal from the Pope to the
Council. The selfsame excommunication was renewed by Julius the second, as is
testified by Silu^ster, V^rbo exco^municatio. 7. Nu. 93. And since that time,
all the Popes have renewed it in the Bull, entitled, In caena Domini. Finally,
Pope Martin the fifth, by the consent of that Council of Constance declares,
that they which are suspected of Heresy, ought to be interrogated of many
Articles, and perticularly whether they do believe that the Pope has the
supreme power in the Church of God: and certainly if the supreme power be in
the Pope, the Pope cannot be inferior to the Council, for so the superiority
should rest in the Council, and not in the Pope: whereby it does appear, that
the Council of Constance in that decree of the 4. Ses. is so to be
understood, as we have expounded it, otherwise it should be contrary to it
self; and admitting that there is a contrariety, we ought rather to give
credit to the second decree, being made by the Pope, and the Council
together; then to the first, being made by the Council without the Pope; that
is to say, by a body without a head.

Friar Paulo
I will not affirm the opinion of Gerson to be true; or mayntaine either his
doctrine, or his reasons in this Apology; but this I will say, that the
reasons which the Author does produce against him, have been considered, and
answered, either by Gerson himself, or by some other of his opinion, which
have written since his time: and here I will set down some of those
resolutions, not that I intend to take upon me to determine any thing, but
only to show that the question is to be disputed with more sollide arguments;
and that Writers so excellent both for learning, and piety, are not so hastily
to be condemned.

Concerning that Council of Constance, alleged by Gerson, our Author has
three Observations: The first is that, that Council has no where declared it
Heresy, to deny the superiority of the Council above the Pope: if the
Authors meaning be that these express words (it is Heresy to deny the
superiority of the Council, above the Pope) are not to be found in the
Council, he speaks but the truth: if he will say further, that the Council
of Constance has not said, that he is Anathema which denies the Superiority
of the Council, he says as truly. Nevertheless Gerson does deny that the
Council has not determined it, which I desire may be taken for Gersons
opinion, and not mine own; and after such manner as is usual in matters of
Faith, and says, that it was reputed Heresy to hold the contrary: this is to
be seen in the fourth Ses. where these words are used, Ordinat, disponit,
statuit, decernit, and declarat: And in the fifth Ses. where the same doctrine
is repeated in these words, Ordinat, d^fi^^^, decernit, and declarat. And
because Gerson says in this consideration, that it is Heresy condemned by
most express constitution, and put in practice by the said council of
Constance; as is else where more largely set down. The author may read, the
places mentioned by Gerson in his works; where he shall see that which will
serve for answer to these objections. The Council of Trent has doubtless
condemned it for Heresy, to deny Purgatory; and yet you shall not find where
it says, that it is Heresy to deny Purgatory; or that he is Anathema which
does deny it. But the doctrine of Purgatory is sufficiently expressed in Ses.
25. and 22. in such sort, as it is evident that it is determined as a matter of
Faith; and he which in the question of Purgatory should use the Authors
words, and say, that the Council of Trent, has no where declared it Heresy
to deny Purgatory; let him read over the Council again and again, and no
such thing shall there be found; should show that he is more ententiue to the
words, then to the meaning of the Council: In like manner it may be said of
Gerson.

The second Observation of the Author against Gerson, is; That men of most
learning do expound this Decree of the Council of Constance, as spoken of a
Pope uncertain, which is most true, and not of a certain Pope: this second
Objection does in all, and every part of it contradict the former: for if the
Decree of the Council, be it what it will, does not make him an Heretic
which is of a contrary opinion; and that it be to be understood of a Pope
uncertain, then it is no Heresy to deny that a Pope uncertain, is subject
to a Council: But to say that such a Pope is not subject to a Council, is
manifestly heresy: so that whosoever will affirm that the Decree is to be
expounded of a Pope uncertain, must acknowledge it to be such a Decree as
makes the contrary opinion to be Heretical. And whosoever will affirm, that
it is not a Decree of this nature, must affirm also, that it is understood of
a Pope certain:

It is true (as the Author says) that very Learned men do expound it as
spoken of a Pope uncertain; but it is as true, that very Learned do expound
it as spoken of a Pope certain: yet this difference is to be observed, that
they which do expound it of a Pope uncertain, were not present at the
Council: But they which do understand it of a Pope certain, were all those
which were present at the Council, and have left any writings; and besides
them, all those which suruiued, and being not otherwise hindered, were present
in the Council of Basil; which of necessity must be many, because between
these two Councels, there was the space of fifteen years.

Furthermore the Author ought to observe, that Gerson does not only say,
condemned, but practiced: and to consider the practice of that Council, and
observe; if that Council did not command as well the Popes certain, as
uncertain, let him read the Ses. 17. and there he shall find that the
Council does decree, that no future Pope shall have power to depose Angelo
Corrario, formerly called Gregory, 12. either from being a Cardinal, or from
his office of Legate Della Marca, which the Council bestowed upon him; or have
any power to call him in question, or proceed against him for any thing which
he had taken upon him to do in the Papacy. Let him read also Ses. 39. which
insued the deposing of all the Popes uncertain, where it commands all
future Popes within a time limited, to summon a general Council. And here
let him mark, the words whereby it binds all Popes to the execution of it;
let him then turn over to the Ses. 44. where Martin the.5. after he is
elected, executed the Decree: and let him observe the word Teneatur, which is
both in the Decree of the Council, and in the execution of it. Afterward in
the last Ses. the Ambassadors of Polonia and Lituania, made humble supplication
to the Pope, that before the dissolution of the Council, a certain Book of a
Friar called John Falkembergh, might be condemned in public Session;
otherwise, protesting in the behalf of their Masters, De grauamine and de
appellando ad futurum Concilium. Neither did the Pope find himself any way
agreeued at this protestation, nor the Council think it strange: and by the
practice of this Decree, the Author may understand, how it may be from hence
collected, that a Pope Canonnically chosen, and undoubtedly accepted for Pope,
is bound to the obedience of the Church, and of the Council: which conclusion,
the Author does affirm cannot be collected from that Council of Constance;
and therefore let him compare the Decree, with the practice alleged, and he
shall see that Gersons speech deserves no reprehension.

The third Observation is, that the Decree can have no further force, save only
for redressing of that Scisme, because it was the work of a body without a
head: but foreseeing an Objection that might be made against him, drawn from
the confirmation of Martin the 5. the Author notes, that the Council was
approved by the Pope only, so far forth as the Acts were decreed
Conciliariter: but this was not so, that is; upon disputation preceding, and
with an orderly collection of the voices of the Fathers. And where I pray you
does the Author find, that this Decree was made without deliberation, and
disputation, or without collection of the Fathers voices? Peradventure he
means, because it is not set down in writing; by that reason in the Council
of Trent, nothing was decreed Conciliariter, because there is no mention made
either of suffrages, or disputations: So then though the disputations whereupon
that Decree was made, were not set down in writing; yet it is to be believed
that there were disputations, and the rather for that the works of very worthy
men were written at that time of this subject: amongst which, that learned
Book of Gerson was one, De potestate Ecclesiastica, and origin viris, and
Legum; as any man may know, who will read it. Moreover, Gerson in this
consideration does declare, that this question was very much disputed, for that
it was begun in the Council of Pisa, which was five years before that of
Constance: And who then can doubt, but that in the Council of Pisa, in the
Council of Constance, and in the interim, of those five years, but that the
difficulties were exactly considered, and in the determination of it, the
suffrages orderly collected. But if any man will read the confirmation of
Martin.5. he shall evidently perceive, that Conciliariter does not signify
that which the Author would have it, but is an interpretatiue. In the 45. and
last Session of that Council, it is said; That the Mass and Letanie being
ended, the Cardinal of S. Vito by the commandment of the Pope, and of the
Council said; Domini ite in pace; whereunto Amen was answered: and afterward a
Bishop, being by order from the Pope about to make a Sermon for the conclusion
of the Council: The Ambassadors of the King of Polonia, and of the great Duke
of Lituania did demand in the name of their Masters (as has been already
touched) that Falkembergh's Book might be condemned in public Session, which
was formerly condemned by those that were deputed in causa fidei; and of the
Nations, of the Council, and of the College of Cardinals: the Popes answer
was, that he did confirm whatsoever the Council had concluded, and
determined, in matters of Faith, Conciliariter, and not otherwise; whereby it
does appear, that Conciliariter is apposed to that which the Ambassadors had
alleged; Namely, that the Book was condemned severally by those that were
deputed in causa fidei, by the Nations, and by the College of Cardinals; and
that Conciliariter does signify as much as if he should have said, In public
Session.

But let us yet come somewhat nearer the matter: if this answer of the Pope
were given upon some unexpected proposition happening, made after the end of
the Council; then neither was the Council approved before, neither was it the
Popes intention to approve it. And if these Pollaxes had not proffered this
proposition, the condemnation of Wickliffe and Husse, had not been
authentical: and it will follow, that a general Council was accidentally
confirmed: And yet this is as tolerable as many other things which are usual
with our Author. That Council was a body without a head, to conclude, that in
the vacancie of the Chair Apostolic, the Church is to be reputed imperfect,
as being defective in some Essential part. After the death of Marcelinus, the
Church continued seven years and a half, without a Pope, under Diocletians
persecution, as Damasus does testify. And who will therefore affirm, that the
Church was defective in some Essential part, in that time of so great
perfection? I know that some men do not believe that the vacancie had so long
continuance; moved thereunto by some probable inducementes: But it is more
credible, that Damasus should know the truth of it, being himself a Pope 69.
years, after the death of Marcelinus, and borne shortly after that vacancie;
then we in our time upon uncertain conjectures: But let this be as it will;
let us speak of things which are certain.

Upon the death of Clement the fourth, in the year 1270. the Church was
without a Pope wel-nie three years; Shall it therefore be said, that the
Church was all that while without a head? No, rather let us hold the doctrine
of S. Ciprian, and S. Augustine, 24 quaest. 1. C. Quodcunque. and C. lequitur.

The author concludes his Discourse of the inualiditie of this forenamed
decree of the Council of Constance, saying: Whereupon afterward, Pius the
second, in the Council of Mantua, does excommunicate whomsoever should appeal
from the Pope to the Council: Here we are to observe, that there may be a
Fallacy in the word Onde. Whereupon (for it may import) as though Pope Pius
the second, did excommunicate such appealance, because the Pope is superior to
the Council; but in the Bull it self, it is not said so. It is true, that it
prohibites such appeals; but the reason is, because they have reference to
that which is not, and of which there is no certainty when it shall be: In
the mean time the poor are oppressed by the mighty, offenses remain
unpunished, Rebellion is fostered against the first sea, it is free for every
one to offend, all Ecclesiastical discipline, and Hierarchicall orders are
confounded: where you may perceive, that Pius 2. does not allege his
superiority for a reason which had been an evident and pregnant argument,
because there is no appeal but to a Superior.

Let no man reply, that though it be not expressed, yet it may be collected out
of those words; for there is no likelihoode that he would so slightly pass
over that which is most substantial, and insist with such diligence upon so
many things, that are but accidental. Besides this, before he does allege
these causes above mentioned: he affirms that he omitteth others manifestly
contrary to this corruption; which argues that the causes alleged, are the
most principal; and that the others are of less importance, and therefore
that point of Superiority is of no force in this place. Moreover, these words
of our Author, in the Council of Mantua serve only to abuse the Reader; for
it was neither done in a general, nor provincial, nor any other Council at
all. It is true that Pius the 2. was in Mantua (as it lay in his way) but he
had no body with him, save only his own Court; as by the words of the Bull
it appears, which says; By the advice, and consent of our reverend brethren
the Cardinals of the holy Church of Rome, and all the Prelates, with the
Ciuillians, and Canonists which follow the Court. But yet that which follows
in the Author, is worse: that Pius the 2. did excommunicate whomsoever should
appeal from the Pope to the Council. And that Julius the 2. did renew this
Excommunication: and that all the Popes succeeding them have done the same, in
the Bull entitled, In Coena.

If this Bull of Pius the 2. and that of Julius the 2. and all the other Bulls
of that title, were not extant; this Objection would remain unanswered: But I
will maintain, that no Pope did ever excommunicate for appealing to a Council,

Unless it were to a future council; all these Bulls may be seen and read.
And because Poenae sunt restringende, No Canonist will say that appellantes ad
praesens concilium, when any such is, shall be excommunicated by virtue of these
Bulls, this then will not serve him to prove that the Pope is superior to the
council. But why did the author leave out the word futurum? If Gersons
interpreter had committed such a fault, what censure would have been thought
severe enough for him? the reason of Pius 2. is good against those, which do
appeal to that which is not, neither is it certain when it shall be, that is
a future council: but it is not good against appealing to a present council,
and this is the reason that all Popes have excommunicated appellantes ad
futurum concilium. Let not us then leave out the word futurum, howsoever our
passions could be contented to conceal it.

After this digression, the author returns once again into Constance, and
says that Pope Martin 5. with the consent of that council did ordain that
they which should be suspected of heresy, should be interrogated whether they
did believe that the Pope had the Supreme power in the Church of God: from
whence he does conclude, that the council did intend the Superiority to be in
the Pope, and that the decree in the 4. Ses. is to be understood of a Pope
uncertain, according to his own exposition, for that otherwise the council
should be contrary to it self, but how this interrogation is understood,
whereof the Pope and the council do make mention, let the author vouchsafe to
peruse the 8. Ses. where, amongst the 45. condemned errors of Wickliff, the
41. is Non est denecessitate salutis credere, Romana^ Ecclesiam esse supremam
inter alias Ecclesias. The council follows. Error est, si per Romanam
Ecclesiam intelligat vniuersalem Ecclesiam, aut Concilium universal, aut pro
quanto negaret primatum summi Pontificis super alias Ecclesias particulares.

This one point being read, does make it manifest that the council of
Constance did intend that the Pope had the superiority over all churches
severed, but not united. And here the author leaving the council of Constance,
walks another way, Bellarmine.
and takes upon him to prove by authority of scripturs, by the consent of
councels and by reason, that Gersons opinion is manifestly erronius, saying.

But laying aside the council of Constance, it is most easy to be proved by
the authority of Scripture, by Counsels and by Reason, that Gersons opinion is
manifestly erroneous. The Scripture does no where give authority to the Church,
and to the councels above their Pastors, much less above the supreme Pastor,
but contrarily, that Bishops are ordained to govern the Church of God,
appears Act. 20. where Saint Paul says, that God has placed Bishops to
govern the Church of God. And by these words of our Savior in the 16. Mat.
where he says to his Viccar, Super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam:
where Christ making Saint Peter the foundation of his Church, did make him the
head of that mystical body, for that which a foundation is in respect of a
house the same the head is in respect of the body, and we see that the head
has power over all the rest of the body, but the rest of the body has no
power over the head. In like manner Io. 21. when Christ said to Peter, Pasce
oues meas, he made him sheapheard over all his flock; and doubtless the flock
has no authority at all over the sheapheard, but the sheapheard over the
flock. Lastly where as our Savior Luc. 12. Quis est fidelis dispensator and
prudens, quem constituit Dominus super familiam suam. says, Doubtless he
does declare that a Bishop in his particular Church and the Pope in the church
universal, is as it were, a high Steward in Gods family, and as the high
Steward has authority over the family, and not the family over him: so has
the Bishop over his Dioces, and the Pope over the Church universal, and not
the Diocese over the Bishop, nor the Church over the Pope, though assembled in
a general council, and to this end it is that our Savior in the same place
adds these words. Quod si dixerit Seruus ille in cord suo moram facit
Dominus meus venire, and coeperit percutere seruos and ancillas, edere, and
bibere, and inebriari; veniet Dominus serui illius in die qua non sperat, and
diuidet eum, partemque eius cum infidelibus ponet. Out of which words it may be
gathered, that when the high steward of Gods house does mis-behaue himself, it
is not Gods pleasure that the family should proceed against him; but reserues
to himself, the power both to judge and punish him: so that according to the
Scripture, the Church, and consequently the Council, which is a representation
of the Church having no power over the Pope, it follows that it is unlawful
to appeal from the Pope, to the Council, but contrarily that it is lawful to
appeal from the council to the Pope.

There was no necessity of writing so much upon this matter in regard of those
few words wherewithal Gerson has touched it and for my part I would forbear
to allege that which Gerson and others of the same opinion do answer, Friar
Paulo,
were it not that I would not interrupt the course which is begun of handling
every point in that order which is observed by the author.

First he affirms that the holy Scripture does nowhere give the Church power
over the pastors, much less over the supreme pastor, to this Gerson
answers that our Savior Christ sent S. Peter to the Church when he said unto
him dic Ecclesiae, for Gerson in his time read the place according to the
ancient Missall, and not according to the newly corrected. Respiciens Jesus in
discipulos suos, dixit Simoni Petro, si peccauerit. etc. As the author may see
both in his works, as also in the text of the scripture which he alleges to
this purpose. But to prove that the contrary is to be found in the scripture,
the author does allege a place Act. 20. where S. Paul says that God has
placed the Bishops to govern his Church, be it that S. Paul says so, although
in truth there be great difference between Posuit vos Episcopos, and posuit
Episcopos. But though that be granted he can conclude nothing out of this
place that the Pope is above the Church no otherwise then any other Bishop is.
But from hence a man might strongly conclude, that all Bishops have their
authority immediately from God, which peradventure would not be very pleasing
to our author.

Who would ever have inferred this consequence? God has placed Bishops to
govern his Church: ergo Papa est supra concilium: but this had been a strong
inference, God has placed Bishops to govern his Church, therefore if they do
not govern it, they do not discharge that office whereunto they are assigned.
This is a true proposition God has placed a King to govern a kingdom, does
it follow therefore that a king is superior to his whole kingdom assembled
together; the author anon will tell us that it is no good consequence and
certainly it is not good neither in our authors opinion, nor in the opinion
of John Mariana the Jesuit, but I may say truly that it holds not in all
kingdoms.

In the second place he alleges Matthew 16. Super hanc petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam etc. where he says that Christ makes Peter the foundation of
his Church, which as Gerson will not deny, because S. Paul affirms that the
Church is builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And in the
Apoc. the wall of Gods City has twelve foundations with the name of the
twelve Apostles, so he will not believe that the author would condemn another
exposition which does interpret super hanc Petram upon Christ and upon the
confession of the faith of Christ, especially seeing S. Augustine admitting
both the expositions does notwithstanding allow best of the second. By this it
does appear that the author upon a place of scripture which has two
interpretations, and both probable, will cull out that which serves best for
his purpose, and make it absolutely a ground of an article. But because it is
true that Peter is a foundation, is he therefore superior to all the building?
Gerson will say, it follows not, because he is not a principal foundation,
but such a one as is it self founded upon Christ, and not a total foundation,
but only a twelfth part according to the meaning of the Apoc. And less then a
25. part according to the meaning of S. Paul, and as concerning our authors
comparison, where he says that when Christ makes S. Peter the foundation of
his Church, he makes him the head of his Church, because a foundation to a
building is the same which a head is to a body* although it be true that S.
Peter be a head, notwithstanding the Analogy is not intelligible, viz. that
there should be the same proportion betwixt a foundation, and a building, as
there is between a head and the body. I do not see where it is possible to
find any part of this proportion; who will say that as the foundation
supporteth the house (for that is the property of a foundation) so the head
supporteth the body? this does not hold. Again who will say that as the head
gives sense and motion to the body, that the foundation does so likewise to
the building; what then does it communicate? the propositions, that we entend
to establish for doctrines, ought not to be grounded upon similitudes
especially upon such similitudes as are them selves grounded upon similitudes,
but why do we trouble our selves with the proofs, seeing we are both agreed of
the conclusion that S. Peter is a head, but what then the Illustriss. Cardinal
Pinelli is the head of the inquisition, is he therefore superior to the whole
congregation of the inquisitors being assembled? this follows not in my
understanding: upon the like reason it is that Gerson will not admit this
proposition viz. that the rest of the body has no power over the head,
especially being such a head as the body it self has constituted, but as I
said before articles are not to be grounded upon similitudes.

In the 3. place he brings in Pace oues meas, and lastly he to does allege
the 12. Luke Quis est fidelis dispensator, and prudens. etc. both which places
Gerso will make one answer to wit: that it cannot be collected out of any
place of Scripture that Christ instituting pastors in the Church has exempted
them from the Churches obedience she being the common mother of all Christians
as well Ecclesiastical as secular; the practice of those times which were
freest from corruption, even when the holy Martyrs were Bishops was, that
Pastors were subject to the censure of the Church, whereof Saint Cyprian Lib.
1. Cap. 4. gives an express testimony, where speaking of the people he says:
Quando ipsa maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes,
velindignos recusandi; quod and ipsum videmus de diuina auctoritate descendere,
vt Sacerdos plebe praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur etc. Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
Our Author affirms that Christ does evidently declare that a Bishop in his
particular Church and the Pope in the Church universal is, as it were, a high
Steward in Gods family, and has power over the family, and not the family over
him. Saint Cyprian says that the supreme power of choosing such Priests as
are worthy, and refusing unworthy does principally rest in the people, and if
the author will read the place he shall perceive that he speaks of
Bishops, particularly, though in the words alleged, he mentioned Priests,
and withal, that it is not only Cyprians Epistle, but the Epistle of 36.
Bishops; and written to the common people of Leon, Asturia and Emerita: and
if he will let him read the 14. Epistle of the 3. Book such authorities as
these we ought to allege for the maintenance of our cause: and not come in
with such mystical, and those enforced explications, as the author does in
this place; where if he had bin disposed to deal sincerely, he should have
alleged that place of Saint Luke entirely; Quis putat est fidelis dispensator,
and prudens, quem constituit Dominus super familiam suam, vt det illis in
tempore tritici mensuram; and then it makes against the author; for this
servant cannot be a general dispen^er of all the Lords treasure, to whom he
has committed nothing, save only the distribution of the Corn, there are
many other things to be distributed, as meat, drink, and apparel, all which
his Lord will commit unto him, if he behave himself faithfully in this
particular office: for thus he says, Beatus ille Seruus, quem cum venerit
dominus, inuenerit ita facientem, vere dico vobis, quoniam super omnia, quae
possidet, constituet illum. Let him read the place and see whether it can
receive any other interpretation. If either the Pope, or any other, to whom
the charge of all things is already committed, be that faithful Steward: what
are those other things which shall afterward be committed unto him, for
having so well discharged his duty in this administration; if the author will
say that we are to understand those words of the Celestial Paradise, we
must answer that the charge thereof, is peculiar to Christ and the Angels; the
holy Popes entering into the kingdom of heaven, receive from God, a reward of
their labors; but their governments they leave behind them, and are for ever
exempted from labor, as for the words that follow Quod si dixerit seruus ille
in cord suo etc. From whence the author will gather, that if Gods high Steward
does misbehaue himself, he reserueth the punishment of him, to himself, and
will not impart it to his family, I answer that the consequence does not hold
in all Stewards, neither can the example which he brings of a vice roy
avail him to this purpose, it is one thing when the father of a family being
absolute Lord of it does commit the government to another; but if the father of
the family shall give leave to his family to choose them a governor with such,
and so great authority over their Masters treasure as he himself shall set
down, it is a case of far different consideration, in like sort, different it
is when a King, who has no dependence of his kingdoms shall constitute a
Viceroy, and when he gives leave to his subjects to choose the^ one with such
authority as he himself shall prescribe; for in the first case, I acknowledge
that the family has no power over their governor, nor the subjects over the
Viceroy; but in the 2. case as the family has power to institute him, so has
it also power to censure his actions: And the subjects in like sort, the
actions of the Viceroy: and as the Cardinal Bellarmine says that the
authority which the Church has of choosing the Pope is nothing else but an
applying of the power to the person, so Gerson in his book, which he writes
upon this occasion, says that when the Church does judge the Pope, it does no
more, but separate the power from that person; if Christ had so instituted the
Popes, as it should have bin in their powers to appoint their successors,
peradventure that might have followed which the author would infer that the
Church should have no power over the Pope, but he which affirms that God
has given power to the Church to annexe power to the person should also have
showed that it has not the self same authority to remove it but the common
doctrine that the pope has no authority of electing a successor, does
euedently declare that he is not a governor of the first sort deputed
immediately from the father of the family: but of the second elected of the
family by the fathers appointment: and with this doctrine does Gerson answer
that of Pasce oues meas, and all other places of Scripture like unto it:
Namely, that although he which is by the owner appointed to be over the
flock, is not subject to the flock, yet if it be such a flock as has power
to choose a shepherd, the sheapheard when he is chosen, shall be subject unto
it; the faithful flock of Christ ought to resemble sheep, in humbleness,
and innocence, yet ought they not to be so sheepish or foolish, as to forgo
the authority which their owner has bestowed upon them, either of choosing
them a good sheapheard, or of judging a wicked. Saint Augustine does prove with
reasons unanswerable, that doctrines are to be grounded only upon the literal
sense of the scripture, and not upon any mystical interpretation, whosoever
will read all that chapter shall easily understand the meaning of our Savior,
and the literal sense of the Gospel. He spoke to his disciples and
consequently to all Christians beginning at those words, about the middle of
the chapter, dixitque ad discipulos suos, that they should not take thought for
the things of this world: because God had prepared another kingdom for them,
that they should be watchful in well doing, as not knowing when the Lord will
call, that if the goodman of the house knew at what hour the thief would come,
he should find him watching, in like sort they should be prepared, because
Christ will come at an hour when we think not; then Peter said unto him,
Master tellest thou this parable to us or even to all, Christ replied, who
think thou is that dispensator fidelis, and prudens, etc. inferring thereby
that he spoke to all, whereas if it had bin spoken only to his Viccar it would
follow that the commandment of watching, of not regarding the things of this
world* of waiting for the kingdom of heaven, and the unexpected coming of
Christ, should have been given to him alone, but because such commandments
as these are equally given to all the faithful, the litterall meaning is, that
they all are these faithful stewards, which God has commanded to exercise
their charity, by imparting their goods, and other abilities, which God has
bestowed upon them to the rest of his family, this is that measure of wheat,
and that office for the faithful administration whereof God will multiply his
blessings upon them, this then, as all interpreters do agree, is the litterall
sense of this place, howbeit besides this general exposition, some men with an
argument a minori, do, as it were, by a singularity apply it to the pastors:
but the author does well to conceal; that all the fathers when they apply this
place to the pastors, add these words also, Quod si coeperit percutere seruos,
and ancillas, edere, bibere, and inebriari, etc. and make long digressions
against their faults and errors. And peradventure this percutere seruos and
ancillas, is that which we see is come to pass in the present occasion:
Gerson therefore will not deny, but this parable spoken to all, but more
especially to Pastors, is most properly to be appplied to the Pope, and
therefore let it be said unto him, that if he give himself over to surfeiting
and to injury his neighbors, the Lord will come and punish him when he looks
not for him, howbeit we cannot conclude that he is therefore subject to no
other punishment, for by that reason it would follow, that no fornicatour or
adulterer could be punished of men, because it is written, Hebreues: 13.
Fornicarios and adulteros iudicabit Dominus, by that reason no sin is
punishable by man, because it is written, iustum and impium iudicabit Dominus,
Ecclesiast. 3. and in like sort it is not permitted to me^ to judge; because
our Savior, in the 5. of John says, Omne iudicium dedit filio, it is not well
that the scripture should be thus wrested and perverted, all these texts are to
be understood of the judgment of the world to come wheru^to it is not
repugnant that there should be punishments in this world both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, neither is there any common person so ignorant, but does
understand that these ordinary phrases God shall judge, God shall punish, etc.
tend not to the excluding of human judgments and corrections: and thus we
see that this text serves not to prove that the Pope is exempted from the
ce^sure of the Church, and consequently of the council, and Gerson does not
insist upon the parable but upon the litteral sense of the place, now let us
examine our authors other proofs, wherein he proceeds after this manner.

Unto this truth which we have proved by Scriptures, Bellarmine.
the sacred Councels do also bear witness, at what time Pope Saint Marcelinus
for fear of death committed that sin of offering sacrifice to Idols. A great
Council was assembled in Sinuessa to treat of that matter, but all that
council did acknowledge that it had no power to censure the Pope, Prima seeds
a nemine iudicabitur: of this council Pope Nicolas does make mention, in his
epistle to the Emperor Michaell; in like sort a Roman Council assembled by
the Pope Saint Siluester in the last Canon of it does declare that the first
Sea, namely the Sea of Rome is not to be judged of any, the Council of
Calcedon, which is one of the four first general councels, in the 3. Act of
it condemned Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria, together with the whole
second Council of Ephesus, because they took upon them to judge the Pope of
Rome. Now if that Patriarch, which after the Pope possesses the highest place
in the church, together with the whole Council, have no authority to judge the
Pope it plainly follows, that the Council is not above the Pope, otherwise
they might have judged him. After this the 5. Roman Council, under Pope
Simachus approved that opinion of Ennodius, as if it had been an opinion of
their own, Aliorum hominum causas Deus voluit per homines terminari, Sedis
istius Praesulem suo sine questione reseruauit arbitrio. Voluit Petri Apostoli
successores Coelo tantum debere innocentiam. in the Act. 7. of the 8. general
Council, we read thus: Romanum Pontifice^ de omnium Ecclesiarum Praesulibus
iudicasse de eo vero neminem iudicasse legimus Paulus Emilius, in his 3. book
of his story writes that a great Counsel of Bishops being assembled in the
presence of Charlemaine by occasion of certain matters objected against Pope
Leo the 3. all the Bishops cried out with one voice, that it was unlawful for
any man to judge the Pope. The general Council of Lateran under Alexander the
3. being to make a decree touching the form to be observed in the election of
the Popes, says, we are to proceed in this election, with singular diligence,
for if any error be committed in it there is no Superior to whom we may have
recourse, there is none upon earth superior to the Pope, Let him read the
chapter, Licet, extra de electione.

Finally in the Lateran Council under Leo tenth in the Sess. 11. it is
expressly determined that the Pope is superior to any Council whatsoever, and
therefore it appertained only to him to summon the Counsels, to transfer, and
to dissolve them. Now if these Counsels themselves do acknowledge that they
are subject to the Pope, who will be so hardy to say, that the Council is
superior to the Pope, or that it is lawful to appeal from the Pope to the
Council?

^rier Paolo.
The first proof which our author brings, is that when the Pope S.
Marcelinus did for fear of death offer sacrifice to Idolles there was a great
council assembled in Sinuessa to treat of this matter, and all the Council
did confess that they had no power to judge the Pope, and that Pope Nicholas
the first, did make mention of this Council, which is true and which is more,
the Acts of it are extant to this day, to this they of Paris do answer that
this Council was not general and that under these words Prima seeds a nemine
iudicatur, a general Council is not comprehended, it seems strange unto
them that the Council being assembled only upon this occasion, it should
conceive that it had no authority to determine it, and it is more strange that
Marcelinus denying the fact that the Council had not eftsoone departed, for so
the matter had been at an end and not proceeded to convict him as indeed they
did, producing first 7. witnesses, which affirmed they saw him offer sacrifice,
after this they examined as many witnesses more as made up the number
fourteen. The second day they produced 14 more, who being interrogated by the
Bishops, affirmed the same. The third day he examined 44. more, so that the
number of witnesses amounted to 72 called Labra occidua, it is certain that to
examine witnesses is a judicial act of a superior, and it is as certain that
Marcelinus after the examination of these 72. prostrated himself up on the
ground and acknowledged his offense and the Test says that the Bishops
Subscripserunt in eius damnationem, and damnauerunt eum, and one of them said,
Just ore suo condemnatus est, and ore suo Anathema suscepit Maranatha, quoniam
ore suo condemnatus est, nemo enim vnquam iudicauit Pontificem, nec prae^ul
Sacerdotem suum, quoniam prima seeds non iudicabitur a quoquam, it is very true
that Iudica causam tuam, nostro iudicio non condemnaberis, is often iterated by
those Bishops, but what their meaning is, the reader may easily discern by
the contrariety which seems to be between their words and their actions.
The Pope denies the fact, the Council does examine witnesses against him, and
subscribed to his condemnation: what needs any more, but seeing the matter
which was handled was a matter of infidelity, the Parisians cannot conceive
according to the doctrine of those times, why the Council should not have to
do with it, for if the words Prima seeds a nemine iudicabitur, be to be
understood in matter of heresy, it is contrary to the doctrine of this time,
if it be to be understood in aliis causis, it agrees not with the purpose of
the Council. Another great difficulty that they find in the Acts of this
Council, is, that Dioclesian in person brings in Marcelinus to sacrifice,
the 72 witnesses are accorded to testify the fact, the Council is assembled
in Sinuessa, it lasts three days, and in the end of it, it is said that
Dioclesian being in the wars of Persia had advertisement that 300 Bishops, 30
Priests, and three Deacons, had met together and that when they came to set
their hands to the sentence, Marcelinus himself was the first that subscribed
his own Anathema. Doubtless Dioclesian made great have into Persia, and the
difficulty is so much the greater, because it should seem that Marcelinus was
put to death by the express order of Dioclesian.

Moreover Marcelinus was excommunicated: for so says the Acts and his Anathema
was subscribed by himself and the Bishops, by whom was he excommunicated by
himself? no, the Schoolmen hold that to be impossible. Was it by the council?
no, the author says the council did not judge him; by whom then? if any man
will answer that it was A Iure; tell us who made that Canon, whether the Pope,
or the council? no man can make a Canon for the trangression whereof, he
himself shall be excommunicated, neither can an inferior make a Cano^ to bind
a Superior, it is confessed that Marcelinus received the sentence of Anathema,
he could not receive it from himself, from whom then did he receive it? if the
council, at least in that cause were not superior unto him: How shall we
reconcile this contradiction, which seems to be between the words and the
deeds of the council: two things there are, which may certainly be
concluded out of these Acts, but such is the contrariety between them, as they
can hardly stand together, one is, that the Bishops speaking to Marcelinus
bad him judge himself: the other that Marcelinus denying the fact they
produced witnesses against him, and examined them, and in conclusion,
Marcelinus was excommunicated. But because this council was not general, all
which has bin said of it, makes nothing against the opinion of the Parisians.

In the 2. place, he cites the Roman council under Siluester, in the last
Canon where of it is declared, that the first Sea which is the Sea of Rome, is
not to be judged of any; he might have don well, to have alleged the
forenamed Canon entirely, because the Canon it self does make it manifest,
what is meant when it is said that the first Sea shall not be judged of any for
these are the words of the Canon Nemo iudicabit primam sedem, quonia^ omnes
seeds a prima sede iustitiam de siderant temperari; neque ab Augusto, neque ab
omni clero, neque a Rigibus, ne que a populo iudex iudicabitur: This according
to the divines of Paris, is the reason why the first Sea cannot be judged of
any; namely because al other Seas appeal to it for justice, but al other Seas
being united, as in a general council they are, can have no controversy with
any inferior Sea, and consequently no cause of appeal to the first, but be
cause al Seas, considered severally may be at controversy among themselves,
therefore it is that the first Sea is superior to all other being so
considered, but not when they are assembled in a council according to that of
the Council of constance Article 41. against Wickliffe formerly alleged, and
they give this for a general rule; that wheresoever these words are found
Prima Seeds a nemine iudicatur, they are to be interpreted, a nulla alia sede
particulari; others there are which say precisly that this Canon extends
generally to all the Patriarchall Seas and not particularly to the Sea of Rome,
for that Pope Nicholas the first does allege it in that Epistle to the
Emperor Michall in the behalf of the Church of Jerusalem: and this Epistle
ought to be of great authority with the author, because himself does vouch it
upon this occasion; and therefore the author does not well to interpret these
words of Pope Nicholas Prima seeds as spoken of the Sea of Rome, which
himself spoke of Jerusalem and are equally to be extended to all the Seas of
the Patriarchs. The Author himself will not deny but that a general council
may proceed against a Patriarch; and by the same reason it may proceed against
the Pope* according to Gersons opinion, notwithstanding any thing contained in
this Canon, but what is the reason why in the Acts of the council it is said
that this council was assembled by Siluester, by the advice of Constantine who
was newly Baptized and yet in the end of this Act it is said that it was in
his 3. Consulship, by this account Constantine was Baptized in his 3.
Consulship, whereas in the Chapter Constantinus did. 96. the Baptism of
Constantine, is said to be in his 4. Consulship, contradictory to that of the
council.

Here unto they add that Cardinal Baronius has convicted of falsehood this
Chapter, Constantinus. Wherein it is said that the Baptism of Constantine was
in his 4. Consulship with Gallicanus, and that by the authority of Amianus
Mercelinus who affirms that Constantine was never associated with a private
man in the Consulship. This reason seems to be at variance with that
council, in the end whereof it is said that it was solemnized Constantin^
Augustus, the third time, and Priscus being Consul, so that by Cardinal
Baronius his reason, we are not to give credit to that Roman council. There
are also certain other passages observed in this council though peradventure
not of so great importance as that Constantine called himself Donnus a word
not in use til some hu^dreds of years afterward; Again it is said Prima seeds
non iudicabitur neque a Regibus, as if there were some King, reigning in
Italy, at that time, of whom they stood in fear: whereas al Kings in those
times were vnchristned, and lived beyond Euphrates, and Danubie, and also that
in the 2. Canon of that council in the ecclesiastical ordinations so large a
time is assigned as the space of 55. years to proceed from a Reader, to a
Priest.

In the 3. place he urges the authority of the council of Calcedon in the 3.
Act whereof Dioscorus is condemned for that he with the whole second council
of Ephesus took upon them to censure the Pope of Rome: concluding that if that
Patriarch which next to the Pope possessed the highest place in the Church
together with a general council, had no power to judge the Pope, it follows
that the council is not above the Pope: Hereunto they of Paris do answer
briefly that the second council of Ephesus which our author terms a
general council was only a Conuenticle, and branded with the infamous
surname of Predatorium, and therefore in that third Act of Calcedon alleged by
our author, Dioscorus is condemned, not only for the excommunicating Leo, but
also for receiving Eutiches to the communion, whom his ordinary had
excommunicated, for using violence to Flauian of Constantinople, and for many
other offenses, but especially for his contumacie which he used that day
against the council.

If out of these premises any man will go about to prove that a council can
not condemn a Patriarch of Constantinople, I will deny the consequence, but
this were a good consequence, that therefore no Predatorie council can condemn
a Patriarch of Constantinople, because he holds the true catholic faith,
and in like sort it follows that no Council can proceed against the Pope in
favor of an heresy, because he teaches the catholic faith. There are some
others who do observe that in that third act many complaints were exhibited
against Dioscorus, as well viua voce of them which were present, as under the
hands of others which were far off. Dioscorus, though he were present in the
city, yet absenting himself from the Council, was at three several times
sommoned to appear, which he utterly refusing to do, the Council resolved to
condemn him, in this condemnation. 186. Bishops pronounced their sentences, as
it may appear by the Acts of that council where these sentences are formally
set down. The legate of Pope Leo said thus that Dioscorus against the orders
of the church taking upon him the primacie had restored Eutiches that he would
not suffer Leos epistles to Flauian to be read and that for these errors he
might have had his pardon, but for that he did afterward presume to
excommunicate Leo the Archbishop of great Rome and for that he was accused to
the Council of many heinous offenses, and for that he being thrice su^moned
refused to appear, they in the behalf of Pope Leo that holy Sinode and
blessed Saint Peter did deprive him of his Episcopal dignity. Anatolius bishop
of Constantinople said, I also am of the same opinion, and do assent to the
condemnation of Dioscorus, for that he was disobedient to the citation, but he
made no mention of the excommunication of Leo. Maximus of Antiochia said, I do
concur with Leo of Rome and with Anatolius of Constantinople in the deposing
of Dioscorus, for that beside other things he disobayed the citation. After
these 184. Bishops pronounced their sentences successively, and some of them
said, I condemn Dioscorus for his contumacie, others, according to the voices
of the three Patriarchs, others according to the sentence of Anatolius, from
whence they do gather that the deposing of Dioscorus by the Concell was for
diverse faults committed, whereupon he being called, refused to appear. The
excommunication of Leo which the Romans did insert amongst the causes of his
deposing, assented unto by some of the fathers, was not they say the general
sentence of the council and prove it as to them it seems manifestly. For the
intimation of the sentence against Dioscorus is not in the Acts of the
council, but alleged by Euagrius in his lib. 2. chapter 18. where making a
repetition of the causes of the condemnation, the excommunication of Leo is not
to be found. These are Euagarius words. De his per litteras a Concilio
referebatur ad Martianum, and abdicatio per idem Concilium missa fuit Dioscoro,
quae ita se habet: Scito te, tum quod diuinos Ecclsiae Canones contempseris;
tum quod Sancto huic, and Generali Concilio minime obtemperaueris; tum propter
alia mul^a crimina praeterea quae co^misisse deprehensus es, tum quod tertio
vocatus a Sancto hoc, and celebri Concilio vt illis, quae sunt tibi obiecta
responderes, non veneris: scito iuqnam, te propter ista omnia a Sancto, and
Generali Concilio tertio idus istius mensis Octobris Episcopatu abdicatum esse,
and a^ omni iure Ecclesiastico penitus abalienatum. Quibus verbis in
commentarios relatis missisque, etc.

And to make it appear yet more plainly that the council of Calcedon was of a
contrary opinion to that which the Author would father upon it, they add that
in the first Act of it, the Senators and the Bishops being assembled in the
presence of the Emperor and the Empress, the Emperor and the Senate sitting
in the midst of the Church and at his left hand the Popes Legates with
Anatolius, and the Bishops under his jurisdiction, at his right hand
Dioscorus of Alexandria, Iuuinall of Jerusalem with their Bishops, the Popes
Legates went into the midst of the council and said, that they had
commandment from the Pope of the city of Rome, which is head of all the
Churches, that Dioscorus should not sit in the council, wherefore they
desired, that Dioscorus might depart the council, or otherwise themselves
would go forth of it, the Judges, and the Senate demanded what was objected
against Dioscorus, one of the Legates answered that he had assembled a
council without any authority from the Sea Apostolic, another of the Legates
said we cannot transgress the commandments of the most blessed Pope, and
another of them said we cannot endure so great an injury that that Sea should
be Judges. The Judges commanded that Dioscorus should sit down; and that all
the rest should likewise sit down in their places. In the last Act also the
fathers, and the Judges being set, the Legates of Pope Leo demanded of the
Judges that they might have leave to speak, which being granted they said,
yesterday after you departed and we followed you, certain Acts were made in
the council which we conceive to be contrary to the Canons, and to the
descipline Ecclesiastical, wherefore we do require that you cause them to
be read again, to the intent that every one may see whether they be just: The
Judges commanded that they should be read, and accordingly a Canon was read,
where it is said that the ancient fathers have given great privileges to the
Sea of old Rome, in regard of the Empire of that city, therefore also the
second council of Constantinople, has given as great privileges to the Sea
of Constantinople, new Rome* judging that a city adorned with the Empire and
Senate, ought to have privileges and authority in Ecclesiastical affairs,
equal to old Rome, and to have the next place after her: The Canon being read
together with the subscription, one of the Legates said, you see with what
subtilty, holy Bishops are dealt with all, in that they have bin enforced to
subscribe without producing the copy of the Canon whereof they have made
mention: The Bishops cried out no man is enforced, and the contention being
prosecuted; the Judges did order that both the parties should propound the
Canons; the sixth Canon of the Nicene council was read in the behalf of the
Romans and in the behalf of the Constantinopolita^s, and the reading was
different; for in that which the Romans read, these words were in the beginning
of it; Quod Ecclesia Romana se^per habuit primatum, which are not in the other
copies, after this a Canon being read of the council of Constantinople, the
Bishops reasoned sufficiently, and finally the Judges demanded of the^ what was
their opinion; whereunto they answered that that which was determined was just,
one of the Roman Legates did protest that either the decree might be
annihilated, or that his protestation might be recorded against it, let the
reader therefore Judge what opinion the council of Calcedon held of the Popes
superiority.

As to the Roman council under Simachus, the Parisians do not deny that the
Popes of Rome have held that they ought not to be judged of any, and also that
the prouincial councels they have assembled in Rome have not confirmed the
same, but they say with all that never any Roman council, neither this fifth nor
any other came to specification that the Pope may not be judged of a general
council and when they say that the Pope can be judged of none, they understand
that he can be judged of none, that has not general authority in the
Church. For the Pope having general authority, it stands not with reason, that
he should be judged by him that has but particular authority: wherewith they
answer also to the history which he alleges of Leo the third.

But here I am enforced to set down a little thing of mine own. Paulus Emilius
in the third of his history reports this fact: Where yet it shall not be found
that he says, there being assembled a great council of Bishops, as the
author makes him speak. He says simply, first that Charles sent Leo to Rome,
with many Bishops and secular noblemen: and enterteined himself elsewhere
about public business. Afterward he went to Rome, and there heard the
accusations against the Pope: and having diligently examined them, he required
their opinion: and the Bishops made answer, that it were well that the Pope
should judge himself: and it was acceptable to Charles to be delivered from
proceeding to that judgment. Let the author read the place, and he shall see
no mention there of a council: and that it was rather a convocation of the
imperial council, where were both seculars and Bishops: and that the Bishops
did favor the cause of the Pope. And let the author also remember himself,
that he opposed before against the decree of Constance because there was no
debaiting of the matter before hand: and let him not here plant such a maine
foundation of a thing which was spoken by some Bishops in a particular fact,
thus assembled, and having their opinion vnpremeditately demanded. For
peradventure the Popes innocence being known unto them, they spoke by way of
exaggeration: not therefore (will Gerson say) to the prejudice of general
councels, which represent the Church universal, and have universal
authority. But see Reader the cunning of our author: Who says that the first
council of Rome under Pope Simachus, approved as their own decree that
sentence of Ennodius, aliorum hominum causas etc. It shall never be found in
that council, that that sentence was particularly approved, no nor yet so much
as mentioned. It will be found indeed that the council said, let a little
book be brought hither, which has been written by Ennodius, against them
which have murmured against our fourth Sinod; and it being read, the council
said, let the book be held of all men for most sound and for Sinodical, and
let it be entered amongst the actions of our fourth and fifth Sinods, Integerrime
Synodaliter.
and let it be held as the other decrees of the Sinodal actions, because it is
written and confirmed with Sinodall authority. And Pope Simachus answered, be
it done according to your will, and be it placed among the decrees
Apostolical, and held for such.

Here say the Parisians that it is to be understood, that by decrees Synodall,
or actions Synodal, or decrees Apostolical, is not meant a Canon, which can
determine an article, as de fide, that is, to be held for matter of Faith. But
all the Epistles of a Pope entered in the Register, are called the decrees of
such a Pope: and he that shall peruse the book of Counsels, shall see this
inscription upon every Pope, The decrees of Pope N. and then his election, his
life, and afterward his Epistles if there be any. And likewise in the Councels
he shall see, that their actions contain many communications of interchanged
speeches; yea not forethought on, and sometimes the epistles of sundry persons:
al which things are not de fide, neither does any man receive them for such. No
man can possibly say, that the Popes epistles, especially before Siricius, nor
all that which at this day is found contained in so many narrations of the
Acts of the council of Ephesus, of Calcedon, and other ensuing, is de fide.
The determinations of Councels are received, which in the ancient for the most
part will not pass one or two sheets; whereas their actions will contain
forty or fifty. And concerning the Papal decrees, their greater part
contains no other matter save such as does not concern the Faith. Sometimes
in a long epistle there shall be one only Article, as in that most famous and
most holy epistle of Saint Leo to Flauian. Wherefore there is great ods to say,
such a proposition of Ennodius was approved, which would intend that it were
approved as an Article of faith, or Ennodius book was approved, which intends
no more save that it is a good book, and made to good purpose, but not that
whatsoever is in it, should be de fide: and to establish well this answer, it
might be said to the author: This book is of many sheets printed in folio, it
contains above 200. Propositiones, among which that is one which the author
produces, It is demanded whether they will that they be all de fide: and it
shall be showed him that there is some there that is not such, If he will not
accept them all, as being de fide, what reason why he would have this to be de
fide, and not the rest? He has thought to escape this objection, by telling
us that one only sentence of Ennodius, was approved. Let us speak frankly,
the pamphlet was approved, wherein among many other, is this sentence; and
therefore no more approved then the rest; so that this shall be no more de fide
then all the book.

Some also observe, that that fourth Council, called Palmare, was assembled to
give an end to the imputations which were laid upon Pope Simachus, which were
not of matters concerning his government, but of matters merely personal, of
adulteries, etc. as the Lord Cardinal Baronius does well deduce: It was
therefore intended by Ennodius, that such like delights should be remitted to
divine judgment, which thing also Gerson and he that follows his opinion does
admit. And that this is true in those very Acts of the fifth Council, where
Ennodius book was approved, Pope Simachus thanking the fathers for their
defending him, proceeds on; that for the time to come he ordeineth, that the
like course be observed, not only for the Bishop of the Sea Apostolic, but
also for all other Bishops of Christendom, for which without making new
decrees, there are already the ancient, that the sheep cannot reprehend their
Pastor, unless he be found in fault in matter of Faith, neither accuse him for
any matter unless it be for his injustice. The sentence of Ennodius is too
general, for by that it would seem, that the Pope were not subject to humane
judgment, no not in case of Heresy: for he says absolutely, that in all
causes, he is reserved to divine judgment, and therefore wisely Pope Simachus
after he had said that he extended the self same to all Bishops, according to
the ancient Canons, excluded the case of heresy and of injustice. And without
all this discoursing, the book of Ennodius placed among the decrees
Apostolical has this title: In the name of the Father, of the Son and the
holy Ghost, the preface of Ennodius etc. and afterward, It was composed against
them, which had presumed to write against Synods; that neither against the
Bishop of the Sea Apostolic, nor any other Bishop any man presume such
matters as were presumed against Pope Simachus. Wherefore the Parisians say,
that this place serves to prove the doctrine of Gerson, and does in no wise
cross it. It may well be thought, that the author, as being of eminent
learning, perceived well the weakness of his argument, and therefore made no
mention, neither of the history nor of the Synod Palmare, nor of the
approbation of the whole book of Ennodius, neither of extending the case of
Simachus to all other Bishops, much less out of the place alleged would draw
any conclusion.

As touching the eight Council, it had been better that the author, besides
his telling us we read in the seventh action, had added also whose the words
were which he has read: for they are the words of Adrian Pope of Rome, spoken
in a Synod of Rome and rehearsed together with many other things. Upon which
not withstanding the Council determines nothing. But we read in the Canons
of the same eight council determined, by it these words. Besides if an
Universal Synod shall be assembled, and any ambiguity and controversy shall
arise also concerning the holy Church of the Romans; it is meet with venerable
respect and convenient reverence to inquire of the question proposed, and to
receive solution or to proceed and give order, So yet as not audaciously to
give sentence against the high Bishops of the elder Rome. So that they allow of
a sentence not being audacious.

There follows another proof out of the Council of Lateran, under Alexander
the third in the chapter Licet de electione: Where a decree being to be made of
the manner of choosing the High Bishop, it says that in this election, there
must be used very especial diligence, because if they commit error, there is
no recourse after to be had to any superior, there being none on earth
superior to the Pope. The Author has handsomely added these words of his own,
There being none on earth Superior to the Pope: which are too significant. That
chapter of the Council says nothing else but that recourse to a superior
cannot be had. It sufficed to allege unto us the bare words of the council
and not to add of his own, as a matter out of the Council just that which is
in controversy. But this place makes against our Author, having said so often
before, that a doubtful Pope is subject to the council, much the^ more a Pope
intruded. Where therefore it says, if there be error in the election, there
is no superior, whom to have recourse unto, it is not meant that the Council
is not Superior: nay, rather as well by his own, as by the general opinion,
so often as there is difficulty and doubt, in the election, the judgment
belongs always to the counsel. The meaning therefore of the said chapter
Licet is this, that there is no superior actually in being, by reason that the
council is not always assembled, whence we see that the author contrary to his
own proper meaning, has added here, there being on earth no Superior to the
Pope. For whenever there is error or doubt of error in the election, himself
affirms that there is on earth a superior to the Pope, and that this is the
council.

To the council of Lateran the Lord Cardinal Bellarmine, in the second book,
de auct. Council. cap. 13. says, that it has most expressly defined this
controversy, But because some doubt whether the council were general,
therefore the question stands on foot still even among the Catholics. And in
the 17. chapter (it appears not whether to c^ntradict himself or to confirm
the same) he says it is a doubt, whether the said council have defined this
thing as a decree of the Catholic Faith. It seems therefore superfluous to
bring an authority against Gerson, which suffers (by the doctrine of himself
that brings it) so many perplexities: and doubt being also made of the
authority of that council, and withal of the determination. But Dominicus
Soto speaks of it well and clearly, For lib. 6. de just; and iur: q. 1. a.
6. he disputes against, the Monti di picta which are very expressly approved in
that council, with these words, Sacro approbante Concilio declaramus and
definimus Montes p^etatis, etc. And it commands under pain of excommunication
Latae sententiae, that no man be so hardy as to dispute against them, neither
in words nor writing. And the said Soto seeing how much this was against his
opinion, who does condemn them; makes answer that all the acts of that
council are not received, nor put in practice. But the Parisians say moreover,
that in that Council there were never present one hundred Bishops, and
particularly in that second Session here alleged by the author, counting the
Assistances in Coct, and the Titulars without diocese, there were threescore
and four Bishops all in a manner of places round about Rome. They add that it
can not be called the determination of a council, whatsoever is said
incidentally in a decree, without the compass of the principal which is
intended to d^fine. ^ut in the B^ll whereof we speak, the intent is only to
disanull the Pragmatick, and this is the substance of the decree. Now whereas
in disanulling it, answer is made to him that maintained it by virtue of the
council of Basil and it is said that the council it self was removed by
Eugenius, and that therefore it is of no validity, seeing the Pope has power
to transfer the councels, as he that has authority above them; this does not
appertain to the substance of that Bull, but is an avoiding of a contrary
reason, and is not therefore a determination. For which cause very well the
Lord Cardinal Bellarmine* in the second place alleged, has revoked that
which he had said in the first: that is, that that council has most expressly
determined; and has said that it is in doubt, whether that be a determination.

The common judgment of all the divines is, that the reasons which are used in
a determination, are not intended themselves also to be determined. And it
should be a maruailous strange matter that framing a decree of a particular
thing, such as is the reuocation of the Pragmatick, which is no matter of
Faith, an article of Faith should incidentally be determined, so that the
principal should not be of Faith, and the accessory should of necessity be of
Faith.

The Parisians add farther, that to prove that the Bishop of Rome has
authority above the Council, there are brought in that place a number of
histories, not so few as fifteen, and lastly the book of Aimarus de Synodis:
whereupon we were to say, that all those histories were de fide. And the
Parisians show plainly, that some of those histories, recited faithfully, do
say the contrary. But it would be too long here to produce so many
particulars. Some also make answer, that the Bull does not say that the Pope
has authority above the Councels, but it says that it is to be auerred out of
the divine scriptures, and out of the sayings of the Fathers, and Bishops of
Rome, and Canons and Councels, that the Bishop of Rome has authority above the
general Councels: so that it is not intended to be otherways true, then so
far forth as that auerment may be justified. Therefore first that proof must
be produced, Quatenus inde constat.
and the sense of the scriptures and sayings of the Fathers must be seen:
seeing the Council does not affirm it as of it self, but with reference,
that is, so far forth as the scripture and those other things alleged make
proof thereof.

An other doctor proposes another difficulty much greater, that in the
beginning of the Bull of this Council, it is said, that Christ ordained Peter
and his successors to be his vicars, unto whom (as is testified in the book of
Kings) obedience is so necessary, that he which does not obey, is to dye the
death. Which if it be an article of faith, is a very severe one; that all
disobedience to the Pope should be punished with death. And certainly the
world has not received it, neither happily ever will. The same Doctor adds
farther, that he cannot conceive how so many years before there was any Pope,
there should be speech of him in the book of Kings. Afterward he says, that he
has read all the 4. books of the Kings, and never yet found there any such
matter. But let us leave the authority of this Council, seeing the Doctors
which follow Gerson do not receive it: And each of the eight answers made unto
it, does of it self dissolve the argument.

For a conclusion the author brings forth, as it were for an Achilles, a reason
founded upon the word of God, saying.

But let us see if the reason founded upon the word of God, Bellarmine.
do testify the self same verity. The holy Church is not like to the
Commonwealth of Venice, or of Geneua, or of other Cities, which confer upon
their Duke that power which themselves please; in regard whereof it may be
said, that the Commonwealth is above the Prince: neither yet is it like to an
earthly kingedome, in which the people transfer their own authority unto the
Monarck, and in certain cases may free themselves from Royal dominion, and
reduce themselves to the government of inferior Magistrates; as did the
Romans, when they passed from dominion Royal to Consulare government. For the
Church of Christ is a most perfect kingedome, and an absolute Monarchy, which
has no dependence upon the people, neither from them had his original; but
depends only upon the divine will. And I (says Christ in the second Psalm)
am constituted a King by him, over Sion his holy mountain. And the holy Angel
said to the virgin Luc. 1. Our Lord God shall give him the seat of David his
Father, and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
there shall be no end. And in a thousand other places the same is read, And that
this kingdom does not depend on men, Christ shows when he says, you chose
not me, but I chose you. Joan. 15. And we shall ackhowledge it, at what time we
shall say, thou have made us to our God a Kingdom. Apoc. 5. And this is the
cause why this kingdom is in the Scriptures resembled to a family. Who is a
faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has appointed over his family? Mat.
24. because the father of a family does not depend on the family, neither from
thence has his authority. Now this being most true there follows thereof by
necessary consequence, that the Vicar general of Christ does not depend of the
Church, but only of Christ, from whom he has his whole authority: as also we
see in earthly kingdoms, that the Viceroy has not his authority from the
kingdom but from the King, neither can be judged or punished by the people, but
only by his Lord and Master. Behold therefore how Gerson is deceived, and he
also that does follow him; and goes contrary to the doctrine of the holy
scriptures, of the sacred Councels, and of manifest reason.

^rier Paolo
Thou shall see here Reader a marvelous piece of Art, wherewith the Author will
lead thee, from Christ the eternal high Bishop, to an high Bishop Temporal:
and when he shall have settled with thee the relation which the holy Church has
toward the divine majesty, he will afterward conclude of the relation toward
the Pope. The Parisians do answer, that thus the doctrine of the Catholics
does hold; that God has called the Church to the faith and his worship; and
that he has placed Christ over it for an head for ever: who first, himself
mortal, did govern it on earth with corporal presence: but ascended into
heaven, does rule it with inward influence and assistance invisible unto the
end of the world. This is meant by, I am constituted a King by him. This
means that, our Lord God shall give him the seat etc. and he shall reign
for ever. This is that, you chose not me, but I chose you. This is the kingdom
in the Apocalips, and thou have made us to our God a kingdom. This Christ is
the Father of the family, who is owner of it, and it his child and servant.
Which for that it is composed of visible men, the Father himself would that it
should be governed also by a man visible: and has appointed the authority
which he should have; and instituted one of them before the Church was
founded, but for the residue of time after it was founded has left on earth
the power to choose a successor. Now with this doctrine, which I am assured
the author will admit, yea rather will say that without it no man is
Catholic, the reason is answered, that the Church is not a commonwealth, as
Venice, or as Geneua, which give as much authority as themselves please to
their Duke; nor a kingdom, which may change the manner of governing it,
neither inuisibly nor visibly, because that Christ has prescribed the manner,
much less is it such a kingdom as France, which has a blood royal, where the
Kings succeed by birth, neither as some other by testament: but as touching
the inward government and merely spiritual, it is not like unto any, because
it has a perpetual and immortal King; In the visible government, it has a
Minister, as concerning his authority, instituted by Christ and vndepending of
the Church, as concerning the application of the authority to the person,
elective and depending of it. Wherefore when he alleges, and I am constituted
a King by him: Our Lord God shall give him: you chose not me: Thou have made us
to our God a kingdom: All these places and such like others are meant of the
invisible kingdom, the spiritual interior; where the Pope has no government
at all, but only the Savior which knows the hearts, and can inflowe into
them, and bestow on them the graces and gifts, whereby they are made Citizens
of the heavenly Jerusalem. Christ also is that Father of the family, which
depe^ds not of it. The high Bishop is a servant, ^et over the family by the
Fathers thereof, in respect of the authority, but which the family it self has
placed over it self, in respect of the election of the person. So as touching
the authority, it is from Christ; as touching the application, it is from the
Church. But the Author makes the Church a family depending of the Father, whom
he acknowledges to be Christ: and this being settled, he concludes that the
Father does not depend of the family, nor has his authority from it: Therefore
the Pope cannot be subject to the Church: and passes from the father of the
family, which is Christ; to the steward elected by the family it self, which
is the Pope. Let him stand firm in the similitude, for he shall never find in
the Gospel, that any other is called father of the family, but God the father,
or else Christ his Son by nature. The minister is a servant, it is not fit to
attribute the propriety of God to another: For which cause the example serves
meruailously for Gerson, as also the example which the author brings of a
Viceroy, is much for the same purpose If a King of France, as S Lewis the 9.,
should go to the conquest of the holy land and should say to the kingdom, I
leave you my cousin for Viceroy, with authority to administer justice, but not
to make laws, not to assemble the states etc. and in case he happen to fail,
choose ye another in his place with the same authority, the authority of the
elected, should be from the King and master; the person which the kingdom
should choose, should be subject to the kingdom. This is that which Gerson
teaches throughout all his works, where it is seen that verily the force of
the reason concludes for him. Out of the things abouesaid, I will not
conclude, that the opinion of Gerson in this point of the supreme power
Ecclesiastical, either is true or is false, but only that the authors
conclusion that Gerson is deceived, and that he is deceived that does follow
him, and goes contrary to the doctrine of the holy scriptures, of the sacred
Councels, and of manifest reason, has need of other proofs, then those
abouesaide. The Author proceeds.

Bellarmine.
And if he should say, that which Gerson himself wont to say, that it is
written in Saint Matthew in the 18. chapter, tell the Church And if he will not
hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and the Publican: I would
answer, that in that place, by the Church is meant the Prelate, who is the head
of the Church and so does Saint John Chrysostom expound it, Homilia 61. in
Matthew and Pope Innocent 3. cap. Nouit, de iudiciis, and so does the practice
of the universal Church of all the world, and of all times declare; that he
who will denounce a sinner to the Church, and observe this precept, does not
assemble a Council, but has recourse to the Bishop or to his vicar.

It is not sufficient to the Author, to have disputed with Gerson, but he also
gives solution to his reasons. But in this place, of many which Gerson brings
and deduceth, Friar Paolo.
the author contenteth himself to produce one only, and to dissolve it: And
this is taken from the authority of Saint Matthew: tell the Church, unto which
he answers the Church, that is the Prelate: and of this exposition he
makes Chrysostom the author: although the Parisians say that Chrysostom does
not say so; but it seems when a thing is accustomed to be alleged, every
man alleges it without once viewing it. Chrysostom expounds, tell the
Church, namely the Bishops and Praefidents. This is that which Gerson says,
to the Church representatiuely: because it being not possible to assemble the
whole, it be comes represented by the assembly of Bishops and Praesidents. And
therefore they add, that under the name of the Church, their cannot be meant
one person: For in vain should that ensue, If two of you shall consent upon
earth concerning every thing whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to
them of my Father which is in heaven. For where there be two or three gathered
in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And for confirmation of this
sense, they bring that Saint Paul, who received the information against the
incestuous, there is plainly heard fornication among you etc. It follows, I
indeed, absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged, as present,
him that has so done, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being
gathered together and my spirit, with the virtue of our Lord Jesus, to deliver
such an one to Satan, Where they note that Saint Paul, who was then in
Philippi, did not write by his Brief, I excomunicate such an one: but wrote to
the Church, that being gathered together with his spirit, they should do it.
It is not therefore repugnant to Chrysostom, that to the Bishops and
Praesidents, may be also meant of a general council Above there was also
proposed the doubt, that tell the Church, were as much as to say tell thy
self. As touching the practice, which shows that tell the Church does mean
the Prelate, because recourse is had to the Bishope or his Vicar: of the
ancient practice, I have spoken to him with the authority of Saint Paul; as
touching the modern, it is true that at this day the Bishope or his Vicar
excommunicateth without the advice or participation of any; many times also the
Register only; and (that which is more important,) by authority delegated, a
Clerk of the first tonsure deputed commissary in some very light particular
cause, does excommunicate a Priest. Yea Leo the tenth in the council of
Lateran, in the eleventh Session, by a perpetual constitution of his, has
granted faculty to a secular person to excommunicate the very Bishops: and
that which does more import, Nauar says chap. 27. Number. 11. that if any man
shall obtain an excomunication of some Prelate, if the obteiner shall not have
an intent that the party be excommunicated, he shall not be excommunic^ted.
Moreover the same author says, cap, 23. Number. 104. that the excommunication
pronounced by the law it self against him that pays not a pension (for
exaample sake) on the vigill of the nativity, is not incurred by him that
pays it not, no not in many months and years after, if the creditor thereof
would not have it incurred. But if on the other side, after many months or
years, he would have it incurred; it is reputed to have been incurred from
the day of the debt, that is from the Vigil of the nativity; and so is the
style of the Court. These are the practices which are now in use: of which I
say nothing else, but that they grow from the interpretation which the author
does approve.

Gerson:
The ninth consideration is, that contempt of the keys is not incurred, when
the Pope does most enormously and most scandalously abuse his power. This
consideration is true in it self, but withal is most injurious to the
holiness of our Lord, and to the holy Sea Apostolic; Bellarmine.
as though it did use to abuse in such sort the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven. Like to this are the arts of the modern Heretics; who to make the
Papal power odious to the world, do spread abroad the most infamous slanders
that the malignity of Satan their head can teach them. And the Venetians
themselves ought to abhor and punish such defenders.

Here it is most easy to defend Gerson: seeing he that handles that which
falls out in a case possible, yea and such as has happened; Friar Paolo.
does not wrong them which do well, but notes them that do ill. This
consideration therefore is not injurious to the holy Sea Apostolic, which
never does ill; howsoever by human fragility, some sitting in it have
committed some falt whatsoever. They which write the lives of the Popes, (and
Platina in particular) do recount so many falts, that taking the time from
820. downewarde, it will be an hard matter to tell whether the number of the
good or of the bad be the greater. It might be said by the authors reason,
that the C. Si Papa of Boniface Martyr is greatly injurious to the person of
Pope Gregory the second, and to the Sea Apostolic; where he says, if the
Pope shall be negligent of the salvation of his brethren, unprofitable, and
remiss in his actions, silent of good, and lead innumerable people by heaps
unto Hell, no man may reprove him: as though Boniface did therefore say, that
the Apostolic Sea were wont to commit such falts. It follows not, neither
is it true, that the Heretics alone reprehend their evil actions: but much
more the Ecclesiastical writers, and the Historians catholic. I will not
speak of Platina, who is all full of it: But all the German Historians,
Regnius, E^ithprandus, Segebertus, Otho; of the French, Annonius, Addo, and so
the Italians of all times. And not to go seeking the old, Frances Guic^arden
is in every man's hands; though many things of that nature have been cut out;
and you may see how he speaks. There is difference between the manner of
the Heretics speaking, and that of Gerson: they reprove the doctrine, Gerson
speaks of abuses. Whosoever shall read Saint Bernard de consideratione ad
Eugenium, will not find fault with four words in Gerson; and that considering
his considerations are in a necessary cause. Every man may be in a marvel at
such a great contradiction, that the consideration of Gerson is true in it
self, and it most injurious to the Sea Apostolic: as though the Sea
Apostolic received injury from the truth. He cannot receive injury from the
truth, that does not ground himself upon falsehood.

And so likewise that it is true in it self, but like to the arts of the
modern heretics, as though Gerson now an hundredth and fifty years since
could have learned of the modern heretics. This is like to the prohibiting of
the use of the divine scripture, because the heretics serve their turns with
it. That the consideration is true in it self, and that the Venetians ought to
abhor it, seems no very good doctrine to teach to abhor the truth, and a
truth necessary for the maintenance of the liberty and power which God has
given them. Now the last part where the author says, that they ought to punish
such defenders, is not well understood. I defend at this present the innocence
of Gerson, but I know not who were his defenders when the author wrote. Besides
that to punish the defenders of truth, seasonably spoken, and in a necessary
cause, is not wont to be done by any just and godly prince, and especially by
that commonwealth, which has ever professed the Catholic truth. It may be
well said to him whom a necessary truth displeases, Every one that does ill
hates the light, And he should not say amiss, that should say that the
doctrine of the author were most injurious to all the Clergy, and to all the
Church because he will not have him reproved, that would ravin the treasures of
the church, vsurp upon the possessions, or reduce the Clergy with their goods
into abject servitude, or causlesly spoil them of their rights. For these are
the words of Gerson which it had bin well that the author had here produced.

Gerson.
The tenth consideration is that they do not incur contempt of the keys, who
procure defense for themselus, against such pretensed judgments, by means of
the secular power: seeing the law of nature teaches, to resist force by force.
This is a pernicious doctrine, and from which infinite Scandals may ensue. For
although that sentence is true. Bellarmine.
Vim vi repellere licet, that is, it is lawful to resist violence with
violence: yet has it many limitations: For the force must be unjust, and such
as has no redress but by force: the resistance must be immediate; and other
things, as Silvester shows Verb. Bellum 2. and the other Doctors which handle
this matter. And therefore if it be not applied to certain particulars with
great discretion, it is cause of exceeding great disorders. When the
Sergeants arrest a man, and bind his hands; no question they offer him
violence: and yet it is not lawful for him to use violence against the
Sergeants, under pretext that violence may with violence be resisted. Semblably
when the Gally-Slaues are tied to the bench of the Gally, and with many a
sharp stroke are constrained to row; who doubts but that great violence is
used toward the^: and yet notwitstanding no man of judgment will say that it is
lawful for them under the same pretense to offer violence to the Comito.
Likewise, when one is forced by his superior, either Ecclesiastical or
Secular, to make restitution to another, of his goods, or of his good name, or
to keep faith and his promises it cannot be said that he who so is forced may
resist with force, and turn himself against his superior: and to pass over
infinite other examples, when sometimes the Magistrates or Princes impose
burdens upon the people, and constrain them to pay them. I trow they would
not be pleased, that any should teach the people to raise rebellion under
color that vim vi repellere licet. And what great confusion would there be in
houses, and in cities and in kingdoms, if to every force, force might be
opposed, with saying that it is lawful, by natural reason to make resistance
with violence to violence? But if we speak of the force which Prelates do use,
when by the censures they constrain their subjects to obey, certain it is
that it is not lawful, to make resistance with force. For if he who will not
hear the church, ought to be unto us, according to the commandment of the
Lord, as a Gentile and Publican: certainly he who with force will resist the
church, ought to be unto us worse then Gentile and Publican. And as for
recourse to secular Princes in matter of excommunication, the sacred council
of Trent has already provided expressly, Ses. 25. cap, 3. forbidding Secular
Princes, that they hinder not Prelates so that they may not excommunicate,
neither command that the excommunicationes already gone forth be revoked,
considering that this is no part of their office. Lastly if we come to the
business which is at this day in hand, it is beside all purpose to produce
that principle, vim vi repellere licet. For the force which our Lord uses to
the common wealth of Venice, is a fatherly and just force, conforming to the
scriptures and sacred canons, and used in all times by the Prelates of holy
church, and the remedy is plain and ready, without recourse to force or to
help of Princes; namely Obedience and Humility, without which all other remedy
is vain.

In the tenth consideration, Friar Paolo.
if to say that to the force of pretended sentences, resistance may by law of
nature be made by force, be a doctrine pernicious, then has Cardinal
Bellarmine taught a pe^nicious doctrine, in his book of the Bishop of Rome,
which we have before alleged, where with most clear words he does establish
this sentence. And of the selfsame perniciousnes are the Cardinals
Turrceremata and Ca^tane authors, alleged by him, and Domimcus Soco, and
Franciscus Victorius, and other modern writers innumerable, who following one
another confirm this Sentence. And it is not true that infinite scandals may
grow out of this doctrine, nay rather it shall be said that out of the
contrary, they would arise indeed, for so should Tirany be brought into the
church, which as a public fault is more pernicious. Even as no more true is
it that by this doctrine there would grow confusio^s in houses and cities
because every one might defend himself from the Sergeants, from the Comito in
Galleys, and from the Prin^e which causes them to pay impositions. For two
which strive together cannot both have right on their sides: but neades must it
be that if he which uses force, do it lawfully, the defense be unlawful; and
where the defense is lawful, the force must needs be unlawful.

The Author knows very well, though here he dissemble it, that when the law
says vim vi repellere licit, it means of that force which is unjustly used.
And therefore the universal is not true which he draws, when he says if to
every force, force might be opposed: neither the law nor Gerson, nor any man
else having said that all force may be by force resisted. The consequence
therefore of the Sergiants, and of the Cometo, and of the Prince who leuyeth
just impositions, does not follow: neither that of the magistrate, who
condemns to restitution of goods or good name, or to keep his promises,
because these are lawful forces. The consequence which he deduceth of the
force which the Ecclesiastical uses, is well to the purpose, when he
intermedleth in causing to make restitutio^ of goods, good name, or performing
of promises; which are things appertaining to the Seculare, in which the
Ecclesiastical has not to intrude himself, save only in foro paenitentiae
in auricular confession. But whenas the author says, that if we speak of the
force which Prelates do use, when by the Censures they constrain their
subjects to obey; certain it is that it is not lawful to make resistance with
force: For if he who will not obey the Church, ought to be as a Gentile and
Publican: so much worse he that will make resistance with force: here he
speaks either universally of all censures, comprizing also those which are
not of validity; or else only of those which have validity. If he speak of
all, and it be the Authors meaning, that to make resistance to Censures which
are null, be worse then to be a Gentile; it is a doctrine absurd, false,
erroneous, and contrary to the law of nature, and to the doctrine of the
foresaid Cardinals, and of Bellarmine himself: but if he mean of them only
which have validity, it is exceeding good doctrine, and not contrary to Gerson
yea rather confirmed by him. For Gerson in the consideration speaks of
pretensed censures, which are not iuridicall, but violences, and if any assemby
pronounce forth such, it is not called together in the name of Christ, neither
is Christ there present; and he that does not hear it, is a good Christian:
and so teach the Canons which are cited by Gratian. 11. Quest. 3. Of the Church
of God which cannot err it is always true, that he is to be reckoned for a
Gentile that does not hear it, and he worse that shall resist it: because the
defense will be unjust against so just a precept; considering that it never
delivers other words then the word of Christ. But if by the Church be meant a
power subject to errors, especially, if not by reason only it appear ^o b^
(...), but ther^ be seen also daily errors in it when it shall (...) in the
commandings, he that shall d^f^^d himself, shall then use force lawfully, and
shall not offend God, because he g^eth not against the Church, but against
human error, which transporteth (...) of the doctrine of the Church. But the
author having proposed to us a true proposition in censures that have validity,
under the covert of an universal, has applied it to those that have no
validifi^ piece of skill at length known, and usual in all these discourses.
The proposition therefore remains sure and (...)* when the assailant uses
unlawful force. Yea and the author himself does grant no less. For minding
to limit the proposition, he sets three limitations, one is, that the force
be unjust; another; that there be no other remedy; the third, that it be
immediate. About which we must have yet one word, to the end we rest not
deceived with the ambiguity of the word, according to custom. For immediately
does not signify a thing indivisible: but it is meant according as the matter
which is spoken of, does require. For if a Prince have a fort surprised; he
shall recover it immediately, although he have need of a year to set an
army in order: yea he shall do it immediately, if he shall have need to make
his leagues and other agreements, wherein he shall spend many years.

We must also take heed of the ambiguity of the second limitation; that there
be no other remedy. For it by other remedy he mean a lawful remedy, ^ee
admit it, and so his limitation is in the self same proposition. For every man
that says, vim vir^pellere licet, does add or understand, cum moderamine
inculpataetu^elae, that is, with moderation of defense unblameable. But if by
remedy, the Author mean a remedy prejudicial to the part grieved; then al
forces unjust have other remedy then to resist, and that is to support them and
take all patiently. But to this sort of remedy is no man bound: yea rather
oftentimes a man should sin in using it, namely when the remedy were not
only prejudicial to himself, but also to an other* See Reader how with an
artificial ambiguity he endeavored to transport thee. First he says that the
proportion is true, with limitation that there be no other remedy: and
afterward many long speeches interposed, he says the Commonwealth of Venice
has a remedy at hand, without recourse unto force, or to the aid of other
Princes, and that is obedience. Very well. This is a remedy, but prejudicial,
and not only to the liberty which GOD has given them, but also to the life,
goods and honor of their subjects. Therefore they are not bound to use it: and
by reason of preiudicing another, they should sin if they should use it.
Whether then all other remedy be vain, as the Author tells us, it belongs
only to God to dispose thereof, and to the event to make it manifest. The
Author shall be besought not to deliver his judgment before the time, lest it be
said to him. To me it is a thing of least account to be judged of you or of
man's clay. That the force which the Pope uses is just and fatherly, according
to the first limitation; this is the point in controversy, and which should
have been handled, but the Author passes it over with a bare affirmation. We
cannot see to what scripture the Author says it is conforming. It is not
according to the 13. Chapter to the Romans nor to the 3. of the Epistle to
Timothy, nor to the second of the first of S. Peter, nor to the 22. of S.
Matthew, nor to the twelve Canons which treat of this matter. 11. Quest. 3.
That it has been used in the Church at all times, we see not before the year
of Grace one thousand. True it is that after that it has been sometimes put
in practice by the Bishops of Rome: but always due resistance has been made
them, whenever they have abused their lawful power. We must not consider
what opinion has remained with posterity concerning the actions of those
times; because that grows often from the affection of the writers. And God by
his most secret judgments does sometimes permit, that the just cause seems
the weaker in the opinion of men. But the resistance which Philip the fair
made to Boniface the 8. and Lewis the twelfth to Julius the second, like to
that which this commonwealth does use at this present, is well commended by
Lodouike Ricbehome Provincial of the Jesuits, in his Apologeticall in the 25.
Chapter, and proposed for an example to be imitated. Yea in the 24 chapter he
shows, that whenever any Bishop of Rome should offend the King of France,
as those Kings were offended by those Bishops; the Jesuits in such occasion
would do that which the Frenchmen did in those times, who united themselves with
their king to the defense of his majesty. I know not with what form of speech
to answer the last parcel where he says that there is another remedy for this
co^monwelth besides resistance. For reading such words he had put me in great
hope that all this so great tumult should suddenly cease. But when he comes
to explicate his meaning, I could not* but merauaile at it: because this is a
remedy in like sort for him that shall be assalted with force of arms to take
from him that he has, namely to yield and to give him whatsoever he list to
have. Obedience is one of those words which we termed ambiguous: and here with
his comlines and fair show it does deceive us. Obedience seems an holy
thing, and so is it when it is yielded to a just and honest commandment, but
when it is referred to a tirannicail and abusiue precept* it is not good; but
natural defense does then succeed in his place. God has bestowed liberty on
the Commonwealth of Venice; and commanded them to preserve it, and to protect
their subjects, and not suffer them to be harmed. If one command them to revoke
the laws needful for this effect, and not to defend the life, goods, and
honor of their subjects, but only against such as it pleases him to allow:
if the common wealth should yield to this, it would be an obedience in name,
but in deeds an extreme disobedience toward God. This commonwealth has
always obeyed the Ecclesiastical power in just things, it has always
reverenced, assisted and increased it: and we trust in God that it will so
continue he giving them grace to do the same for ever: and that he will cause
by his omnipotent virtue, that the present tempest shall end in fair weather,
with great satisfaction of the holy sea Apostolic, and of this Common wealth
no less. We are not also to omit here an interpretation which the Author does
give of a decree of the holy Counsel Sess. 25. cap 3. very different from the
true meaning. The Council ordains that the Secular magistrates shall not
forbid the Ecclesiastical to excommunicate any, nor cause them to revoke their
excommunication already thundered under pretext not to have the things
contained in that decree observed. And the Author says the sacred Council of
Trent has provided expressly, forbidding Secular Princes that they hinder not
the Prelates, so that they may not excommunicate, nor command that the
excommunications already gone forth be revoked. Now this is not the meaning of
the Council. For first he concealeth the condition which follows that is,
under pretext not to have the present decree observed: which as we have showed
before, does not forbid that it may be done for some other cause. Then because
the Council says, whatsoever Secular Magistrate; and our Author alters it,
saying secular Princes. But every lawyer will tell him, that in odious matter,
the name of magistrate comprehends not the Prince. Next because the Council
speaks of a prohibition and command judicial: and our Author brings it
against resistance natural, which he himself in the place alleged, lib. 2.
de Romans Pont. cap. 29. has denied to be an Act of Jurisdiction. So that to
allege that place of the Council to the matter now in hand; is threefoldly to
falsify the meaning of it.

Gerson.
The eleventh consideration is, that contempt of the keys is not incurred, when
some Lawyer or Divine in his conscience does say, that such kind of sentences
are not to be feared: especially if due information be observed with
wariness that no scandal thereon ensue to the weak; who repute the Pope for
a God, who has all power in Heaven and in earth etc. This consideration, to
speak modestly of it, Bellarmine.
is very little considerate. For Gerson should have said at least, that an
ignorant person, in doubtful matters, might rely himself upon the judgment
of a Divine or a Lawyer that carried a name of great learning and honesty. But
that he may rely himself upon what Divine or Lawyer so ever, especially in
matter of obedience to the High Bishop, is an exceeding great rashness. For
it is not doubtful, but most certain, that in doubtful things a man is to
obey his superior. And then only he is not to obey, when it is clear and
certain that the superior commands things contrary to the commandment
of God. And besides, how many Divines and Lawyers may a man find, that through
ignorance or malice may be deceived? And if one teach thee one way, and an
other the contrary; on whom will thou rely? Secular Princes would in no wise
suffer, that when they have passed a sentence, the party condemned might excuse
himself from obeying it, because a Lawyer or a Divine has told him that in
his conscience that sentence were not to be performed. How much less then
ought this to be suffered in case of obedience to the Vicar of Christ; to
whom all Christians by the law of God are bound to be subject and obedient?

Friar Paolo
In this eleventh consideration, the Author modestly makes an invectiue against
Gerson; wishing that at least wise he had said, that an ignorant person, in
doubtful matters, might rely himself upon the judgment of a Divine or a
Lawyer that carried a name of great learning and honesty: as though any man ever
went to a Counselor for a matter certain. Be a man as ignorant as it is
possible to be, he will never ask counsel nor enter into consultation,
about that which he holds for certain and out of all question. The Author
afterward does not contain himself within those bounds of modesty, which he
promised in the beginning: and says, that it is exceeding great rashness to
say, that he may rely himself upon what Divine or Lawyer soever: as though
it were said in the translation upon whomsoever, or in the Latin cuilibet. But
Gerson says aliquis in the Latin, and the translation says Some. That
whomsoever, seems to signify be he who he list be, either learned or
ignorant, a man of conscience or consciencelesse: which is not to be so
understood. For he that sends a man to one as to a Counselor, intends to
address him always to such an one, as has knowledge sufficient of that which
is to be advised on And Gerson does expressly so deliver, when he says some
Lawyer or Divine in his conscience. Conscience (especially with Gerson)
includes knowledge and honesty; whereof there is a tract of his extant to be
seen. Therefore when Gerson says, that he may rely upon the conscience of a
Lawyer or a Divine; he means of one held to be of sufficient honesty and
knowledge. And this ought not displease the author, because the new writers
also, such as are counted the best learned do maintain the very same opinion.
And here it shall suffice me to allege unto him Nauar; who upon the chapter
cum contingal; de rescript: Rem. 2. Number. 30. says formerly. Ninthly it is
inferred, that the Canons of the Church B. securely might and ought communicate
in Divine duties with the foresaid E. upon that reason, that he who does any
thing following the authority of a Doctor famous for his learning and godliness
of mind, is excused, though perhaps that fall not to be right done, and though
other should hold the contrary. He alleges many Doctors upon this point; and
proceeds, which also they acknowledge sufficiently, to be particularly of
force to excuse from violating of Censures. And for this point also he
alleges many other. I will not forbear to add here also, that those words,
when some Divine or Lawyer etc. ought to be taken, either singularly, or
collectiuely, according to the waightinesse of the matter: so that in some case
the counsel of one will suffice; and in an other case is to be sought the
counsel of two, and three and four; and in some perhaps an hundred men's
counsel shall be requisite. In this present controversy, (though for the
matter it be easy and clear,) this Common-welth has taken the counsel of
many, both within Italy and without: so that he needs not to insist upon
that word Some. But the author would show, that in matter of obedience to the
Pope, no recourse at all ought to be had to counselors: because in things
doubtful, we are to obey our superior. Which reason does prove, that we may
never in any case have recourse to a counselor: because in a case doubtful,
we must choose the secure part; and who so makes that choice, shall be free from
fault and error: and therefore we must never take counsel at all. Here we
may not suffer our selves to be deceived by ambiguity of the word doubtful.
But we must say, as we have before showed, that doubtful, is taken in two
sorts; either doubtful before counsel; or so that after all diligent advise
it still remain doubtful. In the first case I say, that it is a sin to obey
our superior; because it is a casting of our selves into hazard to go against
the law of God: but in the second case I agree, that where doubt is, the
superior must be obeyed: a thing which does not take away counsel, but
presupposes it rather. And the reasons ensuing, wherewith the Author proves
the same, have the self same fault. As when he says, how many Lawyers may
one find, that through ignorance or malice may be deceived? This falls not
out only in cases of obedience to the High Bishop, but generally in all
doubts: so that a man should at no time take any advise. He proceeds, and if
one teach thee one way, and another the contrary; on whom will thou rely? It
may happen out in all matters, that one may advise one way, and another man
another way. On whom shall a man rely then? All reasons which conclude more
then is proposed, are fallacies. The Divines which write of cases of
conscience, make answer, that if a man shall be in the wrong, having used all
diligence that he possible can, he shall be excused; seeing his ignorance is
invincible. It may be that a Lawyer or Divine whom I consult with, by
ignorance or malice may deceive me. If I upon sufficient probable grounds shall
have believed that he was a man of knowledge and honesty; I shall be excused.
If one shall teach me contrary to another; then either will I rely upon him
whom I conceive to be more excellently qualified; or else I will proceed on
to take further advise, till such time as I shall be thoroughly cleared, and my
conscience shall be ascerteined.

I see not now how the authors reason does avail when he says that secular
Princes would not suffer that the party condemned might excuse himself from
obeying any of their sentences, because a Lawyer or a Divine, has told him in
his conscience, that that sentence is not to be performed: How much less
ought this to be tolerated in matter of obedience to the viccar of Christ. Here
first of all every man must observe, that Gerson says not generally, that a
Christian does not incur contempt of the keis; whenever a Divine or
Canonist in his conscience does say, that the sentence ought not be performed:
but this is meant only then, when the case is doubtful, and in such sort
doubtful, that the party cannot by himself be resolved of it. For if that
which the Prelate commands be of things clear in themselves, or wherein a
man may be cleared, without difficulty; there were no need of any advise. As
if the Prelate should command to avoid blasphemy or adultery, it were not to
move doubt whether obedience were due. As also when a state is interdicted for
a cause notorious to all men to be unjust (as now we presuppose, and elsewhere
have proved, that that is for which at this present they will that the state of
Venice stand interdicted) there needs not any counsel, the case being clear
that no man ought obey. But speaking only of cases doubtful, I say that the
authors argument from the sentences of secular Princes to those of the
ecclesiastical Prelate, proceeds neither from the place a pari, nor a
minori. For the divine Scripture, which has spoken both of the one and of the
other has not said the same thing of both: but of obedience to Prelates, it
has said to the Hebrews: obey your overseers, for they watch for your souls
to render an account of them: But of obedience due to Princes, it says to the
Romans, it is necessary to be subject not only for wrath but for conscience.
My Prelate is not to command me, save only those things, which pertain to
my souls health, for this is that which he watches for. Howbeit though one
watch for my soul, yet am not I therefore to sleep, but watch to my utmost
power. For Christ so commands me: and it is fit for me to take heed that
the Prelate watch over no other thing save over the soul, nor that he sleep,
or think that he watches when he dreameth And if my own watchfulnes be
insufficient, I will desire my neighbor whom I think not to be drowsy, to
help me and watch with me, so that when I shall be doubtful, whether my
Prelate watch or sleep I will run to counsel. But the Prince watches to
exercise justice, as the minister of God, so that he will not meddle with
matters that belong to the soul, but to things temporal. Therefore I will not
watch here, nor trouble my thoughts about it, but I must obey him first for
wrath, then for conscience sake. True it is, that if the Prince, interuerting
order, should command me something in matters pertaining to my souls health,
as if he commanded me to believe or not beliue some article, I would think
upon it, and examine it according to the law of God, and if I doubted lest it
were prejudicial to my soul, I would to the Divines for counsel, and the
Prince ought to allow me so to do: and if he will not I will say, we must
obey God rather then men. But if he shall command me, that I bring into the
City or not carry out some kind of ware or merchandise, or that I pay a
contribution or custom; or that I ward the walls of the City; and in sum,
when he shall command me that, which may serve to maintain the tranquillity,
quiet and security of the state, which may impeach the raising of tumults and
other novelties, which might bring with them scandal or disquiet, (things
which are committed to public care, where a private man ought not to
interpose his judgment, but follow the judgment of his Prince:) because in
those things the menagement is not of my soul, but of things temporal, I
ought not to trouble my thoughts about them, but will obey him both for wrath
and for conscience sake. The care of the public tranquillity, belongs all
to the Prince; the private man has no part at all therein, except the
execution: therefore I am not to trouble my thoughts about it. The care of
every man's soul, belongs not solely to the Prelate, the subject has herein
the most principal part, to him therefore does it principally apperteine to
think upon it. And by this may one most clearly discern the difference
between the commandments of Prelates and Princes. For these must be obeyed,
though one see not the reason, touching the other you must be well advised what
you do. When the Prince commands, he appoints a thing which belongs to
him, and to him has God wholly committed it, and not to me otherwise then
passiuely. When the Prelate commands, he deals with a matter which
belongs more to me then to him, and therefore am I more bound to advise upon
it then he. But to the Prince I stand bound to yield absolute obedience, when
he dea eth with temporal things, without considering whether it hurt my
private temporal profit, because the public good, must needs be preferred
above any private. But now for the Prelate, I ought not to obey him; if it fall
out to be prejudicial to the profit of my soul, though it would prove
exceeding greatly behoofefull to those ends which were aimed at by my Prelate.
The whole error stands in this, that we give power to the Prelate over matters
temporal, and transform the ecclesiastical ministry into a secular Court
judicial. For to the secular power, has God committed the care of public
tranquillity, and given them authority to impose temporal punishments, for
fear of which it is requisite that we be subject to them, which is meant by
for wrath: besides the commandment of God, which enioyneth us to obey them,
which makes up the other branch for conscience sake. But to the Ecclesiastical,
ministry has God committed the care of souls, which is not to meddle
directly with temporal punishments: and therefore has he not commanded to
obey them for wrath. Of the temporal power, Saint Paul says, For he bears
not the sword without cause; but of the ministry ecclesiastical, it is
exercised by the sword of the Spirit which is the word of God. The conclusion
therefore which the author makes, that to the Viccar of Christ all Christians
are by the law of God obliged to be subject and obedient, is to be meant in
things spiritual and appertayning to the salvation of souls, and in the court
of God, and when he commands according to his divine law. But in temporal
things absolute Princes are not s biect to any other then to God himself,
from whom their power is immediately derived.

And if the weak hold the Pope to be a God, and that he has al power in
heaven and in earth: more pleasing to almighty God is this their weakness; then
their strength who seeming to be wise, endeavor to abase the authority of the
vicar of Christ; as at this day all Heretics do. It is not so great a matter
that the Pope should be reputed a God upon earth, seeing in the psalm he says
of all Princes, I have said ye are Gods. Neither is it inco^uenie^t that one
should say that the Pope has all power in heaven and in earth, seeing Christ
has said, whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth it shall be bound also in the
heavens. Which yet is expounded, and meant soundly by true and learned
Catholics. And in sum I think it may be said with all truth, that the power
of the high Bishop is so great, that few men arrive to comprehend it. For he
is able to do all that which is necessary to the conducing of souls to
Paradise, and can take away all the impediments, which the world or the Devil,
with all their force or craft, are able to oppose. Whence it is that Saint
Cyril, (cited by S, Thomas in his Opuscle de primatu Petri) says, that as
Christ had from the Father, all plenitude of power over all the Church; so
Christ gave to S. Peter and to his successors all plenitude of power over all
the Church.

Friar Paolo.
Because Gerson says, that they of weak and scrupulous conscience must be
instructed, who repute the Pope for a God, and to have all power in heaven and
in earth: The Author makes answer, that this their weakness is more pleasing to
God, then the strength of Heretics, who esteem themselves wise in despising
the authority of the vicar of Christ. As if we would contradict him that
condemned avarice, by saying, it more pleases God, to be a niggard of his own,
then to spend it in riot and other superfluities: as though there were not the
true mean, which is liberality. The right manner of speech were, it less
displeases God, to be niggardly, then to be prodigal in riot: but both
displease him. The sin is most grievous to deny the true authority granted
by Christ to his vicar: yet his ignorance that gives him more authority then
is convenient, is not praiseable. Truth is acceptable to God: ignorance when it
is invincible, is not good, but excusable: it implies great contradiction, to
say that any false thing pleases God. The Author be^ing accustomed to speak
properly, might have said, this weakness of theirs is less displeasing to God,
then the strength of Heretics and we would have commended him. For so should
the truth have been unfolded, that neither the one nor the other of the
foresaid extremes do please at all. And let not the Author think it
inconvenient, if one should say that it is good to instruct the simple people
not to give more authority to the Pope then that which is right and lawful,
for so says S. Gregory. 2. Quest. 7. and yields his reason. Admonendi sunt
subditi ne plusquam expedit sint subiecti, ne cum student plusqua^necesse est
hominibus subiici, compellantur etiam vitia eorum venerari: could this holy
personage more plainly confirm the doctrine of Gerson? Gerson says that
those who in scrupulosity of conscience take the Pope for a God, must not be
suffered to rest in their simplicity, and S. Gregory's words are, that subjects
must be admonished that they make not themselves more subject then is
convenient; but that which is more of importance gives the reason of it;
because they are enforced to flatter them in their vices whose subjects they
make themselves more then they should be. Then can you not err if you add
hereunto, that man's custom is to imitate the things he reuerenceth; and you
may conclude it to be both good and necessary to take away this false
suggestion. That which follows in the Author, that it is no great matter though
the Pope be thought a God since all Princes have the style of Gods has no
inconvenience in it, so as we be not overtaken in the ambiguity of the words:
but whilst that out of this proposition which has good sense in it, we draw a
consequence Papa et Deus constituunt idem tribunal, Papae and Dei idem
consistorium; we shall ascribe to him a kind of diety which Gerson does not
allow. The Author thinks it no inconvenience to say, that the Pope has all
power in heaven and in earth, because it is said quodcunque ligaueris
superterram erit ligatum and in coelis, and yet may it appear to any that this
conclusion is not well drawn from this place, because power belongs to the
active property, and quodcunque, appertains to the matter. If I should say the
Parish Priest is he that makes all marriages, it does not therefore follow that
he has all power in matter of marriage. For to say quodcunque ligaueris super
terram erit ligatum and i^ coelis therefore quocunque modo ligaueris follows
not. And this is it which Gerson does not approve; and thus do I think would
the Author himself understand it when he says that thus it is declared, and
truly understood by true and learned Catholics, because that this proposition
(The Pope has all power in heaven and in earth) being taken absolutely is
false: or being tied to the true construction, there is much more power both in
heaven and in earth which the Pope has not, then that he has, and therefore
that proposition which by one instance only does prove untrue, having more
instances against it then examples for it, is most false. The Author says, he
thinks he may most truly say that the Popes authority is so great, that few
can comprehend it. And I believe it too, because truth is one and the same
thing, and falsehood infinite. Many ascribe to him less then is requisite and
many more, so as the residue is but small which give him just that which is his
due. The Cardinal Bellarmine in his work de Romano Pontifice makes a long
discourse prescribing limits to the Popes authority, and touching many things
which the Pope him self cannot do: now, were this discourse very impertinent
if his authority could not exceed. And for that he says the Pope can do all
things which are necessary to conduct a soul into paradise and can take away
all impediments which the world or the Devil can lay in the way with all their
strength and subtilty, This proposition is fair in show but false in deed. To
conduct the soul of an infant into paradise, which is yet in the mothers belly
and cannot be brought forth alive, necessary it is one way or other to make it
partaker of grace, can the Pope then do it? no truly, for neither can he
institute a sacrament for this purpose, nor grant that the child should be
cut out of the mothers belly: and therefore can not the Pope do any thing
necessary to conduct this soul into Paradise. A man being actually in some
mortal sin and in this case deprived of his wits cannot: be saved unless he
recover his sense again, and repent himself, can the Pope restore him to his
wits again? I believe he cannot: and yet is this necessary for this man's
salvation. Nothing is more necessary to salvation then the internal motions of
the mind, over which S. Thomas denies that the Pope has any power. Infinite
are the things which are necessary for the co^ducting a soul into paradise,
which I can show not to be subject to the Popes authority. Yet, if it were Gods
will, I wish he could (as the Author says) remove all impediments which the
world and the Devil can lay in the way with all their subtilty, for then should
we have neither Turks nor Heretics. The impedime^ts are likewise infinite
which are daily cast in the way by the enemies of the kingdom of Christ, for
which the Pope must content himself without further remedy then only to pray
and nonos inducas in tentationem etc. God has not only not given authority to
the Pope to remove all impediments, which are laid in the way by the world and
the Devil, but has thought it for the good of the Church to permit many of
them. The Reader may well perceive with how good reason Gerson does give
admonishment that the simple people be well instructed, because that here are
four propositions pronounced with one breath by a great man of great learning
which are manifestly false, and all to enlarge that power which God has given
beyond the bounds, within which his divine majesty has restrained it.

We will soon rid our hands of the 12. consideration because the objection is
but short.

The 12. consideration is, Gerson
that those do nourish the contempt of the keys, who when they should resist
the abuse of them are divided within themselves, and hinder each other. The
truth is that all favorable and humble endeavors must be used with the Pope
when upon ill information he pronounces an unjust sentence. But if this
humble diligence will not prevail, then is hold to be laid of a stout and
manlike liberty. Bellarmine
This consideration was to good purpose in Gersons time, because there being
then a schism of three Popes which did thunder out excommunications each upon
others adherents; it was fit at that time that the faithful should unite
themselves to extinguish this schism and make small account of those
excommunicatio^s, since it stood in doubt which of them was the Vicar of
Christ, and notwithstanding the said excommunications might still intend the
business of the union of the Church. But now that by Gods grace we have but
one only Pope and he undoubted and certain; this consideration is nothing to
the purpose, nor serves for any thing, but to make a new schism of the members
against their own head.

If the Author conceive that Gerson wrote this doctrine in a time of schism
let him but look back to the eight consideration and he shall plainly
perceive this treatise was written after the council of Constance, Friar Paolo
and at such time as there was but one only undoubted Pope, But if the Author
have some more subtle meaning by himself, it is hard to be guest at, though
it may well be suspected, because there is no likely-hoode that he should not
observe the time when the treatise was written; but this consideration being
written by Gerson, I see not in what manner it can be applied to a former time.
It does likewise plainly appear that it can have no reference to a time of
schism which happily Gerson might misdoubt would follow, because there is
nothing said of the union of the Church, but only of the means how to take
away the abuses. And further, as long as the Pope is certain and undoubted,
that reverend respect which Gerson does advise, under the style of favorable
and humble endeavors, is not due unto him, but does only belong to the true
undoubted Bishope of Rome. And to dispute no longer of this matter the Reader
reading Gerson and that which the author obiecteth, and considering whether
there may not be abuse of the keys, even when there is no schism, and how
those which should make resistance are divided amongst themselfes and out of
simplicity or baseness hinder each other, some giving countenance to the
abuses which others would willingly take away, may see what it is that is here
truly and precisely spoken of, and whether the objection may go for current.
But that which he says in the conclusion, that this consideration serves for
nothing but to raise new schism, can not be said but by him that will
likewise affirm that Saint Gregory's doctrine in the chapter [Admonendi] which
we have before alleged is false, and that it serves to raise schism, when he
says, that subjects must be admonished that they make not themselves more
subject then is convenient, lest they should be enforced to flatter them in
their vices to whom they have made themselves more subject then they should
be. But this 12. consideration does fitly serve to take away abuses in the
Church of God, which the faithful for many ages past, have earnestly desired:
It serves to keep the holy Church in peace and tranquillity: Nay rather it
serves to prevent schism and division, because that in these latter times many
countries and kingdoms have fallen from the Church of Rome upon no other
occasion, but because the Pope would ever be enterprizing upon their temporal
estates. We may firmly believe that Paulus Quintus had a good intention to
reform the abuses which have bin brought in till this present. But so great is
their violence that it is no marvel if men of never so good minds be
transported and carried away, contrary to their own inclinations to that very
point which they minded to avoid.

AN Answer to Gersons second book, entitled An examination of this
assertion, Bellarmine.
Sententia Pastoris etiam iniusta est timenda.
IN the second book the same John Gerson makes relation, that a certain
Commissary of the Popes in some public proceeding of his makes this assertion
followlowing, Our sentences, though they be unjust, must both be feared and
obeyed. Gerson.
Upon which assertion he passes a censure divided into many Propositions,
which are these that follow. First this assertion is false. Secondly this
assertion is impossible. Thirdly this assertion is erroneous in point of
manners. Fourthly this assertion is suspected of heresy. Fifthly this assertion
bringes the author of it in suspicion for his faith, and must therefore be
called in question till he either explane his sentence or revoke it: and if he
persist in his opinion, then is he to be turned over to the secular power.
Bellarmine.


This in brief is the judgment of Gerson, which how it is too strict and
severe, will appear in the discourse that follows. This Commissary (whether
he were true or fained) not content only to say (according to the saying of
Saint Gregory) that his sentences, though they were unjust were to be feared,
ads further, that they were likewise to be obeyed. And though he might have
forborne the adding of these words, yet do they not deserve so hard a censure
as this of Gersons who has taken that in ill sense, which might have been
well enough taken. Gerson does reprehend two things in this Commissary, of
both which we will briefly discourse.

First he reprehends him for speaking positiuely without distinction, that his
sentences, though they were unjust, were to be feared: for it seems by this
he would say that all unjust sentences are to be feared, though we are to
understand that not all unjust sentences are to be feared, but such only, as
though they be unjust are yet of validity: as it is gathered out of Gratianus.
11. Quest. 3. per totum. To this it may be answered that the Commissary spoke
in like sense as S. Gregory and the holy Canons: for as S. Gregory says that a
sentence of the pastor how just or unjust soever it be, is to be feared though
he speak without distinction, yet can it not be gathered thereby that every
sentence of the pastor is to be feared, but that only which, though it be
unjust, is not yet to be accounted a nullity. So likewise can it not be
collected out of the Commissaries words that all sentences are to be feared,
but those only as though they be unjust are not yet manifestly of no validity.
To conclude the same scandale that is laid to the words of the Commissary may
in like manner be laid to those of S. Gregory.

Friar Paolo.
In the answer to the second book of Gerson, (wherein are many things which
do plainly demonstrate the justice of the cause of the state of Venice and the
nullity of the censures pronounced against it) the Author taking no note of any
of them, falls a disputing with Gerson, and showing, that the assertion
pronounced by a Commissary of the Popes in these words, Our sentences, though
they be unjust, must be both feared and obayed, has some good sense in which
it may be understood, and that therefore Gerson is somewhat too severe a Censor
in making an ill construction of that which may be well taken: not remembering
how in his answer to the first work he has not only taken the words of
Gerson continually in the worse sense, but farther when Gerson himself would
declare his own meaning, omitting the declaration, opposes him self to the
wrong part of the sense which he before had distinguished, and secluded, and
where he is forced to confess that the doctrine of Gerson is absolutely true,
he has either found it to be some way injurious, as appears in the ninth
consideration, or by a voluntary mistaking of times, will seem to believe that
Gersons work was written before the Council of Constance which surely was
written since, as this second book was likewise written since that time,
because that herein he does name the foresaid Council: and more does give the
title of Regent to the son of Charles the sixth who took it not to him till
the year 1418. which I thought fit to touch by the way, to show that both
these books were made in the Popedom of Martinus Quintus, who was a single
and undoubted Pope. By which means the common refuge of the Author (who will
needs have it that Gersons doctrine was written in a time of schism) helps
nothing for all he says, to avoid the force of his arguments. Gerson does not
deny but that the assertion of the Commissary may have some good sense in it,
because he says the Commissary must be enforced either to express himself or
revoke his sentence. But Gerson denies that the assertion in the formal sense
it has, can be true, and true it is that he which examineth an assertion when
it is in Thesis, that is universal, without applying it to the particular
occasion, does examine it in the formal sense of the words. But coming to the
Hypothesis he takes it in that sense which the particular occasion does
minister. Our Author therefore does well in examining it both ways, and first
taking it in Thesis says that it follows not of this that all unjust
sentences are to be feared, (as Gerson affirms) but this should be gathered
only of those, as though they be unjust are not yet to be accounted nullities,
since you may conclude as much out of S. Gregory's saying, that the sentence of
the pastor, be it just or unjust is to be feared, seeing that this is spoken
without distinction, yet nevertheless is to be understood by all men of that
which is unjust and yet of validity, and concludes in brief that the scandale
which is given to the words of the Commissary may as well be given to the words
of Saint Gregory. It had been enough to have said interpretation because this
word scandal and S. Gregory agree not in my opinion so well together. But when
the Author says that the saying of S. Gregory is subject to the same
interpretation, this is to be understood, either as it is set down in S.
Gregory himself, or as it is in Gratianus, or else as it is absolutely
separate by it self, and in any man's mouth that will abuse it. As it is in S.
Gregory I say it is not subject to this sense: for he speaks in this place of
the pastors unjust sentence taken indifferently either with validity or without
it, either with or without nullity: but Timenda signifies non per contemptum
spernenda, and all men affirm that omnis sententia etiam iniusta, etiam nulla
as sententia pastoris non est conte^nenda. S. Gregory's words are, Is autem qui
sub manu pastoris est, ligari timeat, vel unjust nec pastoris sui iudicium
temere reprehe^dat, ne si unjust ligatus est, ex ipsa tumidae repraehensionis
superbia, culpa quae non erat, fiat. And after adds Sed quia haec breuiter per
excessum diximus, ad dispositionem ordinis redeamus. Then does S. Gregory
oppose timere to temere tumide, and superbe reprehendere, after which sort
omnis sententia etiam iniusta and nulla timenda. But in this sense obeyed,
could not be put in steed of feared as the Commissary uses it; because the
sentence of a superior which commands sin (being as S. Gregory delivers it)
should be feared, but in no manner obayed. And the Author might well have
marked this declaration in Gerson, where he says a little after, that the
saying of S. Gregory might have good sense in it but not the Commissaries, who
comes in with his obseruare.

Now if the Author will speak of this saying, as it stands in the Decretals,
let him hear if he please after what sort the Compilator speaks in the chapter
Si Episcopus, Praemissis auctoritatibus Gregorius non dicit sententia^ unjust
latam esse seruanda^, sed timendam, sicut and Vrbanus, timenda est ergo, id est
non ex superbia contemnenda. If Gratianus the Monk were living at this present
and would take upon him the defense of Gerson, he could not speak more to the
purpose then that he said 400. years since. But if the Author will take S.
Gregory's saying so apart it cannot be compared to that of the Commissary,
because this word timere does admit co^structio^s which obseruare does not, and
then no man of learning will allege a saying without looking back to the very
spring and taking it in the true understanding, out of which none who writes
with sincerity will seek to carry it. By which you may see what great
difference there is betwixt the modest and holy manner of speech of S. Gregory
and the absurd and tirannicall words of the Commissary. But let us pass to
the second part.

Bellarmine.
Secondly Gerson does find fault that the commissary should say his sentences,
though they were unjust, were to be feared and obeyed, because obeyed is one
thing and feared, another. The injustice of a tyrant may be feared, but not
obeyed, and he that says injustice is to be obeyed, speaks an untruth and
rests in an error.

To this I answer that the Commissary (as may be imagined) spoke not of
commanding any unjust matter, but spoke of a sentence of excommunication as it
is a penalty which depriues a man of receiving the sacraments and conuersing in
society with the faithful: and in this sense it may very well be said that an
unjust sentence of excommunication ought to be both feared and obeyed: because
that to fear an excommunication, and obey an excommunication have no great
difference; For he that fears it abstaines from receiving the Sacraments and
conuersing with the faithful and so obeyes it; and he that does not obey it,
but does converse with the faithful and receive the Sacraments does not fear
it. So as Gerson has equiuocated betwixt a sentence which commands an action
and a sentence which commands forbearance from doing any thing; and having
grounded his discourse upon an equivocation, no marvel though he have built
it in the air.

For defense of the Commissaries assertion in Hipothesis applied to the
occasion he first alleges that the Comissary (as may be imagined) spoke not
of commanding any unjust matter, Friar Paolo.
but of the sentence of excommunication as it is a penalty; and making
difference betwixt these two, concludes [that] Gerson having equiuocated
betwixt a sentence that commands an action, and a sentence which enioynes
forbearance from doing any thing, and grounded his discourse upon an
equivocation, no marvel though he have built it in the air. The Reader may
see how our Author not knowing of what sentence the Commissary spoke, falls to
guessing, and said that it may be imagined he spoke not of commanding any
unjust matter but of a sentence of excommunication as it is a penalty, and then
concludes affirmatively that Gerson has equiuocated. Gerson has not
equiuocated but as the occasion does require; as I will show you. He knew the
speech was of commanding an unjust matter; and has therein expressed himself
further in this little treatise. But the Author is the man that buildes in the
air, who presupposing a matter and saying [as may be imagined] does thereupon
resolutely condemn Gerson of equivocation, as if that his [as may be
imagined] and [thus certainly it is] had the same signification. But the
Author partly aware of his o^ne error helps it with saying.

Bellarmine.
Put case the Commissary spoke of a sentence which should command any matter
upon pain of excommunication he has not spoken ill though it were so. For
such a kind of sentence, either it commands a matter which is apparently
good; as to make restitution of an other man's goods; or a matter evidently
bad, as to rob or blaspheme; or a matter which is in question whether it be
good or bad: as to assist in a war which is not known whether it be just or
unjust; if it command a matter which is apparently good, it must be both
obeyed and feared; that is to say, it must be obeyed by doing that which is
commanded for fear of falling into excommunication, and so it may fall out
that such a sentence may be unjust. If there have not bin three precedent
admonitions; yet may it be of validity, because that which it commands is
good; It is thundered out by one that had authority for it, and one admonition
at least has preceded. If the sentence be doubtful whether it command that
which is ill or not ill yet is it to be obeyed and feared, because that in a
case of doubt the subject must submit himself to the judgment of his
superior, and not stand upon his own opinion, as is said before, and is the
common doctrine of the holy fathers. If a sentence should command a matter
which is evidently a sin, then is it neither to be obeyed nor feared. And
whosoever says it should be obeyed, is in an error: and upon an assertion of
this kind Gersons five propositions may be true. For there is no question but
thi^ is false that a sentence which binds a man to sin should be obeyed; and it
is impossible that the same sentence should both command sin, and likewise
tie a man to obedience. And more, that sentence is erroneous in point of
manners, because it teaches to do ill; and likewise in matter of faith,
because he that says it is lawful to do ill is an Heretic; and if he repent
not himself he must be put into the hands of the secular power that he may
be punished according to his deserts, and a sentence of this nature must not
only not be obeyed, but also not so much as feared, because our savior says
nolite timere eos qui occidunt corpus and a man should sooner choose to die
then obey such a law. Whereby there can be no discovery made of this fourth
part which Gerson produces, which is that some sentences either ought or may
be feared, yet not obeyed, speaking of that fear which is an inducement to
obedience: though there may be a natural fear of a tyrant which commaundes
wickedness. But neither in this has the Commissary erred, because he always
spoke of such a sentence as though it were unjust, was yet of validity, as this
can not be which commands sin; and may be plainly condemned of a nullity.
See then how the whole dicourse of Gerson is built in the air; And he which
translated it and brought it to light to teach the Venetians to despise the
Popes sentences, being just and of validity, shows himself to be more
fraught with malice then judgment.

For the better expressing the meaning of Gerson, Friar Paolo.
and declaring the truth, it is very necessary (over and above tha^ which we
have said before that it is no hard matter to find sentences which are to be
feared yet not obeyed) to proceed with the same distinction the author uses,
that a sentence must either command a thing which is manifestly good, or
plainly bad, or that which is doubtful. And as for the first part when the
thing which is commanded is manifestly good and equitable, we hold with the
Author that it is to be obeyed. For the third part which imports a
doubtfullnesse, for fear of his equivocations we must distinguish this word
doubt, as we have done before, into that which goes before an orderly
admonition, and that which follows after. The first does not tie us to
obedience but to take counsel only, and then if upon consultation the doubt
can not be overcome, we agree with him that the subject is then bound to
follow the opinion of his superior and not his own.

And I would crave pardon of the Reader in that I so often repeat this
doctrine, because the author comes out so often with his equivocations to make
Ch^istians run blindly forward in being led by other men's passions. In the
second case when a bad matter is commanded upon pain of excommunication, and a
time set down for the fact, or else the excommunication to take effect, this
sentence has two parts: the one which commands obedience to the iniunction
within the time prescribed, and the other which commands forbearance from the
Communion: if it be not obeyed before the said time be expired. As for the
first part, I say it is sin to fear it as the author requires, and he that
fears it in that sort does commit sin: and here that which he alleges is
properly verified, nolite timere eos qui occidunt corpus: but for the second
part, which is forbearing the Communion, it is more then the subject is bound
to; but if he will do it of himself (because he will not transgress the
other iniunction) he does not offend. And thus says Gerson in these words,
which the author must needs have read, because in some cases they may be
feared by timorous consciences, yet notwistanding they are not to be obeyed:
for there is great difference in saying they are to be obeyed, and they are to
be feared: to obey a sentence of excommunication, is understood by Gerson to
execute the iniunction, either by that means not to incur the sentence of
excommunication, or if it be incurred yet to be absolved. But to fear an
excommunication, Gerson takes that to be, to forbear the Communion. A
sentence of excommunication joined to an iniunction which commands an unjust
act, he which obeyes it does sin, whereas he that fears it only sins not,
though he be not bound to fear it. Wherefore there is great diffrence in
saying, Our sentences, though they be unjust, ought to be feared, because this
signifies a forbearing of the Communion, for the reverence is had of them, and
the Commissary speaking in this sort had failed no otherwise then in saying
ought, in steed of may: but when he said they ought to be obeyed, he
committed a greater fault, because they not only not ought, but further, not
so much as can be obeyed without sinning, yet may they be feared, though that
be more then needs. And this is the fourth part expressly declared by Gerson,
which the author says is not to be found, though it may easily be found both
in Saint Gregory and Gratianus, by any that will enter into consideration of
the matter without affecting contradiction. But the author, as it seems, not
well assured before of what the Commissary spoke, yet here as if he spoke upon
better ground, says neither in this yet has the Commissary erred, because he
ever spoke of an unjust sentence, yet such a one as was of validity, as this
is not which commands sin: which enforces me to make a little digression
to declare the fact which is the subject of this book.

Before the council of Constance, and about the year 1399. Henry the sixth
king of France, called an assembly of the Clergy and Scholemen of his kingdom,
where amongst other things, it was concluded: that the Romish Bulls of
reseruatio^s and papal provisions, should not be admitted, but that elective
benefices, should be conferred by election, and the presentations of others
should be made by the Ordinaries; which decree that it might be the better
observed was many times renewed within the twenty years following, as well by
other decrees, made by Churchmen of that kingdom, as by acts of Parliament,
which were often renewed and revived notwithstanding all lets and impediments,
which were laid in the way by Briefes and Commissions from the court of Rome
against the obeying of them. Now it plainly appears in the second
proposition, that Gerson spoke of a Commissary which went into France upon some
such occasion, and that the time in which Gerson wrote, was in the Popedom of
Martinus Quintus may be seen in the same Proposition, where it is said that
for 20. years space, the king held a council of Prelates, which council (as
Guagninus reports) was first assembled in the foresaid year 1399. And in the
third proposition when Gerson spoke of the Son of Charles the sixth he used
these words, To his lawful son now Regent. who as Francis Belforest does
testify, tookel to him this title in the year 1418. So as by all these
circumstances, it is to be gathered, that this work of Gersons was written
after the year 1418. and before 1422. when Charles the sixth dyed. If then
Martinus Quintus was elected in 1417. it is plain the book was written in his
Popedom: beside that Gerson himself in the fourth proposition does nominate
the council of Constance as then past. Then must it needs be that the
Commissary commanded the execution of some Papal provision, contrary to the
orders set down by the foresaid convocation: which according to Gerson was to
command an unjust thing, and did therefore contain intolerable errors against
public justice, and in his opinion did tend directly to an undue usurpation.
All which if it had been observed by our author he had surely forborne to say
that the Commissary spoke of unjust sentences, but such as were of validity,
seeing plainly in the fourth proposition that this Commissaries sentence is a
protestation made against the foresaid acts and decrees, and for this reason
Gerson held it of no validity. This Commissary if he had been a man of
conscience could not have held his own se^tences unjust: but like one that how
ever the world went would be obeyed, to ease himself of trouble in justifying
his mandats writ in a common process, that his sentences, whether they were
just or unjust, were to be obeyed. If unjust sentences might suffer a
distinction, of such as were of validity and such as were not of validity,
he had not freed himself of all difficulties, because he might yet be
encountered with the question of validity: and therefore the Commissary
endeavored in one ambiguous word to include the general, that necessary it
was to obey all his sentences, and by this means thought to purchase obedience
to that which he particularly intended: not much unlike to this present
occasion, wherein many distrusting their own abilities in showing the justice
of the Popes mandats to the common wealth of Venice, say that the Pope is to
be obeyed, though he command unjust things. Surely I cannot but much wonder
how the author treating of a question which is grounded upon a thing in fact,
should conclude contrary to the truth of the story. See then I pray you how all
Gersons discourse is built in the air. And now as if in the eight propositions
following Gerson had swerued from his purpose, and treated of another matter,
the author says.

Bellarmine.
To this discourse Gerson does add certain propositions to show that which the
most Christian king was both able and ought to do in defense of the liberty of
the French church: of which propositions it is not very necessary to discourse
in this place, First, because they are all grounded upon this principle that
the authority of a council is above the Popes authority: for upon no other
reason will Gerson have it that the Pope cannot change the ancient Cannons,
upon which the French Church did then ground their liberty, but because he did
believe that those Canons which were made by the council, could not be subject
to the Popes will and authority. Now that this principal is declared to be
false let us not believe that the Venetians can hold it for true. Secondly
because that since Gersons time; In the council of Lateran, under Leo the
tenth that pragmaticall act was abrogated, which the French churches defended,
and agreement was made betwixt Pope Leo and the most Christian king; so as now
there is no more talk of the liberty of the French church in prejudice of the
Pope. But the most Christian king and all the Bishops of France are at peace
and unity with their mother which is the church of Rome, and likewise with
their Father, which is the Pope Christ's vicar, and Saint Peter's successor.
Thirdly, because this liberty of the French church which Gerson writes of, has
no sympathy with that liberty which is now pretended by the state of Venice;
because that was founded upon ancient Canons, and this is contrary as well to
the ancient Canons as the modern. ^rier Pa^^o.


Gerson having intention to demonstrate in eight propositions that which the
most Christian King was to do in defense of the liberty of the french Church,
defending it from Bulls of reseruations, and Papal provisions, and other abuses
of the court of Rome used in those times sets down eight propositions which
the Author does wisely observe to be better dissembled and past over then
handled, seeing plainly that to endeavor to confute them were to confirm them,
and to establish that which before he contradicted; That Princes both ought and
might oppose themselves to such commandments of Prelates as were exorbitant
and unlawful: and therefore excuses himself from treating of these eight
propositions for three causes. First because they are grounded upon this
principle, that the authority of a Council is above the Popes authority; and
this he says he has declared before to be false. But he might have added,
that notwithstanding his declaration it is both held and maintained by the
Universities of France, of which Nauarra and others give sufficient testimony.
Secondly, because that in the Council of Lateran under Pope Leo that
pragmaticall Act was abrogated; so as at this day there is no more talk of the
liberty of the French Church. The Author takes us here to be very simple and
ignorant in matter of history, as if we knew not that the liberty of the french
Church of which Gerson speaks was one thing, and the pragmaticall decree
another. The one being before Gersons time; but the decree was made by Charles
the 7. about the year 1440. long after this book was written, in which his
father Charles the 6. was mentioned as then living. But why, says he, not here
as well, that upon the annulling of this pragmatical decree by Leo, the
University of Paris made an appeal to the next council? He presupposes
fur^her that we do not so much as know what is a pragmaticall decree, and
what a particular order, and whether this latter does abrogate the former in
the whole or in certain parts only. But the most bold and wilful part of all
is to believe that we are locked up in a prison, and know not so much as the
present occurrences of the world, and are ignorant whether in France there be
daily appeals from ecclesiastical sentences to the Court of Parliament
tanquam ab abusu, and whether that Court does take knowledge of them. Surely
the Author would be well content we were me^ of this sort, and that we knew no
more of the world then what stood with the benefit of Churchmen only, and
blinded in extreme ignorance we should hold them in admiration just like Gods
and Oracles. The third cause which he alleges for not touching the eight
propositions of Gerson, is because the liberty of the French Church which
Gerson writes of, was grounded upon ancient Canons, and this of the Venetians
is contrary both to the ancient Canons and those of latter time. What truth
there is in this last saying of his I will not speak. France is not the
country of Iapan from whence we must expect aduertisements but once a year to
know how that kingdom is governed. All the French writers make mention of the
liberty of their Church, and they are al collected into one volume printed at
Paris 1594. out of which I will gather somewhat to this purpose, and leave it
to be judged of by the Reader. And thus beside many more particulars it is
plainly set down in that book.

The Popes can neither command nor give order in any thing either in general
or particular which concerns temporal matters in the countries and
territories under the sovereignty and obedience of the most Christian King; and
if so be they command or determine any thing, the kings subjects, yea though
they be Churchmen, are not in this respect bound to obey them.

Although the Popes supremacy be acknowledged in spiritual causes yet
notwithstanding is there no way given in France by any manner of means to an
absolute and infinite power, but it is restrained and limited by Conons and
rules of ancient councelles of the Church which are received in this kingdom.
and in hoc maxim consistit libertas Ecclesiae Gallicanae.

The most Christian Kings have at all times according to occasions and affairs
of their country, assembled or caused to be assembled Synodes or provincial
and national councels, in which amongst other thi^^es which did import the
conservation of their states they did in ^^ke manner handle affairs concerning
the Ecclesiastical rule and discipline of their countries: and in these
councels the Kings themselves have caused prescriptions, chapters, laws,
ordinances and pragmaticall sanctions to be made under their names and
authorities: and at this day there are many to be read in the collection of
decrees which are received by the universal Church, and some of them approved
by the general counceles.

The Pope can by no means send into France his Legates a latere with
commission to reform, adiudge, bestow, dispense or such like matters, which
are usually specified in the Bulls of their commission, if it be not at the
request of the most Christian King, or at least wise by his consent; and the
Legate is not to execute his c mmission but upon promise made to the King in
writing, and a solemn oath taken by his holy orders, not to exercise the said
commission in any kingdom, country, land or Lordship under his subjection but
for such time only as shall stand with the Kings liking; and as soon as the
Legate shall be advertised of the kings pleasure to the contrary, he shall
presentiy desist and stay. In like manner he shall not use any part of his
commission, but such as may be with the Kings liking, and conformable to his
will, without attempting or doing any thing in prejudice of the holy decrees,
general councels immunities, liberties, and privileges of the French Church,
and the Universities, and public Colleges of this kingdom. And to this end
are the Commissions of the Legates presented to the court of Parliament, where
they are seen, examined, approved, published, and registered with such
prouisoes as shall seem expedient to the Court for the good of the kingdom.
With which prouisoes, further, are all differences and contentions adjudged
which do rise upon occasion of the Legates actions, and no otherwise.

The Prelates of the French church, though they be sent for by the Pope upon
what occasion soever, yet are they not to go out of the kingdom, without
commandment, license, or pasport from the king.

The clauses inserted in the Bull, in Coena Domini, and those in particular in
the time of Pope Julius the second and others after him, have no admittance in
France, in as much as concerns the liberties and privileges of the French
church, and the rights of the King and his kingdom.

The Pope can neither take upon himself nor commit to others the trial of
rightes, preheminences and privileges of the crown of France and the
appurtenances, neither does the king plead or debate his right and pretensions
but in his own court.

The French Church has ever held, that although by ecclesiastical rules, or
(as Saint Cyrill says writing to Pope Celestine) by ancient custom of all
churches, general councels are not to be assembled or solemnised without the
Pope (claue non errante) who is acknowledged for head and primate of the whole
militant church, and the common father of all Christians, and that nothing is
to be determined or concluded without him or his authority, yet notwithstanding
is it not to be thought or imagined that he should be above the universal
councels, but it is rather held that he is bound to submit himself to the
decrees and resolutions of this universal council, as to the commandments
of the church, which is spouse to our Lord Jesus Christ, and is chiefly
represented by this congregation.

The Bulls or Apostolic letters of citation, be they of present execution, or
thundered out for admonition, or of any other sort, are not to be executed in
France without a Pareatis from the king or from his officers, and such
execution as may be done under permissio^ is done by the ordinary judge
appointed by the king, and with the kings authority, not auctoritate
Apostolica, to avoid confusion which would grow by the mixture of jurisdictions.

The Pope can impose no pensions upon benefices of this kingdom which have
cures of souls, nor upon others, except it be by consent of the incumbents,
and conformable to the holy decrees of councels and canonical constitutions,
or else for the profit of such as do resign upon such express conditions, or
to let peace betwixt parties which are at strife and in suit about a litigious
benefice.

The liberties of the French Church are preserved by diligent observing that
all Bulls and dispatches which come from the Court of Rome be seen and visited,
to know whether there bed any thing in them which might be in any sort
prejudicial to the rights and liberties of the French Church, and the
authority of the King, of which there is yet to be seen an express ordinance
made by Lewis the eleventh, and imitated by the predecessors of the Emperor
Charles the 5. which were then vassals of the crown of France, and likewise by
himself in an Edict made at Madril in the year 1543. which was put in
practice in Spain and other countries of his obedience with more rigor, and
less respect then in this kingdom.

They are likewise preserved by appeals which are interposed to the future
council, of which many presidents (even of latter times are to be seen, as of
appeals made by the University of Paris from Pope Boniface the 8. Benedict,
the 11. Pius the 2. Leo. the 10. and others.

Were I not restrained by the breuity which in reason I must use in this
apology, I might here recite the arrests and acts of Parliament in matter of
judgments in criminal causes, where it is decided that in France the Clergy
men of whatsoever order they be, may not only be apprehended by the secular
magistrate and referred to the Ecclesiastical Judge for common trespasses, but
adjudged by the laity for heinous offenses; and such for which they claim
privilege. And further, when for an ordinary fault a man is twice put over to
the Ecclesiastical power, the third time he is held incorrigible and is
adjudged by the secular. The arrests may be seen in all the French Lawyers and
particularly in Gio: Papons collections. L. 1. r. 5. art. 4. 9. 30. 31. 33. 34.
35. 44. 45. 46. 47. By this it may appear to all men that that which the
Author says is most true, that the liberty of the French Church is grounded
upon ancient Canons though it be not therefore true that they are grounded upon
the^ only; but further upon the law of nature, and upon al equity and reason.
It may further be seen, that that which the Author says is not true, that at
this present there is no more speech of the liberty of the French church: but
rather that most flourishing and mighty kingdom does employ as much care and
study for conseruing it self at this present as it has done in times past.
And comparing this liberty with that which the state of Venice does acknowledge
to hold of God, and intend to preserve with all their power, it may appear
that there is no greater difference, than such as the difference of the
countries does necessarily require. It may rather be seen that the state of
Venice does not make use of all the natural liberties (which it might freely
do) and only to show the greater reverence and respect of the holy sea. By
which every man may directly discover how far the last conclusion which the
Author (...) makes does differ from truth that the liberty which the state of
Venice takes to it self is contrary as well to the old Canons as the new.

Ephesians. 3.
Ei autem qui potens est omnia facere superabundanter quam petimus aut
intelligimus secundum virtutem quae operatur in nobis, ipsi gloria in Ecclesia
and in Christo Jesus in omnes generationes saculi saeculorum. Amen.

FINIS.

