A KEY TO THE KEY OF SCRIPTVRE: OR AN EXPOSITION with Notes, upon the Epistle
to the ROMANS; the three first Chapters: Begun at Walsall in Staffordshire,
continued at Pitmister in Somerset.

By William Sclater Batchelar in Divinity, and Minister of the Word of God at
Pitmister in Somerset.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his shop
near Temple-barre. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir. Henry Hawley Knight, Mr. John Simmes Esquire,
one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, in the County of Somerset, Mr. Roger
War, Mr. Richard War, Mr. Thomas War, Esquires, grace and peace.
RIght Worshipful, 2 Pet. 1.13.14
St. Peter foreseeing, by special revelation, the nighnesse of his departure,
thought it a part of duty, so long as he was in this Tabernacle, to stir up
the people of God, by putting them in remembrance, and, as it should seem,
judged it not enough to teach voce and exemplo, except he also left behind
him, a living remembrancer in writing: as if he had conceived the triple,
pasce, given him in charge, to import as much, as pasce verbo, pasce exemplo,
pasce scripto. The same, upon like ground, I cannot but acknowledge a duty in
me. Revelation I have none, but sensible notices enough, frequent infirmities,
proclamers of mortality, that seem to threaten a speedy dissolution of mine
earthly tabernacle. God may be pleased to support it, beyond my hopes, and
advised desires; how ever, my prayer is, if God be so pleased, that my Master,
when he comes Luke 12.43.
, may find me so doing, and my people have some means to keep in remembrance
doctrines taught them. Heb. 2.1.
How leaking, and sieue-like our vessel of memory is, in retayning the liquor
of divine truth, whose woeful experience teaches not? If I may heal these
breaches in my people, and any whit further the faith of Gods Church, I have my
desire, and shall glorify God in this behalf. The inscription is yours by
just title; as, for the many personal desernings of you all at my hands, so
for the support, some of you affoorded to my pressures: and help you lent me
in bringing these rude notes to their first light, which otherwise had
perished, as abortiues, through malice of the adversary. You delight not in
complements, else would I give them. Thus only I pray to be reputed,
thankful: thus only to be recompensed, with your conscionable perusing of
what is here presented. The many scapes, which as a man, I have made, let your
love cover. The helps, if any, brought to the understanding of this Epistle,
(justly termed by Divines The Key of Scripture) use to your further edifying in
our most holy faith. I end with that prayer of Paul for Onesiphorus. 1 Timothy
1.16.18
The Lord grant mercy to you and your housholdes, that have so many ways and
often refreshed me, and were not ashamed of mine afflictions. The Lord grant
you, to find mercy with the Lord at that day, Amen.

From Pitmister, May 5. 1611. Your Worships in all Christian respectfulnesse
William Sclater.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, thou have here some part of that pains, so long expected,
so much desired. As Caleb and Joshua sent forth to bring tidings and taste of the
promised land; so these, to taste the acceptance, the rest shall expect, from
the Church of God. My desire was, to have forth-sent them, with greater
company, and better furniture: if either mine own incessant employments, would
have permitted more, or friends restless opportunity, had not extorted these.
Where I fault, smite me friendly: it shall be as balm to mine head, and
perhaps an Antidote to prevent the like, in that which follows. Be entreated
to confer the Text with the gloss: and if I be not deceived, thou shall
find the fruit, such as needs not to be repented. Now the Lord, sole giver of
increase to our Labors, make it fruitful, to the comfort of thy conscience,
and furtherance of thy faith. Amen.

Thine in Christ William Sclater.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE THREE FIRST Chapters of the EPISTLE of Saint Paul to
the Romans.
The Occasion and Scope of the Epistle.
THE occasion of this Epistle seems this: Report of manifold disagreements,
both in judgment and affection, risen in the Church of Rome; consisting partly
of Jews, partly of Gentiles. The Jews some of them wholly oppugning the
Gospel, others mingling Law and Gospel together, in the case of
Justification; and jointly all excluding Gentiles from fellowship in Christ.
The Gentiles again, proudly insulting over the Jews; because God, having
rejected the body of the Jews from being his people, had grafted them into the
body of Christ. Now to allay all these controversies and to settle them in
truth, and unity of judgment and affections, the Apostle, being hindered from
coming to them, deals by letters.

CHAPTER. I.
Verse 1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, put apart to
preach the Gospel of God.
THE parts of the Epistle are principally three. First, a Preface or
Introduction, from verse 1. to 16. Secondly, a Treatise of Christian doctrine,
of three branches, Justification, Sanctification, Predestination, to Chapter
12. Thirdly a Conclusion; wherein is an Exhortation to sundry Christian duties,
and a Valediction, or bidding farewell, with sundry salutations, and greetings,
according to the custom of Epistles, from Chapter 12. to the end.

The Introduction has three members: first, an Inscription: secondly, a
Salutation: thirdly, an Exordium, or entrance into the matter it self, by
insinuation.

The Inscription contains a Description: first, of the writer: secondly, of
them to whom the Epistle is directed.

The writer is set forth first, by his proper name, Paul: secondly, by his
titles of Office, one general, a servant of Christ; another more special, an
Apostle; that illustrated by the causes efficient: first, principal, Christ,
verse 5. less principal, calling, and separation. Finally subordinate,
preaching of the Gospel; obedience of faith; supreme, the glory of God.

The Gospel it self illustrated, first, by the Author God; secondly, the
subject matter, Christ; described by his double Sonship, Humane of David;
Divine of God; set forth by the adjoined declaration and manifestation of it;
that also amplyfied, first, by the manner, mightily; secondly, by the mean,
resurrection; whole Christ by his dominion.

Persons to whom he writes described; first, by their place of abode, Rome;
secondly, certain adjuncts, first, Gods love, secondly, vocation; amplified by
the Author, Jesus Christ; and holiness: so that in the inscription are four
principal things; first, a description of the person writing; secondly, of the
Gospel; thirdly, of Christ's person; fourthly, of the Romans, to whom he
writes.

Touching the name of Paul and alteration thereof many opinions might be
rehearsed; for my part, the most probable I take that of Hierome, In epist. ad
Philem: Act. 13.12.
coniecturing it to have begun upon occasion of Paulus the Proconsull his
conversion: the reason of his conjecture, because he then first took the name
of Paul.

Theophilact inquiring the reason of this change, Theoph. in Romans 1.
thus answers; he was therefore of Saul called Paul that he might not seem
inferior to Peter, the chief of the Apostles; no not in this, that his name
was changed. For manner of calling equal, if not superior; for revelations,
persecutions, pains in the Ministry, blessing on his labors, feruencie of
zeal, integrity of life, no way inferior. Nay not in this, that he had his
name altered upon special occasion.

Let Papists now go and boast of Peter's primacie; Paul was his equal, if not
in most of them, his superior.

Paul:] Reasons for prefixing his name; first, to show his readiness to justify
and maintain the doctrine here delivered, to the face of all gainsayers, and
so to procure greater credit to his doctrine, in the minds of the Readers.
Things covertly conuayed into the Church under title incerti Authoris, breed
just jealousy in the Reader, that things so delivered are scarce justifiable
by the Author: for straight occurreth the Proverb, Truth seeks not corners.
Secondly, that the very name of Paul, so worthy an Apostle, might add some
authority to the writing.

Paul, the Apostle of Christ's glory.

Papists make another use; where they find Paul's name prefixed, here
especially, they cry out, manum de Tabula, unto the people. Why? forsooth in
Paul's writings 2 Pet. 3.16.
many things are full of difficulty, which the unlearned pervert to their own
destruction. An^. First not the letter, but the matters are obscure to flesh
and blood. Secondly, not all, nor many, but some things are hard; l^quitur qua^
fieri potest parcissime. Thirdly to whom hard? 2 Cor. 4.3.
viz. to the unlearned and the unstable; to them that perish; and to them
only: the Elect are John. 6.45.
al taught of God, so much as is necessary for their salvation: yea, the Ier.
31.34.
least as well as the greatest. Fourthly* why not other Scriptures detained
from them, seeing these also are perverted by them that perish? Ibid. Fifthly,
Peter commends them for 2 Pet. 1.19.
attending to the Prophetical Scriptures, and cal^ them light; wherein
notwithstanding the mysteries of salvation are more darkly propounded then in
any the writings of the Apostles. Read Ioh. 5 39. Romans 1^.4. Acts. 17.11. 2 Timothy 3.15. The better use of such difficulties is this; therefore be more
paineful in searching, more earnest in praying God to open thine eyes, that
thou may see the wondrous things of the law: less trusting to thine own
acuitie; for sure to flesh and blood these things are mysteries, the natural
man 1 Cor. 2.14.
understands them not, but being illightened by the spirit of God. Now follow
the Titles.

A servant of Jesus Christ.] Service of Christ is threefold. First, of his
power, and providence, from which no creature is excluded: for all things serve
him. Yea, the very Devils themselves in those things they do against his will,
yet unwittingly fulfill his will, and Ier. 27.6.
serve unto the purposes of his secret providence.

Secondly, the service of Faith, as Theophilact calls it, common to all
Christians after conversion; who having received assurance of their particular
interest in Christ's blood, resign themselves to his will and good pleasure.

Thirdly, the service of particular office; whereby in the works of some
special calling, we do service unto Christ. Thus Maiestrates are called Romans
13.6.
servants of God, because in government they do, or should do him service.
Thus Ministers of the Word are called 1 Cor. 4.1.
servants, because they serve him in preaching the Gospel. In these two l^st
senses Paul subscribes himself a servant of Jesus Christ.

First, in regard that he now was become a worshipper of that Christ whom
before he did persecute.

So powerful is God in the works of his grace, 1 Timothy 1.12.13
blasphemers, persecutors, oppressors of the truth, faithful servants unto
Christ. Confer Mat. 21.31.32.

Hope of merciful and gracious acceptance with Paul a persecutor, yet received
to mercy, counted faithful, and put in Christ's service. And least any
penitent should think this mercy was peculiar to Paul, he shows it is
exemplary. God in Paul, as 1 Timothy 1.16.
in a pattern, showing how he would deal with all men, that should after his
example, forsake their sins, and embrace the Gospel.

Romans 11.23.
God is able to graffe them in. As he took Paul out of the heat of
persecution, and placed him in his service: so is he able to turn the heart
of the most desperate, hopeless, and abominable transgressour: too ordinary
are rash censures in this kind.

Secondly, a servant, in regard he was a Preacher of the Gospel; this
mentioned, first, to procure in the Readers a reverent regard to his doctrine,
and patient submission to what he taught them: secondly, to advise them, whom
they should especially have regard unto in the doctrines here delivered.

1 Cor. 4.1.
esteem us as Ministers of Christ. Secondly, not to be discontented at our
doctrines, howsoever applied, whether by threatening, comfort, exhortation,
reproof. In other cases men's boldness is excused by this; they are but
servants, and must do their Masters message: in this calling, me thinks, the
excuse should be rather admitted, considering the woe that waits for us* if
we hold back any thing of the message delivered unto us. Confer 1 Cor. 9.16.
Ezech. 3.18. Thirdly not to ascribe any thing to us, more then as to Ministers,
and instruments of God. For what is Paul, or C^t^^^, or A^ollos? what are we
but Ministers by whom ye have believed? 1 Cor. 3.5.
and that as our Lord and Master gave to every man.

1 Cor 4.2.
fidelity in the work of our Ministry, considering we are Heb. 13 17.
countable to our Master. Secondly, not to Mat. 10.24.
seek our selves, but the glory of our Master. Thirdly, not to haunt after
the praise and applause of men, but to approve our selves to Christ Gal. 1.10.
both in our doctrines and manner of our delivery. Fourthly, not to think much
of our afflictions, which we meet withal in discharge of our Ministry. Me
thinks it should seem enough to the Romans 16.7.
servant to be as his Lord.

Called to be an Ap^stle.] Now follows the special office and kind of
Ministry, wherein he served Christ; together with his warrant for exercise
thereof: Calling and Separation.

An Apostle.] The word in general signifies any Ambassador or messenger sent
in common affairs, whether of Church, or commonwealth: sometimes applied unto
Ministers in general. But most properly, Gal. 1.1.
notes those extraordinary Ministers immediately called by Christ himself,
and by him sent out to plant the Church amongst the Nations. Some things were
common to them with ordinary Ministers, as preaching of the Word,
administration of the Sacraments, use of the Keys. Read Mat. 28.19.20. Mat.
16.19. Ioh. 20.23. Mat. 18.17.18.

Some things were proper and peculiar to them as Apostles. First, calling by
lively voice, Gal. 1.12.
or such like immediate means from Christ. Secondly, immediate Instruction
Act. 8.18.
in the mystery of Christ, by Christ himself. Thirdly, a power to give the 2
Cor. 12.12.
visible gifts of the holy Ghost. Fourthly, power Gal. 2.7.
to do miracles. Fifthly, generality of commission, extended to all nations,
for that Gal. 2.11.14.
Peter took the circumcision, Paul the uncircumcision, it was by free accord
betwixt them. Sixthly, Infallible assistence of the Spirit in all doctrines
delivered to the Church, either by word, or writing. For Gal. 2.11.14.
Peter's error was an error of fact not of faith, in practice, not in doctrine

This office, by consent of all Divines, begun and ended in their persons, to
whom at first it was committed. And except that man of sin, that has entered
by intrusion into the prerogatives royal of Christ, no man would dare to
arrogate the privileges of this calling. He forsooth chalengeth, as in the
right of Peter, universal power over the whole Church in earth; not only to
teach it, but to rule it as a God upon earth. He has glory of miracles, but
These. 2.9.
all lying in form, or end, and if we were so mad as to believe, infallible
assistence of the spirit in all things, that he shall sententiouslie deliver
to the Church out of his chair of pestilence: Sapientum octauus. Apostolorum
14.

1. Pet. 5.2.
flocks of their own depending on them, leave them destitute on the days of
assembling, pretending to feed others, but indeed to fill their own purses.

Now follows his warrant for assuming and exercising the function of an
Apostle; his calling, and separation.

His calling alleged, to prevent suspicion of usurpation, as in other his
Epistles, and in other the Isay 6. Ier. 1.
Prophets of God, whom we see all desirous to show their commission for
aduenturing upon ministerial office.

Number. 3.10.
without assurance of calling from God. See Heb. 5 4. Reasons. First, the
danger of intrusion. Exempl. 2 Samuel 6.6.7. Bethshemites. 1 Samuel 6.19. Vziah. 2 Samuel 26.18.19. Secondly, Christ took not to himself this honor but with
warrant of his fathers calling. Heb. 5 5. No blessing can be expected on our
labors except God has called us.

Calling, is of two sorts; Immediate, and extraordinary, where God calls
immediately, without the ministry of man: so were Prophets and Apostles
called: secondly, mediate, wherein God uses the ministry of man, as at this
day, in designement of every minister unto his function.

Reproved here are all those fanaticall spirits that Ier. 23.21.
Contra. Romans 10.25. as the false Prophets.

Secondly, all those lay people, whether men, or women, that in the case of
supposed necessity, adventure the ministration of Mat. 28.19.20.
Baptism: which together with the preaching of the word, the Lord has
invested in the persons of called Ministers. And as from preaching he has
excluded women 2 Cor. 14.34.
: so also from the other parts of our ministry. Ob. They may teach their
families: therefore also Baptize. Ans. It follows not, teach they may as
private Christians, but not as Ministers; baptize they cannot, but as
ministers; this being every way, in every respect and manner, proper to a
minister.

Ob. Ziphorah circumcised her son. Exodus 4.25. Ans. The question is not what
she did, but how well she did. Just: the wrath of God ceased upon the fact.
Ans. it follows not therefore she sinned not in doing it. Read Exodus 1.19 20
Again, we find not, that circumcision was so appropiated to the Levites, as
Baptism now is to the ministers of the Gospel. Thirdly, it may be the fact
was extraordinary, and therefore not to be imitated without like dispensation
Fourthly, some think her herein to have bin but the hand of her husband in his
weakness.

Labor first for assurance of calling before thou adventure ability both of
knowledge and other fitness to teach. Secondly, testimony of conscience that
thou enterest not for any other respect, then Gods glory. Thirdly, the
approbation of the church. Fourthly, a propense inclination to exercise the
works thereof. See a true minister out of his element, till he be doing some
John 4.34.
work of his ministry.

Verse 2. Which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures.
SEt apart.] This separation is two-fould. First in Gods counsel and decree.
Read Gal. 1.15. Ier. 1.5. understand it of lawful callings, lawfully
undertaken.

Romans 9.20.

Esteem that the calling to which God has designed thee, for which he best
enableth thee by gifts, and to which the means of education have led thee.

Now as Paul was separate, and set apart to this function in Gods secret
decree: so also, by Act. 13.2.
Gods appointment, was he separated to the same by the Church.

office of the Church, where it may be had, though privy to our selves, of our
competencie for the work of the ministry.

Que^t. How if the Church neglect her duty in calling after gifts, and
fitness obtained?

Ans. Modestly tender thy self and thy pains, and if thou be 1. Tim. 3.
approved thou may minister.

Quest. What if after such offer the Church admit not?

Ans. Thus think the time is not come which God has designed for thine
employment.

Anabaptists reproved,

To preach the Go^pell.] The matter subject of Paul's office is here noted.

The Gospel.] The word in general signifies any tidings of good things In
Scripture it is sometimes put for the history of the Mat. 1.1.
birth, life, death, etc. of Christ. In the old Testament the joyful tidings
of redemption, promised to be wrought by Christ, when the fullness of time
should be expired: in this place and almost generally in the new Testament, it
imports the glad tidings of reconciliation, really wrought by Christ exhibited
in the flesh: this also the principal matter of our ministry. See Mat.
16.15. Luke 14 47. As the Gen 8.11.
Done with the Olive branch in her mouth: so ought a minister to be to his
people, bringing tidings of good things.

Quest. May not a Minister preach the law?

Ans. Yes; as a doctrine subordinate to the Gospel, and a means to prepare to
it. See Peter, Acts 2. as a good Surgeon applies Corrasiues to a festred sore,
and sometimes uses his lancing knife to cut away the dead flesh, and to let
out the putrified matter, that he may make way for his healing plasters,
though his proper work be to heal: so etc. In the law three things
considered: First, a doctrine of perfect righteousness; thus taught Mat. 5.
by Christ, that we might in it behold our manifold wants. Secondly, the Curse;
thus taught by Gal. 3.10.
Paul, to break the heart, and to drive to Christ: Thirdly a rule of
obedience; so taught Tit. 2.11.12.
generally in the Gospel. In the two first respects necessary to be taught as
a preparatiue to the Gospel. In the third, as a part of the Gospel, which
has renewed the doctrine of the law. 1 Ioh. 2.8. yet this true withal: the
proper, and principal office of our ministry, is to preach unto Gods people
the glad tidings of reconciliation with God, remission of sins, entrance into
heaven, procured by Christ Jesus.

Me thinks therefore, that if not for our personal gifts, if not for
preeminence of calling, if not for the person of Christ we sustain; yet for
our message sake, we should find more loving entertainment, then the world
commonly affords us. Isaiah prophesying of deliverance from captivity under
Assure, thus expresses their entertainment of the messengers thereof amongst
the people, Isay 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
that declares and publishes peace? etc. were the feet of those messengers so
beautiful? how much more amiable are the feet of them that preach deliverance
from spiritual bondage. See Isay 61.1.2.3.

And yet true it is in experience, that Paul speaks of the Apostles of the
last times; they are counted the skumme, and off-scowring of the world; their
persons and message alike spitefully rejected. Cause: that they never felt
their spiritual misery. See Act. 2.37. Act. 16.30.

Now follows the description of the Gospel: first, by the Author God:
secondly, by the adiunct, it was promised, the promises by the way amplified.
First, by the instruments by whom they were delivered, the Prophets. Secondly,
the records, wherein they were registered, the scriptures. Thirdly, the Gospel,
further described by the object or subject matter, Christ Jesus.

The Gospel of God.] So called because God is the Author, deviser, reuealer,
sender of this glad tidings unto the world. So then though men be ministers,
yet is the doctrine Gods, though men the messengers, yet is the message Gods;
See 2. Cor. 5.18.19.20. It will appear if we shall consider, either the
matter, efficacy or confirmation of it. The matter of our message, such as
none but an infinite wisdom could devise, (viz.) the true means of
reconcilement with God, by composition of infinite justice, with endless
mercy in the work of our redemption. The Ephesians. 3.10.11. 1. Pet. 1.12.
Angels knew it not till revealed by Christ unto the Church.

The efficacy divine, the raising of a conscience cast down, giving hope to
the hopeless, changing 2. Cor. 3.18.
the whole man. Confirmation by Heb. 2.4.
signs and wonders such as none but a divine power could work.

Take heed, how we neglect so great salvation. Heb. 2.4. Reasons there given.
First from the danger, made more probable and grievous by a comparison of
instruments delivering it. Secondly, the evident confirmation of it by
testimonies, Humane, verse 3. Divine, verse 4. yet contempt common.

One special cause, the infirmity, and weakness of men, whose ministry God
uses. Although the Lord h^th told us that he that despises the messenger in
respect of his message, or the message for the messenger, despises not men but
God. And has for good purposes committed to men the word of reconciliation.
First, because our infirmity is not able to endure his majesty. Deuteronomy.
5.24.25.26.27.28. Secondly, that the excellency of the 2. Cor. 4.7.
power might be acknowledged to be of God. Thirdly, to prove our obedience.

The adiunct of the Gospel follows, before promised by the Prophets.]

Before pr^mised.] Note here the Antiquity of the Gospel and doctrine of
salvation by Christ. See Tit. 1.2. promised first in Paradise, renewed, to Genesis
3.15.
Abraham, pointed at in the law, revived by the Act. 10.43.
Prophets in all ages.

Mar. 1.27 what new doctrine is this, never heard of till Luthers time? Yes,
taught by the Fathers, by Apostles, Genesis 3.15.
Prophets, by God himself from the beginning. Let them as Ier. 6.16.
Jeremy speaks stand on the ways and ask for the old way, and then tell me
whether all true Antiquity point not unto Christ, as the only true Ioh. 14.6.
way to eternal life: they talk of satisfactions and merits, of pardon, and
reward, by penance, pilgrimages, fastings, voluntary poverty, etc. but let
them show in any true Antiquity, where all or any of these things are
commended, farther then as necessary conditions and dispositions as it were
for attainment of salvation; or as duties of thankfulness for salvation
purchased by Christ?

Promised.] Observe again the dignity of the Church of the new Testament,
from that of the old. Christ promised Luke 10.23.
to them, exhibited Heb 11.39.40.
unto us, a benefit often commended to our diligent consideration. In this
regard Ministers of the new Testament called by Mat. 11.11.
Christ, greater then John Baptist, not only in respect of a greater measure of
revelation vouchsafed unto them then unto him, but also in regard of the matter
of their ministry. The Prophets taught Christ to come: John Bapti^t pointed
at Christ already come: w^e preach Christ incarnate, crucified, risen,
ascended, reigning; finally, having performed all things that were spoken of
him by the Prophets.

Bless God for this, as not the least grace, that God has reserved us for
these last times, wherein our ears Mat. 13.17.

Take we heed especially how we contemn so great Act. 13.32.33.40.41. Surely
where grace is greatest there is contempt most fearful. The records wherein
these promises were registered are the scriptures; so are the writings of the
old and new testament called by excellency.

The reasons why God would have these promises committed to writing are these.
First, the better to preserve them from oblivion and abolishment. Secondly, to
prevent corruption in doctrine by Heretics. Thirdly, their better propagation
to the knowledge, and use of all men by translations, etc.

Great therefore shall be our unthankfulness, and most just our condemnation,
if when the Lord has so much endeavored to make the scriptures familiar unto
us, we shall be found ignorant of the means of salvation: unable to discern
spirits, to put difference betwixt truth, and falsehood; good and evil.

The Epithet of the Scriptures; Holy: so are they in respect, first of their
Author, and Inditer. 2. Tim. 3.16. Secondly, of the penners, 2. Pet. 1.21.
holy men of God Thirdly, of the matter, the holy and eternal truth of God.
Fourthly, of their effect and end, which is our Ioh. 17.17.
sanctification.

Papists hence infer therefore not to be permitted to lay people, in their
mother tongue: abusing to this purpose the saying of Christ. Mat. 7.6. as who
say all Gods people were dogs. And not only men that by their impudent
contempt of wholesome admonitions (whereof alone Christ there speaks) bewray
themselves to be incorrigible, and past cure.

Rather learn we with what affections we must address our selves to the
reading of the Scriptures; holy doctrines enter not but into holy minds,
neither are they admitted but by sanctified affections, See Ioh. 7.17.
Profaneness is as the veil over the heart. 2. Cor. 3.15. and Gods Psalm.
25.14.
secret is with them only which fear him.

Verse 3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh.
THe object, or matter subject, of the Gospel follows, that is, Christ
Jesus: about whose either person, or natures, or offices, or works, or
benefits with the means to enjoy them, the whole Gospel is occupied.

And all doctrines propounded as Evangelical not reduced unto Christ, are to
be rejected as hellish heresies. Yea, examine all heresies contrary to
Evangelical doctrine you shall find that they ouer-turne some truth which the
Gospel teaches concerning Christ. So then from this description of the
Gospel taken from the Author, God; the instruments first revealing, the
Prophets; the records, Scripture; the object, Christ; may we learn to judge of
all doctrines thrust upon us as Evangelical. Paul, Gal. 1.6. complains of
some, that had obtruded to the people another Gospel, then that he had
preached. And surely many such other Gospels, or Evangelical doctrines, has
the Church of Rome urged upon the people of God. Other means of reconcilement
then the merit of Christ, inherent in his own person: other mediators of
intercession then the man Christ Jesus: another propitiatory and purging
sacrifice, then that which Christ once offered on the cross by himself. And a
thousand such like doctrines of the Popish Ghost-spill: but examine them at
this touchstone, see if they be not descried to be the inventions and fancies
of man; where find we these things taught by the Prophets, registered in the
scriptures? and how I pray you, lead they to Christ?

Now follows the description of Christ's person: First, by his double
Sonne-ship: Secondly, by his dominion, His Sonne-ship, first Divine: of God:
secondly, Humane, of David. See the Analysis.

The Son of God.] Not by creation as Adam. Luke 3.38. nor by adoption as all
Ioh. 1.12.
believers; but by eternal generation: Pro. 8.24. Ioh. 1.18. the manner
whereof, who can so express, as to satisfy the inquiries of fleshly reason?
And yet mine ear has recciued a little thereof, as Job. 4.12.
Eliphaz in an other case speaks. For the better explanation of this
mystery, two questions shall be briefly handled. First, what that is that
Christ receives from his father. Secondly, how he receives it. In Christ's
divine person, two things are to be considered: first, the divine essence:
secondly, the manner of exsistence. The essence he has of himself, not of his
father. Reasons. First, because this is essential to him that is God to have
his essence of himself. Secondly, otherwise Christ must be a distinct God from
the Father, as he is a distinct person. Thirdly, if the essence beget, and be
begotten, then must there be two essences in the Deity, one begetting, the
other begotten; Lib. de Chrsto 2. cap. 7.
but this is absurd, Bellarmine himself being witness. Ergo.

Ob. Now if any shall object that he receives his whole person from his
father, therefore also his essence, that is, persona substrata. Ans. It
follows not: for though he receive his whole person from the father, as it is
the person, yet receives he not all that is in the person. And to speak
properly, that which the father gives to the Son, is not the divine essence,
but the personal existence, or manner of being in the Deity: neither has
Christ from his father, this to be God: but this only, to be the Son.

For the manner or means how he receives his person, or personal being in the
Godhead, it is by generation, or begetting; the manner whereof as it is, is
ineffable. Yet something may be conceived and spoken whereby it may be somewhat
shadowed out to our understanding. Some say he is so begotten of the Father, as
light of the Sun, by a simple emanation. The fathers make choice of the
metaphor used by the holy Ghost to explane this mystery: Ioh. 1.1. as speech
is conceived and begotten of the mind without any passion* alteration, flux,
or decision; so as the speech is in the mind, and the mind in the speech: so
Christ of God the Father. Augustine. The mind is as it were the bringer forth,
knowledge as it were the offspring, or child of the mind: for the mind while
it viewes it self, begets the knowledge of it self, which is the image of it
self. By these and such like resemblances may this mystery of Christ's
eternal generation be in some sort conceived, though as it is in it self, it
cannot be explaned.

Christ is God equal with the Father. See this Ioh. 1.1.2.3. etc. euidenced,
first, by attributes of eternity, etc. secondly, by title of God. thirdly,
works of creation, and preservation: fourthly, by worship divine, given him by
Angels. Heb. 1.6. And what ever Arius says, to impeach this truth, bringing
testimonies to prove his inferioritie to the father, may almost all be answered
thus, that they are spoken of Christ as he is Mediator, and for the work of
mediation clothed with the shape and habit of a servant. See Phil. 2.6.7.

Made of the seed of David.] In respect of his divine subsistence he was Ioh.
1.14.
begotten, not made: in regard of his humane nature Gal. 4.4.
made, not begotten. This making was nothing but an action of the spirit of GOD
in Christ's conception, framing his body of the substance of the Virgin Mary.
See Luke 1.35. Reason, why made not begotten after the ordinary manner of men,
beside the will of God, this: that so the spreading of original sin might be
stopped, by the work of the spirit of God: it being a rule set down as it
seems, by the wisdom of God, that who so is borne of man by ordinary
mixture of man and woman, should thereby receive the infection of original
corruption.

So that we need not with the Franciscans, run to the purity of his mothers
conception, and birth, to make him a pure sacrifice, considering he is made,
not begotten after the manner of men. And as touching the Virgin Mary, though
we acknowledge her blessed amongst women, and sanctified above the ordinary
degree of men and women; yet that she was tainted with sin original, both the
scriptures teach. Romans 5.12 and those fruits springing from this root
sufficiently testify, Luke 2.48. Ioh. 2.4.

Made.] Not by change of the Deity into the humanity: for then how could he
have borne Gods wrath, or merited his love for us? Nor by mixture of both
natures to make one compound, as when water and wine are mingled; but by having
the manhood united to his Deity, and assuming the nature of man into the
unity of his divine person. Heb. 2.14.1^.

Abraham. First, otherwise how could he have borne Gods wrath? Secondly,
satisfied his justice? Thirdly, performed due obedience? Fourthly, merited at
Gods hand either for himself or us? See Heb. 9.14



Of the seed of David;] as appears by the genealogies, Mat. 1. Luke 3. Where
though the Evangelists differ in the order of his descent from David, the one
intending to set down the succession natural, the other the legal succeeding
into the kingdom; yet both agree in this, that they fetch his pedygree from
David. Where the question may be, how Christ being made of the seed of David,
could escape the infection of original sin? Ans. In original sin, are two
things: First guilt; that by Adams transgression lay upon all those that were
begotten of him: this removed from Christ, because he was not begotten of Adam;
though he took his substance from a child of Adam. Secondly, the corruption;
this stopped by the work of the holy Ghost; stopping the propagation of that
infection, or rather purging of that part of the Virgins substance assumed by
Christ from that inclination and disposition natural unto evil.

Of the seed of David.] Therefore true man as David was, Confer Heb. 2.14. 1.
Tim. 2.5. For what Paul speaks: Romans 8.3. of his sending in the similitude of
sinful flesh, he would not have so understood, as if he thought him to have
had only a bare spectrum, and shadow of man, as Manichees dreamt. See Luke
24.39.43. but has respect therein to that frail, and outward miserable estate
of Christ Jesus, wherein he lived as if he had bin chief of sinners, it being
impossible that the lewdest sinner, should have endured more misery, then what
he in himself innocent yet suffered, having our sins imputed unto him. Sent
therefore he was in truth of humane nature, and in habit, and appearance only
of a sinner, having no sin of his own, Heb. 7.26. yet made sin for us by
imputation. 2. C^r. 5.21. Reasons, why made man. First, that the promise might
be accomplished. Genesis 3 15. Secondly, because his brethren for whom he was to
satisfy, both by active, and passive obedience, were partakers of flesh and
blood, Heb. 2.14 Thirdly, that in our nature he might feel our frailties, and
by experience learn commiseration. Heb. 2.17.18.

First, a pattern of Phil. 2.3.4.5.
humility, Heb. 4.

According to the flesh.] That is, as he was man: Eutiches, or of the Acephiah
his off spring; for I hold Hyperius his advice good, that a minister in his
popular Sermons should content himself to deal against the errors reigning
for the present in the people, rather then by needless mention of buried
heresies, give them occasion to inquire into them.

Only so much as our vbiquitaries have of late recalled, of these gross
heresies, I will briefly propound and as briefly confute. Now from this
ground, I think it will follow, that since the natures are not confused, or
trans-fused each into other, the properties also must needs remain to either
nature, without this supposed transfusion each into other: for that rule I
think will never be disproued; confound the properties ye confound the
natures: take away the properties ye take away the natures: transfuse the
properties, ye transfuse the natures.

Secondly, if properties be thus transfused; I demand whether this transfusion
be mutual, or reciprocal or not, that is, whether as divine properties are
transfused into the humanity; so humane also into the divinity: and sure I
see not, but that from the same ground of personal union, we may as well say,
that mortality is really transfused into the Deity; as vbiquitie into the
humanity: for whereas they say, the Godhead is not capable of infirmities
humane, etc. we may as truly say, that the manhood is not capable of divine
excellencies, as they are divine.

Secondly, if divine properties be so communicated unto the humanity of
Christ, that thereby the humane nature becomes omnipresent, etc. why not also
other properties of eternity, a part ante; immortality, simplicity, all
being equally out of the same grounds deducible as any one?

Now shall we a little see their reasons? they may all be referred to these
three. First, personal union. Secondly, that phrase used by the fathers,
communication of propert es. Thirdly, state of glory. Now if it be proved unto
us, that neither of these prove such a transfusion as they imagine, I hope our
people will be armed sufficiently against the error of vbiquitaries.

For the better discerning of the inconsequence of the first reason, it shall
not be amiss a little to enquire. First, what personal union is. Secondly,
what it is that the humanity of Christ thereby receives.

For the first, personal union, it is the uniting and knitting of Godhead and
manhood together: whereby is made one person of the mediator: wherein are
three things. First, that it is an union, or making of two one. Secondly, the
things thus united; Godhead, as it is limited to the second person in Trinity,
and manhood. Thirdly, the term of this union, they are made not one nature,
but one person of the mediator.

Secondly, weigh what it is, that the humane nature receives hereby. First,
subsistence in the second person of the Trinity, whereof it self is of it
self destitute.

Secondly, extraordinary dignity, insomuch that it is a peculiar temple for
the Deity of Christ to dwell in, and wherein it shows and manifests it self,
more gloriously then in any creature. Col. 2.9.

Thirdly, more near familiarity with the Godhead then any other creature,
Angels, or man, has or can have.

Fourthly, an extraordinary measure of habitual graces; of understanding,
wisdom, holiness, etc. Such as in that measure dwells in no creature. Ioh.
1.14.15.16.

Fifthly, a partner agencie with the Godhead, according to its measure in the
works of redemption and mediation.

Now the vbiquitaries add hereto a communication of divine nature and
properties to the manhood, so as to be informed and actuated thereby: insomuch
that the humane nature receives into it self, from the Deity, a power to be
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent in it self: a thing that cannot agree to
the humane nature of Christ, without being made God; for that which some
object, that notwithstanding this kind of having divine properties
communicated, yet the manhood is not Godhead, because it has them not of it
self, but by participation from another, is frivolous; for howsoever these
things be had, if they be had, as they teach, so as to inform the subject
wherein they dwell, they make it God: in as much as these things are divine
properties, inseparable from the divine nature, nor can any thing be said to be
properly omnipotent, omnipresent, etc. but it must be confessed withal to be
God.

Qu. How then are these communicated unto the manhood in Christ's person? Ans.
Even as the divine nature it self and none otherwise, that is, so as they dwell
and show themselves in manhood; and so as that the manhood united unto the
Godhead, may say of them they are mine, not by way of information, but in
respect of possession after a sort: Ratione supp^siti, as divines speak.

So that this being all that by virtue of personal union acrewes unto the
manhood of Christ, it will be impossible from them to infer such a
communication of divine properties unto the humanity as vbiquitaries dream of.

Their second ground is, (...) phrase of speech used by the Fathers for
interpretation of sundry scriptures, which they call (...) or as some term it
(...), which indeed according to the sense of the fathers, is nothing else but
a manner of speech, whereby in respect of that union personal of the two
natures in one suppositum, the properties of the several natures are
predicated either of the whole suppositum, or of the several natures in the
concrete; for by reason of the same personal union, it comes to pass, that
the two natures interchangeably take the concrete names each of other in
predication: so its said: Acts 20.28. God purchased the church with his blood;
not that the Godhead shed blood, but because a person that was God shed blood
to procure redemption: not which it had as God; but which it had in the manhood
united unto it: so John 3.13. the Son of man talking with Nichodemus, is said
to be in heaven: not that as he was man he was in heaven, while he was on
earth; but because that person that was son of man, was by something in his
person, that is, by his Deity, in heaven: so in this place, where we have a
pattern given us, to interpret all such alternate predications: the Son of
God is said to be made of the seed of David, but how? according not to his
divine Sonneship, but according to his humane nature, united to the Son of
God: and how will it hence follow, that because the properties of the divine
nature, may be enunciated of the person denominate, in the concrete of the
humane nature, therefore the divine properties are communicated to the humane
nature so as to inform it. And as a learned Divine and Logitian says well, if
these men had learnt in this point to distinguish between predicata absoluta,
and limitata, we should soon see an end of all these unseasonable and bitter
contentions betwixt brethren.

Their third ground is, the exaltation of Christ's humane nature to the state of
glory, and that which they call statum maiestatis, whereinto Christ entered at
his ascension: whereby they say Christ in his manhood, received an infinite
power and glory, etc. and so this power to be every where present.

Now that Christ's manhood received not by that his exaltation to the state of
majesty and glory, any such nature of being omnipresent, the other grounds
formerly laid do easily euince: for as personal union makes not the manhood
God, so neither does exaltation into state of glory: for that is still manhood
though exalted unto glory; and therefore though he received glory more then
any creature besides; yet not this glory for his manhood to be God, or to have
any such property, upon having whereof, it must needs follow that it is God:
for it is still a creature finite, etc. though the most glorious of creatures,
yet a creature; God having said that he will not give his glory unto any
creature; no not to the humane nature of Christ. Much more might be said to
this purpose, but that I remember for whose sakes I pen these observations.

For us let us learn from the Apostle, how to understand all these places of
Scripture, where weaknesses are given to God, Christ, or divine excellencies,
unto man Christ, namely thus, that they must be taken as spoken, (...) in
diverse respects, according to the diversity of natures in Christ's person, as
when the Son of GOD is said to be made, thus must we understand his making,
as limited to his flesh: when to be eternally begotten, thus conceive it, as
limited to his Divine person.

Verse 4. And declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the Spirit of
sanctification by the resurrection from the dead.
NOw follows the declaration of his divine Sonship, verse 4. The word
signifies determined, and as it were by definitive sentence concluded to be the
Son of God: to omit the resolutions of others, I take it that this
determination is here set out. First, by the manner, mightily, Confer. Col.
1.29. so as that no man could contradict it. Secondly, the matter that he was
the Son of God, as the Centurion confesses, Mat. 27.54. Thirdly, the mean
or argument concluding it: his rising from the dead. Fourthly, the respect
added for explanation, according to the spirit of sanctification, that is,
according to his Divine nature, which sanctified his humanity, for so by
spirit, I here understand the Divine nature of Christ. First, for the
Antithesis. Secondly, comparing it with 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 3.18.

Now sanctification is here ascribed to the Divine nature, as it is in Christ's
person, both because by it the humane nature was made partaker, of habitual
created holiness, whither immediately, or mediately by the work of the holy
Ghost it matters not: as also because his Divine nature, is that that
sanctified his obedience, and made all his actions and passions, undergone for
us, of prise and value with God: in which sense the temple is said to sanctify
the gold; the altar the gift, Mat. 23.17.29.
wherefore he is said by the eternal spirit to offer himself unto God Heb. 9.14.
without spot, that made him a spotless sacrifice, that gave it power to
purge, and expiate our sins.

So howsoever the glory of Christ's Deity was ouershadowed, and almost
ecclipsed by the frailties of his humanity, miseries of life, shame of his
death, yet pleased it God at last, by an invincible demonstration, to prove him
to be the Son of God: (viz.) by his resurrection from the dead. Confer. Act.
13.33. where he is said in the day of his resurrection to be begotten of his
father, declaratiue, as divines interpert, because then he was most evidently
shown to be the Son of God, and not a mere man. Reasons of this declaration.
First, to confirm the faith of his children that seemed a little to stagger at
the shamefulnesse and bitterness of his Passion. Secondly, to convince the
Jews of wilful impiety that had rejected this stone, now made the head of
the corner.

Job by his indiscreet friends, of hypocrisy in Gods service: surely if we
look to the outward estate of Gods children in this life, we shall find it
true of them that Isay speaks of our Savior Isay 53.2.3.
neither form nor beauty, nor any thing why they should be desired; despised,
and rejected of men, etc. the very scum and offscouring of the world: but know
we for our comfort, that there will one day come a day of declaration, wherein
the sons of God shall be revealed, by their glorious advancement into Gods
kingdom, at the day of resurrection, as Romans 6.19. Yea, in particular
blemishes, whereby our good name and innocence is questioned, let us thus
comfort our selves, that the Lord shall one day bring forth our righteousness
as the light, and our judgment as the noone day, Psalm. 37.6.

Verse 5. By whom we have received grace and Apostleship (that obedience might
be given unto the faith) in his Name among all the Gentiles.
IN this verse is set down a description of Paul's Apostleship, partly to
prevent the cauiling imputations of false teachers, ordinarily charging him
with intrusion into that function as Gal. 1.1.2. partly that the Romans might
see, that in writing to them he strayed not beyond the bounds of his
commission. Now it is described, partly by the immediatenesse of his calling by
Christ, as Gal. 1 11. (By whom,) partly by the general fountain when it is
called, a grace, partly by the end subordinate, Obedience of faith; principal,
The glory of Christ; and lastly by the generality of the subject, All
nations, etc.

By whom.] Although it be true that all whatsoever any of us receive from God
we receive by Christ, both as the meritorious procurer thereof, as also as Gods
general steward, to whom is committed the government of the Church, and of the
whole world, yet I take it the Apostle here principally uses this phrase to
prove himself an Apostle; because he was immediately called by Christ, which
is one special difference of Apostles from other ordinary Pastors, as before,
verse 1. where see the uses also.

We have received grace and Apostleship.] Some here by grace understand the
grace of reconciliation and sanctification: some other gifts, whereby he was
f^tted for the function of Apostleship; but I take it here its by a
grammatical figure put to signify the general nature and fountain of
Apostleship; and is in substance nothing but this; the grace of being an
Apostle: or this, favor and free gift to be an Apostle. See Ephe. 3.8.

Ephesians. 4.8.9.10.11. by use of it. 1 Timothy 4.16. 1 Cor. 3.9.10. by reward and
crown given after faithful discharge of it. Dan. 12.3.

1 Cor. 4.7.
and of grace thou have received it. And foolishly do many stand upon terms
of the dignity of their calling, though in it self honorable, Heb. 5.4.
having no other worthiness to grace them; and not considering that of free
grace they have received it. Secondly, rather let them learn to use this
grace, to the end for which God has committed it unto them: See 1 Pet. 4.10.
and tremble at the woe due unto such, as being thus graced by God, neglect to
do that work whereunto they are called. 1 Cor. 9.16.17. Thirdly, give not way
to thoughts of coffeehouse, in respect of the many difficulties, ignominies,
persecutions, thou shall undergo in discharge of this calling, so as to be
grieved at the Lords leading thee to this so toylesome, shameless, disgraceful a
calling, by thine education and calling of the church; for know it is a high
favor of God to be counted faithful, and put in the ministry. 1 Timothy 1.12.
The end of this calling follows, to obedience of faith: the same phrase used,
Romans 16.26. I do here purposely omit variety of interpretations; choosing
that which I think is most direct; by faith here understanding the doctrine,
or word of faith, that is, the Gospel, as that acception is frequent. 1 Timothy
4.1. etc. and by obedience unto faith, nothing but that which Peter calls
obaying the truth, taught in the Gospel. 1 Pet 1.22.

This then is the end of our ministry, Cor. 10.5. and that this is no easy
work will appear, if we consider what the things are that the Gospel
enioynes us.

As first a denial and renouncing of our selves, and all things in us in
respect of any power they have to procure salvation, and to rely our selves
wholly and alone upon Christ, as author of salvation. Now how difficult a
thing is this, if we consider what high thoughts naturally all of us carry of
our selves, 2 Cor 1^.5.
insomuch, that even after GOD has humbled us and brought us low, yet when it
has pleased him again but a little by grace to raise us, we seem to our
selves such as to whom the Lord should as of due give salvation?

The second thing that the Gospel requires, is to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, etc. Tit. 2.12.13. and herein how much ado find we in
experience with our selves, to prevail so far as to abandon what our corrupt
affections lead us unto?

Hence therefore we all to whom the dispensation of the Gospel is committed,
Peter speaks, promise liberty to their hearers, yea set open a gap to all
carnal license, their own courses prove sufficiently; while they labor to
widen that gate that the Lord has by his word taught to be so straight.

The extent of the subject, all nations, so are all people called that are not
of the Jewish common wealth.

Ephesians. 2.12.13.14. Mat. 28 19.

And this is one reason why the church now is called Catholic, because the
bounds thereof now stretch unto all Nations, according to the promise. Psalm. 2.

Acts 14.16. Acts 17.30.

For his names sake.] That is, for his glory sake, or that thereby Christ
might be glorified.





Verse 6. Among whom ye are also the called of Jesus Christ.
AMong whom ye are also. This clause is added and deduced out of the general
formerly laid, for these two ends, first to show that the Apostle in writing to
them passed not beyond the tenure of his commission; secondly, and less
principally, to remember their state in nature, notwithstanding their present
advancement by gracious calling. Now the first of these is easily inferred: for
if his commission extend to all Gentiles, and Romans be Gentiles, then were
they also within compass of his commission.

So careful is the Apostle to avoid suspicion of busy meddling where he had
naught to do: These. 4.11. and the contrary reproved. 1 Timothy 5.13.

And it were to be wished,

Again, whereas the Apostle thus puts them in mind what they are in nature*
Gentiles; and in no better state then others; howsoever grace has put
difference between them and others; it may be observed, that its profitable
for Gods children often to be remembered what they are in nature. See 1 Cor.
6.10. 11. etc. partly for their humiliation. Secondly, for compassion to
others. Tit. 3.2.3. Thirdly, to provoke to thankefulnes unto God. 1 Timothy
1.12.13.14.17. etc.

Thus much of the subscription: the superscription follows; noting the persons
to whom the Epistle is directed; described, first: by the place of their abode,
secondly, adjuncts, declaring their happy estate; for they are beloved of GOD,
and by calling brought to sanctification.

Verse 7. To all you that be at Rome beloved of God, called to be Saints: grace
be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
TO all at Rome, etc.] Note here the indifferency of Paul's affection and care,
toward all the people of God, within his charge, whether bond or free, noble
or base, etc.

And it may teach us the lesson that James commands unto us, James 2.1. not to
have the faith of God, in respect of persons: his reasons: First, God has
chosen the poor: Secondly, he has made them rich in faith: Thirdly, given
them right to his kingdom, and a share in the inheritance of the Saints: to
which may be added, that they are equally purchased by Christ's blood, all
equally dear unto him; all equally committed to our charge. Act. 20.28. But
hereof more at large hereafter.

^ These. 5.27.
sundry reasons may be given of it: precept of Christ: Ioh. 5.39.
practice of Saints, Act. 17.11. 2 Timothy 2.14.15. duties required of all Gods
people, first, to discern Christ's voice from the voice of a stranger: Ioh.
10.4.5. 1 Ioh. 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. Heb. 5.
secondly, to make Apology for the faith, and give a reason of their hope; 1
Pet. 3.15. with sundry other, whereof read, Romans 15.4.

The Romanists here justly taxed as enemies unto the comfort of Gods people,
Verse. 1. Their pretenses are many, as care to keep the Scriptures from
derision of Atheists; secondly, fear of peoples misunderstanding, etc. but the
true cause is this, because they fear discovery of their gross adulterating
of the word of God, in matter of faith, worship, manners, etc.

Beloved of God.] There is a general love of God, whereby he embraces all
men; as appears by his beneficence, Math. 5.44. There is a special love,
wherewith he loves his elect in Christ, and of this is the place to be
understood.

And the evidences hereof he makes effectual calling: for whom God loves,
Romans 8.30. 2 Timothy 1.9. So that this is one special character of Gods special
love, effectual calling. Yea, the first certain evidence whereby God declares
his love to us in Christ.

It is a dangerous error of worldlings whereby they conclude from common
blessings, special love; Solomon have taught that no man can know love or
hatred by any external blessing. Eccle. 9.1.
In as much as all these things come alike to all, Mat. 5.44.
let us if we desire to have comfort by assurance of Gods special love, look
to this special work and fruit of his love, effectual calling.

Called to be Saints.] That is, by calling made Saints: for this is the nature
of Gods call; to make them that which they are not by his calling, Rom 4 17.

Tim. 1.9. Tit. 3.4.5.6.

Ephe. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.2. Romans 9.11.

Ephe. 2.17. from this union flows a Communication of the spirit, to sanctify
and renew us after Gods image, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 Ioh. 3.24.

Hereby then may we try our calling, even by the effect thereof, our
sanctification; 1 Cor. 1.2.
a number of people pretending faith in Christ, utterly disclaim holiness and
sanctification, and being reproved for their sins, their small sins
especially as they term them, throw off all with this excuse, we are not
Saints; what then? Devils? for I know no medium, 1 Ioh. 3.8.9. yet that we err
not; know that there are degrees of sanctity: some perfectly sanctified, as
the Saints in heaven; some not perfectly in themselves.

Quest. Wherein then consists this sanctity, that by calling we are made
pertakers of in this life? Answer. First, fruition of Christ's holiness by
imputation: secondly, inchoation of inherent holiness wrought by the spirit: 1
Cor 6.11.
thirdly, endeavor to be holy: Act. 24.16.
fourthly, separation from the uncleanness of the world, and consecrating of
our selves wholly to the service of God. 2 Cor. 6.17. and 7.1.

Now follows the salvation or (...): where are three things; first, the thing
wished for unto the Romans, Grace and peace. Secondly, the fountain, God the
Father. Thirdly, the mediator or mean, by whom they are procured and conuayed
unto us, Christ Jesus.

By grace here understand the favor and good will of God, with all those other
gifts of grace flowing therfrom: the first called grace making acceptable; the
other grace freely given, as Romans 5.15. by peace, after the phrase of the
Hebrews, all prosperity inward and outward, and which is not the least part of
this happiness, the sweet peace of a good conscience, arising from assurance
of Gods love to us in Christ Now this salutation is at large and distinctly
handled by many; see especially Master Perkins in Gal. 1.3. unto whom I refer
the Reader for further explanation. Some general things only I will propound.
First a question.

Quest. How Paul acknowledging these Romans to be already in state of grace,
prays yet for grace and peace unto them? Ans. First, he prays for a more
plentiful manifestation of Gods love, increase of inherent grace and peace of
conscience, as Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.2. for so it pleases God to
manifest his love by degrees; to work grace by degrees: secondly, he prays
for continuance and confirmation in this blessed estate, 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 These.
5.23.

Where observe that prayers for grace are not unnecessary for men in grace,

And I apply it to the detection of that odious scoff of Papists at our
doctrine of assurance of Gods love and pardon of our sins; that according to
our principles our people are bound never to ask God forgiveness of their
sins. Reason. Because they have already obtained it? Ans. It follows not,
for even those that have obtained remission must still pray, first, for
increase of this assurance: secondly, for continuance of this benefit: thirdly,
for a new act of pardon in the conscience, according as new sins are daily
committed.

viz: favor of God, peace of his conscience: therefore the Lord prescribing
unto Aaron, and his sons, a form of blessing the people, Numb. 6.23.24.25.26.
prescribes the very same things to be wished for; The Lord bless and keep
thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee; the
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace. And from this form
it seems the Apostles in the new Testament with a little alteration of words,
took their form of salutation and blessing.

These things none can judge of a right but those that either have felt how
comfortless want thereof is; or tasted how sweet and comfortable the fruition
of them is; confer Psalm. 32.1.2.

Solomon calls a continual feast, Pro. 15.15.
and which the wicked in their agonies would redeem with the world, as such
outcries are heard from them in their fears: all the world for a good
conscience.

Secondly, let worldlings that desire to know man's Salomons Ecclesiastes, and
thou shall see what he concluded of them all, They are vanity and vexation of
spirit; that that makes a man truly happy is the feeling of Gods love, and the
fruition of a good conscience, pacified by the blood of Christ. And thus much
of the two first parts of the Introduction, the Inscription and Salutation.

Verse 8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because your
faith is published throughout the whole world.
NOw follows the Exordium or entrance into the matter of the Epistle, and it
is of that kind which Rhetoritians call insinuatiue, tending to procure loving
regard from this people toward Paul's person and doctrine, by protestation of
his unfeigned love toward them, declared by two arguments and effects of a
loving affection: first, thanksgiving to God for their good, Ver. 8. secondly,
desire to see them and that for their good, from Ver. 9. to 16.

In the thanksgiving are, first, the act: secondly, the object: thirdly, the
mediator by whom conuayed: fourthly, the matter or ground, their faith, and
publishing thereof in all the world. I mean not to prosecute every particular
at large; but to cull out the principals, least the volume grow too great.

By faith, here understand the gift of faith, and the fruits thereof:
especially their receiving of the word of God, as Act. 8.14.

Galat. 2.23. exemplified in the Angels, Luke 15.7.10. And if it be a thing to
be prayed for, the enlargement of Christ's kingdom, then to be thankfully
acknowledged when it is performed.

Apoc 12.4.

But most odious in this kind, those in place of ministry, that envy the
blessing God gives to other men's ministry, more then to their own. Moses not
so, Number. 11.28.29.
nor John Baptist. John 3.29.

More specially we are taught to rejoice, at the efficacy of the word in
places eminent, if they be evil, or good if they be conspicuous for goodness.

Therefore,

It is not to be omitted, that Paul here applies to himself the general
promise of the Covenant, Ier. 31.3^.34. from experience applying Gods grace
unto himself.

Such a particular knowledge, Gal. 2.20. Job. 19.25. 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
Neither is it the special privilege of some few, to whom God by special
revelation gives such particular knowledge, as Papists teach, but that which
God vouchsafes by general means to all his children: and that which every
child of God, upon performance of the general conditions, as repentance and
faith, may gather to himself, and profess of himself without presumption.
See Romans 8.19.17. where will be fitter place to handle this point at large.

Not only Papists, but generally worldlings, thought no presumption, for Gods
child to outstrip the devil one step at least, in belief of the articles of
his Creed.

Published throughout the world.] Papists here glory much of their faith, that
it is so highly commended by the Apostle; and from this place challenge to
themselves the true faith, as still dwelling amongst them. To which we answer,
that it follows not, a fuisse ad esse. Jerusalem was once a faithful City,
but the Prophet complains she was become an harlot; as famous was
Thessalonica, in the days of the Apostle, as ever was Rome, 1 These. 1.8.
and yet now no face of a Church there remaining: and the like answer we make
to all the commendations given by the Fathers unto that Church; that they were
true of the church in those times, but not therefore belonging to Rome that now
is.

But will you hear their reply? Rome by our confession, was once faithful;
show we therefore the time when she began to decline and fall from the truth
of faith. Ans. Behold a sottish shift; cannot declinations, and apostasies be
euidenced without pointing at the particular times, places, and authors of
backsliding? that they are fallen, we evidence by discord of their doctrine,
from that here taught and commended in this Epistle; but they will not believe
except we show them the time, when they began to decline: as if a man sick
unto death, when the Physician by apparent signs discouers his disease, the
nature and danger thereof should say no its not so, for you show me not the
time, and means, and proceedings of my disease.

Just. This may easily be showed in other heresies: Arianisme, etc.

Ans. Not therefore Antichristianisme, for that is a mystery of iniquity, 2
These 2.7.
especially the beginnings thereof, almost insensibly conuaying themselves into
the Church: Secondly, for the gross points of Popery wherein they dissent from
ancient Rome, their beginnings, and proceedings, and perfection, are euidenced
sufficiently by our Divines. See Perkins his problem.

Rather let us note here, 2 The^ 2.10.11.12.
this verified of Rome, of Jerusalem, once the praise of the whole world; of
the Churches of Asia, etc.

And let it be an admonition to us that yet stand, Romans 11.20.21.
trust not in lying words, saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, etc.

Go to Shiloh, where I once put my name, and see what I have done thereto:
Read at large, Ier. 7. from verse 3. to 16. A needful admonition for us in
this kingdom, wherein are too evident tokens of security this way; and as
evident causes, to fear the like judgment, because we are engaged in the
same disobedience, lack of love to the truth, 2 These. 2.10.
evil entreatie of the ministers, Mat. 23.37.38
barrenness of good fruits: Isay 5. from verse 1. to 8.

Verse 9. For God is my witness (whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of
his Son) that without ceasing I make mention of you

Verse 10 Always in my prayers, beseeching, that by some means one time or
other I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God, to come unto you.


THe second argument and sign of Paul's love is his praying, his continual
praying for them, whenever he presented himself by prayer at the throne of
Gods grace; and the better to persuade them of this duty performed by him in
secret, he calls to witness God himself that sees in secret, and that the
more credit may be given to his oath, he here describes himself by such
behavior, as may justly deserve credence to be given to his bare word, much
more to so serious a contestation: I serve God in my spirit, etc.

Paul, to persuade the people of his love toward them, calls God to witness;
observe how difficult, and with all how important a thing it is for people to
be persuaded of the love of their Pastor toward them. Paul no doubt had
learnt what the religion of an oath was: and that but in matters of weight and
necessity, it ought not to be used: as touching the necessity of this
persuasion, it appears thus; because the mind being fore-stalde with this
conceit, that the Minister loves us not, makes us misdeeme all things
whatsoever are spoken, to suite with the malicious fountain, from whence
prejudice supposes them to proceed: as when the palate is annoyed with some
bitter humor, all things seem bitter to the taste, etc. so dislike of the
people, arising commonly from conceit of dislike in the minister, makes all
things sound according to that prejudice, and thereby is the effect of the word
much hindered.

And for the difficulty of this persuasion especially in natural men, if we
weigh either the policy of Satan, that by his suggestion especially, drives
men either wholly to forbear hearing, or in hearing not to regard, or in
regarding to mis-interpret; or the very inclination of nature, to distaste
things crossing our conceited affections, as reproof, and threatening of
judgment, as 1 Reg. 22.8. and plain dealing in our ministry: as Gal. 4.16.
easily may we judge how hardly persuasion of a ministers love, can sink into
the hearts of carnal men.

Our duty then is by all good means to labor, Ier 8.11.
Secondly; doting indulgence, and giving them the Raines in their carnal
liberty.

Another thing here obseruable, Heb. 6.13.
besides that, it is being rightly used an excellent part of Gods service,
Deuteronomy. 6.13.
acknowledging Gods excellency, Heb. 6.16.
his omniscience, in searching the heart, omnipotence and justice in punishing
perjury, love of truth, etc. and tends also to the good of humane society,
Heb. 6.16.

And that which Anabaptists here answer, that indeed it was lawful for the
Jews, but not so for us in the new Testament, is of no force: for besides the
practice of Gods Saints here and in other places, we have it prophesied as a
part of worship, to be performed in the new Testament, Esaias 56.16.
and the ends of swearing, glory of God, and good of men being perpetual, the
thing it self also must be confessed to be of perpetual and moral
observation.

Mat. 5.34.

To which Aquinas his answer is this; that that, non omnino, is not a word of
absolute denial, but of special restraint, and the force of it is this (says
he) not that a Christian may not swear in any case, but that he must not
swear in every case, but where necessity and importance shall require it.
Howsoever it be it is apparent, that our Saviors drift is this, to prove
against the gloss of the Pharisees, that the Lord in the third commandment,
forbids not only false but vain swearing, whether by God, or by the
creatures, wherein the majesty of God shines and shows it self; and from the
place thus expounded, it will be impossible to deduce the Anabaptists
inference. But what stand I longer to prove the lawfulness of swearing? we are
fallen into times, wherein men are so far from Anabaptisticall niceness,
that they are fallen into Atheistical profaneness; not a word almost comes
from them, but it begins or ends in the name of God, profanely appealed unto
without necessity: whose damnation is just.

Consider well here the nature and form of an oath in this practice of the
Apostle; I call God to witness: so that an oath is a calling God to witness
of the truth we speak, and which is implied in every oath, to judge and to
punish us, if we swear falsely; 2 Cor. 1.23.
for in all swearing God is appealed unto both as witness and judge: and no
oath but has either expressed or implied as well imprecation as invocation.

Which short description of an oath, Mat. 23.22.

To the examples of Joseph and others produced for warrant. Ans. The answer is
by some, that they were not oaths but strong asseuerations; but better I take
it thus, we walk not by example, but by precept.

A second fault here reproved, is vain and needles swearing, when things are
either so evident of themselves, that they need no such confirmation, or so
trifling, that they require not so great a witness: a sin arising from our
little reverence and esteem of the majesty of God: a righteous man fears an
oath, Eccles. 9.2.
caused by Satan, as the first author; Mat. 5.37.
leading to damnation as a just recompense, Iam. 5.12.

A third and most heinous abomination here discovered, is that hellish sin
of perjury, and false swearing; common at this day, not only in our knights
of the post, that have sold themselves to Satan to work wickedness in the
sight of God; but amongst our common people, arising partly from custom of
vain swearing in common speech; partly from ignorance, general or particular,
of the nature of an oath, or from malice, or love of gifts, that blinds the
eyes of the wise; how heinous this sin is, first the dishonor thereby
brought to Gods majesty, whom hereby we make favorer of lying: secondly, the
damage it brings to society, leaving no place for trust, each man of another,
nor safety either of fame, goods, or life: thirdly, the heavy plagues it brings
both to private persons in themselves, and their posterity, Zach 5.4.
as also to whole kingdoms, 2 Samuel 21.1.
and the utter destruction both of body and soul, sufficiently show.

To that might be added, that which is not only cosen-germain to perjury, but
an high kind of this hellish forswearing, equiuocating in an oath, profanely
dallying with the name of God: Secondly, mocking Magistracy, Gods holy
ordinance: Thirdly, crossing the very maine end and use of an oath: Heb. 6.16.
but hereof more at large in due place.

Whom I serve in my spirit.] This clause is added to procure the more credit to
his serious protestation: as if he should say, neither have you cause to
suspect me either of lightness, or profaneness in this protestation: for I
serve God in my spirit, etc.



authority not to be too hasty of belief, neither in the words, informations,
nor yet in the most resolute adiurations of men destitute of the fear of God:
and that it should be as much enquired whether they be religious as whether
homines legales.

And secondly, we are all taught how to carry our

In the words of this clause, weigh these things; first, the action, I serve:
secondly, the object, God: thirdly, the fountain or manner, in my spirit:
fourthly, the special matter subject in the Gospel.

Touching the action referred to the object, it is commonly questioned betwixt
us and our adversaries of Rome, whether any religious worship may be given to
Saint, Angel, or any other creature, save to God only; and their common
judgment is, that the worship called Latria, is peculiar unto God, and cannot
without Idolatry be given to the creature: but another kind of religious and
divine worship there is which they term Dulia, which may be given to the
friends of God. Now hereof thus our Divines speak: first, that for the words
there is no difference, both in themselves signifying one and the same thing,
as they plentifully show both out of the Scriptures and out of profane
Authors: secondly, that it is noted as a part of Idolatry (...), to perform
this worship of Dulia to Gal. 4.8.
any that are not Gods: thirdly, that we stand not so much upon words, as upon
the worship that is given unto creatures; and teach that divine worship of
Invocation, Thanksgiving, and the rest, call they it what it will, cannot be
given to any creature without Idolatry. Neither is the question about words,
but about the things that under these names are given unto the creatures; let
them call the worship of Saints Dulia, or what they will; so that under this
covert of words, they rob not God of his peculiar honor.

viz. unto God alone.

Romans 16.18.
, discerned by these evidences: first, that they leave the doctrine taught by
God to preach doctrines deified by men; as Paul Gal. 1.10.
speaks: secondly, when in matter or manner of teaching they frame themselves
to please Gal. 1.10.
men: thirdly, seek only therein their Gal. 6.12.
own ease, 2 Timothy 4.10.
commodity, 3 Ioh. 9.
preferment, vain praise, applause and commendation; as the false Teachers in
the Church of Corinth, and make these their uttermost term, wherein they rest,
as appears by this, that having attained these things, they shake hands with
painfulness.

Now follows the manner or fountain of this service: in my spirit. Spirit, in
the case of Gods service is sometimes opposed to flesh, that is, to the part
unregenerate, Romans 7 25.
sometimes to letter and ceremony, Ioh. 4.24.
sometimes to show and fashion, Ephe. 6.5.6.7.
and in this last sense is here taken; signifying thus much, that what Paul did
in preaching the Gospel, he did in singleness of heart; not with eye
service, but as from the heart with good will, serving the Lord not men.

alacrity, see Ier. 48.10. etc. Reasons, we deal with God that tries the
hearts, and searches the reins, and can easily pierce through the vizar of
formality, discerns the secret thoughts, and intentions of the heart: see
Ephe. 4.5.6.

Where all that bare formality of many in this kind is justly taxed; Mal. 1.14.

Now as herein hearty performance of duty is required: so in the second place
willingness and feruencie is under this name of serving God with our spirit
commended unto us. See Romans 12.11.

But we are fallen into these frozen times wherein zeal is termed madness;
and feruencie in exhortation or reprehension censured commonly of fury, or
when most gently, of indiscretion: and most men study tempering and temporizing
in religion: would God they did remember the curse denounced in Jeremy, Cap.
48.10. and how loathsome such lukewarm services are unto the Lord. Apoc. 3.16.

Here follows now the special matter subject of his service; In the Gospel of
his son: that is, metonimically in preaching the Gospel of Christ, as Ver. 1.

Whence sundry things are to be observed: first, Genesis 2.15. and 4 2.

Therefore is the Church of God compared to an Army well ordered, wherein
every Soldier has his special station; to a well governed family, wherein
every servant has his special office; to a body of many members, yet every
of them having their special function* the eye to see, the ear to hear, the
foot to walk for the whole body: and accordingly does the Lord fit every man
by his grace for some one calling or other. The Magistrate for government; the
Minister for instruction; others have skill and expertnesse for manual trades;
all which are the works of God, tending this way, to furnish us for our
particular employments either in Church or Commonwealth.

John Baptist, whom they make one founder of Eremiticall life, left not the
function of preaching and baptising, till by Herod's sword he lost his life:
Nor any one of the Prophets or Apostles, men renowned for devotion. We read in
deed of a kind of monastical and solitary life in the writings of the
ancients; but that only tending to preparation, for employment in special
functions; not unlike that College life in Universities, which because it
tends to our fitting for special callings, is in that respect justifiable; but
never shall they prove any such sequestration allowed to any upon any pretenses
where the necessity of church or commonwealth wants their employments; and
who can justify a man's living to himself, whereas the heathen could say, that
country, parents, children, friends, etc. justly claim each their part in us.

And as justly taxed here, are all they that now adays Adam possessour of the
whole world, otherwise disposed of his son and heir Genesis 4 2.
, and Paul deals plainly with such telling them that bread is not due unto
them, nay that men walking thus inordinately out of a calling, eat not their
own bread, but as thieves live of the sweat of other men's faces 2 These.
10.11.12.
, and what the issues of such idleness are, woeful experience of many gallants
teach, that because they lack skill or will to work with their hands the thing
that is good, at length make work for the hangman, to the everlasting reproach
and contumely of their reverend families: their state and resolution in
extremities, not unlike that of the unjust steward, Luke 16.3. dig they
cannot, beg they will not, they know what they will do when honest means
fail them for maintenance.

Secondly, Romans 13.4. 2 Cor. 2.11. but even of the meanest calling, wherein God
has placed us; the plowman, the shepherd, the kitchen boy: or if there be any
calling more base then these, the works thereof are acceptable services unto
God Ephesians. 6.8.
, therefore are they called good things, and such as the Lord will recompense
Ephesians. 6.7.
.

And that should teach us first willingly, and from the heart, to perform the
works of our several callings, considering that in them, we serve not so much
men as God himself, Ephesians. 6.6.7.

Ephesians. 6.8.

The last thing remains in this verse: and that is the action here so
seriously avouched to be performed. (viz.) prayer; and that continual for
this people of God. Not but that there might be some short eiaculations and
dartings out as it were of his desires unto God, wherein was no express
mention of this people; but because in all his solemn and set prayers he made
continual mention of them; by name, praying for the people of Rome.

Numb. 5.24.25 practiced as upon conscience, 1 Samuel 12.23.
grieved at when not permitted, Ier. 14.11.13.
especially obseruable in the great Shepherd of the sheep, Christ Jesus: John
17.
if any man shall ask what it is he should pray for on their behalf. Ans.
Conversion of those not yet turned, preservation, confirmation, increase of
those already called, auerting or removing of judgments, either imminent or
inflicted, etc.

totus vox: as Mat 3.4. In teaching, the voice of God unto the people: In
prayer, the voice of the people to God, to lay open their wants, pray for
supply etc. all teaching, for the most part, fruitless without this, because
the blessing wholly and alone depends upon God. 1 Cor. 3.7.

Making mention of you.] Paul makes special mention of this people in his
prayers: and thence may be observed, that it is not lawful only, but
expedient, to make particular mention of others in our prayers unto God: so
Paul entreats the people of Ephesus, to pray as for all Saints, so for him
especially and by name, Ephesians. 6.19.
and himself makes mention of Onesiphorus and his household, 2 Timothy 1.16.18.
conceauing a special prayer for him, in regard of special favor done by him
unto Paul. And howsoever it may be excepted, that this mention was in private
prayers, yet both there are examples of public prayers, conceived for private
persons, and the grounds are general and public: (viz.) good that may accrue
to the whole Church by some particulars, as Magistrates, Ministers; other
special instruments of Gods glory, and the Churches good; special
necessities of others, which God has commanded all the members of Christ's body
equally to respect.

And therefore frantike, Ans. Common they are called; not so much because
common necessities are therein to be laid open unto God, as because therein the
people of GOD join all together, with one mouth and one heart to glorify God
and call upon his name. Secondly, who knows not but the safety of Kings and
Princes is a common good; yea and that the necessity of every member touches
all the members, and are theirs by sympathy, and the good of every member, the
good of the whole body. 1 Cor. 12.26.

Verse 10.
Beseeching, etc.] This Verse may be added unto the former, and signifies the
special matter that Paul prayed for, as concerning the Romans: (viz.) that
he might h ue a prosperous journey, etc. Wherein these things are to be
considered; first, that he prays for prosperity in his journey: secondly, the
manner of his praying, (viz.) with submission to Gods will, touching the means
and time of coming, that by some means, etc. thirdly, how he esteems his
journey prosperous, that is, when he sees it to be according to the will and
appointment of God.

Jacob Genesis 28.20.21.22.
, Abraham's servant Gen 24.12.
, as also how the success of all our travels depends upon Gods gracious
blessing.



When any such mischance betides us, its our custom to cry out of our hard
luck, and cross fortune, when as we have more cause to blame our own
profane neglect of invocation and prayer, for protection.

Secondly, here note how in temporal things, Mat. 26.39. Reasons, because as
things are promised, so must they be prayed for; things absolutely promised,
may be absolutely prayed for, but where GOD has put conditions and exceptions
to his promise, as all temporal promises he has restrained to expediencie,
etc. then must our prayers always have respect not only to the blessing, but
also to the condition: yea, not only in things temporal, but in a sort in
spiritual blessings promised, this submission is requisite in regard of
circumstances of time, means, measure, etc. for these has the Lord reserved
in his own power, vt infra patebit.

Where is justly taxed that presumptuous prescribing unto God, the means,
manner, time, Iudeth a tempting of God, and as it were a binding of his
counsels: Iudeth 8.12.16. Read her speech though Apocryphal, yet holy.

By the will of God.] (viz.) When as we shall see our selves lead and directed
therein by the will of God; that is a prosperous journey, whereof we can say
that hitherto the Lord directed us, both in his word, as also by good means in
the course of his providence.

And if those giddy-headed travelers into foreign countries to see fashions
even Idolatrous, would learn thus to expect the Lords hand and word to lead
them, no doubt they might expect protection, and return freer from popish and
neopolitan infections then many of them do: and it is Gods just judgment on
them that they return commonly so poisoned, and made drunk with the wine of
popish fornications, because without calling or warrant, they curiously hunt
after unnecessary spectacles. See in an other kind the like judgment on
Dinah. Genesis 34.1.2.

Verse 11. For I long to see you, that I might bestow among you some spiritual
gift, to strengthen you.
THe next argument and evidence of Paul's love, remains to be treated; that
is, his desire and longing to see them, for their good. Wherein these things
are obseruable: First, his desire to see them: Secondly, the ends of it, verse
11. Which by a Rhetorical correction he seems something to mittigate, least
he might be thought to think over meanly of their present faith.

I long to see you.] It signifies such a desire as is impatient of delays.
Whence note the affection of a true pastor toward his people; how holily
impatient their desires are of detainment from their people: pressed partly by
necessity laid upon them, 1 Cor. 9 16.
partly constrained by the love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14.
partly commisserating the state of their people; Mat. 9.36.
to which might be added the knowledge of their peoples several estates, for
their better fitting to divide the word a right. 2 Timothy 2.15.

under pretense of fitting themselves to the work of the ministry, wilfully
absent themselves from their charges, I would they themselves would rather
seriously consider, then give others cause to complain I know its true that a
pastor ought to labor for fitnes to discharge the great work he has
undertaken; 1 Timothy 4.16.
but this I marvel how men can think themselves sufficiently fitted to take
upon them care of souls, and yet by their absence, under pretense of study,
acknowledge their present absolute unfitness, to teach and exhort their
people: or secondly how they can imagine by private study in schools of the
Prophets, better to furnish themselves for pastoral performances, then by
diligent employment of their talents already received amongst their people.

But consider we the ends, why Paul desires to see them. First, to bestow some
spiritual gift upon them: by spiritual gift, he means as I take it, some
word of instruction, or exhortation, tending to increase or confirm the graces
of the spirit of God.

See then what ought to be the largess that a pastor of the Church ought
principally to bestow on his people; though I know it is true, 1 Timothy 3.2.
according to ability; yet herein especially must he show his bounty and
liberality, in bestowing spiritual gifts of instruction, comfort,
exhortation, for the good of his people: and this is the feeding our Savior
commends unto Peter. I^h. 21.16.17.

Now I could wish my brethren of the ministry, souls: and what auailes it
that we gorge their bellies with good cheer, and hunger-starue their souls
through our penurious and niggardly distributing to their spiritual
necessities?

Ioh. 6 seeing the people admire and follow him for belly-cheare, reproves
their carnal affection; and tells them both what they should principally labor
for, and what chiefly to expect from him, as the chief shepherd of the
sheep; food spiritual that perishes not, but lasts to life everlasting. But
to hear the manner of peoples commendation of their pastors is too too
strange; no great scholar they say, nor one that troubles them much with
preaching, but for housekeeping none of them all comes near him; and on the
other side of a painful minister, he is a great scholar, very painful in
preaching, but he keeps no house; now surely it may so well be with many of
us, that through the general short allowance left us, and what through the
peoples unjust detaining of our small remainders; but in such case me thinks
the largess of Peter should suffice us; if when we lack silver and gold to
distribute, we give such as we have. Acts 3.6. spiritual gifts of instruction
and consolation.



The other end follows: that ye might be strengthened. What need Paul so much
to desire to see them to this end? could he not sufficiently by writing
confirm them? Ans. It seems that he thought with Hierome, that viua vox; had
in it aliquid latentis energiae, some more life and power then a naked Epistle.

Whence may be observed, Hy^stol. lib. 2.

Divine, because it has pleased the Lord, to make the ear the special door
for his spirit to enter by. Romans 10 17. Act. 10.44. Not but that he is
effectual in a measure to some ends by reading, but that he more powerfully
works by the ministers lively voice, then by our own, or other men's private
or public reading.

And this as it should stir us up that are in place 2 Timothy 4.4.
, considering we see such great d^sparitie between reading and preaching; so
also it shows what to judge of that comparison odiously entered betwixt writing
or reading, and preaching by lively voice unto our people: surely I could wish
the proper honor due to each to be reserved to each, without others
impeachment; and cannot but take notice of that policy of Satan, well
observed by a faithful minister in this kind; by committing the ordinances of
God in odious comparisons, to impair the reverend respect of that which is
most profitable; but yet this I must needs speak, that if we compare these two
together in efficacy, and liuelihoode of operation, the odds must needs be
given to preaching; I will not speak so profanely as one did in the pulpit,
preaching compared to prayer, is mere profaneness. But this I say, reading
compared to preaching in efficacy, is almost mortuum quia, and as nothing in
comparison.

2 These 5.20.
the principal means ordained as for conversion, so for our confirmation: And
let all such as contenting themselves to serve God at home, forsake our
gatherings together Heb. 10.25.
this consider, that they much hinder their own solid comfort, and
confirmation, and dangerously lay open themselves to fearful Apostasy. ibidem.

That you may be strengthened.] So is the ministry of the word needful even
for those also that are already brought to the faith: for grouth, increase,
establishment, confirmation. Confer. Ephe. 4.12.13. 1 Pet. 2.1.2. 2 Pet.
1.12.13.

Ephesians. 4.12.13. And if he scorn not to submit himself to Paul's judgment, he
shall learn that Prophecy is for them that believe. 1 Cor. 14.22,

Verse 12. That is, that I might be comforted together with you, through our
mutual faith, both yours and mine.
NOw follows the correction, used to this end, that the people should not
think him too meanly conceited of them, because he thinks they need
confirmation: for as he judges that they may be benefited by his preaching, so
he thus esteems; that himself also may receive comfort and confirmation by
their faith.

Where note how carefully a minister must decline suspicion of mean esteem of
his peoples graces. Heb. 6.9 10. For this reason especially, least thereby
their minds be too far estranged from regard unto our doctrine, as in
experience we see them to be by nothing more then by suspicion of our light
estimation of them: therefore observe how this Apostle willingly takes notice
of the good things in any people, and largely commends them, and thanks God
for them.

Howbeit our well judging must not be groundless; Heb. 6.9.10.
for charity though it be not needlessely Jealous, yet is it not foolishly
blind: and to approve, or praise without cause, is either foolish dotage or
dangerous flattery.

That I might be comforted through our mutual faith.] Heb. 2.4.
, yet to comfort and confirm him, namely, when as they shall see their own
experimental persuasions, backed with the experience and testimonies of
others. Example. The doctrine of justification by faith in the blood of Christ
is plentifully taught in the word of God, believed, and comfortably
entertained by all Gods children, acknowledged to be the only means of
righteousness, by which a man can stand in the judgment of God: the only way
whereby a man can come to have his conscience truly pacified. Now though the
experience of Gods children together with the word, sufficiently establish us
in this truth, yet its a confirmation not to be neglected, that we have others
of our brethren from like experience with us, give testimony thereto.

And it were to be wished, that Christian conferences were for this end more
carefully used; no doubt the consent of Gods children in the same truths,
would add unto us no small comfort and confirmation. Ferus, in Mat. 11.
reports of a kind of conference in use amongst the ancient Heremites and
Monks, not much different from that now devised: they were wont, says he, to
meet together, and there freely to lay open each to other their several
temptations, means of resistance, and gracious issue, for counsel, comfort,
confirmation, etc.

Paul acknowledges, that he might somewhat be helped and comforted by the
faith of Gods people. Whence may be observed, that the greatest of Gods Saints
may somewhat be helped by the meanest of Gods people: and who sees it not in
experience that the people may help their pastors, as remembrancers, as
incouragers, as prouokers of their dullness, by being whet-stones, and as it
were spurs unto them; as men though generally of less knowledge, yet sometimes
of more feeling experience in the truth then many of their Ministers.

such of his people, as in whom he sees evidences of true faith and fear of
God. And that whether melancholicke solitariness, or proud disdain, whereby
it falls out that we fly the company especially of our meaner people (as for
their outward state we commonly esteem them) hinders no doubt much of that
comfort that a minister might reap by their friendly conference. And therefore
though of all things I most mislike that haunting of the assembly of mockers in
a minister, be the pretenses never so honest, Ier. 15.17. yet this I would have
always in a minister that he should be a companion of all them that fear God
and keep his precepts: Psalm. 119.63.

Verse 13. Now my brethren I would that ye should not be ignorant, how that I
have oftentimes purposed to come unto you (but have been let hitherto) that I
might have some fruit also among you, as I have among the other Gentiles.
THis Verse is added to the former by way of prolepsis, for having professed
his desire to see them, he saw it might be demanded why he came not; to which
he answers, that he had often purposed, but was hindered, where his purpose is
set out unto us. First, by the frequencie of it. Secondly, by an Antithesis of
things diverse showing the cause of not obtaining that purpose; he was
hindered. Thirdly, by the end; to have fruit. Fourthly, by the inward moving
cause, consideration of his debt, and conscience to discharge it.

Now here are sundry things worthy our observation, and first, where Paul
purposes and is hindered, observe that the good purposes of Gods children are
sometimes hindered of their execution. Compare 2 Samuel 7.5. Act. 16.6.7. God
first by such inhibitions showing his power; secondly, instructing to humility,
and respect to his will; Iam. 4.15. thirdly, judgment on the wicked unworthy
of such blessings. Math. 13.58. Mark. 6.5.

Heb. 6.3.
, and to permit unto him the disposition of all our purposes.

Act. 23.12.13.16 23.

Gamaliel, Act. 5.38. is uttered plausibly to appease the counsel, not ever
truly as experience teaches.

Now if we view the mean of hinderance, something else will offer it self to
our consideration, 1 These. 2.18. the Apostle mentions one hinderance of such a
purpose by Satan; Act. 16.6. Another by special prohibition of Gods spirit;
Romans 15.20.21.22. A third the greater necessity of other people. And this I
take to be that here meant.

Luc. 15 4.
shepherd missing his lost sheep, leaves the rest in the fold, and seeks
that is lost. A careful Physician though he have many Patients lying under his
hand, yet most respects with attendance him that is most dangerously Mat.
9.12.
diseased. A good Captain there places the greatest fortification where the
wall is weakest, because he knows there the enemy is likeliest to make
assault and prevail; we are Shepherds, Physicians, Captains of the Lords
Host, keepers of the Lords defenced Cities, etc.

Yet here this caveat must be remembered; that this must be limited especially
to our own charges, 1 Pet. 5.2.
for though what we can spare from the necessities of our own people, may be
bestowed to others. Yet must our own household people be first and principally
regarded. Math. 15.24.

And therefore our people of more understanding must not repine at their
Ministers,

The end of this his purpose follows; that he might have some fruit, he
means as I take it, the gayning of some of them unto God, Compare Ioh. 15.16.

Where note what a Minister must esteem his chief fruit, not so much
plentiful tithes, and revenues which some call their fruits, as the gayning of
souls to the faith of Christ. This is our harvest, to the gathering whereof we
must principally bend our selves.

Now if any shall demand how Paul calls the people of God converted, his
fruit? Ans. First, because Ministers are Gods 1 Cor. 3.7.9.
instruments and servants to gather it: And secondly, because this in the event
proves very gainefull, and aduantagious unto them in regard of that recompense
God has promised them above others that labor in his harvest: Dan. 12.3.
Compare 1 These. 2.19.20.

Dan. 12.3. that comparison of equals annexed, seems to tend this way, either
to persuade this people of his indifferent care of their gayning, as well as of
others though by means of detaynment he had not as yet labored amongst them,
or else as a reason of his hope to have fruit amongst them, because GOD had
blessed his pains unto others: or lastly, to work in the people hope and
expectation of benefit by his coming, and withal desire of it, in as much as
his Ministry had been so fruitful amongst others.

Verse 14. I am debtor both to the Grecians, and to the Barbarians, both to the
wise men, and to the unwise.

Verse 15. Therefore as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to
you also that are at Rome.


But proceed we to the cause internal, moving him to desire and purpose
coming. It was the consideration of his debt, and conscience to discharge it;
wherein four things are to be considered: first, the obligation or bond, or
what made him a debtor: secondly, the debt it self: thirdly, the persons to
whom he was indebted, Greeks and Barbarians: fourthly, his readiness to
discharge it.

That which made him debtor was his Apostolical calling. 1 Cor. 9.16.17. Cor.
9.16.17.18.

And if this were thoroughly considered, if we well weighed what our pawn is
that we have gaged for the discharge of this debt, no doubt we should as much
abhor this spiritual as that temporal Anabaptisme. Some, says Holcot, sell
their souls, as the covetous; some prodigally give them away for naught, as
the envious; some negligently lose their souls, as the careless and
thoughtlesse people; some pawn their souls for others; so do Ministers,
engaging their own souls for the people, if by any wilful negligence or
default of them they miscarie: see Ezech. 3.18.19.

Ver. 15. To preach the Gospel. This then is the principal debt, to payment
whereof our calling binds us, To preach the Gospel. It needs no proofs.
Read Mat. 28 18.19. and that other, 1 Cor. 9.16. And least any say it is enough
to deal by writing or reading; though I know these also are duties that we owe
to our people, yet by this place it is more then evident, that it is not all
we owe them: Paul had written largely to this people, and yet thinks not his
whole debt paid, till he have preached unto them. And least any man shall again
say, reading is preaching, me thinks Paul puts difference enough betwixt these
two in this place, for having written yet he professes his readiness to
preach. Apparently putting difference betwixt this explication of the mysteries
of salvation by writing, and that other teaching by lively voice which properly
he calls preaching: I say not but the Lord may at his pleasure, use either
writing or reading if he will to the begetting of faith, but this point is
here evident that Paul counted not his writing that preaching whereto calling
bound him.

they bind themselves to an impossibility of payment: The Apostle advises
Timothy to have care to what kind of men he committed this function, and
requires in them two necessary points of honest debtors, fidelity and ability
of payment 2 Timothy 2.2. Titus 1.9.
: men wilfully running themselves into these bonds, me thinks I cannot fitlier
compare them then to desperate banckrupts; that finding their state weakened,
and themselves already so far engaged that they see no hope of recovery;
care not what they get into their hands of other men's goods for their present
use, never purposing to make repayment, but to provide for their own present
maintenance, to the undoing often of their honest Creditors. Not much unlike
are those banckrupt Ministers, that knowing their own absolute insufficiency,
yet for supply of their present wants run headlong into the calling; with the
utter overthrow and undoing (for ought they do) of the poor people of God.

The next thing here to be observed, is the persons to whom he acknowledged
himself indebted; Greeks and Barbarians, wise and unwise: first, by his
Apostolical Commission to all nations, states and degrees, qualities of men
within his charge, as we know the Apostles calling was thus unlimited Mat.
28.18.19
, and so under these general differences of Greeks and Barbarians, wise and
unwise, compriseth he all men, of all nations and degrees. Other Nations
called Barbarians in respect of the Greeks; in respect first of that esteem
that the Greeks carried of them: secondly, for that both in regard of elegancie
of speech, and ciuility of manners, they were as Barbarians unto them: in which
sense that other phrase of wise and unwise, seems to be taken.

Now whereas the Lord by calling binds Paul to preach to all, we may gather,
first, of the Gospel is needful for all men to their salvation: and if we but
consider the imperfection of all other sciences, either natural, artificial,
or even ecclesiastical, it will easily appear; nature revealing God indeed
but only as a creator, governor, venerable majesty, judge of unrighteousness,
but still ignorant of a mediator; Art adding some perfection to this natural
knowledge, and brings us perhaps to more distinct knowledge of God the
creator; but yet notable to see in the works of God the means of
reconcilement Ioh. 1.18.
: and the law showing only the necessity of a Mediator, not discovering who
this Mediator is, or how his mediation may be available for us.

^ Cor. 3.18.
. And its lamentable to see, how when other Arts draw multitudes to their
earnest study, this Art of Arts lies alone contemned; as unworthy of our
knowledge, or at least not so necessary to our salvation: and whereas in other
sciences, we hold the greatest destinctions of knowledge needful, in this we
stay in Confusis only, satisfying our selves with verbal acknowledgement,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners, dyed for us, etc. See Paul
otherwise minded. 1 Cor. 2.1.2.

Fulgent: ser. de Confess. In scripturis diuinis abundat et quod robustus
conaedat, and quod paruulus sugat: there is strong meat for strong men, and
milk for babes Heb. 5.12.
: there is such mysteries as no science reueales, verse 17. so plainly
uttered, that the simplest may understand the whole counsel of God touching
the salvation of the elect by Christ, etc. See a Catalogue. 1 Timothy 3.16.

The Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.22. 1 Cor. 2.6.7.
: is it not a point of infinite wisdom to devise a means how to compound
infinite justice with infinite mercy, so as neither should be impeached? What
skill of men or Angels, could ever devise how God should be infinitely just in
punishing the transgression of the law; and with all infinitely merciful in
saving them that he had elected. This has the Gospel revealed in Christ
crucified; in whom Gods justice has been fully satisfied, and by whom Gods
chosen mercifully saved. The Angels admire this, and prye into it, desirous to
learn it by the Church. Ephesians. 3.1^. 1 Pet. 1.12.

And as blameable is that not searching into this mystical wisdom whether
through careless neglect or needless despair of knowing in our simpler
people, to whose capacity though it have pleased the Lord to demit himself,
and withal to promise instruction by his spirit Ier. 31.34. John 6.45.46.
, yet pretending hopelesnesse of attainment, neglect all means of attaining
this so necessary knowledge. See Psalm. 61.7. Pro. 8.9. 1 Cor. 1.26.27. Mat.

There remains the last thing in this debt acknowledged by the Apostle, and
that is his readiness to discharge it. Where are two things: first, the
readiness it self, secondly, the amplification of it.

The word signifies a propense and forward inclination to do his duty.

John 4.34.
, and its a special thing, upon presence whereof we may assure our selves,
that our labors are accepted, and shall be rewarded. 1 Cor. 9.17.

And it euidenceth it self thus, when we are glad of occasions and
opportunities to do good to Gods people, in exercising our ministry 2 Timothy
4.2
. Secondly, when as outward allurements and enticements being absent, yet we
continue our pains.

Jeremy, and made him in weakness resolve to speak no more in the name of the
Lord; but see how the flame concealed increases, and gives no rest till it had
found vent. Ier. 20.9.

The amplification follows: First, by the measure; quantum in me: Secondly, by
consideration of the people, whole quality might have hindered from doing his
duty.

As much as in me is:] That is, so far as God permits, and shall make way for
discharge; there being nothing else that can withhold but only the impediments
that the Lord objects.

of forces this way, that willingly admits of no distractions. See 1 Timothy 4.15.

Now brethren, defective this way are many of us, Tim. 2.4.5.6.7. that leave
little or no leisure for attendance to the work of the ministry: and though I
acknowledge that the saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8. stretches also unto
ministers, yet must not those cares so distract us, as to make us neglect that
vnum necessarium of preaching the Gospel: see the Apostles reasons: 2 Timothy
2.3.4. etc. and consider what he says, and the Lord give us understanding in
all things.

The second amplification is in the latter words: to you also, or even to you
which are at Rome. Its a particle of amplification, as if he should say: not
to others only more simple, and less ready to deride and reject the doctrine
of Christ crucified, but to you also at Rome.

Rome was at this time the seat of the Empire; had concourse of all Nations;
abounded with mighty Potentates; and great Clerks of all sorts; readier a
great deal to deride and persecute, then to entertain the Gospel of Christ 1
Cor. 1.22.
: yet even to them also is Paul ready when God shall give opportunity to
preach the Gospel.

Whence we learn, Gal. 1.17.

Reasons are, because obedience must be performed without distrustful care for
success. Gal. 1.16.

Secondly, its probable to us that GOD has there some people; a tenth at
least, where he sends his word. Isay 6.13. Acts 18.9.10.

Thirdly, Gods call by the Gospel is powerful, to make those that yet are
not, that which they should be. Romans 4.17.

Fourthly, our ministry is acceptable, and GOD glorified, as well in those
that perish, as in those that are saved. 2 Cor. 2.15.

Moses his infirmity is noted this way. Exodus 4.11. etc. and 5.13.14. and its
that wherein many of us are faulty, that we would feign be our own caruers,
and follow our own choice, where to exercise our ministry; and by foolish
prejudice as Nathaniell John 1.46.
, despair of success, and forbear our pains, when the outward show and
fashion of the people is not such as we desire. Surely, if God should call us
to preach even where the name of Jesus was never heard of, where the contempt
of the word, were never so heathenish, yet me thinks we might promise our
selves success, in respect that the Lord thither sends us.

Verse 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first and also to
the Grecian.

Verse 17. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed, from faith to
faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.


BY way of prolepsis, he adds a Reason of his resolute readiness to preach
at Rome, the sum whereof is this: that howsoever amongst the wise of the world,
the Gospel was had in derision, yet for his part, he was not ashamed either to
profess or preach it; and he gives a reason of this, his not shameing of the
Gospel. verse 16.17.

In these words then we have these two things: first, a protestation of the
Apostle, I am not ashamed: secondly, the reasons of it, two: first, from the
use and end of the Gospel to which it is destined, being Gods power to
salvation: secondly, from the Divine matter it contains; in it is revealed
the righteousness of God: this latter reason also inferring the former. Now how
truly Paul professes this of himself. See Acts 13. and 17. and 24. and 26.

And what Paul here professes of himself, Tim. 6.12.13. Romans 10.9.3.15. Gal.
6.14.

But alas how many are the defects of men in this kind; Cor. 2.12.

And people though convinced of their duty, yet as Nichodemus dare not be
seen in the company of Christ Ioh. 3.1.2.
. Causes are these. First, too much desire and love of men's praise. See Ioh.
12.43. Its true as one says, where a man seeks glory, there he fears shame:
and he that doteth upon the praise of men, Chrysostom.
its no marvel, if he account that shameful unto him, that is most glorious
in the eyes of God. A second cause is that we have not felt the power of the
Gospel in our souls: for surely this once felt makes us easily contemn the
mockes and scoffs of the world.

Reasons to enforce this duty of fearlesse confessing. First, the majesty
and Divine power of the Gospel, vt hic. Secondly, the example of our Savior.
1 Timothy 6.12.13. Thirdly, impudency of men in wickedness. Isay 3.9. Fourthly,
peril of not confessing. Mar. 8.38. all which are so many motives with Gods
children, powerful to enforce confession.

Paul's boldness, the first is taken from the use of it, to which the Lord by
his ordinance has deputed it, its Gods power to salvation, that is, a
powerful instrument, which God uses to bring men to salvation; therefore
called the arm of the Lord. Isay 53.1. Confer. 2 Cor. 10 4.5. Where you may
see the mighty effects of this instrument: howbeit, we are not to think that
this power of the Gospel stands in the letters and syllables of it but depends
wholly in respect of efficacy upon the spirit working therewith. 2 Cor. 10 4.
2 Cor. 3.6. and 1 Cor. 3.7.

Euthusiasts and Anabaptists, that call it a dead letter, as if it were of no
efficacy in the hearts of Gods children. See Heb. 4.12. and they shall one day
find it, even to them that contemn it, powerful to bring down vengeance
upon them for their disobedience. 2 Cor. 10.6.

Secondly, let us to whom the dispensation is committed, Jeremy. Cap. 1.9.10.
and what Paul has. 2 Cor. 10 4.5. all such fears arising from doubt of
success, would of their own accord vanish away.

But let us see the use of this instrument, vt hic: partly because by it as by
an instrument faith is wrought, confirmed, increased in us. 2 Cor. 3.6. 1 Cor.
3.7. and this has the Gospel peculiar to it self, so that no other doctrine
pertakes in it, no not the law it self, being in it self the ministry of
condemnation 2 Cor. 3.6.
, and when its most powerful, working nothing but a preparation to the grace
published and wrought by the Gospel, Gal. 3 24. Heb. 7.19.

And this me thinks if nothing else should procure in our people reverence to
our ministry, Romans 10.15. Gal. 4.14.15.
, as also teach them with conscience to attend unto this part of Divine
doctrine, insomuch as by it only they are brought to salvation.

Come now to the subject, wherein this instrument has his effect; where is
first their quality or act, belief: secondly, the universality; every
believer: and the explication thereof, Jew and Gentile.

Belief then is necessary to the participation of this saving power of the
Gospel. See Heb. 4.2. and 3.10. as the most sovereign plaster has no effect
of healing except it be applied to the sore; no more has this saving doctrine,
except it be by faith received and applied.

And by faith I mean not a general assent unto the truth of the Gospel, but
a particular assurance, whereby we are persuaded that the promise of Gods grace
in Christ belongs to us in particular. Gal. 2.20. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Heb. 4.2.

The Gospel is in it self a most sovereign potion that has power to purge
all the rotten sores of the soul and to restore the decays thereof: but here
faith is required as one principal ingredient, without which the Gospel is
altogether ineffectual unto us. It is a wonderment amongst many, that in places
where the Gospel has been long and powerfully preached, there should yet
appear so little fruit: some blaming the minister of insinceritie: some the
very Gospel of inefficacie; the true cause is this, lack of faith in the
hearers: whiles some make the history it self questionable; others contenting
themselves with that general assent, see not, nor apprehend Gods mercy therein
revealed to themselves.



extended to all believers without respect of persons, according to the
promise. Isay 55.1. Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 1.12. so that they all feel it: howbeit,
that we err not, let us know that believers are not all of one sort; some are
such in profession only Ioh. 6.64.66.
, some that roue in generalities; assenting to the truth of the Evangelical
history, by a general grace; some that by a special work of Gods spirit
appropriate the general promise to themselves in particular Gal. 2.20.
, and of these must this place be understood, and this universality to be
accommodate unto them all how ever distinct amongst themselves by different
degrees and measures of faith.

Now brethren how comfortable this little particle is to the children of God,
Abraham's. But know we to our comfort, that the promise of the Gospel runs in
general to every true believer. Rahabs faith saved her, though she had been an
adulteress Josh. 2.25.
: Abraham's, him though an Idolater; Paul's though a persecutor; and least any
should say this grace was peculiar unto them, Paul tells us, that Christ in him
showed what all may expect that believe in him unto eternal life 1 Timothy 1.16.
. Neither must it trouble us that our faith is not for the measure as Abraham's,
so it be true; and so we mourn for unbelief, and desire to increase faith
Mark. 9.24.
, little faith may be true faith, and being true, serves to justify, as a
spark of fire is true fire, having as well the nature of fire, as the greatest
flame. See Mat. 12.20.

Now follows the explication of the general particle; to the Jew first, and
also to the Grecian, that is, the Gentile.

From that particle of order, first, some take occasion to observe the order of
Gods dispensation, or execution of this saving power of the Gospel: namely,
that it first showed it self amongst the Jews: and that is a truth as
appears. Mat. 10.5.6. Luke 24 47. Acts 13.46. for they were first by Gods
ordinance, though they be now become last, through their infidelity Romans
11.25.26.
: but yet I take it, it is not here intended, as appears by comparing this
verse, with Cap. 2.9.10.11. only thus much is here taught, that the grace and
power of the Gospel belongs to people of all nations, without respect of
persons. Col. 3.11.

Proceed we now to the second reason of Paul's confidence, which is also a
reason of the first reason, taken from the effect and matter of the Gospel: In
it is revealed the righteousness of God, where also is added an exposition or
declaration of the righteousness of God: from faith to faith.

See we first the meaning of the words; the righteousness of God, sometimes
signifies his essential righteousness, whereby God is in himself righteous:
and this is either universally put for all that circle of Divine virtues, that
dwell in the Deity, or else particularly; sometimes for his truth and
fidelity, in performing his promises as Romans 3.5. 1 Io^. 9.1. 2 Timothy 4.8.
sometimes for that justness and vprightnes that he shows in his
administration of the world, and specially for that his distributive justice,
(as we term it) in giving to every one his due. Genesis 18.25. none of these is
here meant. Again the righteousness of God, in the case of justification is
usually so called in opposition to humane righteousness Romans 10.3.
, and is nothing else but that righteousness, whereof God is author, accepter,
approuer, in case of iustifification at his judgment seat; called Gods
righteousness, either because it is wrought and given by God in Jesus Christ, or
because its approved and of force with God at his tribunal and seat of
judgment: as on the contrary that is called humane righteousness which is
wrought by men Psalm. 3 9.
, or which is of force and esteem amongst men, so that for it, they esteem
and judge us righteous, James. 2. that place, Phil 3.9. compared with this
sufficiently expounds this.

The meaning then I take it is this: the righteousness of God, that is, the
righteousness whereby a man is justified in the sight of God, is revealed in the
Gospel: the Gospel, here take largely for all that doctrine opposed unto the
law: wherein God has promised reconciliation either made as now, or to be
wrought by Christ Jesus the promised seed, as in the old testament.

Now this righteousness seems to be called Gods righteousness* principally
because it is wholly wrought by God in Christ, man conferring nothing thereto,
either in whole or in part. See Phil. 3.9. Romans 10.3. Romans 3.21.

Now then having thus seen the meaning, it there is no hope to be saved, Gods
justice inclining him to punish, his purity to hate all unrighteousness. Hab.
1.13. see also Apoc. 21.27. Yea I add further that it must be such a
righteousness so completely perfect, as that it may endure the strict censure
of Gods justice. Gal. 3.10.

Mat. 6.33.
, such a righteousness as may stand before God and endure the trial of his
justice. There is a remanent of this principle even in Nature, if it be not too
far degenerate, that it is righteousness whereby Gods favor and kingdom
must be obtained: and therefore the very Gentiles by light of nature, have
performed some both religious offices toward God, and civil duties to men, as
it were to demerit God thereby: but what this righteousness is, and where to be
found, here nature shows her blindness, and vanishes away in vain
confidence of self righteousness and civil honesty; of which notwithstanding
our Savior pronounces that i'ts utterly unavailable to Gods kingdom Mat.
5.20.
, and Paul that had as much of it as any counts it but dung and dross in
comparison. Phil. 3.8.9.

See we then where it is revealed: secondly, wherein it consists: thirdly, how
it is obtained.

Romans 3.21.
; this the privilege of the Gospel only, to reveal Christ, the wisdom and
righteousness of God.

Whence me thinks it follows, that none of the nations Confer Ephesians. 2.12.
Act. 4.12.

Secondly, it should teach us thankfulness unto the

Let us now see what this righteousness of God is, and how obtained: in the
next words, from faith to faith: which words are added to the former by way of
(...), as if he should say, if it be demanded what that righteousness of God
is that the Gospel reueales, it is the righteousness of faith, or whereof we
are made partakers by faith; an eclipsis of the word (...), not much unlike
that Rom, 3.21.22. compare it diligently with this place.

Here then we have the maine state and thesis of this first tractate in this
Epistle. The sum whereof is this, that the righteousness whereby a sinner is
justified in the sight of God is the righteousness of faith, which conclusion
before I come to prove, I will a little explane, and with as much brevity as
may be set down the state of the question betwixt us and the adversaries of
the grace of God.

The first question betwixt us and them, is touching the term and name of
justification what it signifies; whether making righteous, or pronouncing
righteous; they urging the Etymology of the word, and some texts of scripture,
for the greatest part detorted, to prove the first acceptance: we sticking
rather to the second, having the Apostle for our interpreter. Romans 8.33.

De poenit. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 143.
Now for the Etymology of the word; whereas they say that the very Grammatical
notation proves their interpretation, let them remember what Bellarmine himself
speaks in another place, in eo errant multi (says he) quod vocum
significationes ex Etymologia potius ducunt, quam ex communi scripture and
bonoru^ authorum vsu. Its the error of many, that they fetch the
significations of words rather from their Etymology then from the common use
of Scripture, and good authors. And herein how foulely and stubbornely himself
erreth, see his tract lib. 2. de iustificat: cap. 2. and 3. for its apparent
both by scripture, and the best authors, that thus the word is most commonly
used: yea always used in this question of our justification in the sight of
God.

Howbeit, for my part I see not but we may grant them this notation of the
word to stand even in this question; so be it we join not with them in their
exposition touching the manner how a sinner is made righteous in the sight of
God; this they say is done by infusion of habitual righteousness; which we must
utterly deny, except we will contradict the whole tenor of the scriptures.

Let me a little with good leave of my more learned brethren, to whose censure
I submit my self, propound my judgment herein.

I take it therefore that without any prejudice to Gods truth, we may grant
them that notation of the word, to stand in this question: so that to justify
shall signify to make righteous; to be justified to be made righteous. And if
I be not deceived, the Apostle thus uses it. Romans 4.5. but yet that infusion
of habitual righteousness, they dream of, has here no place, though it be
one inseparable companion of our justification. For better explanation, I will
a little declare the proceedings of the Lord with a sinner in justification,
which is as I take it in this manner. First, by effectual calling he works
faith; by faith unites him unto Christ, so that he is made one with Christ;
thus united, he has interest to Christ's righteousness; has true righteousness
in his head; both passive for satisfaction, and active for acceptance; which
is truly his in respect of right, use, fruit; having thus apprehended Christ,
and made him with all his merits and obedience his own, he cease to be a
sinner in respect of guilt and punishment, God striking of his score,
cancelling the handwriting, in a word, forgiving his sins, and making them so
as if they had never been; and so pronounces him righteous; and accepts him
to life eternal. And so we yield them their heaps of premises, whereby they
labor to drive us to absurdities: and avouch that Gods justice is not
impeached by our doctrine of justification.

It is true that they say, GOD does not justify the wicked: that is, acquites
him, or holds him guiltless while he is wicked, and yet we say with all that
GOD does acquit a believer and holds him guiltless, and that doing thus, he
iustifies not a wicked man, but a righteous man; though not in himself, yet in
his head Christ Jesus: And of the term let this suffice, this only being
annexed, that to justify, imports these three things one descending on other.
First, to make righteous by ingraffing into Christ, and imputing his
righteousness unto us: Secondly, to absolve from sin which follows the former
imputation: Thirdly, to pronounce and accept as righteous.

Come we now to the second controversy betwixt us and them, and that is what
that righteousness is, by which a sinner is made righteous in the sight of God,
and so acquitted from his sins, pronounced righteous, and accepted to life
eternal: they say it is a man's own innocence, habitual and actual
righteousness merited indeed by Christ, but inherent in us as in a subject: we
utterly disclaim this, and teach that the righteousness whereby a sinner is
made, esteemed, and accepted as righteous before God, is the righteousness
wrought by Christ, inherent in him only as the proper subject, made ours by
faith, that is, by believing it to be ours, and wrought for us.

Where the third controversy offers it self to be considered; (viz.) what
kind of faith this is, and how it concurreth to justification.

By faith they understand, a general acknowledgement of the articles of faith,
and an assent to them as true. We a particular assurance, that what Christ
wrought and merited, he wrought and merited for us.

Faith again, they teach to be a part of that righteousness as other virtues
also. We not a part, but an instrument only to apprehend and receive it
offered unto us in the Gospel. And therefore our Divines say well, that faith
is here to be understood with his object, the object being indeed that that
does justify us; faith being but the instrument to receive it, as the hand may
be said to feed or nourish the body; not that any nutritive virtue is in the
hand, for that is only in the meat; but because the hand is an instrument to
conuaigh the meat into the stomach, etc.

Having thus explained the question, let us resume the conclusion, as it is
here expounded, and so apply the proofs here set down by the spirit of GOD.
The conclusion is this, that the righteousness whereby a man is justified in the
sight of GOD, is the righteousness of faith, that is, the righteousness of
Christ, apprehended by faith: and not the works of the law either natural,
ceremonial, or moral, done by us either before or after grace: and this Text
affords for proof four invincible arguments. First this, the righteousness
whereby a sinner is justified in the sight of God, is only that righteousness
which God only has wrought in Christ; called here the righteousness of God in
opposition to man's righteousness, as also Phil. 3.9. Romans 10 3. but so is only
the righteousness of faith, not that of works, Ergo. For though it be true, the
adversaries themselves, confessing that our actual righteousness is the work
of God in us, yet this with all they teach, and that truly, that in the
exercise thereof, there is a concurrence of our will, and other powers of soul
and body with the grace of God, and we are in them in some degrees (...)
fellow-workers with the grace of God, but this righteousness whereby we are
justified, is wholly of Gods working in Christ, therefore by faith, and not by
works, are we justified in Gods sight.

A second reason, is from the instrument and mean of Revelation: which is the
Gospel, and that only. Whence I thus reason: the righteousness whereby a
sinner is justified in the sight of GOD, is revealed in the Gospel only, the
law Moral never discovering it: but the righteousness of works, is revealed
and taught in the law, therefore that cannot be the righteousness whereby Paul
teaches us to be justified in the sight of God.

Thirdly, the Apostle here directly avouches, that it is the righteousness of
faith, and proves it by the testimony of the Prophet Habakkuk, whereby we are
justified, and so saved; therefore not the righteousness of works.

Fourthly, verse 18. etc. the Apostle at large proves that all both Jews and
Gentiles, are breakers of the law. Whence a fourth reason arises on this
manner: no transgressour of the law can be justified by the law. See Gal.
3.9.10. but every man, Jew and Gentile, natural, and regenerate, is a
transgressor of the law: therefore no man can be justified by the works of the
law: these are the reasons laid down in this chapter.



But let us a little turn back to the words of the Text, and rid them of
some difficulties, and gather what may be gathered from them for our further
instruction.

From faith to faith.] The words are diversely expounded, and their connection
diversely expressed: some refer them to the former words thus: by the Gospel
the righteousness of GOD is revealed from faith to faith; that according as
faith increases, so is this righteousness of God, and our interest thereto,
more and more made known unto us, and this is a truth, though I take it not
that here intended; for I take it the Apostle speaks here of the general
propounding of this righteousness of GOD in the Gospel, not of our
apprehension and acknowledgement thereof.

Some others take them to be as it were a description of justifying faith, by
the nature of it, for it is such a faith as continually increases, and
gathers new strength; this also a truth; but the sense but harshly collected
from the Text.

I take it rather that they are added unto the former, by way of (...) and show
what that righteousness is which he calls the righteousness of God, (viz.) the
righteousness of faith: and thus me thinks the words hang well together, if
we shall supply the note of explication that is here wanting; thus, to wit, or
the word esse, to be from faith to faith, that is, to be wholly absolved in
faith; so that beginnings, continuance, and accomplishment of justification are
wholly absolved in faith.

Which sense standing, Paul speaking of his righteousness of good conscience
after the first justification, yet acknowledges no value in it at all to
justify him 1 Cor. 4.4.
, and counts not only his works before grace, but his best deeds, in grace,
as dung and dross in respect of any worth or avail of them to justification,
and it shall never be disproued that our Divines teach, that justification is
actus indiuiduus, and has no latitude; the manifestation thereof to us is given
by degrees, but the act is absolved in an instant, so that a believer in the
first moment of his belief, is as much justified at Gods judgment seat, as
ever he shall be: but hereof more hereafter.

The proofs of this conclusion now follows, and the first is taken from a
testimony of the Prophet Habakkuk. Cap. 2.4. In it weigh the quality:
secondly, the substance of it, it is a written testimony; selected from the
written word of God; the only Cannon indeed to try all truths by; and the
sole sound authority wherein our judgment may rest, and therefore observe
that the Apostles when soever they have to deal with the people of God, that
had received the scriptures for the word of God, they use none other
testimonies; in deed when they deal with heathenish people, they fit them
with Prophets of their own stamp. Tit. 1.12. Acts 17.28.

Augustine advises, to hear, haec dicit dominus, thus says the Lord; or thus
it is written; and as Constantine, in the Council of Nice, advised to make the
Scripture sole judge and vmpire of all controversies in matter of faith: and if
this course had been holden in the first heat of these contentions, we might
have hoped of a more speedy end of all these bitter and endless disputes.

But see we the substance of it, The just by faith shall live.] It is doubted
whether these words, (by faith) be to be referred to the subject of this
proposition (the just) or to the predicate (shall live,) as they stand in the
original they may be indifferently applied to either. If we refer it to the
predicate, it affords a good argument against that second justification
formerly mentioned: for if the just live by faith, and not by works then what
place have works in justification? If to the subject; so also it proves the
conclusion, that the righteousness of God, is the righteousness of faith; because
the just live by faith and he only is saved.

But a greater difficulty there is about the fitness of this testimony, to
prove the conclusion in hand, for it is apparent that the Prophet speaks of a
preservation in a temporal judgment; and what is this to eternal life? To
this the answer may be diversely framed: first, perhaps that Chaldaicall
captivity, figured our spiritual bondage under Satan: and deliverance from
that calamity, typically shadowed our freedom from hell, to be procured by
Christ: as there are plentiful examples of the like. Compare Isay 40.3.4. Mat.
3.3. and then the accommodation is easy. Or secondly thus, that general
sentences applied to particular cases, are not thereby restrained only to
those particulars, but still retains the generality of their nature, Mat.
19.6. and so also the explication plain. Or thirdly thus, that the Prophet in
that place, does not only describe the blessing of a believer, but also the
cause of it, which is his faith; and then it is also plain, for aetiologycarum
similis ratio. Or fourthly thus, that it is one and the same justifying faith,
that apprehends and gives us interest to all the promises of God, made to us in
Christ, and as by it we live in temporal dangers, so by it also are we freed
from spiritual and eternal destruction: and let this suffice for the argument
drawn from testimonies.

Verse 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth, in
unrighteousness.
NOw follows an other reason, proving the same conclusion: the sum whereof
seems to be this. No transgressour of the law can be justified by the works of
the law, but if he will be justified he must be justified by faith: but every
man is a transgressour of the law: therefore no man can be justified by the
law, and so must needs righteousness be by faith.

The proposition is not here set down, but easily gathered out of the Text:
and the truth of it easily euinced: because the law requires to our
justification a perfect and continual performance of the whole law, and every
part thereof by our selves. See Gal. 3.9.10. apparent therefore, that the least
transgression excludes from all justification by the law.

Now the minor, or second proposition, namely, that every man is a
transgressour of the law, he proves at large by a general distribution of all
mankind; according to the phrase of the holy Ghost: all Jews and Gentiles are
transgressors; but under one of these two differences comes all mankind;
therefore: and for the Gentiles transgression, he proves it at large from this
18. verse, to verse 17. Cap. 2. sorting them also into two ranks: for they
were either more notoriously wicked, or else Hypothetically only just: of the
first sort he shows it, Cap. 1. Of the second, cap. 2. After he proves the
same of the Jews, from ver. 17. cap. 2. to the end of cap. 3. This the
disposition and general sum of these three chapters.

As for the first sort of the Gentiles, he proves that they were
transgressors, by a reason drawn from the effect, as a sign of
transgression, (viz.) Gods wrath, metonymically his vengeance or judgment
inflicted on them. Where the reason lies thus in form; upon whom the Lord
poures down his vengeance they are transgressors: but on the Gentiles God
powered down his wrath; Ergo, they were transgressors.

In handling of which reason this shall be the order: first to give the sense
of the words; then to show the force of the consequence, and then the
observations.

The wrath of God.] It is a question amongst the learned, whether anger may
properly be given to God; and many things are spoken both ways: the truth is,
that anger as it is in us, either for the material, or formal part of it,
cannot be given to God that is free from all such passions and perturbations:
yet in a sense it is true that anger is in God: that is, an inclination and
will to punish sin, arising from his detestation of sin: and so here it is to
be understood for the displeasure of God conceived against sin, testified by
the punishments he inflicts on the transgressors.

Is revealed from heaven.] (viz.) By those punishments which out of that his
throne of majesty, and imperial seat, he executes upon them that provoke him.

Now the consequence is easily euinced: if there be wrath, there is sure
transgression: both from the nature of GOD that abhorres nothing that he has
made, nor is displeased at any thing whereof himself is author, as he is of
all things in the world, except sin: if therefore he be angry with man sure
it is because man has sinned: secondly, his justice permits not to punish the
guiltless. Genesis 18.25. Job. 4.7.8.

Lament. 3.38.39. Neither do either the sufferings of Christ, or the
chastisements of Gods children, that in Christ are accepted as righteous, any
whit impeach this truth: for howsoever Christ was in himself a Lamb undefiled
and without spot 1 Pet. 1.19.
, yet was he by imputation a sinner 2 Cor. 5.21.
, and Gods children though they have no sins to be satisfied for by their
own punishments, yet have they sin to be abolished, chastised, prevented.

Pelagians, (viz.) that imitation only makes us partakers of Adams sin: for
see we not that infants also dye before they come to use of reason and
understanding: dye they, and yet are guiltless, and free from all sin? far
be it that the judge of all the world should not do right, or inflict death
the wages of sin, where is no transgression.

Christ, consider it well, and we shall find the witch in our own bosom; the
grand witches are our sins, they hinder the good things from us, they bring
down all this wrath of God upon us: so for common calamities wherewith whole
Kingdoms and States are visited: as how long has the Lord followed us in this
Kingdom, with variety of his judgments; once and twice by famine and
scarcity of bread, and cleanness of teeth, with pestilence after the manner
of Egypt; with unseasonable weather, fearful inundations; and yet behold the
wrath of the Lord is not ceased, but his hand is stretched out still. Wonder
we at this? O Lord, says Iosuah, in like case, what shall I say when Israel
turn their backs before their enemies Joshua 7.8.
: mark the Lords answer; get thee up Iosuah, get thee up; Israel has sinned
and transgressed my covenant, etc. for they have taken of the excommunicate
thing, and stolen, and dissembled, and have put it even with their own stuff:
and this is the cause that Israel cannot stand before their enemies, because
they are execrable: and surely, beloved, the same answer may we give to the
like demand: What should we say when England, the people of GOD, are thus
laden with the judgments of God? What, but that we have sinned, and broken the
Lords Covenant? shall I say and dissembled and hidden our sins? that modesty
were yet tolerable, but they have declared their sins as Sodom, and have not
hidden them Isay 3.9.
: the streets ring again with oaths, for which the land mournes; the tables
and tauernes swim with filthy vomitings; the sabbath polluted, judgment
perverted; the rulers sell sins, and say with shame enough (O shameless
shame) bring gifts Hosea 4.18.
: and can we wonder at this wrath of the Lord? Nay, O Lord it is thy mercy,
thine unspeakable mercy, that we are not consumed.

Jeremy infers Lament. 3.40. might take place amongst us; that in all these
judgments of GOD we would search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord.
Israel had never rest, till the execrable thing was removed; nor let England
ever think to have rest from Gods wrath, till these execrable sins are some
ways expiated amongst us: the Lord give us eyes to see every man his own
personal sins, and to turn from them: and move the heart of our Iosuah, to
search out the execrable things amongst us, and to consume them, that the Lord
may return and have mercy on us, before his wrath have utterly consumed us.
Amen.

Let us now proceed to that that follows. It may be demanded how the Lord
manifested his wrath upon these Gentiles: Ans. Read the process of the
chapter, and you shall find it was by inflicting spiritual plagues upon them,
and permitting them to those gross and brutish sins, wherein they wallowed.

Psalm. 89.31.32. but only with the desperate wicked. Hosea 4.14.

to such an height, and ripeness of hellish profaneness. I could be content
to promise my self any good thing of my mother the Church of England; and to
hope for all gracious blessings from God upon her, were it not that I see the
Lord daily making way for an extreme vengeance, and by so evident tokens
manifesting his wrath against her. And when I see such open assembly of
Adulterers, by companies in harlots houses Ier. 5.7.
, such defiling of the land with blood, such perverting of justice, such
stopping of the ear to the cry of the poor, such open profanation of
Sabbaths, desperate contempt of the word, scoffing at religion, etc. I then
begin to say with the Lord, Ier. 5.7. How should he spare us for this? shall
not the Lord visit for these things: and shall not his soul be avenged on such
a Nation as this: verse 9. Surely if the Lord would continue his mercies
toward England, he would never suffer so gross impieties to be so shamelesly
committed: if his wrath were not too much incensed against us, some means or
other he would use of our restraint: but permitting such sins to such an
height, he plainly testifyeth the fierceness of his wrath against us.
Consider what is said, and the Lord give us understanding in all things: great
is the security of our people in this kind, every man blessing himself in
his wickedness, and promising himself peace, though he walk after the
stubbornness of his own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst. Deuteronomy. 29 18.

And would God our Prophets had not their share in this, saying we shall have
peace, when alas, if we may judge by signs, there is no peace: what though
the Lord have multiplied our people, enlarged our kingdoms, stablished our
peace with foreign Nations, and yet permits sin to such height amongst us:
are we better then Nahu. 3.8.9.10.
No, better replenished, better fenced, better friended? yet was she carried
away; no brethren, never look for peace whiles our sins, our abominable
sins, are in so great number and high measure amongst us 1 Reg. 9.22.
: and the Lord grant these things may work in us truly turning from our
sins, that the Lord may repent him of his great wrath, that he is preparing
for us. Amen, Amen.

Come we now to view the cause of this wrath, whereby the equity of Gods
proceeding is showed: this wrath was revealed from heaven: if any ask why: it
was because they withheld or detayned the truth in unrighteousness; for so I
take it, this description of the Gentiles by their behavior, imports the cause
of Gods wrath upon them. See we the meaning of the words.

By the truth we are here to understand, those (...), true principles and
notices that the Gentiles had in their understanding, these and the like; that
there is a God, that this God is the maker and governor of the world, of
infinite power, wisdom, justice, goodness, etc. and therefore to be
worshipped: and those also of justice, equity and charity to be practiced
toward men; as that what we would not another should do to us, that we
should not do to him, etc. This truth they detayned or kept down in
unrighteousness; that whereas the conscience, from that light that was in the
understanding, suggested often, and urged on to the practice of those things
known, they wickedly suppressed all such motions, and hindered them from that
effect they would have had in their hearts: This the Sense.

the good motions suggested by conscience, out of principles in the
understanding: for first, what is this but to be wilfully wicked? Secondly, see
the haynousnesse of it in the dangerous consequent: for hereby it comes to
pass by little and little, that conscience is quite killed, and the truth
utterly extinguished, so that the grossest sins are practiced without any
check or remorse of conscience. See Ephesians. 4.18.19. Romans 1.21.26.27.

And let it be our admonition to take heed how we suppress the truth, S.
Paul would have the word of God to dwell plentifully in our hearts Col. 3 16.
: to have full scope and the whole sway in the heart of a Christian. Now
brethren how far engaged our people are in this sin of suppressing, and
suffocating the known truth, too lamentable experience shows: the checks of
conscience, caused either by word, or works of God, they are commonly
accounted fits of melancholy, and when such quames come over their hearts, a
pair of tables or cards, or merry company, is sought to drive them away:
fearful is this sin, and such as is the forerunner of a reprobate mind, etc.

Verse 19. For as much as that, which may be known of God, is manifest in
them: for God has showed it unto them.
HEre is a prolepsis: that is, an objection prevented which some might make in
excuse of the Gentiles, thus; how could they suffocate or suppress the truth
of GOD, which they knew not, seeing they wanted his word? Ans. Yes, they knew
it, verse 19. which is proved proleptically, verse 20. by the particulars of
this knowledge, and means, whereby they knew it: (viz.) the creatures, in
which the power and Deity of God shines; and the power of understanding given
them by God.

So that in these words we have these things to consider; first that the
Gentiles had the knowledge of God: secondly, the author of this knowledge, God.
ver. 19. thirdly, the means whereby they obtain it; consideration of the
creatures: fourthly, the measure, use, and effect of this knowledge; it left
them without excuse.

That which may be known of God, etc.] It may be demanded whether the
Gentiles knew all that may be known of GOD? Ans. Not so; if we take it
generally, for God, as a redeemer, is known only by the word: how then may
this be understood? Ans. First, either thus, that what may be known of God by
power of nature, that was known unto them: or secondly, thus, referring it to
verse 20. so much as might serve to leave them excuselesse was known unto the
Gentiles.

Psalm. 19.1.2.3. etc. Acts 14.17. and 17.27.28.

Eccles. 7.31.
, he never left himself without witness amongst them Act. 14.17.
, so, but that they might, and did know more of GOD, and their duty toward
him, then they would or did practice: different measures in deed of knowledge
there are, but to every one is granted so much as should deprive them of
excuse. The Philosopher sorted the Heathen people into three ranks. First, was
of the maine or vulgar sort of people: second, their (...), and politic: the
third their wisemen and Philosophers: now though in the rude vulgar there was
least distinctnes of knowledge, yet some glimering light they had, whereby
though obscurely, they discerned a Deity, etc.

The author of this knowledge follows: Ioh. 1.9.
: and fourthly, if we shall add, that there was an influence of general grace
into nature corrupted, helping the imbicilitie of nature, I think it nothing
different from truth.

But hence we learn thankfulness to God,

Verse 20. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his
works, to the intent that they should be without excuse.
THe means of manifestation follows, that is, the creatures: which carry so
lively representations of the infinite power and wisdom of God, that being
duly considered, they bring us to a certain acknowledgement of the Deity of
their maker.

Now the reading in this place is something intricate; I take it we may best
make the Syntaxis thus: the invisible things of God being considered in his
works, even ever since the creation of the world, are discovered; to wit, his
eternal power and Godhead.

And they seem to be annexed by way of preoccupation; because it might be
objected, that the Lord is invisible, and therefore could not be thus known:
Ans. That though the Lord be in himself invisible, yet are his invisible
properties evidently discerned in the creatures.

The proposition of this place is this: that the invisible things of God are
seen.

The subject amplified by some particulars; his power and Godhead; the
predicate by three arguments, the mean of discerning, consideration of the
creatures: secondly, the time or indurance, ever since the creation* thirdly,
the event or effect; so for that they are without excuse.

So though God be in himself invisible,

And it may serve for answer to that sottish objection of Atheists against the
being of God: Col. 1.16.
? but to leave them to their wilful blindness, let us now see how we may
profit by the creatures in the knowledge of God.

Not so much by the bare and idle gazing upon them, as by due consideration and
pondering of them: to his creatures Read Job. cap. 37.38.39.

David's practice. Psalm. 8. and 145.147. etc. and Job. cap. 26.27.28. and learn
to imitate their holy example.

David. Psalm. 19. speaking of the two-fould manifestation of GOD; first, by
works; secondly, by word: appropriateth converting power to the law of God;
and the usual distinction of knowledge, whereby one is made effectual, the
other ineffectual, has warrant sufficient from the word of God: and he that
knows God no farther then the creatures reveal him, may know what shall stop
h s mouth at the day of accounts, when Christ shall come with thousands of his
Angels to render vengeance to them that know not God, and disobay the gospel 2
These. 1.
: but cannot by it be enlightened to salvation: For tell me: how do the
creatures manifest the Trinity of persons; out of which if we conceive God,
we conceive an Idol and not GOD Ephesians. 2.12.
? how those mysteries of God manifested in the flesh 1 Timothy 3.16.
, etc. and the true means of reconcilement unto God? etc.

And it should teach us this lesson;

Verse 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was full of darkness.

Verse 22. When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools.


THese Verses contain a probation of the last clause in the former Verse;
(viz.) that the Gentiles even by this knowledge natural, were left without
excuse, and could have no cloak for their sin; and the argument may thus be
framed: they that know God, and yet glorify him not as God, are without
excuse; but the Gentiles knowing God, glorified him not as God, etc. Ergo, were
without excuse. And this minor, which is alone set down, is further amplified
by an Antithesis of things diverse; but became vain in their imaginations, or
as the word signifies, in their discourses, etc.

Act. 14.16.

Ob. And if any will say, that they might justly excuse themselves before God,
because he had not given them further knowledge of him by his word. Ans. First,
that the Lord was not bound: Secondly, that he justly denied them that
blessing, in regard of the contempt of it in the first creation: Thirdly, that
the breach of the law written, shall not be imputed unto them Romans 2.12.
: Fourthly, but only their abusing, or not using of their knowledge natural,
as they ought to have done.

Now brethren weigh well; if neglects of duty, David said of the Israelites,
Psalm. 147. He has not dealt so with any Nation; and yet would God it were not
too true, that the Gentiles themselves in their blindness have exceeded our
thankfulness, and pious performances, in all this plenty of divine
revelation. It were long to recite all their devout intendments; all their
strict obseruances of justice and equity; how great religion of an oath with
them, how little reverence and regard with us: what examples of justice,
temperance, contempt of the world amongst them; to shame and condemn the
oppressions, gluttony, and idolatrous covetousness of us, to whom the Lord is
come so nigh by his word* that comination of our Savior has place with us;
woe to us, yea a heavier vvoe then to the Gentiles, that knew not God by his
word: easier shall it be for them at the day of judgment then for us: for it
is probable, that if those great revelations had been granted them that have
been vouchsafed unto us, they would have repented their impieties in sackcloth
and ashes: they therefore shall be our judges.

The reason proving them justly inexcusable, follows; because they knowing
God, glorified him not as God: that is, they worshipped him not with worship
beseeming his Deity: nor were thankful, (viz.) as they should have been,
for those many blessings the Lord blessed them vvithall; doing good unto them,
giving them rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness Acts 14.17.
, and by the creatures revealing himself unto them.

Psalm. 116.12.13.

Psalm. 5^.
: secondly, as thankfulness causes continuance and increase of blessings; so
unthankfulness justly procures a depriuall. See Isay 5. and alibi.

Paul calls glorifying God as God. And if any shall ask what this meet
worship is here spoken of? it is when God is worshipped according to his
will; secondly, with worship agreeable to his nature, (viz.) spiritual.

Mat. 15.9. Col. 2. after the devises and traditions of men. What is it to
build a temple? to erect an altar? to give sacrifice if it were of thousands of
Rams, and even of ten thousand rivers of oil? as if the Lord that made
heaven and earth dwelt in temples made with hands; or as if he had more
pleasure in sacrifice then when his voice is obayed; or cared for the
lip-deuotion of an hypocrite, when his heart is far from him. Mat. 15. Isay.
29. M^r. 6.

But here mark that nature though it direct to worship God, Heb. 19.15. by
which all our gifts are sanctified.

And if there were nothing else, yet this would sufficiently Ephesians. 2.12. And
if they had any claim to salvation, it must needs be by the worship they
performed unto GOD: but how vain that was, this place sufficiently proves,
agreeing neither with the will, nor with the nature of God. And though I deny
not but many of them were saved, because many of them had the knowledge of
Christ, partly by conuersing and traffic with the Jews, partly by
extraordinary revelations, as the Sibyllae, prophesying of Christ's coming
into the world; yet if we speak of the multitude of them that neither knew
nor worshipped GOD otherwise then the creatures directed, what can we think
of them, but that they perished in their blindness, Acts 14.



The Antithesis follows: of three members: they became vain, etc. had their
mind darkened: were foolish, etc.

Touching the meaning of these words, by vanity, understand friuolous^es: and
the word (...), translated imaginations, may better be rendered discourses, or
reasonings; such as they made out of those principles they had in their
understanding.

The heart is put for the mind or understanding faculty; darkness signifies
ignorance, etc. the rest are plain.

Col. 2.18.
Again, because we are often forgetful of the Majesty of God, therefore a
picture was requisite to be our remembrancer, and sexcenta eiusmodi; vain,
foolish, sottish devises.

And let it teach us as in all things, Romans 8.7. Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.23. Leuit.
10.1.2.
How unmeet is it that fleshly wisdom, which is an enemy unto God should be
a framer of his worship? how unprofitable is will worship? yea how abominable
to add or alter the least circumstance in the worship of God? And howsoever
there may be a show of wisdom in voluntary religion. Col. 2.23. yet being
rightly weighed, all the devises of men shall be found vain, foolish; yea more
then sottish in the judgment of God.

Again, Ephesians. 4.18.

And how sottish that error of Papists is: whereas they teach corruption
original to stay only in the sensual part of the soul, this place
sufficiently shows: their reasons are scarce worth recital: We yield them
that man by the fall lost not understanding, or will simply, the faculties
still remained; but this we teach that the right use of them was lost by the
fall. The understanding is naturae, male intelligere corruptae naturae, been
gratiae, as Bernard sometime spoke of the will: and see what Paul speaks of
the natural man's understanding, 1 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 4.23.
and how he exhorts to have the very spirit of the mind renewed, and then shall
we see what to judge of that Regina Ratio, and that (...), ruling part of the
soul, which Papists so much extol and admire.

Verse 23. For they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude
of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and foure-footed beasts, and
of creeping things.
NOw follows the evidence of their idolatrous folly: they turned the glory
of the incorruptible God, etc. The Apostle seems to allude to that place of
the Psalm. 105.20. The glory of God, understand the glorious majesty of God
himself: which they are said to turn or change, not that they were able to
bring any alteration into the Deity; but this is spoken, as Chrysostom says,
either according to their intendment, and nature of the fact, as much as in
them lay: or in respect of the event, quoad populum, whom by this means they
occasioned to think GOD to be like unto those things, in whose image they did
represent him.

Where first observe: that the Gentiles themselves intended their images most
of them to represent the true God, creator and governor of the world. And
howsoever they erred in hypothesi imagining that to be this true God, which was
not; yet in thesi they erred not in respect of their intention. Sundry
testimonies might be produced to this purpose out of Divines, and heathens.

And the rather observe I this, because Papists to defend their image
resemblances, and worship, often insist on this; that the images condemned in
Scripture, were such only as were made to represent false Gods, and things
that were not: whereas a man that (...) has eyes to see, may easily perceive,
that the Lord forbids not only images of false Gods, but images of himself
also, the true Jehovah. Compare these places. Deu. 4.15. Exodus 32.4.5. Judge.
17.5.13. Psalm. 40.18. etc.

Now that wherein their folly chiefly appeared, was the disproportion of the
image to the thing thereby resembled, GOD incorruptible, man corruptible; what
possibility of resemblance?

Whence may be gathered a reason unanswerable against representations of Gods
majesty, by any image of creatures whatsoever: because none of them can
represent God so as he is in his nature or properties. And it is used often by
the Prophets and other Divines. Isay 40.18. The Lord thus reasons against the
Images of the people. I am omnipotent, infinite in essence, power, majesty,
etc. to whom then will you liken me? Lactantius de orig. erroris, lib. 2. cap.
2. The Image of God that lives for ever, must be like him, living and sensible;
and if simulachrum has his name from likeness, how can these images be thought
like unto God, seeing they have neither sense nor motion?

Now if this be thought a good reason against images of the heathen, (viz.) the
desparitie, and disproportion that must needs be betwixt God and all images of
creatures made to represent him, why holds it not against images of Papists,
made to represent the Trinity, though not as lively representations of Divine
essence, yet as anologicall shadows as it were of his properties, and actions?

They teach indeed, that there can be no image devised by man lively to
represent God as he is; yet some analogicall resemblances there may be to help
us in conceiving the properties and actions of the Trinity. But how vainly?
for first, what is Gods essence but his properties? what his properties, but
his essence? secondly, mark the reason of the Spirit of God here, and Isay 40.
and you shall see the ground of it is this: what image soever does not lively
represent the nature of GOD: that may be made to represent GOD, but no image
does set forth GOD as he is: therefore may none be made to resemble him. And
where as they say, that Angels though invisible may be resembled by an image:
therefore God also though invisible. Ans. First, with M. Zanchius in praecept.
secund. that I like not the liberty Painters take to themselves herein.
Secondly, that there is manifest disparitie betwixt the two: Angels* being,
though invisible, yet finite; GOD not invisible only, but also infinite, and
unmeasurable, as Damascene himself speaks, de orthodoxa fide, lib. 4. Cap.
13. But more of this by and by.

Plutarch, de Isid. and Osir.

And let it teach us to magnify the name of God for his mercy, in that he has
hitherto preserved us from that extreamitie of spiritual blindness; and
specially be our caveat, how we begin to corrupt our selves, either in the
apprehension, or worship of GOD: there is a steep downfall in such
corruptions. See Ier. 10.14.

Verse 24. Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves.
NOw follows the punishment of this sin. Wherein we are to consider the
punishment it self; which is corporal uncleanness, and fornication: secondly
the manner of inflicting, gave them up: thirdly, the inflicter God.

Where first observe, Exodus 9. 2 These. 2. 1 Reg. 22. Hos. 4.12. and this is
confessed by all Divines popish, and orthodoxall: the scriptures also are
pregnant for this purpose.

And it may serve to arm us against that Argument that has often troubled
many: (viz.) against the providence of God, and his care of the things of this
life: drawn especially from the present prosperity of wicked and ungodly men;
whom it pleases the Lord to feed fat with the things of this life. Now if we
would consider, and well weigh the matter, we should easily perceive that they
are not without their judgment: for their very sins and their lying in them,
is as great a judgment as may be inflicted in this life: to live in
drunkenness, whoredom, etc. what punishment can be greater, seeing it
defaceth Gods image: secondly, hardens the heart: thirdly, prepares for
destruction.

But see we the Author of this punishment, and the manner of inflicting it.
The Author is God: God gave them up. See Exodus 10.17. 2 These. 2. Yet that we
err not, consider we a little, how God inflicts it.

Ans. Not by infusing any new wickedness into them. See Iam. 1.13. but first, by
denying, or withdrawing his grace, by which they might have been withholden
from such sins: as Genesis 2^.6. which Divines call spiritual desertion. In
which regard they make God in in this case, Causam remouentem prohibens. of
these sins whereunto they rush, after their stay and hold-back is removed:
secondly, by tradition or delivering them up to the power of Satan, and
headstrong swinge of their own corruptions. See 1. Reg. 22.22. thirdly, which
is accidentally only, by giving them means of restraint, which falling upon a
heart thus forsaken of God become unto them occasions of greater violence in
wickedness; as the Law. Rom 7.8. As impediments cast to hinder the current of a
violent stream rather increase the violence thereof* then any way stop the
passage: fourthly, after such abuse of these means of reclaiming, by denying
unto them those means of restraint. Read. Hos. 4.14.

Hence therefore it will easily follow, that there is some act of Gods will
extended to the being of sin it self, in respect of the event. First, that
God wills that there be sin, though not qua peccatum; yet as a means to
manifest his mercy in pardoning* justice in punishing; and as the just and
operative permission thereof in men is an act of God, as a judge punishing some
former transgression thereby. And why men should now be so abhorrent from this
doctrine so long since taught in the Church of God I see not: yea, the very
idle permission they talk of, implies as much: for what God permits, he wills
to permit, and so wills to be.

down to the place of our iniquity, where is pain endless, caselesse, and
remediless, a greater judgment cannot befall us.

And as we are fearful of the judgment: so especially take we heed of the
causes thereof, they are, first, unthankfulness for graces received: secondly,
ill use of gifts bestowed: thirdly, not profiting by means vouchsafed. Confer
Isay 1 5. Heb. 6.8. Ezech. 24.13.

Neither is it to be omitted, Hos. 4.12. as also we see at this day come to
pass in the Church of Rome: wherein how such uncleanness has been practiced,
tolerated yea defended, as less evil then marriage copulation, which the Lord
teaches to be undefiled, their books and practice sufficiently witness.

But last of all, Col. 2.23. and indeed what sensible creature has the world
so full of comeliness and majesty as the body of man preserved in health?
And how this sin above others depriues it of this honor Solomon, testifyeth
Proverb. 5.9.10.11. and ordinary experience teaches; there being no sin
that brings with it a more present blemishing of beauty, impayring of
strength, rotting of the marrow. A second honor of the body is to be a
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto GOD. Romans 12.1.2. A third to be a member of
Christ. 1 Cor. 6.15. A fourth to be a Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in. 1
Cor. 6.19. of all which high honors we deprive our bodies, when we give them
up to this filthy uncleanness.

1 Cor. 6.18.
whereas all other even outward sins, though the body be the instrument of
them, yet is it not the object of them; in this a man sins against his own
body, spoiling it of that excellent honor whereto GOD both in nature and
grace has advanced it. Consider if thou will, with what strange, and incurable
diseases GOD has in all times plagued this sin, pockes, dropsies, etc. and
many others at the naming whereof many times we tremble. And how many
excellent personages both of men and women, renowned for beauty, and comely
feature of body, (a worthy blessing of GOD) have thou seen utterly
disfigured, and so quite deformed? that there has not been left the least
foot prints of what formerly appeared in them: fly fornication.

Verse 25. Which turned the truth of God unto a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature, forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for ever. Amen.
IN this verse, and those that follow, is set down a repitition of the
Gentiles sin, with the amplification thereof; as also of the punishment with
like amplification.

The sin is repeated in this 25. verse in words something different; for what
before he called the turning of the incorruptible God into the similitude of an
image: he here calls the turning of Gods truth into a lie. The increase of
their sin is that they worshipped the creature passing by the Creator; where
is annexed a short, but pithie confutation of that fact, by a description of
God; who is blessed for ever.

Touching the meaning of the words, there is some difference amongst
interpreters; for my part I think with Martyr and others, that by the truth of
God, we are here to understand the same, that before he called the glory of
God, that is, the true essence of God; or the Deity, as it is in truth: by the
lie or falshoode nothing else, but the images made to represent him: so called
often in the Prophets, because they represent God falsely, and otherwise then
he is in the truth of his nature. Confer Ier. 10.10.14.

So is every image of God falsehood, Ier. 10.14.
Therefore called falsehood. Ier. 10.14. and lying. Isay 44.10. Neither will it
suffice to say that the Prophets speak of heathenish images, made to represent
false Gods: for both the places show that they speak of Images that were made
to represent the true God* John 4.24. 1 Timothy 6.16.
and reason euinceth it from the quality and quantity of Divine essence:
being a spirit invisible, never seen by the eye of man, and o^ an infinite,
vnme^surable, and incomprehensible majesty. I ay 40.12.18.

Whence it will ea^ily follow, that it is altogether unlawful, to purtrey God
in an image; and let Pap^sts say what they will, in defense of their audacious
practice in this kind ^et seeing the commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 4.15.16.17.
backed with such reasons as have now been mentioned, stands still in force*
they shall never be able to free themselves of that crime of violating the
Divine majesty; so justly in this regard imputed unto them. Many pretty shifts
they have devised to keep off from themselves this imputation, and reasons to
justify their practice, but how vain they are all, will appear if we a
little take view of them.

As first that the scripture condemns such images of God only, as are made to
express the perfect similitude of the Divine essence and nature; not such as
are deu^sed analogically only, and by mystical signi^^cat on. Ans. But it is
appa^ant, that the Lord utterly for^ids all images, and likenesses, whether of
perfect, or analogicall representation: for mark the reason. D ut. 4.15 16.
Y^u (...) ^o image in the day when God ^^^ke unto y^u in the m^unt: no image
either of perfect, or analogicall signification: therefore you shall make no
image at all: and who can think that the calfe made by the Israelites, was any
otherwise devised, but as mystically to represent some action, benefit, or
property of God* and yet are they condemned as well for making, as for
worshipping the golden image.

But let us consider briefly their reasons. First, they say Angels that are
spirits also and invisible, yet were lawfully pictured in the old Testament.
Ans. First, there was an express warrant given to Moses, and Solomon, whereas
they were expressly forbidden to make any image or representation of the Lord:
Secondly, grant that there may be some liberty taken herein (as what dare not
Painters, and Poets?) yet how unequal this reason is, appears by that great
inequality, and disproportion betwixt Angels that are finite creatures, and
God which is of infinite and incomprehensible majesty.

And whereas they allege, that the Lord has appeared in visible shapes. Ans.
First, that they were not shapes of his essence, but pledges of his presence;
neither was it Gods purpose thereby to teach the people what an one he was in
his nature or properties; but only to testify, and evidence that he was now
present with them: Secondly, besides that, how will they prove that it is
lawful for us to picture God in those images and shapes wherein he has
appeared unto men?

Neither is their third reason though more plausible, yet any whit more
forcible: The scripture they say attributes unto God all the members of man's
body: And why may we not resemble him in a picture, as God has as it were
painted out himself in the scripture? Ans. Though other answers be given by
many; yet this is that I take surest to rest in; Gods will to the contrary,
and his flat prohibition, and that is answer sufficient to all such plausible
why nots? made by the wisdom of flesh. What though the Lord descending to our
capacity thus please to speak? shall we therefore presume thus to picture?
having so express prohibition, with a reason; the voice was heard but no shape
seen. Deuteronomy. 4.5.16.

Their fourth reason is this; that man may be pictured, and his image drawn;
therefore God also whose image man is; for the image of the image, is the image
of the exemplar, and first pattern. Ans. That man as he is the image of God
cannot be pictured; for wherein is man an image of God? in the lineaments of his
body? Let Papists leave that dream to the condemned Anthropomorphites. But he
is the image of God, in regard he pertakes analogically in holiness, Ephesians. 4
24.
and true righteousness, which though it spread it self over body and soul,
yet cannot be seen otherwise then by effects in either.

The last reason artificial is drawn, from the many profits that such images
serve for: as instruction, remembrance, devotion, restraining of wandering
imaginations. Ans. Where mark the quickness of an Idolaters sent, Hab. 2.18.
Isay 44.9.
that has smelt out so many great benefits of those things, that the Lord
thought, and taught to be utterly unprofitable.

But for more particular answer to this argument, how will they ever be able
to prove this, which must be the proposition of their syllogism: that
whatsoever may be a mean of instruction, admonition, devotion, etc. may be
used as helps to these ends: when as God has tied us to those means only
which himself has sanctified to this end: and has given Christ to be the
only doctor of the Church, and has provided us sufficiently of means to
these ends by the great book of the creatures, book of the scriptures,
visible word of the sacraments, inward teaching of his spirit: secondly, how
was it that when these were such excellent means of teaching, the Lord denied
them to the Jews? and how falls it, that the people set to school to these
teachers are found most ignorant of Gods nature and will? thirdly, what teach
they, but lying, and falsehood? as lamentable experience shows: what gross
conceits of the Deity these doctors have filled our peoples minds withal.
And lest they say this has come to pass by defect of other teaching by their
ministers. Ans. That may well be in part; but yet such grosenesse comes
principally from the image; and this also their inexpiable sin, that have
given them teachers no better then images; having no more of true pastors, then
their images have of the Deity. But enough of this popish devise.

Secondly, come to ourselves, Romans 7.14. and forbids not only corporal, but
even mental resemblances, or similitudes of the Godhead, conceived by the
mind; Acts 17.29.
we may not so much as think God like to any thing that we see or can conceive.

And the best way to conceive God, is as an Ancient Divine well teaches, via
negationis, by way of negation. And he that can most abstract God from
likenesses, has best learnt to conceive GOD, such as he is.

Proceed we now unto the increase of the Gentiles sin. And worshipped and
served the creature, etc. This, though I know it may be verified of the Gentiles
in respect of their idolatrous worship of the Sun, Moon, etc. and other
visible creatures; yet I take it, is here to be understood of the worship given
by them to their images.

To make way to the doctrine, this question shall be propounded; whether the
Gentiles gave unto their Images Divine worship? or whether their worship had
the term in the images without reference to the prototypa, the things which
their images represented. Papists gladly lay hold on the affirmative part, that
they may put difference betwixt theirs and heathenish Idolatry committed with
images. And this, they say is that worshipping of an image, which the second
commandment condemns, namely the worshipping it as God.

Now for answer, know we that if we speak of the rude multitude, whom God
had principally blinded, no doubt, but they many of them intended their worship
to the images, wherein they thought some Deity, and divine power to dwell, and
what marvel, that men should grow so sottish, when God gives up to blindness?
Isay 44 18.19.20. But for the learneder, and wiser sort of them, they knew well
enough that they were no Gods, neither did their worship stay in the image, but
was referred to the thing thereby represented, as Augustine, Lactantius,
Ambrose, and others show; and as Plutarch, de Iside and Osir. and other of the
heathen professed. August. in Psalm. 96. thus brings in an heathen, speaking for
himself: I do not worship that stone, or that image which is without sense,
but I adore that which I see, and serve him whom I see not, who is that? The
invisible divine power that is president of the Image. Many such testimonies
might be produced.

Now if it be replied, that the scripture imputes unto them this grossness:
Ans. The scripture speaks generally, not of their intention, but of the event,
as amongst other places that one. 1 Cor. 10.20. sufficiently euinceth. The
things which the Gentiles offered, they offered not to God. but to devils; not
that they intended their sacrifices to the honor of devils, but because this
was indeed, in the event, an honoring of Satan* whose suggestions they rather
followed then the will of God. So Psalm. 107.19. the Israelites are said to have
worshipped the molten image, not that their intention rested in the Image, as
Exodus 32.5. but because all this worship intended to be conveyed unto God by
the image, fell back upon the image; God utterly rejecting such a worship from
acceptance, which he had so often forbidden by his precept.

Now this sense standing (as I see not how it disagrees from the rule of faith,
or is impertinent to the Text) affords this observation.

That the worship intended to God by an image, Cor. 10.20. Exodus 32.4 5.
understand this, as before, not of the intention of the worshipper, but of the
event.

Here then are the Papists justly charged with as gross Idolatry, as ever the
heathen practiced; that worship images of God, and Saints, though not
intentionally, yet in the event with the worship due to God alone.

Many large disputes, and queries they have concerning the kind, and degree of
worship that is due to holy images: some of them resolving fool wisely, that
images are to be worshipped with the same worship that is due to the president;
others, thinking that some thing to gross, concluding, that this is to be
understood improperly, by way of concomitance only. It were long to reckon up
all their fooleries in this kind. Alas, that such wits should be so occupied?
and that there were not some good Josiah amongst them, by axes and hammers to
put end to such heathenish reasonings. Read Isay 30.22. and thou shall see
what honor is due to such trash. Their common excuse is sufficiently removed
by that which has been said in the former question.

Now for their worship of Images they have these reasons; first, that they are
signs of holy things, and are for their relation to God to be worshipped. Ans.
But I demand, by whose institution come they to be signs of holy things, and
what is the foundation of this revelation? if by humane appointment only, they
will never be able to prove that man can give to any thing such a revelation,
or ordain a sign, thus to signify a holy thing, or to bind us to such
reverence of signs by man ordained. And for divine institution, which alone
has power to consecrate signs to such holy significations, when they shall
show it us out of the scriptures, we will entertain their images with that
reverent esteem, and regardfulnesse in using, as is due to such ordinances,
but yet will ever be far from religious adoration of them.

Secondly, they affirm that God by images has wrought miracles, thereby to
procure honor unto them. Ans. Whether God wrought miracles to procure them
honor, or the devil maruels to delude Idolaters, is hard for Papists to
determine.

But first we answer that they were mira non miracula, maruels not miracles
many of them, that God permitted to be wrought, at or by them: strange things
perhaps many, that filled the poor people with wonderment, whilst they knew
not the cunning and power of Satan.

Secondly if miracles, yet not to procure them honor, but to prove our
obedience, did the Lord permit them. See Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. miracles are not
always seals of truth; but sometimes trials of loyalty.

Thirdly, they reason a pari, or simili: man is worthy of veneration because he
is the image of God; therefore other images also because they are images of
Christ, or Saints, etc. Ans. To this I answer; that images made by man to
represent God, or his Christ, are but equiuocally called images of God and
Christ. Indeed we honor man as the image of God with civil honor, because
God has so commanded us: secondly, and has given to men venerable gifts of
holiness, and righteousness, that make them honorable; and when they can show
either GOD to command worship of their images, or demonstrate such charecters
of Divine excellencies in them as GOD has placed in man, we will also give
them their due reverence.

Their fourth argument is, a paribus in contrarijs. Images are capable of
infamy, and reproach, therefore also of honor, and worship; which argument
some utter thus, the contempt done to the image of GOD and his Christ redounds
to God, and Christ: Ergo, the honor done to their images is done to them. Ans.
Our Divines fitly answer that it follows not: neither are those contraries
paria: for it suffices to the dishonouring of God that there be an evil
affection, or intention; but a good intention is not sufficient to the
honoring of God, except the means as well as the meaning be prescribed of God.

Their other arguments are frivolous, and not worth the naming: for what is it
to prescribe in error? And what though evil men have oppugned images, and
good men reverenced them? for neither did the one oppugn, as they were evil;
neither were the other good so far as ^hey defended them. That last argument
from the unfortunate end of those that have opposed, and the happiness of
those that have maintained them, has an apparent mistaking of no cause for a
cause; for neither were these plagued for opposing, nor those blessed for
maintaining images.

Now I conclude this whole place with that saying of Lactantius de origin:
error. lib. 2. cap. 2. where having at large disputed against the folly of
Image-making, and worship, he concludes: Foolish men as they are, they consider
not nor understand, that if their images had sense, or motion, they would of
their own accord worship men by whom they were polished; which, had they not
been fashioned and brought into shape by man, had still been either incult and
horride stones, or unshapen and rude matter.

Psalm. 106.19. etc. partly through that bewitching which is in them when they
are clad as it were with Divine representations: partly through Gods just
judgment, giving men over to blind dotage, because of their first declining
from his will.



But shall we hear their reasons why they must be placed in our temples;
forsooth Solomon erected Cherubims in the temple. Ans. Yet placed he them out
of the sight of the people, in the holy of holies: secondly, had Gods special
warrant.

Secondly, they reason from conueniencie; what meeter places for holy images,
then holy places? besides that, they are an ornament to the Temple, and withal
a mean to keep our minds from vain by-thoughts, and wandering imaginations.
Ans.

To the first: if they were indeed holy by Gods ordinance it were somewhat: But
now being but as they are men's devises, and found in-experience to be occasions
of Idolatry, what more unmeet place then the Temple for an Image? whereas the
very reverence of the place wins it too much esteem with superstitious minds.

To the second: that Temples should be decently kept, and moderately adorned,
we deny not; but hold such trash the vnmeetest deckings: and as for images
abused to idolatry, we justly count them rather blemishes then ornaments to
our Churches; and may truly say of them, as Hezekias of the like to the
Levites; carry forth this filthiness out of the Sanctuary. 2 Par. 29.5.

To the third: that they are means rather to occasion, then to prevent
wanderings: the occupying of the outward sense, is in experience the
abalienation of the mind; which made the Lacedaemonians permit no picture in
their Senate house, least by beholding thereof, the minds of their Counsailors
should be distracted from the present consultations. And I wish men for
preventing of wandering in prayers, first to labor for feeling of wants, which
they would have supplied. 1 Reg. 8.38. Secondly, duly to consider in whose
presence they stand. Acts 10.33. these they shall find better stays from
wandering, then all other self devised means whatsoever. I have dwelt
something long in these controversies; but now proceed to that that follows.

Which is God blessed for ever, Amen.] These words, are diversely construed with
the former; some thus conceive them, as importing the disappointing of that
inconvenience, to which the nature of these Idolatrous acts tended: as if he
should say, notwithstanding, all this sacrilege committed by these Idolatrous
Gentiles, yet continued the Lord in his blessed and happy estate: and so it is
a truth; that no impiety of man can really rob GOD of his honor, or impeach
his blessedness: And if any shall say, why does he then complain. Ans.
Because he measures impiety according to the intention of the doer, and
nature of the fact, not after the event, which by his power he disappoints.

Some thus understand them as a speech of Paul's zealous affection, occasioned
by mention of that dishonor the Gentiles labored to fasten on the majesty of
God.

I rather think that they are a short reprehension of the Gentiles Idolatry,
as if he should say, they worshipped the creature, passing by the Creator: to
whom alone all praises, and honor by just right appertains, so Iunius
interprets out of the Syri^ke: it would be too long, and perhaps impertinent,
to insist on that common place; this only I wish, that hereto we may all
heartily subscribe, and say Amen, both in affection, and practice.

Verse 26 For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their
women did change the natural use into that which is against nature.

Verse 27. And likewise also the men left the natural use of the woman, and
burned in their lust one toward another, and man with man wrought filthiness,
and received in themselves such recompense of their error, as was meet.


THere now follows the increase of their punishment spiritual; as they grew
more and more corrupt in the worship of GOD: so by Gods just judgment, much
more filthy in their conversation: changing the very course of nature in
their uncleanness. This foul abominable filthiness was one of those crying
sins of Sodom. See Genesis 19.5. and is therefore of Divines called Sodomie.
How frequent the Gentiles were herein, who so reads their poets, many of them,
Paederastes, and other histories of the heathen, as Suetonius in Nerone, shall
easily perceive.

But hence let us observe, how as man increases transgression: so does God
vengeance; Leuit. 26. per totum. Spiritual, 2 Timothy 3.13. Psalm. 69.27.
Eternal: Mat. 11. Romans 2.5.

And let it be our warning, how we go about to provoke the eyes of the Lords
glory. Heb. 10.31.
especially when we walk stubbornly against him, and refuse to be reformed by
his lighter corrections. Leuit. 26 23.24.

Apoc. 22.11.

Job. 11.12.
And no marvel, since man in his nature is borne as a wild ass colt,
headstrong in wickedness; but where GOD by grace pleases to restrain: what
marvel then, the bridle removed, if we run headlong into all profaneness?

2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2.
Again, what other thing can be hoped when a man is wholly given up to the
power of Satan? our proverb is, he must needs go that the devil drives;
and what wickedness will he make conscience of, in whom the prince of the
world reigns? such is the state of every man forsaken of God.

Cain, Judas, Achitophels ungodly lives, and discomfortable ends: I warrant you
say they? And do you think us such wretches? It calls to mind the speech of
Hazael; to whom when the Prophet weepingly foretold with what merciless
cruelty he should use the people of God, not sparing the women with child,
nor the Infants that hung on the breast: 2 Reg. 8.12.13.
Is thy servant a dog (says he) that I should do this great thing? think
thou me so beast-like savage, that I should do these things? yet accordingly
it fell out, God giving him up to the power of Satan. Alas men know not the
viciousnes of their own deceitful hearts, that thus speak.

Secondly, me thinks well weighing this fearful estate, I cannot but pray
GOD of all judgments to keep me from this; the giving me over to mine own
hearts lusts. If GOD should give me the option, to choose the torments of hell,
with hope to recover his gracious favor, or thus utterly forsake me of his
grace, and leave me to mine own counsels; I would wish rather hell torments
with expectation of deliverance, then this giving up to the lusts of mine own
heart.

Signs of this fearful estate are these.

First, when GOD curses the means of reformation unto us, so that we are not
bettered by them. Heb. 6.8. Isay 6.

Secondly, hardness of heart, Ephesians. 4.18.19.
when conscience cease to do her office, and that which accompanies it,
working wickedness with greediness.

Thirdly, when the Lord remoues, or denies means of reclaiming. Hos. 4.14.

Fourthly, to walk in our own counsels. Psalm. 81.12. Ezekiel. 24.13.

Whereas this giving up to these fearful sins, is called a just recompense
of their error: it follows that sins have sometimes the nature of
punishments. See Annotat. in verse 24. Neither does that which some object, any
way impeach the truth. They say they are not painful, therefore no
punishments: For first, not feeling makes them so much the more grievous; in
regard that they are hereby kept from seeking remedy: Secondly, that they are
not felt proceeds of the hardness of their heart, as when a limme of the
body is cut off, the member being first mortified by the Surgeon: Thirdly,
when God awakes their conscience by his judgments, they feel the horror
thereof; or if they die senseless, yet follows their unspeakable torture,
weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth.

And whereas again they say sins are voluntary, and therefore no
punishments. Ans. There are punishments voluntary, which men greedily run
into: as Saul to his Sword, Judas to the halter, etc.

The uses, see verse 24. this only annexed; we have many that in respect of
outward prosperity, because they come in no misfortune like other men, bless
themselves in their courses, and think that their very irreligion, or
superstition, pleases God; because the Lord so long forbeares inflicting of
outward plagues; whereas notwithstanding, they are given up to most vile
abominations in life, whoredom, drunkenness, covetousness, etc. which if
they had eyes to see, are heavier plagues, then all those outward misfortunes
that betide Gods children. How fond is this argument? I am free from
afflictions, therefore my ways please GOD. Yea, how certain is this
inference? I thrive in wickedness, therefore the Lord is angry with me. Ezech.
24.13. And this; sin dies in me, therefore GOD loves me; Sin grows in
me, therefore I am none of his.

Verse 28. For as they regarded not to acknowledge God, even so God delivered
them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.
THere yet follows another degree of this spiritual judgment, with the cause
of it; declaring also how equal this vengeance was, and how justly inflicted;
in the words observe these things: first, the sin, they regarded not the
knowledge of God: secondly, the punishment, giving up to a reprobate mind:
thirdly, the consequent of the punishment; doing of things uncomely; fullness
of all unrighteousness.

The sin is, that they regarded not to know God. These. 5.21. sometimes to
approve and allow, so here it imports a not allowing, or regarding, or making
that precious account of the knowledge of God: a grievous sin noted in men of
desperate impiety, Job 21.14. and the common sin of these times; wherein the
Lord has vouchsafed us so plentiful means of knowledge of himself, in the
face of Jesus Christ, by the Gospel.

Signs of it: first, to despise the means: Pro. 1. Ier. 32.33.

Secondly, not to preserve it being attained, by all holy means, hearing,
reading, meditation, conference, practice, prayer, etc.

Thirdly, wilfully to suppress, and choke it in us. Romans 1.18. 2 Pet. 3.5.

Fourthly, to prefer other vain speculations of our own, or other men's
devising* before what God reuealeth. Romans 21.22. Many other might be reckoned,
but these sufficiently convince our people as guilty of this sin. See we now
the punishment; God gave them up to a reprobate mind. This reprobate mind
some take actiuely, and thus interpret; a mind not so much reproved, as
reproving, or disallowing things to be allowed; approving things to be
reproved: which though it may be implied as a fruit of this reprobate mind,
yet I take it, is not principally, and first here meant. And to my remembrance
there is no use of these words (...) and (...), in this active sense, in any
Greek authentike Author.

This reprobate mind, I therefore interpret; a mind rejected, disallowed,
abhorred of GOD and good men; in respect of that blindness, vanity, impiety,
perverseness it abounds with all. We have an Epithet in our English something
near it; when we use to say of a man desperately froward, and malicious; that
he is a man of a devilish mind.

Such a mind has in it these detestable fruits: first, a disallowing of all
that good is; approving of all that is naught. Isay 5.20. Secondly, an
abolishment, or at least a great decay of those natural synterisis, that is,
principles of direction for Moral actions; which in some natural men are
means of much restraint from evil, provoking to good duties. Thirdly,
vncapablenesse of all good understanding, and knowledge. See Ier. 4.22.



Secondly, and let their harm teach us to beware, the like sin of little
esteeming the knowledge of the most high: least when we would know, God shut
our eyes, that we cannot see the things that concern our peace. Isay 6. etc.

How many of our people, too late bewail this; that they cannot now conceive
the plainest truths taught them in the plainest and most familiar manner. Isay
28. and cry out of themselves for neglecting, and despising instruction; but
all in vain?

I cannot here pass over this consideration: Ier. 24.26.28. Their bodies first
defiled; then their affections subiugated: Now their very minds forlorn of
all judgment, and justly rejected of the Lord. Compare also 1 Timothy 1.19.
Adultery how creepes it from the body to the affections bewitching them? Hos.
4.6. How then blindes the judgment; to think, and censure it but a trick of
youth? Drunkenness, what an inward thirst of the desire works it? and how
easily inclines it to judge it no worse then fellowship, yea, Isay 5.22.
so good as a point of manhood.

And let it be our caveat, how we admit even the least of bodily pollutions;
least by Gods judgment, our affections thereby be entangled, and our minds
darkened, our bodies they are part of Christ's purchase. 1 Cor. 6. should be
sacrifices unto GOD. Romans 12. weapons to fight the Lords battles against
unrighteousness. Romans 6.

But how frequent libertinisme is in this behalf, we see in ordinary
experience; whiles men with an Epicharmus like protestation, take liberty to
see, hear, practice bodily uncleanness; and all with this pretense of a good
heart, and clean soul to Godward. To see the impious fooleries of a Mass,
many hold it expedient; and to be present at Idolatrous services, with
reservation of conscience to God, how frequent is it in our beyond sea
travelers? little weigh they how speedy a passage the^r^ is from the eye to
the heart, and how soon our affections are bewitched with such garish
spectacles; and how GOD often punishes such fond curiosity with blindness, and
giving up to be ensnared.

Come we now to the consequents of this judgment: first, doing things not
comely nor convenient: secondly, fullness of all iniquity.

(...) implies two things. (...): Duty, and Decorum. And the meaning is, that
they ran wilfully into the grosest sins, contrary to all even natural
Duty, and Decorum; without regard to any thing that might beseem their age,
sex, condition of life, etc. not that any sin agrees with Duty or Decorum;
but that even corrupt nature, till it be infatuated and given over, has care
of some Decorum in transgressing; and holds some sins, at least in the manner
of committing, disgraceful, and detestable: As it is said of Scipio, when a
beautiful strumpet was tendered him to abuse himself with all, vellem,
inquit, si non essem Imperator. I would willingly, were it not unseemly for
the great place I am in.

Ephesians. 4.18.19. also Romans 1.26.27.

cherish in us that light both of nature and grace, that it pleases God to set
in us, that this reprobate mind come not upon us.

Verse 29. Being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit,
taking all things in the evil part, whisperers.

Verse 30. Backbiters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, boasters,
inuenters, of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant breakers, without natural affection, such as can never be appeased,
merciless.


THe other consequent, and fruit of a reprobate mind follows; and that is,
fulness of all unrighteousness; and even an ouerflowing of ungodliness,

Signs of this state, fullness of sin, and vacuitie of grace, these eminent in
many of our people: first, when without any reluctation at all, we yield to
suggestions of sin; Gal. 5.17.
for where there is any spark, or even the least seed of grace, there is a
lusting against the motions of sin that are in our members: secondly, delight
in doing evil: for grace disalowes those evils, to which violence of
temptation, and corruption draws. Romans 7.15. thirdly, 1 John 3.9.
an intermitted course of sinning. 2 Pet. 2.14. for where the seed of the
spirit is, there cannot be exercised a trade of evil doing. These things
applied, easily evidence this fearful judgment on many of our people.

Of all unrighteousness: that is, of all manner of unrighteousness, as Luke
11.42. Where the question may be, whether in every of the Gentiles all those
sins reigned? Ans. I take it no: if we speak of the external exercise of
them: but here Paul speaks of the Gentiles, as of one whole, and entire body;
wherein though every member were not tainted with every uncleanness, yet in
the whole body all those sins were found, or secondly of the generality of
them; or thirdly, even of most particulars, amongst whom, though there were
some restrained from the external practice of some vices, yet were the seeds
of all in all unmortified; no one as of conscience abstaining from any one
iniquity.

And this is the state of every man in his nature; no sin but reigns,
howsoever want of occasions, and grace restraining, keep some from practice of
some unrighteousness.

Now the Apostle goes on to declare this general, by enumeration of sundry
particulars. And in the forefront is placed whoredom. It were a needless
labor, to give instance of every of these in the Gentiles: and would be too
long to handle every of them at large; yet a little will not be amiss for the
better understanding of the nature of these vices. And that in this order;
first, their description shall be given: secondly their distinction by degrees,
or kinds: thirdly, their remedies: fourthly, reasons of disswasion.

Whoredom, or fornication largely taken, according to the commandment, is any
whatsoever breach of Chastity, and all that is contrary to that, which Paul
calls, the possessing of our vessel in holiness and honor. 1 These. 4.4.

And may thus be distinguished by degrees: It is either optatiue in the wish,
Mat. 5.28.
or desire of the heart, or occasional; whither may be referred lascivious
thoughts, gestures, spectacles, speeches, songs, dancings, etc. and that which
in this kind excels, being baudes to other men's lusts. Or practical; in
sundry degrees, with a man's self which some call Moli^tiem. 1 Cor. 6.9. with
others, of which are many degrees, First, simple fornication betwixt parties
unmarried, and vnbetrothed, either strumpets, or virgins: secondly, Adultery,
where the marriage bed is violated: thirdly, Incest, where the bands of
consanguinitie, or affinity, are violated: fourthly, lust against nature;
either where the course of nature, or the sex, or the kind is altered. All of
them ordinary amongst the Gentiles: and would God not too frequent amongst
Christians.

Remedies. First, to avoid the causes and means; as idleness, 2 Samuel 11.
Company, Genesis 39.10. Pro. 5.8. Excess of eating and drinking, Pro. 23.31.32.33.

Secondly, to use the remedy ordained of God, marriage society. 1 Cor. 7.2.

Thirdly, to delight in the love of our yoke fellow given us of God, Pro.
5.18.19.20.

Reasons of disswasion: Consider, first, the odiousness of the sin being
worse then theft, Pro. 6.31.32. Secondly, against our body, 1 Cor. 6.18.
Thirdly, God having provided so comfortable a remedy, Heb. 13.4.

Secondly, weigh the dangerous effects, and consequents; bringing judgments on
the body, consuming the strength, filling with rottennes, Pro. 5.11. on the
goods a consumption: Job. 31.12. on the name a blemish never to be done away,
Pro. 6.33. Withdrawing the heart from God, Hos. 4.11. hardly shaken off by
repentance: Eccl. 7.28. Pro. 22.14. and 23.27.28. hazarding to hell fire. 1
Cor. 6.10.11. Heb. 13.4. Apoc. 21.8.

(...), This our English renders, wickedness: which I take is not here so fit;
it being the purpose of the holy Ghost, to set down a particular vice. I take
it we may not unfitly translate according to the Etymon, troublesomenes, or a
desire to procure trouble, and molestation to another. In which respect also it
is given to Satan, the troubler of the Saints of God; called often (...), that
troublesome one, (...). How full every Congregation is of such absurd, and
troublesome men. 2 These. 3.2. every painful Ministers experience witnesses.

Reasons of diswasion; first, it conformes to Satan; secondly, crosses the
very end of creation, and the holy ordinance of Magistracy, 1 Timothy 2.2.
thirdly, cannot stand with grace to delight in it; prophesied of the Church of
God, that all such cruel, and barbarous affections should be reformed in Gods
children; and that in the mountain of Gods holiness should be peace. See Isay
11.6.7.8.9.

(...): We may thus describe; an inordinate desire of having more wealth then
the Lord allots us.

Inordinatenesse of desiring includes these things: first, preposterousnesse,
when wealth is principally, and in the first place desired. Mat. 6.33.
secondly, Irregularitie, when not ruled by the word of God, which teaches to
submit our wills to Gods, to use means only prescribed and to depend on GOD
for the blessing: thirdly over eagerness of pursuing: fourthly, lack of
reference to the right end; supply of our own, and others wants. Ephesians. 4 28.
promoting of Gods glory.

The object is, wealth, 1 Timothy 6.10. and more specially, wealth in greater
measure then God allots.

Now Gods allotment is thus to be measured: first, by our own necessities:
secondly the means affoorded.

Necessity is also to be weighed: first, according to our persons: secondly,
according to our callings and states of life.

Those things are said to be necessary to our persons, which are requisite to
the maintaining of the body, in health, strength, cheerefulnes, for the better
performing of our general, and particular callings. And this also to be
weighed according to difference of persons. Some man's complexion, and state of
body requires more then others; as in experience we see, the hardest, and
coursest fare, by Gods blessing, preserues some in fullness of strength, and
perfection of health: others, in respect of greater tenderness, not able to
maintain their bodies in honor, without better and more dainty provision.
See 1. Tim. 5.23.

Necessary in respect of our states, and conditions of life those things are
said to be, that our several callings require for their performance, so that
is but necessary for a master of a family, that is superfluous for a lone
man, but necessary for a Magistrate, that is, sometimes superfluous for a
private man. So of a Minister, etc. in respect of those duties the Lord
requires of him, as hospitality: 1 Timothy 3.2. attendance unto reading, 1 Timothy
4.16.

Yea, this may be extended as well to future as to present necessities. 1 Timothy
5.8. 2 Cor. 12.14.

The second thing, whereby we may judge of the Lords allotment, is the lawful
means that the Lord affoords, and offers unto us in the course of his
providence; reaching unto us, as Joseph to Benjamin, a double portion, in
respect of our brethren; which is lawful for us thankefully to accept and
embrace. But whatsoever is more then these, falls justly under the censure of
covetousness.

Kinds of covetousness these: first, inordinate love of riches: 1 (...). 6 1
and esteeming of them above their value: the common covetousness of the poorer
sort, that carr^ so high an account of wealth, that they think them only
happy that have it; themselves miserable because they want it.

Euidenced by these signs: first, coffeehouse at our present state Heb.
1^.5. whence those speeches why had not God made me rich, etc.

Remedies: First, labor to be persuaded that thine own state is best for
thee, as thou can not but judge, if thou acknowledge God to be a father unto
thee. Mat. 6.32.

Secondly, to consider thine own small or no deseruings. Genesis 32.^0.

A second sign of it: Envy at the greater plenty of others, as we think,
less deserving then our selves.

Remedies. First, to consider, that it pleases the Lord thus to dispense his
blessings; let not our eye be evil, because his is good: he may do with his
own what seems him good. Mat. 20.15.

Secondly, to remember, that howsoever the Lord has scanted thee in the things
of this life, yet has he given thee pledges of a better inheritance, denied
unto many wealthy. Pro. 29.15.

Thirdly, view but how the wealth of a rich man is snare unto him; withdrawing
his heart from GOD, made instruments of cruelty, and injustice; the seeds of
which sins are in thy bosom, and would perhaps bud forth in thee, were it
not that the Lord depriueth thee of occasions.

A third sign; a will, and settled purpose to be rich: 1 Timothy 6.9. Pro. 28.20.
Whence follows all evils, noisome, and pernicious lusts Ibid. 1 Timothy 6.9.10.
that drown in destruction.

A second kind of Covetousness is, the greedy scraping together of the things
of this life. And that either of necessaries or of superfluities.

Of necessaries; for even in seeking things necessary there may be covetousness:
while they are over greedily pursued; and this also incident to the poorer
sort; then whom, none more having: signs of it* first, neglecting the best
duties for the things of this life.

Secondly, use of ungodly means for supply of wants.

See plentiful reasons against it. Mat, 6. from verse 19. to the end. See also
the promise. Heb. 13.5.6.

Of superfluities: which insatiable desire the Lord every where complains of
by his Prophets.

Remedies of it: first see the inconveniences, super-abundance brings with it:
disquieting the mind: See Eccl. 5.11. distracting from better cares; choking
the seed of the word. Mat. 13.

Secondly, consider the vanity, in two things: first, uncertainty. 1 Timothy
6.1^. Mat. 6.19. unprofitableness, and vnauaileablenesse either to decline
wrath, or procure salvation. Luke 12.15, 20. Proverbs 11.4. Mat. 16.26.

Thirdly, weigh the large reckoning that is behind, as Luke 12.48 hitherto
also may that clause of the parable be applied.

The fourth, and best remedy, to make God in Christ thy portion; as Paul,
Phil. 3.8.9. Confer Col. 3.2.

A third sort of covetousness there is, in the too near keeping of that we
have gotten, we may term it in the wise man's phrase, sparing more then is
meet.

And it is of two sorts; first of men that spare from their own necessary
comfort; as Solomon complains of such. Eccl. 1.2. Drudges to the world, slaves
to their pelf; not beteeming to themselves a good meals meat; more homely in
diet, rustie, and sordide in their attire, then the poorest snake, that has
nothing but his labor to maintain himself withal.

Another of them, that pamper their own bellies with the daintiest, cloth
them with the most gorgeous; but spare not their very fragments to those that
need. See Luke 16.19. etc.

To remedy this evil, good to consider: first, that we are but Stewards whom
God has entrusted with this plenty, to distribute as the necessities of our
brethren shall require.

Secondly, to behold the reward of benificence; in this life, in our selves,
and our posterity. Psalm. 37.25.26. in the life to come: Luke 16.9. Mat. 25.
etc.

Thirdly, that we shall leave the things behind us. 1 Timothy 6.7. the comfort of
well using them may follow us: Apoc. 14 13. but it is certain, says the
Apostle, we shall not carry any of the things with us.

I have the longer insisted in this vice, because I see it is one of the common
sins of the land; insomuch that the complaint of the Prophet: Ier. 6.13. may
justly be taken up of us; from the least of us even to the greatest, every one
is given to covetousness; Priests, and Prophets, Princes, and People swollen
with this incurable Dropsy: and insatiable thirst after the things of this
life.

But proceed we with more brevity to those that follow.

(...): We read Maliciousness; but that I take it is comprised under envy
next following. And therefore I think it may better be rendered
mischieuousnesse. A hateful disposition of men to work the spoil, and utter
overthrow one of another.

Now I cannot but observe, Covetousness, and Mischieuousnesse; perhaps
purposely to intimate that they commonly meet in the same subject, Solomon Pro.
1.19. describing the courses of a Covetous man; thus expresses them; such are
the ways of a man greedy of gain, he would take away the life from the
owners thereof, and S. Paul makes it the root of all evils. 1 Timothy 6.10. It
might be exemplified in Achab, and Judas, if need were; but very experience
abundantly shows, that the very mercies of the Covetous are too too cruel,
not pitying wife, nor children, etc. ruinating whole families without
compassion, as we see in the practice of greedy usurers, and oppressors.

And it may teach us to fly these things, Paul exhorts: 1 Timothy 6.11. to look
upon Covetousness, and beware of it. Luke 12.15. As for other reasons maine
and many, so for the mischievous practices it inclines unto. No sin so
barbarous as Covetousness. And let us beware how it gets ground on us. Satan
many times conueies it into us by holy pretenses; such as this; what good a man
may do in relief of the poor, defense of the truth, if greater abundance
were present. And though I simply condemn not desire to increase our state
present, with such sincere reference and respect to those ends, and submission
to Gods will; yet let us beware how by such colors, colored covetousness
creep upon us.

Sincerity of such desires for such ends, may thus be discerned in our selves,
and others; if there be a care to use the little present, so as we pretend to
use the more desired. See Luke 16.10.

Secondly, again it should warn us, Many a colored pretense thou shall
hear from such, how glad they are that they have to pleasure us in our need;
and all but colors for cruelt^e. See Psalm. 10.9.10. as the cruel practice of
usurious men abundantly every day witnesses.

Now as touching this mischievous disposition, Paul has described it, Romans
3.16. and examples are plentiful amongst our selves; malice prevailing: for
remedy consider.

First, the end of our creation, as principally to glorify our God, so also to
be helpful each to other, so that what the Lord said of woman at her creation,
should be verified of every man; to be helps each to other. Genesis 2.17. and the
Lord for this end, has knit us together in a bond of mutual necessity, that
conscience thereof might prevent this mischieuousnes.

Secondly, the example of our heavenly Father, doing good to his very enemies,
Mat. 5.45. that no man might make enmity a color for mischief.

The next is Envy, which may thus be described; discontentednesse at another
man's good, and prosperous estate; and has these three principal branches.

First, grief at the good things they enjoy, whether temporal or spiritual.
Exempl. Cain, Genesis 4.5. etc.

Remedies: first, for temporal things wherein others excel us, or are equal
with us, to abate the over good conceit we carry of them. A man that esteems
them as Solomon did, vanity, and nothing but vanity, never enuies at another
man's having of them.

Secondly, to place our affections on things, that may equally be enjoyed,
without imparing a^es plenty: for this shall be found one cause of envy, a
conceit that another having is cause of our want, or of having in less
measure then we desire. Thus is it not in heavenly riches.

Thirdly, to consider the original of this, as we judge it, unequal
distribution, which is the will, and good pleasure of GOD, that has full power
to do with these things what himself pleases, Mat. 20.15.

Fourthly, Gal. 5. ver. 26. To root out pride, and over weening conceit of our
own worth; seldom see you an humble man envious, or an envious man humble.

The second branch is, rejoicing at others evils, Pro. 17.5. a barbarous vice;
complained of often by the Prophet David. See Psalm. 69. etc.

Remedies: first, consider how odious it is in Gods sight, often provoking him
to turn his wrath from the afflicted, to the triumpher, Pro. 24.17 18.

Secondly, see the contrary practice of the Saints. 2 Samuel 1. Psalm. 35.15. And
surely a man thus barbarously affected euidenceth sufficiently his graceless
heart.

The third branch, is incommunication, Inuidia Canina: fitly to our proverb,
of the dog in the manger.

Remedies: first, consider the end of all gifts bestowed on thee; given they
are or lent thee rather of God, for the good of others. 1 Cor. 12.7.

Secondly, the practice of our heavenly Father, delighting in communicating
himself and his blessedness unto us.

To this might be added that other; desire to have all good things enclosed
unto our selves: See Number. 11.28.29.

Other reasons against envy in general; of all vices most unprofitable:
having in it none either profit, or pleasure. The iustest of all vices, says
an ancient Divine; bringing with it his own vengeance. See Pro. 14.30. Seneca
wishes them none other plague, but that they had eyes to see the good state of
all men.

Murder, an ordinary companion of envy; therefore coupled together also, Gal.
^.21. and how often meet they in one person? See Genesis 4 5.8. Genesis 37.4.11.18.
Mat. 2^.18. etc.



Murder is the unlawful taking away of a man's life.

Unlawful: for their is a lawful shedding of blood, first ex iusta causa,
when the offense deserves death. Genesis 9.6. et alibi: secondly, ex ordinata
potestate: such as the magistrate, soldier, executioner has: thirdly, iusto
ordine, by due proceeding, conviction ever going before execution: fourthly,
Recto animo: for even a Magistrate inflicting death deserved by just
proceeding, yet may be a murderer, adiudging to death not ex amore iustitiae;
but libi^ine vindictae. These all concurring, make killing lawful; any one
wanting lays crime of murder upon us.

Taking away of life: life is either natural, or spiritual: here we have to
speak of murder committed about life Natural.

From man. This clause added against the Manichees error, that permitted not
unto men the slaying of beasts for necessary use, no nor cutting of herbs at
length; because they had life, against which. See Gen 9.3.

Now murder as it is referred to life natural, may thus be distinguished,
according to the several degrees, as also instruments or subjects of it.

One is committed in the heart by Anger. Hatred.


Anger is thus distinguished by the learned; one is ira per Zelum, Anger rising
from discreet zeal; and is nothing else but an holy indignation at our own, 2
Cor. 7.11. or other men's sins, Exodus 32.19. This a gracious affection.
Another per vindictam; flowing from, and tending to unjust revenge; of which
three sorts, Acuta, sharp Anger, soon raised, soon calmed: Amara, bitter
Anger, hardly, and not without some longer respite appeased: thirdly, Grauis,
sore Anger, not allayed without requital, and retaliation of wrongs.

Against it are these reasons: first, it is a note of folly, Ec. 7.11.
secondly, hinders duties Isa^ 1.20. from performance: thirdly, marreth the
best duties, and makes them unacceptable, 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Pet. 2.1.2. etc.

From this Anger continued, arises another degree of murder in the heart,
hatred of our brethren. See 1 Ioh. 3.15

A second degree of murder is in the countenance and gesture, Mat. 5.22. Acts
7.34.

A third in the tongues, by Derision, Mat. 5. 2 Reg. 6. Contumelious railing. 2 Samuel 16. Malediction, or cursing.


A fourth committed by the hand; which has also several degrees, according to
the degrees of life Natural, which are; first, cheerefulnes of the heart.
Examples, see Ezech. 13.22. Genesis 27.46. Pro. 17.^2.

Secondly, soundness and perfection of the body; when every member is
maintained without hurt. Guilty hereof, Alehouse soldiers; rigorous
masters, and parents, maiming their servants and children, or dulling their
senses by immoderate punishment.

Thirdly, health of body: thus by drunkenness, etc. murder is committed; by
too much afflicting; and macerating of the body by abstinence, etc. to the
impeaching of health.

Fourthly, that proceeds to the seuering of the soul from the body, whether
by omitting of duties of mercy, or by laying violent hands to deprive of life.

A sin odious and monstrous in Nature: the Lord testifies his detestation
hereof: first, by miraculous discoueries: secondly, horror of conscience, Genesis
4. thirdly, special vengeance; seldom die such a dry death; fourthly,
punishing whole Kingdoms where it it is not punished. Numb. 35.33. and God
grant the impunitie of this sin amongst us, draw not down Gods fierce wrath
upon us. See Numb. 35.31.32.33.

Debate: that is unlawful strife, and contention: and may be distinguished by
the object into Ecclesiastical, and civil. The first, which is about matters
of religion; either principal, or inferior; of both sorts whereof we have
had, and still have lamentable experience in our own Church: opening the
mouths of our adversaries to speak evil, and occasioning the weak to many
distractions, and doubtfulnes of judgment: whereof more hereafter.

Civil about the things of this life, either without law, or where law is made
the instrument of our contentions. 1 Cor. 6.

Causes whereof are: first pride; Pro. 13.10. Phil. 2.3. whiles every man makes
an Idol of himself, and thinks it his disgrace, to pass by an injury, or
to be the first that yields in a contention.

Secondly, over precious account of the things of this life.

Remedies: first to root out pride, Phil. 2.3. secondly, to esteem of the
things of this life no better then they deserve: thirdly, to keep us within
compass of our own callings, and diligent employment thereof, 1 These.
4.10.11. fourthly, to contend where we ought to contend: first, for God, and
his truth, Psalm. 139.21. Iud. 4. secondly, against our own corruptions, Romans
7. 1 Cor. 9.27. thirdly, to excel in the graces of Gods spirit. 1 Cor. 14.1.
Mat. 11.12.

Reasons against it: first, voice of nature; man being borne the most peaceable
of all creatures, without weapon either of offense, or defense: secondly, our
near conjunction in one brotherhoode, Genesis 13. Acts 7. in one body, Ephesians. 4.
1 Cor. 12. thirdly, necessities each of others, 1 Cor. 12 fourthly, benefit of
the contrary. Psalm. 133. per totum. fifthly illoriginall, Iam. 3. sixthly,
scandal to the truth, 1 Cor. 6. seauenthly, property of aliens, Romans 2.

Deceit: to say nothing of spiritual guile, hypocrisy in religion, because
impertinent to this place; that here spoken of is either more largely taken,
for that which we may term double, or hollow-heartednesse, and dissimulation;
whereof read Ier. 9.4.5. And is opposed to open heartedness, and plain
dealing: or else more strictly for that which is used in matters of contract;
whether by the seller or buyer: by the seller either circa speciem; when one
thing is sold for another, suppose lead for pewter; water for wine; or about
the quantity; whether in weight, number, or measure, Leuit. 19.35. Deuteronomy 25.14.
or about the quality, when bad for good, the defects concealed; with that
profane protestation, caveat empt^r, beware the buyer.

By the buyer, when abusing the simplicity of the seller, he vilifies the
thing bought beneath the worth, whereof see Pro. 20.14.

Against all these the scripture every where plentifully deals, by showing
our near conjunction, 1 These. 4.5. certainety of Gods wrath, Ibid. and Mic.
6.11. instabilitie of wealth so gotten, Job. 20.15. And that maxim in nature
even corrupted; what thou would not have done to thee, that do not thou to
another.

(...), Malignitie; well rendered by our translation after the ancient
description, taking all things in the worser part.

Plutarch taxes this vice in Heroditus, and withal excellently sets out the
nature of it in these acts, proceeding from this vicious habit: first, when a
man relating any evil action of another, uses harder terms then the quality
of the fact requires.

Secondly, when a man intrudes himself into mention of things faulty: which he
might with better manners, and more honesty conceal.

Thirdly, when having just occasion to speak of a man's due commendation he
enuiouslie suppresseth it.

Fourthly, when things are doubtful in themselves, or in their report, to
embrace the worst.

Fifthly, when facts in their nature good, are depraved by supposall of
sinister, and bad intentions.

It is the opposite of that which we call ^ander; inclining to interpret
things doubtful the better way.

Causes of it: first a vicious mind in the man's self that uses it, Mat.
12.34.

Secondly, want of love to the party undergoing our censure., 1 Cor. 13.5.

Thirdly, a fond conceit that another cannot have that grace which our selves
want.

Whisperers, betwixt whispering, and backbiting these are two differences.

They differ: first in modo: one being privy, the other open defamation.

Secondly, in the extent of the end; a whisperers end is to disgrace to some
one well conceited of us, to the end to work us out of their beneuelous
affection; a backbiter aims at our general disgrace amongst whomsoever.

Whispering then may thus be described: privy defamation of our brother to the
end to dissolve the bond of amity, and work vari^nce betwixt men at one. See
Psalm. 101.5. Pro. 6.19. and 26.20.22. these are the firebrands of contention.
Pro. 26.20.2. and the very bane of society: rife in all places: See examples,
Haman, Est. 3.8. Do^g, etc.

Remedies: first, an Angry countenance, Pro. 25.23. secondly, banish them from
your company, Psalm. 101.3.5. Leuit. 19.16. thirdly, reveal their practice.

Backbiters.] Backbiting is a public speaking evil of our absent brother,
for the impayring of his credit. And is either in respect of good things, or in
regard of evil.

That which is in good things has three degrees: first, deprauing of a good
action by supposing a sinister intention.

Secondly, lessening the graces, and commendable parts of others; to diminish
our own is humility; but to clip another due praise is envy. See 2 Cor.
8.1.2.3.4. etc.

Thirdly, denial of those good things we know to be in another, love
willingly takes notice of the least; and grace will hunt after occasions to
praise God in his gifts bestowed on others.

In respect of evils; that also has three branches: first, publishing their
secret slips, which in charity we ought to conceal, and that, either without
all mention of their virtues; or else with commemoration of other their good
parts, and pretense of sorrow for their faults; in this or the like manner, a
man of good parts, fair conditioned, kind to his friend; it is pity on him
he has his fault, something covetous, etc.

Secondly, by increasing, and making their evils worse then they are, beams of
motes, mountains of mole-hils: humility aggrauates its own sins, to
magnify Gods mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13.14.15. but charity lesseneth the sins of
others, by all circumstances, Acts 3.1^.

Thirdly, by imposing false crimes, properly called slander.

Reasons against it: first, the detriment it brings is great, robbing a man of
the chief treasure, a good name, Pro. 22 1. Eccl. 7.3.

Secondly, scarcely admits any sound restitution; crimes even unjust ever
leaving a skarre upon our good name.

(...). Our translator, and generally all new interpreters, render haters of
God. The word has a passive termination; and signifies properly hated of God.
Now though I dislike not the judgment of the new, knowing that words passive
are sometimes actiuely used, as 2 Pet. 1.3. And specially considering that the
Apostle here entendeth a Catalogue of the Gentiles sins; yet it shall not be
amiss to speak in a word or two of the proper signification of the word.

Hated of God.] Gods hatred is of two sorts, eternal before time including
these two acts: first, a purpose not to show kindness: secondly, a designing
to evil, Romans 9 11. Temporal in time; and is nothing but the dislike, and
detestation of men in respect of their sins. Euidenced by these signs: first,
denial of saving grace and means thereof.

Or secondly, not blessing means unto them: Isay 6. Thirdly, depriuall even of
common graces, permitting to the power of Satan, and serving of a man's own
corrupt heart. Fourthly, inflicting of temporal plagues, as curses, and
beginnings of eternal woe after to be inflicted.

Taking it actiuely it implies that hatred that men carry to the Divine
Majesty, where school men usually question, whether it be possible for a man
to hate God, that is the chief good, and that has in him all amiable
excellencies. To which their answer is, that God apprehended in his essence,
or immanent actions, or gracious properties is not hated of any. But
apprehended as a judge, and auenger of disobedience so he is hated of profane
ungodly men.

Signs of it best assigned by the contrary tokens of love; for it is true he
that is not with God, is against him; he that loves him not, hates him.

First, not to love his presence, either in the heart by his spirit, or in the
congregation by his word, or in his coming to judgment.

Secondly, to abhor cogitation and thought of God, Psalm. 10.

Thirdly, to hate the friends of God, that is, those that love him.

(...): that is, contumeliously, or insolently injurious. Unto this head may be
referred all wrongs done to our goods, good name, persons. But briefly it
shall suffice to speak of the several kinds, and manners of doing wrong,
which though they may be applied to all kind of wrongs, yet show themselves
especially in wrongs done in respect of temporal goods. And this is done
principally three ways. First, by detayning of dues: Pro. 3.27. Compare Iam.
5.4. where it is amplified by a circumstance of the persons to whom it is done,
and made in that case a crying sin. See also Psalm. 37.21.

Secondly, by exaction of that is not due. Example see 1 Samuel 2.13.14 etc. as
in fees at this day, as for bare forbearing of money, or wares: so selling time.

Thirdly, by violent rapine, or taking away, what is another man's. See Mic.
2.2. God is an auenger of all such things, 1 These. 4.5.

(...). Proud.] Pride may be thus briefly described: the inordinate love, and
admiration of our own supposed, or real excellencies.

And bewraies it self by these evidences: first, presumptuous aduenturing
things beyond our measure, and compass, Romans 12.3.

Secondly, a disdain and contempt of others in comparison o^ our selves, 1
Cor. 8.1.2.

Thirdly, coffeehouse at other men's advancement above our selves, Est. 5.13.

Fourthly, grief at our own little respect, and esteem amongst men, Est.
3.5. and 5.9.

Fifthly, gate, gesture, looks, apparel, etc. evidence it, See Isay 3.16.

Sixthly, (...); love to be talking of our own good things; which Paul calls
boasting, etc. Let another man praise thee says Solomon, not thy self, Pro.
27.2.

Seauenthly, Ambition; hunting after honor, and the like, 3 John 9.

Remedies of it: first, we have nothing but what we have received, 1 Cor.
4.7. and that not of merit but of free grace, Romans 11.35. 1 Cor. 15.10.

Secondly, labor to be acquainted with thine own imperfections, and
specially with thy sins.

Thirdly, God crosses the attempts of the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5.6. and purposely
sets himself to hinder affected exaltation. Honor says one is like your
shadow; the more you run after it, the faster it runs from you: like the
Crocodile, insequentes fugit, fugientes pre^sequitur.

Fourthly, it disgraceth all graces; as humility adornes them, etc.

Boasters. Boasting the daughter of Pride. It is of two sorts: one for
necessary defense; the other of vain ostentation. For necessary defense not
unlawful; used by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11. and 10. his own good name and
edification of the Church, requiring a modest commemoration of his own good
parts, and deserved respect with the Church of GOD. Yet withal observe in this
boasting, Apostolic modesty and humility: first he comes not to it but as
it were constrained: 2 Cor. 12.11. Secondly, in things of the greatest
admiration, speaks of himself in the third person, 2 Cor. 12.2.3. Thirdly,
chooses his infirmities: that is, afflictions to boast of: verse 9. Fourthly,
acknowledges his own weakness, and magnifieth the grace of God, verse 7.8.9.

There is another kind of boasting, which is for vain ostentation, and this
is that the Apostle here notes: sundry sorts of it might be reckoned up; these
two shall suffice as the principal, first, of our good things that we have, or
have done, to the end that we may seem some great men amongst our brethren,
when we think all lost that others know not. See Mat. 6. if we give alms,
the trumpet must sound it out, etc, as if our best deeds were more then
duty; but such says Christ, have their reward.

Another is of our evils, or sins: as Ier. 11.15, Pro. 2.14. to which degree
of wickedness I know not what can be added. Bernard, or he, whosoever was
Author of that Treatise de Conscientia, under his name, has excellently
expressed the degrees of sinning: first, when a man that has been accustomed
to well doing, any thing grieuouslie sins, the burden thereof seems to be
intolerable unto him, that he seems even to go down to hell alive; in a
little process of time of importable, it is made but heavy; of heavy, it
becomes light; of lightsome, delightsome; of delightsome, desirable; of
desirable, customary; of customary, excusable; of excusable, defensible; of
defensible, matter of boasting; to this height can nothing be added. Nothing,
says Bernard, so much exasperateth the majesty of that dreadful Judge as to
sin and securely to sin, and to boast of vices as if they were virtues. And
yet how frequ^nt examples hereof are every where occurrent? The Adulterer
numbers up the tale of his strumpets, or virgins, with whom he has defiled
himself; the drunkard his dozens, and how many he has drunk under the
table. Shameless wretches, glorying in their shame, Phil. 3.19. should not the
Lord be avenged of such pe ple? Ier. 5. their end is damnation. P^il. 3.19.

Inuenters of evil things: whether we refer this to evils of pain, or
evils of sin, we may find examples thereof in heathen: I would they were
not also amongst Christians.

Phalaris propounded a reward to him, that could devise a new kind of torment;
and what exquisite torments the ten bloody persecuting Emperors devised for
poor Christians, stories record, and we tremble at reading: yet this I dare
say, they never went beyond Papists in bloody designs, and inventions;
witness if there were no other, their Spanish inquisition, and tortures of
their holy house. Let all such monsters as delight in blood, consider the Lord
is as witty to revenge cruelty, as they can be to devise it. And that plague
the Lord threatens to disobedience, shall surely light in the heauiest measure
upon such deuisers of villainy, Deuteronomy. 28.59. their plagues shall be wonderful,
and themselves as signs and wonders amongst men for their afflictions.

Referring it to evils of sin; we have it exemplyfied in Sardanapalus, that
fleshly Epicure, that having surfetted of the pleasures already in use,
propounded a reward by a crier to him that could invent a new kind of pleasure.
See also Nero, in Sueton. cap. 27. Sueton in Neron. cap. 27.
And how witty our own age has been this way, who can without grief
mention? Such strange, and as they are profanely termed, gentleman-like
oaths, by Jesus, by Christ, as our forefathers never heard of: drinkings by the
yard, by the dozens, healthes, kneeling upon a dye, lying, etc. stranger
devises of sins, then of fashions in apparel. It were long to reckon up the
new tricks of cosenage, and con^catching, poling and racking, that no
vigilancie of Magistrates, nor wariness of laws is able to prevent. We
marvel at the strangeness of Gods judgments in diseases, and other kinds
that bring our Physicians beside their books; but let us cease to wonder at
new plagues, while our selves are so witty in devising new sins, so utterly
without understanding to do well. Ier. 4.22.

Disobedience to parents.] Under this title of parents are comprised all such,
as under God are Authors to us of our being, or wel-being in Nature, Grace, or
civil society. In Nature, as natural parents that begat us. In Grace, as
Ministers, by whom we are begotten a new through the Gospel. In Civil
Society, as Magistrates, and fathers of the country. Here principally are
intended Natural, and Political Parents. Of disobedience to Magistrates it
will be fittest to handle when we come to Cap. 13. Now of that only shown to
our natural parents. The Lord every where testifies his detestation of it,
appointing death in the old law, for him that obstinately lived in it, Deuteronomy.
21.18.19.20.21. and as he has graciously promised long life to the obedient.
Ephesians. 6.3. so has he threatened contumely, and shameful death to the
obstinate. Pro. 30.17. as we read the execution of this judgment on Absalom,
Adonuah, etc. and let them fear all graceless children from disobedience.

(...): Without understanding.] This may not be so conceived as if they were
deprived of reason, or had utterly lost the faculty of understanding; but is
to be referred principally to their sottishness in spiritual things, 1 Cor.
2. albeit also very natural light in things concerning manners, was much
ecclipsed in the multitude: for the better sort of them, many testimonies are
extant of their understanding in the course of Nature, and some more then
rudera of their wisdom in civility, and matters Moral, and political. But
as for things concerning God and his worship, as sottish almost as bruites,
Ier. 10.14. and their multitude blind in matters of manners, and common
honesty.

Now this being without understanding in the things that concern God, or men,
as it was their sin: so also a fearful judgment upon them, for their
disobedience, and neglect of cherishing the knowledge of God given them by
light of Nature. And that which ordinarily follows upon neglect of
obedience, and lying in sins against conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. such a canker
is ungodliness, that it eats out knowledge, yea all even capacity of heavenly
understanding. And how evident it is in our people. Compare what Isay has.
Cap. 28.9.10.13.

(...). Covenant breakers.] Some commendable examples their are of there
conscience to keep covenants, especially confirmed by oath: yea, though it
were sometimes with hazard of life, as that known instance of Pirrhus
euidenceth.

Yet as frequent are records of their treacherous and, perfidious dealing each
with other: But which is our sin, and shame, nothing so thick as those of
unfaithfulness amongst Christians; such Eeles are many, that they find holes
to wind out of the most cautelous contracts for their best advantage.

It were long to run into this large field of complaints of unfaithfulness;
a question, or two only shall be propounded, and so a passage to the next.

Qu. Are all covenants to be performed? Ans. Not so; covenants of things
unlawful are at no hand to be accomplished, the old saying of vows has
place herein. In malis promissis rescinde fidem in turpi voto muta decretum.
Repent the making, but forbear the performance; bind not two sins together.

What if they be made with evil men? Ans. Yet to be performed: Iosuah kept
touch with the Gibeonites; and Saul's cruelty shown on them* contrary to
covenant, brought a famine upon the land of Israel, not expiable but by the
death of his sons, 2 Samuel 21 1. etc.

What if rashly made and without due consideration of circumstances? Ans. if
the thing couenanted be lawful, rashness must be repented: but the promise
performed.

What if hinderance come by performance? Ans. accept it as thy cross, and
chastisement from the Lord; but think not of change, Psalm. 15.4.

(...). Without natural affection. (...); are those Germane affections of
love, that by instinct of nature we bear to those in nature and blood
conjoined to us: such as are those betwixt parents, and children, brother and
brother, etc. how these were extinguished in the Gentiles, those monstrous
bloody sacrifices of their sons and daughters unto their Idols, abundantly
witness, Deuteronomy. 12.31.

And how evident footsteps of such lack of natural affection toward children
of our own loins, besides that rigor of many parents in immoderate
corrections, carelessenesse of provision for families, etc. those often
murders of poor infants by strumpets, testify: besides those cruel
persecutions of children by parents, for truths sake, foretold by our
Savior, Mat. 10.21. And that which at this day is magnified as a work of
perfection amongst papists, exposing of children and families to beggarie, for
I know not what pretended holy contemplations.

But here by the way may be observed the folly of Stoikes, commending vacuitie
of affections, as a point of chief wisdom, which the Lord condemns as a
fruit of a reprobate mind.

And for lawfulness of affections; first, their impression in Nature by the
finger of GOD: secondly, the command they have in the law. Mat. 22.37. thirdly,
Exodus 32.
their commendation registered in the Scripture: 2 Pet. 2.8. fourthly, their use
in our Savior, Heb. 2.1^. sufficiently witnesses. Indeed here is wisdom,
first, in applying them to their right objects: secondly, in keeping them to
their just proportion, that they neither exceed, nor come short of their
measure: but to banish them out of man, is to banish man out of man, and to
make him a stock rather then a Stoike.

The next vice follows. (...): Well rendered unappeasable, such as whose
malice admits no terms of truce, much less of hearty reconcilement. Psalm.
120.6.7. And this graceless disposition of the heart, how is it now accounted
a matter of greatest wisdom, and manhood? And a principle it is amongst
politicians, to keep the coals of malice raked up under the ashes of a
friendly countenance, which yet opportunity, as bellows, rekindles to such a
flame as often-burnes to the destruction of him they hate: yea, such monsters
are there in this kind, that think their children unworthy to inherit their
possessions, except they vow also to be heirs of their malice and to prosecute
unto death the reuengefull courses set on foot by their predecessors. Yea,
our people have now learnt to distinguish betwixt forgiving, and forgetting:
forgive they may, but never forget, as if he should say, respite their malice
till a fit opportunity of revenge. See Genesis 27.41.

Now surely, if from any one vicious affection, we may conclude a nullitie of
grace, then chiefly from this: for as the experience of Gods love in
pardoning, enclines to an easy forgetfulness of wrongs; so does the continued
prosecution of a reuengefull purpose, argue sufficiently our little, or no
feeling of Gods pardoning mercy.

(...). Merciless. Mercy has in it two things: first, compassion, and a
laying to heart the miseries of others: secondly, an inclination to succor,
and relieve their miseries: the want whereof is that here called mercilesnesse.

Examples whereof we need not fetch from the heathen, our own times abound
with them: to hear the outcries at poor widows, and orphans turned out of
their house, and home* to the mercy of the merciless world, by remorselesse
landlords, dispeopling whole towne-ships, and leaving no room for the poor
to inhabit, whose bowels that has any spark either of grace, or good nature,
yerne not? to see the poor perish for hunger whiles not only hired servants,
but even dogs have bread enough: what eye can behold without showers of
tears? And to consider how in the days of dearth the merciless rich men of
this world, triumph, putting off all bowels of mercy with this, that it is a
plague to the poor; whose heart rues not? Let all such remember betimes whose
mouth has spoken it, that there shall be judgment merciless to such as will
show no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

Verse 31. Which men though they knew the law of God, how that they which
commit such things, are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also
favor them that do them.
ANd thus much of the particular vices reigning among the Gentiles, wherein I
thought good to insist a little, because they are rife even amongst our selves;
but willingly have I run them over with more brevity then was intended least
the volume should grow too great.

There follows now in the last verse an amplification of the Gentiles sin,
set out by an Antithesis of things diverse; they knew, and yet did; secondly, a
comparison of unequals; not only did, but applauded, and took delight in
others that did them.

Their knowledge is declared by the object; the law of God; secondly, by the
measure; that the doers of such things were worthy of death.

Ioh. 9.41. If you were blind you should have no sin; Augustine truly
interprets, none in comparison, not simply none, Confer. Iam. 4.17. Luke 12.47.
Ioh. 15.22. Gal. 4.8.9. etc. for from what fountain can known sins be
imagined to proceed, but either wilful neglect, or profane contempt of the
lawgiuers authority?

Now it is strange to think of the profane inferences our people make from
this ground: that seeing knowledge makes sin so heinous; therefore vvelcome
ignorance. Foolish men that cannot distinguish betwixt nescire, and nolle
scire; betwixt simple ignorance, and wilful refusal of knowledge, the one
something lesseninng sin and damnation; a poor comfort: the other doubling,
yea trebling every iniquity. Implycing first breach of duty: secondly,
ignorance of Gods will: thirdly, wiifull contempt of means to know.

Now I would these men would consider, what a poor comfort it is for a man in
hell to be tormented less then others; when the least degree of those pains is
intolerable. How miserably shall a Sodomite comfort himself in that day of
judgment, with thinking that a Capernites case is worse then his; when he is
thrown down amongst the reprobate rabble, into that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever.

Such is the comfort of every one that sins but of simple ignorance; Luke
12.46.47. he is beaten, though with fewer stripes; damned everlastingly,
though not so much tormented.

From them I pass with this advise, that they strive to avoid all wretched
extremes, and if it may be, labor for the mean amongst them. Not to know is
damnable simplicity: to refuse to know heinous impiety: to know and not to
do, intolerable obstinacy. Well is it with them, that labor to know, Ioh.
13.17.
and knowing endeavor to practice what they know.

Let us all to whom GOD has vouchsafed knowledge of his will, practice. 2 Pet.
1.5. Ioh. 13.17. If we know Gods will blessed are we if we do it: if we
know and do it not, woe worth the time that ever we knew, not because we
know, but because knowing, we neglected to do what we knew; and sinned
against our knowledge and conscience.

But see we first the object of this knowledge, what is it that the Gentiles
are said to know? The law of God. It may be here questioned how this accords
with Psalm. 137. verse 9. Where it is made the Jews prerogative to have the
statutes of God; and of the heathen said, that they had not knowledge of Gods
law. Ans. The law of God according to a double manner of revealing, is
two-fould, written, unwritten; the law of God written the Gentiles had not; but
yet they knew some generals of those things contained in the two tables; God
writing it in their hearts, Romans 2. and revealing to them so much thereof as
might deprive them of excuse, Romans 1.19.

This imperfect rule of life vouchsafed unto the Gentiles is commonly called
the law of nature. Not for that it is borne with us, or is propagated from
Adam; who not only weakened, but even utterly lost the image of GOD, one
chief part whereof consisted in knowledge C^l. 2. but because this knowledge
is vouchsafed unto all by a general influence of Gods grace, which is indeed
as common as nature: and therefore called the law of nature.

Here therefore it shall not be amiss, once for all to show what the law of
nature is, and how it differs from the law written.

The law of nature, is that rule of piety, and honesty, that the Lord has
written in the hearts of all men: whereby they know confusedly, and in
general, what is good; what is evil; what to be done; what to be forborne.

It differs from the law written, not in substance; they being all one; but
first, in the measure: secondly, in the manner, and means of revelation: for
what the written law reueales distinctly, and particularly; that the law of
nature teaches confusedly only, and in general. First, that God is to be
worshipped the law of nature reueales; but how to be worshipped distinctly it
reueales not: secondly, the manner of revealing is not all one: for the one had
certain, and immediate revelation from God; and afterward was delivered by
the same GOD in writing; the other was known only by a general light set in
the soul in creation. Ioh. 1.9.

But hence it will easily follow; Romans 2.14.15. where Paul proves it, first* a
fa^io; they did the things of the law: secondly, a Conscientiae testimonio.
Confer also, Acts 14.17. and 17.27.

And this suffices to clear God from show of cruelty in their condemnation:
Eccl. 7.31. he also gave them more knowledge of his will, then they had either
will or conscience to obey.

Hence also the collection is sound, that the law of nature is the law of God,
and that the transgressions of that law, are the transgressions of the law of
God.

Wherein how far they of Rome have engaged themselves, those many
dispensations by them granted for murder, even of the Lords anointed, for
marriages within the degrees prohibited, etc. are abundant witnesses. Things
that heathen by light of nature detested are allowed by them as commendable,
yea in some cases meritorious, and worthy of canonization.

See we now the measure of their knowledge. They knew the law of GOD: yea the
penalty due to transgression thereof; that they which commit such things are
worthy of death.

Now for the meaning it may be questioned; whether the Gentiles knew that their
sins deserved everlastingly death? Ans. As touching corporal death the laws
of Draco are recorded; which appointed death for every transgression less, and
greater: and being demanded the reason, why when all sins were not equal,
death was appointed equally for all; his answer was, that he well knew that
sins were not all equal, yet knew that the least deserved death. But for
eternal death it seems more doubtful, yet this is evident, that they knew
another life, and death after this; as appears both by their Elisian fields,
and their hell, which they write of; as also by the terrors of conscience that
they were filled vvithall even where humane laws took no hold of them. And
howsoever perhaps they thought with Papists, that every sin deserved not
hell; yet for the gross acts of notorious sins, it was their persuasion,
that hell torments were due unto them. See Tully in Somuio Scipion.

fourthly, their own fears wherewith their consciences are possessed, upon
the least manifestation of Gods wrath, etc.

Now here the Rhemists entreat us to observe, in what sense their Catholic
Church teaches some sins to be mortal; some venial: some mortal, because
all that do them are worthy of damnation; others venial, that is to say,
pardonable of their own nature, and not worthy of damnation.

This exposition we acknowledge to be theirs; and were it not for the
exposition could easily allow the terms of distinction: we say also that
there are some sins mortal, some venial; but this we enterpret as the
Scripture teaches, 1 Ioh. 5.16.17.18. of the event, not of the natural
desert. All sins are venial in the event, except that against the holy
Ghost, Mat. 12. all sins of the elect are venial in the event, because none
are imputed unto them unto condemnation.

Not persecution, not blasphemy, not abiuring of Christ excepted; but yet the
least deserves death, yea and to a man out of Christ brings death everlasting:
not idle words ^^cepted, Mat. 12.36. Compare Gal. 3.10. And here let me
entreat the reader to observe, how well heathenisme, and Popery accord, as in
many other, so in this point also. For even this was the opinion of the
heathen, that heinous and gross sins deserved death; but petite sins, as of
idle words, evil thoughts, etc. were pardonable of their own nature, and not
worthy of damnation.

Follows now the Text, the second amplification of the Gentiles sin, by
comparison; they did not only themselves commit them, which perhaps might be
imputed to infirmity: but approved, yea applauded, and took delight in others
that did them, which was desperate impiety.

Now my purpose is not to handle all those kinds of consenting to other men's
sins, by applause, counsel, encouragement, instigation, abetting, etc. Which
M. Beza well observes to come under this term, (...): but only to propound
what the Spirit of GOD here seems principally to point at.

Solomon, Pro. 2.14. expressing the nature of a man desperately wicked, thus
sets it forth: they delight in doing evil, and which is more, delight in the
frowardness of the wicked. Hos. 4.8. the Prophet speaking of the lewd Priests
in Israel; they eat up the sins of Gods people, and lift up their minds at
their iniquity. What it grieueth a good minister to see, that these long
after, and rejoice in: to see and hear the ungracious behavior of the ungodly
in respect of that sweet they sucked from the sins of the people. And indeed
it argues a heart set upon wickedness, and taken up with the pleasures
thereof, for a man to rejoice in the dishonor of the name of GOD; as it is the
nature of the child of God, to grieve at the sins of himself, and others,
and no greater corasiue to such then that the law of GOD is broken. 2 Pet. 2.8.
Psalm. 119.136. so there cannot be a surer evidence of a heart desperately
wicked, then to delight in the ungodly behavior of another.

And let all such as are this way guilty lay it to heart, we have a kind of
people amongst us, a crew of swaggerers, as they delight to be termed; given
to all excess of riot themselves: and not content therewith, prouokers of
others to fellowship in excess; how glads it their hearts when they can draw
another to drunkenness? and what greater pleasure to such, then to see the
beastly behavior of those, whom they have with their own cost drawn into
drunkenness? woe and a heavy woe to such says Habukkuk. Hab. 2.15.16. It were
strange that amongst the rulers of Gods people, set up for the terror of the
ungodly, their should any be found, thus ioying at other men's ungodliness: and
yet who sees not, but the Prophets complaint befits the time; they lift up
their minds at the peoples iniquite: and he the vvelcomest guest that brings
sacks to their mill; tidings of the peoples sins to their courts: by which
their portion is made fat; men living indeed by the sins of the people. I
might instance in sundry other particulars, but that I fear I have been too
long in this chapter.

This only I will annexe for conclusion. That the sins here imputed to the
Gentiles, are ours also by natural inclination. And as the Apostle when he
has reckoned sundry gross, and abominable sins, applies them thus to the
Corinthians, such were some of some of you, though now you be washed,
sanctified, justified in the name of the Lord JESUS, and by the spirit of our
GOD, 1 Cor. 6.11. so may I say of us all in nature; such were all of us by
nature, howsoever now washed from them in the blood of Christ. Tit. 2.3. And
let it ever teach us to magnify the grace of our GOD, that has pulled us out
of that damnable estate, wherein we were borne, and once lived; and make us
ascribe our whole righteousness to the mercy of GOD, in CHRIST JESUS our sweet
Savior; by whom we have been delivered from the power of darkness, and of
children of wrath by nature, made children of grace by free Adoption; and
calling in him. To the same GOD that has so freely beloved us, to Christ Jesus
our blessed Savior, that has paid the price of our sins; to his holy
Spirit that has purged us from so vile corruption, be praise, and glory in all
churches of the Saints for ever, and ever, Amen.

THE II. CHAPTER.
Verse 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
condemnest: for in that that thou condemnest another, thou condemnest thy
self: for thou that condemnest, do the same things.
TO make way to the opening of this chapter, it shall not be amiss briefly to
repeat the Apostles whole project. That which he drives at is this, that all
both Jews and Gentiles are transgressors of the law; and therefore cannot be
justified by the works of the law. And as touching the Gentiles transgression,
he first proves it, ranging them into these two ranckes.

First, of those that were openly and outragiouslie breakers of the law of
Nature; secondly, of such as partooke not with them in these open enormious
sins; but rather condemned them, though themselves in the mean time lived in
the secret practice of them, at least had the seeds of them all unmortified in
them; against the first sort he has dealt in the first chapter, and here
begins to convince those hypocritical censurers of these sins in others.

The passage to these hypocrites is by an inference out of a general laid
down, verse 31. cap. 1. on this manner: seeing all those that know the law of
GOD, and commit things worthy of death, are subject to condemnation; therefore
thou also that iudgest others art inexcusable: neither have any thing which
thou can plead in Apology for thy self, why the sentence of condemnation
due to others, should not likewise pass on thee: the reason is annexed, verse
2. for even thou that iudgest others and condemnest them for transgression of
Gods law, do thy self the some things for which thou condemnest others: And
howsoever by these shows thou blearest the eyes of men, that cannot see nor
judge farther then the outward appearance, yet can thou not think to escape
the judgment of God, to whose eyes all things are naked, and uncovered, and
that judges not according to outward shows, but according to the inward
sincerity of the heart, and the truth of the inward parts.

The conclusion then of this place is this: that the very masters of manners
and chief controulers of other men's sins, amongst the Gentiles are
inexcusable before God, and liable to condemnation, ver. 1. Reason proving it,
ver. 2. in this form, he that condemns himself is without Apology before
GOD, but thou hypocrite condemnest thy self: Ergo, etc. If it be demanded how?
the Apostle shows, even by this, that thou iudgest and condemnest another, for
that whereof thy self art guil ie: so that out of the same ground from which
thou concludest another culpable of judgment, thy self art withal shut up
under condemnation: Example. When a privy Adulterer shall thus reason against
another detected of whoredom: every Adulterer is guilty of wrath, thou art
an Adulterer, Ergo, etc. is not the same inference strong against the secret,
as well as against the open Adulterer.

greatest enormities themselves, but also applauders of them in others; other
more modest in their sins, burning perhaps with lust, but yet forbearing the
open exercise and execution thereof, and condemning the outrages of men more
shameless. In Israel some declaring their sins as Sodom Isay 3.9.
; other digging deep to hide their sins, not from men only but from God
himself Isay 29.15.
, some sacrificing upon the tops of the mountains Hos. 4.13.
; other had their secret chambers of Imagerie, to practice their abominations
Ezech. 8.12.
: at this day not all alike shameless in sinning; some ciuilly honest and in
respect of men unrebukable, and yet not purged from their filthiness: Reasons
whereof may may be these: first, that in some men natural knowledge and
conscience is more clear then in others: secondly, God keeps some from
occasions: thirdly, God by general grace restraines corruption in some, more
then in others, Genesis 20.6.

And it shows how fondly many please themselves in comparatiue righteousness;
and the Pharisees, Non sum sicut caeteri. I am not as other men, an adulterer,
a drunkard, or extortioner. Foolish men, as if wickedness lay all in
extreamities, or as if civility were righteousness in the sight of God. But let
all such know, civility suffices not to the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5.20.
, and a man may live unrebukable in respect of men Phil. 3.6.
, and yet be for all that a child of perdition.

Another thing here obseruable is this: Mat. 7.3.
Very companying with sinners censured in our Savior, as a point of highest
profaneness h, their own notorious oppression, cruelty, repealing of Gods
laws by themselves, winked at. The Donatists in Austins days took upon them
to censure the least blemishes in other Churches, their own in the mean time
not only practicing, but even defending gross corruptions.

Let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6.4.
so shall he have rejoicing in himself not in another.

2 P^t. 2.14.
, surely, such are their own judges, and as it were the Lords mouth, damning
their own souls to the pit of hell. Neither is this to be understood of
private men only, but even of men in public place, as Magistrates and
Ministers; when a Magistrate shall censure a poor pilferer to death, that has
stolen perhaps to satisfy his own soul Pro 6.30.
, himself in the mean time living in extortion, and briberie, what does he
but adiudge himself to death everlasting? when a Minister shall out of the
pulpit denounce Gods judgment against whoredom, drunkenness, etc. and
himself be as the Priests of Israel, a man given to Wine, and strange flesh,
redounds not that sentence upon his own soul?

Wherefore let us be admonished that by calling, Mat. 7.5.
: the heathen could thus advise, that a man that would be an accuser and
censurer of other men's dishonestie, should first sift and purge his own heart,
from what he meant to blame in another.

And as the reason here given is forcible, so are there other in Scripture very
effectual: as first, that a guilty conscience hinders the right and
courageous exercise of admonition and correction: and it was not for nothing,
that Iethro requiring courage in Magistrates, requires also that they be such
as fear GOD, and careful to depart from evil Exodus 18.21.
, and the Lord before he sends Isay to denounce judgments against the
Israelites, first purges him from his own sins Isay 6.7.
; because indeed, he can never as he ought, reprove or correct that in
another, whereof himself is guilty Ioh. 8.7.9.
. How often does a lewd Minister meet with a Text, that he trembles to
handle? or if for shame he be forced to say something of the sin whereof
himself is guilty, how cold in discovering? how trembling in reproof? how
many times shifts he from it, by shameful means? as fearing to be judge and
condemner of himself? other reasons there are many. See Mat. 7.1.2.3.4.

Now before we pass from this verse, sundry questions offer themselves to be
decided. First, whether it be lawful for any man to exercise Magistracy,
since no man can say my heart is clean, I am clean from my sin: and some
possessed with a spirit of Anabaptisme, have urged this and the like scriptures,
against the use of maiestracie, requiring Angelical purity in him, that takes
upon him to correct or chastise the sins of others. Ans. First, by as good
reason might they prove, that the use of Ministry is lawful, in as much as
it is their part to reprove, and censure the sins of others: and yet who of
them is perfectly purged from the seeds of all sins? know we therefore* that
the scripture, when it requires freedom from sin in those that undertake the
censuring or correcting of other men's sins, requires not perfect freedom
from all inherence of sin, so as that it shall be sin, to a man, himself
subject to in^rmiti^ to correct or reprove the sins of others; but only a
freedom from the reign, and dominion of sin; and taxes only impenitencie,
rashness, and rigor in the controuling of others, and so is that place, Ioh.
^.7. to be understood, being a reproof of the peoples hypocrisy and rigor,
no simple condemning of the fact in urging the punishment of the Adulteress.

Secondly, it may be demanded, whether a man subject to the reign of sin
(whereof another is guilty) sin in condemning that sin in another whereof
himself is guilty. Ans. The fact of condemning such sins in others, is not
simply a sin in it self, yea not to condemn it is sin I^^y 5.2^.
; yet a sin it is in such a man by accident, as all actions of impenitent
sinners are sins in them; not materially, or in respect of the matter, as
those that are simply forbidden in the law of God, but formally, that is to
say, in respect of their faulty manner of performing those things, which for
their substance are duties.

Thirdly, if any demand, what is to be done in such case? must a man forbear
to censure and reprove these sins in others? Ans. Not so Isay 5.20.
: but this let him do, begin judgment at his own heart, that is, judge,
condemn, bewail, reform, his own sins, so may we with comfort reprove the
sins of others, Mat. 7.5.

Fourthly, it may here be questioned, whether all these controulers of other
men's sins, were themselves guilty of those sins, which they condemned in
others. Ans. Some answer thus, if not of the same, yet of the equivalent, of
sins as heinous. Others thus, if not of the facts, yet of the affections and
inward motions to the same: this last the best answer: to which let this be
added, that the scripture measures all out of Christ, by their natural
inclinations, and judges them guilty of all sins, unmortified by Gods
spirit, or unpurged by Christ's blood.

Verse 2. But we know that the judgment of God is according to truth, against
them which commit such things.
NOw the rest of the chapter is spent in preuentions, and remouall of such
objections, as these hypocrites might make in behalf of themselves: as verse
2. whereas they might say, that the world could not detect them of any of these
crimes, and they had the witness of men to acquit them: the Apostle answers,
that howsoever by their outward shows they might blind the eyes of men, and
escape their censure; yet Gods judgment they could by no means escape; no
vizard could cover their deformities from Gods eyes, neither could he be
mocked with shows, who searches the hearts and tries the raynes, and judges
not after outward appearances but according to truth, and inward uprightness
of heart before him.

For the meaning of the words; by Gods judgment understand, first, his
censure, and sentence of men's guiltiness, or innocence; secondly, his
adiudging to punishment; truth also I take here to be opposed to counterfeit
shows, and is nothing else but uprightness, and sincerity of the heart,
which David calls truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6.

^y 29.15.16.
for he sees not as man sees, neither judges he, as man judges.

2 Cor. 4.2.
, and ever in Christ to walk in sincerity, and as in the sight of God 2 Cor.
2.17.
, but oh the glozing of these dissembling times; what a world of hypocrites are
we fallen into? such studying to seem so, no care to be what we desire to
seem.

Take but these notes of hypocrisy, and apply them, and then judge whether the
complaint be just.

First, an hypocrite is careless to reform his own life, curious to sift the
lives of others Mat. 7.3.
: an Israelite indeed, a true Nathaniel, so busied in sifting his own
deceitful heart, that he finds small leisure to look out to others.

Secondly, an hypocrite has eyes like the windows of the temple 1 Re^. 6.4.
broad outward, narrow inward; other men's moates are beams in his eyes, his
own beams moates Mat. 7.4.
, contrary with him in whose heart there is no guile; other men's sins are
apprehended as little, being further of, his own being nearer, greatest in his
own eyes. Paul styles himself the chief of sinners 1 Timothy 1.15.
, imputes the crucifying of Christ to the ignorance of the Jews 1 Cor. 2.8.
; so littleing a sin more grievous.

Thirdly, an hypocrite is rigorous in censuring, and punishing others slips;
still ouer-milde in judging himself John 8.5.7.
: a true Christian most sharp toward his own, tender toward another
infirmity, Gal. 6.1.

Fourthly an hypocrite is scrupulous in the least, remorselesse of the greatest
sins; strains at a gnat, Mat. 23.24.
and swallows a Camel.

Fifthly, precise in the lesser, regardlesse of the waightier points of duty.

Sixthly, strict in urging and observing man's traditions, desperately dissolute
about Gods commandments; holds it the highest breach of duty, to omit an
humane ceremony; tolerates, yea approues, yea countenanceth, yea
legittimateth, wilful rebellion against the law of God Mat. 15.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
I pass from this point with that saying of an ancient Father. Hypocrite, is
it good to seem good? then sure much better to be good: Is it evil to seem
evil? far worse to be evil; therefore hypocrite, either be as thou showest,
or else show as thou art. And this remember, that how ever shows may shadow
thee from men's censure, it is truth only, that shall steed thee at Gods
judgment seat.

Verse 3. And think thou this, O thou man, that condemnest them which do
such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Verse 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and
long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance?

Verse 5. But thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest
up as a treasure unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God.


THere follows now a denunciation of certain and most severe judgment upon
those hypocrites, and is disposed very fitly into a Rhetorical Dialogisme, and
communication. Wherein first he preoccupates the foolish thoughts of these
hypocrites after resolves o^ the certain issue, on this manner.

Tell me hypocrite, think thou that when Gods judgment is against all that
do such things, thou shall amongst all be exempted? or that thou shall escape
the judgment of God? what a madness is this? when as other men's facts escape
not thy censure, which art but a man, thou should think thine own evil
deeds should escape the judgment of GOD; or how else? think thou that
because the Lord has hitherto forborne thee, and heaped his blessings upon
thee, therefore he approues thy courses? and sends these as testimonies of thy
righteousness? here see how ignorantly thou abusest, and mistakest the end and
use of Gods bountifulness; which tends indeed, to bring thee to repentance,
no way either justifies thy courses, or secures thee from future judgment.

The resolution follows: well how ever it be, whether one or other, this I am
sure of, thou by thy hardness and unrepentant heart* heapest up unto thy self
a treasure of wrath, against the day of wrath, etc. this the disposition of the
Text; in the words may be observed: first, an expressing of a secure hypocrites
thoughts, with a confutation of them annexed: secondly, a denunciation of
certain and most heavy judgment to be inflicted, the cause whereof is, first
declared, hardness of heart, and impenitencie: secondly, the t^^e pointed at,
in the day of wrath, etc.

Think thou this that thou shall escape?

Where first note, Isay thus brings in these men triumphing; we have made a
Covenant with death, and with hell we are at agreement, though a scourge run
over, and pass through, it shall not come to us; for we have made falsehood
our refuge, and under vanity are we hid Isay 28 15.
: so little think they of Gods impartial justice, al-seeing providence, and
irresistable power.

And is not this the conceit of our own people? Rex Jupiter omnibus idem; and
here the Apostle, with God their is no respect of persons.

A second fond thought of an hypocrite here mentioned, is this; that as he
escapes man's judgment, so he may Gods; and thinks all well so man justify
him, etc. But how vainly, the Apostle here shows by their own fact; reasoning
from the less to the greater, thou a man as another, iudgest the facts of
others, and nothing can pass thy censure how then can thou think that thou
can escape the strict censure, and judgment of the Lord Almighty: Saint
John's speech is not much unlike, 1 Ioh. 3.20. Compare it.

Or despisest thou, etc.

They are said to despise Gods bounty and patience, because they abused it to
another end, then it tended unto: for whereas it was vouchsafed unto them to
bring them to amendment of life, they abused it, as an occasion to encourage
them in their sins.

Eccles. 8.11. Psalm. 50.21.
: for hence they gather, as Atheists, that God regards not the things done on
earth, and count hell and judgment but a fable 2 Pet. 3.4.
, or else that their courses, though ungracious, are well pleasing to him Psalm.
50.21.
, that thus multiplyeth his blessings upon them in their profaneness.

tail: defeating their policies, turning their mischiefs, devised for us,
upon their own heads: multiplied our kingdoms, increased our friends; in a
word, what could he have done more for us, that he has not done? And what has
all this bounty of our gracious GOD wrought amongst us, but even a blessing of
our selves in our wickedness, and an adding of drunkenness to thirst; yea, with
the wise this goes for current, God has blessed our government with peace,
etc. therefore amongst us nothing needs reformation,

And for particulars, how often is the reason heard from them, thus and thus
long have I lived in this course (as Preachers say) of sinning, but I see not
but God has blessed me as well as the precisest of them all, etc. Now
understand (ye unwise among the people) must all needs be well, because God
forbeares to punish? or shall we therefore continue our sins, because God
continues his mercy toward us? God forbid. Other reasons there are of Gods
bounty and patience; it may be for the greater good duties he has winked at
the less infirmities Exodus 1.2^ 21
: It may be the dressers of the barren fig tree, have obtained respite of our
cutting down Luke 13.6.
: It may be sins, though heinous enough amongst us, have not yet come to
their full ripeness Genesis 15.16.
: perhaps a remnant there was yet to be gathered from amongst us, etc.
howsoever, this once I am sure of, Gods patient forbearance, and rich bounty,
are no arguments of man's innocence, nor tend always to countenance received
courses, but to give occasion to alter accustomed evils; and to show Gods
loathnesse to destroy, if man were not too loath to forgo his sins.

But what odious contempt of Gods grace is this, for a man to take occasion by
Gods bountifulness to continue, and increase his sin? In things of this life
we hold it detestable, if a servant should thus reason from his masters
bounty; he deals thus and thus liberally with me, he has advanced me from
nothing to this estate, wherein now I am, etc. therefore I care not how I
provoke him, etc. how unworthy should we deem him, to have kindness continued
unto him? Joseph reasons contrarily Genesis 39.9.10
, and yet how frequent are such reasoners from Gods mercy to our
unfaithfulness? well this once I dare say, there cannot be a surer evidence of a
graceless heart, then thus to abuse Gods loving kindness; and Gods children I
know reason otherwise Psalm. 13^.4. Hos. 3.5.
, there is mercy with thee (says Daui^) therefore shall thou be feared; they
fear the Lord and his goodness; fear to offend him in regard of his goodness:
but let us now see the attributes given to God, with their Epithete, as also
the end of them.

bountifulness; it is that holy inclination in the nature of God, to expose
himself to the use of his creatures, and to communicate his blessings unto
them Acts 14.17.
secondly, patience and forbearance, whereby he tolerates the ungracious
behavior of men as it is (...), given unto God, not without some burden Isay
1.24.
long suffering, whereby he defers the fierceness of his wrath, that it break
not out to our destruction: see examples in the old world Genesis 6 3.
, in the Amorites Genesis 15.16.
, In Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. in our own kingdom.

The Epithete is riches of patience, etc. that is plentifulnes, and abundance
of bounty Romans 10.12. Ephesians. 2.7. Exodus 34.6.
, etc. plentious in goodness and truth.

Now brethren which is there of us, that cannot from experience acknowledge
this riches of Gods bounty, long suffering and patience? Exodus 34.6.
: The Lord, the Lord, strong, and merciful, and gracious, slow to anger,
abundant in goodness and truth: whether we respect his dealing with our
Nation in common, or his gracious benificence and patience, vouchsafed to our
particular selves: what Nation is there under heaven to whom the Lord has come
so near, as he has done to us in all things that we call unto him for? what
a long Iubile has our land had? when as our neighbor Nations have been
wearied with bloody wars, and scarce received any other dew then the blood
of the inhabitants. What plenty of all things? what liberty of the Gospel?
notwithstanding, our many prouocations of the eyes of his glory by our crying
sins? Come to our personal kindnesses that we have all tasted, and that long
suffering and forbearance the Lord has showed us; what a course of sinning
ran we along in before our calling? walking according to the course of the
world, and after the Prince that rules in the Air, even the spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience Ephesians. 2.2.
. And who of us can say, that the Lord has been hasty? or extreme to mark,
or punish our doings amiss? Now it were well with us if the Lords rich bounty
and forbearance had had that use in us, for which he has vouchsafed it unto
us: see we what it is.

The end of it is (though profane men through wilful ignorance mistake it) to
lead us to repentance, and amendment of life 2 Pet 3.9.
: not as Epicures think, as if the Lord regarded not the evils done upon earth
Psalm. 33.11.
, or liked their wickedness Psalm. 50.21.
or had forgotten the truth of his promise, as those mockers dream 2. Pet. 3.4.
: but hereby to give space of repentance Apoc. 2.21.
: and to allure to amendment of life 2. Pet. 3.9.
: as a kind father deals with an ungracious child, often admonishing,
sometimes seasonablie correcting, sometimes using fatherly conniuence, never
neglecting supply of necessaries; yea, bountifully providing, and bestowing all
favors, in hope at length by kindness to overcome, and make the heart melt
for disobedience; with such cords of love, does our heavenly father draw us:
Hos. 11.4.

Joseph could make this use of his masters bounty Genesis 39.8.9.
; my master has dealt thus kindly with me, committed all things to my trust,
advanced me to the highest dignity, and a place of command in his family, kept
nothing from me but thy self, his wife, how then can I commit this great
wickedness? etc. why do not we reason thus from the rich kindness, and
superabundant bounty of our gracious God? and surely thus I presume Gods
children reason. But to see the frowardness of profane worldlings, in turning
the graces of God into wantonness Jude 4.
: how often hear we this Apology returned, when all other defenses fail? God
is merciful, Christ dyed for us, etc. But what? because God is merciful, will thou be sinful; because Christ died for thee, will thou by profaneness
crucify him afresh? and tread under thy foot the blood of the Testament,
whereby thou wast sanctified? Oh, says the Apostle, I beseech thee by the
mercies of God, give up thy body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God
Romans 12.1.
, and consider, that Christ dyed to redeem thee from thy vain conversation 1
Pet. 1.18.
: and gave himself for thee, to purge thee, to be of his peculiar people,
zealous of good works Tit. 2.14.
: and remember, what the proverb has; Patientia laesafit furor: there is no
wrath so justly, or furiously outrageous, as what

Now something else we may learn, from the riches of Gods patience, and long
suffering: and that is, as good children, to t ead in the steps of our heavenly
father Col. 3.13.
: and as our selves taste of Gods goodness toward us, so to practice, the
like toward our brethren: such effect has the experimental and feeling
knowledge of God in all his; themselves are transformed into the same image of
GOD, from glory to glory: therefore see how the Apostle urges this to a
Minister 2 Timothy 2.24.25.
; to bear and tolerate the evil men: proving if God at any time, (mark that,
at any time) will give them repentance; and to all Christians, to bear each
others burden Gal. 6.2.
: Beloved that hot-spur spirit, of calling for fire from heaven for every
disobedience, we know how it was reproved Luke 9.54.
: and let us ever have an eye to the rich patience of our gracious God,
provoked by us every day; learn to tolerate the froward infirmities of our
ignorant brethren with meekenes: instructing, rather then by rashness of zeal
rejecting them.

Now follows the issue of this patience and bounty of the Lord contemned;
Verse 5.
thou after the hardness and heart that cannot repent treasurest to thy self,
etc.

The fruit and issue of this contemning Gods goodness, and refusal to be lead
thereby to repentance,

First, in that hereby hardness ouer-growes the heart, and casts it into an
indisposition, and almost an impossibility of repenting: woeful experience of
many at this day shows it Ephesians. 4.19.
: and this befalls us partly through a natural effect that sin, especially
custom of sin has: and it is well observed by Divines both Popish and
Protestant, that every sin has in it, not only anomie and guilt, but
brings with it maculam, a spot: that is, not only a blemish to the soul, but
as some interpret, a stronger inclination to the practice of the same sin,
then was before in the soul: use of swearing makes swearing habitual, and
every new oath is as oil to the tongue, makes it more glib in the fleet
utterance of profane oaths, and custom is turned into an other nature: Ier.
13.23. partly, through spiritual des^rtion, GOD is thereby provoked to deprive
us of his grace, and gives us up to the power of Satan, and swinge of our own
lusts. Romans 1.24. Ezech. 24.13.

time enough yet, and repent when we are old, and that devilish proverb,
young Saints, old devils: a people rife in all places who as though they had
repentance in a string, and could perform it when please them, put off from
day to day, age to age, till at length their case grows desperate; of youth
they say, it must have his swinge: when manage comes, marriage will bring
staidness, etc. so still delaying from youth to man-age, from man-age to
marriage, from marriage to old age, from old age to dotage, from dotage to
death, and from death to the Devil; that is the end of most of them: In bodily
diseases we are wiser, and ever hold speediest cures safest, because by
experience we see inueterate diseases, having gotten into the habit of the
body, are seldom or never removed: how are we not as wise for our soul,
seeing as frequent experience has taught, a blackemore may as soon change his
skin, and a leopard his spots, any thing throw off his nature, as a sinner
accustomed to do evil, can learn to do well Ier. 13.23.
? mark how continuance in sin hardens the heart, hardness brings
indisposition to repentance; God justly leaving them to perish in their
filthiness, that have neglected the season of his gracious visitation; that
one place, Ezech. 24.13. read often and diligently, and know whose mouth has
spoken it, that no deceitfulness of sin bewitch thee.

The Apostle upon this ground advises, that we Heb. 3.13.
: and though it be true, that ordinate charity begins at our selves, yet shall
it be inordinate selfeloue, so to regard our own, as to neglect our brothers
salvation: It was the Lords charge to his people, that they should help even an
enemies Ass lying under his burden, and reduce his Ox or Ass going astray:
Has God care of Oxen? or says he, it not altogether for our sakes 1 Cor.
9.9.10.
? surely he that would have us bring back an Ox from going astray, would he
not much more have us turn our brethren from going astray, and deliver their
souls from death Iam. 5.19 20.
? and if an Ass, ouerlade with his burden, must be succored, much more our
brethren pressed with the burden of their sins. It was a profane speech of
Cayn; Am I my brothers keeper Genesis 4.9.
? surely the Lord has made us every one keepers, and guardians each of other:
perhaps also with that fearful memento 1 Reg. 20.36.
, that our life shall go for their lives, if through our default they be lost:
see Paul's reason Heb. 3.13.
, why this must be done daily, and while it is called to day, least, etc.

Proceed we now to the second fruit and issue of such delays, and abusing of
Gods grace to wantonness, thou treasurest up to thy self wrath, etc. The speech
is metaphorical, and may thus be unfolded; that as it is the course of the
world, to lay up for time to come that wealth whereof they have no present use;
and still to be adding to their heap as means of increase are offered, so does
the man that abuses Gods bounty and rich patience, by adding to his sins,
add to his own vengeance, whereof though he feel not the present smart, yet
afterward he has the full measure thereof powered down upon him: if not in
this life, yet in that day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of
God; understand this not of a sinners intention, but of the event.

Lento gradu ad vindictum sui, etc. Gods wrath comes slowly to inflict
vengeance, but makes amends for delay, with the weight of vengeance; slow he
is to wrath, but when he comes he pays home: we foolishly flatter our
selves in our wickedness, because the Lord does not presently strike us; when
all this while, the Lord is but fetching his blow, and the higher he lifts,
the heavier it lights. The Prophet David has excellently expressed this
dealing of the Lord, in delaying his vengeance Psalm. 7.12.13.
: where he compares the Lord to a man of War that meaning to make his sword
drunk with the blood of his enemies, takes sometime to scour up his sword,
and to sharpen both edge and point, that it may pierce the better; to an
Archer, that before he goes out to strike his pray, first bends his bow,
makes ready his arrows, takes time to fit them to the string, and when he
means not to miss his mark, holds up long to the leuill, draws far, where
he means to pierce deep: so is the Lord, while we think him negligent, but
whetting his sword, that he may wound the deeper; stands long at leuill,
because he will certainly hit, and not miss; draws far, even to the head,
that his arrows may pierce, even through the thickest skin and callum of the
soul: many such like comparisons the scripture is full of, euidencing the
point now in hand; that though the Lord delay, yet he neglects not; and
therefore delays, that when he strikes, he may pay home.

Oh consider this you that forget GOD, Psalm. 50.22.
: know, the long suffering of God brings salvation 2 Pet. 3.15.
, if thou have grace to be led thereby to repentance; or otherwise heavier
damnation, if thou abuse it to impenitencie. Never did people taste more of
Gods patience, and merciful forbearance, then that of Israel: never any drank
deeper of the cup of his indignation: witness those irreparable ruins of
their City and Temple, and that horrible blindness whereinto they are justly
plunged: examples are infinite in this kind, and would God the desperate
amongst us had grace to consider it: But to hear the wretched resolutenes of
hopeless men, whose heart rules not? all is but damnation; damned, they know
they shall be, and as good take pleasure here, etc. Now had they eyes to see
that which I persuade my self their hearts are sometimes affrighted to hear,
what this is to be damned: could they thus speak, or practice? to be separate
from God, and his Christ for ever, to be cast out to the devil, and his Angels
for ever, etc. Is this of so slight regard? Again, though it be true that
damnation belongs to every impenitent sinner, yet are there degrees of torment
in hell, proportioned to the number and measure of transgressions here
committed Luke 12.47.48.
: and if they will needs to hell, whether the Lord will or no Ezech. 18.31
, yet let them labor to abate something of the weight, and horror of their
unspeakable torments. The time of this vengeance follows.

In the day of wrath.] Where might be observed,

Psalm. 37.1.2
, in respect of his long patience showed on the wicked: though a sinner do
evil an hundred times, Eccl. 8.12.13.
and GOD prolongs his days; yet shall a day come when anguish and sorrow shall
oppress them that have not feared before the Lord.

Luke 21.28.
: secondly, in opposition to the time of this life, that is indeed a time of
grace, and a day of salvation, wherein the Lord offers mercy and salvation to
all those in the church, that will accept it, leaving no place for grace,
though sought with tears, when once this season is ouer-slipt.

Mat. 7.22. Luke 13.25.26. Mat. 25.11.12.
, Me thinks I see the behavior, and fruitless importunity of these
despisers of Gods grace in these days of mercy; running, like men distraught,
to the mountains to fall on them, and the hills to cover them, from the
presence of the lamb, and him that sits upon the Throne; begging and yelling
with the voice of dragons for mercy, mercy, Lord, Lord, open unto us, to a
judge in that day justly inexorable, I say again, justly inexorable, as whose
many loving inuitations by temporal mercies, earnest beseechings by his
ministers to accept reconcilement often knockings at the door of their
conscience by his spirit for entrance, they have so scornefully and proudly
rejected. Oh that men would consider, that one tear or sigh of a penitent
heart, might here more prevail for attainement of mercy, then all their
bitter and importunate yellings in that day of Gods wrath.

The second Epithete, here given to that great day of judgment is this; it is
called a day of declaration, foro conscientiae, for both here do Gods children
receive sentence of absolution from sin, in justification and assurance of
life eternal, given them by Gods spirit: and wicked men, here have their
woeful doom in their own consciences Tit. 3.11.
, but this judgment is here secret, and the equity thereof, not so sensibly
perceived: but at that day the Lord shall reveal, how justly he has accepted
the one to salvation, rejected the other to damnation, when as by their works,
their faith, or infidelity shall be discovered.

So that we may here see, how friuolouslie vulgar Papists reason, in behalf of
their Purgatory; Ans. though souls departing from the body, go presently to
their final and unchangeable either weal or woe, yet a general judgment is
needful, for manifestation of Gods just proceedings in this particular, and to
us secret judgment, passed in men's consciences in this life, executed on their
souls immediately upon their death. But proceed we in the next verse.

Verse 6. Who will reward every man according to his works.
Connection.
HE has immediately before, styled the day of judgment, a day of declaration
of Gods just judgment, vt antea. Now here he shows a reason of that
Epithete, given to that day of reckoning; and withal more then intimates, how
the Lord shall then declare the equity of his judgment, here passed in our
consciences, that is, by rewarding every man according to his works, as the
best evidences of faith or infidelity; (as if he should say) and if ye demand
how the Lord shall evidence the equity of his secret proceedings, I answer;
by rewarding every man according to his works: which general is farther
amplified by the specials. ver. 7.8.9.10.

In the words observe these particulars, serving to evidence the justice of
Gods judgment: first, his fact, he shall reward; secondly, the object, every
man; thirdly, the rule, according to his works; fourthly, the explanation of
this general by particulars, ver. ^ 7. etc.

Shall render or reward.] The usual collection of Papists from this place, and
the like is; that therefore good works of men justified and in grace, are
meritorious causes of eternal life: reason because Paul testifies, that GOD
shall reward, and that according to works. Here therefore fitly offers it
self to be discussed, that large controversy of the merit of good works: in
handling whereof this shall be the order: first, the state of the controversy
shall be explaned; secondly, the truth proved; thirdly, the contrary arguments
answered.

The question then is this: whether the good works of Gods children, done in
grace, do truly merit at Gods hand everlasting salvation? The sum of the
adversaries opinion is this, as the Council of Trent has expressed it Ses. 6.
Can. 32.
, that the good works of a man justified, are so the gifts of God that they
are withal, the good merits of the justified man; and that a man justified by
the good works done by him, through the grace of God, and merit of Christ,
does truly merit or deserve increase of grace, life eternal, and the
attainement of eternal life (if so be he die in grace) as also increase of
glory: our judgment is this, that howsoever good works done in grace, are
acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 2.5.
: and shall be by him rewarded Mat. 10.41.42
: yet that acceptance, and reward is not deserved by our works, nor is there
any worth or value in the best of our works, for which we may challenge
eternal life; no nor any access of glory at the hands of GOD: and this we
prove in this manner.

First, for that the scripture teaches every where, eternal life to be a
free gift of grace Romans 6.23.
: and therefore not a reward due to the dignity of our works: for it is
truly said, and agreeablie to the scripture Romans 11.6.
: non est quo gratia intret, vbi i^m meritum occupauit: there is no place for
grace to enter, where merit pleades possession. To this argument Bellarmine,
Lib. 5. de iustif. cap. 5.
and the Rhemists in Romans 6.23. thus answer, that eternal life is called
grace, not because it is not the reward of merit, but for that we have the
merits themselves of grace. How fondly? for first, weigh the antithesis, how is
death called the wages or stipend of sin? is it not because it is given as a
reward due to the merit of sin? and how shall the Antithesis intended hold?
except we say, that eternal life is given, not as wages due to the merit of
sanctification, but as a gift given freely without the desert of our works?
secondly, I demand, is life eternal, therefore only called a free gift, for
that the works to which it is given, are from grace? and not rather because,
as the works, so the reward both come from free grace? for that we do good
works, we have it from grace; and that these works, done in grace, have a
reward, it is also of the grace of the prouiser: thirdly, if good works be
from grace, as the sole cause, then must the reward needs be of grace merely.

Our second reason, is from the requisite conditions of meritorious good
works, which are these: first, a proportion betwixt the person meriting, and
the person of him, at whose hands we can merit; and in deed what obligation can
there be wrought, by the work of a creature, to bind the Creator to
recompense? and it is truly said, that the obedience of Christ himself, could
not have merited at the hands of God, had he not been, in respect of his
Divine person equal unto his Father Heb. 9.14. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
, and howsoever, if we had stood in state of innocence, and obedience,
eternal glory should have been recompensed unto us, yet could it not have
been challenged, as due by merit, but as by Covenant and promise freely made
by God.

Secondly, that they be done by persons free from sin, Heb. 7.26.27.

Thirdly, that they be our own, wrought by our own strength, not by power
ministered by him that rewards.

Fourthly, that they be more then duty, Luke 17.9.10

Fifthly, that they be profitable unto God.

Sixthly, that they be perfect. Gal. 3.10.

Seventhly, primo aquabilio, that they be in some sort proportionable unto the
reward.

Now then, first since we are creatures; secondly, sinful creatures Iam. 4.1. 1
Ioh. 1.10.
; thirdly, our works not ours, but Gods Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor. 4.7.
; fourthly, due debt, not supererogated Luke 17.10.
; fifthly, stained with imperfections Gal. 5.17.
; sixthly, no way beneficial unto God Psalm 16.2. Rom 11.35. Job. 22.2. and 35.7.
; seauenthly, no way comparable unto the glory that shall be revealed Romans
8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
, how shall we say that they are, or can be meritorious, that is, such as by
any value, or worth of them should bind the Lord to recompense them?
especially with such a transcendent excellency, and weight of glory, as is
that of the kingdom of heaven? I might be infinite in this kind, but abstain
purposely from prolixnie. Hear we now the reasons brought by our adversaries
to stablish the merit of good works, done in grace.

The Text now in hand, is as often, as any alleged; whence they must thus
reason; if GOD shall reward every man according to his works, giving to those
which continue in well doing, eternal life, verse 7. then are good works
meritorious of eternal life; but the first is true, therefore the second also.
Ans. The consequence is not good; for though GOD give eternal life, to those
that continue in well doing, yet follows it not, that well doing deserves
eternal life: neither does this place intimate the cause for which eternal
life is given, but the qualification of the persons that shall have admittance
into eternal life; which brief answer well weighed, brings much light to the
controversy; for indeed the question is not, whether men continuing in well
doing shall have eternal life; which we grant, but whether such as are saved,
are saved for the merit of their well doing. And in this whole question, there
is a double inquiry to be attended: first, of the subject or persons, to whom
eternal life is given; as also of their qualification; to which the answer is
that it is given to such as by faith are united unto Christ, and bring forth
the fruits of faith, holy obedience: secondly, of the cause for which it is
given; to which the scripture never makes other answer then this, for the
merits and obedience of Jesus Christ apprehended by faith. Works are Regula
retributions^, non causa mercedis: and if in any place, there be any thing said
to the contrary, it is spoken according to the tenor of the legal covenant;
not after that covenant of grace which is made with us in the Gospel; where
the condition is altered: for whereas the Covenant of works runs thus; do
this and live; the Covenant of grace has this condition, believe and thou
shall be saved: Instance. But in the giving of eternal life, according to the
Covenant of the Gospel, salvation is said to be given according to works; as
here. Ans. True, according to works as testimonies of Faith, not for works as
causes of salvation; and in a word, that we may see this answer to fit this
place, consider the drift of the Apostle, in alleging this prouerbiall
sentence, as I may term it: he had called the day of judgment, a day of
declaration of the just judgment of God; and in these words renders a reason
of that appellation; and shows withal, how the Lord shall declare the equity
of his proceedings, in accepting some to salvation, rejecting others to
damnation: the Lord shall declare his justice and equity hereby; by giving to
every man according to his works, as the best means to declare the truth of
faith, hidden in the heart, and the certainest evidences of infidelity lurking
in hypocrites.

But let us hear what they object further, against this exposition, laboring
to prove, that salvation is given according to works, not only as testimonies
of Faith, but as causes of eternal life. Object. The scripture testifies that
the heavenly reward is given according to the measure and proportion of works
and labor; therefore good works deserve everlasting salvation: and eternal
life is given not only according to works as testimonies, and fruits of
faith, but for works as causes of salvation. Ans. To omit that the places
alleged to this purpose, are for the most part impertinent to the purpose, I
answer, that the scripture, where it speaks of proportioning glory to our
labor, means it not of the substance of eternal life simply: how then? Ans.
Themselves have a distinction fit for this purpose; for thus they distinguish
of eternal glory, that it is either essential, or accidental; the first
they call Auream, the crown; the second Aureolum the crownet: that is, an
emminence of glory greater then other, according to the excellency, and
measure of their works.

Now for the substance of eternal happiness it comes unto us as an
inheritance, and by right of Adoption in Christ, or if by purchase, rather
Christ's then ours Mat. 25.34. Romans 8.19. 1 Pet. 1.5.
: but for the measure of glory it is indeed proportioned to the measure of
sanctification, and obedience here performed; yet not so, as if the best
measure or degree of glory, were deserved by the greatest measure of obedience
Romans 8.18.
: but only for the promise and bounty of our heavenly Father; and our Divines
in this controversy, to show that this proportion of glory, arises not from
any proportionable worth of our labors, use this similitude: as if some
wealthy king, should out of his bounty to some choice of his subjects, whom in
his love he means to advance above others, propound ten several prises, the
least of them equalling the value of a kingdom; on these terms, that he that
comes first to the goal, should have the greatest, he that seconds him the
second, and so in order; the race being ended, the several rewards are, and
may be said to be given according to their running, and proportion of speed
therein, and yet it were fondly concluded, that they by their running deserve
such rewards, etc so the application is easy.

Ergo, etc. Ans. Some Divines grant the consequence, and deny the assumption,
yielding, that in these scriptures no more is affirmed, then that evil works
are the rule, not the cause of damnation: not but that sins are also causes
effectual of damnation, as other scriptures teach plentifully, but that this
is all, that these scriptures affirm; yea and some have gone so far,
(prestent ipsi) as to say, that infidelity only damnes; which they thus
explane, desiring to be understood, as speaking of the event, not of the
natural desert of other sins.

And as they explane themselves, their words have some truth, though perhaps
impertinent to the argument in hand; for it is true, that there is no sin, in
the event, seuering from salvation but what is not repented of, and for pardon
whereof, the committer has not apprehended satisfaction in Christ; it being
the Lords promise, that the sins of a believing penitent, shall be all
pardonable unto him. But secondly, I answer, by denying the sequel; and that,
partly in respect of the great desparitie between the two; partly also by
explanation of the Apostle; good works are respected only as testimonies of
faith, not as causes deserving salvation: because indeed they are signs of
faith, and by reason of their imperfection, can be no meriting causes of
salvation; evil works are regarded both as signs of infidelity, and as
causes of damnation; having in them a nature to deserve endless torment, being
committed against an endless majesty: And this is the same, that the Apostle
teaches, Romans 6.21.22.23. where having proposed the contrary issues of sin,
and Gods service; of sin, shame and death; of obedience, holiness and
salvation: ver^e 23. as it were purposely to cut off all such reasonings from
paritie, thus concludes; the wages o^ sin is d ath: but eternal li^e is the
gift of God: as if he should say, though it b^ true, that death follows
sin, and life holiness, yet follow they not from like principles: for death
follows sin, as a deserved stipend; life holiness as a free gift of God, in
respect of his promise; and of the first objection thus far: in the rest I
will be more brief.

Their second reason is drawn from those places, where eternal life is called
a reward Mat. 5.11.12.
: Ans. First, that it is so called not properly, but by Analogy: because as
wages follows work; so life eternal holiness: hence called the end
properly 1 Pe. 5.
: therefore also the term sometimes put to signify any free blessing given of
bounty, without respect to merit Psalm. 127.
: secondly, therefore the Apostle makes a double kind of reward; one properly
so called, another analogicall Romans 44.
, besides that the place cited, speaks rather of accidental, then of
essential glory.

Their third reason, from those scriptures that testify life eternal to be so
given to good works, that the works are said to be the reason why eternal
life is given, as Mat. 25.34.35.

Ans. Who knows not but these conjunctions (for) etc. serve to intimate any
argument, as well as the cause: Ex. If I should thus say, Summer is near, for
the figgetree sprowteth: the tree is good, for it bears good fruit; who sees
not but my (for) shows rather the effect, then the cause? secondly, these
words seem to be a reason, not so much of their admission, as of the cause of
their admission into life eternal: the kingdom is prepared for you; for you
have shown by works, that you were chosen to life: so that which is objected
from paritie of Reason, in the first contrary, see the answer to the first
objection.

Fourth reason, from those places where reward is said to be rendered to good
works of justice, as 2 These. 1.7. 2 Timothy 4.8.

Ans. Justice of God sometimes signifies the truth of God, and his fidelity in
performing promise Romans 33 5. 1 Ioh. 1.19.
: and so in justice, that is, in respect of the promise of God, and his truth
therein, reward is rendered to our labors: and if in any other scripture
salvation is said to be given as of justice, it has relation to the merit of
Christ, not to any desert of our own.

Fifth reason, from these scriptures wherein is mention made of our worthiness, 2
These. 1.5. Luke 20.35. Apoc. 3.4.

Ans. Neither these, nor any other scripture speaks of any worthiness of us
before God, by reason of our works; but how worthy? first, by acceptance in
respect of Christ's worthiness imputed unto us: secondly, comparatively unto
men, that have neglected holiness, and withdrawn themselves from the cross;
other reasons will be more fitly answered in their several places, and of this
question thus far: other particulars of this verse will be best explaned in
the explication annexed by the Apostle.

Verse 7. That is, to them which through patience in well doing seek glory,
and honor, and immortality, eternal life.

Verse 8. But unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

Verse 9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that
does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian.

Verse 10. But to every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and
peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian.


IN these verses the Apostle draws out into particulars, that which he has
summarily set down in the former. Now whether these sentences be legal, or
evangelical it matters not much to enquire; for rightly explaned, they have
their truth in the Gospel; their drift is to prove by particulars, the general
before laid down: God shall give every man according to the quality of his
works continuers in well doing, shall have life eternal, men obstinate in
evil doing, indignation and wrath. Hence might be observed, what before was
touched, that the rule of recompense are the works of men; they are Regula,
though in good works, not causa, vt supra: Reason also was before given;
because the end of the last judgment, being to justify unto the very wicked,
both men and Angels, the equity of Gods secret judgment, works seem the
best outward evidences of faith, and infidelity.

Verse 7.
To them which by continuance, etc.] Wherein are two things: first, how they
are qualified that are admitted to life eternal: they are such as continue,
etc. secondly, the blessed issue of a man thus qualified; life eternal.

Heb. 12.14. Psalm. 15. Heb. 5.9.
: understand it of grown men, that have opportunity: and thus far Papists
and we agree: the question between us, is, how they are necessary; whether
necessitate causae, or necessitate presentiae, that is, whether as causes
procuring by their merit salvation, or as antecedents only, and as it were
dispositions in the subject, which if they were absent, life eternal should
not be given. The former is that which Papists defend, and we have before
confuted: the latter we acknowledge, God having required them, first, as
testimonies of thankefulnes, for the grace of redemption Luke 1.47.45.
: secondly, as evidences of faith, to the stopping of all slanderous mouths
Isay 2.3.
: thirdly, as means to draw others to Christ, by our virtuous example 1 Pet.
2.12.
: in a word, according to that old saying of Bernard, as via regni, not as
causa regnandi: as the way to the kingdom, not as causes of reigning.

yes, (say they) for except men be persuaded, that they shall by their good
works deserve heaven, they will never be drawn to good works. No? is it not
a sufficient spur to obedience, that God has so freely chosen us to
salvation, redeemed us by his sons blood, promised a glorious recompense to be
given of grace, except they may also merit it at the hands of God? such
mercenarie obedience beseemes slaves, not sons; such thoughts of pride, what
show they but a loathnes to be beholding to the Lord for salvation? as if they
would none but what they pay for.

Come we now from their slanders, to our peoples Saul also was amongst the
Prophets, and Judas numbered with the twelve?) that professing to know GOD, and
believe in Jesus Christ, in their works deny him; so abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate Tit. 1.16.
; faith only iustifies, what need good works? surely to justify thee they
are needelesse, and fruitless; but to approve thy justification to thy self
and others, good works are needful Iam. 2.14.
: if a man say he has faith, and has no works, can that faith save him?
Consider the Saints of God, and see whether faith that justified them before
God, was not fruitful also by good works amongst men Gal. 5.6.
: Abraham's faith, was it not a working faith? Rahabs faith, was it not a
working faith? and surely, what ever men talk of their good faith to God, if
thy want good works of obedience to God, and love to men, they confute by
their life, what they profess with their tongue.

And therefore, let us all that have by grace received good works; that we be
not unfruitful Tit. 3.8.14.
: It is an holy truth, that fire and water may as well agree, as faith and
works concur in the act of justifying; and as easily may heat be severed
from fire, or light from the sun, as good works from faith in the life of
him that is justified Gal. 5.6.
. Their uses might at large be shown, but that I see still the volume grower
greater, then mine opinion: they serve to assure us of our election, and
calling 2 Pet. 1.10.
: secondly, to adorn the doctrine of our GOD and Savior T^t 2.10.
: thirdly, to stop the blasphemous mouths of the faithless 1 Pet. 2.13.
: fourthly, to win even aliens to the truth, etc.

be faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life Apoc.
: and if any man withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him,
Heb. 10.38.

diary dewy Christians, whose goodness is dissipate as soon as ever the sun
beholds it, would conscionablie remember it Hos. 6.4.
: to desist from good beginnings, is far worse then never to have begun 2
Pet. 2.10.
: they loose what they wrought; and what ever they have done, is in vain unto
them, Gal. 3.4.

Seek glory and honor.] So then the observation hence is easy, that it is
lawful in obedience to have respect to the end of obedience, as a motive
stirring up to all holy duties Heb. 11.25.26. 2 Cor. 4.18.
: neither is it for nothing, that it pleases the Lord to propound it in the
promise, to the end to quicken our dulnes, etc.

against us when they affirm us to teach, that it is unlawful f^^ us to wo^ke
intuitu mercedis: this in deed we teach, that our principal end and motive,
ought not to be the reward, but Gods glory. Reasons, for this were to
subordinate the Creator to the creature, and to seek to our selves: secondly
that though there were no reward, or happiness promised, yet ought we to
perform duties enjoined: for the principal motives to all obedience, ought
to be: See Bernard de diligendo Deo. cap. 3.
first conscience of duty: secondly, love of Gods majesty: thirdly, zeal of
his glory.

Eternal life, glory, honor, peace, etc.] Verse 7.10.
This is the issue, and end of obedience Romans 6.22.
: of which blessed issue to speak as it deserves, what tongue of men or Angels
is able 1 Cor. 2.
? a little part of it here obtained, how passes it all understanding Phil. 4.7.
? and who can utter the sweetness of that peace of conscience, and spiritual
rejoicing in GOD, which himself has tasted? but sure, if the beginning be so
sweet, what shall the fullness be? What delight is it to a Christian soul, in
this Tabernacle of the body, but even, as in a glass, to behold the face of
GOD manifested in Jesus Christ? how glads it a child of GOD, when he can but
in the least measure, master his corruptions? and how joyful, when he has
occasion to manifest the sincerity of his affectionate love to his maker and
redeemer? etc. which graces when they shall be perfected, and we freed from
all grieuances inward and outward, what access (imagine we) shall come to our
happiness? note what the Scripture speaks to set out the excellency of this
happy estate; first, by perfection: secondly, variety: thirdly, perpetuity
of all good things: fourthly, by absence of all things that can in the least
measure impeach our happiness.

Mat. 3.14.
? Oh, had they ever but tasted the sweet comforts, that are in the very works
of religion, and that heaven upon earth, the feast of a good conscience, could
they thus speak? or if the Lord would set them as he did Moses, upon some
Neboth, to behold but the face of the heavenly Canaan, how would it ravish
their thoughts and affections; and make them say there were no life to the life
of a Christian, that here has the first fruits, and upon certain evidences,
expects the full harvest of happiness.

Cor. 5.1.

Verse 8. But unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

Verse 9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that
does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian.

Verse 10. But to every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and
peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian.


SEe we now the contrary quality, and issue of an obstinate sinner; his
description is first to be considered, then his issue.

They are set out by four properties: first, contentious: secondly,

Now contentions they are called especially in respect of their vain iangling
against Gods truth, as unwilling to let the light thereof shine to their hearts
2 Timothy 3.8.
: and this humor of wrangling, this spirit of contradiction, arises, first,
partly from that natural enmity that is betwixt carnal wisdom, and that of
Gods spirit Romans 8.7.
: secondly, partly from vain glory Phil. 2.3.
: whiles they hold it a point of wit, to be able to reason against the plainest
truths: and thirdly, from an evil conscience, desirous to maintain peace in
evil, which knowledge and yielding to the truth cannot but disturb, Ioh. 3.20.

Now if there be any truth so clearly euidenced, that they cannot but
acknowledge it, yet in this second they show their rotten hearts: they yield no
obedience thereto Jude 10.
: and this is the devils policy, if he cannot blind the eyes of the
understanding, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ may not
shine unto them 2 Cor. 4.4.
, if that succeed not, yet labors he to keep in wilful disobedience Ephesians.
22.
: but which yet increases their wickedness, they not only withhold obedience
from the truth, but willingly yield obedience to unrighteousness 2 Pet. 2.19.
: servants of corruption Romans 6.12.
: obey sin in the lusts thereof; sin sitting in their hearts, as the
Centurion in his house, bidding one go, and he runs; another come and he
comes.

To which add the last, and you shall have a wicked carnal man in his
colors: he is ordinary in the committing of sin, that is his trade Ephesians.
4.19. 2 Pet. 2.14. Pro. 4.16. Isay 5 11. Ier. 6.7.
: as the fountain casts out her waters, so they their malice: how evident
those notes of unreformed, and damnable sinners are amongst us, it were long to
speak, and is doleful to consider. This only let all such wrangling,
rebellious workers of wickedness consider, their present estate and future
misery; that if it be possible, they may rid themselves out of the snare of
the devil, of whom they are taken, to do his will; surely, says James the
wisdom that is from above is (...) Iam. 3.17.
, and as it is said Isay 52.14.
, that Kings should not open their mouths against Christ, so is it true of all
Gods children, they labor to captiuate every thought to the obedience of
Christ 2 Cor. 10.5.
, and though they fail in many particulars through frailty, yet this they can
say; sin reigns not in them Romans 6.12. and 7.23.
; neither walk they after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1.

Well, see we secondly the end, issue, and just recompense of such obstinate
sinners.

To such shall be indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish.

Note here how thick the Apostle lets come on with vengeanee against such
sinners; Psalm. 11.6. Mar. 9.43.45. such changes and armies of sorrows has the
Lord provided for all the ungodly. Reasons thereof seem these, first, to teach
that no sin is little: secondly, to rowse us to consideration of our natural
misery, and to melt our hearts Nehe. 1. Joel 2.13. 2 Reg. 22.20.
: thirdly, that we might hunger and thirst after reconciliation by Christ Gal.
3.24.
: fourthly, to deter us from practice of sin.

Now hence let us learn, rightly to poyse the weight of our sins, in the
balance of the sanctuary: and by the fearful issue and afterclaps that they
bring, judge how heinous they are in the sight of GOD: can we think them
little, that provoke the fiery, and furious wrath of the Lord? or that cast us
into such intolerable anguish and tribulation? it is the folly of carnal men,
ever to little their sins: because commonly they measure them by the
smalnesse of the matter wherein they offend: a little recreation on the saboth,
etc. Now brethren know we, that sins are to be esteemed rather thus; by the
measure of malice in the heart, from which they proceed, then by the small
matter wherein we offend Numb. 15.35.
: a small matter it seems, to gather a few sticks upon the sabbath; but yet
the presumptuousnes of the offender made it great in the eyes of God: secondly,
by the greatness of the person whom we offend, that is, the majesty of God:
thirdly, the price of the Ransom; the blood of God himself Acts 20.28.
: fourthly, the weight of vengeance, whereinto they plunge us: yea, and mark,
how the smalnesse of the matter may aggrauate the sin; for how great contempt
of Gods majesty shows it? when for a trifle, a man will incur his
displeasure; to transgress for a piece of bread, as the just man speaks.

Nahu. 1.2.3.4 etc.

Joseph speaks of Pharaohs dreams, they are doubled, because the thing is
decreed with God, and the Lord hastens to perform it, Genesis 41.32.

Genesis 19.14.
? and how does every man almost, bless himself in his wickedness? persuading
himself, that he may have peace, though he walk after the stubbornness of
his own heart Deuteronomy. 29.18.19.
: and ever we think our master delays his coming Luke 12.45.
: Oh, says the Apostle, be not deceived; no whoremonger, drunkard, etc. has
any inheritance in the kingdom of God 1 Cor. 6.9.
: and let no man deceive you with vain words; for such things sake, comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience Ephesians. 5.6.
. And thus much of this period.

Verse 11. For there is no respect of persons with God.
NOw follows a reason, proving the Lords impartialitie, both in mercy and
judgment: (...), whether Jew or Gentile, it matters not, if they obey, they
shall live, if they be rebellious, they shall perish. Reason, from the
property of the Lord; with God there is no respect of persons; explained,
verse 12. especially in that part that respects punishment.

It may be demanded, Ans. By person or face, as some read agreeably to the
phrase of scripture, we must here understand, not simply men themselves, but
their outward condition, and quality, as country, sex, wealth, poverty,
friendship, enmity, and whatsoever outward thing impertinent to the cause: to
accept or respect persons, is, when a man is moved to reward or punish, only
by these and the like outward circumstances, so that the meaning, as I take it
is this: that the Lord, in his judgment, respects no man according to his
outward condition, or state; as nation, parentage, poverty, wealth, etc. But
whosoever he is, Jew or Gentile, male or female, poor or rich, bond or free,
that fears God and works righteousness is accepted with him Acts 10.34.
: and whosoever works evil, is without partiality punished, Job. 34.19.

Now the usual inference of Papists hence is this, that therefore there is no
such absolute decree of election or reprobation as we teach; whereby the Lord
chooses one to salvation, and refuses another, of his mere (...), and free
power and right he has over all, but that the decree is respective, to
different behauiours foreseen: Reason, otherwise God shall be a respecter of
persons. Ans. It follows not: for though herein unequal things be given to
equal persons, yet is not the Lord moved hereto with any external
circumstances, such as before are mentioned: secondly, it is a sound rule, that
schoolmen give, that in gratuitis acception of persons has no place;
Antonin. part. 2. Tit. 1. cap. 20. Aquin. in locum.
neither is he guilty of accepting men's persons, which prefers one before
another, in things which duty binds not to give: acception of persons is
opposed to justice, and has place only in things given as of debt. Exemp.
that God gives grace to one sinner by calling, denies grace to another, here is
no acception of persons; for God is not bound to give to either, but of free
mercy and grace gives to one, what he justly denies to another, being bound
to neither Mat. 20.15.
: this easily applied to the purpose.

Having thus cleared the meaning of the text, see it verified in the Lords own
practice; the Lazars poverty hindered not his salvation; neither the rich man's
pomp free him from damnation Luke 16.22.23
: It was no impeachment to Cornelius that he was a Gentile, nor immunitie to
any, that he was a Jew; Saules scepter was no shelter from Gods wrath, nor
David's sheephooke an hold-backe from Gods blessings: Esaus eldership removed
not Gods hate, nor Jacobs minority hinder his love, etc. What needs more
words? since the Apostle pleases to instance in one part, follow we his steps,
and tell me who ever perished in obedience, or prospered in rebellion? God
spared not the Angels for their excellency, nor the old world for their
multitude, nor Jerusalem for fair buildings, nor Saul for his personage, nor
Absolon for his beauty, nor Sodom for her fatness; but all these perished
equally for disobedience.

And what may this teach us? first comfort in our Act 10.34.
: it is not enquired how wealthy or honorable, how old or young, how learned
or unlearned, but how obedient, etc.

Terror in evil doing, and filial fear in all our 1 Pet. 1.17.
: it is not Gentry, nor Lordship, nor kingdom, that can steed thee, if thou
be a transgressor Job. 34.19
: GOD accepts not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor, seeing they are all the work of his hands: Now Lord, that we could thus
persuade our selves: and that we could ever consider, how impartial a judge
we shall all one day stand before Apoc. 20.12.
: that Princes could thus think their swearing, epicurisme, whoredom, sabbath
breaking, etc. lays equal guilt upon them, as upon others, if not greater,
because exemplarie, etc. but what times are we fallen into? wherein greatness
and smalnesse, riches and poverty, profession and Atheism, are made so many
exemptions from obedience, and taken as dispensations for wilful
transgressions: the poor man thinks his poverty will excuse his pilfering;
the rich, that riches shall bear out his oppression, etc. Now had we grace to
remember that great day, when we shall stand before GOD, stripped of all our
personal qualities, and regarded only according to our works, how much of
this libertisme would be abated? But let us see other uses.

Thirdly, we are here taught, to imitate the example this duty pressed by the
Scriptures, to every estate and cond^tion of men; to Judges and Magistrates
Deuteronomy. 1.17.
; you shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the small,
as well as the great, not fear the face of the mighty, nor esteem a poor
man in his cause Exodus 13.3.
: not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty
Leuit. 19.15.
: and would God we had not just cause to complain of our laws, in respect of
their execution, as Anacharsis did of those of the Scythians; that they were
like Spyders webbes, the great flies break through, and the smaller only are
holden.

Secondly, to Ministers urged with strait charge and adiuration 1 Timothy 5.21.
: that they thus walk as in all parts of their ministry, so especially in
reproof of sins; observing these things without preferring one before
another, and do nothing partially.

Thirdly, to common Christians, that they have not the faith of GOD in respect
of persons Iam. 2.1.
: etc. Where the form of such regard to persons is expressed, and reasons of
dehortation given; first, God has chosen: secondly, rich in faith: thirdly,
heirs of the kingdom; fourthly contrary is sin. But hereof thus far.

Verse 12. For as many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish also
without the Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the
Law.
NOw follows the proof, and explanation of what was generally propounded.

They that sinned without the Law, etc. Sense.
This seems a paradoxe; no Law and yet transgression Romans 4.15.
? and every sin is an anomie, the breach of some Law 1 Ioh. 3.4.
: Ans. It is true, where there is no law at all, there can be no transgression;
but of laws of God we may thus distinguish, according to the different manner
of their delivery; there is a law written, and there is the law unwritten:
which commonly we call, the law of Nature: written in every man's heart: they
differ not in substance, but in circumstance touching manner of delivery. The
meaning of the words then is this, they that sinned without the law written,
shall perish without the law written, that is, without imputation of the
writing of the law; that shall lay no more guilt or aggrauation on their
consciences, in as much as the Lord vouchsafed not that mercy unto them;
neither requires more of any, then he committed unto them: but see we the
observations.

First, hence it is easily collected, that even such as sin of invincible
ignorance, Luke 12.47.48.

Reasons: first, God made man righteous Eccl. 7.31.
: secondly, amongst no people leaves himself without testimony Act. 14.16.
: having laid open before every man's eyes, the great book of his creatures
Romans 1.20.
, and given them Reason, and understanding, whereby, in discourse, they may
arise from the creatures to the Creator Ioh. 1.9.
, even in things known naturally, there is in all, either malicious corruption
Jude 10.
; or wilful omission, Romans 1.21.

ignoramus, will not serve turn at the day of reckoning and accounts;
especially for us in the Church, to whom the law written has been committed:
surely, if any should be excused for ignorance, it should be the Gentiles: and
even they sinning, perish: and yet, even this the best pillar of hope and
confidence, our poor people have; and hear what a company of Fig leaves
they have sowed together, to hide this their nakedness: first, one says he has
that knowledge that GOD has given him: Ans. Not so: for he gave thee more in
Adam Genesis 1.27. Col. 3.10.
: secondly, Gods gifts are to be measured, according to the means vouchsafed:
and means plentiful have been granted unto our people, which if we refuse to
make use of, we cannot blame God for not giving, but our selves, for not
receiving what the Lord tendered unto us.

A second, pretends multiplicitie of worldly businesses, Ans. See Luke 14.18.
Mat. 6.33. Pro. 8.18.

A third, not booke-learnd: Ans. First, the book of the creatures lies open:
secondly, the fault thine own: thirdly, even without booke-learning, may a
comfortable measure of knowledge be attained by attendance to the public
ministry, conference, prayer, etc.

A fourth, obscurity of Scriptures; which yet are plain: first, in things
necessary: secondly, to Gods children 2 Cor. 4.4.
: thirdly, having will to understand Pro. 8.18.
: fourthy, and using the helps the Lord has provided, Ier. 3.15. Mal. 2 7.
Ephesians 4.11.12.13.

A (...) that their guides shall answer for them. Ans. Not if they have been
skillful, and industrious Ezech. 3.19. Gal. 6.5.
, secondly, if blind or malicious seducers, they shall perish with thee but not
without thee. Mat. 15.14.

Reasons de^^ading ignorance: first, that none excuses, no not inuinc^ble
wholly Luke 12.48.
: secondly, no service done in ignorance, pleases God, thou^h done in greatest
heat of devotion Romans 10.2. Eccles. 4.17.
: thirdly, ignorance makes vassals of Satan 2 Timothy 2.25.26.
: fourthly, excludes from salvation, Ioh. 17.3. 2 These. 1.8.

Shall peri^h without the law.] That is without imputation of the breach of
the law as it was written.

Now here it may be demanded, whether the breach of the whole Moral law, shall
not be imputed to the Nations, to whom it was not committed in writing? but
only the breach of so much as was known unto them by that divine light, that
remained to them afer the fall? Ans. I take it yes; that every breach of
every Moral precept, is imputable to every child of Adam, Reason, because
we were all created in him righteous Eccles. 7.31.
, and had by creation the knowledge of the whole law Moral, Col 3.10.

It may again be demanded, whether infidelity in respect of the Gospel,
shall be imputed to the Gentiles, unto whom it was not revealed? Ans. I think
no; because, that is no doctrine known by nature, neither had Adam the
knowledge thereof revealed unto him; but by especial grace, after the fall,
when he stood in esteem of a private person.

And they that sinned in the Law.] That is, the Jews to whom the perfect
Doctrine of the law was renewed in writing shall be judged by the law, etc.
quatenus, it was written, and redeliuered unto them.

Mat. 11.21 22.23.24.
: easier for Tyrians, and Sydonyans, Sodomites, and Gomorheans, then for the
people of Capernaum, Corazin and Bethsaida. Reason, because to them fewer, to
these greater means of repentance vouchsafed.

Means are of two sorts; first, out^ard, as creatures, scriptures, preaching,
sacraments, afflictions, etc secondly, inward, natural reason, wit, capacity,
Art, etc. acquired by education, 2. supernatural, the spirit of God, the best
schoolemaister.

Reason; as sins have more or less of wilfulnes, so are they more or less
heinous in the sight of God L^^^ ^.4.5.6.
: secondly, even humane equity requires little, where little; more, where
more is committed. Luke 12.48.

Luke 12.48.
: and that might serve them for salvation, which shall not steed us.

Secondly, let us all be admonished, to be in some

Thirdly, let no man swell with conceit of his great

Before we pass from this place, it shall not be amiss to propound one
doubt, that perhaps may disquiet weak consciences: shall they all perish that
sin in the law? and that sin without law? who then shall be saved? Ans. To
this the answer is, that the Gospel points at a remedy for this rigor of
the law; these sentences are legal, and the Gospel only reueales exceptions:
such as these: first, except Christ satisfy: secondly, except faith apprehend
his satisfaction Ioh. 3.10. Gal. 3.13.
: and thus must all legal sentences be understood.

It was the Apostles discretion, Mat. 19.17.

Iona. 3.4. Act. 2.36.37. Iud 23.
: words of comfort must be ministered in season: Isay 50.4. which season may as
well be prevented, as ouershipt.

Verse 13. For the hearers of the Law are not righteous before God: but the
doers of the Law shall be justified.

Verse 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, they having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.

Verse 15. Which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or
excusing.


THese three verses included in a parenthesis, contain answer to objections
that might be made out of the twelfe verse. As first, whereas Paul had said,
that the Jews, sinning in the law, should be judged and condemned by the law:
the Jews might thus except; that they are hearers of the law, and therefore not
culpable of judgment, by the law: Ans. The Apostle answers to the
consequence: though hearers, yet not therefore free from the sentence ot the
law; reason, for not the hearers, but the doers of the law shall be justified;
hearing suffices not, except there be doing also; the Gentiles plea for
themselves, is also propounded and answered, ver. 14 as we shall anon see.

For the meaning of the words, shall be justified, it may be demanded what is
here meant by justifying, whether absolution and acquitall from guilt of sin,
and acceptance for righteous: or rather being made righteous by inherent
justice. Rhemists here triumph over us as making justification, in this and all
other places, to signify nothing else but acquitall from sin, and
acceptance for righteous. Ans. Wherein first they slander us; for none of us
teach that to be justified always signifies to be absolved from sin. Vt
supra in Capite primo. ver. 17. Neither in this and other like legal
sentences, urge we that signification of the word; but to be justified, we say
in the terms of the law, signifies to be righteous by inherent justice; and
accordingly to be accepted as just in the sight of God: now whereas they hence
infer, that therefore good works justify a man in the sight of God, and to
that purpose allege this place, the doers of the Law shall be justified. Ans.
We answer, that this sentence is to be understood hypothetically; that is
thus; that a man shall be justified by the works of the law; if he do the
works of the law; as the law prescribes them to be done; and this is indeed
the drift of the Apostle, as appears to any man reading the place with
attention, and judgment: not simply to show how a sinner is justified before
God, but to show what is requisite to justification, according to the tenor of
the law: to wit, not the hearing only, but doing; and that in such sort, as
the law prescribes: and so we say, that if there be any man that shall bring
unto the Lord the perfect obedience of the law, of his own performing; that
man shall be justified, yea and saved by his works; but in as much as no man,
neither natural nor regenerate, can so fulfill the law as the law requires,
therefore still we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. Thus much of the meaning: see now the instructions.



Luke 81 13.14.15. Iam. 1 2^.

Mat. 1^.17. Gal 3.13.

In which obedience these things must concur according to the tenor of the
law: first, that it be performed by our selves, for the law reueales not the
mediator: secondly, it must be inward, as well as outward Romans 7.14.
: thirdly, perfect in parts and degrees Deuteronomy. 6.5.
: fourthly, constant and continual from the conception, without the least
interruption, through the whole course of the life Gal. 3.10.
: the least thought dissonant from the law, laying us open to the curse.

Rom 8.3.
, which reason concludes as well men in grace as those in their pure naturals
Psalm. 143.3.
: this question will be more seasonablie discussed in the process of the
Epistle; and therefore I here pass it over: only I say as Paul, Gal. 4.21.
When he had fully proved this point: tell me says he, you that will needs be
under the law, and require righteousness and salvation thereby; do you not
hear the law? you must perfectly keep the law in all points, if you will be
justified thereby; which if it be impossible to flesh Romans 8.3.
, and we have all flesh, though mingled with spirit after grace Romans 7. Gal.
5.17.
, why stand we out at the staves end with the Lord? refusing his gracious offer
of righteousness made us in Christ Jesus. But to proceed.

Verse 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, they having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.

Verse 15. Which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or
excusing.


Having answered what the Jews might object, he now preoccupates the Gentiles
plea for themselves: he had said, that even they that sinned without the law,
should perish also without the law, verse 12. Some Gentile might here object,
that not having the law, they could not transgress; neither were culpable of
judgment; the Apostle answers, that though they had not the law written in
tables of stone, as the Jews; in which respect they might be said not to have
the law: yet had they the knowledge of the law, in respect of the outward
works thereof, written in their hearts, and this he proves: first; a facto, by
their deed; they did the works of the law, therefore knew it; secondly, from
testimony of conscience; accusing in breaches, excusing in obseruances of the
law; therefore had some knowledge of the law of God, and could not plead
absolute ignorances this the sum.

periphrasis or description of the Gentiles; they were such as had not the
law; that is delivered to them in writing, or by special revelation, as had
the Jews: Psalm. 147.20. Ephe^. 2.12 Acts 14.15.16. etc.

And least any blame the justice of God in this behalf, know that the Lord is
bound to no people, or person; that he vouchsafed the scriptures to the Jews
was his special mercy Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus 19.
: that he denied that mercy to the Gentiles, it was of his absolute (...),
whereby he may do with his own, what thinks him good Mat. 20.15.
; no man having given him before. Romans 11.35.

Ephesians. 2.12. and 3. ad medium. Act. 14.16.

Acts 22.22.

they do by nature the things of the law. For the sense of the words: least
any Pelagian hence infer a power in Nature, since the fall to fulfill the
whole law: it shall not be amiss, a little to enquire the meaning, of what
Paul here speaks. The things of the law: indefinitely spoken, and is
particularly to be understood; for all they knew not, but some things
prescribed in the law they knew, and practiced; some worship they performed
unto God, and were strict obseruers of civil justice, and honesty; as
appears both by laws, enacted for observance of both, and by histories,
recording the excellent virtues of many heathen. By nature. Nature is here
opposed, either to scripture, or to grace; and may thus be understood; either
that the things they did, they did by instinct of Nature, and by the dictamen
of reason natural, without any direction from Scripture, or special
revelation; or else thus, by power of Nature, without any assistance of
renewing grace; but the first sense seems most pertinent; which sense
standing, this Text is too narrow to infer so large a conclusion, as Pelagius
would hence infer: for how will it hence follow, that there is in Nature
since Adams fall, a power perfectly to fulfill the whole law, with performance
of outward and inward obedience in all things; because Paul here testifies,
that the Gentiles, by light of nature do some outward works prescribed in the
law? What logic, but Pelagian, would out of particular premises, infer so
general a conclusion?

That which we may take notice of, Abimelech Genesis 20.
, and call to mind what Paul speaks of the incest amongst the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 5.1.

And it shall be the just condemnation of many in the Church of GOD, at that
great day, that the Heathen by nature showed more conscience of obedience,
after their measure of knowledge, then those in the Church whom the Lord has
so plentifully instructed by his word, and daily exhorted to obedience? what
Christ speaks to the Jews of his time, we shall one day see verified; the
Ninevites, Queen of Saba, the heathen, shall rise up in judgment with the
Children of the Church, and shall condemn them Mat. 12.41.42.
. To read of the extreme detestation of drunkenness amongst the
Lacedaemonians, and see the bezelling of these swaggering times; how, what they
counted brutishness, our gallants call manhood Isay 5.22.
: how makes it us pity those poor heathen, and loath those, that under the
title of Christians, practice intemperance more then heathenish? Lucretia, how
priced she chastity? that chose to redeem it with loss of her life? and
shall it not judge those prostibula amongst Christians, that set sale of
honesty and all womanhood? what should I speak of their hatred of briberie?
reverence or their priests, conscience of promises, religion of oaths? etc.
surely what Paul speaks of one particular, we may make more general, such
viciousness seen amongst us, as was scarce named amongst them; many virtues
admirable in them, whose very names are worn out amongst us, and their mention
argued of novelty; I say no more, but if Christ teach, that it must be greater
righteousness then heathenish or pharisaicall, that shall give admission unto
Gods kingdom, what hope of salvation have those, that come not near the
virtuous life of heathens? But proceed we in the Text.

They having not the Law are a Law to themselves.] Sense; that is, are as a
law, doing the office of the law; ordering and directing their lives,
prescribing what is to be done, what to be avoided, by that dictamen of reason
GOD has imprinted in them; the note will be best gathered, after the
explanation of the next words.

Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts.] The work of the
Law, some interpret the office of the Law; which is to command things to be
done, to forbid things to be forborne: others the sentence and sum of the
law; which is, to love GOD above all, and our neighbor as our selves: I take
it, they best interpret, that by the work of the law understand the substance
of external actions therein prescribed; which is well nigh all that the
Gentiles had knowledge of: for as touching the right fountain, manner, end of
our actions, they knew not: the works they knew and performed, but failed in
the right manner of performance; written in their hearts: to wit, in respect of
knowledge; showed by practicing them; which they could not have done, had they
not known.

Hence then the observation offers it self that was made in the first Chapter,
Ier. 31.33.
Ans. The place is to understood. First, of distinct and particular knowledge,
which Heathens had not. Secondly, in respect of sincere affection, endeavor,
and some acceptable measure of performance.

If again it be objected, that some of them were brutish, both in
understanding and practice. Ans. They were such as did suffocate, and
extinguish the light of nature in them; keeping down the truth in
unrighteousness; and therefore justly given up to a reprobate mind Romans
1.18.19.20.21.28. Ioh. 1.9.
. The uses of this point, see in the annotations upon the first Chapter, the
nineteenth and twentieth verses. And thus much of the first evidence, proving
the Gentiles knowledge of the law: the second follows; which is, the
concordant testimony and works of conscience. The opening of these words and
their application to the Apostles purpose, see above in the coherence.

That which is to be observed out of this verse, I will comprise as briefly as
may be, in handling shortly the common place of conscience; so much of it I
mean, as the text seems to lead unto: as, first, the nature, secondly, the
kinds, the offices or works of conscience: thirdly, the manner how conscience
performs her office.

For the first, what conscience is: many have elegantly given descriptions of
it, from effects, adjuncts, etc. One calls it a little register, sitting in a
man's heart, with a pen in hand, to make record of all thoughts, desires,
speeches, actions of life. Another domesticus index. Another domesticus
carnifex; another thus; it is that that is either the best friend, or the
greatest foe; another thus, a friend soonest offended, hardliest appeased;
another, it is a bridle before sin, and a whip after sin: another, that
that most men brag of, and fewest have; these are elegances not altogether
unprofitable; see we more exactly the nature of it.

Touching the name, Conscience; so called either because it is joined with
science, exercising its offices, by principles of knowledge imprinted in the
understanding; which principles they call Syntereses, (...); or else, because a
joint science or knowledge, wherein some other communicate with us, as God and
our selves.

For the general nature, it is commonly enquired, whether it be an act habit,
or power of the soul: that it is not a bare act appears, because sundry
actions are given unto it; as to testify, accuse, excuse, acquit, condemn; as
also because it can never be lost. That it is not habit, appears also,
because it is borne with us, it remains therefore, that it is a power or
faculty of the soul.

For the subject wherein it is; that is either common or proper: the common
subject, are reasonable creatures, all and only; men and Angels; devils
tremble. Iam. 2.19.

Proper subject, is the understanding, not the will as all divines accord: the
faculties of the understanding, are thus distinguished diversely. First, by
their manner of action; one that simply considers things singular: secondly,
that ioynes or disioynes things thus singularly considered. Thirdly, that
discourses either by inferring one out of another, or by ordering things one
with another: again according to things considered, and ends why they are
considered: the understanding part is thus distinguished: It is either
contemplative, whose object is truth and falsehood: or practical, whose object
is good, and evil: whose end knowledge of good and evil. Now in these and
many other distinctions of the faculties of the mind, conscience is not yet
found; what then? if we say it is that faculty of the mind whereby i^
beholds it self; and all things in man by a kind of reflection, that it has
on it self; answering perhaps in office, to the common sense, in respect of
the particular senses. Bern. page 366.
Hugo libro secundum de anima. Seems not to dissent: his words are these out
of Bernard: the heart knows it self by its own knowledge; and many other
things: when it knows, or takes notice of it self, it is called conscience;
when other things besides it self, science 1 Cor. 2.11. and 4.4.
: in which respect especially, it has obtained the name of a witness;
testifying on this reflection, as I may term it, of the mind upon it self, of
all that is in the heart, etc.

Out of all which particulars arises this sum, whereby in part the nature of
conscience may be known: that conscience is a faculty of the mind, taking
notice of all that is in the mind, will, affections, life of a man: and this
seems to be the general notion of conscience, and the proper and first act
thereof; other things ascribed thereto belonging unto it secondarily only;
Whence it will follow, that a man by power of conscience may know whatsoever
is in him, as what he knows, thinks, believes, wills, purposes, greeues at,
delights in etc. this being the proper office of conscience, to see, know,
testify, what is in man Eccles. 7.24. 1 Cor. 2.11. Rom 9.1.
: which conclusion has some use in the controversy, betwixt us and Rome,
touching the knowledge of the graces of God in our hearts, testifying our
election and effectual calling.

But to proceed, Schoole-diuines speak more narrowly of conscience, making it
a faculty, or act rather of the practical understanding, concluding out of
principles in the understanding, that things are to be done or not done; well
done or ill done; where is omitted one special act, and office of conscience;
that is, testifying of things already done or omitted: but to omit these
speculations, which may perhaps distaste the learned, and amaze, rather then
edify the simple reader; the nature of conscience will best appear by
viewing: first, the acts or offices of conscience: secondly, the objects of
the several acts: thirdly, the manner how these acts are exercised. For the
first.

The acts of Conscience are these, first, to testify or give witness; the
object of which action, are all things in man, as was before said; but here
we will restrain it to his actions. Ex: If the question be whether a thing
were done by us, or no; conscience witnesses of the doing, or not doing
thereof 2 Samuel 12.13.
: I have sinned, said conscience in David, in Judas Mat. 27.3.4.
: I have not conspired against Saul, says David by testimony of his
conscience; I have had my conversation in the world in sincerity (says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 11.12.
:) and this act of conscience, is performed without any such practical
syllogism, as some have imagined to be the very nature of conscience; some
help indeed it has from memory, but none from the illatiue discourse of the
mind.

Since conscience is set in us as a witness to give Conscientia milletestes.
his conscience testifies, when the Lord cites it to answer, even of the most
secret sins. Job. 24.13.14.

Secondly, hence we are taught, not to hunt after

Thirdly, comfort thy self with this witness of 1 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 1.12.
let it suffice, that thou have God, and thine own conscience witnessing
with thee.

A second act of conscience is, to give judgment; and this act, according to
the diverse considerations of the object, is diuersified. Things whereof
conscience judges, are first, facienda; things to be done, or not to be done;
and these are considered either universally, without respect to particular
circumstances, or else particularly, with respect to such time, place, person,
manner, etc. and in things of this nature, the practical syllogism has use;
Ex: when a man is tempted of Sa han to commit Adultery; the mind has this
reasoning with it self, whether it be to be done or not; the ynterisis or
principle natural ^s this; all filthiness is to be avoided; the dictate of
Reason assumes this minor, adultery is filthiness; and conscience infers the
conclusion, therefore Adultery is to be avoided: so in good duties, where this
conclusion comes into deliberation; whether war to be undertaken against
the enemy of the country; the principle natural is this; our country is to
be defended; but this war tends to defense of our country, says the dictate
of Reason therefore infers the conscience, this war is to be undertaken

To this act of conscience, there are two other conjoined; in evil things so
apprehended at least by judgment and conscience, remur muration and a voice,
as it were, of inhibition; do it not: as in Ruben touching the murder of
Joseph; conscience, no doubt, suggested to him that inhibition: slay him not
for he is a brother.

In good things so apprehended, there is also another act of conscience, which
we call instigation, and a voice, as it were, of provocation to do them; as
in P^late, in that deliberation touching the murder of Christ: upon evidence
of his innocence, conscience concluded that he was to be absolved: and
suggested that duty; absolve him, or seek to loose him, and the like see we
in common experience of our selves; stirrings up to good duties: restraints
from sins by conscience; and when duties thus suggested, and after a sort
exhorted unto by conscience, are omitted; when sins disdained by conscience,
and from which it discourageth, are committed, these are called sins against
conscience.

And herein see we the great mercy of God toward us that knowing our
headstrong inclination to evil, has set in us this bridle, as it were, of
conscience,

A second thing whereof conscience gives judgment, is, the quality of things
either done or omitted; as that they were well, or ill done or omitted: and
herein is also use of the practical sillogisme. Ex. in that sin of Judas
betraying Christ Jesus; there was no doubt this reasoning in his mind. The
Synterisis laid this proposition; he that betrayeth innocent blood, sins;
thou Judas have betrayed innocent blood; therefore thou have sinned, says
conscience inferring the conclusion. So in good actions by the same kind of
reasoning, conscience gives judgment of good actions that they were good, and
well performed.

Dependent upon these actions, are others: as first, in evil, accusation: etc.
that is, a continual laying off our sins to our charge, as it is said of
David, after numbering the people 2 Samuel 24.10.
, and after the cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, that his heart smote
him; that is, his conscience accused him, told him he had done evil.

Secondly, condemnation 1 Ioh. 3.20.
, by applying the curse of the law to the soul of the delinquent, in the like
practical syllogism as before.

The consequents whereof, are fear and trembling Iam. 2.
: grief and sadness Dan. 5.
: desperation, etc. as in Cain, Judas, etc.

In good duties or innocence, excusing or clearing of our selves from guilt;
and so absoluing from punishment. Whence follows comfort in the soul, joy,
boldness to come into Gods presence, even in the midst of judgment 1 Ioh. 3.21.
: and these are the actions and offices of conscience: and we have seen the
manner how it performs them.



Secondly, that we hereby encourage our selves in vvel-doing, though we see no
outward acceptance, or encouragement afforded us by men: an excusing and
peaceable conscience is comfort abundant to a child of God. 2 Cor. 1.12.

Proceed we a little farther; there are accident to conscience in the
performing of these offices of judgment, two things: first, error: secondly,
scruple arising there from. Error has place both in things to be done, and in
things done: scruple especially in things deliberated, and not yet performed.

Error of conscience in both kinds, is of two sorts: it erres two ways;
either by a false assumption, the Synteresis being corrupted, or by false
applying of true principles in the conclusion.

By a false assumption; as when a man mistakes good for evil, or evil for
good; that is, thinks that good which is evil, or that evil which is good: by
which mistaking, it comes to pass, that conscience resolves, where it should
restrain; restraines, where it should resolve; condemns, where it should
acquit; acquites, where it should condemn. Exemp. It shall come to pass, that
he that kills you shall think, that he does God good service Ioh. 16.2.
: that is, having his judgment blinded, taking evil for good, his conscience
shall clear, acquit, comfort him, even where if judgment were not erroneous,
it would condemn him: examples of this kind of erroneous conscience are
frequent amongst our people: so see we many practicing usury, without any
remurmuration of conscience, through error of judgment, etc.

The second manner of conscience erring, is by false application of true
principles; instance whereof schoole-diuines make this: this principle is true;
that GOD is above all, and only to be beloved: here is the error of
conscience, when it concludes from this true principle misinterpreted, that
therefore our neighbor is not to be beloved: again, that thanksgiving is part
of Gods worship; therefore no thanks to be given to men, as instruments of Gods
blessings unto us; and of this kind of erroneous conscience, the world is full:
Recreations are lawful; a true principle: Ergo, this recreation, suppose
cards and dice in this measure, at this time, lawful; here is the error.
Religious adoration is not to be given to creatures; a true principle;
therefore we may not kneel in the act of receiving the Sacrament; an
erroneous conclusion. Christians have liberty in things indifferent; a true
principle; therefore not bound to obey Magistrates in things indifferent: an
erroneous application. Ostentation to be avoided in prayers; a true principle;
therefore we may not pray with our families; an erroneous conclusion, etc.

Causes of these errors assigned are these: first, ignorance, either
universal or particular: secondly, neglect of means of reformation: thirdly,
self-love, fourthly, pride, and that which Peter calls singing our own song,
and a disdain to yield to the judgment of men better informed.

Before I pass from this place, it shall not be amiss to propound that usual
question; whether, and how far erroneous conscience binds, for explanation.
Exempl. A man through error of judgment, is persuaded, that it is a
necessary part of Gods worship to be present at a Mass; the question is,
whether that man be bound in conscience to be present at a Mass, so that the
omission thereof, shall lay guilt of sin upon his conscience; or thus, a man
is persuaded in judgment, that to kneel at the Communion, is a kind of
Idolatry, and utterly unlawful; it is demanded whether a man having this
settled persuasion, be bound to abstain from kneeling; and whether kneeling,
he lay guilt of sin upon his conscience; or thus, a Papist living amongst us
is persuaded, that it is utterly unlawful to be present at our Church service;
the question is whether he be bound in conscience to abstain from our
congregation; so that if he be there present, he shall sin against God?
Ans. For distinct answer to this intricate question; we must distinguish of
things whereabout the error is: they are either such as are simply commanded,
or secondly, simply forbidden, or thirdly, of indifferent nature, betwixt both:
simply neither commanded, nor forbidden.

Now if the question be touching the settled error of judgment in things
simply commanded, or forbidden; the answer, as I judge, is this: that the
omitting of a thing forbidden of God erroneouslie judged lawful to be done, is
a sin in the omitter interpretatiue, as the schools speak; and yet secondly,
the conscience is not bound to do the things so erroneously judged lawful;
Hieron. ab Hang. in moral.
and I judge hereof with an ancient schooleman; that there is much difference
betwixt these two propositions in this case; the conscience suggesting that an
Idol is to be worshipped; to say the party, during that error of judgment
and suggestion of conscience not worshipping the Idol, sins: and to say,
that while that suggestion of conscience continues, he is bound to worship the
Idol: the first proposition is true; the second false; Reason of the first
proposition is, because according to such a man's judgment, that was a duty,
and therefore neglect thereof may be reduced to lack of fear of GOD. Reason of
the second this; because erroneous conscience absolues not from Gods precept,
which binds, not to commit Idolatry: more plainly thus; it suffices unto
sin, to do against conscience; it suffices not unto duty, to do according
to conscience, except the conscience be ruled by the word of God; the same is
to be holden of the second instance, and the like; where the conscience erres
in judging that unlawful, which is a commanded duty; he shall sin, that
judging it unlawful to come to our churches, yet comes; because he does that
which he judges to be a sin yet will it not follow, that he is bound not to
come; for the error of conscience cannot dispense with the bond of Gods precept.

So then you will say, not doing or doing in such a case he sins: true, but
yet here is no absolute perplexity; for there is a third thing required; that
is, deponere erronea^ conscientiam, and that is the remedy in such cases;
labor to be better informed, that thou may free thy self from this
dangerous necessity of sinning.

As touching error about things indifferent, the case is something different;
while a man judges of a thing indifferent that it is unlawful; for during
such judgment, both he shall sin in doing that which he judges unlawful,
and secondly he is bound not to do it: because the Lord has commanded
touching things indifferent, that they shall not be done with doubting Romans
14.23.
, much less where the judgment is fully persuaded of their unlawfulness: and
thus much of the settled error of conscience.

A second accident befalling conscience, is scrupulousness arising from some
error, or ignorance more or less in the judgment, and it differs thus from
that other conscience commonly called erroneous; for that there is a judgment
and resolution passed (though erroneously Romans 14.14.
) here, no judgment passed either way, but a desceptation and debate in the
mind, whether the thing to be done, be lawful or not. Romans 14.23.

And of this there are degrees: first, where the mind hangs in ^quilibrie, as
it were, in even poyse, inclining neither way, which is called ambiguitie:
secondly, where the mind is inclined more one way, then the other, yet not
fully resolved; and is called suspicion, more properly conjecture.

Causes of it as of the other; ignorance especially particular: secondly, a
ni^^ium, as some term it, of pious humility and fear.

Concerning this state of the mind and conscience, it is usually demanded in
things indifferent whether during scruple, the thing doubted of may be done.
Ans. I take it no; for the Apostle affirms that what so ever is not of faith
is sin. Romans 14.23.

What then is the course to be holden in such condition of the conscience? Ans.
This is the principal: make conscience to use the means of resolution; such
as are conference, study, etc. without prejudice, and with sincere desire to
be rightly informed, and humble purpose to yield to the truth once euidenced;
prayer unto God, etc.

For absoluing of this place, this question shall be propounded; whether in
case of such error, and scruple of conscience, the Magistrate may urge to do
things lawful, contrary to judgment whereof we are not yet thoroughly
resolved. Ans. I take it yes; with these cautions: first, that there be care
taken for better information, of the erring, and for resolution of the doubting
conscience: secondly, that advice that Antonine, Archbishop of Florence, once
gave, is not to be omitted; that scrupulosi be not too hardly dealt withal:
thirdly, that punishment and compulsion be not hastened, so long as there
appears a desire and godly endeavor to be better informed: these specially in
things indifferent.

Whether sins a man in abstaining from acting an indifferent thing, lawfully
commanded by the Magistrate, during his scruple? Ans. Yes, for his scruple
frees him not from the obligation of Gods precept, touching obedience to the
Magistrate.

And should he also sin, if during his scruple he should do it? Ans. Yes;
Romans 14.23. these three conclusions pertinent to this purpose, let them be
considered.

A man doing or abstaining from any action, contrary to the dictate of
erroneous conscience, sins: Reason, because God has commanded that we go
not against conscience.

A man doing or abstaining according to erroneous conscience, as erroneous, is
not free from sin; nay sins, because GOD has no where commanded or
warranted to do according to conscience simply: but with this supposition,
that conscience be rightly informed by the word of God, and as was before said,
the error of conscience dispenses not with obedience to Gods law.

Thirdly, in such case there lies a bond upon the conscience, to free it self
from error, wherewith it is entangled: and continuance of error through
neglect of means of better information, is censurable of obstinacy before the
Lord.

Now the use which we make of all this now spoken, there is nothing that thou
can do well, whiles thy conscience is polluted, or erreth, or doubts Tit.
1.15. Romans 14.23.
. Thirdly, conscience erring may excuse but vainly, terrify needlessely, and
would God in these scrupulous times, this care of right information, might be
conscionably undertaken; perhaps the peace of our Church might be more, and
without all doubt the peace of our conscienences would be far more solid;
and that distaste of conference for information, upon prejudice and too much
stiffenesse in our own opinions, how continues it the maime of our Church? and
robs the people of much of their comfort? Beloved, I blame not any for
abstayning while scruple lasts; but this is that I lament, and pray in the
bowels of Christ Jesus, may be reformed: that conferences of things now
controuersed may more conscionably be endeavored, and less scornefully
rejected. In things substantial, I love resoluednesse: in matters of less
importance thus I am minded, and I think with warrant; not so to resolve, but
as willing to change sentence when better reason shall sway me.

Proceed we now breefely to the last thing in this common place; that is the
kinds or divisions of conscience; which are diversely assigned: first,
according to the light that directs it, thus: one directed by principles
natural, which they call natural conscience; another enlightened with the
knowledge of the scripture, and by it directed in all his functions. Of
natural, and as we may term it, heathenish conscience, this scripture now
in hand treats; whose light (though imperfect,) directs notwithstanding to
do some duties; and restraines from some sins, as we see by those many
wholesome laws made by them against perjury, murder, whordom, etc. and those
terrors, termed by their poets, furies, wherewith in gross sins, their
conscience was possessed.

Conscience Christian, has, besides this divine light of nature that other
clear light of the scriptures to direct and guide it; whose guidance is more
large and more distinct, then that which heathenish conscience had: these
things might be profitablie pressed further, but I fear I have been already
too long in them. Bernard (if that Treaty of conscience be his) makes four
sorts of conscience, first, m^la and tranquilla; D^latata.
secondly, m^la and turbata; thirdly, bona and tranquilla; fourthly, bona and
turbata: an evil quiet conscience* an evil troubled conscience; a good quiet
conscience, a good troubled conscience. Of evil quiet conscience are three
sorts; first, the large conscience, that swallows small sins (as they are
termed) without scruple or remurmuration: stirs only in gross enormities;
trembles at murder, pleases it self in rash anger: restraines from great
oaths, by wounds blood, etc. makes no conscience of those by faith, troth,
bread, fire* etc.

Second kind of quiet evil conscience is, S^pita.
the slumbring and sleeping conscience; that stirs not, till it please God by
affliction, or fear of death to awake it Gen 42.21.
. Then all the world for a good conscience.

Third the seared or brawnie conscience that in life and death, prosperity and
adversity, Ephesians. 4.18. 1 Timothy 4 12.
is senseless as a stone; as is said of Naball 1 Samuel 25.37.
. I spare the large handling of these particulars; reasons or causes of this
evil quiet conscience, these: first, ignorance Ephesians. 4.18.
, secondly, error Ioh. 16.2.
, thirdly, commonnes of sin, when it is grown into fashion; thus it is
thought, the Patriarchs swallowed up their Polygamie, fourthly, custom of
sin, fifthly, want of a sound and faithful ministry, 1 Cor. 14.24.25.

But hence are these two consectaries; first, that every quiet conscience is
not presently a good conscience, because quiet: for even evil conscience may
be at peace; and many proclaim their misery and shame, that living in gross
sins, thank God they were never troubled in conscience.

Secondly, that therefore the not stirring or recoyling of the conscience, is
no good rule to walk by Ioh. 16.2.

A second kind of evil conscience is the stirring or troubled evil
conscience; which also has three differences: first, which stirs in small
things, swallows up greater in silence, Mat. 23.24.
grudgeth at breaking the fridayes fast, at flesh in Lent, but at no time
sticks at strange flesh. This generally popish Conscience.

Secondly, which accuses and terrifieth for doing good, or omitting evil,
through error of judgment.

Thirdly, that too sorely accuses, though rightly, as in Cain, Genesis 4.13.
Judas, Mat. 27.3 4.5.

To remedy the just terror of the conscience this do: first; humble thy
self under the mighty hand of GOD, acknowledging thy guiltiness Psalm.
32.3.4.5.
: secondly, beg earnestly of the Lord, to have thy conscience sprinkled with
the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.14. Romans 5.1.

Add as signs of an evil accusing conscience these: first, to fly the
stroke of the ministry Ioh. 3.20.21.
, secondly, fearfulness and trembling in darkness and solitude, even at the
noise of a leaf shaken Job. 15.21.
: thirdly, general disquietnesse in the heart. Isay 57.20.

A consectarie hence is this, that even stirring conscience is not a good
conscience. Follows now that which we call good conscience.

Of good conscience I here speak, not intending an absolute goodness; which
is none since the fall. I know conscience perfectly, and thoroughly good, is
always stirring, yet excusing and comfortable: as appears by Adams fearelesse
conuersing with Gods Majesty, in time of innocence: and therefore all that
deadness and dullness of conscience, all accusations and terrors of
conscience, let them be as so many remembrances of our natural guiltiness,
and falling from our first estate.

But of conscience, as it is good in part after regeneration, so speak I, and
so would Bernard be understood: this also is of two sorts, good and quiet, good
and troubled; not that the goodness of conscience stands in disquietnesse, but
that there may be a good conscience, where there is trouble, and some degree of
terror.

The good quiet conscience, is that that rightly excuses in Christ Jesus, upon
priuitie of performing the conditions of remission, faith and repentance, this
that Solomon calls a continual feast Pro. 15.15.
, the Jewel of a Christian, and as one well terms it, heaven upon earth. It
has joined with it boldness and liberty to come into Gods presence 1 Ioh.
3.21.
, secondly, comfort in judgments, yea in the expectation of that judgment of
the great day, 1 Ioh. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4.8.

Means to obtain it: first, to judge and condemn our selves 1 Cor. 11.31.
: secondly, stablish faith in Christ's blood Heb. 9.14.
: thirdly, desire in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

A good troubled conscience, is that that accuses, for the breach of the law,
and sometimes fills the heart with disquietnesse; see David's heart smiting him 2 Samuel 24.10.
: and this I call good, not simply, but first because it tends to good in Gods
children: secondly, for that it is in a measure in those that are sprinkled in
their hearts from an evil conscience Heb. 10.22.
: thirdly, because there is some rectitude in the performance of these
functions.

This state of the conscience is felt, ever now and then in some measure in
Gods children; and as Bernard says well, some of Gods Saints have more of the
quiet good conscience; some, more of the troubled good conscience: the first is
the happier, the second the stronger, but both righteous. Would thou then
know whether God be well pleased with both? that God that frees one from
temptation, strengthens the other in temptation 2 Cor. 12.9.
: the one feels that the Lord is sweet, the other proves that the Lord is
strong; strong in deed and mighty in battle, wherein though he suffer his
servants to be pressed, yet not to be oppressed through the multitude of his
compassions.

Notes of goodness of conscience joined with terror: first, except in violence
or temptation, it holds the principle, yet God is good to Israel; as in
another case David speaks Psalm. 73.1.
: secondly, resolves, though the Lord kill him, yet to put trust in him Job.
13.15.
, the violence of temptation being ouer-blowne: thirdly, earnestly seeks to
God by prayer: fourthly, carefully, and with an hungring desire, hangs on the
ministry of the word: and no Physician more welcome in the deadliest
sickness of the body, then an interpreter, that one of a thousand, that
declares gods righteousness to a man thus troubled Job. 33.23.
: fifthly, continues die ways of Gods commandments, usually with more
strictness, and more zeal, then others less troubled; as Bernard well says,
the one in sweetness, the other in sharpness, runs the way of Gods
commandments.

And thus much of the nature, offices, accidents, and kinds of conscience;
wherein, if I seem to have been long, consider in what times we live:
secondly, how necessary the knowledge of conscience is; and for amends of this
prolixitie, expect even compendious brevity in all that follows.

Now by this that has been spoken, the meaning of the words is explaned; the
applying of this verse to the conclusion, see in the Analysis; the thing proved
is, that the Gentiles that knew not the law of Moses written, yet knew by
nature some things of the moral law of God, this proved by two arguments:
first, their fact in outward doing the things which the law contains:
secondly, their conscience, excusing in well doing, accusing in evil: (...),
Coattestante. That is, together with their fact; as their fact testified their
knowledge or the law, so their conscience also witnessed the same. (...);
their thoughts, or rather their reasonings and discourses; because conscience
performs these offices by discourse, which we called the practical
syllogism: (...); that is, as I take it vicissim; not as our English reads,
one another: but as it wereby turns; one while accusing, to wit, in evil
doing; another while excusing, to wit, in doing well.

Verse 16. At the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel.
IN the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, etc. The 13. 14. 15. I
judge with M. Beza to be included in a parenthesis: and these words to be
referred to the twelfe verse; expressing the time, when the Gentiles shall
perish for their breach of the law of Nature; and the Jews be judged by the
law, that is in that day, when God shall judge the secrets of men, etc.

Now the particulars of this verse are these: first, the time, when we shall be
judged, at that day: secondly, who shall judge, God: thirdly, what he shall
judge, the secrets of men: fourthly, by whom he shall judge, by Jesus Christ:
fifthly, the proof hereof, or reference of the people to the evidence hereof,
according to my Gospel.

In that day.] So though the Lord for a time delay to punish the rebellion of
wicked men, yet will a day come when every transgression shall receive its
recompense Eccles. 12.14.
: some sins are here punished, that we may know there is a providence,
taking notice of all: not all here punished that we might know there is a
judgment to come; other reasons of the delay; first, to prove the patience of
Gods children: secondly, to aggrauate the torments of the wicked that have
despised his patience.

verse.

and speedily turn from their iniquities: Acts 17.30.31.

Let us all learn conscience and fidelity in our callings, Cor. 5.10.

Let it patient our hearts in all afflictions, Iam. 5.7. and 11.

God:] that is, the Father: although it matters not much whether we take it
here essentially, or personally; this act, for the substance of it, belonging
to all the three persons; though with some difference in the manner of
administration.

This aggrauates the terror of this judgment to the wicked, considering they
have to deal with God, Heb. 4.13.
, whose justice is infinite, whose pure eyes can endure no uncleanness Hab.
1.13.
, whose power is irresistable, and that in his wrath is a consuming fire Heb.
12.29.
: and let this terror of the judge persuade us, 2 Cor. 5.11.

The secrets of men.] Eccles. 12.14. 1 Cor. 4.5.

Vain therefore that digging deep of hypocrites to Isay. 20.15.
: in vain does the Adulterer weight for the twilight Job. 24.15.
, and the strumpet cover her with darkness, as with a mantle; GOD sees in
secret Mat. 6.4.
, and shall one day reward them openly.

And let it teach us to avoid, as well secret as open Psalm. 139.12.
: and learn, as the Lord speaks to Abraham, to walk before God, and to be
upright. Genesis 17 1.

Hence learn to refrain judgment of men's secrets, censure, thou condemn the
innocent, 1 Cor. 4.5.

By Jesus Christ.] As the immediate executioner of that judgment: Compare Acts
17.31. And all the proceedings therein; to which also may be applied that
place, Ioh. 5.22.23. this being a part of the administration of the world
committed unto Christ the mediator, compare also Act 10.42. partly as a
recompense of his humiliation Phil. 2.9.10.
: partly because the proceedings of the judgment being visible, it seemed
convenient that the judge himself should be conspicuous.

Heb. 2.11.
, their redeemer, their mediator, shall be also their judge; and how should we
not rather love and desire his appearing 2 Timothy 4.8.
? then slauishly fear the mention of it; compare Romans 8.33.34.

Apoc 1.7.
, despised his grace, and trampled under their feet the blood of the Testament?
Heb. 12.18. to the end.

See we now the evidence to which we are referred for the proof hereof.

According to my Gospel.] Paul's gospel not in respect of revelation Romans 1.2.
: but in regard of dispensation. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Cor. 9.17. Romans 16.25. for the
fiction of an Euangelical story written by S. Paul, as by Matthew, Mark, etc.
Papists themselves begin to be ashamed of.

Sense. According to my Gospel.] That is to say, according as I have taught in
preaching of the Gospel.

1 Cor. 5.11.
, but first, because it serves to explane the office of Christ, and is a part
of his kingly function; and secondly because it is also matter of great joy and
rejoicing to the people of God Luke 21.24.
: and thirdly, a means to keep us in continual awe of Gods majesty, and a
spur to all faithfulness in his service, 2 Cor. 5.10.11.

So that they are foolish exceptions of graceless people against the pressing
and explaning of this Article of our faith; Ans. as who say the doctrine of
this last judgment, belonged not to the gospel; but thus bewray they their
guilty conscience, and give evidence of their little or none assurance, or
hope, of remission of sins, Acts 24.15.

And thus have we absolved the first part of the Apostles assumption; wherein
has been proved, that the Gentiles are transgressors of the law of God
written in nature; and therefore subject to condemnation: so far is it, that
they should be justified by the works of the law.

Verse 17. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, an gloriest
in God.

Verse 18. And know his will, and allowest the things that are excellent, in
that thou art instructed by the Law:

Verse 19. And perswadest thy self that thou art a guide of the blind, a light
of them which are in darkness,

Verse 20. An instructor of them which luck^ discretion, a teacher of the
unlearned, which have the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law.

Verse 21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self?
thou that preachest, A man should not steal, do thou steal?

Verse 22. Thou that sarest, A man should not commit adultery, do thou
commit adultery? thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege.

Verse 23. Thou that gloriest in the Law, through breaking the Law,
dishonourest thou God?

Verse 24. For the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as
it is written.


THe second remains touching the Jews: and is handled from this place, the
17. verse of the 2. chapter, to the 21. verse of the 3. chapter.

The conclusion of which whole place is this, that the Jews are also
transgressors of the law; and therefore cannot be justified thereby. This
conclusion is laid down from the 17. verse of the 2. chapter to the 24. proved
in the 24. by testimony, as also in the 3. chapter from the 9. verse to
nineteenth; cleared from exceptions from the 25. ver ^ to the ninth ver e of
the third chapter.

The passage to this conclusion, is by preoccupation and preventing of such
things, as whereby the Jews labored to keep off from themselves, the
sentence of condemnation, wherein is, first, an enumeration of their
privileges whereof they boasted, with a concession of them, verse 17.18 19.^0*
secondly, a correction, wherein he shows the vanity of such privileges,
without obedience; and a Rh^toricall Dialogisme, consisting of many galling
interrogatories, propounds the conclusion obliquetie; viz. that the Jews
notwithstanding all their boasting, were transgressors of the law: which he
proves from an effect of their transgression, confirmed by testimony of the
Prophet Ezech. 36 23.

The privileges whereof they boasted, were partly external; partly internal;
outward privileges are first, the title of Jews, and that as it seems in
this regard, for that the Messiah was promised to come of the tribe of Judah
Genesis 49.10.
: secondly, the giving of the law, that is, because the Lord had vouchsafed
them that dignity as to commit unto them the oracles Deuteronomy. 4.8.
: wherein they are said to rest, as in a matter of much grace and favor from
God, as indeed it was; save only that they pleased themselves too much in the
very giving of the law, without regard to the obedience of it, or respect to
the end thereof, which is Christ for righteousness to them that believe 2
Cor. 3.13.14.
: there was the outward Covenant which GOD had made with that people, passing
by all other Nations: in regard the Lord had called himself the GOD of
Israel, and in the Covenant promised to be their GOD. These in the 17. verse.

Inward privileges; knowledge of the will of God, and that in an excellent
measure; in so much that they were able to discern, and put difference betwixt
good and evil; to judge of things agreeing to the law, and to discry things
dissenting therefrom: not only so, but able also to instruct others; which he
enunciates, first, metaphorically; then plainly, as expounding his metaphor,
verse 19.20.

Where by the way, he shows that these things were in many but vain bragges;
residencing their vain boasting fitly to the fashion of our people: I trust I
am not now to learn my duty; I hope I know what my duty is, and for need am
able to instruct others. (...), whereby he means as I take it, the very Idea
as it were of knowledge, and that truth taught in the law; and the platform of
knowledge gathered into a compendious method for their own, and other men's
information, etc. These their privileges.

Follows the correction, in a vehement obiurgation: vt supra, where the words
are plain, and free from difficulty: verse 22. Sacrilege; understand here
generally the robbing of God of his honor.

Romans 9.4 5.6. yet no shelter from Gods wrath, while severed from obedience: a
wonderful dignity it was, as ever had creature, to be the mother of our
Savior; yet this was not that, that made the Virgin blessed; but her hearing
and keeping of the word of GOD Luke 11.27.28.
. An excellent favor, to be brought up at the feet of Christ, and to be of
his household servants; yet what auailed it Judas? an unreformed reprobate. An
high dignity to be a preacher, and an interpreter of the will of God to his
people, to work miracles, cast out devils, yet nothing available, if thou be
a worker of iniquity Mat. 7.22.23.
: what profited it Esau, to be circumcised, to sorrow for sin, continuing in
profaneness Heb. 12.16.17
? What Iehu, that he was jealous for the Lord of hosts 2 Reg. 10.16.
? not regarding to walk in the way of the Lord nor departing from the sins
of Jeroboam? What Judas, that he was one of the twelve, an Apostle a doer of
miracles, a sorrowful penitent Mat. 27.3.
, his heart hanging after his covetousness? What Balaam, that he prophesies,
wishes to die the death of the righteous, refusing to live the life of the
righteous Numb. 23.10.
: what the Jews, to have eat and drunk in Christ's company, to have heard him
teach in their Synagogues, considering they were for all that, workers of
iniquity Luke 13.27.
? or what us, to be baptized, to hear, read, know the will of GOD; while we
are no doers of it? for search both Covenants, law and Gospel, see, whether
they require not both, obedience. Exodus 19 5. Ier. 31.33.

To apply these things to Iusticiaries according to

Give leave also to apply it after the tenor of the Gospel, and covenant of
grace, wherein also new obedience is required to salvation, though to other
ends, and on other terms Heb. 5.9.
: and set all such as boast of their Christendom, and other common personal
graces, lay it to heart: knowing that their idle faith cannot save them, if it
be severed from obedience; not that has place in justifying, but yet is
necessary in the person justified.

Tnere be that thank God for their knowledge; and it is indeed a thank
worthy gift of God; time was ^ say they when I knew neither God not his will;
now, I thank God, I know when I do will when I do ill, etc A^^. but if thou
know and do not, how is thy state bettered Ioh 1^ 17. Luc 12 48.
? others praise God they find sweetness in the word; whereas it was death to
them to hear a Sermon, now they have a delight in hearing. Ans. a good gift of
God, but nothing in avail without reformation ^^ others boast of zeal; let
them see Judas M^^k. 6.22. H^^ 6.5. M^t. 13.
; others of grief for sin, their heart aches to think of them let them see
Judas 2 Reg. 10.16.21. R^m 10 6.
, ^^au Mat. 27.^. Heb 12.1^.
; others of desires and fleeting purposes to leave sin; others of some
momentante external reformation^ this is ^uch; yet read we of many foul
relapses and fearful apostasies. 2 Pet 2.2 ^.

2 Cor. 7.1.
, through reformation of our hearts, and lives, read 2 Cor. 17.1. wherein the
Apostle has comprised in a short sum, the whole doctrine of Christian
reformation, first, the nature, secondly, the measure, thirdly, the grounds,
fourthly, the means. The nature may thus briefly be collected out of the text:
to be the purging of our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit,
and growing to full holiness in the fear of God; the heart is not all Rom 1^
10. 2 Cor. 6 20.
, nor the outward man all Heb. 10.22.
: many things suffice not Mark. 6.
, but all filthiness must be forsaken: nor yet to cease from evil, except
thou do good Isay 1. l 6.
. Full holiness implies two things, first, universality of graces 2 Pet.
1.5.6 7
, secondly, perfection indegree: which though we cannot attain, yet must we
aim at. Phil. 3.12.13.

Reasons, the promises, first, of Gods presence; secondly, of his acceptance;
thirdly of his father-hood; 2 Cor. 6.18.

Means, fear of God, wrought thus, first, setting our selves always in his
presence Psalm. 139.18. Heb. 4.13.
; secondly, considering he has pure eyes Heb. 1.13.
, thirdly, meditation of judgments particular, general; fourthly, Gods
kindness, Psalm. 130 4. Hab. 3.19.

These things may seem impertinently here applied to the Evangelical, which
are spoken according to legal covenant, in case of justification, but consider
that they are thus applied Analogically only, having their truth also after a
sort in the Gospel. Verse 21.22.23. Doctrine.


Sundry other perticulars might be observed out of this Text, one only I will
insist on: and that is this, whereas the Apostle thus sharply chides the
dissolute, life of those, that would be masters in Israel, and yet lived in
wilful disobedience; we may observe, that there cannot be a more odious thing,
then for a man to take upon him to teach others, neglecting in the mean while,
to teach and reform himself: and how bitterly the spirit of God every where
inueighed against such teachers: see Psalm. 50.16.17. Math. 23.4

And it should admonish every of us in place of teaching, to begin instruction
and information at our 1. Sam. 2.12.13.14.17.
; evil practice in our selves, not only impayring the authority of our
teaching, but even making all admonitions loathsome unto our people, secondly,
more hurt does ill example then all instruction, admonition, or correction can
profit; thirdly, besides that, the people usually attend more to example, then
to doctrine, till that wisdom prescribed Math. 23.3. be learned: fourthly,
and what a woeful case is that Paul intimates 1 Cor. 9.27. of such teachers,
that preaching to others, themselves through disobedience become castawaies,
fifthly, to say nothing, that such men can never with that power, and feruencie
reprove that sin in another whereof their own conscience is guilty; yea it
fares with such a man, as with him that holds a mad dog by the ears, he
knows not whither is best, hold him or let him go: and what combats such men
have, when they fall upon texts that point the finger at their own sores we
see in experience.

Verse 24.
But proceed we in the text. In this verse is the proof of the conclusion by a
testimony of Ezechiel, cap. 36.20. The Jews were transgressors, proof: for
the name of God was blasphemed amongst the Gentiles through them; partly in
respect of the wrath of God upon them for their transgressions, partly, for
other their abominable actions, which opened the mouths of the heathen to
blaspheme the truth, mercy, power, purity of the Lord, whiles their sins
drew down the vengeance of God upon them.

2 Samuel 12.14.
: experience hereof we see daily; let a profane man, that neither fears God
nor reuerenceth man, live in the grosest sins that can be thought of not a
word of reproof or dislike uttered; let another that professes religion,
through infirmity, but once in his life to be overtaken, then are the mouths
of all the profane multitude opened against the very truth, and profession it
self: these are your bible-bearers, your professors, your men of the holy
house, see their fruits, etc. The sin fearful in such as give occasion, see
2 Samuel 12.

Verse 25. For Circumcision verily is profitable if thou do the Law: but if
thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision.
IN these words is a new prolepsis, the objection whereof is this, if these
former privileges avail not to righteousness and salvation yet circumcision
at least may steed us, else what use is there of circumcision? Circumcision is
profitable to justification: Ergo, works of the law serve to justify. Ans.
The answer follows, of three members: first, a concession; Circumcision
indeed is profitable: secondly, a correction, wherein is first a limitation,
if thou keep the law; illustrated by an Antithesis, verse 25. and a comparison
from the greater to the less, verse 26. Secondly, a distinction; circumcision
is of two sorts; literal, spiritual, outward, inward; literal auailes not
except with men; the circumcision of the heart is that only that stands in
force, and has acceptance with God. verse 28.^9.

In this period I must profess a swaruing from the course I held in public
handling, as judging my second thoughts here somewhat wiser; circumcision I
then took as a Sacrament, sealing up unto us the covenant of grace, and
conceived the profitablenesse of this sacrament here mentioned, to be as of
others, a mean to confirm faith; the law also I restrained to that condition
of faith and new obedience, to which the Sacraments bind us, as Romans 6.3.4.

But now observing the scope of the Apostle, me thinks this exposition though
suitable enough to the anologie of Faith, yet fitting not the drift of the
Apostle.

That we may better judge of the sense; consider we a little the purpose of
the holy Ghost: which is, as I take it, to take from the Jews all their vain
confidence in circumcision and such like ceremonious obseruances in the matter
of justification: they object circumcision is profitable to justification: Paul
yields it with a limitation, and a distinction as before, not to be long.

Consider we what it is whereto the Apostle affirms circumcision to be
profitable. Ans. to justification in the sight of GOD: for that is it which the
Jews expected from circumcision.

The question then is, how the Apostle could affirm circumcision to be
available to righteousness of works in the sight of God: seeing Romans 4.11. it
was instituted for a sign, and a seal of the righteousness of faith. Ans.
Circumcision is considered two ways; generally as a ceremony, or a branch of
the law ceremonial; more strictly as a Sacraments as a part of the law, it may
truly be said to be available to justification, pro part ^ua, as every part
of obedience auailes that way. Now whether in this sense the Apostle affirms
it to be available, I dare not determine; how be it this is every where
evident, that the Jews used, urged, trusted more in it as a part of obedience,
then as in a sacrament of the Covenant of grace, read Acts 15.5. Gal. 5.23.

Yea, what if we take it as a Sacrament, and say that it assured even
iusticiaries of salvation by works, if they could bring such works as the law
required? Surely, all that the Lord requires in both Covenants, is obedience
unto the law: and that is the condition of both Covenants; that obedience to
the law be performed; this only the difference, that the legal Covenant
requires righteousness to be performed by our selves; that of grace admits
this dispensation, that if we can bring it performed by our surety, it shall
avail to righteousness and salvation: in sum. Circumcision seals up
salvation even to iusticiaries hypothe^^, if they keep the law; to believers
certainly in respect^ the event, if they but believe in Christ, and perform
new obedience, see. Gal. 5.3.

But here I think the observation is easy out of the body of the Text: that
the work done in Sacraments auailes not to righteousness or salvation, except
the condition of the covenant be performed, by those that partake them: first,
the condition, then the Antithesis shows it, if thou be a breaker of the law,
thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision; that is, all one to thee as if thou
had never been Circumcised: yea, a Gentile wanting the Sacrament, having
obedience, nearer heaven then thou, that have the Sacrament, and neglectest
obedience 1 Cor. 11.1.2.^.4.5.
: and weigh well that the Lord in promising, or sealing, binds not himself to
performance, but conditionally; that we perform our restipulation, and whence
Sacraments should have efficacy, but from the promise and grace of God, I see
not.

And therefore that is a mere collusion of Papists, when they teach that the
work done in Sacraments; is auailable to those that participate, yet sine bono
motu vtentes. See we first their explication, secondly, their reasons: in
Sacraments therefore they assign a double work; one of the worker, that is,
of him that receives the Sacrament: another which they call barbarously opus
operatum: that is, the act exercised about the Sacrament, as in baptism; opus
operantis, is the devotion of him that receives it; the work wrought, the very
sprinkling or dipping in water, and pronouncing of the words by the minister;
which very work wrought, (except there be Obex, that is, an impediment in the
receauer, id est, except he set himself purposely to hinder the effect of the
Sacrament,) confers faith, justification, Bellarm. de effectu Sacr. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
pardon of sin, etc. This the ancient exposition, and howsoever Bellarmine
and some other Neoterickes amongst them hunts after other expositions and take
themselves slandered, when this opinion is assigned unto them; yet when they
have all done, their own explanation is coincident herewith, for what ods
betwixt these two? that the very act of Sacraments confers grace without the
devotion of the receauer; and that it is nothing else for Sacraments to confer
grace by the work done, but to confer grace by force of the very Sacramental
action ordained of God for this purpose, not by the merit, that is to say,
disposition of the suscipient: this being the general doctrine of the most,
that Sacraments confer the grace which they signify, where is no
predisposition of him that receaues them.

Now when they come to prove this conclusion, they thus enunciate it, that the
Sacraments are true isntrumental causes of grace; which if they would thus
explane, that the Sacraments are instruments or means of grace which they are
ordained to confer, potestate: we would easily accord with them; for it is
true, that they are not empty signs, but by Gods ordinance have a fitness,
when they light upon a subject rightly disposed, to work that whereto they
are ordained: but to say that they are actual^ causes of grace where they are
applied to subjects not disposed, is a thing senseless, and without ground in
the word of God.

But let us see their reasons: which are, first, testimonies, secondly,
artificial arguments: first, testimony is, Math. 3.11. whence they thus
conclude Christ's baptism is more powrefull then John's, but John's Baptism did
nourish faith where it was already, therefore Christ confers it where it is
wanting. Ans. all this we easily yield being rightly understood; but they
deceive us in the h^mon^mie of Christ's baptism, which they thus interpret;
that by Christ's baptism we must understand, that which he instituted for the
perpetual use of the Church, under the element of water, whereof Math. 28.19.
whereas it is manifest, that here we are to understand the baptism which
Christ ministered in shedding out the gifts of the holy Ghost upon his
Disciples, etc. as Act. 1.5.

Testimony the second, Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved. Ans. To omit their cauils against us, it will be impossible hence to
conclude, that baptism confers grace, or salvation where it is wanting by the
work wrought: all that is here affirmed, is that salvation belongs to them
that believe, and are baptized. Now how absurdly hence is concluded therefore
baptism confers grace and salvation ex opere operato? whereas first, faith
foregoeth; and secondly, it is added that who so believes not shall be damned,
yea though he be baptized.

Testimony the third, John 3.5. Hence they thus conclude, baptism of water is
cause of new birth; therefore it works regeneration by the work wrought. Ans.
first, yield that by water we are here to understand the Sacrament; yet
follows not the conclusion; yea the very coupling of the holy ghost with
water, intimates thus much at least, that if the holy Ghost work not with the
element, (which is possible) the Sacrament auailes not to regeneration:
secondly, it is not without cause, that our Savior often makes mention of the
holy Ghost only, and his purpose is this only to show the necessity of new
birth to salvation, verse 7.8. yea and otherwise this absurdity would follow,
that all lacking baptism should be damned; and that some having the washing
of the spirit should not be saved, because they want the Sacrament.

Testimony the fourth, Act. 2.38. Act. 22.16. Repent and be baptized for
remission of ^innes, be baptized and wash away the ^innes (...) calling on his
name: therefore baptism confers remission of sins, by the work wrought,
Ans. first, the Text it self requiring some things, as dispositions, plainly
euerts that inference of opus p^r^tum; for if baptism of it self confers
remission: why does Peter require repentance? and Ananias invocation?
secondly, why do themselves confess, that both the Jews believed and Paul
repented ere they were baptized, and yet would have us believe; that where is
no disposition of the receauer, the Sacraments confer grace? but hence it is
easily collected, that the meaning of the places is this; that baptism was to
be received as a seal for their further assurance of pardon; for who knows
not but that to believers, and true penitent^aries remission belongs by the
promise of God? why then must they be baptized? Ans. For further confirmation
Rom 4 11. 1 John 5.8.
, receiving the Sacrament as a testimony and witness of their reconciliation
with God.

Testimony the fifth and sixth, E^he. 5.26. Tit. 3 5. where baptism is made the
instrument of purging and regeneration. An. First, doubtful whether there be
any speech of the Sacrament, or whether only of the blood of Christ, and
the spirit Ezech. 36 25
; secondly, let that be granted, yet their work done will never hence be
concluded: we yield them instruments and means this way: but yet so as that
their eff^cacie, requires a predisposition, in those that receive them.

Testimony last 1 Peter 3.22. Baptism saves. Ans. the place it self affords
solution: baptism saves, but there is a twofold baptism; one elementarie;
whereby the body is washed; the other spiritual, whereby the conscience is
purged; hereof this place is to be understood; at least they are to be taken
coniunctly, so that without this latter, the former has no saving efficacy.

See we now their artificial arguments, first, a subiectis, or persons to whom
Sacraments are administered, they are rightly and profitably administered to
infants, deaf, dumb, mad, sleeping, therefore are not signs only
stirring up faith, but immediately conferring sanctity by the work wrought.
Ans. First, their antecedent ^f general contains a most absurd falsitie; for
who, but a mad man, would minister the Eucharist to a child, a mad man?
etc. Not being able to examine themselves, or discern the Lords body? or with
what profit should they partake them 1 Cor. 11.28.29.
? secondly, if particularly understood of baptism, the consequence is absurd;
for what though it may profitably be administered to infants? (for as touching
mad men not able to profess faith) me thinks Pap^sts should demurre of
administration: must the profit needs be conferring of sanctity, without
their disposition? and not rather their obligation and binding to obedience
through their whole life? we minister rightly to infants of believing parents
thereby initiating them into the covenant, binding them to perpetual
obedience; but whether baptism any otherwise profit them, till they have
discretion to make use of baptism by meditation, to me it is doubtful.

Second argument ab efficiente, they are signs of divine institution and
therefore practical, and have power by the work done, to effect some thing
supernatural. Ans. We yield all; but yet their conclusion remains unproven;
for what though they have by divine institution a power to work supernatural
effects; yet actually they effect them not without the praeuious disposition of
the receiver.

Third argument, Sacraments depend on God in the very use, who works by the
minister, therefore by the work done they confer grace. Ans. It follows not:
for what though concurrence of the principal agent to be required to make the
instrument effectual? will it follow therefore, that the effect, to which
they are designed, is wrought wheresoever the instrument is applied? I take it
not: except it be showed, that as the cooperation of the principal is
necessary, so it is always certain and present; which who can affirm to be
perpetual in the Sacrament?

Fourth argument, Sacraments depend upon Christ's death and passion, Christ's
death has given a power to Sacraments to work grace, Ergo, etc. Ans. first,
that Sacraments respect Christ's death, rather as the object, then as the
efficient: secondly, be it granted, that Christ by his death has procured
unto his children the gifts of the spirit, by which Sacraments are effectual
unto us? yet will it not follow that therefore thy are effectual to all
receauers, in as much as the efficacy of Christ's merit reaches not to all,
and again the spirit by which they are made effectual, is not given to all.
John 16.

Fifth argument, Sacraments are effectual to assure us of pardon of sins;
therefore are practical signs, that have a kind of inherent virtue to confer
grace: Ans. It follows not; the Antecedent is too narrow to infer so large a
consequent. It is true that they are effectual means to assure believers in
greater measure of the pardon of sins; not true, that they are thus
effectual by the very receiving, to those also that are not pre-disposed. And
Bellarmines speech is not to be forgotten; though sacraments of themselves be
infallably effectual, yet may it come to pass that to us they are not
effectual, in respect of our own indisposition.

Sixth argument, sacraments respect faith, otherwise then the word; for the word
goes before faith, sacraments follow it Romans 10. Acts 8.
: therefore sacraments work their effect not by meditation or discourse, but
by inherent virtue. Ans. A mere calumney; for what if Sacraments and the word
be in that respect unlike, that the Word goes before faith, and Sacraments
follow it? shall it thence follow that Sacraments require not our meditation,
to this end that they may be effectual? or that they confer grace where is
no disposition in the receiver? Nay, does not the contrary hence follow, that
for as much as Sacraments may not be administered but to believers Acts. 8.
: that therefore they are not effectual to us without our predisposition?

Seventh argument, Sacraments are effectual to the receiver though ministered
in an unknown tongue; therefore by the work done. Ans. If by this not
understanding of the language, they mean an universal ignorance of the tenor
of the Covenant; so we deny their Antecedent: if such an ignorance of the
tongue, as that the word of promise is understood by the suscipient, though not
as propounded by the minister; so their Antecedent infers not the conclusion.

Eight Argument: if they avail not, save only by meditation and
understanding, then were there no cause why the learned etc. should be
baptized. Ans. It follows not, for even they that understand may by renewing
their meditation in the use of the seals be confirmed. Romans 4.11.

Argument the last; otherwise no difference betwixt sacraments of new and old
testament. Ans. We yield it in respect of efficacy 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3
; though in the signs, manner of signifying, and such other circumstances
differences be manifold.

Many other both testimonies and reasons are produced by the adversaries, which
partly for brevity sake, partly, because they are not so urgent, nor so
nearely concern the question, I have omitted; if any shall say that I have
imposed upon them a conclusion which they maintain not. Ans. Either this must
be their conclusion to which their reasons must be applied; else prove they
nothing against us: for we yield them, to be not only signs to signify, but
instruments effectual to confer grace to Gods children in the right use of
them.

In this question my stay has been the longer in as much as I see the dregs
of this popish leaven to stick in our people that hold them p^^^ chresta
pharmaca, salues for all sores, and potions so powerful to cleanse them from
sin, that though there be no care of performing what they bind unto, yet the
grace therein offered they think shall be by the work done, communicated unto
them. Let them read. 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3.4.5. Romans 6. Mar. 16.16. 1 Pet. 3.22.
Proceed we now in the Text.

Verse 26. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the ordinances of the Law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision.
THe first amplification, by Antithesis: sum whereof is this; that as
circumcision without obedience auailes not to salvation; so obedience, though
severed from circumcision, is in some case comfortable.

Uncircumcision; understand metomynically, the Gentiles uncircumcised, if it
keep the ordinances of the Law. Quest. First, whether possible to keep the
law? Ans. This scripture teaches no such thing, being hypotheticall. Ob. It
seems obedience is requisite to justification. Ans. so we grant; but then this
we distinguish; that the obedience of the law necessary to justification is
performed by believers in their surety Christ Jesus; and this requisite to
every person justified: not by our selves, in as much as first nature corrupted
cannot possibly perform it Romans 8.3.
; secondly, nature sanctified is but in part sanctified. Romans 7.

Be counted circumcision.] That is, as well esteemed, verse 26. Not to be long
this way: it is that the Rhemists yield unto Gentiles before Christ not of the
stock of Abraham. Whence thus we reason; that if under the old testament
sacraments were not absolutely and every way necessary to salvation, then may
we not imagine such an absolute necessity under the new: but before Christ
not absolutely necessary. Ergo, etc. For this were to make our condition worse
then was the state of Jews, etc. Object. If any shall say, that circumcision
was not then enjoined with so straight charge as baptism now. Ans. The
contrary appears. Genesis 17.14

Secondly, infants many dyed without Circumcision before the eight day; of whom
if we shall conclude they were damned, we shall first impose crime of tyranny
upon Gods Commandment; and secondly, (which is not probable 2 Timothy 2.19.
,) be able to say of some particulars, they are damned. Now if bare want of
Circumcision damned not them, neither does bare want of Baptism throw us out
of hope of salvation.

Thirdly, without the Sacrament, righteousness and justification may be obtained
Romans 4.10.11
: if justification, then salvation: betwixt which two, the connection is
inseparable. Romans 8.30.

Voti^us Baptismus.
Fourthly, Quid quod? Some of the adversaries confess, that there are some
cases wherein Baptism of water is not absolutely necessary as in martyrdom;
secondly, speak of a kind of Baptism in vow, or desire which in some case
may avail to salvation.

Fifthly, were authors of that distinction of necessity: first, absolute;
secondly, ordinatae potestatis.

Whence me thinks is easily concluded, that though Baptism be ordinarily
necessary to salvation, when it may be had; yet not absolutely necessary,
where is a bare want severed from contempt.

Bellar. de Sacr. Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 4.
that Baptism is necessary as a mean to salvation, and that in such sort,
that if a man be not Baptized, he perishes everlastingly, although perhaps for
his ignorance, he may be excused from breach of the commandment to that end
given.

Now sure their proofs should be pregnant for so heavy a doom passed on so
many infants, borne in the Covenant, and yet dying unbaptized. Let us hear
them.

First, Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Ans. How strange is it? that so
peremptory a conclusion, should be built upon a Text, of so doubtful and
ambiguous interpretation? how often does water signify the spirit Ezec. 36.
Ioh. 4.
? nay does not our Savior intimate a disparitie of necessity? when he first
propounds, after repeates the absolute necessity of regeneration, without
mention of water; and Mar. 16.16. having said that who so believes and is
baptized shall be saved, in the Antithesis says not, he that is not baptized,
but only, he that believes not shall be damned.

And as to their second reason from humane testimonies, let it suffice to
oppose that one sentence of Augustine De Baptis. contra donatat. Libro 4. cap.
22. that suffering sometimes does the steed of baptism, S. Cyprian has no
slight proof from that thief; to whom (being not baptized) it was said, this
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Quod etiam atque etiam considerans,
(says Austine;) inuenio non tantum passionem pro nomine Christi id quod ex
Baptismo deerat, posse supplere; sed etiam fidem conuersionemque cordis, si
forte ad celebrandum mysterium baptismi in Angustijs temporu^. succuri non
poterit. Neque enim Latro ille pro nomine Christi crucifixus est, sed pro
meritis facinorum suorum: nec quia credidit passus est, sed dum patitur,
credit. Quantum itaque valeat etiam sine visibili sacramento Baptismi quod ait
Apostolus Romans 10.10. Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem fit confessio ad
salutem, in illo Latrone declaratum est: sed tunc impletur inuisibiliter, cum
mysterium Baptismi, non contemptus religionis sed Articulus necessitatis
excludit. Thus far Austine; whose sum amounts to this, that though
contempt of baptism be damnable, yet bare want damnes no man.

Aaron, Heb 5.5.

Verse 27. And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature (if it keep the Law)
judge thee, which by the letter and circumcision art a transgressour of the Law?

Verse 28. For he is not a Jew, which is one outward: neither is that
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh.

^erse 29. But he is a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the
heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.


THe next amplification follows, in a comparison of unequals: bare want of
circumcision shall not hinder the salvation of a believing Gentile; nay more,
his obedience performed in want of the sacrament, shall judge thee, which by
the letter and circumcision art a transgressour of the law. Circumcision by
nature: that is, a Gentile vvanting outward circumcision: letter and
circumcision, that is, literal and external circumcision severed from the
grace of the Sacrament, shall judge, that is, condemn: judgment of men is
properly ascribed to God, as the principal agent; sometimes to the word 1 Ioh.
12.48.
as the rule or witness; sometimes to the Ministers and Saints Mat. 19.28. 1
Cor. 6.
: First, in respect of their testimony; secondly, example; thirdly,
approbation: so here, the Gentiles shall judge the Jews, viz. by their
example, occasioning the Lord to pour out the severity of his wrath upon
such, as having more means, and prouocations, perform less duty and
obedience. Compare Mat. 12.41.42.

Then how heavy shall be the condemnation of many in the Church,

Which by the Letter and Circumcision.] Letter and Circumcision, that is
literal circumcision having the element, wanting the substance. Interpreters
note an Enallage of the praeposition ((...)) for ((...):) perhaps fitly; and
yet, it may be the Apostle would intimate, the occasion of their transgression;
vain confidence in the outward element received by them. This once is evident
in common experience, that trust to the elements incourageth many to
libertinisme in their lives 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3.
. Sacraments rightly meditated lead to obedience Romans 6.
: misapplyed through corruption, occasion licentiousnes; as how often do our
people, reproved by the word GOD, for swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, etc.
take sanctuary at Baptism? as if it assured of remission; men trading in
transgression. Let such consider, what now follows, in the Apostles answer;
and that is the distinction of Jews and Circumcision, and analogically of
Christians and their Baptism.

Verse 28.
He is not a Jew, namely approved of God, and within the Covenant, that is one
outward, etc. that has only carnal generation of Abraham Rom 9.6.
: neither is that Circumcision; available to salvation: that is outward in the
flesh; and cutting of the fore-skinne; but he is the Jew indeed, that is such
in secret: that is, in heart; whose heart is upright before GOD, in performing
his restipulation, sincere obedience; and circumcision which is of the heart;
whereby corruption of the heart is abated, in the spirit: by the work and
operation of the holy Ghost; whose praise is not of men only, which judge
after the outward appearance; but of God, which pondereth the hearts.

Apoc. 2.9.
: not all Israel that were born of Jacob Romans 9.6.7.
: not all Christians that are Baptized. Act. 8.

men, members of the visible Church; but that they should be in any sort true
members of that Church, which Christ has bought with his blood, to whom those
benefits of remission of sins, resurrection to glory, and life eternal
belong, passes (I dare say) S. Paul's skill, to conceive, and Bellarmines
logique to prove. Read this Text.

And let it teach us, not to content our selves with

Notes of a true Christian indeed; general: ointment of the spirit. 1 Ioh.
2.20. More particular first, they are kings in ruling their own affections,
governing their families, Joshua 24. Genesis 18.19.

Prophets, instructing themselves. Romans 2.21. and others within their compass.
Ephesians. 6.

Priests, gifted with the spirit of deprication, Zachar. 12.10. Carefully and
delightfully exercising it, in behalf of themselves and others. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Job. 1.5.

Notes of an heart truly circumcised: first, such worship GOD in spirit:
secondly, rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh Phil. 3.3.
: thirdly, put of the sinful body off the flesh Col. 2.11.
. And of this second Chapter hitherto.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Verse 1. What is then the preferment of the Jew? or what is the profit of
circumcision?

Verse 2. Much every manner of way: for chiefly, because unto them were
committed the oracles of God.


THis Chapter, first, continues the allegations of the Jews in behalf of
themselves, and the Apostles answers to the same; secondly, after resumes the
assumption discontinued; that Jews also are transgressors of the law; and
thirdly, prosecutes the first conclusion; that man is justified by faith,
without the works of the law.

Their first allegation, propounded by way of question is verse 1. If the case
be so, that Jews equally with Gentiles, are liable to condemnation for sin,
belike then the Jew has no preferment above the Gentile, neither is there any
benefit of circumcision: but the Jews have prerogatives above the Gentiles,
and circumcision is sure profitable, Ergo. The Apostles answer consists,
first, of a concession to the first member; secondly, a proof of it; and
thirdly a denial of the reason, as it serves to ouerturne the first
conclusion. verse 9.

The concession propounded, verse 2. much is the prerogative of the Jew, proved
by instance, the oracles of GOD were committed unto them: the rest shall be
shown in order. Observe here first, the excellency: secondly, propriety:
thirdly, manner: fourthly, the title of their prerogative.

And hence observe; first, Paul primarium; Excellency.
for so I take that particle; to note rather the excellency of the blessing,
then the order of enumeration Psalm. 147.19.20. Deuteronomy. 4.8.9. Psalm. 19. 2 Timothy 3.
Romans 15.4.
. See Psalm. 147. where the excellency of it is shown, by attributes, effects,
comparisons. First, it conuerteth the soul: secondly, it is sure, we may build
on the truth of it: both in promise of mercy, and threatening of judgment:
thirdly, it gives wisdom, and that to the simple: fourthly, it is righteous
altogether, no error in it: fifthly, rejoices the heart: sixthly, pure in all
points: seauenthly, enlighteneth the eyes; compared to gold for profit; to honey
for sweetness: eighthly, makes circumspect: first, in showing the danger of
sin Romans 6.25.
: secondly teaching how to avoid, verse 10. ninthly it encourages to
obedience by propounding rewards, comforts our distresses Romans 15.4.
: instructs in righteousness, discovers errors; checks our steppings aside,
which David counted a great benefit Psalm. 141.5.
: as the Arc amongst the Israelites, so this amongst any people is a pledge of
Gods presence.

How much then are we indebted to the majesty and Psalm. 147.19.20.
? but to see how coldly thanks for this benefit comes from us, is strange: our
peace and plenty, we can sometimes thankefully acknowledge; but this blessing
of blessings, the glad tidings of peace, wrought with GOD by Jesus Christ; and
published in the Gospel; this plenty of the word, how seem we either to
loath, as the Israelites Manna; or at least coldly to commend and publish the
rich grace of GOD to us in that behalf.

Reasons of it in many, earthly mindednesf: first, because it allows none but
lawful profits, and in some, for that it restraines carnal liberty, and
reproues corruptions Ioh. 3.19.20.21. Am. 8.5.11.12.
.

Pro. 23.23.
?

Sins depriving us of this blessing, first, contempt Acts 13.41.46.51.
; secondly, barrenness of good fruits Isay 5.4.5.
: thirdly, persecution of the ministers Mat. 23.30.37 Mat. 21.28.
.

Mat. 21.19.
compare Psalm. 76. and 1.147.20. Deuteronomy. 4.7.8. Act. 14.17. Ephesians. 2.12 and 3.
dim d.

Propriety.
The time of this appropriation, seems to have bin about their deliverance out
of Egypt; Job an Edomite, yet a true worshipper of God; Melchisedech also a
Priest of the most high God Genesis 14 18.
.

Reasons of it given are: first, Gods undeserved and special love, secondly,
truth of his promise Deuteronomy. 7.7.8.9.
.

Act. 14.17. Mat. 10.5.6.
: since knowledge of the means of salvation was denied to the nations 1 Timothy
2.4.
.

Romans 55.9.
, (...) entrusted with it, as with an excellent treasure; Manner.
where we may observe how the word is committed unto the Church; and what our
duty is in respect thereof, faithfully to keep it; and employ it to the uses
of the trust 1 Timothy 1.11. and 6.20.
: this that depositum, the doctrine of the Gospel and whole word of God, parts
of faithfulness: first, that we add nothing thereto Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
: which part of faithfulness how well our adversaries have discharged, he that
knows the (...) adding of the Apocriphall books to the canon, and equalling
their own traditions to the written word of God, except he will be blind
cannot but acknowledge, with how severe a charge we are adjured to take heed
hereof: See Apoc. 22.18.19.

And to what purpose need we such a supply, since what is written: first, it
suffices to faith and salvation Ioh. 20.31.
: and secondly, is able to make the man of God completely perfect to every good
work of his calling 2 Timothy 3.17.
?

A second thing in fidelity is; that nothing be diminished of what it has
pleased God to entrust us with all Deuteronomy. 12.32. Apoc. 22.18.19.
: herein also our adversaries have deceived the trust reposed in them;
shouldering out the second commandment that they might make room for Images,
and scanting the sense of the law as the Pharisees their predecessors Mat. 5.
: with them thoughts of sin arising from corruption, are no sins; though it
be commanded, that God be loved with all the thought; and the law has said,
thou shall not lust Romans 7.
: and such motions draw away and entice the heart Iam. 1.14.
.

A third part of faithfulness; that we keep it unmingled 2 Cor. 2.17.
, and not as deceitful vintners, mingle this Wine of the Lords truth, with
the water of humane fancies.

A fourth part is to beautify and adorn the truth in all things Tit. 2.10.
.

The fifth is that we be careful and choice to whom we communicate: these holy
things are not for dogs, nor these pearls for swine Mat. 7.6.
.

The sixth and last; that we defend, maintain, and publish this truth 1 Timothy
3.15.
.

Last thing obseruable, is the Title given to the word; Title.
Oracles of God: partly because delivered either by lively voice, or by
immediate inspiration from God; in which respect, they are called (...), lively
Oracles Acts 7.3.8.
, partly because they should be to us as Oracles, whereto in all doubts we
should resort. Therefore Isaiah calls us to the law and to the testimony Isay.
8.20.
, and David makes Gods statutes the men of his counsel Psalm. 119.24.
.



Isay 8.19.
, and wearying themselves with consultations of Astrologers, would tie
themselves to these Oracles, both the comfort and success of doubtful
attempts, would be much the greater.

Verse 3. For what, though some did not believe, shall their unbelief make the
faith of God without effect?

Verse 4. God forbid: yea, let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is
written, That thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou
art judged.


But proceed we in the Text: For what though some dealt unfaithfully, shall
their unfaithfulness abolish the faithfulness of God? God forbid, etc.

Their second objection follows; well; yet this will follow, that either the
Lord has falsified his faith, or else, that all those great promises mentioned
in the instrument of his covenant, are become unfruitful and unprofitable unto
us. Ans. Neither of these; for first* that unfaithfulness was not universal
among the Jews; some dealt unfaithfully, and to them Gods promises were by
their own default, ineffectual; but some others there were, and shall ever be
in that people, to whom the Lord shall perform his covenant; secondly, yea
though all men be liars, and even Gods own children, through frailty, bewray
particular unfaithfulness; yet is God still true, both in himself, and to
them, if they be his; rather pardoning their transgressions, then suffering his
truth to fail. And man's unfaithfulness serves rather to illustrate, then to
overthrow the Lords fidelity; in as much as he performs his promise, even to
those also, that in some part deal unfaithfully with him in his covenant. And
this is proved by instance Psalm. 51.
, I have sinned that thou might be justified, that is, I have fallen through
thy just permission, and this thou have suffered, that thou may be justified:
that is; declared and known to be just, and faithful in thy promise.

This, saving the better judgment of the learned: I take to be the meaning of
the word. For that which some allege, that this exposition seems to import,
that how ever men carry themselves, they shall partake the promises. It follows
not from it; nay this only follows, that the Lord performs his promise,
notwithstanding the particular disobedience of his servants, which is true
Mala. 3.7.
, and the promises of God have their effect to the believing Jews,
notwithstanding the unfaithfulness of some others amongst them.

Now that we may hence observe, is this; Ezech. 18. by reasons; first, all
souls are Gods, equally his creatures, equally dear unto him; secondly open
profession, the soul that sins, and that only dies; thirdly, more
particular explication; handled in a comparison of equals; as the rebellious
son has no immunity by his fathers righteousness; so neither does the
innocent son receive any detriment by the disobedience o^ the father Hab. 2.4.
. The Just lives by his own faith Gal. 6.
, every man bears his own burden.

heresy; secondly, lewd life; thirdly, ignorance.

For heresy, the question is ancient; whether baptism ministered by an
heretic be baptism or no: so of the supper. Ans. Here I take it is this
answer, nec a quouis, nec quouis modo.

Perhaps there are Heretics, whose administration is frustrate; take for
instance those, that in the main doctrine of the Sacraments, and Trinity of
persons, err fundamentally, as if says Zanch. in precept. 2. de culta dei
externo.
Zanchee, some heretic should teach the party baptized, that the Father alone
is God, the Son a mere creature; the holy Ghost nothing else but the action
of God in our souls; this baptism thus administered, thus received, according
to Zanchee his judgment, is no baptism. Reason: because not administered
according to the doctrine by Christ delivered, and therefore wants the very
form of baptism.

Augustine thinks otherwise; I leave it in medio: so likewise if any thing
essential to baptism be wanting, as matter, or form, such baptism is no
baptism. August. de Bapt. contra Don. lib. 3 cap 15. Niceph. hist. lib. 3.
cap. 33.
Nicephorus makes mention of a minister that in the want of water baptized with
sand; the party was again baptized; and as I judge rightly.

But if the Heritique baptising keep the doctrine of the Sacrament sound in
substance, fail not in other things essential to the Sacrament; judgment of
the Church now long continued is, that such Sacraments are Sacraments; and need
not to be iterated.

I will propound the reasons of the Ancients, briefly, and as briefly answer
the contrary objections: first, August. de baptis. contra. Donat. lib. 1. cap.
1.
Augustine; thus, a pari as he thinks; baptism may as well be given out of
the Communion of the Church, as it may be had; but it may be had out of the
Communion of the Church, by consent even of Donatists themselves, that use not
to rebaptise repenting reuoltes. Ergo.

Secondly, truth taught by Heritiques is Gods truth, and available to
edification Mat. 23.1.2.3. Phil. 1.18.
. August. cont. Epist. Par. lib. 2. cap. 11. and contra lit. Pet. lib. 2. cap.
5.
Augustine says well, Sic eorum fictionem fugit spiritus sanctus, vt eoru^ non
deserat ministerium. Iteru^, et si non cast annunciabant, sua quaerentes, non
quae Jesus Christi; castum tamen erat quod annunciabant, etc. Iterum, si ipse
non regeneretur; castum tamen sit quod annunciat, nascitur credens non ex
ministri sterilitate, sed ex veritatis foecunditate. If this be true of their
preaching, why not also of their administration of Sacraments.

Again, circumcision administered by Samaritanes was circumcision; and not
repeated; why not baptism ministered by an heritique?

Reasons of Cyprian, keeping ever my reverence to that glorious Martyr, prove
not his purpose; Cypri. Epist. 72.
and let it be no imputation of pride to dissent from him herein, since himself
professes, he desired not to fore judge or prescribe to any man; but leaves
to every one, liberty of contrary both judgment and practice: his reasons
are these; Heretics cannot give remission of sins or the holy Ghost, since
themselves lack them. Ergo, Epist. 70.
give not the sacrament. Ans. First, the state of the question is changed, for
we enquire not so much of the efficacy to the receivers, as of the
sufficiency of the sacrament in it self: secondly, some answer thus; that
even heretics may be said to have remission of sins, and the holy Ghost;
though not formally, yet instrumentally: thirdly, most directly; the
consequence is naught; the sacrament may be entier in it self, though the
grace of the Sacrament be not given by the minister. John's baptism was a
Sacrament; yet professes he not to be giver of the holy Ghost: that dignity
was his whose servants we all are Mat. 3.11.
. Ob. Heretics cannot pray to be heard, for God hears no sinners Ioh 9.31.
. Ergo, Ans. August. cont. Epist. Par. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Augustine has three answers: first, that it is not the speech of our
Savior, but of the blind man; secondly, that if universally understood, it
crosses other scriptures, as Luke 18.13 14.

Thirdly, that good prayers put up by evil men, have audience with God: non
pro p^^uersitate propositorum, sed pro deuotione populorum. Balaam blessed the
people, though an evil man, and speaking against the desire of his heart, yet
were his words good, and heard of the Lord in behalf of the people Numb. 23
.

Ob. But will it not hence follow, that haeretical congregations are Churches
of God, since they have sacraments sufficient?

Ans. Not so. Austine well says, they have baptismum ligitimum, but not
legitime; as the thief has the true man's purse. And the Sacraments merely
prove not a Church: if severed from doctrine sound in the foundation.

And our people may here arm themselves against Anabaptisticall dreamers; that
would nullify Popish Baptism, and urge rebaptization.

It is true, they never felt fruit of Baptism, till they left communion with
Rome; but had the sacrament in it self entier, and potentially fruitful to
seal up forgiveness to believers.

Now if heresy of the Minister impair not the nature of the Sacrament, much
less shall it hinder the office and efficacy of the Sacrament in the heart of
the believer, which hangs wholy upon the promise of God; and faith of the
recipient, wrought by the spirit.

From heresy let us pass briefly to other lewdness of the Minister, and see
whether the lewd life, or unsanctified heart of a Minister any whit diminish
the perfection of the sacrament in it self, or hinder the efficacy thereof to
us.

These questions I rather propound, because I see they are such as at this day
much trouble the church of God. And Lord, that our church were so happy as to
cut off such stumbling blocks from the vveake. It is too true of our
Ministers, many of them, that is said of Elyes sons they have occasioned the
people to abhor the offerings of the Lord 1 Samuel 2.
: I say not, but it is the peoples sin to abstain, yet withal I am sure it
is the heavy sin of such Ministers, that occasion such abstinence, from the
Lords holy ordinances. To the question.

Some of the reasons before alleged may hither be applied, to prove that the
lewdness of the Minister, detracts nothing from the substance or efficacy of
the sacrament.

To these add these reasons: first, Judas ministered baptism Ioh. 4.2.
sufficient in it self, I doubt not also but effectual Mat. 10.
to the believing suscipient, yet himself a secret infidel, yea a devil
incarnate Ioh. 6.70.
.

Secondly, Levites and Priests amongst the Jews offered sacrifices, celebrated
Sacraments; which to Gods people were seals of the Covenant; means to
nourish faith; yet themselves many of them unsanctified men. Thirdly, otherwise
there could be no assurance at all to Gods children that any time they received
a sacrament; because that sanctification of the heart, though it must be
presumed to be, where the life is but outwardly reformed; yet cannot be known
certainly, except by special revelation. And what difference there is in this
behalf, betwixt a secret, and open profane man; I see not. Fourthly,
instruments have their efficiency from virtue of the principal mouer; neither
can the euilnes of the Minister frustrate the virtue of Gods ordinance, in the
making, or working of the sacrament.

August. in Joan. tract. 5.
Ancient Divines have expressed this in sundry similitudes; as by water that
passes through a channel of stone into a garden, though the channel it self
receive no benefit, because of its own indisposition, yet the garden is made
fruitful. So, etc.

August. lib. 3. cont. Cres. Grani. cap. 8. De Bapt. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Again, as in sowing it matters not whether with clean hands, or foul, the
seed be sown, so it self be good, the soil fertile, receive the heat of
the Sun, and benefit of rain. So etc.

As the light of the sun is not defiled, though it pass through the dirtiest
place, so neither the dignity nor virtue of Sacraments hindered by lewdnes of
the minister.

And therefore though I loath such Ministers as by their lewd life cause Gods
people to abhor the Lords sacrifices 1 Samuel 2.
: yet I cannot see, with what comfort the people can refuse Sacraments for the
ill demeanor of the Ministers. Does any man refuse a Kings Donation, because a
lewd Lawyer draws up the conueyance, or delivers it sealed in the name of the
King?

But I hasten to the third branch, which is ignorance; and here thus propound
the question; whether the negligence or inability of the Minister to preach,
impeach the sufficiency or efficacy of the Sacrament to the believing
communicant. This question has long troubled the Church of God amongst us, and
yet disquieteth some men weak in judgment.

I wish with my heart, our Church were so happy as to cut off occasion of this
question, by furnishing it self with able pastors in every congregation. But
to the purpose. The negative seems to me most probable; and with all that
heat of inueighing, I see not yet one argument soundly proving, their actions
nullities. And for my judgment I propound these reasons.

First, it has been proved that the ill life of the Minister preiudiceth not
the sufficiency of the Sacrament, therefore neither their ignorance: for it is
as much required of a Minister that he be (...); unreprovable in his life; as
that he be (...); able and fit to teach 1 Timothy 3
.

Secondly, Baptism has been administered by some that had no calling to
preach: yea, and that warrantably, and with Christ's own allowance the
Disciples of Christ; before ever they were sent out to preach, administered
Baptism Ioh. 3.22. Ioh. 4.2.
. And that this was before their sending to preach, appears by this, that
Christ himself began not publicly to preach: till John's imprisonment Mat.
4.12.17.
; and at this time when Christ's Disciples baptized; John was not imprisoned
Ioh. 3.24.
. Ergo.

Thirdly, some ancient Divines are of opinion that those to whom Peter
enjoined the baptising of Cornelius and his company) were no preachers Acts
10.48.
. Ambros. in Ephesians. cap. 4.
( Ambrose says) that Peter had not so much as Deacons with him, nor did
himself baptize Cornelius, and those with him, but commanded the brethren,
which came with him from Ioppa to Cornelius to baptize: And the reason of his
conjecture is more then probable; for as yet besides the seven Deacons, there
was none ordained: The same Ambrose his authority in this place Ambros. in 1
Cor. 1.17.
is not to be despised by men of the adverse part, for as much as themselves
allege him as authentical for them in the point of Bishops calling.

Other reasons will appear in answer to the objections of the adverse part;
which are on this manner.

First, every ministry of the new testament, is a preaching ministry, and
therefore sacraments are nullities that are delivered by no preachers; for
Ministers only can give sacraments. Ans. First, it will trouble these men, I
suppose, to prove that every ministry of the new Testament is a preaching
Ministry: holding their own 1 Principles: For what think they of Deacons
and governing Elders, must they also be preachers? 2 What of Doctors, who sure,
if their description of preaching be sound (as I think it is) come not within
the compass of preachers? 3 What of those (...) 1 Cor 12.
, which why I should understand of assistent preachers rather then of assisting
readers and ministers of Sacraments, I see no reason.


The consequence will not easily be proved; for be it granted that by Gods
ordinance none should be ministers, but who are preachers, will it thence
follow; that the action of a no preacher is a nullity? by Gods ordinance none
should be a Minister, but who is a sanctified man; now if an unsanctified man
have by briberie or fraud thrust into that holy calling, are his actions
therefore mere nullities Mat. 23.
?

Their second Argument whereby they prove them no Ministers; is because they
wait not on their office Romans 12.6.7.8.
: namely on preaching, the only essential property of a minister.

Ans. And does this prove them to be no Ministers by calling, because they
neglect execution? Kings then are no Kings if they use not the sword to punish;
and their lawful injunctions are nullities to the subject, because they fail
in the principle work of their calling, show a desparitie between the two; or
else learn, they may be Ministers by office that neglect the execution of
their office.

Their third objection is, that unpreaching Ministers sin in meddling with
administration of Sacraments, because that is a pastoral function.

Ans. First, I demand whether the action it self for the matter of it be a
sin in him; or is it his sin only because of the faulty manner of
performing? If it be in the latter respect only; that I am sure will not make
his action a nullitie to us; and that materially it is no sin in him, me
thinks is evident; because every man in place of a pastor is bound to
administer Sacraments; yea and by omitting any pastoral office he lays open
himself to Gods wrath, come he in how he will, whether ordinately, or by
intrusion: for in every pastor has the Lord laid necessity of doing
pastoral offices. Secondly, it remains yet to be proved, that administration
of Sacraments is so appropriated to the person of the pastor, that no other
but a complete pastor may deal in it.

Certainly in the ancient church Deacons were assistents to the Bishops and
Presbyters, in administration both of Baptism and Eucharist.

And many stiff in the opinion forenamed, Ambros. de officijs bib. 1 cap. 41.
use help of others in public reading, praying, catechizing, who by office are
no pastors. Lastly, I would gladly have this consulted of by my Brethren
differing from us in judgment. What the word of God has against this; the
ordayning and setting a part of some persons, to public reading, praying,
administration of Sacraments, who yet should not be permitted to deal in
public preaching. Surely, some such order appears to have been amongst the
Levites and Priests of the old Tabernacle. And M. Iunius seems to acknowledge
the employment of Deacons this way in the primitive Church, Animaduers. in
cont. 5. lib. 1. cap. 13. Bellar.
partly for ease of pastors, partly, for their own trial.

With what vvarrant of the word they may be called to a Pastors office that
know not how in some measure to divide the word aright, I see not; but if some
men lacking the gift of prophecy be admitted to some other inferior
subordinate service in the Church, I see not what the church does herein
repugnant to the scriptures, provided always they possess not the place of
pastors.

Thus far of these controversies, entered into as God can witness with my
soul, not to justify the boldness or ignorance of such as have without gifts
thrust into the pastors office; but to remove the unjust and causeless
scruples of vveake consciences, that deeming their actions nullities, have
almost resolved of rebaptization; and utterly refuse Sacraments at the hands of
unpreaching Ministers. Their desire to have true seals set to their pardon, I
blame not; but their refusal of Gods seals for ignorance or negligence of the
keepers, who can defend?

To these may be added, that other quaere betwixt us and Brownists, whether a
man may with comfort of conscience partake the Sacraments with those
assemblies wherein open sinners are tolerated to participate; so that he shall
not partake with them in their sins, nor any way hinder his own benefit by
these and like works of religion.

Here again I could wish the executours of Church Discipline would be awaked,
and not suffer the profane drunkard and adulterer to touch things so holy
Mat. 7.
. And my Brethren the Ministers to discern betwixt the precious and the vile
Ier. 15.19.
: that the hearts of the righteous be not made sad by such promiscuous
promising and sealing up life to the wicked: howbeit, it should be far from
every honest heart; to separate from assemblies wherein such abuses are
tolerated through negligence; or therefore to refuse to use their own right,
because usurpers unjustly intrude thereon.

For the question; best Divines both ancient and modern thus resolve, that in
assemblies, where the word and worship of GOD is kept pure for substance,
there may be a comfortable participating of Sacraments; yea though by
conniuence of governors some inordinate walkers be admitted.

Reasons, some of them are these: First, Paul 1 Cor. 5.11.28.29.
, prescribing an order of due preparation to sacraments, wishes us to examine
our selves, not others: now if he had thought it unlawful to communicate with
others that are unworthy, he would have given charge, with as great
circumspection, to look to others as to try our selves: secondly, the same
Apostle limits the crime and penalty of unworthy receiving, to the persons
self that partakes unworthily, verse 29. By unworthy communicating he brings
judgment on himself not upon others: thirdly, examples of Prophets living in
corruptest times of the Church; yet not separating from the public assemblies,
where was the word of GOD, and ceremonies of Gods own Institution; but in the
midst of a polluted people lifting up pure hands and pure hearts unto God:
fourthly, practice of Christ and his Apostles, in extremity of Pharisaicall
license and superstition; yet assembling to the same temple with the wicked
themselves, unto public exercises of religion. More I will not add. The
objections of the adverse part shall have a short solution; and so a passage to
the next.

Object. They allege, 1 Cor. 5 11. with such eat not 1 Cor. 5.11.
: 2 Cor. 6.17. Isay 52.11. come out from among them 2. Cor. 6.17.
, touch no unclean thing Isay 52.11.
.

Ans. Calu. Instit. lib. 4 cap. 1. Sect. 5.
Our Divines thus answer; first, that the places some of them speak of
fellowship with them in works of darkness Ephesians. 5.7.11.
, by comparing, Ephesians. 5 7.11. secondly, that they are meant of private
familiarity or amity with such; and thirdly, that only as it tends to
countenance them in their evil.

It is true says August. de ver. Dom. secundum Mat. cap. 18. sub finem.
Augustine; that the Prophet said plainly, come out from amongst them,
separate your selves, touch no unclean thing. Ego vt intelligam quid dixit,
attendo quod fecit, by his fact he expounds his speech. He said depart; to
whom said he it? surely to the righteous: from whom should they depart? surely
from sinners and unjust. I enquire whether himself departed from such, and I
find, that he departed not. Therefore he meant otherwise, viz. then of a
bodily separation: for sure he would be the foremost in doing, that himself
commanded: he separated in affection; obiurgauit atque arguit: continendo se a
consensu, non tetegit immundum obiurgando autem exijt liber in conspectu Dei,
cui neque sua Deus imputat peccata; quia non fecit; neque aliena quae non
approbauit; neque negligentiam, quia non tacuit, neque superbiam quia in
vnitate mansit. Sic ergo fratres mei quotquot habetis inter vos, etc. If you
have any amongst you laden with love of the world, covetous, periurers,
adulterers, etc. as much as in you lies improve them, that in affection and
heart ye may depart from them. Reprove them, that ye may go out from amongst
them: and consent not unto them, that ye may touch no unclean thing.

Thus far August. cont. Donat.
Augustine against old Donatists, whose proud schism Brownists amongst us have
revived.

Yea, let God be true, and every man a liar. Verse 4.


The former conclusion is here proved by a reason, as I take it, a fortiori:
God is true in his promise and covenant; though every man be in part
unfaithful; therefore the unfaithfulness of some few in the church abolisheth
not the fidelity of God in his promise. The Antecedent is proved by a speech
of David Psalm. 51,
. The accommodation of this place is diverse, some refer it to David's petition
Verse 4.
, wash me etc. that thou may be justified, id est: that thou may be
acknowledged just and true in thy promises. Some to Confiteor, I acknowledge my
wickedness, etc. that thou may be justified. Some to peccaui, I have
sinned, that thou may be justified

And this saving other men's better judgment, I take to be the connection
agreeablest to the Apostles purpose, and the words of the objection following.

Quest. Was this then David's end in sinning? Ans. Not so: not David's end in
committing; but the Lords end in permitting his sin: secondly, the particle
(that) notes not always the intention but the event. Vt sit sensus, I have
sinned by thy just permission; out of which sin, this one thing has
followed, the illustration and magnifying of the glory of thy truth, in as much
as even to me dealing unfaithfully in thy Covenant, thou keep promise and
mercy. And this me thinks first agrees with the Apostles scope, and has an
argument a fortiori to prove the conclusion of the Apostle; man's infidelity
abolisheth not the truth of God, nay which is more it serves to illustrate and
commend it, as one contrary set by another: secondly, it suites with the
objection ensuing; which is this, our unrighteousness commends the righteousness
of God.



Particular unfaithfulness; I thus interpret; that which is shown in some
particular acts of unfaithfulness: as in David's adultery and murder, etc.
gross falls, and such as deserved utter reiection from Gods love, yet through
Gods pardoning mercy, no separating sins: secondly, such as wherein the
committer is in part a patient as Bernard de Not. and dig. Amoris diuini. cap.
6. patitur peccatum non facit.
Bernard interprets; because with the whole heart he sins not, but has
ever some reluctation against the temptation; some dislike after the committing
Romans 7.
: See the reasons Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 89.32.33.
.



Now if any should hence emboulden himself to commit sin; let me say what I
think; he gives evidence that he never yet came within Gods Covenant; but if
by infirmity any have been overtaken; let him not from particular slips
conclude his throwing out of the Covenant; God is still a father, and Christ an
advocate 1 Ioh. 2.1.2.
.

That thou may be justified, etc.] Very sin it self Pharaoh in his pride
and obstinacy proposed to Gods command Exodus 9.15.16
? It was foelix culpa, says Gregory of Adams fall (judging of it by the issue)
that made way for such a redeemer as was Christ the Lord. In a word; God
glorifies his mercy in pardoning, his justice in punishing, his power in
ouer-ruling, his wisdom in ordering the very sins of men and devils.

May he not then, Austin has, the omnipotent God would never so much as suffer
evil to be done, but that he knows to bring good out of evil.

There is nothing so absolutely evil, but either has or may admit some
respects of goodness. And whether they more dishonor God, that teach an idle
speculation of the evil deeds of men, and erect a power of committing sin,
countermaunding Gods power in preventing it, or they that ascribe to him a
voluntary permitting of it for his own glory, let Gods Church judge.

Verse 5. Now if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what
shall we say? Is God unrighteous which punishes? (I speak as a man)

Verse 6. God forbid: else how shall God judge the world?


NOw follow certain objections, occasioned by this present doctrine, and
allegation out of the Psalm. Ob. If this be so (as thou seem to allege
out of David) that our unrighteousness, commend, id est, sets out, and makes
more conspicuous the righteousness and fidelity of God; then is God unjust
that punishes for unrighteousness. Ans. Of three members; first, a Caution: I
speak as a man; that is, in person of a carnal and profane man: secondly, a
detestation; GOD forbid: thirdly, confutation of the consequent; by a reason
from the act or office of God; God is not unjust; for then could he not be
judge of the world, etc.

In this objection note we two things: first, the manner of propounding:
secondly, the substance of it: manner, by way of question; and that after a
sort interrupted in the very utterance; the Apostle me thinks, therein
residencing the state of godless cauillers against Gods truth.

Romans 2.15.
: secondly, remembrance of judgments inflicted on others causes trembling:
thirdly, GOD himself sometimes immediately strikes with fear Ioh. 15.21.
.

And it were to be wished they had grace to stop;

Substance of the objection. If our unfaithfulness serve to illustrate Gods
truth, and to make it more glorious; then is GOD unjust that punishes
unfaithfulness. But the first is true: Ergo. Now the direct answer is not
here expressed by the Apostle, partly for that the cavil was so odious, that
it required rather detestation, then answer; partly because the answer was
so obuious, that any man might frame it; see we what it is: the answer is on
this manner, that it follows not, because that the illustration of Gods
glory flows not from our sins, either by nature of them, or by intention of
the committer, but by accident rather. See we therefore a little how sins
set forth and commend Gods truth, and promote his glory. Ans. First, as one
contrary sets forth the nature of another, by comparison and iuxta-position.
Sickness commends health, peace, war; and man's unrighteousness Gods
righteousness, thus only by making it appear more glorious, when they are
compared together. Health receives no bettering from sickness naturally, yea
rather it overthrows it: so secondly by accident, because GOD takes occasion
thereby either to show mercy in pardoning, or justice in punishing. Whence
follows this doctrine:



Reasons: first, sin in its own nature tends to Gods dishonor Romans 2.23.
: secondly, the sinner in it intends not to honor GOD Isay 10.6.7. Genesis 50.20.
. August. quaest. super Exodus quaest. 79.
Augustine shows how in wilful murder, though it be true, that GOD after a
sort gives the innocent into the hand of the slayer, yet God is just, and the
murderer, doing the secret will of God, is justly punished.

Deus non nisi just, homo autem poena dignus; non quia illum occidit quem deus
nollet occidi: sed quia per iniquitatem. Non enim ministerium Deo iubenti
praebuit, sed suae malignae cupiditati seruiuit. In vno igitur eodemque facto;
and Deus de occulta aequitate laudatur; and homo de propria iniquitate punitur,
etc. he adds the instance of Judas, vt alibi.



It is true that there is not the lewdest action of the prophanest miscreant,
but GOD brings some good out of it: their judgment is never the less,
notwithstanding GOD be thereby accidentally glorified. There was never more
hellish sin then that of the Jews in crucifying the Lord of glory; nothing
by which God ever reaped greater glory then by the death of his Son: yet is
the wrath of GOD come upon them to the utmost 1 These. 2.16.
: and that most justly.

It is true that Paul's bands turned in the issue to the furtherance of the
Gospel Phil. 1.12.
: yet woe to that Lion that bound him. True, that persecutions of Gods children
turn to their benefit Romans 8.28.
, bringing quiet fruit of righteousness Heb. 12.11.
: working unto them an incomparable weight of glory 2 Cor. 4.17.
: yet shall God in his just judgment recompense tribulation to them that
trouble his 2 These. 1.6.
: but proceed we in the Text.

In the Apostles answer, occurres first this Caution: I speak after or
according to man: first, not in mine own person; as if I either approved or
devised such a deduction; but I Anticipate only the cauils of profane carnal
men; readier to blaspheme then to believe the truth.

So charie ought Gods children to be in obiecting against the truth, and even
in propounding the cauils of others, never to own them for theirs; such
protestations were seasonable in the scholasticall disputations; especially
where rude nouices are admitted to be Auditors; I speak what I know, the very
omission of such cautions, and over great heat in pressing objections, though
but personately, has tainted the judgments of some through their ignorance.

Secondly, his detestation. Ab sit: God forbid; the form of Apostolical
detestation: and as Caietane says; it shows how he even abhorred to hear
mention of the injustice of God. And should teach us not without trembling and
detestation to reject cauils especially blasphemous against GOD, and injurious
to his truth: instances in this Epistle are diverse.

And if there were no other thing to prove our key-cold love of Gods truth, and
zeal for his glory; this one were sufficient; our lentitude in reproving
those many blasphemies of Gods holy name, which in company of profane men we
cannot but hear.

Thirdly, his confutation: (else how shall God judge the world.) The manner of
answer may in logic seem absurd, but is in Christianity the best that can
be shaped to denyers of principles; neither was it want of skill that made the
Apostle deny the conclusion; but Wisdom rather to direct Gods children, how
to carry themselves toward such as question undoubted principles: still hold
evident truths, yea though thou know not how to assoyle doubts raised by men
of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth.

In Philosophy it is received, not to dispute against such as deny principles;
in Divinity it is most safe especially for meaner men; to hold conclusions
evidently taught in despite of all cauilsome premises.

If any shall question the being of my GOD, in whom I live, move, and have my
being; whom, if I were blind, I may even palpably feel: I may perhaps pity
his Atheism, and deplore the abuse of wit, but shall choose to confute rather
with a club, then with an argument, though plenty want not. If Arius or
Antitrynitaryes, shall oppose against the Trinity of persons in the unity of
Divine essence, detest their blasphemy; but though their contradictions seem
never so plausible and unanswerable, hold still the conclusion that there are
three bearing witness in heaven, and that these are one 1 Ioh. 5.7. etc
.

Verse 7. For if the verity of God has more abounded through my lie unto his
glory, why am I yet condemned as a sinner.

Verse 8. And (as we are blamed, and as some affirm that we say) why do we
not evil, that good may come thereof? whose damnation is just.


But see we here other cauilling inferences from the same grounds: The Apostle
brings in the cauiller thus yet inferring: If Gods truth has been much more
abundantly manifested by my lie, and unfaithfulness to his glory, not only
God shall be unjust in punishing, but God and man both injurious in censuring my
action of sin, yea more then that; these evil things (as they are deemed)
should be exhorted unto and done as good, that so great a good as Gods glory
might come thereby: This the objection; answer follows; first, these are but
slanders and scandalous imputations; for we teach no such thing, neither will
these conclusions follow upon our doctrine; secondly, by denuntiation of
judgment, their damnation or judgment is just. The direct answer to all
these cauils see in verse 5. they have all a manifest fallaci accidentis.

Observe the common lot of Ministers to be subject to slanders (as we are
slandered Acts 24.5. Ier. 15.10. and 18.18.
.) Verse 8.


Reason; thorough our sides Satan wounds the truth; and by disgrace of our
persons aliens from respect of our doctrine.

Let neither Ministers nor people think it strange if Mat. 5.10.11.12.
. The devil is still a Devil; as the accuser of the brethren Apoc. 12.10.
: so especially the slanderer of the ministry.

1 Timothy 5.19.
: not under two or three witnesses and those authentical. The reason of which
caveat, is thus given by some; for that Satan has special envy at such, and
none more exposed to calumnyes then they, none whose disgrace brings greater
prejudice to passage of the truth.

Mat. 5.19.
: what need we seek further then our own experience? he that has leisure,
let him see that f^rraginem blasphemiarum scraped together by Kellysson out of
Bellarmine against not ours, but Paul's doctrine of Predestination; certainety
of salvation, justification by faith only, etc.

This only let me admonish our people, as not to be offended at this when it
falls out, so withal to compare what we teach of the Articles with the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, yea this withal let me more say, that
the cauils against our doctrines are no other then what Gods spirit has
prevented, and plentifully answered in the scriptures Romans 3.31. Romans 9.14.19.
etc.
.

And let these slanderers well weigh what the Apostle here speaks of their
issue; (their damnation is just) and sure if for idle words we are countable
Mat. 12.36.
, how much more for blasphemies against Gods holy truth p?

Verse 8. And (as we are blamed, and as some affirm that we say) why do we
not evil, that good may come thereof? whose damnation is just.
LEt us do evil that good may come of it. This resolution here reproved,
affords us this instruction:

That evil may not be done, that good may come of it: no not the least evil
to procure the greatest good Job. 13.7.
: Will you speak wickedly for Gods defense, and talk deceitfully for his
cause? may I not lend God a lie for his glory? much less do any other evil,
for any other good whatsoever. Saul's pretended intention was good, yet his
action censured of rebellion, and compared with the sin of witchcraft 1 Samuel
1^.20.21.23
; and how did Gods wrath burn against Vzzah, notwithstanding his zealous
intention, to preserve the Arc from falling 2 Samuel 6.7.
.

What Apology therefore can Papists have for their vvarranting rebellions and
treasons against Princes haereticall, as they term them, in Deum, and good of
the Church warrant such attempts to conspiratours? It is a good saying of
Caietane, upon this place; secundum sanam veramque doctrinam peccata non sunt
eligenda vt media ad quemcumque bonum finem. Hear his reason. Quia suapte
natura repugnat peccato quod sit eligibile; and propterea nec propter se nec
propter aliud bonum est eligibile. And i^ no sin, sure then not the murder
of the Lords anointed, howsoever heretical; tyrannous, excommunicate.

I say nothing of the whole frame of their religion, that has no other
foundation in the world much of it, but good ends and intentions; such as are
stirring up of devotion alluring of the people, abating of corruption Col.
2.21.22.23.
, and see in what esteem such wise ordinances are with the Lord Mat. 15.19.
.

Now I could wish our people had this principle thoroughly fastened in their
understanding; that good intentions make not good actions, and that as well the
mean, as the meaning must be good: if we desire to have our actions pleasing
unto God Mic. 6.8. Ioh. 26 2.
. Satan's advantages are many from hence; evils by this means being not only
bouldly committed but stoutly defended.

I will pass from this place with a question or two; first, what if two evils
be propounded? may not the lest be chosen to avoid the greater? Ans. Evils are
of two sorts: first, evils of pain: secondly, evils of sin: If both be evils
of pain, the old rule is E malis minimum, though perhaps there are cases, 2 Samuel 24.13.14.
wherein it is not safe to be our own caruers. If both be sins, the rule is
this; E malis nullum: no not the least to avoid the greatest. Caietane reasons
well, if no evil may be done that good may be procured, much less that evil
may be avoided: seeing that to avoid an evil is a less good, then to procure
a thing truly good.

Secondly, what if evils of both natures offer themselves; perhaps a little
sin (if any may be little) and a great pain? as an officious lie or cruel
death, may not the lie be adventured, that death may be avoided? Ans. If thou
may not lie for Gods glory Ioh. 13.7.
, much less for thine own life, that should be as dung unto thee, compared
with the glory of God.

May sins be tolerated to avoid inconveniences? as usury to maintain
traffic; Idolatry to preserve peace of kingdoms, etc. Ans. This rule well
weighed sufficiently assoyles these doubts; whatsoever sins we have power to
hinder, and hinder not, become ours by just imputation Neh. 13.17.18. Ezech.
18.13.
. And for toleration of strange worship, if it has been the blemish of good
kings to tolerate instruments of Idolatry, though not the use of them; if
secondly, commendation of others to remove them; if thirdly, Asa did well in not
tolerating his mother to have her Idol 1 Reg. 15.13.
: if fourthly, he and others be commended for commanding and compelling their
people to serve the Lord, and to do after the law and the commandment 2 Par.
14.4. and 34.31.32.33
; me thinks they cannot escape blame that tolerate evils so odious: and I
could wish all Christian politiques to consider, that righteousness is the
best vpholder of states, and transgression in the issue proves their overthrow
2 Par. 15.2.
. May a less sin be tolerated, to prevent a greater. Ans. where means are
not to hinder both Mat. 15.8.
: though in Moses perhaps there was something extraordinary: and that only
till God give means and opportunity to reform all.

Thus far of these cauils by way of digression; of purpose used by the
Apostle, to prevent the scandal of weak, and stop the mouths of profane
cauillers.

This wisdom let it be imitated of us all in our ministry, in doctrines
that may by mistaking prove offensive; prudently prevent whatsoever a cauiller
may object, though sometimes we be censured to shake hands with our Text.

Verse 9. What then? are we more excellent? No, in no wise: for we have
already proved, that all, both Jews and Gentiles are under sin.

Verse 10. As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one.

Verse 11. There is none that understands: there is none that seeks God.

Verse 12. They are all gone out of the way: they have been made altogether
unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one.

Verse 13. Their throat is an open sepulcher: they have used their tongues to
deceit: the poison of aspes is under their lips.

Verse 14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

Verse 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood.

Verse 16. Destruction and calamity are in their ways.

Verse 17. And the way of peace have they not known.

Verse 18. The fear of God is not before their eyes.


LEt us now proceed to that that follows; verse 9. Where the Apostle
preoccupates what Jews might infer upon his former concession of privileges
granted them above the Gentiles. verse 1.2. Ob. Thus much then you grant; that
Jews have something more then Gentiles; and therefore are not equal in the
case of justification. Ans. Not so; says the Apostle, for we have already
proved, that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin.

First, see we how this seeming contradiction may be reconciled, the Jews have
pre-eminence above the Gentiles many ways, and again, Jews excel not
Gentiles. Ans. Both true in diverse respects: if we regard favors vouchsafed
of God; so Jews exceed Gentiles; if we view them in nature, and consider
them in the point questioned of the breach of the law; so no odds betwixt Jew
and Gentile; for all are equally under (...) sin; all equally therefore
excluded from possibility of being justified by works: This is the plainest
reconcilement; though there be others conceived in other terms.

Now whereas Jews so readily take hold of what Paul grants, touching their
pre-eminence. Luke 18.11.12.28.
. Reasons, First, nature sick of self-love; and loath to seem nothing in her
self; the lesson hard to deny our selves Mat. 16.24.
: Secondly, and the cunning devil first wounded in himself by pride; labors
by pride to keep possession against grace; GOD resists the proud 1 Pet. 5.8.
: this is well known to the Devil.

This may we easily take our selves withal ever by a little observance;
labor we to correct it,

The Lord uses these means to remove it: first, Affliction after greatest
favors 2 Cor. 12.7.
: secondly, permitting graces to ebb and flow in us: thirdly, sometimes
leaving us to our selves, Mat. 26.
that by experience of frailetie we may learn to bear lowly conceits of our
selves in nature.

For this cause let us consider the observation this verse next affords, that
is, grace or providence has put betwixt us, in this we are all equal, whether
Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, king or beggar, if we be sons of Adam, we
are all under sin. That fountain has poisoned all the streams thence
issuing. Now so we are said to be in three respects: first, under guilt of
sin: secondly, under curse of sin: thirdly, under reign of sin.

The two first are here chiefly meant Romans 5.12. Gal 3.9.10. Ephesians. 2.3.
, and the gloss of Rhemists, that will have this saying of Paul, and the
testimonies annexed, to be restrained to the multitude and more part of the
Jews, not understood of every particular; as Zachary and Elizabeth; the
blessed Virgin, and others, is absurd; for who can imagine Paul, or rather Gods
spirit so bad a logitian, as out of a particular to conclude a general.

No lew can be justified by the law; for the most part of them are under sin:
is this trow we Paul's best logic?

Ob. Zachary and Elizabeth etc. were just. Ans. by grace, not by nature,
whereof the Apostle here concludes. And Paul's wisdom is obseruable, reckoning
himself amongst these that excel not by nature though God had by grace, put
difference betwixt him and others.

Isay 61.1.2. Mat. 9.12. and 11.18.
: secondly, it has a gracious promise of refreshing, vbi supra Mat. 5.3. Isay
57.15.
; thirdly, lack of it hinders all solid comfort Luke 1.5.3.
: fourthly, the first step to Gods kingdom Acts 2.37.
: Means, first, view our selves in the looking glass of the law Iam. 1.25.
: it is the end why it is given, to show misery, by reason of sin; and to
implead us guilty before Gods judgment seat Romans 5.20.
: secondly, apply to our selves the curses, which are without partiality
threatened to every transgressour, for every transgression Gal. 3.10.
: thirdly, consider of how pure eyes the Lord is Hab. 1.13.
: how he hates iniquity Psalm. 5.4.
: and suffers no transgression to pass unpunished Heb. 2.2.
: has appointed a day wherein to judge the world in righteousness Acts 17.30.
: brings every work to judgment, and every secret thing whether it be good
or evil 12. Vlt.
: fifthly, ask but thine own soul, thou have a thousand witnesses in thine
own bosom of this guiltines and subjection to the curse of sin. Conscience
(if it be not seared) I persuade my self trembles, in most men, at the sight
of particular hearing, of general judgment Acts 24.26.
: if seared, this a heavier judgment Exodus 7.3.
: and it self an argument of our being still under sin Ephesians. 4.18.19
:

Lastly, I would but know the reason, why amongst-men in their pure, or
rather impure naturals, the doctrine of the law is so distastefull, as in
experience ministres find? No doubt conscience in them guilty of
transgression, flies that arraignement Acts 24 26.27.
.

Hence learn we to clear Gods justice, in judgments Exempl. Ioh. 7.24.25.
We read of a judgment executed upon Achan and his children, for reserving
part of what GOD had devoted to execration.

With what justice, says an Atheist, dies the infant for the fathers sin?
Ans. Many answers are given: first, that it was a work of Gods absolute
(...), for terror of others: secondly, that children are parts of their
parents, and in them their parents are punished: thirdly, some, that perhaps
they sinned by concealment; the scripture no where mentioning that they were
infants: fourthly, let it be granted they were infants; yet were they sons of
Adam, and therefore unclean Ioh. 15.4. Psalm. 51.5.
: and as Paul here speaks, under sin.

That God defers execution of wrath, but for the least moment, it is his great
mercy; that he inflicts death at any time upon men under sin, what
injustice is it?

Luke 23.41.
: we are justly here; and receive things worthy of that we have done.

Verse 10.11. ad ver. 19.
Here follows proof of that formerly taught; that all sons of Adam, whether
Jews or Gentiles, are under sin: it is taken from place of testimonies, out
of the Psalms and Prophets, as the margin well notes them: touching
accommodation of these testimonies to the Apostles purpose: some doubt there
may ^e made, in as much as the Prophets, David and Isay, seem to apply them to
particular persons and times. Some answer; that these being the purest times
of the Jewish church, under David and Ezekiah, they may well conclude the rest,
by an argument from the greater to the less: secondly, some, that Paul meant
to prove his purpose, by induction of particulars, which upon the former ground
of the purity of these times, more then of other, he brake of, thinking the
purpose by these particulars sufficiently proved; but thirdly, it is apparent
to him that reads the Psalms especially, that they are universally to be
understood of all persons and times. Vt Psalm. 14. etc. To which let this be
added; fourthly, that howeuer some particulars of actual sins, show not
themselves in all and every man, yet the fountain and seed, as it were of
all, is in all men, none excepted; and by these particulars that we see
eminent in some, we may see to what we are all inclined, were it not that the
Lord by grace, either restraines, or corrects.

But here let us observe,

Consider but the testimonies alleged, and you shall see an Anatomy of the
whole man natural; I spare particularly to handle them, for that they are
odious to the considerate reader.

This only consider, how he justly taxes us of want of all goodness:
pronesse, and execution of all evil, etc.

Ob. If any shall say that even in men natural* we see abstinence from some
evils, performance of some good duties, and as every earth bears not every
weed; so neither is every man's heart full of all sins.

Ans. That any man is exempt from any one sin, and extremity thereof, it
comes not of nature, but of restraining grace Genesis 20.6.
, man is borne (says Job) as a wild ass colt in the wilderness, and as the
horse rusheth into the battle, so a natural man, more then it pleases God to
bridle, runs headlong into all extremity of profaneness Ephesians. 4.18.
.

And this should teach us jealousy and watchfulness Mat. 26.41.
: fearful are examples even of Gods Saints, this way: see Peter Mat.
26.33.70.71.74.
, and Solomon 1 Reg. 11.1.2.4.
: sundry particulars might be instanced.

That one I will press which is common in practice at this day;
regardlesnesse of choice in marriage; the common inquiry is how beautiful how
vvealthie, how friended; religion that should principally be eyed, not once
thought of: they hope, though never so profane or superstitious, to be a mean
to gain them. It is a holy speech of Nehemiah. Cap. 13 26. upon this occasion;
did not Solomon king of Israel, sin by these things? yet among many Nations
there was none like him; for he was beloved of his GOD, and GOD had made him
King over Israel; yet strange women caused him to sin: Compare 2 Reg.
8.12.13. see an exhortation, Phil. 2.12.13.

Mat. 15.19.
: In them as in a looking glass, thou may see thine own nature: Let every
gross sin seen in another, be unto thee a Sermon of thankfulness unto God;
by whose grace thou have been vpholden and kept from like enormities Genesis 20.6.
.

Gal. 6.1. Iam. 3.1.
.

Verse 19. Now we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says it to them
which are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be
culpable before God.
IN this verse the Apostle preoccupa^es the exception of the Jews Ob. These
testimonies conclude not us, but Gentiles. Ans. First, the records out of which
they are drawn prove the contrary; that Jews especially are here meant: what
soever the law says, it says to them in the Law: but these things the law
says, therefore Jews who only had the giving of the Law Romans 9.4.
, here especially are intended: secondly, a fine: the end of these and like
speeches in scripture, is that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world
be culpable before God. But except Jews be here concluded; their mouths are
not stopped. Ergo.

Sense. What the Law says: Law: first, Scripture; Synecdochically; as Psalm.
19. and 119. etc. to them in the law, that is, to that people to whom God gave
his word written; such were Jews Romans 3.2. Psalm. 147.19.20 Obser.
.

Now that we may here observe is; how desirous nature is to shift off from it
self the stroke of the word of God Ioh. 9.40.
: especially where it censureth and condemns of unrighteousness; first, such
hypocrites are we by nature; secondly, and so desirous to seem something, more
then our brethren.

This that we have daily experience of in our ministry; one of you shall
betray me, and ask, is it I? we should find our selves the person meant;
at least by what is reproved in others; might see old Adam reproved in our
selves; and take occasion by correction of other men's breaking out into action,
to bewail and strive against our own inclinations.

For this cause, consider we, what the law says, it says to them in the law;
to them only and to them all; understand it generally; first, of
prescription: secondly, reproof: thirdly, indictment; fourthly, of
commination: fifthly, condemnation. Duties equally prescribed to all; breaches
of duties equally reproved in all: transgressions equally accused in all:
punishment equally threatened to all: sentence of death equally passed on all
that transgress Gal. 3.10.
.

Pharaoh profanely) that I, a King as I am; should hear his voice, and let
Israel go Exodus 5 2.
?

Thus minded as Pharaoh, alas, how many are there? Devotion is fit for
Churchmen; and religion for idlers, that have naught else to do; Amaziah
will have Amos dismissed from Bethel Am. 6.12.13.
: sins in the country, are no sins in court. Prophecy in Judah, etc.
would GOD this corruption stayed only in Kings Courts; though they also should
remember their Lord is in heaven; that Rex Regum and Dominus Dominatum; whose
law imperial, reproues, accuses, threateneth; condemns the sins of all
without partiality.

That every mouth may be stopped, etc. whether this, (...), That, declare the
intention of God, in thus conuincing us of sin by the law, or the event
only, there is some doubt, it is sometimes put for (...), so that; a note of
illation rather then of intention.

I have in the Analysis interpreted in the first sense, with other expositors;
and leave it in medio; because the odds is not much in the substance of the
conclusion. Every mouth might be stopped Metaphora; that is, that all men might
be put to silence, for any claim they can make to righteousness or salvation by
the law; or as others, from boasting of their own righteousness as verse 27. or
for justifying themselves in Gods sight.

And all the world.] First, not Gentiles only but Jews also, all sons of
Adam be obnoxious or culpable before God. (...); impleadable as guilty of
transgression, and so subject to condemnation.

Now has the Lord sufficiently convicted us of transgression, Job. 9.15.
? are we so loath to be beholden to our God for righteousness? had we rather
magnify the power of Nature, then transcribe glory of righteousness and
salvation to the grace of our God? Surely, says Paul, they must judge, accuse,
condemn themselves, that will escape the severity of Gods judgment 1 Cor.
11.32
(...); impleadable as guilty; and subject to condemnation; that this is the
state of all men, see testimonies Gal. 3.10.
: and if there were nothing else, yet that trembling of the conscience at the
least evidence of Gods wrath, would sufficiently euince it Isay 57.20.21.
: and Examples. Genesis 4.13.14. Mat. 27.4.

Now Lord that we had eyes to see, Ephesians. 2.3.
: we had gone a good step toward our happiness Mat. 5.3.4. Luke 18.13.14.
: and let us all pray God to give us that eye salve of his spirit; to see how
miserable, wretched, poor, blind, and naked we are by nature Apoc. 3.17.
.

Verse 20. Therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight for by the law ^m^^th the knowledge of sin,
LEt us now proceed. Therefore by the w^rkes of the ^aw, etc. The assumption
of the principal syllogism is here concluded: (...), that by works of the
law no man is, or can be justified in the sight of God; where a new reason is
added; from a contrary use and effect of the law: ^y the la^ c^mm^th (...)
k^^wl^ ^f ^nne. In the words are two things; first, a conclusion; no flesh sha^
be (...) the works of the (...) in the sight of God: secondly, a reason,
confirming the conclusion: for by the law c^mm^ the knowledge (...) sin. We
will a little at large explane the conclusion; that the state of the question
betwixt us and iusticiaries, may the better be perceived. What flesh? What
justified? What works ^f the law?

Flesh in Scripture syneedochycally sometim^s signifies man at large Ioh. 4.14.
: sometimes corruption of nature drawn by Adams fall Gal. 5.17.
: sometimes man's nature with the corruption adjoined Ioh. 3.6.
the first and last sense, are pertinent to this place. No flesh, that is no
man; as P^al. 143 2. to which place the Apostle seems to allude.

An^] No flesh; we may understand it formally, and so it implies a reason for
the conclusion: as if he should say, no man can be justified; because every
man is flesh: that is, corrupted with original sin.

Shall be justified.] In the right explanation of this term, lies almost the
whole substance of the controversy.

Our adversaries urging the Grammatical Etymology, Bellar. de iustif. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
^^ke it Physically and with them, to be justified, is to be made righteous by
infusion of habitual righteousness.

They urge: first, Grammar Etymology: secondly, Texts (...): thirdly,
Aequipoll^nces, or explanations by other terms.

Iustificare, signifies to make righteous, as the composition shows; Ans.
first, let that be yielded, does it thence follow that this making righteous,
is by infusion of habitual righteousness? Secondly, Bellarmine himself in
another place blames those that urge Grammar against received use of words; de
poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 7. In eo erran^ multi (says he) quod v^cum significati
^es ex Etym^l^gia por^us ducunt, quam ex communi scripturae and bonorum
authorum vsu.

Texts are these, Dan. 12.3. They which justify many. Ans. And is it
Bellarmines judgment that Martyrs; Ministers, or other Christians, do
justify by infusion of righteousness? I cannot think it. Now if they be said
to justify, as they are said sometimes to forgive sins Ioh. 20.23.
, to cover a multitude of sins Iam. 5. vlt.
: to save 1 Timothy 4. vlt.
, as instruments, by whose ministry the Lord iustifies, remits, saues; what
is this to the sense by them urged? or what against our explication.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many Isay 33.11.
. Ans. And why must this scripture signify justifying after a Physical,
rather then after a judicial manner? The Chapter has a prophetical
description of Christ's humiliation; and the blessed effects thence issuing unto
us; the main amongst them, is justification, explaned in this verse; first, by
the author, meritoriously procuring it unto us: secondly, by subject, or
persons to whom its vouchsafed: thirdly, the instrument or means in us; he
shall justify many, that is, procure by his humiliation to all that know him:
that is, acknowledge him for their mediator, absolution from sin and
condemnation. And that this is the sense appears by the reason adjoined. For
he shall bear their iniquities, that is, the punishment of their sins.

The exposition of Bellarmine and the reasons brought to approve it, are to any
indifferent reader frivolous.

By his knowledge: that is, doctrine; Ans The words best read thus, out of the
original; by the knowledge of him; making Christ the object known, rather
then the subject of knowledge. Ob. my righteous servant, Ergo, by justice and
service he iustifies. Ans. First, what necessity to take these Epithetes
formaliter? Secondly, it was needful for him that undertook as a mediator to
procure our absolution, at the bar of Gods judgment; himself to be holy,
harmless, separate from sinners Heb. 7.26.
: Ob. seruus: he iustifies therefore by doing service to his father, in the
work of justification; not by judging. Ans. first, that is not here taught:
secondly, how tar fetched is this conclusion? the Prophet shows here the
effect of Christ's humiliation: viz. that he, as the meritorious cause, shall
procure our discharge from sin; neither do any of us contend, that to
justify always is put for actus iudicis: but is sometimes* Metonymically
given; to Author, means, instrument, of justification.

Ob. Apoc. 22.11. Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc: Ans. First* their own
Authentic Greek, has not iustificetur; but (...), secondly, what necessity
to interpret Physically, rather then iudicially? May not the sense be this? he
that is just by acceptance in Christ, let him endeavor to preserve himself,
in that blessed condition.

Thirdly, yield that gloss, will it hence follow that in the question of our
justification in the sight of God, it must be so taken? Says their own
Caelius Pannonius: this is spoken Prophetando non optando. By way of prophecy,
rather then of desire or exhortation; And then what hinders but the iudiciarie
acception of the word, may stand?

Ob. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are justified; that is, ex iniust^s iusti effecti. Ans.
first, be it granted; what is that to making righteous by infusion of inherent
righteousness? secondly, the Apostle directly distinguishes betwixt
sanctification and justification, which Papists in this whole controversy
confound. Ob. Equipollence or explanation: Romans 5.19. Many shall be made
righteous in Christ, as many were made sinners in Adam: he urges first the
phrase made righteous: secondly, the comparison etc.

Ans. Some interpret the phrase thus; (...), shall be presented just. But
contra: first, no example can be brought either out of scripture, nor for ought
I know, out of classical author, where this verse, joined to a word,
whereinto his signification passes, signifies to be presented; but to be
constituted or made: secondly, why translate we here presented: and in the
former clause, made? for there to interpret otherwise, were harsh.

Secondly, therefore I answer; first, that they cannot show that the Apostle
here intended to interpret the word justified: secondly, we yield that we are
by the obedience of Christ made righteous; but will it thence follow, that it
is by infusion of inherent righteousness? and not rather by Donation or
imputation?

Ob. It must be by inherence, for so is Adams sin conuayed to us, and thus did
Adam make us sinners.

Ans. Comparisons must not be stretched beyond the intention: there can no more
be hence collected, but that we are made righteous by Christ's obedience, no
less then by Adams disobedience we were made sinners: or that Christ is
herein like to Adam; that as he conuayed sin to his posterity, so Christ
righteousness to his children.

Touching manner of conuayance or communication, the Apostle speaks not.
Therefore in this sense, the term is not used in this question.

Let us see now how the scripture uses the word: and especially, how in this
place and question the Apostle understands it? The word to justify, or to be
justified* signifies sometimes to acknowledge just, and give commendation of
righteousness: as Luke 27.19. Romans 3.4 so men are said to justify GOD.
Sometimes to approve, maintain, defend as just Luke 10.29.
. so to men in respect of themselves or others. Sometimes Metaphorically, or by
Senecdoche, to free or deliver; as Romans 7. Sometimes to absolve and acquit from
crimes whereof a man is accused, whether justly, or unjustly: or to pronounce
just, and give commendation of righteousness Pro. 17.15.
, so Pro. 1 etc. callat. cum. Pro. 24.24. Isay 5.23. Sometimes to give
testimony and reward of righteousness 1 Reg. 8.32.
. Sometimes to esteem, accept, pronounce, righteous Rom 2.13.
. These significations are many of them coincedent. Let us enquire in what
sense the Apostle in this question takes it: we shall best understand it:
first, by scope of the Apostle: secondly, by use of the word in this question.

The scope of the Apostle is this, to show how a poor sinner guilty of
transgression, and thereby excluded from hope of heaven, and liable to
condemnation, may obtain righteousness, such as for which the Lord shall at the
bar of his judgment pronounce, and account him righteous, and so acquit him
from condemnation.

That this is the Scope, appears by that formerly in the Epistle; where the
Apostle has convinced all sons of Adam of unrighteousness; to this end, that
they might seek righteousness out of themselves in Christ. And willing to
give refreshing to the weary soul pressed with conscience of sin, and
priuitie of lack of righteousness; he sets down, what that righteousness is,
for which God will accept and account us righteous: according to this scope,
then to be justified is to be pronounced and accounted as righteous. Now this
being granted to be the Apostles drift; see we* what in experience of a
Christian, is that that troubles the conscience arraigned? what that that gives
it peace? I speak now in general: that that first affrights, is fear of
condemnation; because of the sentence of the law, and severity of the judge;
this first in sense Acts 16. and 2.37.
; but if a man be demanded why he fears condemnation, his answer will be,
because he lackes righteousness, and knows GOD to be of pure eyes, hating
iniquity, and not holding the wicked innocent: and till he see some
righteousness in which he may stand before God, he can never be freed from
fear of condemnation. Therefore the Apostle purposes here to show by what
means a man may obtain righteousness, such as for which the Lord shall accept
and account him righteous.

Secondly, use of the Word. The word in this Epistle is first used. Romans 2.13.
the hearers of the law are not righteous with God; but the doers of the law
shall be justified: where I think the word must thus be rendered; are not
accounted and holden righteous: for, what he in the latter clause calls
justified, in the former he terms being just with God; that is, in Gods
account and estimation.

I spare heaping up of testimonies for breuities sake: To be justified then,
here, is to be accounted or approved for righteous: that which some urge, that
to be justified here signifies to be acquit from sin, that is, to have pardon
of sins; though the acception be frequent, yet is not pertinent to that
place, as the clause (...), intimates; compare Romans 2.13. as also the reason of
the Apostle this; every man a transgressour, therefore no man justified by the
law; that is works of the law; that is, obedience to the law; or secondly,
performance of duties therein prescribed.

The sense then is this; that no man borne of Adam can by works of the law
procure account and esteem of righteousness before GOD: so that in this
conclusion, he remoues this effect. (Justification) from this cause (works of
the law) in respect of every son of Adam.

Hence then, let us observe this conclusion; that works of the law cannot
procure the esteem of righteousness with GOD, to any child of Adam. First,
reason of the Apostle collected from the illatiue particle therefore; and
stands thus, if we look back to the Apostles discourse. No transgressour of
the law can be justified, that is approved as righteous before God by the
works of the law; but all flesh, that is, every son of Adam is a
transgressour of the law: therefore shall no flesh be counted righteous before
God, by works of the law. The assumption has been at large proved: cap. 1.2
and 3. see we the reason of the proposition; it is this. The law to
justification requires continuance in every thing therein written, to do it.
Wherefore, seeing he that transgresses continues not in all things written in
the law to do them; apparent that by works of the law no flesh can be
justified.

Second reason: or rather the same iterated in other words, is in the latter
end of the verse, from a contrary effect of the law: that is, conviction of
sin: thus: If by the law we be all convicted of sin; then by works of
the law, can none be justified; but by the law comes knowledge of sin; that
is, we are convicted of sin: Ergo. The assumption again is evident, set
down in the Apostles words, reason of the consequence; vt supra.

Knowledge of sin; not so much, quoad naturam peccati; for so by the law
comes the knowledge of righteousness; but quoad inhaerentiam in nobis; that
is, if we look to the law we shall see our unrighteousness discovered, and be
forced to acknowledge that we are sinners; therefore can we never look to
obtain righteousness by doing of the law: for even one transgression
anihilates righteousness, in respect of righteousness by the law: Gal. 3.10.

Now wha^ (trow we) can our adversaries object to elude this so direct
testimony of the Apostle? They distinguish: first of the law: secondly,
works: thirdly, justification. Works of the ceremonial law, say Rhemists,
are here excluded, not those of the law moral. Contra: mark then how worthy
a disputer they have made the Apostle: every man is a transgressour of the law
moral; Ergo. no man can be justified by the works of the law ceremonial. He
means by works of that law, whereof they are transgressors; that was the law
moral: secondly, he concludes of all men both Jews and Gentiles that neither
Gentiles by works of the law of nature, nor Jews by works of law written,
can be justified. Now to the Gentiles was not the law of ceremonies given:
thirdly, he means works of that law, by which comes knowledge of sin, but
that is the law moral Romans 7.7.
, and that of ceremonies, does not directly, but secondarily, and by accident
convince of sin, fourthly, he means that law by which the true means of
justifying a sinner is not revealed, verse 21. but the law of ceremonies, in
sacrifices and other types, though obscurely, reveal Gods righteousness;
namely, Christ the end of the law for righteousness Romans 10
. It remains then: that he concludes of all works, of all law, whether
ceremonial or moral.

Of works they distinguish thus, according to their principle, and time of
doing: de iustitia and operibus loquitur, quae fidem and gratiam dei
praecedunt: so Bellarmine, so Rhemists, of works Moral done without faith, and
the grace of God: that is, as they must be understood; of works done by
infidels, and such as are not yet members of the church: but contra. Gal.
2.15.16. directly preuents this cavil: secondly, the Apostle has of purpose
convinced the people of God of transgression, ver e 19. to show, that even they
could be justified by their works, though done in faith: thirdly, the reason
of the Apostle will conclude works of grace; for if whosoever transgresses
the law cannot be justified by works of the law, then neither they that have
faith, and are in state of grace; since they also are transgressors: fourthly,
works done in grace and faith follow justification. Ergo, cause it not.

Of justification: this is of two sorts, or has two degrees; first, whereby a
sinner is made just inherently: secondly, whereby a man being now just is made
more just inherently too: that is, has inward righteousness increased in him.
Ans. First, scripture is not acquainted with the first and second
justification; for justification, as in this question the scripture uses it,
is actus indiuiduus: secondly, that which they call justification: scripture
terms sanctification; and distinguish it from justification thirdly, it is
apparently the Apostle purpose, to show how a sinner a may attain
righteousness, not how he may increase it: here therefore the place for that
distinction: we conclude then, that no man can be justified by any works of
the law.

Now I could wish our people had learnt, but this one lesson thoroughly,
amongst those many other, necessary to salvation: but so natural is Popery
in this point, to the sons of Adam, that though they cannot but acknowledge
themselves sinners, yet they have hope of justification by their works; their
good prayers, and their good serving of God, the very pillar of their
confidence, for righteousness and salvation. It is true, they confess they
are sinners, and have offended; but their good works they hope will overcome
the bad.

Poor souls, if they had eyes to see their misery: first, how even one
transgression, takes away all possibility of being justified by the law Gal.
3.10.
: and wherewithal will thou come before God, to appease his wrath, for thy
innumerable transgressions? secondly, can nature poisoned with sin yield any
fruit pleasing unto God? thirdly, or our imperfect good works, ^^ay down our
perfect and consummate sins? Holy David had many good works; and except in
the case of Vrujah, not noted of any notorious crime; yet deprecates judgment
P^ 14^.2
, upon this ground; he knew no man living could, by his best works, endure the
censure of justice; and Job resolves to supplicate to his judge Io ^9.1^
: and Paul, counts all his own righteousness dung and dross Phil. 3.
: and Daniel dares not present himself to God in his own righteousness Dan.
^.^.
: and who are we, that we should once dream of our good works, ouerprising
our sins, in the balance of Gods justice? but see, yea pray GOD thou may
see, the cunning of the Devil; first, to rob us of righteousness by
bringing us into transgression; and then to flatter us with hope of
righteousness by the law, that he may keep us from Christ.

Now before I pass from this place, the question fitly offers it self to be
discussed, whether works of the law, are here wholly and absolutely excluded
from power of justifying: or only our works of the law, as done by us;
briefly whether he exclude as well the obedience of Christ to the law
performed for us: as our own obedience and doing the works enjoined in the
law. This question has been but of late moved, and was never thought off by
the first restorers of our faith, though exercised long in the question of
justification: the more I wonder at the peremptorinesse of those that now
press the affirmative; and sure if the case were mine own, I should a little
suspect my self of singularity and be jealous of mine eyesight, least
itching after novelty, had something dazeled me. And for the opinion generally
received, let me say thus much in general; that it suffices to the Apostles
purpose to exclude works of the law done by our selves; first, hereby is man
as much abased, as Romans 3.27. secondly, Gods grace as much magnified, as Tit.
3.5.6.7. thirdly, necessity equally laid on us to seek righteousness out of
our selves in Christ: fourthly, heart as much inflamed to love God: fifthly,
conscience as well settled in a sweet peace: sixthly, objections as sufficiently
answered: seauenthly, shall I add, (which I presume is all the adverse part
can plead) scripture as easily and currently explaned; all which so being,
though I would have no man for pretense of novelty, to reject a truth
clearly euidenced in the word; nor am so profane as to choose to err with
many, rather then to think truth with few: yet sure, I should much suspect my
self in such a case, where I go alone, and would not easily be brought to
diuulge my conceits supposedly true, considering what an open I should give to
adversaries, to tax of leuitie and uncertainty in foundations: though I know
this taken at worst, is but hay or stubble, built on the foundation.

Now to the point; I take it, it cannot be shown to be the Apostles purpose to
exclude works of the law absolutely, but only as done, or to be done by us.
Reasons; first, this suffices to the Apostles purpose; vt supra: secondly,
this particle (done by us) is in some Texts directly expressed; in some others
by good consequence deduced Tit. 3.5. Phil. 3.9.
: not having mine own righteousness, which is by the law; that is, as I
think, by the law, as performed by me; for in other sense, Paul could not call
the righteousness by the law, his own righteousness, but in respect of his own
performance: thirdly, if I should define righteousness, I could not do it but
in these terms, a conformity to the law of God; if unrighteousness; no
otherwise then thus, that (...) is (...), 1 Ioh. 3. but righteousness we have
by justification, and that such, as whereof we are denominated just and
righteous; therefore justice of the law, not simply excluded, but only in
respect of our performance: fourthly, the Apostle giving a reason, why it was
impossible to the law to justify us, says, it was only because it was
vveake, by means of the flesh Romans 8.3.
: intimating thus much, I think, that we are excluded from justification by
the law only in respect of our disabilitie to perform it: fifthly, consent of
Divines, teaching that the righteousness of the law, and that of the Gospel,
differ not in matter and form; but only in the efficient and end, so Iunius
These. Theolog. 36. Polanus in Daniel: cap. 9. verse 24. Zanchius ad Ephesios.

And that Christ's obedience to the law, is not excluded from office of
justifying; me thinks is more then probable by these reasons: first, because
it seems to be performed by him, as a duty for us, or in our steed: which
by this reason I think is evident: performed it was by Christ; either vice
sua, or nostra; or neutra, or v^raque the third is absurd, if the second and
fourth be granted, we have the purpose. And that he did it not vice sua, or as
a duty which himself ought to God appears; first, then could it not have
been meritorious, no not for himself Luke 17.10.
: but it was meritorious: secondly, he was no mere creature, neither was the
law given to him.

Again, our whole debt was to be paid by Christ, our surety: and to say
the punishment was our whole debt, me thinks is unreasonable: for shall we
say the devils and damned in hell, pay all they owe to the majesty of GOD, in
bearing the punishment due to their sins? are they not, even in hell, bound
still, not to blaspheme etc. else how could those sins of theirs be sins;
since every sin is transgression of some law? I omit other reasons because
others will occur in process of this Epistle, and objections fitlier
answered in other places. Now we will proceed.

Before God, or in the ^ight of God.] Divines hence gather that distinction of
justification in foro human^, before man: and in foro Diuin^, before God.
Compare Romans 4 2. and thus generally expound the place, Iam. 2. of
justification before men: how fitly we shall see hereafter, if the Lord give
life and strength to publish my notes on that Epistle. It is true, that works
justify in the sight of men; when we see them, we are, in charity, to
esteem them as fruits of faith; and for them to allow them esteem of
righteousness; till it please GOD to discover hypocrisy: but not so in the
sight of God Psalm. 143.2
: who judges not after outward appearance but pondereth the heart.

By law comes the knowledge of ^inne]

De sensu. Of what law means the Apostle? Ans. Chiefly of the law written and
delivered in Tables Romans 5.20. and 7.7.
comes knowledge of sin.

Quest. Whether this the original use of the law to manifest sin? Ans. The
law taken for substance of doctrine contained therei^, was original given.
First, for a rule of life. Secondly, for a mean o^ salvation by keeping
thereof Leuit. 18.5.
. The writing of the law after the fall, had this, as one principal end, to
convince of sin Gal 3.29.
. Whence it appears that conviction of sin is rather an accident, then a
natural and proper work of the law. Kn^wl^ (...) understand, not so much of a
speculatiue notice as of a feeling ackno^ledgement.

Here t^^n we see one principal use and effect o^ the law, to the sons of
Adam, Romans 5 20 Gal. ^.10.
. Therefore called the ministry of condemnation, not of life 2 Cor. 3.7.9
(...).
.

How Popishly then do Papists use it, as a glass to behold their perfections*
rather then their blemishes in? And suppose it, even since the fall, to be
propounded as a means of justification at least, in the sight of God: shall
we hear their reasons? The principal is this: It is (say they) improbable,
that the Lord would give a law, which no man is able to keep, and promise life
under an impossible condition; yea, most tyrannous were he, to damn for breach
of that law, which is impossible to be kept. Ans. To all these cauils, this
Answer serves: First, that when God first gave the law, the law was possible
to be kept by man: strength by creation was given to man, proportionate to the
duties enjoined in the law: And we are not to think that the moral law was
first given at the promulgation in Synai; the very same law for substance, was
given to Adam in innocence; Love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy
self, and particulars of it also, as appears by that precept of the Sabbath
Genesis 2.2.
. Secondly, that the law is impossible to us is not Gods fault, but ours Romans
8.3.
. Thirdly, no injustice, much less tyranny, to exact debt at the hands of an
unable debtor, that by wilfulness has disabled himself: Fourthly, especially
when the Lord, by this exaction, aims at this only, to bring us to
acknowledgement of our misery, that so in Christ he may have mercy on us Romans
11.32.
. But thus have Papists perverted the law.

Antinom^, have utterly taken away all use of the law, and the doctrine thereof
under the Gospel: we are not under the law: And yet Christ professes, he came
not to destroy the law Mat. 5.19.
. Paul, that faith is so far from abolishing, that it rather stablisheth the
law Romans 3.31.
. And is it nothing? think we, that hereby, first, natural misery is
discovered: secondly, the heart humbled: thirdly, hunger and thirst after
righteousness in Christ wrought in us: fourthly, heart enlarged to
thankfulness to God, for deliverance from that yoke, and burden importable:
fifthly, actions of life directed and ordered: sixthly, old man more and more
destroyed in us?

Antinomi: but to use it rather, as a looking glass, to behold our manifold
blemishes natural and actual James. 1.
. This is one of the best uses, we sinners can make of the law: and let no man
through pretended fear of despair, distaste either public ministry or
private meditation of the law. God has propounded a remedy in his son
Christ Jesus Mat. 11. Romans 10.4.
; but requires us first to be prepared by the law. A method of conuersing in
the law, see in M. Perkins ad Gal. 3o.

Verse 21. But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law,
having witness of the Law and of the Prophets.
THus far has the Apostle stablished his negative assumption, and proved
that by works no child of Adam can be justified: Now it remains he should
infer the other part of his disjunction, [Therefore by faith:] which also he
does Ver. 28, directly. And to the conclusion passes by oblique answer to a
supposed question: If not by works, how then? If they be no cause or mean of
justification, how then are we justified? and where shall we have such
righteousness as may steed us at Gods judgment seat? Ans. Ver. 21. The
righteousness of God is made manifest without the law, etc. In which words,
and those that follow to Ver. 27. is set down a description of that
righteousness, whereby a sinner is justified in the sight of God. Particulars
of the description these:

First, efficient; Righteousness of God.

Secondly, mean of revelation, negative: Without law.

Thirdly, adjoined: approbation and testimony of law and Prophets.

Fourthly, Instrument: Faith in Christ.

Fifthly, Subject: Believers all, and only.

Sixthly, Causa (...). Grace of God.

Seauenthly, Causa. (...), or meritorious: Redemption in Christ.

Eighthly, ends subordinate Ver. 25.26.

[Righteousnesse of God:] Sense of the words. Righteousness is diversely taken
in Scripture:

First, for that universal holiness, that is in Gods nature, whereof he is
denominated just.

Secondly, as opposed to mercy, it signifies particular justice distributive,
whereby he rewards every man after his works.

1 John. 1.
Thirdly, for the truth of GOD, and his fidelity in performing promise.

Here none of these meant: and it was a dream of Osiander. That the Lord
should in justification communicate unto us his essential righteousness,
which is incommunicable. We shall best see the meaning by comparing this
place with others: as Philip. 3.9. Romans 10.2.3.
where we see it opposed to our own righteousness. Now so is that
righteousness termed, which is wrought by our selves, in doing the duties
prescribed by the law: Gods righteousness then is that, whereof GOD is the
worker, donour, approuer.

2 Cor. 5.19. Romans 3.26.
: And least any iusticiarie should object: that God is indeed the worker of
it, but by inherence in us, using us as instruments to work it, see Romans Rom
10.3.4.
10.3.4. where we are remitted to the person of Christ, as the only
storehouse where the Lord has laid it up for us.

Philip. 3.8.9.
, and heavy is the doom, passed by the Apostle, on all that seeking to
stablish their own righteousness, refuse that wrought for us by God in
Christ, and tendered to us in the Gospel.

See we mean of revealing negative: (Revealed here taken strictly for law
moral; more largely in the latter part of the verse, for the writings of Moses.

Moral law then so far from procuring, Romans 10.4.5.
. That we err not, let us a little inquire the sense: whether must this be
universally understood, or only in some respect? Some take it universally;
those especially that exclude Christ's active obedience from justification,
thinking that neither matter, nor efficiencie of righteousness is revealed in
the law. Now I take it, that is more then can be collected; for it is confessed
on all sides, that bearing the curse of the law is required to justification
and that the law reueales and urges. I take it therefore, this is to be
limited to the worker, and manner of efficiencie, which the law never
reueales; that ever presses obedience to be wrought by our selves;
satisfaction to be made by our selves. Has no word of obedience, or
satisfaction to be wrought for us by our mediator Christ Jesus; which is that
mean of justification that the Lord has ordained, and revealed in the Gospel
Romans 1.17.
. If any shall hence thus reason; Law reueales not the righteousness, whereby
a sinner is justified; and it reueales Christ's active obedience to the law:
Therefore Christ's active obedience, is no part of that righteousness whereby
a sinner is justified. Ans. First, ad maiorem: if it be understood of the
matter of our righteousness, false; if of the author and manner of efficiencie,
true; and serves not to prove the conclusion. Secondly, ad minorem: Law
reueales not Christ's active righteousness: viz. as done by Christ, or as to be
performed by him in our steed; but it reueales, that righteousness for the
matter of it, which was to be performed by him, that undertook to procure
justification for us in the sight of God.

(hypo^hetice) all that will be justified by the law, to do themselves the
things in the law enjoined, apparent it is, that we can never be justified by
our own performance of the law.

Mat. 7.12.
: The truth hereof, viz That Moses and Prophets send us out of our selves, to a
righteousness of Gods working, and donation, I might prove by a large
induction Genesis 3.15. and 15 6.
: Types of law many; Passover Ezod. 12. Psalm. 32. Isay. 53. Ier. 23.8. Act.
10.43.
, Inscription on the Highpriests plate. Holiness of the Lord: brazen serpent:
In a word sacrifices all prefigured Christ: for Prophets, see David: Psalm. 32.
Isay cap. 53. Ier. 23.8 etc. Confer like speech of Peter. Act. 10.43.

Luther? out of question, one of the two is true; either Moses and the Prophets
were Lutherans; or else Luther, in this, as in many other points of doctrine,
a disciple of Moses and the Prophets.

Verse 22. To wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all and upon all that believe.
EVen the righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ.]

Sense: Whether this (by faith) must materialiter, as if faith were the matter
of our righteousness; or instrumentaliter, because it is the instrument by
which the righteousness of GOD in Christ is apprehended, may be questioned:
Modern interpreters (all that I have read) take it in the last sense; and till
of late, I think it never came into any man's head, that faith should be the
matter or thing) whereof the righteousness of God consists, which me
thinks may thus be euidenced: First, then should the thing whereof our
righteousness consists be in our selves: Secondly, that almost continual
annexing of Christ, or his blood, or some such like, as it were knitting the
instrument with the object, makes me believe, the spirit of God would teach us,
(as all our Divines accord) that it is not faith, but the object of faith,
Christ his blood, and obedience, for and by which we are justified: Therefore
leaving these quiddities to men that delight in novelties, insisting in the
old broad way of the Saints, this plain truth I propound.

That faith is the sole instrument, or thing in us, vt sen^us sit: And if you
would know how this righteousness is obtained, it is by faith of Jesus Christ;
that is, by faith receiving, and applying Christ, as he is tendered unto us in
the promise of the Gospel: that is, by particular acknowledgement of the truth
of this proposition, Christ loved me, Gal. 2.20.
and gave himself for me a. My purpose is, to reserve the questions touching
the nature, and quality of Faith justifying, to a place more proper; here
only it shall suffice to give reason, why no other thing in a Christian, can
serve, so much as instrumentally, to justification: And it is this, rendered by
our Divines. Because there is no other gift of God in us, where by the matter
of our righteousness, Christ's obedience can be received; as is required Ioh.
Ioh. 1.12.
1.12. But hereof also more largely hereafter.

By faith of Christ.] As in whom righteousness whereby we are justified is
resident as in a subject. Something further might here be observed, if I would
be curious to press every word (as this is indeed the privilege of the
Scripture, no word but has his weight:) This only I point at, and proceed.



Acts 4.12.
that there is no other name given under heaven, by which a man can be saved,
but the Name of Jesus. Ephesians. 4.12.
Secondly, and Paul, ill makes it a part of heathenish misery, to be without
Christ: thirdly, and as ill ranks them with Atheists, that apprehend, or with
Idolaters that worship GOD out of Christ, ibid. and Gal. Gal. 4.8.
4.8. and fourthly, our Savior was deceived, when he taught the kingdom of
GOD should be taken from Jews, even for erring obstinately in the person of
the Messiah: but enough of these.

Fifthly, the Subject follows; (^o all and on all that believe.) Not to be
curious about these particles (to and upon,) betwixt which I see no difference
more then betwixt Aarons beard, and the beard of Aaron: The ingemination is
either for stronger auouchment, or else for interpretation and restraint: (to
all) as if he should say: yea and I say again to all, without excluding any,
either Jew or Gentile All: (to all) as if he should say, but thus limmit the
universal particle; all that believe. But the first sense seems fitter in
respect of the reason annexed: For there is no difference, etc.

There is then no enclosure of this blessing of righteousness, to any nation,
person, sex, Acts 15.9.
And note in this whole Epistle, the general particle, often and purposely
used.

This point a long time sounded harsh in Jewish Acts 13. and 15 and 28. Romans
15. Ephesians. 2.
: which made the Apostle so often inculcate it, and so largely insist on it;
so envious is our nature, and so gladly would we make several Gods common
favors. Not much unlike Jews in this behalf, are the now Romish clergy:
willing to pen up truth, righteousness, and salvation, within the precincts of
the Romish Church; forgetting the Catholiquenesse of the Church Christian, to
consist in this; Psalm. 2.
that now the heathen are given Christ for his inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession.

And let us Gentiles praise God for this mercy. Romans 15.


And will you see the cunning of Satan, whereby he robs Gods children of much
of their comfort? As he has given Rome seizure of the keys of heaven, so
himself has reserved power to widen or straighten heaven gate, as may best
serve for his advantage: with profane men, any faith, be it never so blind or
implicit, never so doubtful or faithless, the very shadow and lip-profession
of it, serves turn for salvation: with Gods children, none does the deed, but
what caries us full sail to the Mediator of righteousness. Let Gods children
carefully remember, what the Apostle here teaches. To all believers reaches
Go^s righteousness; If thou walk in the steps of Abraham's faith, though thou
keep not pace with him, to thee also shall thy faith be imputed for
righteousness: Romans 4.23.24.
little faith is faith, as a little spark is fire: And we know who has
promised, not to quench, either flame or coal, or spark, Mat. 12 20.
no nor smoke of faith, if it be in sincerity.

[To all that beleeue*] The universality of grace then, at least in respect of
efficacy, admits restraint, and limitation to believing. There is a world of
men, whom Christ came to save, but it is the mundus credentium, the world of
believers, as an ancient Divine interprets it. These limitations are so
frequent in Scripture, that they need no evidence by instance; and it is
confessed by the very Advocates of universal grace, that though Christ's
righteousness has a sufficiency in it, to procure salvation to all: yet in
respect of efficacy, it is appropriated to believers, and their seed.

This only it shall suffice here to touch, by way of inquiry: what kind of
belief that is, to which righteousness is extended. Our adversaries generally
accord, that a general faith suffices, and belief of the truth of points of
faith, without particularizing is enough to justification. Now surely the
Devil is beholding to them, that in generals, I dare say* goes as far as
most Papists; yea, upon better evidence believes the History of the Gospel,
then most formal Papists do. And I would have Papists tell me, what hinders
even devils from justification, if not this; that they cannot particularize the
generals of faith to themselves: it is vain to say, they want charity, the
fruit of faith: for in this very point of believing there must be something,
wherein Gods children go beyond the devil Iam. 2.19.
.

But let us hear their reasons: One of their principal advocates thus pleades
Bellar* de iustif. lib. 1. cap. 8. and 10.
: First, from testimonies: Mat. 9. and 16. John. 1. and 6. and 19. Act. 8. Romans
4. and 10. etc.

It was all Christ required to justification. All that Philip required to
baptism of the Eunuch, etc. Therefore suffices to righteousness and
salvation. Ans. 1. It will trouble these men, I think, out of these promises
to draw their conclusion: for general faith might suffice, to procure a cure
miraculous; and profession of faith, give interest to baptism; and yet not be
sufficient to justification in Gods sight. Ans. 2. Our Divines well answer,
that belief of many the particulars here specified, employed particular
assurance of Gods love in Christ: And that, howsoever profession is made of
believing particulars only here specified, according to the present occasion;
yet it is to be presumed, the rest was also believed; it being one faith that
apprehends all particulars propounded in the word. Ans. 3. That what is not
expressed is employed: 1 John. 5.1.2.
as 1 John. 5. Ver. 1.2.

Their reasons.

Ob. 1. No particular word of God declaring pardon of sins, or salvation to
belong to such or such particulars: Ergo.

Ans. First, that the general compriseth vertually all particulars: and that
out of the generals rightly assumed, may the particular conclusion be well
deduced for faith to rest on. Ex. gra. As out of this general, Every
reasonable Animal^ a man. Socrates, rightly assuming, may conclude, that he is
a man: so out of this general, Whosoever believes in the son of God, has
life, and shall never come into condemnation, John. 3. Whosoever can rightly
assume, may conclude that he has life. Secondly, that we have it in the
equivalent, God having made a promise general, and giving a command of
particular applying. Thirdly, Sacraments at least particularize the generality
of the promise.

Ob. 2. Faith justifying goes before justification, as the cause thereof: but
fa th special follows justification: because I cannot believe my sins to be
forgiven, till they be forgiven: secondly, every act depends on his object,
not con^^a.

Ans. 1. If they speak o^ pr^ority of nature, it is true, faith is before
justification actually enjoyed the sentence of absolution not being passed on
any, till he believe: if of priority of time, so we affirm them to be simul,
neither before or after other: for as soon as ever I believe, so soon am I by
the Lord approved as righteous. And secondly, whereas they talk nicely of the
objects praecedence to the act, and the acts dependence on the object. Ans.
First, that the object, qua obiectum, is simul cum actu; for it is no actual
object, till the act be exercised there about. Exemp. gra. Color though it be
by fitness Natural, obiectum vi^us; yet cannot be said to be obiectum actu,
till some act of sight be exercised there-abouts: so much of the general.
Secondly, it is harsh, that the object is said to give essence to the act,
except it be thus understood, that without it the act cannot be exercised.
Thirdly, more directly to the purpose: the object of faith justifying, which we
will suppose to be this proposition: thy sins are forgiven thee; we are to
consider, in what sort it is propounded to a sinner: and that is, sub
conditi^ne fidei, in respect of the actual truth thereof, that though the
mind have an ^n^uitus of this object before justification; yet it apprehends
the truth of it, but in proposito Dei, and sub condition: neither has it
actual and categoricall truth, till the Hypothesis be performed: And thus
though the object be before this act of the mind (consideration,) yet it is
not before the act of believing it, in respect of execution, and real fruition
of it.

Ob. 3. This special faith takes away prayer, use of Sacraments, good works,
therefore is not justifying faith, but rather destroying: And will you hear
their reason? For if I must certainly believe, that my sins be forgiven me,
how can I pray, Forgive me my sins? nay, I shall be an Infidel, to pray for
forgiveness, as well as if I should pray, that the word might be made flesh.
A^s. This argument has been often answered by our Divines. The sum of the
answer is this: That though sins be known to be forgiven, yet is not prayer
for forgiveness unnecessary: first, for that assurance of pardon is but in
part obtained: secondly, because new sins are daily committed; which, though
in the purpose of God they be forgiven; yet is not sentence of forgiveness
past in the conscience, till act of faith, and repentance be renewed, and by
all means testified. To that of Sacraments: Read but what is R m. 4.11. Romans
4.11.
and thou shall see reason, why Sacraments are necessary even for men justified
Viz: as Seals: that is, means to work farther, and more plentiful assurance
of justification.

Ob. 4. Confidence that sins are forgiven, depends upon good conscience, and
perseverance in love of God* and good works 2 Pet. 1.10.
: and therefore presupposes justification, but works it not. Ans. First* we
must distinguish betwixt justification it self and the manifestation of it:
the evidence of justification depends upon good conscience, because no man can
know himself to be justified but he that has good conscience, yet the act of
justification ex part Dei is performed simul cum fide. Secondly, or otherwise
thus, justification depends on good conscience and good works, only as ex
signis not as ex causis. Thirdly, good conscience is not after faith in time
Act. 15.9. Heb. 9.14.
, but only in nature; and so soon as faith is given, so soon is the heart
purified; and purpose of new obedience resolutely determined by the believer.

Object. 5. Because this special faith breeds nothing but perturbation,
disquietnesse, and even desperation in the mind: because a man may be deceived
in his special persuasion; and Calvin requires a certain knowledge of
remission of sins, and predestination to life in every justified man. Ans.
First, it is not faith special, but lack of it that breeds disquietnesse
Romans 5.1.
Secondly, and though some men are deceived in their opinion and persuasion of
justification and election to life as M. Calvin at large shows, that have
nothing but Laruam fides, yet will it follow thence, that none other may have
infallible persuasion of their justification and adoption? that in deed have
the spirit to witness it unto them Romans 8.
. Thirdly, if there be doubtings, arise they from faith? and not rather from
remains of infidelity? Fourthly, where teaches M. Calvin that faith
considered in subjects, as it is in Gods children, is free from doubtings? nay,
shows he not that the dearest of Gods Saints have conflicts with infidelity?
Fifthly, and yet since faith is in the issue conqueror, might he not justly
ascribe unto it certainty and infallibility of persuasion? Briefly all that M.
Calvin teaches of faith, amounts to this; that it is certain and infallible
natura sua and secondly, that it is so in a measure in Gods children: and
thirdly, ought to be endeavored by such as desire solid comfort: fourthly, is
conqueror in the end in all conflicts, no where teaches, so much as by
dream, that there can be no assurance of election or adoption, but where is
fullness of persuasion, ever free from conflicts with doubting.

Verse 23. For there is no difference: for all have sinned, and are deprived of
the glory of God.
THus much of the subject of justification, believers, and of the quality of
that faith that justifies: follows now the reason, proving necessity of
faith to justification in all both Jews and Gentiles. And is taken from the
equal state of guiltiness in all for transgression of the law. Summa est; if
all be equally guilty of transgressing the law, then is faith necessary for all
to justification: but all have sinned; Ergo. Reason of the consequence see
Annot. capit. 1. ver. 17. declaration of the assumption: see cap. 3.9. Now the
assumption is amplified by a consequent or effect of sin? all have sinned,
and by sin are deprived of the glory of God.

Sense: By glory of God, some understand the glorious image of God, standing in
our likeness unto him in righteousness and true holiness Ephe. 4.24. 1 Cor.
3.18.
, but not so fitly: for, first, glory of GOD is never put in Scripture for
image of God: Secondly, it seems not so pertinent to the question of
justification, here, almost to mention the image of God: some others, by glory
of God; that glorying or boasting in the presence of God, that, as they
suppose, man not sinning, might have had in innocence: but first, glory of
God, no where signifies boasting before God: secondly, even man in innocence,
had had no cause of such glorying, save only in God; and therefore I take it,
by glory of God, we may best understand, that glorious estate whereof through
grace in Christ we shall be partakers in the kingdom of heaven. Compare Romans
82. and 2.7. and from enjoying whereof we were justly excluded by our
disobedience.

Romans 7.10.
: the law was given for life; that is, that through observing thereof, we might
obtain eternal life Romans 2.7. Leuit. 18.5.
. And surely if death not only bodily, but eternal and hellish was threatened
to transgression, me thinks it is more then probable, that life not only
earthly, but heavenly, was promised to obedience in the legal covenant. It is
curiosity to enquire how or in what time man should have had admission to that
reward prom^sed; perhaps by a kind of translating, such as was vouchsafed to
Henoch, and Elias; or, not unlike that assumption of our Savior Act. 1.
; or answerable perhaps to that change of suruiuers at the second coming of
Christ 1 These. 4.17. 1 Cor. 15.51.52.

And me thinks they are too idle quiddities of some, that with a preface of non
constat e scripturis (a cunning trick of conuaying errors into the Church)
spread this, and like novelties amongst their admiring Auditors; that man
th^ugh he had stood in inno^encie, should not have had possession of the
kingdom of heaven: quorsum ista? surely their end I know not; the fountain me
thinks I see; the good old way, even for oldnesse dislikes us; novelties
though never so odd or impertinent, must be hunted after, if we will seem
great in the eyes of the people.

But let us see the punishment of loss, inseparably accompanying
transgression; how heavy and fearful it is; deprived of the glory of God: not
to enquire curiously as schoolmen, whether be the greater punishment, that of
sense or this of loss; how vexes it reprobates Luc. 13.28.
, to behold the admission of Saints into the kingdom of God, and themselves
thrust out of doors?

Verse 24. And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus.
BEing justified freely, etc. The Apostle goes on in describing the blessing of
justification; by causes impulsive; which are on our part none. Freely: inward
in God the Father; his grace; outward and meritorious; Redemption in Christ
Jesus.] Final to declare his righteousness, etc. And to this explication he
passes by prolepsis: if we have all sinned and be deprived of the glory of
God, how then come we to righteousness and salvation? Su^: we are justified
freely, etc.

Touching term of justifying see Annot. in ver. 21. Freely. Quest. Sense.
How freely when not without so great a price and satisfaction as the blood of
Christ? Ans. Freely in respect of us, quia nihil operantes, Ambros. ad loc.
neque vicem reddentes sola fide iustificati sumus dono Dei, says Ambrose, not
without price and satisfaction performed by Christ. And so Bellarmine: De
iustificat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
we are justified of God freely, that is, of his mere liberality, as touching
our merits; for by no work of ours deserve we to be justified: see Tit.
3.4.5.6. 2 Timothy 19.

And is it not strange, that these very men should talk of works done before
justification, Rhemens. in Act. 10. v. 2.
by general grace, that should be acceptable preparatiues to the grace of
justification, and such as move God to mercy; yea, that deserve at Gods hands
of congruitie toward justification? surely if these grounds be true; first,
that without faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
: secondly, that the Tree must be good before the fruit be good Mat. 12.
: thirdly, that God accepts not the offerer for the gifts, but the gifts for
the offerer Genesis 4. Greg. lib. moral. 22. cap. 12. De just. lib. 5. cap. 12.
: fourthly, that to do good works is required not every grace, but such as
makes a man a member of Christ's body, as Bellarmine proves ex Ioh. 15. Fifthly,
that where the conscience is defiled, all things are unclean Tit. 1.15.
: sixthly, that of Augustine de fide and operibus, Cap. 14. sequuntur bona opera
hominem iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum; what place is there left
for works done before justification? to merit so much as of congruitie, any
thing toward justification. That we may a little see the mystery of their
iniquity in this point, we must understand, that of merit, they make two
kinds: one ex condigno; the other ex congruo. Joan. Bunder. a Gaud. Tit. 6.
Art. 5.
That of condignity; they thus describe; it is any voluntary action to which a
reward is due, in justice, for the equality of the work, and the reward
according to due estimation. And thus forsooth, before state of grace, we have
no merits. Merit of congruitie, is any action, whereto a reward is given, not
as due by nature of the work, but as of the liberalty of the donour. And thus
they teach a man unregenerate, may merit at Gods hand, the grace of
justification: in as much as it is very meet and congruent, that to a man well
using the gifts of nature for Gods sake; God which is so bountiful, should
give gifts of grace. But if it be true that in merit largely taken there must
be Debitum; and something to which the rewarder owes a recompense: secondly, if
recompense mentioned depend wholly of the liberality of the donour, as
themselves confess in this merit of congruity; what do we with the term of
merit in works before regeneration? It is strange circling they use in this
question; In gratuitis they say nullum est debitum: in merito vero debitum
asserimus: In this kind of merit there is no debitum; and the recompense
depends merely of the liberality of the donour; and yet forsooth these works
must be called merits, not so properly in deed, as themselves confess, in
truth most absurdly, and impiously. And let us but consider, what the things
are in man, whereupon this congruitie is built; they are, first well using
gifts of nature: and secondly, that for God, or in reference to him. Now, how
can we imagine in an unregenerate man, such a well using of the gifts of
nature? the frame of whose heart is evil only and continually Genesis 6.5. Genesis
8.21.
, in whom till he be sanctified and have felt Gods love in his heart, there can
be no motus charitatis in deum 1 Ioh. 4.
: nor any other ends, or motives propounded to do good things, but dulce,
decorum, honorificum: nor any propension to any good action, but what arises
either from ambition, or servile fear: but leave we these merit-mongers and
proceed in the text.

By his grace:] For the sense; De iustif. lib. ^ cap. 3.
Bellarmine by this grace of God understands righteousness given of God, and
infused into us, to establish his dream of inherent justice, as the formal
cause of our justification. Our Divines by grace of God, understand the free
favor and good will of God bestowed on us in Christ: as being not the formal,
but the inward impulsive cause, moving the Lord to justify us. The reasons of
Bellarmines interpretation are these: first, for that the favor of God seems
sufficiently to be expressed in the former term gratis. Ans. As who say it
were strange, for the spirit of God, to use diversity of terms for (...); and
explanation: secondly, is it so strange to affirm? that liberality may be
exercised without favor; or, that the Lord may of liberality bestow a
blessing, where love and benevolence is not the fountain. Mat. 5.

But hear we his second reason; the particle (per) is not rightly given to the
favor of God, the cause motive; but only shows either formal, meritorious,
or isntrumental cause. Ans. First* Aquinas otherwise judges; Part. 1. Quest.
36. Act. 3.
that it may signify any thing, that is cause to the agent of working: whether
it be final, formal, effectiue, or motive cause. And how will Bellarmine
interpret the place, Act. 18.27. they believed through grace; for whether of
the three does his per there import? formal, meritorious, or isntrumental
cause? any or none? Secondly, but what if his (per) be not found in the Text?
as in deed it is not; then notwithstanding his right use of (per) grace may,
for all that, signify the impulsive as well as the formal cause of
justification.

His third reason; because whom God favors, and wills well unto, him he makes
such as he would have him: otherwise Gods benevolence should be a vain and
empty good will: therefore to be justified by grace is not to be reputed just,
when we are not; but to be indeed just, holy, and immaculate. Ans. Now what
when all this is granted, that Gods grace, is not without his effect in us? we
yield that this effect, justification, flows from this cause, the grace of
God. We are justified by grace: but how does this prove the conclusion; that
by grace we are here to understand righteousness infused, and not rather the
free favor and love of God? secondly, we yield that by this favor of God we
are made just indeed, before ever we be iudicially reputed, and approved for
righteous: this question will fall out fitliest to be handled, Cap. 4. Here
only it shall suffice, briefly to propound our judgment, how or in what order
we come to esteem and reputation of righteousness before God; first, therefore,
in execution of Gods purpose to justify and save, is that work of GOD,
effectual calling; whereby faith is wrought in us: to believers, is Christ,
with all his righteousness given, so that whatsoever Christ has or wrought,
becomes ours, by free yet true donation: thus enjoying Christ and his merit, we
are presented to Gods judgment seat; and there receive the sentence of
absolution and approbation for righteous: truly therefore are we made
righteous, before we be esteemed righteous; yet not by righteousness inherent
in us, though that accompany justification: but by donation of Christ's
righteousness unto us.

Wherefore, for ought they have yet alleged, grace may here signify the
favor and free love of God: and couple this grace with gratis, freely by
grace; me thinks, it is as much as if he had said, merely by grace,
without any concurrence of works, so much as of adiuvant causes to
justification: which also other scriptures affirm. Ephesians. 1.7. Tit. 3.4.5.6.7.

That we may see how ill a medley Papists have made, of faith and works,
grace and merit, in this article of justification, things simply incompatible,
if the Apostle could judge. Romans 11.6. to which place, the larger handling of
this question shall be reserved.

In the mean while, let us learn to admire the riches of Gods grace toward
us in Christ, and take heed, how we attempt sharing in the glory of
justification: remembering who said, agreeably to the Apostle, Gal. 5.4. non
est quo gratia intret vbi iam meritum occupauit.

Follows the cause meritorious: Redemption in Jesus Christ. Where are two
things: the cause meriting righteousness; the subject in whom it resideth; in
Jesus Christ.

Sense: Redemption, is that act of Christ the mediator, whereby he has
ransomed us from our spiritual enemies; in this place by a Metonymie of the
end, put for the mean destinied thereto: it signifies the satisfaction, made
by Christ to the justice of his Father: and this satisfaction, some well
distinguish on this manner; it is either Legis or Crucis. Under the first, they
comprise the obedience of his life, performed to the law: by the second they
understand his whole passion, that had consummation upon the Cross: and this
did the order of Divine justice require which could not have been kept, if God
by his own power and will without satisfaction for sin, had repared
mankind; as Thomas well says. Thom. Compend. Theolog cap. 200.
Compare Heb. 2.14.13.

Which is in Christ Jesus.] Whither this preposition (in) here note the cause
efficient, as often; or subject, in which this redemption resideth, or both, it
matters not much to enquire.

If we take it in the first sense, me thinks it excludes all humane
satisfactions from power of justifying; for if by the price paid by Christ
only, we be justified, then not by any price paid by our selves; or any
other mere creature for us: and in truth, how can we, dust and ashes, once
conceit such a power to be in us? since our weldoing reaches not unto God
Psalm. 16.2. Job. 22.3.
: secondly, nor can be proportionate to the offense of that endless majesty:
thirdly, and must be, if it be a satisfaction, a work or passion more then
duty: for by doing duty, can we satisfy for breach of duty?

Is it not then a strange conclusion of our adversaries? that man in grace, may
make some kind of satisfaction for the sin of his soul? Bellar. de de
poeniten. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Let us see their opinion, as they have nicely minced it out, and propounded it
unto us by parcells: of satisfaction therefore, they make two kinds or degrees
rather: the one is absolute, and every way perfect; wherein is rendered, a
satisfaction completely answering to the perfect equality of divine justice;
the other imperfect, answering but imperfectly to the breach of some justice;
and that, because it pleases God to accept it, for full satisfaction, at the
hands of his children, being reconciled unto him. Touching the first kind or
degree of satisfaction, they seem to confess, that it is quite out of the
power of any mere creature; partly, because whatsoever we are or have, we are
and have from God; partly because them m iestie offended, is infin te, and all
that we are or have, is finite: so that, except there be some acceptance, or
donation on Gods part, there can be no satisfaction made by men; but if we
speak of a satisfaction, that is such by Divine acceptance or donation, this
is in the power of every justified man: besides this, in sin they consider
two things; culpam and poenum; fault and punishment; now, that for fault they
make merely free, in respect of us; and ascribe it only to Christ, the
mediator: for punishment, they make two sorts; eternal and temporal; for
eternal punishment, Christ's passion only satisfies; for temporal power is
given us, by grace, to make acceptable satisfaction.

Next, they assign what these works satisfactorie are; namely prayer,
fasting, alms deeds: so that now, if we sum up their doctrine of
satisfactions it amounts to this: that a justified man, may by fasting, prayer,
alms deeds, make such satisfaction as GOD will accept, for the temporal
punishment of sin.

Shall we hear their proofs? First Dan. 4.24. Redeem thy sins by
righteousness. Sins therefore may be satisfied for. Ans. Our Divines well
answer, that they ill render the original word; which in no use of
Hebrews, or Chaldees, signifies to redeem, but to break off; and let them if
they can show instance to the contrary: secondly, that the phrase is never
read in scriptures, to redeem sins; redemption being always applied to
persons: thirdly, it is me thinks not a little crossing to their own
doctrine, that make their satisfactions proper to justified men; in number
whereof, they cannot place Nabuchadnezzar: fourthly, that if satisfaction were
here intimated, no necessity it should have reference to Gods justice, but to
men's injuries.

Their second testimony is Luke 3. bring forth meet fruits of repentance:
that is, now, they cannot be meet or worthy fruits of repentance, except they
be sufficient, to recompense the wrong done; if not inequality of quantity,
yet at least in equality of proportion, and according to the acceptance of
him that was wronged: and here they lay on load with testimonies of Fathers.
Ans. But what the fruits of repentance are, who can better expound, then John
Baptist himself? ver. 11. ad 14. Which if ye read, ye shall find, to be
nothing else, but a ceasing to do evil, and a learning to do well: and they
deceive the world with the homonymie of their Latin poenitentiae: the Greek
word (...), signifies nothing else, but a change of the mind: and so
proportionally, the fruits of a changed mind, are nothing but actions of a new
life, beseeming and testifying a changed heart.

The third testimony is 2 Cor. 7.11. Where amongst fruits of a godly sorrow,
is reckoned up, revenge or punishment. Ans. First, whither this punishment, be
that that the repentant party takes of himself, or which the Church inflicted
on the incestuous person, is questionable: their own Caietane so interprets,
referring it to the sentence of excommunication passed on the incestuous
person: the end whereof, who ever taught to be satisfaction to Gods justice?
Secondly, be it granted, that it signifies revenge, which the penitent takes of
himself, by barring himself of his lawful refreshings, in respect of his
immoderate pursuit of unlawful pleasures, and the like; is this a satisfaction
to God for former sins of his soul? what scripture; what Father so teaches?

The next testimony Leuit. 4.5. and 6. Where are appointed sacrifices of
diverse value, according to the measure of offenses: and these sacrifices were
satisfactions, and expiations of the guilt of temporal punishment. Ans. That
they may justly be termed expiatorie sacrifices, we yield; yet in this sense
only; quatenus the name of the truth signified, may be given to Types,
signifying the truth: a phrase of speech usual in scriptures, when matters
Typical or Sacramental are enunciated.

The only true expiatorie sacrifice, was that of Christ on the cross Heb.
9.10.
: signified by these types, in the Leuiticall law. Neither can it be proved,
that the acts of offering them, purged otherwise then legally. Heb. 9. Christ's
blood, which in these types their faith beheld, alone having power to purge the
conscience, Heb. 9.14. Their other testimonies I spare mentioning; and come now
briefly to examine their distinctions, out of which, they have nicely framed,
this their carnal doctrine of satisfactions.

Satisfactions then they would have to be of two sorts; some every way aequable
to the offense of Divine justice; such they gently yield, there are none
per^ormable by any mere man: but an other sort there is, which they call
acceptable; that is, such as God accepts for satisfactions, and amends made to
his justice for the sin of our souls. And will you hear what effect they
ascribe unto them? they have not power, they say to restore, or recover amity
with God; but yet this they can do, satisfy his justice; at least for guilt
of temporal punishments, to be suffered in purgatory.

Now first, where find they either terms, or grounds of this distinction? we
read indeed, that our services of new obedience are sacrifices acceptable unto
GOD through Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 2.
: but that they are satisfactions to his justice, either by absolute
correspondence, or acceptable proportion we find not. Secondly, see how in
explication of their distinction, they confound themselves. Can they satisfy
justice? then sure they may remove offense: can they remove offense? they can
also restore favor, and amity with God. For is there any thing that is
offensive to God, but the violation of Justice? satisfy his justice, thou
shall sure have him propitious. Thirdly, tell us I pray you, without halting,
whither is first, in order of nature satisfaction to Gods justice, or
reconciliation? If our old books fail us not* if the scripture deceives us
not, satisfaction even plenarie goes before as the mean; reconcilement
follows, as the end whereto that tended. Therefore, if we be reconciles
perfectly, satisfactions are performed; if satisfactions plenarie be not
performed, we are sure not reconciled.

And that they prattle of temporary punishment, reserved for us to suffer for
satisfaction for venial sins; what does it but impeach the all-sufficient
sacrif^ce of our Savior? that with his one oblation of himself, has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified Heb 10.
? or secondly, thrust us into fellowship of Christ's mediation, and make him a
Savior by us; of whom the scripture teaches, that by his own self he has
made a purgation of our sins Heb. 1.3.36.
: or thirdly, according to their grounds, lay crime of injustice upon the
Majesty of God: that having received perfect satisfaction in the blood of his
son, and thereby as themselves, cleared us from all fault, should yet punish
us being wholy faultlesse, at least by imputation.

Their instances, whereby they would prove that the fault being pardoned,
punishments temporary are reserved, and that for satisfaction to Gods justice,
De peccat. merit. and remiss lib. 2. cap. 34.
are of no value; to them all we answer with Austi^. Ante remissionem esse
illa supplicia peccatorum; post remissionem autem certamina exercitationesque
iustorum. Before remission, they are punishments of sinners; after
forgiveness, exercises of just men. And of David, 2 Samuel 12. the example
wherein they triumph, pardon was given him that he might not be hindered from
life eternal: but the effect of that commination followed Wherefore? to
satisfy Gods justice? No, but in that humiliation to exercise and prove man's
piety. ^t pietas hominis in illa humilitate exerceretur, atque probaretur.

Thus Austin iudicially; consonantly to whom, our Divines teach that temporal
pains, and afflictions of this life, though they remain for substance one and
the same, before and after reconciliation, yet is their habit and use changed
unto Gods children: remaining only, as chasticements, as reducements, as
preuentions, as admonitions as prouocations to diligence in good duties, as
means to mortify corruption, and to humble us for our sins; etc. And
surely, if they are therefore inflicted, that God justice may, after remission
be satisfied, that a kind of pardon call ^e this? that has not a release, but
a mitigation of punishment only, or as themselves pract se, in their pro
poenitentiali, a commutation of an heavier for a lighter punishment and is this
the Lords pardon? but enough if not too much of this heresy.

Verse 25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation, through the faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins
that are passed, through the patience of God.

Verse 26. To show at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and a
iustifier of him which is of the faith of Jesus.


IN these words, (...), etc. is ^ot only a further illustration of our
justification, by causes efficient, and final; but a proof of that
immediately foregoing: justified we are by redemption in Jesus Christ. And if
any man ask a reason, why by that means, rather then by any other? the
answer is, because God has purposed or proposed him as the mean of
reconcilement: in them consider we these things: first, the agent: secondly
his action: thirdly, the subject: fourthly, his office and work whereto he is
designed; fifthly, the condition required on our part, for partaking in this
blessing of r^conciliation.

The agent is God: whether we take it personally, or essentially, it matters
not: if personally, we must refer it to the Father, as to the original, in a
sort, of this purpose and decree: if essentially, so also it is true; the whole
Deity, as it were, sitting in counsel of the means of man's reconcilement,
resolved of the second persons designement to this work of propitiation, in
that manner that we now see it in execution.

The action follows; (...), whether we render purposed, or proposed, it
matters not: the word bears both; and both perhaps are intended, the proposing
of Christ, both in types of the law, as also in the clear revelation of the
Gospel, being a consequent of that purpose; howbeit, perhaps it is best
understood of Gods purpose, to which usually the works of redemption are
assigned, as to their cause and measure. See Ephesians. 1.9.

The subject of this purpose and designement, is Christ Jesus; as the meetest
person, both to assume a sonship of man, and to impart unto us, the honor of
his own sonship, by taking us into fellowship of that his prerogative: His
work and office, whereto he is designed, is propitiation, that is, to bring us
again into favor and grace with God; by satisfying his justice, and so
removing the offense and just displeasure of God; as also by purchasing unto
us, al other the testimonies of love: as adoption gift of the spirit,
possession of the kingdom of heaven, etc

Thus far of the sense; out of all which joined together, me thinks we may
well frame answer, to those curious questions, rise amongst school Divines:
as, whether there could not have been another mean of reconciling man to God,
then the incarnation and passion of the son of God; whither this mean was
the most convenient; to first, whereof the usual answer is, that the infinite
wisdom of God, might have found out, and resolved of so me other means of
atonement, had it so pleased him: but secondly, this was the means most
convenient, whether we respect the ends, the Lord propounded to himself; or
the things requisite to those ends: the ends were to manifest his love, and
rich grace toward man; and that secondly in such sort, as that no jot of his
endless justice, might be impeached, by extending such mercy to man
transgressing Ephesians. 1. Titus 3.
. Now wherein could the Father have shown more love? then in this demitting
his own, and only son out of his bosom, to assume our nature, and in it to
mediate betwixt God and us. And could men and Angels have devised a means to
show mercy, without impeachment of Divine justice, as herein we see manifested?
thus mercifully to save, thus severely to punish those that he determined to
save, except by these means who could have devised?

Consider we again, the things requisite to our reconciliation; such as are
undue obedience, perfect satisfaction; things both of them requiring an
infinite person, to give both infinite value: that we may very well say, there
was not any mean of prop^i^tion more convenient then this, according to God,
eternal purpose exhibited in Christ: he which would see more to this purpose
let him read S. Augustine de Trinitat. lib. 13. cap. 10. Anselm. lib. cur Deus
hom^. Aquinas part. 3. 9. 1. Act. 20. And generally schoolmen in 3. Sentent.
Distinct. 20. but in all such quaeries this rule should be remembered; that the
conueniencie of means to their ends, must be measured by their choice and
designement in Gods purpose and counsel.

Ioh. 6.27.
, that is, designed by his eternal counsel, to this office of reconciling us
to God.

The office or work whereto Christ is designed follows; that is, to be our
propiatour or mediator of reconcilement unto God. And this office be thus
performed: first, submitting himself to the whole curse of God, deserved by
our sins, and standing in the gap, as it is said of Moses, so bearing the
brunt of Gods fiery wrath and indignation: and by that means removing from our
persons all whatsoever wrath or justice could be offended at. Secondly, by the
merit of his obedience purchasing unto us the donation of Gods spirit, to work
faith, whereby we might be brought into the covenant of grace* etc.

Which office thus performed by our propyatorie; Jesus Christ the righteous,
who is also the propitiation for their sins. 1 Ioh. 2.

And withal, assures us of our preservation in state of grace, till full
possession of that glorious life purchased for us by the merit of Christ: For
if when we were enemies, we were reconciled, etc. Romans 5.

The condition required of us, to make this propitiation effectual to us, is
faith; declared by the object, Christ's blood: as if he should say, by resting
and relying on the death and obedience of Jesus Christ.

Herein triumph the patrones of justification by the sole passion of Christ;
making his blood the ad aequatum obiectum of faith justifying; how fitly let
them judge by this, that they cannot choose but acknowledge here a Synecdoche;
for will they exclude soul passions from the satisfaction of Gods justice? or
make the sufferings of his life, only preparatiues to compassion, and not also
for their part expiations for sin? let him believe that lists; for my part,
I know nothing in the whole humiliation of our Savior, but was not only a
deposition necessary, but even a part of his expiation. And had almost rather
define with schoolmen, that Christ merited from the first instant of his
conception, then thus limit his meritorious and expiatorie satisfaction to his
last act in death. Reasons of this Synecdoche, seem these: first, because in
his death was the complement of his humiliation Phil. 2.
: secondly, it served best for opposition to Jewish opinion, of legal
sacrifices offered in blood of beasts Heb. 9.
: thirdly, most sensibly answered to the types of Jewish law, etc.

But here observe we, that to partaking in Gods favor procured by Christ's
humiliation, faith is required; what kind of faith whither general or
particular has been already declared; whither also as a disposition
preceding, as fear, love, hope, etc. or as an instrument to apprehend Christ's
merit, has been also shown; here only it shall suffice to note, that faith
is here put metonimically, for the consequent or effect of it; which we call
fiduciam; that is, confidence, or affiance, which me thinks the particle
((...)) sufficiently notes: so that if our adversaries would learn, to leave
that point of their skill, in diuerting the stroke of our arguments in this
point, to a controversy of words; many there needless disputes, about the
nature of faith justifying, would soon have end: for my part I judge with them
in this point, that faith, properly so called, is in the understanding, not in
the will; and may better be rendered, a persuasion then affiance. But yet this
is true, that affiance in Christ's merit, is a fruit of faith justifying; and
the very act of affiance or putting trust in Christ, required of us, to our
justification, which if no other Scripture affirmed, yet this evidently
avouches: and can we think this flows from a general believing of the
history of the Gospel? yea, can it arise from any thing, but particular
evidence of our title to Christ's merit.

1 Cor. 13.5.
: that old distinction of Schoolmen borrowed of Augustine, in question
touching the extent of Christ's merit, may in fit place be discussed: this once
is agreed on all sides, except the Chiliasts, that howsoever there be a
sufficiency of worth in Christ's merit to reconcile all; yet the efficacy
thereof reaches only to such as believe. It concerns us therefore for our
comfort, diligently to try and examine our confidence. Notes to discern it,
besides the feeling and experience every man may have of himself, are these.
First, gathered by proportion from that of Solomon; Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and leave not to thine own wisdom Pro. 3.5.
. Proportionally, it is true of every man resting in Christ's merit for
propitiation, and favor of God, that he leanes not on any thing in himself to
procure it; but is so humbled with conscience of sin, and terror of Gods
majesty, is so well acquainted with natural disabilities, imperfection of his
own righteousness, that he counts all dung and dross for the knowledge of
Christ, that he may be found in him not having own righteousness Phil. 3.
, etc. I say not, that every one renouncing himself in this behalf, has
presently affiance in Christ's blood; (although me thinks truly to do this, is
a thing supernatural) but negatiuely I am sure it holds; whosoever rests in
himself, relieth not on Christ etc.

A second evidence of confidence in Christ, and his merit for righteousness,
is detestation of all Teachers and doctrines in any sort rasing this foundation
and pillar of our confidence. How stoutly the Apostle opposed against such, who
so reads his whole Epistle to the Galathians may judge, with what earnestness
of affection enuies he against those, that in this Article of justification,
desired to mingle Moses and Christ, faith and works of any sort? The like is
the affection of all such, that have learnt truly to rest on Christ.

But proceed we. The end of this ordinance, and decree of God, proposing
Christ as mediator of reconcilement, through his blood, and faith therein,
follows; that is, to declare his righteousness in forgiving sins, of both
Testaments, etc.

Sense: To declare his righteousness.] As if he should say, If any ask a
reason, why God ordained Christ to propitiate, and that by his blood; it was,
to show himself just in forgiving sins. To omit variety of interpretations;
by justice of God, we may best understand, his judicial justice, which some
call, remunerating, or distributive; a property enclining him to reward
obedience; to punish disobedience. Now, for that his purpose was to deal
mercifully with man in forgiving sins, and yet justly too, in punishing
disobedience; (for God cannot so be merciful, as to impeach his justice Psalm.
116.5.
) this way his Divine wisdom devised for merciful forgiveness; to deliver
his son to dye for our sins, that justice might be satisfied; and withal,
mercy ouerflowe to the Elect in forgiving iniquity and sin.

To declare his justice in forgiving sins:] That is, that he might be
acknowledged just, even while of mercy he forgave sins. To this sense agrees
that Ver. 26. where first, we may learn to admire the mystery of divine
wisdom, 1 Pet. 1.12.
as in all other his works conspicuous, so in this of compounding endless
justice, with as infinite mercy most admirable; no marvel if Angels so
desirously buckle themselves to pry hereinto. It was that about which the
Sophies of all times busied themselves, but were in all their devises
frustrate; by light of nature they knew justice must receive satisfaction,
before ever mercy could have passage, from that Father of mercies, to the
sons of Adam. Hence were their fastings, sacrifices, sometimes offered in
man's blood* yea, in blood of their own sons and daughters; intended to
propitiate the divine majesty, fondly imagined to reside in their Idols: but
the true mean of propitiation, the Gospel only has revealed 2 Timothy 1.10.
: and the matter of it Christ Jesus, opened out of the bosom of his Father.

Secondly, me thinks if there were none other argument this alone
sufficiently overthrows all that doctrine of Popish satisfactions, for
reconciliation: for can there be no mean of propitiation, but what yields
satisfaction to divine justice? will not the Lord be merciful in forgiving
sins? Nay, can be not be merciful in forgiving sins, till justice be
satisfied? then sure, humane sufferings, and alms, and prayers, must needs be
acknowledged to be no sacrifices propitiatory for the sins of our souls.
But hereof before.

Follows now an amplification of the sins forgiven by a distinction or
distribution of them, according to several times of committing; some were
(...); that is, done or committed, in time before Christ's exhibiting in the
flesh; some after; to both which the merit of Christ's passion extends itself.

(...). Diverse are the interpretations; that now specified. I judge most
probable, comparing this place with that Heb. 9.15.

Consent of other Interpreters, both Popish and others might be shown Whence
the collection is easy, that virtue of Christ passion reached unto the Fathers
of the old Testament; and that the Lord gave the plenarie forgiveness of
their sins respecting the future humiliation of his son. This point needed
not much proof, but that our Romish adversaries by a consequent of their
doctrine, seem to deny it: for truth of it see these Sriptures. Acts 15.11.
Ioh. 8.56. Heb. 13.8. Apoc. 13.8.

And what should let then to infer? that they were admitted to heaven properly
so called, without detainement in their Limbus, the skirt of hell, until
Christ's coming thither to deliver them.

That which they teach of this place is this; that it is a part of hell; and
such a part* as betwixt which, and the place of the damned, there is no solid
interstitium: that it was a prison, Catechis. Trident. in Art. descendet ad
inferos.
wherein, though the Fathers had an immunitatem poena sensibilis, freedom from
all sensible pain; yet were they deprived of the vision of God, and tormented
at least with this that they hung in a suspensiue hope of that blessed glory,
which they expected.

Now if it be true, their sins were remitted: secondly they justified and
reconciled unto GOD, by faith in Christ to come: thirdly, were adopted for
sons: how can it be imagined, that they were thus punished? Again, S.
Augustine professed, that he never could find hell in Scripture put for good;
and the receptacle of souls, August. Epist. 99. ad Euod.
what ever it were, whither the Fathers went, was sure good; wherein they had,
not only immunity from sensible pain, but received comfort. Luc. 16.25.

Thirdly, it is a ruled opinion of many their Divines, that it is a greater
punishment, to be deprived of Gods presence, then to feel any other the pains
of hell; and that the anguish is more, to consider that depriuall of glory,
then to feel the smart of any other infernal torment; which if it be so; then
sure the greatest punishment was theirs that yet are confessed to have lived
and dyed high in Gods favor. Heb. 11.

Add unto this, that the title given to their place of abode, is Paradise
metaphorical Luke 23.43.
: that with Paul is all one, with the third heaven 2 Cor. 12.2.
, the Palace of Gods principal residence; a place of pleasure sure, and free
from all punishment, both of sense and loss. But let us hear what they can
say for maintenance of their Lymbus, they allege that Genesis 37.35. I shall go
down sorrowing to my S^nne in infernum. Ans. And why not in sepulchrum? to the
grave: the word bears it well enough, and the purport of Jacobs speech; wherein
he expresses a grief that would never leave him, till death: and compare Genesis
42.38. the like speech; ye shall bring my gray head with sorrow to the grave:
the word is all one, and think ye his gray head went to Lymbus?

The second testimony, is Luc. 16.23.26. betwixt the place of the damned, and
the bosom of Abraham; there was (...): a great hiatus: therefore no solid
interstitium between them, but both souls in the same gulf. Ans. Now sure a
pretty collection. And if Bellarmine had been to deal with Chemnitius; how
scoffingly would he have girded at such grammatical quiddities? But is it his
opinion in deed? that this chasma is such an empty hiatus, wherein is no
solid interstitium? Then me thinks, there should be no such impossibility of
interchangeable passage, betwixt the spirits above and below; and how a
Commeatus between them, should in such an empty space, be more impossible for
spirits, then sight or audience, I see not. But for answer he cannot forget
their rule in schools that Theologia symbolica, non est argumentiua; and that
every string of a parable is not to be strayned; nor can any thing be urged
thereout, beyond the principal intention. And for his empty (...), though it
signify properly, that hiatus oris in oscitation; yet is translated by a
Synecdoche of the species, to signify any distance or space of place. And so
here is intended by our Savior, in this parabolicall pro ^popaeia: his (...),
being nothing, for ought our adversaries can prove, but that great distance,
betwixt heaven, the seat of the blessed, and hell, the prison of the damned.

Thirdly, they allege 1 Samuel 28.13 The soul of Samuel was seen ascending
out of the earth Ans. first, the text has not the soul of Samuel, but Deos.
And is it their opinion it was Samuels soul, came up so wrapped in a mantle
verse 14. belike he found cold comfort in that refrigerium, that Lymbus
afforded, that he was feign, thus to be-mantle his soul, to keep hear:
secondly, I thus reason: if this ascending were of the true Samuel and not of
his spectrum; either of soul alone, or of body alone, or of both: not of his
soul alone, for quid animae and pa^^io? what had his soul to do with a
mantle? if of body alone, an assent might be thereof out of the grave; if
both; why might not his soul first descend out of heaven and in the grave
resume the body? and so ascend: so that there is no necessity of ascending
out of hell, or any list thereof: but thirdly, what if not Samuel at all, nor
nothing of his, but his spectrum: a phantasm, alone assumed, by an evil
spirit, was that that appeared? surely, the reasons brought both by Fathers,
and other late writers for this opinion, are not to be contemned.

For first, is it likely, that the Lord refusing to answer Saul by means
ordinary, verse 6. would thus extraordinarily give resolution by Samuel sent
from the dead? Secondly, was Samuel soul thus at command of a Witch? to be
called out of his rest, by her, verse 11. especially by Magical means? but I
perceive, it is not for nothing they place ^ymbu so near the hell of the
damned; they should do the Devil great wrong, to take his borderers out of
his kingdom, or to imagine, that empty Chasma could keep them from his
command. I omit answer to the arguments of the contrary opinion: as that he
is called Samuel: and secondly, that he foretold things to come; which being
contingent, were accordingly accomplished. Hear the answer of some Fathers to
these reasons, and thereby judge of their opinions: to the first thus
Theodoret, Theodoret. in 1 Samuel 28.
historia cum qui visus est, nominat Samuelem, propteria quod, sic crediderit
Saul. The history calls him that appeared, Samuel, because Saul so thought of
him: and this to be no strange kind of speech, he proves, by the like in other
scriptures; thus also it styled the Angels, that appeared unto Abraham, and the
Lord of them (men;) because the Patriarcke supposing them to be such, set meat
before them, etc. vide locum.

To the second, S. Basile thus; Basil. in Isay 8.
ad eum modum and daemones quae sententia ac decreto dei constituta erant,
iamque palam euulgata saepenumero annunciarunt bis, qui facile in fraudem
illiciuntur. etc. After the same manner have the devils often declared such
things as were appointed, by the sentence and decree of GOD and now openly
diuulged unto such as are easily brought into error.

And then instanceth in this example, affirming them, to be Devils,
transforming themselves into the habit and person of Samuel: that having heard
the sentence of condemnation pronounced against Saul, promulged it, as their
own; I might glut the reader with like testimonies of others, but these may
suffice.

Their third testimony is, 1 Pet. 3.19. he preached unto the spirits in
prison; now heaven is no prison. Ans. The full opening of this place, will best
be done, when we shall come by Gods grace, more purposely to handle it. Here
only, as much as shall suffice, for loosing the hold, they have here taken, for
Lymbus, first, the spirits here preached unto, if they were in pr son at the
time of their preaching, cannot be intended to be the souls of the Fathers;
for that they are described to have been incredulous and disobedient; and so I
hope they will not say of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. Secondly, See Heb.
11.93
they will never be able to prove that this preaching was to them, at the time
while they were in prison: for quorsum? But hereof more hereafter.

As touching their other testimonies, and reasons pretended out of the
scriptures, they have been all sufficiently, and often answered, and the
aunsweres stands to this day vnconfuted, as that Crambe Zach. 9.11. Thou have
brought the prisoners out of the lake where are no waters; the (^u) here
mentioned, is to be applied to the Church, as the foeminine particles show; the
lake is not hell, but babilonish captivity: and the whole reading is corrupt,
as appears to any aduising with the original.

Their reason: then Christ was not the first that ascended into heaven Ans.
This seemed no great absurdity to the ancients; whose judgment it was of
Elias, that he was translated in to heaven Mat. 2.58.
: secondly, for all this Christ might be the first, that in body and soul
entered into fullness of that glory, prepared for the elect in the kingdom of
heaven. And thus much of that controversy.

The remainder of this verse has little else, then has been already treated
off, he resumes only the end of this ordinance of God to reconcile us by the
blood of his Son; and secondly, explanes that which he had said of the
manifestation of Gods justice; showing what he meant thereby: that he might be
just: that is, declared to be just, and yet, a iustifier of him that is of the
faith of Jesus; that is, although he did discharge from punishment, and guilt
of sin; and approved as righteous, such as renouncing themselves and their
own righteousness, expect justification by believing in Christ Jesus. Him
that is of the faith of Jesus. Gal. 3.9.10. as if he should say, him that
renouncing the sect of merit-mongers, embraces the supposed heresy of
solifidians.

Hitherto, of the Apostles first argument against justification by works, thus
largely handled from cap. 1. verse 16. to this place. Follows now the position
of the contrary conclusion: that a man is justified by faith, with new
arguments to that purpose.

Verse 27. Where is then the rejoicing? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
Nay: but by the law of faith.

Verse 28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the Law.


THe first reason is taken from the effect of this manner of justification by
faith, removed from that other by works, in this form. If by the doctrine of
justification by faith, boasting be excluded and not by that which requires
works, then we are justified by faith and not by works: but by the doctrine
of faith, boasting is excluded, and not by that of works: therefore we
conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.

The proposition is omitted, but easily collected out of the Apostles
Enthymem^. The assumption is propounded, in a Rhetorical Dialogisme, as is
easy to be seen; the conclusion expressed in so many terms, verse 28.

The consequence of the proposition depends upon this ground; that man must be
justified by such a mean, as whereby he may have no cause to glory in
himself. Ephesians. ^.9. 1 Cor. 1.30.31.

The truth of which ground, as it is evident by the testimonies now alleged,
so will it further appear, by the whole project of Gods counsel touching
the salvation of his Church. Wherein it is evident he chose such a course, as
whereby the whole glory might be his: none, man's: he chose us before we
were, freely, without respect to any thing in us* according to the good
pleasure of his own will; for the glory of his rich grace Ephesians. 1.4.
: he made us without our selves after his glorious Image: permitted; yea,
decreed to perm^t our fall, that he might have mercy Romans 11.32. Gal. 3.22.
: and that the claim to salvation, might be by mere mercy; wherefore? I
demand would the Lord that had power to stablish us, as he did good Angels,
shut us up under sin? but that he might make way, for the glory of his
mercy? he sent his Son to reconcile us; made not us our own propitiatours:
wherefore? but that the whole glory might be his? he called us freely Tit.
3.5.
, of grace inuiting, by his spirit opening our hearts to attend, and by the
same spirit drawing us Ioh. 6.44.
: ordained means in themselves silly and vveake to convert us 1 Cor. 3.
: sanctifies indeed, but in part only; wherefore? but that, as the Apostle
speaks, no flesh might glory in his presence 1 Cor. 1.29.
: all which joined to the testimonies forecited, evidence the soundness of
the Apostles ground: and thus far furthers us in discerning the means of our
justification in general, that it must be such, as where by all occasion of
boasting may be taken from man.

Come we now to the particular assumed; but boasting, doctrine of works
excludes not; doctrine of Faith excludes, and may we not then conclude with
the Apostle? that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.

Let us a little examine the assumption: sense; law of works: that is,
doctrine of works: that is, teaching that we are justified by works. Law of
faith, that is, doctrine of faith; as the Hebrew properly signifies; for the
truth of it, both members are to be scanned; first, that doctrine of
justification by works excludes not boasting: secondly, that that of faith
excludes it.

For the first, consider we what it is, that by doctrine, requiring works
to justification, is to be performed by him, that will that way be justified:
and that is, a doing of the whole law Gal. 5.3. Romans 10.5.
, and that by the person himself, that looks for justification. And is not
this, to puff up the proud heart of man with conceit of ability to justify
himself? What prouder doctrine then that of Pelagians? teaching that by
natural abilities, the law might perfectly be kept to justification. That of
Papists, is not all out so gross; they teach, that nature helped by grace, may
do this: and, that by works done in grace, some justification may be
achieved: they diminish boasting, but exclude it not. It were long, to rake
up all they teach, touching power of will in nature: how it deserves ex
congruo, even before grace received. But happily, by that they teach of the
necessary assistance of grace to justification, they amend the matter. Surely
little or nothing. For let a man view all they teach touching the efficacy of
grace, in this point of justification: he shall find it to amount to this
sum only: that grace does little more then bring out that power, that is in
nature, into act; or heal a little the wound, that sin has made; or
confirm weakness natural: so making nature, to go cheek by iole with
grace, in the act of justifying: and is this to exclude boasting? and not
rather to occasion it?

Let us see now whether the doctrine of faith excludes it; so says the
Apostle. But consider we how: viz. in as much as it teaches to go out of
our selves for righteousness; and makes us, no more but receivers of that
righteousness, whereby we are justified; wrought by Christ, given by GOD
the Father, received by faith Ioh. 1.12.
, according to this doctrine, what cause has man to boast? Perhaps they will
say of this, that he believed: and by believing, accepted the righteousness
offered? as if a beggar should boast of his wealth, and ascribe it to his
labor, whereas all he did was but to receive, what the li^eralitie of
almoners pleased to bestow; yea in the case betwixt GOD and us, man has not so
much to boast of, since very power to receive is also the gift of God. Ephesians.
2.8.

The conclusion now may well be inferred, that therefore a man is justified by
faith without works of the law.

And what have adversaries of grace, trow we, to except against this round
argument of the Apostle? Forsooth they labor by a distinction of boasting, De
iustif. lib. 1. cap. 19.
to elude all. So Bellarmine: the Apostle excludes not all boasting, but that
only, which arises of works done by sole power of freewill; for he says
not, vbi est gloriatio? Where is the boasting? but vbi est gloriatio tua? Where
is thy boasting? the boasting whereby thou gloriest in thy self, and not in the
Lord; now in respect of works done of faith, and so by grace, no man can
glory but in the Lord; and that boasting is not prohibited: for the Apostle
says, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord 2 Cor. 10.
.

The sum is this, that boasting in our selves only is forbidden and not
boasting in the Lord: and that is sufficiently excluded by this, that they
affirm, works done by power of nature, without aid of grace, to be unable
to justify.

Ans. Plausibly. The distinction of boasting, we grant, if they yield us thus
much, that all glorying in our selves, is excluded; for we list not to contend
about quiddities; though Bellarmines (tua) be not found in the text. And thus
propound the Apostles ground; a man must be justified by such a means as
whereby he may have no cause at all to glory in himself: but must
transcribe the whole glory of justification, to the grace of GOD: and hence
thus assume.

But by doctrine of works, whether done by sole power of nature, or mixtly by
grace and nature, all boasting is not excluded; Ergo, that not the mean of
justification. Our minor for the first part, is granted by adversaries; and do
they not see, how their mingling of grace and nature, leaves still some cause
of boasting to our proud nature? Am I a coworker with grace by power natural,
and depends the efficacy of grace, upon the assent of my will? then sure in
respect of my coagencie, and assent, be it less or more, I have some cause to
boast of my self, and so, all boasting in my self is not excluded; but all
boasting in our selves, must be excluded; therefore all works whatsoever
whether done by sole power of nature as Pelagians; or by nature and grace
mixtly, as Popish Semipelagians now teach, are here excluded from justification.

To conclude this argument: let all such as desire to inform themselves, in
this weightiest point, wherein errors are most dangerous, bring doctrines on
both sides taught, to this touchstone. If Popish doctrine, here hold current,
let them embrace it, if it take away all boasting from man, hold it firm: but
if it puff up the proud heart of man, in the least measure, as indeed it does,
reject it as a doctrine of Devils; and hold the teachers thereof, though
Seraphicall, for ever accursed: it serves not the turn, to say, they ascribe
Iustificatorie works to grace of God; for first, what do they herein, more
then the Pharisee Luc 18.11.12.
: I thank God (says he) not my self, that I am thus and thus: and yet is
dismissed without justification: and secondly, all they ascribe to grace, is
but an assistance of nature; or a principality at most, in works that
justify; and by associating nature with grace, give us at least some cause to
boast of our selves? for sure, if we be either principals, or in the least
measure adiutours to our justification, we have some cause of boasting: but
it is wholly excluded by the true Doctrine of justification. Therefore we may
well conclude against works; they have no power to justify in the sight of
GOD. And surely were it not that I consid^r Gods secret, though just judgment,
in sending them strong delusions; and compassionately ponder the pride of
nature, both to become nothing in the work of salvation; and the subtlety of
Popish teachers, in suiting this doctrine to the humor of nature; I should
wonder how any man advisedly reading this short Enthymeme of the Apostle, could
in this point, ^erre in judgment; It was well said of one, that Popish
religion, it is a natural religion: leave man to himself, he falls on
Popish conclusions, and practice: in this one point it is more then evident.

Let Gods children learn, to acknowledge their own nothingnesse in this
article of justification; that GOD may be all in all. Who so walks, after
this rule, peace shall be upon him, and mercy, and upon the Israel of GOD: and
if any attempt sharing with the Lord in this glory; I testify unto him, with
the Apostle, he is abolished from Christ* he is fallen from grace Gal. 5.4.

By faith, etc. It is usually enquired how faith justifies: whether as an act
or work, or organice, and correlatiue; as an instrument, receiving that, for
which we have esteem of righteousness; and so in respect of that, vvhereto
as an instrument, it has relation: our Divines hitherto, have jointly resolved
of the two latter; and as I take it upon good reason: for that, otherwise
righteousness shall be inherent; which hitherto has been holden an
absurdity; the question will come fitliest to be handled, cap. 4.3. and
therefore to that place I reserve it.

By faith without works: And is not the inference direct enough? therefore by
faith only. The inference is usual amongst our Divines, both ancient and
modern: and thus we explane our selves; that no grace of God, no work,
either of nature or grace in us, concurreth, so much as instrumentally to
justification. Reason, because none other gift, or act but faith receives that,
for which we are accounted righteous in the sight of God.

What say our adversaries to this collection? forsooth they charge us with
foysting in the term (only.) Ans. And is it foysted in beyond the Apostles
intention? have we it not in the equivalent? by faith without works; only by
faith, are they not equipollents. See Amb. in Romans 3.9. Hierom. in Romans 4.
Basil in Concione de h^mil, etc. Fulgent de incarnat: cap. 16.

But how reconcile we that of S. James? cap. 2. not by faith only; with this
of Paul, by faith only; James justified by works; Paul justified without
works; Ans. The answers are thus; that Paul treats of justification before
God; so it is true, faith only justifies in the sight of God; James, of
justification in foro humano, or before men; and so works justify: that is,
declare to be just: Al: that Paul treats of the effect or office of faith, in
foro Diuino, Iame^, of the quality of that faith that justifies, and her
effect before men; and all that James says is this, as Ca^^tane truly, quod
non fide ster^ls, sed fide foecunda operibus bonis iustificamur. That we are
justified not by a barren faith, but by such a faith, as is fruitful in good
works: more of this Text of James, when by Gods grace we shall come to that
Epistle.

Without works of the Law, either natural, ceremonial, or moral; before or
after grace, as plentifully is showen, ad verse 9.

Therefore say some, without works of the law, even done by Christ; for the
exclusion is universal; except we can evidence a restraint. Ans. Restraints
to works done by our selves, me thinks first; the whole purpose of the
Apostle, implies; for the question is whether a man be to be justified by his
own righteousness; that is, righteousness of his own performance, or by the
righteousness of another: secondly, see Romans 10.3.5. and tell me why he calls
the righteousness of the law, our own righteousness? except in regard of our
own performance.

Verse 29. God, is he the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also?
Yes, even of the Gentiles also.

Verse 30. For it is one God who shall justify circumcision of faith, and
uncircumcision through faith.


A Second reason for justification by faith without works of the Law. From
absurdities; if by works of the Law, and not by faith only; one of these two
absurdities will follow; that either God is God of the Jews only, and not of
the Gentiles also; or else that he is variable in this action of justifying;
justifying the Jews, by works of the law; Gentiles by faith; but God is not
the God of Jews only, but of Gentiles also; and is one; that is, vnvariable
in this act of justifying. Ergo.

Is he God of Jews only? etc. That is, he has now under the new Testament
accepted Gentiles, into his covenant of grace. The tenor whereof read Ier.
31.33, etc. But as touching the consequence of the proposition, it may be
enquired how it flows? Ans. Because that unto Jews only was the Law given in
writing Psalm. 147. Romans 9. Romans 2.14.
, the Gentiles were (...), without the Law. If therefore justification be by
works of the Law, Jews only shall be capable of that blessing; and the
Gentiles, whose God the Lord has couenanted to be, shall lack this principal
blessing, promised in the covenant; justification. But that is absurd. For God
is one. This oneness as I may term it, of God, is not numerall, as in other
places 1 Cor. 8.
, but has reference, either to the unchangeableness of God, and his keeping
one steddie, and vnvaried course in justifying all; or to the indifferency,
and vnpartiality of his affection toward all, of all sorts. Within the
covenant. If we take it in the first sense, they contain a second absurdity,
issuing from the doctrine of justification by works of law written, urged by
Jews; in as much as then it will follow, that the Lord does not, by one means
iustificall. But Gentiles by faith, Jews by works of the Law; but all are
justified by one and same means; since God is one unchangeable in his courses.

If we take it in the other sense, as noting the indifferency of Gods
affection to all in the covenant, it is a reason of the clause foregoing; viz.
that God is God of Gentiles also.

Circumcision, that is, Jews circumcised: uncircumcision, that is, Gentiles
vvanting circumcision. Metonimya adiuncti, as Romans 2.26.

But that we may here note, is, that the blessing of justification belongs to
all in the covenant, whether Jews or Gentiles believing: see Ier. 31.33.34.
Act. 15.8.9 10.11. See Annot. in Ver. 22. Reason: God is one.

Note to discern whither we be within the covenant of Grace, principally is
this; if we have performed our restipulation, carrying our selves in all
things, as the people of God. Zach. 13, 9.

Verse 31. Do we then make the Law of none effect through faith? God forbid:
yea we establish the Law.
Do we then abolish the law by faith? God forbid, etc.] The words have in them
a preoccupation, of what might be objected against the former doctrine,
excluding works of the Law, by auouching justification through faith only.

Object. If we be justified by faith only, it should seem the Law is utterly
abolished. Ans First, the consequent is denied and rejected with Apostolical
horror, God forbid. Secondly, the contrary is avouched: as if he should say,
we are so far from antiquating the law, by doctrine of faith, that we rather
establish it. By faith understand doctrine of faith, or teaching that we are
justified by faith.

Whence then, we have these two conclusions; first, that the doctrine of
justification by faith, abolisheth not the Law.

Secondly, that same doctrine stablisheth the Law.

Now for the first of these, the explanation is not all out so difficult; for
what though by teaching faith, we make the law ineffectual to justification?
follows it thence, that it is in every respect abolished, and to all purposes
ineffectual? There are sundry other ends of the law, for which it ought to
stand in use in the Church of GOD: As first, to bring us to knowledge of sin
Romans 3. and 5.
: secondly, to be a rule of life Math. 5.
: thirdly, to be mean of continual humiliation, and sundry the like.

But how by this doctrine we establish the Law, requires more diligent
inquisition. Variety of interpretations, I am loath to cloy the Reader
withal; yet some few of the most probable, it will not be impertinent to
propound. Some thus; faith stablisheth the Law, as it is a rule of life: while
it works by love, which is the fulfilling of the Law. But the question is as I
take it, how the Apostle teaching that we are justified by faith, does in so
teaching, stablish the Law? Do we abolish the Law? and we stablish the Law:
viz. we that teach a man to be justified by faith, even whiles we so teach,
or by this very doctrine, stablish the Law.

I therefore judge with the best modern interpreters, Paraeus and Beza.
that the Law is thus far established by the doctrine of faith; that the
righteousness, which it requires, quod ad materiam, is not abolished; but
rather stablished. In as much as what it requires, Do this and live, we have
it in Christ by believing. Faith finding in him, what man cannot find in
himself, the perfect obedience which the Law enioyneth.

And if any say, then belike we are justified by righteousness of the Law.
Ans. It implies no absurdity to speak so in a sense. For according to
judgment of best Divines, Legal and Evangelical righteousness differ, not
in matter, but efficiente and modo: we have the same righteousness which the
Law requires; but yet in other manner, then the Law required it: the Law
required it of our own performance; the Gospel teaches, it suffices to
righteousness, that it be for us performed by our Mediator Christ Jesus, and
apprehended of us by faith.

And if this be Paul's meaning, then I hope it follows; that Christ's active
obedience enters our justification.

And then, there is some end of imputation; that it may become ours. And this I
am sure is the old way, and as I yet judge, the good way: in it I find as
much rest to my soul, as in that other compendium some have framed.

In this point so weighty, I will be glad to learn; but can scarce be
persuaded; the truth has hitherto lien hid, from so many of Gods Saints, so
purposely conversant in this question. And though I am not so Popish, as to
measure truth by multitude, yet sure me thinks, where other things are equal,
as learning* industry; sincerity, prayer to God for revelation; I had rather
impute error to one then many.

Their cut, they say, is shorter into Gods kingdom; ours, I think, safer; and
howsoever our circumference seem larger, yet our center we are sure, is
Christ. Atque hic baculum fixi: though still I profess with Augustine;
Augustine. de Trinit. lib. 1.
Non p^gebit me, sicubi hasito, quaerere: nec pu^ebit, sicubi err^, discere. It
shall never gre ue me, where I doubt, to enquire: nor shame me, where I err,
to learn and be better informed.

FINIS.
Errata.
GEntle Reader, litterall and punctual faults being over many, we leave them
to thine own favorable correction. The material, either perverting,
obscuring, or annulling the sense, are thus to be amended.

Page 10 line 8. this part of the Text, verse 2. Which he had promised before,
etc. is to be inserted page 14. line 4. Page 18. line 13. read from his Father
this, to be God: page 20. line 23. read petigree. p. 21. line 33. for Acephiah,
read Acephali. p. 26. line 20. For us, ibid. line 22. to God Christ, or divine
excellencies unto man Christ. p. 46. line 19. Howsoever it be, p. 57. line 18.
time, how in temporal. p. 58. line 2. Neapolitan. p. 61. line 25. disparity.
page 62. line 2^. (...). line 23. put out of. p. 72. line 8. bringing. line 9.
not able. line 30. for concedat, comedat. page. 79. line 13. available: page.
81. line 11. them all. page. 85. line 14. (...) page 87. line 11. read off,
page 89. line 3. The line 9. themselves confessing. p. 91. l. 4. (...). page
92. line 8. of it. It is, etc. p. 93. l. 6. just by faith lives. p. 95. l 7. in
form: Upon whom. p. 102. l. 9 obtained. p. 107. line 9. Universities. p. 109.
line 23. by his word. That commination.

P. 116. line 3. the sense is corrupted, the Syllogism being this. What image
so ever does not lively represent the nature of God, that may not be made to
represent God. But no image does set forth God as he is. Therefore etc. Ibid.
line 12. betwixt the two: Angels being. p. 121. l. 15. for their, read the. p.
122. line 33. of God? p. 128. line 5. and 7. for revelation. read relation p.
140. l. 7. for their, there. p. 147. line 7. none more having. Signs etc. line
27. God in. p. 153. line 1. vindictam p. 155. line 7. ill original, p. 156 l.
3 Herodotus p. 157. l. 2. variance. p. 160. l. 33. persequitur. p. 164. l. 34.
for Pyrrhus, Regulus. p. 167. l. 2. often burns p. 169. l. 12. implying first,
p. 173. l. 23. for accepted, r. excepted. p. 182. l. 4. of the Ministry is
unlawful. p. 183. l. 2. for we, 1. he. p. 184 l. 24. is so busied. l. 30.
moates. p. 193. l. ^1. or have r. having. p. 195. l. 11. or says he it not. l.
16. ouerladen. p. 196. l. 10. vindictam. p. 197. l. 17. for rules, r. ru^s not
p 198. l. 21 to this purpose, me thinks. p. 199. l. 29. life, p. 202. l. 22 23.
point thus, had he not been, in respect of his divine person, equal to his
Father. ib. l. vlt. for primo aequabilto r. praemio aequabi^a, p 208. l. 9. to
life. To that etc. p. 211. l. 6. promised a glorious etc. ibid. l. 31. for thy,
r. they. p. 213. l. 6. for seek to our selves, r. seek our selves p. 215. l.
16. unrighteousness. ibid. l. 19. for contentions. r. contentious. p. 218. l. 2.
for just man, r. wise man p. 219. l. 5. (...) p. 221. l. 5. for means, r.
meannesse. ib. l. 18. think; ib. l. 31. libertinisme. p. 222. l. 23. the
contrary. p. 225. l. 3. industrious. ib. l. 6. dissuading. ib. l. 19. for
divine light, r. dim light. p. 226. l. 5. Sidonians. p. 233. l. 16. r. dim
light p. 236. l. 231. index. ib. l. 34. r. Synter^ses p. 237. l. 8 for not, r.
no. ib. l. 32. for in it self, r. on it self p. 239 l. 32. r. diuersified. p.
240 l. vlt. disclamed. p. 246. l. 4. disceptation p. 249. l. 1. for divine, r.
dim. p. 250 l. 29. for even r. every. page 253 line. 9. Coattestante. ibid.
line 15. (...). 259. l. 15. r. obliquely. ib. l. 32 for there r. third. p. 264.
l. 30. grossest. ib. l. 33. put out (to) p. 265. l. 2. for is, r. in. p. 266.
l. 5. r. analogy. p. 268. l. 31. r. actual. p. 269. l. 6. r. homonymie. p.
271. l. 15. for of, r. if. p. 272. l. 10. put out (to) ib. l. 25. for thy, r.
they. p. 274. l. 19. r panchresta. p. 275 l. 15. for this, r. thus. p. 276. in
Margin. for votibus, r. votiuus, p. 279. l. penult. r. of God. p. 281. l: 18.
r. deprecation. p. 283. l. 25. for privy, r. prime. p. 284. l. vlt. for the in,
r. their. p. 283. r. (...). page. 288. l. 22. r. peruerfitate praepositorum.
ib. 31. r. legitimum. p. 293. l. 10. r. disparity. ib. l. 25. for in r. on. p.
299. l. 4. 5. for proposed, r. opposed. p. 300. l. 27. r. appalled. ib. l. 29.
r. wakened. p. 303. l. 4. for this, r. his ib. l. 5. for first, r. that is, ib.
l. 13. put out (the) p. 306 l. 14. farraginem ib. l. 15. r. Kellison. ib. l.
20. r. these Articles. p. 307. l. 29. for is, r. ^^. p. 311 l. 10. put out (in)
ib. l. 22. for wounded, r. wound. p. 314. l. 15. for me, r. be. p. 315 l. 5.
for odious, r. obuious. p. 316. l. 11. for least, r. best. p. 317. l. 8. for
first, r. that is. p. 318. l. 29. and 34. for first, r. that is.


